Computational neurodevelopment: infant decision-
making in changing environments 
 
Rick A. Adams1,2 *†, Addison Billing3†, Levente Baljer3,4, Eleanor Smith3, Rob J. Cooper5, and 
Rebecca P . Lawson3* 
 
 
1 Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, London, UK 
2 Centre for Medical Image Computing, University College London, London, UK 
3 Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 
4 Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Kings College London, London, UK 
5 Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, University College London, 
London, UK 
 
 
* Correspondence 
† Shared first-authors, equal contributions. 
 
Keywords: infant decision making ∙ eye-tracking ∙ reversal ∙ perseveration ∙ Bayesian 
inference ∙ active inference ∙ clustering 
 
 
 
 
 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Abstract 
In recognition of the fact that most psychiatric conditions have neurodevelopmental origins, 
there is an increasing interest in applying the methodological and conceptual approaches 
from computational psychiatry to developmental cohorts. However, the challenge of acquiring 
and modelling behavioural responses in very young infants has thus far proven difficult to 
overcome. To address this we developed a novel gaze-contingent, cued-reversal paradigm that 
allowed 6-10 month old infants to make overt behavioura l responses to assess learning of 
expectations and updating of behaviour in response to change. We then fit computational 
models to infant behaviour and, for the first time, were able to validate the winning model to 
the same standards as would be expected of adults (e.g. good parameter recoverability, model 
identifiability and simulated behavioural responses). Similar to prior findings in adults, model-
based prediction error measures correlated with post-switch increases in pupil size; consistent 
with nora drenaline’s hypothesised role in learning about change.  Data -driven clustering 
based on model parameters revealed two infant behavioural subtypes hidden within the data; 
one with a perseverating profile and the other with a more exploratory decision -making 
pattern. This approach sheds new light on the ‘classic’ finding that all infants under 12 months 
tend to perseverate. Crucially, there were no significant differences in age between the 
clusters, but differences in terms of adaptive skills and temperamen t measured via gold -
standard developmental assessments. These results prime the field for infant computational 
psychiatry, demonstrating that we can reliably fit models to infant data and that the 
parameters from such models can identify subgroups with distinct cognitive profiles that are 
superior to those derived from the behavioural data alone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Introduction 
Our external environment is constantly changing and survival rests on the ability to recognise 
and respond to these changes. This basic cognitive capacity requires initial learning about 
statistical regularities (e.g., that A follows B) to build expectations about the world. However, 
sometimes the context changes (the order reverses, and B follows A), causing the experience 
of ‘prediction errors’ in service of new learning1,2. This is the cornerstone of cognitive flexibility 
and fundamental to adaptive behaviour 3. Good cognitive flexibility is associated with better 
resilience to threats and negative life events4,5, higher educational attainment6, better quality 
of life7 and better social skills8. Compromised cognitive flexibility exists in almost every major 
neuropsychiatric and developmental condition to date 3,9,10. This highlights the susceptibility 
of cognitive flexibility to risk factors that lead to adverse outcomes, and the importance of 
studying the emergence of error-driven learning at an early age. 
Computational psychiatry has made great strides in parameterising the mechanisms 
underlying cognitive flexibility. To date , computational modelling has revealed that the 
learning mechanisms underlying expectation formation and updating are differentially 
affected in major depressive disorder 11,12, autism spectrum disorder 13,14, anxiety 15–17 and 
psychosis18–20. In fact, altered computation s of learning under uncertainty have been 
identified as a n important  transdiagnostic feature across almost all forms of 
psychopathology10,21,22.  This fundamental cognitive process depends upon the integrity of the 
ascending monoamines, with strong evidence for the role of the noradrenaline (NA) system. 
Often measured by -proxy with pupillometr y23–25, NA is  implicated in the encoding of 
‘prediction errors’ signalling that a context has changed 26–28. These computational signatures 
of learning are also sensitive to  medications that act via noradrenergic mechanisms 27,29–31, 
opening up potential new treatment options. 
However, by studying the ‘end-state’ - adults who have a current psychiatric diagnosis - we 
risk only ever understanding the consequences and not the causes of neuropsychiatric 
disorders. This limits opportunities for intervention and prevention. We know that poor 
outcomes in later life (i.e. mental, neur al and physical health difficulties) are preceded by 
changes in infancy, crucial neurobiological antecedents that are set in motion long before 
difficulties begin to emerge32. However, in order to meaningfully predict likelihood of cognitive 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
difficulties or mental health challenges, we need predictors that speak to what the brain does: 
the computations it performs in response to, and in support of, our interactions with the 
environment. 
Human infants are equipped with the capacity to learn statistical regularities about their 
environment33, and this is readily observed from about 6 months of age34,35. This fundamental 
mechanism is phylogenetically preserved across non -human primates, rodents and birds 36; 
suggesting experience -dependent plasticity acts as scaffold for higher cognitive functions. 
Such an ability has been suggested to support the transition from reflexes (e.g., 
rooting/suckling) to inference (e.g., anticipating milk in sight of a bottle) 37. Classic paradigms 
– such as Piaget’s A-not-B task – would suggest that infants under 12 months old typically do 
not show cognitive flexibility, tending to perseverate on previous choices 38. However, 
measures of cognitive flexibility in infants are relatively blunt instruments (in-lab structured 
play with binary outcomes: e.g., infant ‘passed’ or ‘did not pass’)39. These measures are often 
confounded by social interaction with the experimenter and lack the granularity to capture 
meaningful individual or mechanistic differences between infants. Neural responses similar to 
prediction errors appear as early as 6 months of age 35,40. However, the trial-by-trial dynamics 
of learning have been difficult to measure in infants this young.  Notably, standard tasks 
preclude computational interrogation of behaviour, a nontrivial issue affecting all 
developmental neuroscience, since infants < 12 months cannot follow explicit task 
instructions, make overt responses (e.g., button presses), or pay attention for more than a few 
minutes. These limitations have made it difficult to reliably and robustly model infant 
responses. 
To overcome these challenges, we developed a novel decision -making paradigm involving a 
contextual switch, namely a cued reversal paradigm to capture infant behaviour from 6 –10 
months of age. This paradigm allows infants to interact with a visual scene and make choices 
(e.g., right or left) to reveal outcomes (e.g., a cartoon reward). This requires infants to form 
expectations about the outcomes under each context and deploy the appropriate response to 
be rewarded. We acquire infants’ choices trial-by-trial using their viewing behaviour via gaze-
contingent eye-tracking and concurrently measure pupil size as a non-invasive proxy for phasic 
noradrenergic responses24,25,28. Reversal paradigms are ideal for testing the emergence of 
cognitive flexibility in infants, as making correct responses requires the maintenance of 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
information about the context, recognising the change in the context and deploying the 
correct responses.  
We then model  behaviour on this  paradigm with a Markov decision process (MDP) 
formulation of active inference and estimate model parameters specific to each infant. MDP 
models express environmental dynamics using discrete states and time and describe the 
mapping from states to outcomes using probability distributions. Active inference is a 
Bayesian framework that expresses attention, perception, and action in terms of minimization 
of an information -theoretic quantity, namely variational free energy (VFE), where VFE is an 
upper bound on surprise (or negative log model evidence)  41,42. The model responses are 
driven by a function called expected free energy, which incorporates both instrumental 
incentives and uncertainty -resolving motivations about the latent variables and model 
parameters. Crucially, to set the standards for infant co mputational psychiatry on solid 
foundations, we held this model to the same standards as behavioural modelling in adults, 
including multi -stage model comparisons, and demonstration of parameter recoverability, 
identifiability and the ability to accurately recapitulate infant behavioural responses with 
simulations43,44.  
Based on prior literature in adults showing that pupil size encodes surprise  26–28, we wanted 
to assess whether a similar noradrenergic mechanism drives new learning in early life, and 
therefore hypothesised that infants’ model-derived estimates of prediction errors would drive 
increases in pupil size after the reversal. We then sought to combine behavioural and data -
driven modelling approaches by clustering, based on the estimated parameters for each 
infant, to assess for subgroups expressing distinct profiles of cognitive flexibility. Finally, to give 
an indication of whether subgroups  might differ in terms of the earliest indicators of 
developmental risk, we acquired gold -standard assessments of adaptive functioning and 
temperament which could be explained by computationally distinct mechanisms.   
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Methods 
Participants 
We recruited infants aged 5 to 10 months old who were carried to term and did not have any 
known or suspected developmental condition or delay. The participants were gifted little toys 
and t-shirts, and parents were reimbursed for travel expenses. The infants who completed at 
least three trials following the reversal were included in the analysis, as it is more likely that 
their expectations were violated in this interval. We recruited 55 infants, and 41 infants were 
included in the final analysis. Full dem ographics of the sample can be seen in Table 1. The 
gender ratio of females in sample was 0.54. A chi-square test revealed that the proportion of 
females and males were not different  𝜒2(1,41) = 0.219, 𝑝 = 0.639. Out of 14 excluded 
infants, 10 were either unable to perform the tasks or did not meet the data inclusion 
criterion. A further four infants were excluded due to a bug in the script that affected a subset 
of infants (see the supplementary materials).  
This study was approved by the University of Cambridge Psychology Research Ethics 
Committee (CPREC #PRE.2019.016).  Participants were approached from the Cambridge 
BabyLab Infant Database, which recruits from flyers, advertisements and via linked studies at 
the local maternity hospital. 
Questionnaires 
Adaptive functioning was assessed with the Vineland-II Adaptive Behaviour Scales and their 
temperament with the Infant Behaviour Questionnaire – Revised Very Short Forms (IBQ -R 
VSF). The Vineland-II questionnaire provides an measure of adaptive behaviour in 
communication, daily living, socialisation, and motor skills domains, and it has been widely 
used to assess the developmental state starting from birth and assist in the diagnosis of 
developmental impairments 45. IBQ-R VSF is based on three dimensions of the IBQ -R 
encompassing the positive affect/surgency (PAS), negative affectivity (NEG) and 
Orienting/Regulatory Capacity (ORC) 46 . We additionally collected the State -Trait Anxiety 
Inventory (STAI) scores on parents 47. Full details of questionnaire scores can be found in Table 
1.  
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Cued reversal paradigm 
In this eye-tracking paradigm, the mapping between choices and outcomes changed abruptly 
during the experiment (i.e., reversal), forcing the decision-maker to adapt to the new context. 
Trials started with gaze -contingent orange and blue star cues which ser ved as attention 
grabbers and triggered the start of each trial in a gaze -contingent manner.  The cue colour 
indicated the phase in the paradigm (pre- or post-reversal). Upon looking at the coloured cues, 
they would spin for 500ms, followed by an auditory cue lasting 1000ms, and the decision -
making period would begin 500ms after the onset of the auditory cue. The tone of the 
auditory cues were different for the pre- and post-reversal phases. The cue was followed by a 
2000ms decision making screen in which t wo squares, namely the left and right regions of 
interest (ROIs), were displayed. One ROI was  “correct” on a given trial and, if chosen, lead to 
a clear clip of an animation showing “five little monkeys”. Choosing the “incorrect” ROI lead 
to a blurred version of the same clip with the audio reversed. These served as rewarding and 
aversive outcomes respectively. The infants set the correct ROI in the pre -reversal phase by 
deploying a greater dwell time on one of the ROIs on the first trial. This meant that the infants’ 
decision on the first trial of each block was always correct. The correct and incorrect ROIs were 
swapped in the post - relative to the pre -reversal phase. The animation clip appeared for 
5000ms at the ROI with the greatest dwell time, depending on whether a correct decision was 
made. At the end of each trial, there was a jittered baseline period between 5000 -7000ms 
during which time concentric circles appeared and disappeared on screen and gentle sounds 
played. Each block consisted of eighteen trials, with nine pre - and post-reversal trials. There 
were two blocks of this paradigm, but not all infants completed the second block due to 
fussiness. During the task infants also wore a soft neoprene cap comprising hexagonal LUMO 
tiles for concurrent m easurement of diffuse optical tomography (DOT) but those 
measurements are not reported here. Please see Figure 1 for the experimental flowchart. 
 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 
Figure 1. Cued reversal paradigm – The pre- and post-reversal trials started with gaze-contingent orange and blue 
star cues that span for 500ms upon looking at it. This was followed by a 1000ms long auditory cue that had a 
different tune in the pre - and post-reversal phases. The last 500ms of the auditory cue overlapped with the 
decision screen, which lasted 2000ms. In the decision screen, two white rectangles were displayed on either side 
of the screen. There were three ROIs, the left and right large ROIs and a nar row ROI at the centre (red dashed 
lines were not visible, and they are used for illustrative purposes only). The left and right large ROIs were defined 
as the area from the left red line to the left edge and the right red line to the right edge of the screen, respectively. 
The infants’ choices between the left and right ROIs were determined by dwell times, where the ROI with the 
greater dwell time was registered as the infants’ choice. The trials where the combined dwell time on the left 
and right ROIs was shorter than 500ms on the decision screen were repeated and no animation was played on 
these trials. In the cartoon animation period, a clear or blurred animation would play at the ROI of choice for 
5000ms, depending on whether a correct decision was made. Correct and incorrect choices prompted the clear 
and blurred versions of the animation, and the audio was reversed in the blurred animation. Finally, there was a 
baseline period, which involved an animation of two concentric circles with an auditory tune,  and its duration 
was jittered between 5000 – 7000ms. For illustrative purposes, we assumed that the left ROI was chosen on the 
first trial, thus setting the correct side of the screen as the left and right ROIs in the pre- and post-reversal phases, 
respectively. 
Eye tracking and pupillometry 
The eye movements and pupillary responses of the infants were collected with an Eyelink 1000 
plus eye tracker that used a 940 nm illuminator where a 17'' monitor was mounted on a 
flexible arm, making it suitable for infant research. The sampling rate of the eye tracker was 
500 Hz. We used the SHINE Toolbox to match the frames of the cartoon clip and the star cues 
in terms of luminance 48. 
Previous work in the literature suggests that pupil dilation reflects surprise. Here we used 
pupillary responses as a proxy for surprise and tested whether there were any correlations 
between model-derived prediction errors and pupillary responses. We were interested in the 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
pupillary responses from the animation period as the animations were used as feedback to 
decisions, and therefore, any violations in the infants’ expectations should manifest in this 
period. We first removed pupil data when the gaze was off-screen by replacing them with NaN 
entries and pre-processed the remaining data according to the steps outlined in Kret & Sjak -
Shie (2019)49. Pupil data from the animation period on each trial was converted to z -scores 
using the mean and the standard deviation of the combined pupil data from the animation 
period of all trials for a given block. Average normalised pupil sizes over the animation period 
are reported across trials. 
Computational Modelling  
Here, we briefly describe the states and outcomes in the MDP model, leaving the details to 
the supplementary materials. The MDP model of this paradigm consisted of a hierarchy with 
two levels. The higher level of the model involved a single state factor, an outcome modality 
labelled context, which encoded the pre- and post-reversal phases in the paradigm.  
The lower level of the model was concerned with the dynamics on the within-trial level. There 
were three sets of states, namely context, starting side  and when. The context states 
represented the pre- and post-reversal phases in the paradigm. The trials in the pre- and post-
reversal phases always started with the orange and blue star cues, respectively, signalling the 
context. The starting side states described the infants’ choice between the left or right ROIs 
on the first trial of a block. The clear animations are displayed on the left and right ROIs in the 
pre-reversal phase, given that the infants choose the left and right ROIs on the first trial of 
each block, respectively. The ROI where the clear animation is displayed is swapped in the 
post-reversal phase. The when states represented the time and chosen actions in the decision-
making period. These were labelled i) 𝑡 = 1, ii) 𝑡 = 2, 𝐿𝑒𝑓𝑡 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑛, and iii) 𝑡 =
2, 𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑛. Time points 𝑡 = 1 and 𝑡 = 2 were associated with when the star cues 
(orange or blue) and animations (clear or blurred) were displayed on the screen, respectively. 
The states 𝐿𝑒𝑓𝑡 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑛 and 𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑛 described the chosen ROI in the decision period. 
There was a single outcome modality representing the visual features in the task, namely the 
orange and blue star cues and the clear and blurred versions of the animation. 
We considered two kinds of generative models. These models included or excluded the 
starting side  state factor. This state factor is necessary for the model to learn all unique 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
combinations of state-to-outcome mappings (i.e., likelihood matrices). For example, consider 
an infant who chose the left ROI on the first trial of the first block. This means that the clear 
animation will play on the left ROI in the pre -reversal phase. If the same infant chooses the 
right ROI on the first trial of the second block, the clear animation will play on the right ROI in 
the pre -reversal phase. Given that the orange star cue is always associated with the pre -
reversal phase, the infants can learn that choosing the left ROI after seeing the orange cue will 
prompt the clear animation in the first block. If they now carry forward these beliefs to the 
second block and keep choosing the left ROI after seeing the orange star cue, they will instead 
see the blurred version of the animation since they chose the right ROI on the first trial of the 
second block. Including the starting side  factor in the model allows separate likelihood 
mappings for blocks 1 and 2, given that the infants may choose opposite ROIs on the first trials 
across blocks.  For an infant who chooses opposite ROIs on the first trials across blocks, 
excluding this factor would force the model to overwrite its learned experiences associated 
with the pre-reversal phase of the first block with the pre -reversal phase experiences of the 
second block  (just as all models have to overwrite their pre -reversal learning in  the post-
reversal phases). We referred to the models including and excluding the starting side factor, 
as complex and simple models, respectively. 
Model parameters 
The parameters that were estimated on an individual basis by fitting the model to the data 
involved i) (inverse) volatility 𝜔, preferences 𝑐, learning rate 𝜂, and ‘dominant policy bias’ (for 
choosing the left or right ROI ) ɛ. A very high (inverse) volatility 𝜔 equips the agent with the 
belief that the environment is very rigid and the switches between contexts are unlikely, 
whereas a low 𝜔 means that the contextual switches are to be expected frequently (see Figure 
S3A). The parameter 𝑐 determined the model’s preferences for clear and blurred animations, 
much like a reward sensitivity. The clear and blurred animations were assigned utilities 𝑐 − 5 
and 5 − 𝑐, respectively. Although we expected the infants to prefer the clear animation (𝑐 >
5), the formulation of the prior preference vector allowed preferences for the blurred 
animation as well ( 𝑐 < 5); see Figure S3B. Learning rate 𝜂 modulated the rate at which the 
model learned the mapping from the states to the outcomes. The agent learned the likelihood 
mappings faster with high learning rate (see Figure S3C). Finally, the predominantly chosen 
ROI was calculated for each infant and block individually, and the most and least frequently 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
visited ROIs were assigned ɛ and 10 − ɛ, respectively. These values expressed a bias for the 
dominant policy (i.e. a primacy bias) and were converted to probabilities by applying a softmax 
function (Left bias: 𝐄 = σ([ ɛ 10 − ɛ ]), Right bias 𝐄 = σ([ 10 − ɛ ɛ  ])); see Figure S3D. 
Model comparison 
In the first stage of model comparison, we compared the complex model and three variations 
of the simple model in terms of free energy (evidence). The first variation of the simple model 
carries its learned likelihood mappings from the first block forward to the second block. We 
will refer to this model as simple – keep experience. In the second variation, the likelihood 
mappings at the beginning of the second block were reset, and the learned mappings in the 
first block were discarded. We refer to this model as simple – discard. The third variation could 
not learn unique mappings from context states to outcomes. This model overwrites its 
experiences in the pre -reversal phase with th e post -reversal phase, and the likelihood 
matrices under each context state are always identical. We will refer to this model as simple – 
no context. 
The model’s choice behaviour is driven by a function called expected free energy. Expected 
free energy has three components, namely novelty, epistemic value and extrinsic value. In the 
second stage of model comparison, we fit models by excluding each component of the 
expected free energy – one at a time – in order to establish whether infants’ behaviour was 
motivated by each of these components . Novelty encourages the model to visit rarely 
occupied states to learn their mapping to the outcomes. A model without novelty would have 
no motive to resolve uncertainty about the mapping from states to the outcomes. Epistemic 
value encourages the model to sample the ROIs that would resolve uncertainty about the 
context. Excluding epistemic value robs the model of its drive to resolve uncertainty about the 
states. Extrinsic value drives the behaviour to fulfil the model’s preferences. A model without 
extrinsic value would have no preferences for the animations. 
The final stage of model comparison involved estimating evidence for models defined in terms 
of parameter combinations. This approach employs a general linear model consisting of a term 
encoding group averages per parameter in a hierarchical inversion scheme, namely parametric 
empirical Bayes (PEB). The evidence for models including and excluding parameters is 
estimated using Bayesian model reduction (BMR) 50. This method allows the posterior 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
probabilities of the model parameters to be estimated. The parameters with low posterior 
probabilities (< 0.5)  were fixed to their posterior expectations at the group level, and the 
model inversion was repeated for each infant. 
In brief, model comparison involved three stages where different models were compared in 
terms of their free energy. In the first stage, we compared four models: i) simple – keep 
experience, ii) simple – discard, iii) simple – no context, and iv) complex. In the second stage, 
the winning model of the first stage was refitted to the data, excluding each component of the 
expected free energy (EFE) and compared with the original EFE. These models were i) EFE, ii) 
EFE – without novelty, iii) EFE – without epistemic value, and iv) EFE – without extrinsic value. 
In the third stage, models defined in terms of the combination of model parameters were 
evaluated using PEB and BMR. Because there were four free parameters, each of which can 
be either included or excluded to define a model, there were 24 = 16 models to compare at 
this stage. The redundant parameters were fixed at their group -level means, and model 
inversion was repeated. 
Prediction errors  
Prediction errors express a mismatch between the model’s expectations and its observations. 
Here, we define prediction errors on both levels of the model. Considering that the prediction 
errors from different levels of the model may contribute varying amounts to the infant’s 
physiological response after the reversal, we fit separate multilinear regression models 
involving the intercept term and a separate weight for the prediction errors to the normalised 
pupil data of each infant.  
Clustering 
We applied k-means clustering on the estimated parameters to test if the clustering solution 
finds infant subgroups that are distinct in terms of their behavioural responses and 
questionnaire scores. Each parameter was rescaled using minmax normalisation over infants, 
and cosine distance was used to evaluate cluster membership. We tested clustering solutions 
that allowed up to 10 clusters in terms of the Calinski-Harabasz variance ratio criterion (VRC)51, 
where a greater VRC suggests a better clustering solution. 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Hypothesis testing 
The behavioural responses in the cued reversal paradigm involved accuracy, perseveration, 
correct and incorrect dwell times (and their difference) in the decision period and the dwell 
time on the displayed animation. Accuracy is the binary correct or incor rect response on a 
given trial, where choosing the ROI with the clear animation is assumed to be the correct 
response. Perseveration is defined as incorrect responses on consecutive trials under the 
same context. For example, if the infants choose the inco rrect ROI on two consecutive trials 
in the pre-reversal phase, that counts as perseveration. Dwell times correspond to the time 
spent looking at ROIs in the decision and animation periods. The left and right large ROIs were 
used to determine the dwell times. We used generalised linear mixed-effects models (GLMMs) 
for hypothesis testing involving the response variables accuracy, perseveration, dwell time – 
decision period and dwell time – animation period. See the supplementary for the details on 
GLMM analysis. 
The differences between the pre- and post-reversal pupillary responses and prediction errors 
were tested using paired t -tests. The differences in questionnaire scores between clusters 
were evaluated using linear regression models that included cluster iden tity and age as 
regressors. Finally, the reported correlation coefficients correspond to the Pearson correlation 
coefficient.  
Results 
Behavioural responses 
As expected, there was a main effect of reversal on accuracy 𝐹(1,1087) = 217.88, 𝑝 <
0.001, and perseveration 𝐹(1,959) = 190.14, 𝑝 < 0.001, with post hoc comparisons 
revealing that accuracy decreased and perseveration increased following the reversal (see 
Figure 2A and B, Table 2). Dwell time difference between the correct and incorrect ROIs in the 
decision period decreased 𝐹(1,81) = 87.94, 𝑝 < 0.001 (see Figure 2C, Table 2) and the dwell 
time on the displayed animation also decreased in the post - compared to the pre -reversal 
phase 𝐹(1,51) = 29.26, 𝑝 < 0.001 (See Figure 2D, Table 2). There was a main effect of block 
on perseveration 𝐹(1,959) = 8.55, 𝑝 < 0.005 and a main effect of accuracy (correct vs 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
incorrect) on the dwell time during the animation 𝐹(1,950) = 154.48, 𝑝 < 0.001. Post hoc 
comparisons revealed increased perseveration in the second compared to the first block and 
increased animation dwell time on correct compared to the incorrect trials. See Table 2 for 
full details of all post hoc comparisons. 
 
Table 1. Means and standard deviation of the demographic data. Vineland: Vineland -II Adaptive Behaviour 
Scales, IBQ: Infant behaviour questionnaire, STAI: State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Vineland and IBQ pertain to the 
infants, whereas STAI pertains to the parents. The number of participants who completed the questionnaires is 
reported separately for each questionnaire.  
 
 
Table 2. Behavioural responses – This table shows the significant pairwise differences between behavioural 
measures for the contrasts i) post vs pre-reversal, ii) block 1 vs 2, and iii) correct vs incorrect trials.  
Infants (n=41)
Mean (SD)
Female Ratio 0.54
Age (months) 7.82 (1.15)
Measure Subscale
Listening and Understanding 8.25 (1.96)
Talking 11.56 (2.80)
Caring for Self 8.47 (3.21)
Relating to Others 18.67 (3.00)
Playing and Using Leisure Time 8.86 (2.79)
Using Large Muscles 11.47 (4.44)
Using Small Muscles 10.97 (3.33)
Total (Vineland) 78.25 (15.70)
Surgency 54.24 (9.77)
Negative Affect 44.43 (10.89)
Effortful Control 55.70 (7.05)
Total (IBQ) 154.38 (19.09)
STAI-Y1 (Parents) 35.75 (7.78)
STAI-Y2 (Parents) 40.89 (9.23)
Total (STAI) 76.64 (15.93)
Vineland (N=36)
IBQ (n=37)
STAI (parents, N=36)
Pairwise Comparisons Contrast LL UL p-value
Accuracy Post - Pre -0.543 -0.434 < 0.001
Post - Pre 0.426 0.549 < 0.001
Block 2 - Block 1 0.036 0.196 < 0.005
Dwell time difference - 
decision period [ms]
Post - Pre -1355.927 -881.281 < 0.001
Post - Pre -802.239 -367.955 < 0.001
Correct - Incorrect 825.02 1134.392 < 0.001
95% CI
Dwell time on cartoon - 
Animation period [ms]
Perseveration
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 
Figure 2. Behavioural measures – The panels on the left show behavioural measures across trials where the first 
and last 18 trials correspond to blocks 1 and 2, respectively. The red dashed lines indicate the final trial before 
the reversal in each block, while the solid black line at the 18th trial indicates the end of the first block. The panels 
on the right illustrate the pairwise differences in behavioural measures with respect to different contrasts (see 
the legends at the bottom). A) The right panel s hows average accuracy in the pre- and post-reversal phases. B) 
These panels show the average perseveration, defined in terms of consecutive incorrect responses in the same 
context (pre or post-reversal). The middle panel compares perseveration in pre- vs post-reversal phases averaged 
across blocks, whereas the right panel compares block-averaged perseveration (i.e., blocks 1 vs 2). C) The green 
and red shades in the left panel show the dwell time on correct and incorrect ROIs in the decision period, 
respectively. The right panel shows the dwell time difference between the correct and incorrect ROIs in the pre- 
and post-reversal phases, averaged across blocks. D) The green and red shades in the left panel show the dwell 
time on the displayed animation followi ng correct and incorrect responses, respectively. Clear and blurred 
versions of the animation are displayed following correct and incorrect responses, respectively. This means that 
green and red shades are associated with the clear and blurred animations. The middle panel shows pre- vs post-
reversal dwell time on the displayed animation, averaged across blocks. The right panel shows the dwell time on 
the animation following correct (clear animation) and incorrect (blurred animation) responses.  
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Computational modelling 
In this section, we compared models over three stages and reported the winning model at the 
group level. The winning model of the first stage was simple – discard (see Figure 3A). This 
model does not learn separate likelihood matrices for different starting sides as the complex 
model does. If infants chose opposite sides on the first trial of each block, there need to be 
four likelihood matrices to learn the true state –outcome mappings (see Figure S2A ). The 
winning model, however, does not learn separate likelihood matrices for different starting 
sides, and it has only two likelihood matrices, one per context (i.e., pre- and post-reversal) 
state (see the right panel of Figure S2B). Furthermore, this model does not carry forward the 
learned contingencies from the first to the seco nd block. This means that the learned 
contingencies are discarded at the end of the first block. The winning model of the second 
stage excludes novelty from the expected free energy (see Figure 3B). The final stage of model 
comparison shows that the 6th model, which excludes (inverse) volatility 𝜔 and learning rate 
𝜂, has the greatest evidence (see the top right panel of Figure 3C). We fixed the volatility 𝜔 
and learning rate 𝜂 parameters to their posterior expectations at the group level and repeated 
the inversion for each infant. Note that this model still incorporates volatility and learns from 
its recent experiences, but the parameters 𝜔 and 𝜂 do not express between -subject 
differences because they are fixed to their group-level means.  
The left panel of Figure 4A shows the individual estimates of parameters 𝑐 and ɛ for each 
infant (in log space). The right panel of Figure 4A shows a weak positive but statistically 
insignificant correlation (r(28) = 0.23, p = 0.15) between the parameters 𝑐 and ɛ. The left and 
centre panels of Figure 4B show the group-level estimates of these two parameters and their 
posterior probabilities, respectively. We computed the degree of correspondence between 
the model’s and the infants’ choices by forcing the model to make the same observations and 
take the same actions as the infants in the first 1 to 𝑛 − 1 trials and compared the model’s 
response to the infant’s decision on the 𝑛𝑡ℎ trial. We repeated this for each trial (except the 
first) and infant. The right panel of Figure 4B shows a median decision fit of ≈ 86%, with a 
minimum fit of 60%. To test the validity of the estimated parameters, we generated two 
datasets per infant using their individual parameter estimates and refitted the model to the 
simulated data. The original and the simulated datasets are presented in Figure 4C. There 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
were high and significant correlations between the parameter estimates obtained from the 
first (original data) and the second (simulated data) inversions (see Figure 4D). 
 
Figure 3.  Model comparison – A) There are four competing models at this stage, namely i ) simple – keep 
experience, ii) simple – discard, iii) simple – no context and iv) complex. The upper panel shows that simple – 
discard has more evidence than the other models, and the lower panel shows this model has a posterior 
probability of nearly 1. B) The winning model of the previous stage, simple – discard, is refitted to the data, 
excluding one component of expected free energy at a time. The competing models at this stage are i) expected 
free energy (EFE), ii) no novelty, iii) no epistemic and iv)  no extrinsic. The no novelty model has more evidence 
than the rest and similarly has a posterior probability of nearly 1. C) The winning model of the second stage 
enters this stage as a parent model, where the children models are defined by turning off the parameters of the 
former. There are 24 = 16 children models because each parameter of the parent model can be either included 
(on) or excluded (off). The bottom left panel shows the model space where the dark and white colours indicate 
which parameters are on or off for a given model. The top left and right panels compare models in terms of their 
evidence and posterior probabilities, respectively. The middle left and right panels show the maximum a 
posteriori (MAP) parameter estimates (in log space) at the group level before and after applying Bayesian model 
reduction, respectively. The posterior probabilities of parameters are presented at the bottom right panel. 
Parameters with higher posterior probabilities have greater evidence to be included in the model. 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 
Figure 4. Parameter estimates and correlations – A) Individual parameter estimates and the correlation between 
the parameters are displayed on the left and right panels, respectively. B) The group-level means of parameters 
and their posterior probabilities are shown on the panels on the left and centre. The correspondence between 
the model’s and infants’ choices is presented in terms of decision fit on the right panel. C) Two datasets were 
generated per infant using their individual parameter estimates. The panel on the left shows the accuracy in the 
original dataset, whereas the right panel shows the average accuracy (over datasets and infants) in the simulated 
dataset. D) This panel presents the correlations between the original parameter estimates and the  estimates 
obtained by fitting the model to the simulated dataset. Parameters are presented in log space. 
 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Pupillary responses and prediction errors 
The left panels of Figure 5A show the normalised pupil sizes and prediction errors across trials. 
The prediction errors shown in the figure are a weighted linear combination of both high and 
low level prediction errors from the regression model. The pupil sizes and prediction errors 
increase in the few trials following the reversal. The pupil size profile in the second block 
shows a delayed increase and more variance – potentially due to the decreased number of 
infants in this block. The right pan els show the difference between the average responses in 
the post and pre-reversal phases as a function of the number of trials 𝑛 used to compute the 
averages in the respective phases. In the pre - and post-reversal phases, 𝑛 preceding and 
following trials are used from the switch trial to compute the averages, where 𝑛 ∈ {1,2, … ,9}. 
The average pupil size and prediction error follow a similar profile such that there is a 
substantial increase for 𝑛 = 2, and they gradually decrease with increasing 𝑛. However, 
carrying out separate paired t-tests to test for the effect of reversal on average pupil sizes for 
𝑛 ∈ {1,2, … ,9}, 𝑛 = 3 maximised the t-statistic. 
Carrying out paired t -tests using the average pupil sizes over 𝑛 = 3 post ( 𝑀 = 0.20, 𝑆𝐷 =
0.46) and pre-reversal trials (𝑀 = −0.11, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.31) yielded a significant difference 𝑡(40) =
3.46, 𝑝 < 0.005. Similarly, there was an increase in the prediction errors in the post ( 𝑀 =
0.11, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.25) compared to the pre -reversal trials (𝑀 = −0.01, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.11) when 𝑛 = 3, 
𝑡(40) = 2.54, 𝑝 < 0.05. The differences between average responses in the post and pre -
reversal phases are computed over 𝑛 trials for pupil sizes 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑙𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡−𝑃𝑟𝑒 and prediction errors 
𝑃𝐸𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡−𝑃𝑟𝑒. There was a significant correlation between 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑙𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡−𝑃𝑟𝑒 and 𝑃𝐸𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡−𝑃𝑟𝑒 for 
𝑛 = 3, 𝑟(39) = 0.46, 𝑝 < 0.005. See Figure 5B. 
Conducting paired t -tests using the average pupil sizes on incorrect ( 𝑀 = 0.12, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.34) 
and correct trials ( 𝑀 = −0.02, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.15) showed that there was a tendency for increased 
pupil size on incorrect trials 𝑡(40) = 1.92, 𝑝 = 0.062. As one would expect, t here was an 
increase in the  size of prediction errors on  incorrect ( 𝑀 = 0.09, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.23) compared to 
correct trials, ( 𝑀 = −0.02, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.09), 𝑡(40) = 2.62, 𝑝 < 0.05. The differences between 
average responses in the incorrect and correct trials are calculated for pupil size 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑙𝐼𝑛𝑐−𝐶𝑜𝑟 
and prediction errors 𝑃𝐸𝐼𝑛𝑐−𝐶𝑜𝑟. There was a significant correlation between 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑙𝐼𝑛𝑐−𝐶𝑜𝑟 
and 𝑃𝐸𝐼𝑛𝑐−𝐶𝑜𝑟, 𝑟(39) = 0.57, 𝑝 < 0.001. Excluding the outlier infant (see the red circle in 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Figure 5C) still yielded a significant correlation between 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑙𝐼𝑛𝑐−𝐶𝑜𝑟 and 𝑃𝐸𝐼𝑛𝑐−𝐶𝑜𝑟 𝑟(38) =
0.40, 𝑝 < 0.05. See Figure 5C. 
 
 
Figure 5. Pupil size and prediction error – A) Normalised pupil size and prediction errors are plotted across trials 
on the left panels. The differences between the average post and pre-reversal responses are plotted as a function 
of the number of trials (𝑛) used before (pre-reversal) and after (post-reversal) the contextual switch. The average 
responses in the pre -reversal phase are obtained by computing the mean responses over 𝑛 preceding trials 
relative to the switch trial. Similarly, 𝑛 trials are used from the switch trial to compute the average responses in 
the post-reversal phase. The differences between the two are reported for the pupil size 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑙𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡−𝑃𝑟𝑒 and 
prediction errors 𝑃𝐸𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡−𝑃𝑟𝑒  as a function of 𝑛 on the right panels. B) The top panel shows that there is a 
moderate correlation between 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑙𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡−𝑃𝑟𝑒 and 𝑃𝐸𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡−𝑃𝑟𝑒 for 𝑛 = 3. The bottom panels show that there are 
significant differences between the post and pre -reversal pupil size and prediction errors for 𝑛 = 3. C) The 
average difference between the responses on incorrect and correct trials are computed for pupil sizes 
𝑃𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑙𝐼𝑛𝑐−𝐶𝑜𝑟 and prediction errors 𝑃𝐸𝐼𝑛𝑐−𝐶𝑜𝑟. The top panel shows a significant correlation between 
𝑃𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑙𝐼𝑛𝑐−𝐶𝑜𝑟 and 𝑃𝐸𝐼𝑛𝑐−𝐶𝑜𝑟. Excluding the outlier infant (see the red circle), still yielded significant correlations. 
The bottom panels show that there is an increase in the pupil size and prediction errors on incorrect trials. 
However, this increase is only significant for the prediction error. The error bars show the standard error of the 
mean. 
 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Clustering 
Applying k-means clustering on the minmax normalised parameter estimates yielded two 
infant clusters, shown with magenta ( 𝑁𝑀𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎 = 26) and yellow ( 𝑁𝑌𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤 = 15) colours in 
Figure 6. The top left panel of Figure 6A illustrates these two clusters in the parameter space 
𝑐 against ɛ. The boundary between these two clusters of infants is obtained by applying 
Fisher’s discriminant analysis49 (see the red and blue coloured areas). We included the main 
effect of cluster and the interaction between cluster and reversal in our GLMM analysis. This 
resulted in a significant interaction effect between cluster and reversal on the accuracy 
𝐹(1,1085) = 46.45, 𝑝 < 0.001, perseverance 𝐹(1,957) = 33.27, 𝑝 < 0.001 and dwell time 
difference between the correct and incorrect ROIs in the decision period 𝐹(1,75) =
28.63, 𝑝 < 0.001. Post hoc comparisons revealed increased accuracy and dwell time 
difference in the pre-reversal phase and decreased accuracy and dwell time difference in the 
post-reversal phase for the yellow compared to the magenta cluster. Post hoc comparisons 
also showed increased perseveration in the post -reversal phase for the yellow compared to 
the magenta cluster. See Table 3A and Figure 6A. 
There were missing data points in the questionnaires as some participants did not complete 
them. This left us with 36 participants on the Vineland (𝑁𝑀𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎 = 23, 𝑁𝑌𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤 = 13) and 37 
participants on the IBQ ( 𝑁𝑀𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎 = 24, 𝑁𝑌𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤 = 13) questionnaires. Carrying out linear 
regression on questionnaire scores where the independent variables were cluster identity and 
age (months) revealed significant differences between clusters in terms of questionnaire 
scores and significant relationships between age and questionnaires. Table 3B and Figure 6B 
show decreased questionnaire scores for the yellow compared to the magenta cluster in terms 
of Vineland – Talking, – Caring for Self, – Playing and Using Leisure Time, – Total and IBQ – 
Surgency. There was a positive relationship between age and Vineland – Relating to Others, – 
Using Large Muscles, – Using Small Muscles, and Total (see Table 3B ). There were no 
significant differences between the parents of infants who were assigned to different clusters 
in terms of STAI. 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 
Figure 6. Infant clusters – A) Applying k-means clustering returned two clusters of infants, represented by the 
yellow and magenta colours. The top left panel shows the clusters in the parameter space after minmax 
normalisation, where the cluster centers (centroids) are shown with the star symbols. The differences between 
the two clusters manifest behaviourally in terms of accuracy, perseveration, and dwell time difference between 
the correct and incorrect ROIs in the decision period. The lower panels compare the clusters in the pre-reversal 
(light colours) and post-reversal (dark colours) phases. B) These panels show cluster-wise differences in terms of 
questionnaire scores. These are the Vineland subscales – Talking, – Caring, – Playing and the total Vineland score, 
and the IBQ – Surgency subscale from the Infant Behaviour Questionnaire (IBQ). 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 
Table 3. Cluster-wise differences – A) GLMM analysis of behavioural measures returned a significant interaction 
effect between the phase (pre- or post-reversal) and cluster identity on accuracy, perseveration and dwell time 
difference (decision period). This table  shows the significant pairwise differences between clusters in the pre - 
and post-reversal phases. B) Multiple linear regression was used to test if the cluster identity and age explained 
questionnaire scores. The significant coefficients for clust er identity and age are reported in this table. The 
reference cluster is magenta for the cluster coefficient 𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟, and negative coefficient estimates indicate 
reduced scores for the yellow cluster. Age is converted to months for the regression analysis. 
 
A higher variance ratio criterion (VRC) suggests a better separation between data clusters. In 
the next analysis, we clustered infants based on two separate sets of measures and compared 
the two clustering solutions on a third set of measures  in terms of VRC. This involved: 
clustering solutions derived from i) behavioural measures and parameters , tested on 
questionnaire data and ii) questionnaire data and parameters , tested on behavioural 
measures. The behavioural measures involved four features: accuracy, perseveration, the 
difference between the dwell time on correct and incorrect ROIs in the pre-reversal phase and 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
the post-reversal phase. The questionnaire data involved Vineland (7 features) and IBQ (3 
features) subscales. Finally, the parameters involved the prior preferences over the animations 
𝑐 and the bias for the dominant policy (i.e., ROI side) ɛ. In this analysis, we included the infants 
who have questionnaire data ( 𝑛 = 36). Clustering solutions derived from parameters 
provided a better separation between clusters when tested on both the questionnaire data 
and behavioural measures (see Table 4). 
 
Table 4. Comparisons between clustering solutions – The upper panel compares clustering solutions derived 
from behavioural measures and parameters when tested on the questionnaire data. The lower panel compares 
clustering solutions obtained with the questionnaires and parameters when tested on the behavioural measures. 
The entries in the table are the variance ratio criterion (VRC) estimates. Higher VRC indicates better separation 
across clusters. 
Discussion 
Here we demonstrate for the first time that is it is possible to reliably fit theory driven models 
to infant choices, to parameterise individual differences in behaviour at a mechanistic level. 
To do so, we employed a novel gaze-contingent version of a cued reversal paradigm, optimised 
to allow infants to act, with consequence, on the world; shaping their own learning experience 
in response to changes in the environment.  
By choosing correctly or incorrectly in the decision -making period, infants subsequently saw 
a clear and blurred version of a cartoon clip, serving as rewarding and aversive stimuli 
respectively. In these two clips, visual (e.g. colour, luminance, velocity) and auditory features 
are matched, but the auditory -visual information differs in its coherence or value across the 
conditions. In this study, and in earlier pilots, we showed longer dwell times on the clear, 
relative to the blurred, animations suggestin g infants find these stimuli more engaging. 
Similarly in adults it has been shown that people make fewer fixations and tend to have 
reduced viewing time on noisy versions of images compared to their original 49. Optimising 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
rewarding and punishing outcomes for infant studies requires careful consideration. The 
absence of reward e.g. not playing the animation at all, might seem like the obvious choice in 
a developmental context when common primary (e.g. electric shocks) and se condary (e.g. 
monetary losses) negative reinforcers are not appropriate. However, infants <12 months old 
will quickly lose interest when nothing is presented on the screen. As such, any peripheral 
measures such as EEG, NIRS or pupillometry will be confound ed by infants looking away on 
the non -rewarding trial types. Additionally, commonly reported experimenter efforts to 
recapture attention (e.g. shaking a rattle or blowing bubbles) might artificially create high 
salience conditions which would confound the measure of key variables such as prediction 
errors. Here we believe that our paradigm – fully gaze-contingent, self-paced, with outcomes 
matched on as many features as possible – strikes the optimal balance between these 
considerations and might inform more tightly controlled paradigm design for studying infant 
learning in future.  
At the group -level, our model agnostic results show reduced accuracy and increased 
perseveration in the post-reversal phase. There was also a decrease in the dwell time on the 
displayed animation following the reversal. This general tendency towards persev eration is 
widely reported in  infant studies involving reversals 38,52,53. In Piaget’s classic A -not-B 
paradigm, a toy is hidden initially at location A, and the infants explore and recover the toy at 
location A. Once the infants retrieve the toy successfully on a few trials, the toy is hidden at 
location B next time as the infant observes. It is widely reported that infants under 12 months 
old display perseverative errors by exploring location A rather than B after the location switch. 
Importantly, the perseverative errors in our cued -reversal task fit well with the previously 
reported infant behaviour on paradigms involving reversals, validating our novel gaze -
contingent task against classic in -lab games and structured play paradigms that have 
historically been  used to capture cognitive flexibility at these ages.  
Crucially, however, we then fit these choices with a Markov decision process (MDP) 
formulation of active inference and estimate model parameters specific to each infant. 
Individual-level behaviour on the task can best be explained by a model comprising two  
parameters 𝑐 and ɛ - which represent reward preference or sensitivity, and dominant policy 
bias (for the left or right of the screen). Clustering based on model parameter estimates 
yielded two clusters: magenta and yellow. The yellow cluster had an increased bias and 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
decreased reward preference, compared to the magenta cluster. These parametric differences 
manifest in terms of distinct behavioural profiles in the pre - and post-reversal phases, with 
the yellow cluster showing greater accuracy followed by a larger drop f ollowing the switch, 
and more perseveration. In effect, this group demonstrate a ‘primacy bias’ in learning, such 
that they perform better until the reversal occurs, after which point they learn less, and seem 
relatively insensitive to the continued negati ve feedback. In contrast, the magenta cluster 
displayed a more exploratory decision -making profile, with decreased, though still above 
chance, accuracy pre -reversal and increased accuracy post -reversal. These infants might be 
said to show greater cognitive flexibility.  
The yellow and magenta clusters did not differ in terms of age. Prior work on the development 
of perseveration in early infancy is mixed, with recent studies employing variants of the A-not-
B paradigm suggesting that older infants might show more perseveration than their younger 
counterparts54. In the current study, however, these clusters show differences in terms of 
adaptive skills and temperament, as measured via established developmental assessments. 
The magenta cluster, with the more exploratory or flexible cognitive profile, generally showed 
better adaptive functioning assessed with the Vineland II ABS. This demonstrates the 
computational mechanisms supporting good cognitive flexibility also undersco re adaptive 
behaviour from the very earliest stages of development. Furthermore,  increased  IBQ-R VSF 
surgency scores in the magenta cluster suggest increased extraversion compared to the yellow 
cluster. This might partially explain why the magenta cluster exhibits more exploratory 
behaviour in the cued reversal task. Whilst the infants in this study comprise a typically 
developing sample, and none of the participants would be considered ‘at -risk’ or high -
likelihood of developmental delay, it is nonetheless important to demonstrate that robust 
parameterisations of infant behaviour can identify subgroups with distinct cognitive profiles 
that are otherwise ‘hidden’ in the behavioural data alone. Furthermore, we take the important 
step of demonstrating that clustering based on model parameters yields better solutions than 
clusters derived from behavioural measures and questionnaires when tested on unseen data, 
demonstrating the generalizability of the model-based solutions. 
Our model was subject to rigorous validation, including model comparisons that can reveal 
information about the model architecture that infants are using to perform this task. For 
example, the first stage of model-comparisons revealed that infants do not carry forward their 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
learned contingencies across blocks. There are several reasons why this might be the case, 
including a decreased learning rate or forgetting the contingencies during the short break 
between blocks. Indeed, working memory capacity has long been recognised a s a pre-cursor 
to executive functions that contributes to performance on cognitive flexibility tasks in early 
life55.  Additionally, at the second stage of model -comparisons, the model containing the 
novelty component of the expected free energy was not well supported by the model 
evidence.  For an infant who makes correct decisions by sampling the left ROI in the pre -
reversal phase, the novelty component would encourage sampling the right (incorrect) ROI 
simply to learn about the consequences of doing so41. The exclusion of the novelty component 
in the winning model suggests that, in our sample, behaviour is not yet characterised by this 
strategy. 
The final stage of the model comparison yielded low confidence in the volatility 𝜔 and learning 
rate 𝜂 parameters expressed in terms of posterior probabilities. These two parameters were 
fixed to their group-level estimates, and the prior preferences over the animations 𝑐 and the 
bias for the dominantly sampled ROI ɛ were estimated for each infant. Fixing the learning rate 
𝜂 meant that the model still learned over trials, but this parameter no longer expressed 
individual differences between infants. A similar logic applies to the volatility 𝜔 parameter. 
Given, that computational indices of volatility and learning rate have proven to be influential 
in characterising neuropsychiatric differences in adult samples 10,14,19,22,56, and response to 
pharmacological treatment 27,30,57 it will be interesting for future longitudinal studies to 
consider at what point along the developmental trajectory the model architecture changes 
such that individual expressions of volatility and learning rate capture meaningful differences 
between indiv iduals. This might represent an important window of opportunity for 
intervention. Volatility represents the rate of change in a contingency mapping across 
time10,16,58. Given that the infants in our study can only focus for ~18 trials, with a single 
contingency reversal, it makes sense that volatility estimates don’t yet factor in to their 
individual decision-making strategies. Sustained attention, to be able to integrate over a wider 
envelope of time, is likely necessary for meaningful estimates of volatility. We stress, however, 
that we could have fit volatility 𝜔 and learning rate 𝜂 parameters to our data, but model 
comparisons indicate they likely would not offer true or meaningful explanations of infant 
behaviour. As we see the early emerging steps towards infant behavioural modelling59,60, we 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
urge for models fit to infant data to be held to the same standards as adults 43 to arbitrate 
parsimoniously between competing explanations and the developmental emergence of 
cognitive processes. 
Finally, we explored the relationship between pupil size and model-derived prediction errors 
as a measure of surprise. Comparing the post and pre -reversal responses yielded significant 
differences in pupil size and prediction error for 𝑛 = 3. Moreover, these differences (pupil size 
𝑃𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑙𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡−𝑃𝑟𝑒 and prediction error 𝑃𝐸𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡−𝑃𝑟𝑒) were significantly correlated for 𝑛 = 3. 
Furthermore, pupil size and prediction errors were larger on incorrect trials across the task 
and the differences between incorrect and correct trials for pupil size 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑙𝐼𝑛𝑐−𝐶𝑜𝑟 and 
prediction error 𝑃𝐸𝐼𝑛𝑐−𝐶𝑜𝑟 was also significantly correlated. These findings demonstrate that 
in infants, as in adults, pupillary responses signal surprise14,16,27,28,61,62. There is also evidence 
that noradrenergic (NA) activity, especially originating from Locus Coeruleus (LC), mediates 
pupil dilation24,25,27, and the interactions between cholinergic and noradrenergic systems are 
suggested to be involved in determining contextual changes 63,64. Our work suggests that in 
infants, pupil dilations signal contextual switches where large prediction errors are to be 
expected. Future imaging studies  – especially cutting -edge tools like high -density diffuse 
optical tomography (hdDOT 65–67), could uncover the intricate relationship the cortical 
afferents which receive projections from the LC , such as the frontal and medial prefrontal 
cortex and their role in processing prediction errors. 
This study showed that computational modelling can be a valuable method to distinguish 
between behaviourally distinct groups of infants, and it provides insight into the 
computational underpinnings of infant behaviour. The winning model explained the behaviour 
of the infants well, with a median decision fit of ≈ 86%, and also showed good parameter 
recoverability, identifiability and faithful simulations of behavioural performance. These 
results set the standards, show proof of concept, and demonstrate the potential, for the field 
of infant computational psychiatry. In particular, it will be important to discover to what extent 
these subgroups reflect either developmental stages or lasting cognitive subtypes, given the 
association of a ‘primacy bias’ in inference to rigid beliefs in adults20. 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Acknowledgements  
R.P .L is supported by a Wellcome Trust Royal Society Henry Dale Fellowhip, and funding for these 
studies was provided by a Lister Institute Biomedical Research Prize and also a Wellcome Leap grant 
awarded to R.P .L. R.A.A. is a Future Leaders Fellow (MR/W011751/1). We would like to thank all the 
infants and their parents who gave up their time to take part in this study, and also Berk Mirza for all 
of his hard work in supporting the analysis. 
References 
1. Schultz, W. (2017). Reward prediction error. Curr. Biol. 27, R369–R371. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.02.064. 
2. Schultz, W., and Dickinson, A. (2000). Neuronal coding of prediction errors. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 
23, 473–500. 
3. Dajani, D.R., and Uddin, L.Q. (2015). Demystifying cognitive flexibility: Implications for clinical 
and developmental neuroscience. Trends Neurosci. 38, 571–578. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2015.07.003. 
4. Genet, J.J., and Siemer, M. (2011). Flexible control in processing affective and non-affective 
material predicts individual differences in trait resilience. Cogn. Emot. 25, 380–388. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2010.491647. 
5. Hildebrandt, L.K., McCall, C., Engen, H.G., and Singer, T. (2016). Cognitive flexibility, heart rate 
variability, and resilience predict fine-grained regulation of arousal during prolonged threat. 
Psychophysiology 53, 880–890. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.12632. 
6. Stad, F.E., Van Heijningen, C.J., Wiedl, K.H., and Resing, W.C. (2018). Predicting school 
achievement: differential effects of dynamic testing measures and cognitive flexibility for math 
performance. Learn. Individ. Differ. 67, 117–125. 
7. Davis, J.C., Marra, C.A., Najafzadeh, M., and Liu-Ambrose, T. (2010). The independent 
contribution of executive functions to health related quality of life in older women. BMC Geriatr. 
10, 16. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2318-10-16. 
8. Memari, A.H., Ziaee, V., Shayestehfar, M., Ghanouni, P ., Mansournia, M.A., and Moshayedi, P . 
(2013). Cognitive flexibility impairments in children with autism spectrum disorders: links to age, 
gender and child outcomes. Res. Dev. Disabil. 34, 3218–3225. 
9. Lage, C., Smith, E.S., and Lawson, R.P . (2024). A meta-analysis of cognitive flexibility in autism 
spectrum disorder. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 157, 105511. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105511. 
10. Sandhu, T.R., Xiao, B., and Lawson, R.P . (2023). Transdiagnostic computations of uncertainty: 
towards a new lens on intolerance of uncertainty. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 148, 105123. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105123. 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
11. Kumar, P ., Goer, F., Murray, L., Dillon, D.G., Beltzer, M.L., Cohen, A.L., Brooks, N.H., and Pizzagalli, 
D.A. (2018). Impaired reward prediction error encoding and striatal-midbrain connectivity in 
depression. Neuropsychopharmacology 43, 1581–1588. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41386-018-
0032-x. 
12. Lawson, R., Nord, C.L., Seymour, B., Thomas, D., Dayan, P ., Pilling, S., and Roiser, J. (2017). 
Disrupted habenula function in major depression. Mol. Psychiatry 22, 202. 
13. Crawley, D., Zhang, L., Jones, E.J.H., Ahmad, J., Oakley, B., Cáceres, A.S.J., Charman, T., Buitelaar, 
J.K., Murphy, D.G.M., Chatham, C., et al. (2020). Modeling flexible behavior in childhood to 
adulthood shows age-dependent learning mechanisms and less optimal learning in autism in 
each age group. PLOS Biol. 18, e3000908. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000908. 
14. Lawson, R.P ., Mathys, C., and Rees, G. (2017). Adults with autism overestimate the volatility of 
the sensory environment. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1293–1299. 
15. Aylward, J., Valton, V., Ahn, W.-Y ., Bond, R.L., Dayan, P ., Roiser, J.P ., and Robinson, O.J. (2019). 
Altered learning under uncertainty in unmedicated mood and anxiety disorders. Nat. Hum. 
Behav. 3, 1116–1123. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0628-0. 
16. Browning, M., Behrens, T.E., Jocham, G., O’Reilly, J.X., and Bishop, S.J. (2015). Anxious individuals 
have difficulty learning the causal statistics of aversive environments. Nat. Neurosci. 
17. Hein, T.P ., Weber, L.A., de Fockert, J., and Ruiz, M.H. (2019). State anxiety biases estimates of 
uncertainty during reward learning in volatile environments. bioRxiv, 809749. 
https://doi.org/10.1101/809749. 
18. Adams, R.A., Napier, G., Roiser, J.P ., Mathys, C., and Gilleen, J. (2018). Attractor-like Dynamics in 
Belief Updating in Schizophrenia. J. Neurosci. Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 38, 9471–9485. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3163-17.2018. 
19. Powers, A.R., Mathys, C., and Corlett, P .R. (2017). Pavlovian conditioning–induced hallucinations 
result from overweighting of perceptual priors. Science 357, 596–600. 
20. Baker, S.C., Konova, A.B., Daw, N.D., and Horga, G. (2019). A distinct inferential mechanism for 
delusions in schizophrenia. Brain J. Neurol. 142, 1797–1812. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awz051. 
21. Gibbs-Dean, T., Katthagen, T., Tsenkova, I., Ali, R., Liang, X., Spencer, T., and Diederen, K. (2023). 
Belief updating in psychosis, depression and anxiety disorders: A systematic review across 
computational modelling approaches. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 147, 105087. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105087. 
22. Pulcu, E., and Browning, M. (2019). The misestimation of uncertainty in affective disorders. 
Trends Cogn. Sci. 
23. Costa, V.D., and Rudebeck, P .H. (2016). More than Meets the Eye: the Relationship between 
Pupil Size and Locus Coeruleus Activity. Neuron 89, 8–10. 
24. Joshi, S., Li, Y ., Kalwani, R.M., and Gold, J.I. (2016). Relationships between pupil diameter and 
neuronal activity in the locus coeruleus, colliculi, and cingulate cortex. Neuron 89, 221–234. 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
25. Larsen, R.S., and Waters, J. (2018). Neuromodulatory Correlates of Pupil Dilation. Front. Neural 
Circuits 12, 21. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncir.2018.00021. 
26. Braem, S., Coenen, E., Bombeke, K., van Bochove, M.E., and Notebaert, W. (2015). Open your 
eyes for prediction errors. Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 15, 374–380. 
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13415-014-0333-4. 
27. Lawson, R.P ., Bisby, J., Nord, C.L., Burgess, N., and Rees, G. (2021). The Computational, 
Pharmacological, and Physiological Determinants of Sensory Learning under Uncertainty. Curr. 
Biol. 31, 163-172.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2020.10.043. 
28. Preuschoff, K., Hart, B.M. ’t, and Einhäuser, W. (2011). Pupil dilation signals surprise: Evidence for 
noradrenaline’s role in decision making. Front. Neurosci. 5, 115. 
29. O’Callaghan, C., Hezemans, F., Subramaniam, N., Ye, R., Tsvetanov, K., Murley, A., Holland, N., 
Orlando, I., Regenthal, R., Baker, R.A., et al. (2024). Pharmacological and pupillary evidence for 
the noradrenergic contribution to reinforcement learning in Parkinson’s disease. Preprint, 
https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-4361233/v1 https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-4361233/v1. 
30. Marshall, L., Mathys, C., Ruge, D., de Berker, A.O., Dayan, P ., Stephan, K.E., and Bestmann, S. 
(2016). Pharmacological Fingerprints of Contextual Uncertainty. PLOS Biol. 14, e1002575. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002575. 
31. Holland, N., Robbins, T.W., and Rowe, J.B. (2021). The role of noradrenaline in cognition and 
cognitive disorders. Brain 144, 2243–2256. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awab111. 
32. Caspi, A., Houts, R.M., Ambler, A., Danese, A., Elliott, M.L., Hariri, A., Harrington, H., Hogan, S., 
Poulton, R., Ramrakha, S., et al. (2020). Longitudinal Assessment of Mental Health Disorders and 
Comorbidities Across 4 Decades Among Participants in the Dunedin Birth Cohort Study. JAMA 
Netw. Open 3, e203221. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.3221. 
33. Forest, T.A., Schlichting, M.L., Duncan, K.D., and Finn, A.S. (2023). Changes in statistical learning 
across development. Nat. Rev. Psychol. 2, 205–219. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44159-023-00157-
0. 
34. Xu, F., and Garcia, V. (2008). Intuitive statistics by 8-month-old infants. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 105, 
5012. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0704450105. 
35. Emberson, L.L., Richards, J.E., and Aslin, R.N. (2015). Top-down modulation in the infant brain: 
Learning-induced expectations rapidly affect the sensory cortex at 6 months. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. 112, 9585–9590. 
36. Izquierdo, A., Brigman, J., Radke, A., Rudebeck, P ., and Holmes, A. (2017). The neural basis of 
reversal learning: An updated perspective. Neuroscience 345, 12–26. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.03.021. 
37. Knight, E., and Friston, K. (2014). Autism, oxytocin and interoception. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 
47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.09.012. 
38. Piaget, J. (2013). The Construction Of Reality In The Child (Routledge) 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315009650. 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
39. Devine, R.T., Ribner, A., and Hughes, C. (2019). Measuring and predicting individual differences in 
executive functions at 14 months: a longitudinal study. Child Dev. 90, e618–e636. 
40. Kouider, S., Long, B., Le Stanc, L., Charron, S., Fievet, A.-C., Barbosa, L.S., and Gelskov, S.V. (2015). 
Neural dynamics of prediction and surprise in infants. Nat. Commun. 6. 
41. Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P ., and Pezzulo, G. (2017). Active inference: a 
process theory. Neural Comput. 29, 1–49. 
42. Mirza, M.B., Adams, R.A., Mathys, C.D., and Friston, K.J. (2016). Scene construction, visual 
foraging, and active inference. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 10, 56. 
43. Wilson, R.C., and Collins, A.G. (2019). Ten simple rules for the computational modeling of 
behavioral data. eLife 8, e49547. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.49547. 
44. Palminteri, S., Wyart, V., and Koechlin, E. (2017). The Importance of Falsification in 
Computational Cognitive Modeling. Trends Cogn. Sci. 21, 425–433. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2017.03.011. 
45. Sparrow, S.S., Cicchetti, D.V., and Balla, D.A. (2005). Vineland adaptive behavior scales Vineland-
II: Survey forms manual (Pearson Minneapolis, MN). 
46. Putnam, S.P ., Helbig, A.L., Gartstein, M.A., Rothbart, M.K., and Leerkes, E. (2014). Development 
and assessment of short and very short forms of the Infant Behavior Questionnaire–Revised. J. 
Pers. Assess. 96, 445–458. 
47. Spielberger, C.D. (2010). State-Trait anxiety inventory. Corsini Encycl. Psychol., 1–1. 
48. Willenbockel, V., Sadr, J., Fiset, D., Horne, GregO., Gosselin, F., and Tanaka, JamesW. (2010). 
Controlling low-level image properties: The SHINE toolbox. Behav. Res. Methods 42, 671–684. 
https://doi.org/10.3758/BRM.42.3.671. 
49. Kret, M.E., and Sjak-Shie, E.E. (2019). Preprocessing pupil size data: Guidelines and code. Behav. 
Res. Methods 51, 1336–1342. 
50. Friston, K., Parr, T., and Zeidman, P . (2018). Bayesian model reduction. ArXiv Prepr. 
ArXiv180507092. 
51. Caliński, T., and Harabasz, J. (1974). A dendrite method for cluster analysis. Commun. Stat.-
Theory Methods 3, 1–27. 
52. Aguiar, A., and Baillargeon, R. (1999). Perseveration and problem solving in infancy. Adv. Child 
Dev. Behav. 27, 135–180. 
53. Wellman, H.M., Cross, D., Bartsch, K., and Harris, P .L. (1986). Infant search and object 
permanence: A meta-analysis of the A-not-B error. Monogr. Soc. Res. Child Dev., i–67. 
54. Clearfield, M.W., Diedrich, F.J., Smith, L.B., and Thelen, E. (2006). Young infants reach correctly in 
A-not-B tasks: On the development of stability and perseveration. Infant Behav. Dev. 29, 435–
444. 
55. Anderson, P . (2002). Assessment and Development of Executive Function (EF) During Childhood. 
Child Neuropsychol. 8, 71–82. https://doi.org/10.1076/chin.8.2.71.8724. 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 
56. Hein, T.P ., de Fockert, J., and Ruiz, M.H. (2021). State anxiety biases estimates of uncertainty and 
impairs reward learning in volatile environments. NeuroImage 224, 117424. 
57. Pulcu, E., Shkreli, L., Holst, C.G., Woud, M.L., Craske, M.G., Browning, M., and Reinecke, A. 
(2019). The Effects of the Angiotensin II Receptor Antagonist Losartan on Appetitive Versus 
Aversive Learning: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Biol. Psychiatry 86, 397–404. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2019.04.010. 
58. Mathys, C.D., Lomakina, E.I., Daunizeau, J., Iglesias, S., Brodersen, K.H., Friston, K.J., and Stephan, 
K.E. (2014). Uncertainty in perception and the Hierarchical Gaussian Filter. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 
8, 825. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00825. 
59. Poli, F., Ghilardi, T., Bersee, J.H.M., Mars, R.B., and Hunnius, S. (2024). Infants Track 
Environmental Volatility to Optimize Their Learning. Proc. Annu. Meet. Cogn. Sci. Soc. 46. 
60. Poli, F., Serino, G., Mars, R.B., and Hunnius, S. (2020). Infants tailor their attention to maximize 
learning. Sci. Adv. 6, eabb5053. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abb5053. 
61. Lavín, C., Martín, R.S., and Jubal, E.R. (2014). Pupil dilation signals uncertainty and surprise in a 
learning gambling task. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 7, 218. 
62. Wetzel, N., Buttelmann, D., Schieler, A., and Widmann, A. (2016). Infant and adult pupil dilation 
in response to unexpected sounds. Dev. Psychobiol. 58, 382–392. 
63. Yu, A.J. (2012). Change is in the eye of the beholder. Nat Neurosci 15, 933–935. 
64. Angela, J.Y ., and Dayan, P . (2005). Uncertainty, neuromodulation, and attention. Neuron 46, 681–
692. 
65. Frijia, E.M., Billing, A., Lloyd-Fox, S., Vidal Rosas, E., Collins-Jones, L., Crespo-Llado, M.M., Amadó, 
M.P ., Austin, T., Edwards, A., Dunne, L., et al. (2021). Functional imaging of the developing brain 
with wearable high-density diffuse optical tomography: A new benchmark for infant 
neuroimaging outside the scanner environment. NeuroImage 225, 117490. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117490. 
66. Zhao, H., and Cooper, R.J. (2018). Review of recent progress toward a fiberless, whole-scalp 
diffuse optical tomography system. Neurophotonics 5, 011012–011012. 
67. Lee, C.W., Cooper, R.J., and Austin, T. (2017). Diffuse optical tomography to investigate the 
newborn brain. Pediatr. Res. 82, 376–386. 
 
 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 7, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.08.617314doi: bioRxiv preprint 