arXiv:2501.19368v3  [physics.soc-ph]  5 Feb 2025
The Physics and Metaphysics of Social Powers: Bridging
Cognitive Processing and Social Dynamics, a New Perspective
on Power through Active Inference
Mahault Albarracin 1,2,3, Sonia de Jager 4,5, David Hyland 6, and Sarah Grace Manski 7
1VERSES.ai, Los Angeles, California, USA
2Universit´ e du Qu´ ebec ` a Montr´ eal, D´ epartement d’informatique, Montr´ eal, Qu´ ebec,
Canada
3Universit´ e du Qu´ ebec ` a Montr´ eal, Institut de Sante et Societe, Montr´ eal, Qu´ ebec,
Canada
4Erasmus School of Philosophy, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, N etherlands
5Noise Research Union (NRU)
6Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
7Spatial Web Foundation, Los Angeles, California, USA
Abstract
The concept of power can be explored at several scales: from p hysical action and process ef-
fectuation, all the way to complex social dynamics. A spectr um-wide analysis of power requires
attention to the fundamental principles that constrain the se processes. In the social realm, the
acquisition and maintenance of power is intertwined with bo th social interactions and cognitive
processing capacity: socially-facilitated empowerment g rants agents more information-processing
capacities and opportunities, either by relying on others t o bring about desired policies or ul-
timately outcomes, and/or by enjoying more information-pr ocessing possibilities as a result of
relying on others for the reproduction of (material) tasks. The eﬀects of social empowerment thus
imply an increased ability to harness computation toward de sired ends, thereby augmenting the
evolution of a speciﬁc state space.
Empowered individuals attract the attention of others, who contribute to increasing the scale
of their access to various policies eﬀectuating these state spaces. The presented argument posits
that social power, in the context of active inference, is a fu nction of several variables, among them:
an individual’s or group’s ability to attract the attention of others with the ability to facilitate
desired policies, and an individual’s or group’s capacity t o eﬀectively process information. As
a result of its power-amplifying eﬀects, this extended comp utational ability also buﬀers against
possible vulnerabilities. Semantic social artifacts (nar ratives, ideologies, histories, representation,
etc.) as attentional scripts (ensuring the coordination of social patterns: psychological schemata,
habits, groupthink, insulation, policies, etc.: [ Albarracin et al. , 2021]), are the structures under
and by which agents mediate and leverage power, and are thus t his article’s main objects of
analysis.
Narratives are social mechanisms which have the ability to m ake or break power [ Blakeley,
2024]. Not-yet-engaged scripts (speculations, ﬁctions, etc.: future forecasting) can be understood
as semantic attractors enabling—relatively—risk-free le arning [ de Jager , 2022]. Possibilistic cogni-
tive explorations in the form of, e.g., (ﬁctional) narrativ es allow agents to consider counterfactual
scenarios and minimize uncertainty without exposure to “re al-world” consequences. This mech-
anism frames both the evolutionary advantage and persisten t appeal of narrative engagement in
human culture. In the context of power, leveraging “strong n arratives”—such as “us versus them”
reductionisms—greatly minimizes uncertainty (technical ly: variational free energy, the divergence
between what is expected and what is actually experienced) a bout an agent’s or group’s current
predicaments, and thus become appealing (sometimes self-f ulﬁlling) policies that bring about their
eﬀects, resulting in collective behaviors which can be bene ﬁcial or detrimental to the greater whole
[Albarracin et al. , 2022].
1
The eﬀects of variational free energy-minimization can be o bserved at the level of the basic
structures of language: (semantic) attractors such as redu ndancy, rhyme and alliteration, can be
understood as patterns which aid memory, communication and information-retrieval policies: they
permanently reappear, pooling attention to the “same” phen omena, thus greatly reducing the need
to decode and recode linguistic interaction anew. By way of t he same uncertainty-minimizing
mechanisms, (simple or complex) narrative scripts create c ognitive situations where agents can
reduce complex aspects of the world down to preferred and/or already-identiﬁed scenarios. Unlike
“direct” experience, where prediction errors present imme diate risks, narratives provide speculative
semantic spaces for exploring models against hypothetical outcomes. With regard to social power,
the problems immediately emerge in situations where collec tive attention controlled by agents
already beneﬁting from dominant narratives can lead to, e.g ., the exacerbation of misinformation,
echo chambers, conspiracy theories, etc. (ibid.), in an att empt to retain attention and therefore
power. In political communication and organization, where the proliferation of scripts can be
understood as an optimization of the learning/risk trade-o ﬀ inherent in active inference, this is
of crucial attention, particularly at a time when the democr atic, technological and futurological
organization of life is in question.
We propose that individuals wield power not only by associat ing with others possessing de-
sirable policies, but also by enhancing their ability to int ake and compute information eﬀectively.
This dual mechanism is argued to create a cyclical, reinforc ing pattern wherein the empowered
are able to incrementally expand the scope of policies and st ate spaces available to them while
minimizing risk-exposure. The theoretical framework deve loped here has implications for under-
standing both the cognitive foundations of script engageme nt in the mediation and evolution of
power, as well as strategies for their possible modulations . Formalizing and modeling these mech-
anisms demands special attention in the context of futurolo gical prospects. This article reorients
what has been previously framed in terms of territorial, mat erial and cultural power towards what
can now be understood in terms of informational and computat ional power. All of these have
received attention as forms of capital; a term we can reframe under active inference as possibilistic
power, i.e., the creation of the future.
Keywords— Power, Scripts, Active inference, Narratives, Semantic at traction, Shared intentionality, Col-
lective intentionality, Attention
Introduction: The Nature of Power
The concept of power has a long history, and can be explored at several scales. In t his article, our interest
is to explore the concept as a phenomenon that can be understo od as unfolding across scales, by framing
and formalizing it through active inference. In the context of social organization dynamics, one of the most
compelling elucidations of what constitutes the nature of p ower was presented by Michel Foucault:
“... power must be understood in the ﬁrst instance as the multiplicity of force relations immanent
in the sphere in which they operate and which constitute thei r own organization ; as the process
which, through ceaseless struggles and confrontations, tr ansforms, strengthens, or reverses them;
as the support which these force relations ﬁnd in one another , thus forming a chain or a system ,
or on the contrary, the disjunctions and contradictions which isolate them from on e another ; and
lastly, as the strategies in which they take eﬀect...” ([
Foucault, 1990], pp. 92–93, our emphasis in
bold).
The phenomenon, as well as the representations of what preci sely constitutes the social acquisition and
maintenance of power, is thus a complex series of multidirec tional processes which cannot be simplistically or
hierarchically schematized, but must be analyzed in terms o f interactions between agents and the constraint-
regimes they are embedded within. Traditionally, the frami ng of socially-facilitated empowerment—such as that
of the state, or of a large corporation—has been understood a s the eﬀectuation of (often top-down) strategies,
tactics, policies, narratives (i.e., scripts, as will be argued later) which grant empowered agents/syst ems more
leverage, that is: more inﬂuence on future states 1. We will frame this in terms of information-processing
capacities and opportunities, where powerful agents eithe r rely on others to bring about desired policies (i.e.,
exploitation: in the biological and sociological senses), or enjoy more information-processing possibilities as
a result of relying on others for the reproduction of (materi al) tasks (i.e., exploration). The eﬀects of social
empowerment therefore imply an increased ability to comput e information, thereby augmenting the evolution
of a speciﬁc state space. Basing our arguments in active infe rence, as will be explained, will allow for an
analysis of “[p]ower [a]s the probability that one actor wit hin a social relationship will be in a position to carry
1Note: here we refer to the meaning of state as “condition”, no t in the political sense. However, the double entendre
is opportune in this context.
2
out [their] will despite resistance,”( Weber [2009], p. 152) in terms of actual 2 probabilities. We will present
novel understandings of concepts such as scripts and attent ion, by analyzing power in terms of the physics of
beliefs [ Ramstead et al. , 2023], and the metaphysics of social organization, where metaph ysics is understood
as the possibilistic exploration of state spaces (i.e., the future).
The outline of the article is as follows: in the subsections t hat follow, we present a necessarily broad and
brief elucidation of diﬀerent understandings of power, pri marily by way of philosophy and sociology, in order to
set the focus on the concept of power as the control of attenti on via explorative and exploitative scripts, which
can exist as shared metacognitive computing conditions (i. e., agents are relatively aware of the implications of
scripts), coercive domination (where agents are subsumed u nder a narrative which does not beneﬁt them), or:
often an inevitable combination of both. In section 2, we exp lain the formal context of Active Inference as the
theoretical ground which will sustain our analysis. In sect ion 3, we synthesize the previous sections towards
an explanation of social scripts and power, and how scripts c an frame the concept of narratives, attention,
coercion and resistance. In section 4, we look at power throu gh the lens of Active Inference, and in section 5,
we treat the formal framework integration. We conclude by pr esenting attentional strategies which can result
in alternative modulations of power.
0.1 Power-pooling in, through and between agents
Gravitational metaphors abound in language [
Shepard, 1987, Lakoﬀ and Johnson , 2003, Dennett, 1992, de Jager ,
2021, Kent, 2024]3). Such gravitational metaphors ﬁnd analogues in the networ k sciences, whereby preferen-
tial attachment processes lead to additional power accruin g increasingly to those already in possession of it
[Barab´ asi and Albert, 1999]. The idea of power being pooled towards complex social attr actors was famously
presented by Pierre Bordieu, who linked various concepts of capital (cultural, political, etc.) to power as
social (at)traction, borrowing the metaphor from physical ﬁeld theory 4. We expand on his legacy which takes
the ontoepistemological and the empirical to be inseparabl e—and his desire to ground sociological analyses of
habitus in a scientiﬁcally tractable manner—by framing the se attentional attractors that move systems toward
speciﬁc conﬁgurations, through Active Inference (AIF). An other key thinker of power in the 20th century
was Hannah Arendt. Arendt’s relational idea of collective p ower frames its essence as communicative, public
and permanent potential: people may gain momentum together , but power is never guaranteed. Coercion,
(symbolic) violence and oppressive authority, in her frami ng, do not constitute power but are rather reduc-
tions of its possibility. In our context, this diﬀerentiati on would imply the ﬁrst presentation being shared
cultural narratives towards explorative change, and the se cond as top-down exploitative practices which re-
duce the possibility of novelty in given structures (system s such as communities; identities, histories, etc.).
Similarly, more recently, Grace Blakeley has analyzed the d isempowerment of collective political imagination
by presenting this as the disillusion 5 with shared narratives: democratic engagement in the conte xt of, e.g.,
British politics, has been aﬀected by a sense of lack of agenc y (from “there is no alternative” all the way
to the not-so “free” market 6). This resulting political disenchantment was framed earl ier by Mark Fisher in
terms of the privatization or individualization of systemi c stress [ Fisher, 2009]: through strategic narratives
which set public attention on individual responsibility, p ublics become overwhelmed by having to resolve, at
the individual level, stress which is in fact systemic. Whet her we are talking about a metastabilizing “in-
visible hand” or modeling swarm-organization [ Wareham et al. , 2023]: we know of many systems that have
2Weber’s quote ends in “... regardless of the basis on which th is probability rests.” (ibid.). We will challenge this
through a material-informatic analysis, as the basis of thi s probability is not trivial. See, e.g., [ Ramstead et al. , 2023], on
the introduction of a “formal language for modelling the con straints, forces, potentials, and other quantities determ ining
the dynamics of such systems, especially as they entail dyna mics on a space of beliefs (i.e., on a statistical manifold)” for
more background on the possible bridges between material an d informatics in terms of Bayesian mechanics. Also note
that the translation of “probability” in Weber has also been that of “ability”, “capacity”, and other terms, we take one
of the most popular formulations here which also aids our pur pose of framing this in terms of a probabilistic mechanics.
3Lachlan Kent has further argued that the vestibular system, which regulates graviception, also aﬀects the higher-
order consciousness of selfhood [ Kent, 2024]: gravity constrains physical proprioception and action, as well as the very
sense of a narrative self [ Dennett, 1992].
4Just as electromagnetic ﬁelds exert forces on particles dep ending on their position and properties, Bourdieu concep-
tualized social ﬁelds as spaces where agents’ positions are (pre)determined by their access to diﬀerent forms of capita l
(economic, cultural, symbolic, etc.). Bourdieu’s use of ﬁe ld theory therefore frames system structure and the dynamic s
of agency: a given ﬁeld structures possible actions by deﬁni ng what counts as accepted or legitimate, and habitus as
inclinations; dispositions, determine how ﬁelds are navig ated: possibilities. The ensuing social practices herein a re the
result of heuristics comparable to satisﬁcing/fast and fru gal heuristics, which in our context are formalizable throu gh
AIF.
5In our terms, perhaps, understood as the loss of attentional momentum.
6“This sense of unfreedom is grounded in the deep disparities of power that exist within capitalist societies—many of
which are completely invisible. Most people are denied auto nomy over their lives, yet we are consistently told that we
are free to choose how we live. Life under capitalism means li fe under a system in which decisions about how we work,
how we live, and what we buy have already been made by someone e lse. Life under capitalism means living in a planned
economy, while being told that you are free.” ([ Blakeley, 2024], p. 6, our emphasis in bold).
3
infelicitous critical points when scaling: requisite vari ety demands that control systems maintain suﬃcient
internal complexity (entropy) to match the complexity of wh at they aim to control. This can be understood
at a number of levels (in modeling: computational tractabil ity problems regarding communication between
agents that have to do with temporal tracking and issues such as latency, for example), but at the level of
social dynamics and the (in)eﬃciencies of power asymmetrie s, this is most obvious in the context of the power
of attention: the assertion of a speciﬁc narrative, if it gai ns traction as a collective belief, will result in the
simpliﬁcation (and mobilization) of desire. That is: a stro ng-enough narrative can become a script which
agents incorporate as part of their generative model, rathe r than as a meta-consideration (a highly possibilistic
variable), existing on a dialogical landscape. In crude ter ms: the diﬀerence between the ﬁrst and the second
can be exempliﬁed by the situation where an agent believes th at any single solution can solve national scale
problems, such as the deportation of immigrants supposedly solving every socio-economic issue in a very large
nation. Our framing allows for a new take on the dialectics be tween the individual and the collective. In terms
of questions of information-processing capacity: not only are resource-distribution and the division of labor
a systemic fact, but also: since the modulation and projecti on of future possibilities cannot be computed at
the level of the individual due to its high complexity, this i s how and why the minimization of uncertainty for
social systems is, in fact, social. Agents seek alliances an d policies which ensure cognition (i.e., information
processing and future-projection) can be distributed [ Vasil et al. , 2020], as this allows for eﬃcient practical
traction because of “epistemic conﬁdence in knowing, inter preting, and acting together” [ Shteynberg et al. ,
2023]. This is the basis for any division of labor, where speciali zed roles and collaborative synergy optimize
task execution. As demonstrated by [ Ispolatov et al. , 2012], division of labor in biological systems improves
ﬁtness by compartmentalizing incompatible processes, whi le [ Labella, 2007] shows its application in robotics,
enhancing adaptability and resource eﬃciency. [ Marzband et al. , 2017] show that coalition-based strategies in
distributed energy resources maximize collective beneﬁts , oﬀering a model for scalable and cooperative sys-
tems in human and artiﬁcial contexts. This is in contrast wit h individualized agency—which is a prerequisite
for social coercion—where one’s estimation of “divergence in mental states between self and other(s)” allows
for the “prediction and interpretation of others’ behavior ” [ Shteynberg et al. , 2023], resulting in shorter-range
practical eﬀects. Remaining politically-agnostic in any a nalysis presents us with some questions: what can
we assume to actually know about each other when we act collec tively? The concept of a ‘self’ as a single
agent seems particularly questionable, especially as all s elves exist within a regime of constraints which exert
eﬀects on their supposed autonomy. A famous response to the F oucauldian take on power and the individual
came from Gilles Deleuze. His concept of the “-dividual” rep laces the image of, e.g., the factory worker as a
subject of disciplinary capitalism, with the image of a dist ributed subjectivity, e.g., the owner of a credit card
as a subject of libertarian debt, occupying various spatiot emporal scales and modulated not by clock-time or
physical enclosure, but by probabilities and contractual ﬁ xation/limitation [ Deleuze, 1992]. The latter condi-
tion emerges, Deleuze shows, as a result of novel paradigms o f technocapitalism which present new constraint
regimes. Distribution, collectivity, or shared sameness, therefore, do not always equal autonomous collective
traction, but can also be the result of policies which pool po wer towards attractors, where the agents implicated
within them may not even be aware of their implication (the ex amples in capitalism are vast: we have very
little idea of the complexity behind the products we buy into , but we are coerced into buying nonetheless 7).
In the interest of this article, the concept tying all these p rocesses towards an analysis of power dynamics is
that of attention. We will brieﬂy treat this below (and in lat er sections) before moving to section 2 for an
exposition of the AIF framework.
0.2 Attention as power: shared narratives and awareness or coercion
Exerting social control over others’ actions begins at the l evel of attention: whether this be by attracting
attention (“follow me!”), or directing attention (“look at that!”). Our interest in formalizing certain aspects
of power dynamics is directing attention towards (metacogn itive and collective) scripts with the capacity of
empowering responses to counter dominant strategies which , currently, minimize uncertainty for the very few
8.
Shared structures of meaning can exist as collective metaco gnitive computing conditions, i.e., conditions in
which agents are—relatively—aware of the implications of t he scripts they follow, or coercive domination:
where agents are subsumed under a script which, often, does n ot beneﬁt their uncertainty-minimization on the
long run. If we understand successful narratives as those wh ich exert the most eﬀect 9, analyzing them in terms
of attention seems logical: in the context of uncertainty-m inimization, simple narratives have the capacity to
7For more on this theme, see “Post-control Script-societies ” [ de Jager , 2023].
8Again, often by allocating too much importance to the atomiz ed individual, which is a predictably convenient way
to simplify the actions of complex distributed processes su ch as individuals, into overseeable patterns. There is noth ing
essentially “wrong” with this, this is the way perception tr acks reality. However, revealing these dynamics allows us a n
entrance into the ways in which we may modulate (the eﬀects of ) these phenomena/concepts.
9Often “fast and frugal” [ Gigerenzer, 2008, Simon, 1978] heuristics and narratives, which are low-risk and, in most
political contexts, imply promises or solutions impossibl e to accomplish: “you have been lied to”, “the other is the
problem”, etc.
4
dominate vast regimes of attention (economies), as they are scripts which minimize the complexities of life into
low-computation, predictable visions 10.
In the transition between an economy centered around materi al and spatial capital, towards one of temporal,
speculative capital, we can straightforwardly connect att ention to computation by understanding the implicit
link between risk-assessment and investment: (possible) f uture gains ought to be calculated, and directing
investment begins with attentional gains 11. Beyond the strictly ﬁnancial realm, in the context of futur ology
and planetary survival, the concept of AI technologies as “p owerful” grounds the arguments surrounding
possible existential risks. E.g., Cappelen et al. rely on th e concept of “power” in order to assess to what extent
humans may or may not lose control over their own technologic al creations [ Cappelen et al. , 2024]. Likewise,
other authors make claims for “powerful yet narrow AI system s” as incapable of accommodating the semantic
complexity which grounds mortal life [ Ororbia and Friston , 2023]12. What these assessments have in common
is a concern with attention as a resource: a collectively pre dicted future is one where attention is directed
towards synchronized goals (whether this be investment, al ignment, etc.).
Ultimately, because potential power (as attention) is both a material and an informational force, “seizing
the means of computation” (Doctorow, 2023) follows in line w ith a Marxist analysis of capital in our moving
paradigm: from materialist analyses of territorial and lab or time domination, through a semantic-sociocultural
analysis [ Bourdieu, 2018], to informational analyses where we ought to think about th e production of the future
by means of projective computation. Power is thus based on th e controlling of attention by way of scripts
(again: narratives, representation, identities, symboli sms, etc.) and its current substrate in our contemporary
landscape is computation: both in the ﬂesh and in silico. As w e will see in section 3, power’s dual nature (as
force attraction and information computation) in the socia l realm thus implies the use of scripts as they are the
means by which agents gain or lose the ability to direct the at tention of other agents (with access to desired
policies), and the ability to eﬀectively process informati on in favor of these policies (and other longer-term
possibilities).
The variables modulating regimes of attention that have pra ctical modeling potential are plenty, and in
sections 4 and 5, our interest is in the control, inﬂuence, an d synchronization of attention, which lead to
social power structures. Our focus will be on empowerment qu antiﬁed as agents’ potential inﬂuence over
their environment (which is tracked by assessing the mutual information between actions and states). We
will analyze this through formal methods that are tractable , but this presents us with indications of future
modeling possibilities, which in our context remain unform alized as they are practically intractable. We can
think, for example, about the modeling of “inheritance” or “ provenance” variables: wherever/however an agent
exists, they could be born into a rich family, in a speciﬁc par t of the world, etc., and these factors have an
inﬂuence on how others interpret them (and therefore on life -expectancy: mortality, and many other crucial
eﬀects). One can also posit a possible “frictions/continge ncies/contextualities” variable—in colloquial terms
“you have to work with what you’ve got”—by which, even if agen ts can attract others’ attention and process
information eﬀectively towards the eﬀectuation of a speciﬁ c policy, the projected goal and thus possible state
space is constrained by a context which can be highly diverge nt from the “ideal” one they project as required
for bringing a goal about. Conﬁdence in policies is a well-fr amed and studied variable in the context of AIF, and
in the literature it is often directly linked to the concept o f power: “self-conﬁdence [is] the person’s experience
of their power to act in the world” [ Kiverstein et al. , 2019]. There are more, of course, and it depends on how
granular one may want to go, these are examples which give the reader an indication of our intentions in later
sections.
Power as potential, as force: as the ability to do work in phys ics and the ability to do work in the
socioreproductive realm, represent two sides of the same co in: the mechanics of matter and energy sustain
the dynamics of complex systems; which, in turn, modulate ma tter and energy. Under AIF, this ‘common
currency’ can be studied as the process by which state spaces are explored by collectives (dis)attending to
projective possibilities. In order to understand this bett er, formalizations are necessary, which is our interest
in this paper: awareness about the modulation of attention b egins at the level of understanding the constraints
framing attention. As Foucault notes in “The Subject and Pow er” [ Foucault, 1982], formalizations are not
without their reductive, objectifying problems, but are ne cessary in order to drive critical analysis forward.
Further, he also notes: “What we need is a new economy of power relations—the word “economy” being used
10Whether these are dialogical and representational/symbol ic or surreptitious and encrypted: we’re dealing with
diﬀerent strategies, but similar results.
11“A suﬃciently large ﬁnancial institution has the power to di rect investment into certain technologies and therefore
to determine which futures are available and which ones are f oreclosed. And all these ﬁrms can consolidate their power
by buying up competitors, erecting barriers to entry, and cr ushing workers’ attempts to organize, further insulating t hem
from competitive pressure and giving them signiﬁcant autho rity both within their domains and over society as a whole.”
[Blakeley, 2024].
12They continue: “One might view the future as residing in not v iewing intelligence as a diﬀerence engine but instead
as an artiﬁcial form of sentience: one that is capable of self -healing and self-repairing with autonomy — its existentia l
imperative being to persist in (generalized) synchrony wit h its world.” (ibid.). The questions of “autonomy” and
“synchrony” are precisely the ones we are after in this artic le, by observing how power, in mortally-determined social
systems, is driven by attention.
5
in its theoretical and practical sense” (p. 779). This is, in great part, what we aim to explore here, not an
established structure but “a technique, a form of power” (p. 781): attention itself, analyzed under AIF.
In the socioconstructive realm we currently observe: those under duress resort to inevitably short-term
policies, as well as pool their attentional trust in those wh o seem to promise them less uncertainty 13. Those
who can rely on the minimization of uncertainty because of hi storically-given, infrastructural factors have
access to more and therefore longer-term leverage on the unf olding future. Power as the exertion of longer-
term agency implies that, to begin with, an agent relies on fa ctors that make more spacetime available for the
computation (as projection: planning and eﬀectuation) of p ossible futures.
We now present the theoretical framework before moving on to deﬁning formal aspects of this, i.e., the
ways in which we may organize variables in narratives as scri pts, and how controlling a narrative or exerting
a script implies controlling attention, which implies powe r.
1 Theoretical Framework: Active Inference
AIF posits that biological systems maintain their existenc e by minimizing a quantity known as free en-
ergy—an upper bound on surprise or unlikeliness given senso ry data. AIF extends this principle to explain how
agents—whether cells, brains, or organisms—actively alig n their internal models with their environments to en-
sure adaptive behavior. It ascribes a dual role to perceptio n and action: while perception updates beliefs about
the world based on sensory inputs, action minimizes discrep ancies between sensory inputs and predictions by
altering the environment to match internal expectations (F riston, 2009).
This is fundamentally embodied and enactive. Through it we i ntegrate ideas from predictive processing and
Bayesian inference. It is a useful tool to cast self-organiz ing systems as nested within hierarchical generative
models that predict sensory inputs at multiple spatiotempo ral scales.
Interestingly, we can also link it to an enactive inference p erspective, which focuses more strongly on the
role of action in shaping perception. Under this lens, belie fs are formed actively. For readers unfamiliar
with the intricacies of Active Inference Framework (AIF), t his concept can be seen as a dynamic process where
agents optimize their interactions with and models of the wo rld to reduce uncertainty and maintain homeostasis,
allostasis, or homeorhesis [
Ororbia and Friston , 2023]. AIF highlights the importance of generative models that
represent the structure of the environment and guide behavi or. It directly integrates perceptual, cognitive, and
motor processes.
Generative models are thus the heart of any AIF agent. They re present a structured way for agents to
analyze sensory inputs and infer their possible causes. The se models consist of hierarchical representations
that generate predictions about sensory states based on bel iefs (i.e., inductive habits) about hidden causes.
Generative processes represent the true states of the world that produce sensory observations, while generative
models represent the agent’s internal hypotheses of these p rocesses. AIF hinges on the alignment of models
with processes, with actions taken to correct any mismatch. This framework allows agents to learn both the
structure of the environment and eﬀective policies through message-passing algorithms, which mimic neuronal
processes [ Parr et al. , 2019].
Generative models can be organized hierarchically, with ea ch layer producing predictions about the level
below it. For example, higher levels might model abstract ca uses (such as intentions or environmental condi-
tions), while lower levels represent more immediate sensor y or motor states. Each layer generates predictions
(i.e., expected sensory states) based on inferred hidden ca uses and corrects these predictions based on incoming
data. This process is mathematically described through con ditional dependencies that cascade through each
layer.
In generative models, the primary components involved in se nse-making include observable sensory states,
hidden states, and parameters that encode the probabilisti c dependencies between them: Sensory states are the
inputs that the agent receives from the environment. They ar e the observations the model is trying to predict
or explain based on hidden states and other parameters. Sens ory states provide feedback to the generative
model, helping the agent assess how well its predictions ali gn with real-world data. This can be represented as
P (o | s, θ ), where s is a hidden state, and θ represents the parameters of the generative model. Hidden s tates
capture the unobserved causes or latent variables that the a gent infers to explain sensory states. Hidden states
can represent underlying factors or situations that produc e the sensory input, which aren’t directly measurable
but can be inferred from patterns in sensory states. In Bayes ian terms, these are inferred by the model to
reduce uncertainty (or surprise) about observable data. Th e distribution over hidden states can be represented
as P (s | θ), where θ (i.e., the generative model parametrization) inﬂuences th e hidden state predictions based
on prior beliefs or learned parameters. Parameters deﬁne th e relationships between hidden and sensory states.
Parameters capture the structural and statistical depende ncies within the model and are updated over time to
13“...in trials in which the agents’ prior beliefs are strong, such as after a change of mind, they do not simply follow
one another, but try to fulﬁll their prior belief—and this ex plains why we observe several errors after only one of the
agents changes mind. These examples illustrate that it is th e strength (or the precision) of the beliefs about the joint
goal context that determines whether or not an imitative res ponse takes place.” [ Maisto et al. , 2024].
6
maximize model ﬁtness to the data. Parameters specify the ex act form of dependencies, such as the strength
or variance of the connection between hidden states and obse rvable outcomes.
The likelihood function deﬁnes the probability of observat ions o given hidden states s and parameters θ. It
measures how well a speciﬁc combination of hidden states and parameters can predict or explain the observed
data. The prior distribution encapsulates the model’s beliefs about the hidden states be fore observing any
data. This distribution is essential in Bayesian inference as it provides a reference point or initial expectation
about the hidden states. The posterior distribution represents the updated belief about hidden states after
observing sensory data. Using Bayes’ rule, the posterior di stribution combines the likelihood and prior to form
an updated probability distribution over hidden states.
Model evidence, or marginal likelihood, represents the pro bability of observing data under the generative
model, integrating out the hidden states. This term is used i n model comparison and is a measure of how well
the model as a whole can explain observed data.
1.1 Free energy minimization
Free energy minimization is the unifying principle that mot ivates perception, cognition, and action in Active
Inference Framework (AIF). As described in Parr and Friston ’s 2019 paper, this minimization occurs at both
local and larger scales [
Parr et al. , 2019]. Free energy minimization at cellular and cognitive level s could reﬂect
larger systemic constraints and eﬃciencies. This process i nvolves reducing the divergence between an agent’s
predictions and its sensory inputs, maintaining a state of l ow surprise or entropy.
Free energy is an upper bound on the “surprise” (or negative l og-probability) an agent experiences given
its observations ( o). Surprise reﬂects the degree to which sensory data diverge s from an agent’s predictions,
but it is generally intractable to compute directly. Variational free energy (VFE), an approximation applied
by Friston and others to the study of the brain [ Friston et al. , 2006, 2015, 2016], allows the agent to sidestep
this intractability by using an internal generative model, represented as q-distributions over hidden (latent)
states ( s), to approximate the posterior distribution. The variatio nal free energy F can be expressed as:
F = DKL[q(s) ∥ p(s | o)]  
Divergence
− ln p(o)  
surprise
= DKL[q(s) ∥ p(s)]  
Complexity
− Eq(s)[ln p(o | s)]  
Accuracy
.
Here, DKL[q(s) ∥ p(s | o)] is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the appr oximate posterior q(s)
and the true posterior p(s | o). Minimizing this term aligns the agent’s beliefs (encoded in q) with the posterior
distribution.
The actual sensory data (encoded in p). The − ln p(o) term represents the surprise, or the negative log
model evidence, which represents how poorly a model ﬁts the d ata it is trying to explain.
Eq(s)[ln p(o | s)] represents the expected log-likelihood of observations given the hidden states. Maximizing
this term makes the agent’s model predictive of actual senso ry inputs. To minimize free energy and align their
sensory inputs with their predictions, agents have to updat e their beliefs about the world. Belief updating
under AIF is achieved through variational Bayesian inferen ce, whereby agents continuously update their beliefs
about the state of the world based on new sensory information . This allows agents to make predictions and
adjust their actions to conﬁrm these predictions, thereby p reserving a coherent sense of self and environment.
Given appropriate belief updating, the system can then sele ct actions that are consistent with its internal
generative model. This eﬀectively ensures that the chosen p olicies minimize future free energy. This mech-
anism has broad implications, enabling goal-directed beha vior and coherent action selection, even in novel
environments.
Minimization can be broken down into two complementary stra tegies. Agents can perform perceptual or
active inference, which are inextricably related. Perceptual inf erence entails adjusting beliefs about hidden
states to make them more consistent with current sensory dat a, which is akin to learning or updating internal
representations to match the environment. AIF, on the other hand, entails modifying the environment or
seeking new sensory data to make incoming data consistent wi th beliefs, guiding action selection and resulting
in a feedback loop where actions bring sensory data closer to expectations. It is important to note diﬃculty
in diﬀerentiation between the active and the perceptive, wh ich brings us to the question of modeling collective
desire: is there a way to tell the diﬀerence between when we ac t according to an “inner” logic we have conscious
cognitive access to, and when are we moved by a logic we simply ‘feel’ driven by? Friston and others postulate
that free energy minimization, as a principle, might reﬂect broader systemic eﬃciencies in biological scaling
laws, where living systems seek to maintain optimal interna l states (allostatic setpoints) with minimal energetic
cost [ Vasil et al. , 2020]. The “average” aspect is important to emphasize here: for c omplex systems, long-term
averages may signify signiﬁcant shorter-term high-risk, h igh-energy investments.
7
For example, cells engage in biochemical processes that aim to maintain homeostasis, and deviations from
expected internal states (e.g., due to external changes) tr igger corrective actions, such as upregulating certain
pathways to maintain ion balances or in response to increase d energy demand. This is a form of local free energy
minimization. In cognition, the brain applies predictive c oding, where sensory inputs are compared against
predictions generated by a hierarchical generative model. Mismatches trigger updates (prediction errors) at
successive hierarchical levels, ultimately inﬂuencing co gnition and behavior to minimize surprise. Free energy
minimization translates into entropy reduction. Entropy h ere quantiﬁes uncertainty about the states of the
world, and free energy minimization reduces this uncertain ty by aligning beliefs (internal model) with reality
(sensory inputs).
Part of the internal model of an agent may include prediction s about its own actions. Such predictions can
be thought of as plans, which may be optimized to bring about desirable outcomes. I n information-theoretic
terms, this results in a shift from minimizing the Variation al Free Energy (VFE) to minimizing the Expected
Free Energy (EFE), which can be decomposed into two components— extrinsic value (goal-directed, rewarding
outcomes) and epistemic value (uncertainty reduction). Minimizing EFE addresses both im mediate needs and
long-term information gathering, balancing exploration a nd exploitation through actions aimed at reducing
uncertainty about future outcomes. It is expressed as:
G = − Eq(s,o |π )
[
DKL[q(s | o, π )∥q(s | π )]
]
  
Epistemic value
− Eq(o|π )[ln ˜p(o)]  
Pragmatic value
,
where ln ˜p(o) represents the agent’s preferences over observations or extrinsic value , expressed as a (biased)
prior probability distribution over observations [ Parr et al. , 2022]. The ﬁrst term represents the (negative)
expected information gain or epistemic value , which scores the degree to which an agent expects to update
their beliefs in light of new sensory data. By pursuing outco mes that maximize a balance between epistemic
and extrinsic values, agents simultaneously satisfy immed iate goals and resolve uncertainty, driving adaptive
behavior in complex environments.
1.2 Why active inference is suitable for modeling power dynamics
Active Inference Framework (AIF) is well-suited to underst and power dynamics, beginning with individual
agents as predictive systems that minimize uncertainty thr ough perception and action [
Bruineberg, 2017].
These agents develop control through embodied interaction with their environment, establishing what Bru-
ineberg calls the “primacy of the ’I Can”’—the fundamental a bility, or power, to inﬂuence one’s surroundings.
This individual control scales up through generative model s that enable agents to predict and understand
others’ intentions [ Friston et al. , 2020, Vasil et al. , 2020], while attention is fundamentally shaped by deep
preferences that determine what becomes salient in the envi ronment [ Parvizi-Wayne, 2024].
At the social level, power dynamics emerge through shared pr edictive models and environmental mediation.
Groups develop shared narratives that coordinate actions a nd expectations [ Bouizegarene et al. , 2020], while
stigmergic processes allow for distributed control throug h environmental modiﬁcations that inﬂuence collective
behavior [ Friedman et al. , 2021]. This social coordination is reinforced through deontic cues that signal social
norms and expectations [ Constant et al. , 2019], while cultural practices shape attention patterns to cre ate
shared perceptual landscapes within the environment. Join t attention and shared ﬁelds of aﬀordances enable
eﬃcient coordination through mutual understanding of acti on possibilities [ Tison and Poirier , 2021, Vasil et al. ,
2020].
These mechanisms ultimately can give rise to complex power s tructures through decentralized interactions
rather than top-down control [ Friedman et al. , 2021]. Groups self-organize into subgroups based on belief sim-
ilarity [ Kastel et al. , 2023], while inﬂuence spreads through network structures that a mplify certain messages
while marginalizing others [ Albarracin et al. , 2022]. This process creates systems of ‘cultural capital’ [ Bourdieu,
2018] where shared knowledge and norms enable eﬃcient navigatio n of social contexts [ Constant et al. , 2019,
Hip´ olito and van Es, 2022]. The result is a dynamic system where power emerges from the interplay of indi-
vidual prediction, social inﬂuence, and cultural learning , all of which can be uniﬁed under the principles of
AIF.
The question of social sameness (as in “same” narratives, be lief similarity, etc.) and (dis)attention to it, is
therefore a political question. If attention is fundamenta lly shaped by deep preferences that determine what
becomes salient in the environment for an agent or group, the n we ought to ask how the production and
performance of scripts (habitus, narratives: histories, i dentities, etc.) can be newly understood so that we may
critically construct these collectively, without risking that this collectivity is induced by strong homogenizing
scripts which occlude or incapacitate ever-renewing possi bilities (as warned by Arendt). Incentives to promote
legibility in a population can also manifest in institution s shaping and direction of attention toward speciﬁc
narratives [ Scott, 2020], and may similarly arise in collectively determined scrip ts. Thus, a balance needs
to be maintained between beneﬁts such as improved coordinat ion and an oversuppression of diversity among
8
constituent members of collectives. As mentioned earlier, “There is no alternative” can be understood as the
poster-child of ‘one-dimensional’14 visions eﬀectuated by reducing complex systems into simpli ﬁed structures
which pool attention towards a speciﬁc goal. Through our tre atment, a new deﬁnition of social power can thus
be understood as possibilistic. Essentially: if we ought to adopt a politics based on the knowledge that scripts
work in the ways discussed above and in what follows below, an d if the organization of life is hierarchical by
deﬁnition (both physically and metaphysically: we are give n to a world of already-existing constraints which we
organize around by means of concepts aimed at future possibi lities), taking account of this by understanding
the nature of distributed generative models—over time: as g enerations, as the representation of historical
narratives, etc.—oﬀers a vision of possibilistic landscap es based on collective dynamics (and their analyzable
mechanics) which can be framed beyond our current visions ba sed on simplistic ideas of agency as individualized
freedom and through atomized actors.
2 Social Scripts and Power
2.1 Scripts as frameworks for social behavior
Social scripts are blueprints that enable agents to navigat e social situations and select situationally appropriate
behaviors [
Albarracin et al. , 2021]. They represent both internalized cognitive schemas and e xternalized social
orders that structure behavioral possibilities within cul tural contexts. Scripts harness socially shared knowledge
that prescribes normative standards for behavior, similar to how actors share a dramaturgical script. Strong
scripts specify precise sequences of structured behaviora l events that agents are expected to perform in certain
social situations [ Albarracin et al. , 2021]. These scripts maintain causal and temporal relationship s between
events, enabling agents to make reliable inferences about o thers’ likely actions. For example, the North
American restaurant script prescribes speciﬁc ordered seq uences: being seated by the host, reviewing menus,
ordering drinks, ordering food, eating, and paying the bill including tip [ Albarracin et al. , 2021].
Weak scripts specify the typical features and semantic asso ciations that agents encounter in particular event
types, without strictly prescribing event order [ Albarracin et al. , 2021]. These scripts function as clusters of
conceptually related possibilities that help agents inter pret situations and identify appropriate actions. The
semantic connections in weak scripts adapt agents’ percept ual ﬁelds by making certain action possibilities more
salient based on contextual goals.
Scripts help maintain power structures. Scripts normalize certain behavioral patterns by providing tem-
plates for ”appropriate” action, making deviations appear abnormal or inappropriate (Constant et al., 2018).
This normalization reinforces existing power relations by making them appear natural and inevitable. They
establish reliable sequences of interaction in favor of a cu rrent norm: whether agents following this are (critical)
aware of the norm, or simply perform it, is often the question . They thus reduce uncertainty and create pre-
dictable social patterns that beneﬁt those already in power [Albarracin et al. , 2021]. These patterns become
self-reinforcing as agents learn to expect and reproduce th em. Given this predictability, scripts assign and
maintain social roles by specifying appropriate behaviors for diﬀerent agents based on their position within
power structures [] (Constant et al., 2018). This role diﬀer entiation helps reproduce hierarchical relationships.
Looking at scripts under AIF, they can be understood as share d generative models that enable coordinated
social behavior. Scripts represent shared knowledge about the causal structure of social situations, allowing
agents to make predictions about others’ behavior and selec t appropriate actions. These shared models facilitate
social coordination by reducing uncertainty about interac tion patterns. Scripts incorporate deontic cues that
trigger speciﬁc behavioral policies, helping agents selec t appropriate actions in response to environmental
signals [ Constant et al. , 2019]. These cues guide action selection by making certain polic ies more likely in
speciﬁc contexts. Scripts are transmitted across generati ons through cultural learning processes, enabling the
reproduction of social structures. This transmission occu rs through both explicit instruction and implicit
learning from environmental regularities.
2.2 Narratives as Scripts
The role of narratives in power dynamics, as scripts which no rmalize behavioral patterns by providing templates
for “appropriate” action, may make “deviant” behavior appe ar explorative (others may learn, inspired by their
curiosity) or inappropriate [
Constant et al. , 2019]: leading to social eﬀects such as castigation or neglect. T his
leads to the creation of shared meaning as well as to the justi ﬁcation of existing power structures. Because of
the challenges inherent to the coordination of social reali ty—as mentioned: whether agents following a script
are (critically) aware of the implied norm, or simply perfor m it, being the main question—we can also think
about scripting narratives in terms of self-fulﬁlling prop hecies, hype, ﬁctions that make themselves real, etc.:
none of the possibilistic options on social oﬀer need be real istic, so long as they are strong enough to attract
attention (driven by the desire to reduce uncertainty about future states).
14For this Marcusian notion at work in similar ways in the domai n of NLP, see [ de Jager , 2023].
9
The eﬀects of variational free energy-minimization are obs erved at the level of the basic structures of
language: (semantic) attractors such as redundancy, rhyme , alliteration, etc., can be understood as patterns
which aid memory, communication and information retrieval policies, because they permanently reappear,
pooling attention to the “same” phenomena, thus greatly red ucing the need to interpret and organize linguistic
interaction and cognition anew. We can understand, for exam ple, the possible emergence of rhythmic patterning
in communication as enabling the storage and access of infor mation collectively: by connecting a sound-pattern
to a phenomenon, we reduce uncertainty about reality once th at sound-pattern is witnessed, in true Pavlovian
fashion. By way of the same uncertainty-minimizing mechani sms, (simple or complex) narrative constructs
create cognitive situations where agents reduce complex as pects of the world down to preferred scenarios: it is
easier to imagine the end of the world than the end of capitali sm [ Fisher, 2009]. In light of our arguments: this
might be, perhaps, because the end of the world is relatively easy to imagine: asteroid collision, megavolcano,
etc., while the systemic nature of capitalism is rather diﬃc ult to pull apart in detail. Or: it is easier to reduce
uncertainty about my current stress-predicaments by blami ng my neighbor’s lifestyle, than by reassessing my
entire lifestyle (generative model) and change it on the bas is of a myriad other variables. Cognition, often led
by a desire for and mechanics of the shortest path, tends towa rds predictable, digestible narratives more often
than not.
Unlike short-range projective experiences such as the ones detailed in [ Maisto et al. , 2024], where prediction
errors present immediate challenges, narratives and scrip ts provide vastly speculative semantic spaces for
exploring models against hypothetical outcomes. As we have been highlighting, with regard to power, the
problems emerge in situations where agents controlling dom inant narratives are guided by nothing other than
power-acquisition or maintenance, leading not only to, e.g ., misinformation, echo chambers, conspiracy theories,
etc. [ Albarracin et al. , 2022], but, in political communication and organization, to the justiﬁcation of future
policies based on (supposedly) given conditions (deriving an ought from an is, essentially). Abstract semantic
constructs (ﬁctions, narratives, scripts), which can be un derstood as constraint-regimes coming to operate as
distributed generative models, create cognitive situatio ns where agents can learn by “internally” simulating
responses to high-stakes scenarios, while maintaining cor poreal integrity and safety, all the while plastically
exploring their epistemic condition. An environment pooli ng attention to strong-enough narratives will elicit
the scripting of policies in line with those narratives (as m entioned, regardless of their ‘veridical’ content).
For agents under thermodynamic duress (socioeconomic, cor poreal, etc.): the simpler the narrative, often,
the better. This being for the banal reason that they are unde r duress, and therefore incapable of making
enough spacetime available for deep, projective computati ons. Narrative structures tempered by the pooling
of attention act as semantic attractors which organize poss ible world-states into explorable patterns. These
patterns function as probability-possibility landscapes for belief-updating, allowing agents to or restricting the m
from ﬁne-tuning their predictive models through engagemen t. Considering homo sapiens’ universal tendency
towards narrative-sharing, this process can be understood as a corollary of actively-inferential social agents,
particularly if we understand ‘control’ as the phenomenon o f conscious attention to how the modulation of
variables eﬀectuate the production of the future 15. The theoretical framework developed here has signiﬁcant
implications for understanding both the cognitive foundat ions of narrative engagement and how the power of
attention to these results in the scripting of communal beha vior. We now move to an analysis of power through
the lens of AIF.
3 Power Through the Lens of Active Inference
3.1 Individual agency and empowerment
Autonomy refers to a system’s capacity to govern itself base d on internally deﬁned norms [
Watson and Scheidt ,
2005]. Autonomous behavior emerges through entropy maximizati on under constraints. Agents do not simply
maximize randomness (though in some instances they do: expl orative behavior is subject to high noise and
beneﬁts from high noise, again, note on average long-term VF EM in social agents). Agents optimize their
behavior by maintaining a balance between maximizing entro py and respecting system constraints [ Jaynes,
1957]. This is consistent with Jaynes’ principle of maximum entr opy, which states that the least biased
estimate of a probability distribution is the one that maxim izes entropy subject to known constraints. In
autonomous agents, these constraints include both the agen t’s internal model and environmental dynamics
[Golan and Foley , 2022].
We can think of empowerment as a formal measure of an agent’s control over its future stat es, deﬁned as
the maximum mutual information between an agent’s actions a nd the resulting states [ Klyubin et al. , 2005]:
Et,n = max
p(at,n)
I(At,n ; st+n),
15In the context of “ﬁctional inference” [ de Jager , 2023], which is much of what humans do, this is the exploration of
domains where direct experience would be prohibitively ris ky or even impossible. Fiction provides “all of the learning ,
at relatively low risk” (ibid.).
10
where I(At,n ; st+n) denotes the mutual information between the next n actions At,n from time t and the
state st+n at time t + n, and p(at,n ) represents the probability distribution over the next n actions from
time t [Klyubin et al. , 2005]. In this context, agents select actions that maximize thei r control over future
environmental states, optimizing their ability to inﬂuenc e outcomes. Higher empowerment indicates greater
potential for an agent to achieve desired future states. Imp ortantly, empowerment can be decomposed into
entropy terms as:
I(At,n ; st+n) = H(At,n ) + H(st+n) − H(At,n , s t+n),
where H[X] represents the Shannon entropy of the random variable X and H[X, Y ] denotes the joint entropy
of X and Y . This decomposition reveals that empowerment involves max imizing the marginal entropies of
state and action distributions while maintaining strong co rrelations between actions and their consequences 16.
We can also link these ideas to recent developments in unders tanding intrinsic motivation in dynamical control
systems [ Tiomkin et al. , 2024] and complex behavior emerging from the drive to occupy futu re action-state
path spaces [ Ram ´ ırez-Ruiz et al., 2024].
Empowerment as deﬁned above is an intrinsic motivation that does not specify how an agent should
take actions to achieve speciﬁc goals. Extensions have been introduced to incorporate goal-directedness by
introducing a reward constraint [ Volpi and Polani , 2020] or tradeoﬀ [ Leibfried et al. , 2019], which highlight the
tensions that may arise between intrinsic and extrinsic mot ivators.
Under the Active Inference Framework (AIF), autonomous age nts select policies (sequences of actions) by
minimizing expected free energy, which includes both epist emic (information-seeking) and pragmatic (goal-
directed) terms [ Friston et al. , 2010, Parr et al. , 2022]. AIF diﬀers from empowerment in several respects, but
one crucial point of diﬀerence is that it explicitly models t he partial observability inherent in many decision-
making environments, motivating agents to resolve uncerta inty through curiosity-driven behavior. This balance
between exploration and exploitation allows agents to both gather information about their environment and
pursue speciﬁc goals. Policy selection in autonomous agent s involves maintaining a generative model of en-
vironmental dynamics. To do so, agents must update their bel iefs about current states through perceptual
inference. Then, they can select actions that minimize expe cted free energy over future states and ultimately
learn from action outcomes to improve the generative model.
Both empowerment and the EFE highlight diﬀerent components of power that are relevant to the present
discussion. Empowerment more directly formalises the noti on of an agent’s control over its environment,
while the EFE emphasizes the role of information gain in the c ontext of generative models, pointing to the
importance of understanding how informational landscapes and aﬀordances can be shaped by those who wield
social power. Developing a uniﬁed framework for integratin g these diﬀerent objectives would likely provide a
deeper understanding of how power, goals, and information r elate to one another.
3.2 Social power dynamics
Social power dynamics emerge as a function of interacting pe rception-action loops across multiple agents.
Power is the ability to shape both the physical and informati onal environment. Power operates as an attractor
in social systems, creating a force that draws agents toward centers of inﬂuence. This gravitational eﬀect works
through two primary mechanisms. Entities with high power gr avity naturally draw others to them through
access to resources, information, or strategic advantages . As more agents are drawn into their ‘orbit,’ their
inﬂuence ampliﬁes through positive feedback loops, e.g., t hrough phenomena such as preferential attachment.
Powerful entities oﬀer perceived stability and predictabi lity in an uncertain environment. In AIF terms,
they help other agents minimize their expected free energy b y providing reliable frameworks for prediction,
essentially by dictating the information geometry landsca pe [
Constant et al. , 2019]. Power confers signiﬁcant
advantages in information processing and management. Powe rful entities occupy positions that grant them
privileged access to information streams, enabling more ac curate modeling of their environment. Ultimately,
they also control what can and cannot be modeled, and in what w ay, through their position and resources,
powerful agents can oﬄoad computational demands onto other s or their environment, allowing for more eﬃcient
processing of complex information. In the complexiﬁcation s of the “free market” condition unfolding over the
20th century, we can understand these dynamics as the emerge nce of a novelty-generating network of agents
which has proven to provide beneﬁts to those with leverage ov er its structures: agents already well-positioned
within the informatic domain. In sociological lingo: capit alist capture, or the cancellation of the future [ Fisher,
2009]. Power inﬂuences how errors and uncertainty are processed within social systems. Powerful entities can
better absorb or reinterpret errors due to their broader res ource base and inﬂuence over narrative construction.
Through their ability to shape both physical and informatio nal environments, powerful agents can actively
reduce uncertainty for themselves while potentially incre asing it for others.
The manipulation of information geometry—both in terms of p erception and action—is central to how
power operates in social systems. Powerful entities can sha pe the attentional landscapes of others, directing
16We would like to thank Alex Kiefer for pointing out this break down of empowerment in terms of entropy, and for
suggesting the broader idea of casting intrinsic motivatio n as constrained entropy maximization.
11
focus and resources toward certain states while making othe rs less salient or accessible. This ability to manip-
ulate both the physical and informational structure of the e nvironment creates a self-reinforcing cycle where
power begets more power through increasingly sophisticate d control over the collective predictive landscape.
Power also expands an entity’s available state-space polic ies in several ways: powerful entities have access to
a broader range of possible actions and strategies through t heir resources and inﬂuence. Through their at-
tractive force, they gain access to the state-space policie s of agents within their sphere of inﬂuence, eﬀectively
expanding their operational capabilities.
3.3 Formal Framework Integration
Power dynamics within and between agents can be formalized b y addressing various dimensions of control,
inﬂuence, and synchronization. At the individual level, re call that empowerment quantiﬁes an agent’s potential
inﬂuence over its environment by assessing the mutual infor mation between the agent’s actions and the resulting
states [
Klyubin et al. , 2005]. Here, we discuss some implications of this notion in the co ntext of active inference.
In social contexts, free energy is expanded to incorporate deontic value , which reﬂects the inﬂuence of social
norms and expectations on behavior. This is formalized as:
P (π | o) ∝ exp(−G(π ) + D(π, o )),
where G(π ) represents expected free energy for a policy π , and D(π, o ) is the deontic value associated
with aligning actions with social norms and expectations [ Constant et al. , 2019]. Social norms modulate policy
selection, encouraging behavior that is goal-oriented and aligned with collective expectations. This deontic
value may also be linked to a particular kind of empowerment o f other agents. Consider that to another
agent, one’s own actions may be viewed as part of the external state that is being predicted and controlled.
Therefore, the empowerment of other agents includes their i nﬂuence on one’s own policy, which may be reﬂected
by the deontic value term above. A deeper investigation into how the two are precisely related is beyond the
scope of this paper, but would shed light on the relationship between social norms and individual/collective
empowerment.
Beyond control over other agents’ policies, agents may also exert inﬂuence over others’ beliefs, constituting
another aspect of empowerment which focuses on viewing othe r agents’ generative models as states external
to oneself. In particular, one phenomenon worth investigat ing is the synchronization of beliefs between agents
in social interactions. This can be quantitatively assesse d through the Kullback-Leibler divergence between
diﬀerent agents’ generative models. In the simple case of tw o agents i and j, this can be quantiﬁed as:
DKL[Qi(s)∥Qj (s)] = EQi [ln Qi(s) − ln Qj (s)],
where Qi(s) and Qj (s) denote the belief distributions of agents i and j over the hidden state, respectively.
This quantity reﬂects the degree of belief alignment, indic ating the extent to which a shared understanding
emerges from social interaction. The ways in which this is un conscious, tacit, or otherwise unexplored are the
elements which lead to many of the intractable aspects of for malizing these dynamics. This is a consideration
which ought to be explicitly stated in any modeling attempt.
Belief alignment itself can emerge from reciprocal interac tions governed by the minimization of variational
free energy. This may arise as agents select actions consist ent with their internal models, and thus produce
outcomes that align with their beliefs, which reciprocally inﬂuences the beliefs of their counterparts. Over
successive interactions, the minimization of expected fre e energy can lead to synchronized beliefs (encapsulated
by the KL divergence), by a process of mutually adapting beli efs and behaviors in order to achieve beneﬁts
from coordination, which includes both pragmatic and epist emic components 17. Repeated exchanges eﬀectively
reduce this divergence:
lim
t→∞
DKL[Qt
i(s)∥Qt
j (s)] ≈ 0,
where the superscript indicates the generative model of eac h agent at diﬀerent points in time. Intuitively, under
appropriate interaction conditions, agents share beliefs (typically in the form of likelihoods) with one another
and incorporate these into their own generative models, thu s bringing their states of belief into alignment with
each other. This signiﬁes a stable convergence where the bel iefs of both agents synchronize, establishing a
shared understanding and a common ground for interaction. T here are many ways this synchronization can
occur, with extreme cases being where
lim
t→∞
DKL[Qt
i∥Q0
i ] ≪ lim
t→∞
DKL[Qt
j ∥Q0
j ],
or vice versa. Intuitively, these correspond to situations where one agent makes a small update to their beliefs
but causes the other to change their beliefs to a greater exte nt to ﬁt their own. The agent who makes the
signiﬁcantly smaller update may do so as a result of being in a position of greater social power.
17In adversarial or mixed-motive settings, this synchroniza tion need not occur, e.g., in situations where an agent is
being deceived or manipulated by another.
12
Linking this idea back to empowerment, notice that deﬁning “external states” is more complicated in
social contexts, because one agent’s internal state is anot her agent’s external state, and vice versa. This
means that diﬀerent agents’ internal representations of th e world must be similar in some parts (those that
are external to all of them) and diﬀerent in other parts. Ther efore, part of what it means for an agent to
maximize their empowerment in a social context is to activel y make parts of other agents more predictable
and useful to themselves, which is often more easily achieve d by bringing other agents’ generative models in
line with one’s own. In general, belief alignment can emerge as a natural consequence of each agent’s drive to
minimize free energy within the right social context. This f osters synchronized behavior, shared narratives, and
collective understanding, unifying individual agency, so cial inﬂuence, and collective behavior under the cohesive
formalism of AIF [ Friston et al. , 2020, 2024]. However, as the brief analysis above reveals, such synchr onization
through belief alignment may come about as a result of the exe rtion of social power, highlighting the importance
of understanding not just when this synchronization occurs , but also how it does so. As we conceptualized it,
power is an agent’s capacity to shape and control the (semant ic) “attractors” within a social or informational
landscape. These attractors represent stable states or pat terns that agents are drawn towards, which reduce
uncertainty and create predictable social structures. Pow er enables agents to inﬂuence which states become
salient or preferred for others, thereby controlling the ﬂo w of attention, shaping beliefs, and modulating the
precision of predictions. The 20th and 21st century have sho wn, time and time again—especially so in the last
20 years—how mediatic domination (narrative control) resu lts in the shaping of attractors which organize life.
An agent with power has the capacity to shape these expected o utcomes by adjusting the social or infor-
mational environment in a way that ampliﬁes certain states w hile suppressing others. For example, powerful
agents may create narratives, i.e., scripts, that reduce th e dimensionality of the state space by establishing
strong, predictable attractors—such as social norms or sha red narratives. By doing so, they eﬀectively direct
attention and ensure that other agents align their actions w ith these preferred states.
π ∗ = arg min
π
G(π ) + α · precision(Q(s | o, π )),
where α is a modulating factor that reﬂects the power to aﬀect the per ceived reliability of beliefs, amplifying
the impact of certain beliefs and actions across a social net work.
In leader-follower dynamics, a leader minimizes this diver gence by exerting control over precision, amplifying
others’ conﬁdence in speciﬁc interpretations of their sens ory data. For example, if the leader’s goal is clearly
deﬁned and they select social epistemic actions (more infor mative, albeit less eﬃcient actions), they convey
their intentions early and reduce uncertainty for follower s [ Maisto et al. , 2024]. This approach encourages
other agents to update their beliefs to align with the leader ’s, eﬀectively lowering KL divergence across the
group. Even in cases where leadership is not predeﬁned, an ag ent can assume a leadership role by adjusting
precision to show high conﬁdence in their beliefs or goals. T his increase in precision draws other agents toward
the conﬁdent agent’s stance, resulting in a convergence on s hared beliefs. Precision-driven leadership can
thus promote belief alignment without coercion, as agents g radually follow those who express strong, reliable
predictions. In this way, the power to direct attention, str ucture narratives, and therefore modulate precision
enables agents to actively shape collective beliefs, creat ing cohesion within groups and guiding group behavior
through the minimization of belief divergence.
The applications of this inevitably begin at reductive form alizations (and the math is never the territory
[Andrews, 2021]), however, the implications of these arguments for comple x social dynamics in the realms
of, e.g., policy and governance are vast. Coordination dyna mics at the level of simple perception-action
cycles such as the ones analyzed in [ Maisto et al. , 2024], need to be framed in terms of their possibilities for
novel understandings of social change processes: how shoul d humanity—as one, as many—develop strategies
with enough coherence and plasticity so as to resist the oppr essive aspects of dominant narratives which do
not beneﬁt the coordination of the whole? What kinds of timef rames are we thinking about (in terms of
generations, or the reorganization of our understanding of future time altogether)? Leader-based top-down
control ‘works’ when established cooperation dynamics are already in place, and the same can be said about
distributed control (either as presented by a socially-pos itive cybernetics (e.g., Beer) or “free market”, invisible
hand narratives).
A starting point for the analysis of such multi-agent intera ctions may be from the point of view of game
theory. In particular, the concept of Free-Energy Equilibr ia (FEE) captures the notion of a joint policy in
which all agents in a given interaction are minimizing their (Expected) Free Energy [ Hyland et al. ]. Under
certain conditions, it may be expected that interactions be tween agents tend to drive the system toward FEE.
However, as is well understood in game theory, there are typi cally many equilibria of a game and depending
on the starting point and interaction/learning dynamics, t he system may converge to undesirable equilibria
where a handful of agents exert signiﬁcant control over othe rs to their detriment. An important area of future
study is thus to ﬁrst establish a better understanding of wha t makes diﬀerent equilibria more or less societally
desirable, and then to understand how incentive landscapes may be shaped to navigate society toward better
equilibria. Shared narratives, where agents are in the know about what is shared, are fundamental here, and
this begins by paying attention to the (possible) rules in pl ace, hence the need for formal methods. This is
13
part of what critical metacognition entails: knowing how we are collectively navigating uncertainty, and taking
account of already-given asymmetries. In the conclusion be low, we explore a few salient implications of our
arguments.
4 Conclusion
Attentional power dynamics shape the probability landscap e of future possibilities. Our proposal to address
possibilistic power, grounded in AIF, oﬀers ways to identif y and address power imbalances. These formal-
izations can have signiﬁcant impact for understanding powe r dynamics in an increasingly information-driven
world. The transition from material to informational forms of power presents plenty of questions and oppor-
tunities for possible framings of future social dynamics. T his paper examined how AIF can shed light on these
shifts, suggesting that (possibilistic) power operates th rough mechanisms of social association, through the
identiﬁcation of and attention-pooling towards (apparent ly!) inﬂuential agents, as well as through enhanced
computing-projective capabilities. Both these phenomena create self-reinforcing cycles, where empowered
agents can expand their state space (and, often, minimize co st and future vulnerability). What has been
previously framed in terms of territorial, material and cul tural power can now also be understood in terms
of informational and computational power, both of these hav e received attention as forms of capital; a term
we can therefore reframe as possibilistic power. This new un derstanding links the cognitive foundations of
narrative engagement and the ensuing social scripts which m ake or break power relations.
The ontoepistemic challenges in grounding (deontic) value can be understood under AIF in ways that open
up complex semantics and social coordination towards a poss ible naturalization of these phenomena. Not in
an eﬀort to reduce them to simplistic images, rather in an eﬀo rt to provide new entries into as well as possible
accountability metrics of thorny ethical landscapes. In ou r proposal, coordinated behaviors emerge as shared
models that reduce collective uncertainty (again: with the caveat that whatever is supposed to be “shared” is
not always given nor understood). When scripts become inter nalized by multiple members of a community,
this allows for the collective construction of future state s. Following those who appear to have the potential
to reduce our uncertainty, leads to agents associating with agents and actions that would seem to meet those
expectations. Metacognitive criticality, that is: not jus t playing the game (or being played) but knowing
the rules and being able to imagine new rules, is how we ought t o collectively navigate uncertainty, assuming
already given asymmetries. Future research could focus on d eveloping metrics for measuring possibilistic power
and designing interventions to promote equitable distribu tion of both material and informational resources.
This shift from territorial/material to informational/co mputational power requires special attention in
futurological contexts. We propose that AIF provides cruci al theoretical tools for making power structures
visible and therefore analyzable, allowing for the potenti al to rethink current social asymmetries. Given
the apparent transition between the organization of life ar ound the centrality of physical work and matter,
towards a centrality of attention and information, a sustai nable social future requires addressing both resource
and information distributions. The latter is best analyzed through the power of attention as a major factor
inﬂuencing social dynamics.
Hierarchies are inevitable in complex thermodynamic syste ms. We propose fostering transparent, plastic
hierarchies that remain contestable and therefore open to n ovelty. This approach acknowledges historic and
thermodynamic constraints, while acknowledging space for systemic evolution. While hierarchies are inevitable,
social scripts should be read-writable by those with an inte rest in survival within them. This helps reorient our
understanding of an unfolding, globalizing, interconnect ed and interdependent life: participation in a system
is only participatory if those involved are able to track the consequences of the variables and thus future state
spaces at stake. A true distribution of information process ing capabilities is essential for systemic sustainability
and proper equitable development. And “if nature is unjust: change nature.” [
Laboria Cuboniks , 2015].
References
Mahault Albarracin, Axel Constant, Karl J Friston, and Maxw ell James D Ramstead. A variational approach
to scripts. Frontiers in Psychology , 12:585493, 2021.
Mahault Albarracin, Daphne Demekas, Maxwell JD Ramstead, a nd Conor Heins. Epistemic communities
under active inference. Entropy, 24(4):476, 2022.
Mel Andrews. The math is not the territory: navigating the fr ee energy principle. Biology & Philosophy , 36
(3):30, 2021.
Albert-L´ aszl´ o Barab´ asi and R´ eka Albert. Emergence of s caling in random networks. Science, 286(5439):
509–512, 1999.
14
Grace Blakeley. Vulture Capitalism: Corporate Crimes, Backdoor Bailouts, and the Death of Freedom . Simon
and Schuster, 2024.
Nabil Bouizegarene, MJ Ramstead, Axel Constant, Karl J Fris ton, and Laurence J Kirmayer. Narrative as
active inference: an integrative account of the functions o f narratives. Preprint, 10(10.31234), 2020.
Pierre Bourdieu. Structures, habitus, practices. In Rethinking the subject , pages 31–45. Routledge, 2018.
Jelle Bruineberg. Active inference and the primacy of the’i can’. In Philosophy and predictive processing , pages
1–18. MIND Group, 2017.
H Cappelen, S Goldstein, and J Hawthorne. Ai survival storie s: a taxonomic analysis of ai existential risk.
preprint for Philosophy of AI Journal, 2024.
Axel Constant, Maxwell JD Ramstead, Samuel PL Veissi` ere, a nd Karl Friston. Regimes of expectations: an
active inference model of social conformity and human decis ion making. Frontiers in psychology , 10:679,
2019.
S de Jager. Inevitably falling into place: Intuition as a fun ction of spatial prediction. In Philosophy after AI:
Meaning and Understanding, Society for the Study of Artiﬁci al Intelligence and the Simulation of Behavior ,
2021.
S de Jager. Fiction, speculation, prediction. preprint, 20 22.
S de Jager. Semantic noise and conceptual stagnation in natu ral language processing. Angelaki, 28(3):111–132,
2023.
Gilles Deleuze. Postscript on the societies of control. October, 59:3–7, 1992.
Daniel C Dennett. The self as a center of narrative gravity. I n F Kessel, P Cole, and D Johnson, editors, Self
and Consciousness: Multiple Perspectives . Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1992.
Mark Fisher. Capitalist realism: Is there no alternative? Zero Books, 2009.
Michel Foucault. The subject and power. Critical Inquiry , 8(4):777–795, 1982.
Michel Foucault. The history of sexuality: An introduction, volume I . Vintage, New York, 1990. Originally
published 1978.
Daniel Ari Friedman, Alec Tschantz, Maxwell JD Ramstead, Ka rl Friston, and Axel Constant. Active inferants:
An active inference framework for ant colony behavior. Frontiers in behavioral neuroscience , 15:647732, 2021.
Karl Friston, James Kilner, and Lee Harrison. A free energy p rinciple for the brain. Journal of Physiology-Paris ,
100(1-3):70–87, 2006.
Karl Friston, Francesco Rigoli, Dimitri Ognibene, Christo ph Mathys, Thomas Fitzgerald, and Giovanni Pez-
zulo. Active inference and epistemic value. Cognitive neuroscience, 6(4):187–214, 2015.
Karl Friston, Thomas FitzGerald, Francesco Rigoli, Philip p Schwartenbeck, and Giovanni Pezzulo. Active
inference: A process theory. Neural Computation , 29(1):1–49, 2016. doi: 10.1162/NECO a 00912.
Karl J Friston, Jean Daunizeau, James Kilner, and Stefan J Ki ebel. Action and behavior: A free-energy
formulation. Biological Cybernetics, 102:227–260, 2010.
Karl J Friston, Thomas Parr, Yan Yuﬁk, Noor Sajid, Catherine J Price, and Emma Holmes. Generative models,
linguistic communication and active inference. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews , 118:42–64, 2020.
Karl J Friston, Maxwell JD Ramstead, Alex B Kiefer, Alexande r Tschantz, Christopher L Buckley, Mahault
Albarracin, Riddhi J Pitliya, Conor Heins, Brennan Klein, B eren Millidge, et al. Designing ecosystems of
intelligence from ﬁrst principles. Collective Intelligence , 3(1):26339137231222481, 2024.
Gerd Gigerenzer. Why heuristics work. Perspectives on Psychological Science , 3(1):20–29, 2008.
Amos Golan and Duncan K Foley. Understanding the constraint s in maximum entropy methods for modeling
and inference. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intellig ence, 45(3):3994–3998, 2022.
Inˆ es Hip´ olito and Thomas van Es. Enactive-dynamic social cognition and active inference. Frontiers in
Psychology, 13:855074, 2022.
15
David Hyland, Tom´ aˇ s Gavenˇ ciak, Lancelot Da Costa, Conor Heins, Vojtech Kovarik, Julian Gutierrez,
Michael J Wooldridge, and Jan Kulveit. Free-energy equilib ria: Toward a theory of interactions between
boundedly-rational agents. In ICML 2024 Workshop on Models of Human Feedback for AI Alignme nt.
Iaroslav Ispolatov, Martin Ackermann, and Michael Doebeli . Division of labour and the evolution of multicel-
lularity. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 279(1734):1768–1776, 2012.
Edwin T Jaynes. Information theory and statistical mechani cs. Physical Review , 106(4):620–630, 1957.
Natalie Kastel, Casper Hesp, K Richard Ridderinkhof, and Ka rl J Friston. Small steps for mankind: Modeling
the emergence of cumulative culture from joint active infer ence communication. Frontiers in neurorobotics ,
16:944986, 2023.
Lachlan Kent. Mental gravity: Modelling the embodied self o n the physical environment. Journal of Environ-
mental Psychology , page 102245, 2024.
Julian Kiverstein et al. Obsessive compulsive disorder: a p athology of self-conﬁdence? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 23(5):369–372, 2019.
Alexander S Klyubin, Daniel Polani, and Chrystopher L Nehan iv. Empowerment: A universal agent-centric
measure of control. In Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Compu tation, pages 128–135,
2005.
Thomas Halva Labella. Division of labour in groups of robots . Universite Libre de Bruxelles , 2007.
Laboria Cuboniks. Xenofeminist Manifesto . 2015.
George Lakoﬀ and Mark Johnson. Metaphors we live by . University of Chicago Press, 2003. Originally published
1980.
Felix Leibfried, Sergio Pascual-Diaz, and Jordi Grau-Moya . A uniﬁed bellman optimality principle combining
reward maximization and empowerment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 32, 2019.
Domenico Maisto, Francesco Donnarumma, and Giovanni Pezzu lo. Interactive inference: A multi-agent model
of cooperative joint actions. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: System s, 54(2):704–715,
2024.
Mousa Marzband, Reza Rouhi Ardeshiri, Milad Moaﬁ, and Hassa n Uppal. Distributed generation for economic
beneﬁt maximization through coalition formation–based ga me theory concept. International Transactions
on Electrical Energy Systems , 27(6):e2313, 2017.
Alexander Ororbia and Karl Friston. Mortal computation: A f oundation for biomimetic intelligence. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2311.09589 , 2023.
Thomas Parr, Dimitrije Markovic, Stefan J Kiebel, and Karl J Friston. Neuronal message passing using
mean-ﬁeld, bethe, and marginal approximations. Scientiﬁc Reports , 9(1):1889, 2019.
Thomas Parr, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Karl J Friston. Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind,
Brain, and Behavior . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2022.
Darius Parvizi-Wayne. How preferences enslave attention: calling into question the endogenous/exogenous
dichotomy from an active inference perspective. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences , pages 1–47,
2024.
Jorge Ram ´ ırez-Ruiz, Dmytro Grytskyy, Chiara Mastrogiuseppe, Yasir Habib, and Ruben Moreno-Bote. Com-
plex behavior from intrinsic motivation to occupy future ac tion-state path space. Nature Communications ,
15(1), 2024.
Maxwell JD Ramstead, Dalton AR Sakthivadivel, Conor Heins, Magnus Koudahl, Beren Millidge, Lancelot
Da Costa, Brennan Klein, and Karl J Friston. On bayesian mech anics: a physics of and by beliefs. Interface
Focus, 13(20220029), 2023. doi: 10.1098/rsfs.2022.0029.
James C Scott. Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed . Yale
University Press, 2020.
Roger N Shepard. Toward a universal law of generalization fo r psychological science. Science, 237(4820):
1317–1323, 1987.
16
Garriy Shteynberg et al. Theory of collective mind. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 27(11):1019–1031, 2023.
Herbert A Simon. Rationality as process and as product of tho ught. The American Economic Review , 68(2):
1–16, 1978.
Stas Tiomkin, Ilya Nemenman, Daniel Polani, and Naftali Tis hby. Intrinsic motivation in dynamical control
systems. PRX Life , 2(3):033009, 2024.
Remi Tison and Pierre Poirier. Communication as socially ex tended active inference: An ecological approach
to communicative behavior. Ecological Psychology, 33(3-4):197–235, 2021.
Jared Vasil et al. A world unto itself: human communication a s active inference. Frontiers in Psychology , 11:
417, 2020.
Nicola Catenacci Volpi and Daniel Polani. Goal-directed em powerment: combining intrinsic motivation and
task-oriented behavior. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems , 15(2):361–372, 2020.
Todd Wareham et al. Swarm control for distributed construct ion: A computational complexity perspective.
ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction , 12(1):1–45, 2023.
David P Watson and David H Scheidt. Autonomous systems. Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest , 26(4):
368–376, 2005.
Max Weber. The theory of social and economic organization . Simon and Schuster, 2009.
17
This figure "frog.jpg" is available in "jpg"
 format from:
http://arxiv.org/ps/2501.19368v3