TYPE Opinion
PUBLISHED /two.tnum/nine.tnum July /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
DOI /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fpsyg./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/one.tnum/nine.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Rüdiger J. Seitz,
Heinrich Heine University of
Düsseldorf, Germany
REVIEWED BY
Peter Holzer,
Medical University of Graz, Austria
*CORRESPONDENCE
Mahault Albarracin
mahault.albarracin@gmail.com
Riddhi J. Pitliya
c-riddhi.jain@verses.io
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work
SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to
Theoretical and Philosophical
Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
RECEIVED /three.tnum/zero.tnum June /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
ACCEPTED /one.tnum/three.tnum July /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
PUBLISHED /two.tnum/nine.tnum July /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
CITATION
Albarracin M and Pitliya RJ (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum) The
nature of beliefs and believing.
Front. Psychol./one.tnum/three.tnum:/nine.tnum/eight.tnum/one.tnum/nine.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum.
doi: /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fpsyg./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/one.tnum/nine.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum
COPYRIGHT
© /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum Albarracin and Pitliya. This is an
open-access article distributed under
the terms of the
Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which
does not comply with these terms.
The nature of beliefs and
believing
Mahault Albarracin /one.tnum,/two.tnum*† and Riddhi J. Pitliya /one.tnum,/three.tnum*†
/one.tnumVERSES Research Lab, Los Angeles, CA, United States,/two.tnumDépartement d’informatique, Université du
Québec à Montréal, Montréal (Québec), QC, Canada,/three.tnumDepartment of Experimental Psychology,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
KEYWORDS
active inference, beliefs (non-religious), epistemic (belief) changes, socio-political,
psychopathology
The nature of beliefs
Conceptualizations of beliefs diﬀer according to the school of thought considered;
here, we take the view from cognitive science.
In cognitive science, beliefs are propositional attitudes, where the world is depict ed
as being in some state or another (Schwitzgebel, 2021). Beliefs have two main properties:
some representational content and assumed veracity (Stephens and Graham, 2004) .
Beliefs entail speciﬁc representational content, which portrays causes of sens ations
(agency, events, and objects) as being a speciﬁc way (Rimell, 2021) . So understood, they
are undoubtedly a central part of cognition, dictating our perceptions, behavior, and
executive functions. Beliefs do not need to be conscious or linguistically articulated , and
indeed, the majority of beliefs can be construed as subpersonal; i.e., remain unc onscious
(Majeed, 2022). Rational agents generally view beliefs as having a truth value, and update
their beliefs in light of new evidence. The term “belief” is also used to denote a mor e
deﬂationary sense, where what is at stake is merely a probability density over s ome
support; where we call a belief a probabilistic assessment of how plausible some st ate
of aﬀairs is (Smets, 2005) . On this probabilistic reading, beliefs acquire the attribute of
uncertainty—or its complement precision.
Beliefs provide the foundation that allows agents to understand—or at least make
sense of—the world and act within it: they provide agents with a consistent and cohe rent
representation of their world, which they can then use to make inferences abo ut the
causal structure of the world and their place within it (Churchland and Churchland,
2013). This scaﬀolding of beliefs helps [human] agents appraise the environment,
explain new observations, construct shared perspectives on the world, and e ngage in
goal-directed behavior.
Beliefs also help us experience the world temporally, as they can represent the s tate
of the world in the past and allow us to anticipate its state in the future; this is especia lly
important when holding beliefs about the consequences of action—a prerequisite for
planning and a sense of agency
(Shipp et al., 2009) .
Active inference
Active inference is a formal description of self-organization derived from t he
variational free energy principle, and provides a mechanistic account of belief-guide d
Frontiers in Psychology /zero.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org
Albarracin and Pitliya /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fpsyg./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/one.tnum/nine.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum
action (Friston, 2010; Friston et al., 2017) . In particular, it is used
to model and simulate how beliefs about the states of the world
are formed and updated. It proposes to naturalize belief in the
ﬁrst sense by formalizing them as beliefs in the second sense
(Friston et al., 2015) . In this context, the semantic content of a
belief is equated with the support of its probability density (i.e.,
the external or worldly states over which it is deﬁned).
Figure 1
illustrates the dynamic relation between (internal, external, and
blanket) states.
Belief formation
Active inference rests on a particular partition of a system
(i.e., into particles), where we distinguish between the states
internal and external to a system, as well as the states that
constitute the boundary of the system via which it interacts
with its environment
(Friston, 2010; Friston et al., 2017) . The
external states are assumed to be hidden from direct observation
behind the blanket states. In other words, sensory states allow
the agent to access their environment vicariously, by sampling
it through action. Internal states encode beliefs about the
external world, in the form of suﬃcient statistics (e.g., an
expected value or expectation and the conﬁdence of precision
of that belief). The agent thus forms beliefs about the hidden
states of the external world that have caused their observations
(sensory data). Through this accumulation of observations,
agents continuously update their beliefs about external states
FIGURE /one.tnum
An illustration of how a model of the external world is formed, resulting in beliefs about the true states of the world and belief updating,
encoded by internal states.
of aﬀairs, and about the most likely future states—that clearly
depend upon action.
Belief updating
These beliefs are not static. Depending on how well their
beliefs enable them to predict the world, agents can update their
(Bayesian) beliefs about of the world. This can be read as a
Bayesian mechanics in which, agents acuminate and assimilate
new evidence, and re-calibrate what they believe to be the
cause of their sensory experiences
(Ramstead et al., 2022) . This
process is generally read as minimizing surprise (technically, the
negative logarithm of model evidence of observations). This is
mathematically the same as maximizing the evidence for a model
of the world; sometimes called a world model or generative
model—that generates predictions of (observable) sensory states
from their (hidden) external causes.
Active states allow the agent to interact with her world, by
directly aﬀecting the process generating her sensory data (i.e.,
the environment), and accordingly update her beliefs about the
external world (Of course, new observations may be formed
by causes other than the agent herself)
(Friston et al., 2016) .
This enactive aspect of inference now aﬀords the opportunity
to plan responses and choose those actions that will minimize
surprise and maximize model evidence; sometimes referred to
as self-evidencing.
In active inference, policy selection determines the agent’s
actions. A belief about a current course of action is called
Frontiers in Psychology /zero.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org
Albarracin and Pitliya /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fpsyg./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/one.tnum/nine.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum
a “policy.” In this setting, the agent also forms beliefs about
what she is doing, and updates her beliefs about the current
course of action (i.e., its policy) based on her other beliefs
about the current state of world and the goals that the agent
is trying to achieve. The diﬀerent policies available to an agent
are then variations of beliefs about expected future observations,
contingent on diﬀerent courses of action. A policy is selected
based on preferences for speciﬁc sensory outcomes, by choosing
the one that minimizes the divergence between expected and
preferred outcomes. This divergence between expected and
preferred outcomes is quantiﬁed using “expected free energy.”
The optimal policy is the one that provides the most evidence
for the generative model (or equivalently, that is expected to
generate the least expected surprise or uncertainty). Active
inference thereby purports to explain the dual aspect of choice
behavior; namely preference-seeking and information-seeking
behavior, respectively. Both aspects are in the service of avoiding
surprises (e.g., non-preferred, outcomes). Technically, expected
free energy can be decomposed into expected information gain
and expected loss; in the sense of optional Bayesian design and
Bayesian decision theory, respectively.
Perception is realized by a process called state estimation
(Oliver et al., 2021) . Beliefs about the current state of the world
are updated, based on priors that encode what the agents believes
to be the base rates of occurrence of various states of aﬀairs, the
likelihood of current observations being caused by certain states,
and the probability that states will transition to other states.
All knowledge about past states is implicitly packed into beliefs
about the current state: belief updating of this sort satisﬁes what
is known as the Markov property and is the basis of all evidence
accumulation and inference. The structures that underlie this
kind of belief updating are themselves optimized to maximize
model evidence leading to an understanding of learning in
terms of optimizing the parameters of a generative model (e.g.,
learning the weights of a neural network or associative plasticity
in neuronal networks).
Beliefs across scales
The basic mechanics of active inference can be deployed
across nested spatial and temporal scales, describing a nested set
of agents composed of other agents—e.g., organs composed of
cells and communities composed of individuals—thanks to its
scale invariant construction
(Kirchhoﬀ et al., 2018) . Each scale
relies on a formulation of self, which is bounded in a way that
individuates self from non-self.
These boundaries just are the Markov blankets above: a
Markov blanket comprises of the sensory and action states that
separates the internal states from external states of a system
(see
Figure 1). Markov blankets are drawn at the boundary of
a system and deﬁne the interface where it receives sensory
stimulation. Thus, depending on the perspective, an agent can
have its own Markov blanket, or can be a part of a higher-order
blanketed system, as a component of that system
(Kirchhoﬀ
et al., 2018) .
Shared beliefs
A Markov blanket can also be drawn over a group of
agents. These agents gain an advantage, namely, they can pool
their resources, gathering evidence as a group without having
to expend the eﬀort necessary to acquire in isolation. The
individual agents forming a higher-order agent thereby improve
their own predictive abilities and minimize expected free-energy
as a group, aligning their beliefs as they share their beliefs about
the (co-constructed) world. In the ideal case, agents generate
evidence for a shared model of the world. The more similar each
agent’s model is, the more likely they are to minimize surprise,
predict each other and resolve uncertainty, i.e., jointly self-
evidencing. Thus, sampling from members of a group that share
a similar model itself provides signiﬁcant informational and
evolutionary beneﬁts and allows groups of agents to optimize
their beliefs over longer timescales than would otherwise be
possible; c.f., cultural eco-niche construction
(Bouizegarene
et al., 2020) .
Applications
We can use the deﬁnition of beliefs as propositions
of the true—but unknowable—states of the world, and the
formalization of belief formation and updating as proposed
by active inference, to understand several socio-political and
psychopathological phenomena.
Socio-political phenomena
When two agents interact, the value of their beliefs is
weighed against the beliefs and observations to which the
individual agents already have access. It is advantageous for
individuals to be part of a group in terms of large-scale
coordination, available resources, and computational power. But
it is costly to change any single agent’s deeply held beliefs.
Therefore, individual agents will give more weight to sensory
evidence from agents who are believed to share the same
generative model or world narrative. The more agents in a
group consider some data points as valuable, and as constituting
evidence for their beliefs, the more likely it is that the agents
in that group will conform to the beliefs of the group. This is a
form of epistemic conﬁrmation bias. In extreme cases, agents can
then fall into “echo chambers, ” in which their beliefs no longer
align with any other interpretation of the world, outside that
of their own group. We can see this phenomenon at play with
Frontiers in Psychology /zero.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org
Albarracin and Pitliya /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fpsyg./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/one.tnum/nine.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum
misinformation on social media, spreading extremely fast in
echo-chambers, and leading to radicalization
(Albarracin et al.,
2022).
When a group exists long enough and shares a core set of
beliefs, it tends to leave traces in the environment that reﬂect
those beliefs. Consider agents walking in a park. As they walk
on the grass, they tend to leave footprints, where the grass will
be less likely to grow. Agents noticing these traces may be likely
to follow a similar path, reinforcing the path in the grass. This
recursive process engraves shared beliefs in the structure of the
environment, serving as an anchor around which narratives
and semantics will be carried through generations of agents in
similar groups. As agents continue to produce shared beliefs,
they become embedded in a culture and a cultural materiality,
which allows them to predict—and navigate—each other and
their environment more easily
(Ramstead et al., 2020) .
Psychopathology
Active inference is often used in computational psychiatry,
to characterize psychiatric conditions as a consequence of
atypical beliefs. Strange and untrue beliefs may form based on
an individual’s experience of the world and the structure of their
beliefs, giving rise to psychiatric conditions.
Consider schizophrenia, which has been characterized by
a failure of sensory attenuation, with secondary consequences
for the dysfunctional acquisition of beliefs about the world
and interpersonal interactions
(Brown et al., 2013) . In the
context of sensory exchanges with the world, a failure of
sensory attenuation means that the weight of the sensory
data (observations) is too high, relative to the prior beliefs
about the causes of sensations
(Friston et al., 2014) . This
may explain the inability of schizophrenic patients to infer
regular contingencies between stimuli in the world. However,
since the prior beliefs are themselves compromised, surprising
new data paradoxically improves the detection of new stimuli
and contingencies. At the same time, this may also result
in such individuals misinterpreting ambiguous information
and inferring contingencies that do not exist, resulting in
inaccurate beliefs (or delusions). For example, individuals with
schizophrenia tend to fail to contextualize the consequences
of their actions and thus possess false beliefs about their
agency
(Jeannerod, 2009) . Such individuals may also “jump to
conclusions”—i.e., they may require less evidence to form a
strong belief
(FitzGerald et al., 2015) .
If an individual’s beliefs cannot be ﬂexibly updated, they
may consistently act in a way to align their observations with
their beliefs, which would result in dysfunctional behavior. Such
individuals would not be able to update their beliefs, even when
confronted with new observations that challenge their current
beliefs. This is a common symptom observed in individuals with
depression, where they tend to not act in their environment
even when they do have control, giving rise, over time, to a
sense of learned helplessness, and to low motivation and inaction
(Grahek et al., 2019) .
Summary
Beliefs are propositions about the true states of the world.
Active inference—a process theory based on the free energy
principle—describes how an agent forms and updates beliefs.
The active inference framework posits that the agent (i) observes
the world, (ii) infers the causes of the observations, and (iii)
forms beliefs about the external states of the world. The agents
then act in the world, prompting new observations, and thereby
update their beliefs. These beliefs underwrite how an agent
approaches the world, and how they will navigate through
it, given possible paths into the future. Modeling how agents
update their beliefs is thus central to understanding both micro-
and macro-phenomena, such as deviations in beliefs at an
individual level, resulting in dysfunctional behavior and the
development psychiatric conditions. And, at the group level,
allowing us to better understand socio-political dynamics in
multi-agent scenarios.
Our commentary is an addition to Credition—An
Interdisciplinary Approach to the Nature of Beliefs and
Believing. In this edition, Seitz, Angel, Paloutzian and Taves
have put together a series of perspectives on believing which
furthers our understanding of the ways beliefs play a part in
cognition, technology and science, ranging from understanding
how beliefs are shaped, to their role in artiﬁcial intelligence, to
the role of culture in beliefs, and more.
Author contributions
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct,
and intellectual contribution to the work and approved it
for publication.
Funding
This article was funded by RS, via the Volkswagen
Foundation, Siemens Healthineers, and the Betz Foundation and
the VERSES computational phenomenology lab.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Maxwell J. D. Ramstead and Karl J.
Friston for useful feedback.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Frontiers in Psychology /zero.tnum/four.tnum frontiersin.org
Albarracin and Pitliya /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fpsyg./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/one.tnum/nine.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed
or endorsed by the publisher.
References
Albarracin, M., Demekas, D., Ramstead, M. J., and Heins, C. (2 022). Epistemic
communities under active inference. Entropy 24:476. doi: 10.3390/e24040476
Bouizegarene, N., Ramstead, M. J., Constant, A., Friston, K . J., and Kirmayer, L.
J. (2020). Narrative as active inference: an integrative ac count of the functions of
narratives. Preprint 10. doi: 10.31234/osf.io/47ub6
Brown, H., Adams, R. A., Parees, I., Edwards, M., and Friston , K. (2013).
Active inference, sensory attenuation and illusions. Cognitive Proc. 14, 411–427.
doi: 10.1007/s10339-013-0571-3
Churchland, P. S., and Churchland, P. M. (2013). What Are Beliefs? The Neural
Basis of Human Belief Systems. Hove and New York: Psychology Press, 1–18.
FitzGerald, T. H., Schwartenbeck, P., Moutoussis, M., Dolan, R . J., and Friston,
K. (2015). Active inference, evidence accumulation, and the urn task. Neural
Computation 27, 306–328. doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00699
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain t heory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., Pe zzulo, G., et al.
(2016). Active inference and learning. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 68, 862–879.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.06.022
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., an d Pezzulo,
G. (2017). Active inference: a process theory. Neural Comput. 29, 1–49.
doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00912
Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald , T., and Pezzulo,
G. (2015). Active inference and epistemic value. Cognitive Neurosci. 6, 187–214.
doi: 10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053
Friston, K. J., Stephan, K. E., Montague, R., and Dolan, R. J. (2 014).
Computational psychiatry: the brain as a Phantastic organ. Lancet Psychiatry 1,
148–158. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(14)70275-5
Grahek, I., Shenhav, A., Musslick, S., Krebs, R. M., and Koster , E. H. (2019).
Motivation and cognitive control in depression. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 102,
371–381. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.04.011
Jeannerod, M. (2009). The sense of agency and its disturbanc es in schizophrenia:
a reappraisal. Exp. Brain Res.192, 527–532. doi: 10.1007/s00221-008-1533-3
Kirchhoﬀ, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., and Kivers tein, J. (2018). The
markov blankets of life: autonomy, active inference and the fr ee energy principle.
J. Royal Soc. Interface15:20170792. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0792
Majeed, R. (2022). The relationship between conscious and un conscious
intentionality. Philosophy 97, 169–185. doi: 10.1017/S0031819121000383
Oliver, G., Lanillos, P., and Cheng, G. (2021). “An empirical study of
active inference on a humanoid robot, ” in IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and
Developmental Systems. 14, 462–471. doi: 10.1109/TCDS.2021.3049907
Ramstead, M. J., Friston, K. J., and Hip’olito, I. (2020). Is th e free-energy
principle a formal theory of semantics? From variational densi ty dynamics
to neural and phenotypic representations. Entropy 22:889. doi: 10.3390/e2208
0889
Ramstead, M. J., Sakthivadivel, D. A., Heins, C., Koudahl, M., Millidge, B., Da
Costa, L., et al. (2022). On Bayesian Mechanics: A Physics of and by Beliefs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.11543.
Rimell, N. (2021). Representational Content and the Objects of Thought. Palgrave
Macmillan Singapore: Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-981-16-3517 -5
Schwitzgebel, E. (2021). “Belief, ” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, Winter 2021 Edition, Metaphysics Research Lab , ed E. N. Zalta
(Stanford University).
Shipp, A. J., Edwards, J. R., and Lambert, L. S. (2009). Conceptu alization
and measurement of temporal focus: the subjective experience of the past,
present, and future. Organizat. Behav. Human Decision Proc . 110, 1–22.
doi: 10.1016/j.obhdp.2009.05.001
Smets, P. (2005). Belief functions on real numbers. Int. J. Approximate Reasoning
40, 181–223. doi: 10.1016/j.ijar.2005.04.001
Stephens, G. L., and Graham, G. (2004). Reconceiving delusion. Int. Rev.
Psychiatr. 16, 236–241. doi: 10.1080/09540260400003982
Frontiers in Psychology /zero.tnum/five.tnum frontiersin.org