fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 1
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 20 July 2021
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.585493
Edited by:
Irene Messina,
Mercatorum University, Italy
Reviewed by:
Steffanie Guillermo,
Pitzer College, United States
Mike Oaksford,
Birkbeck, University of London,
United Kingdom
Jun Tani,
Okinawa Institute of Science
and Technology Graduate University,
Japan
*Correspondence:
Mahault Albarracin
albarracin.mahault@courrier.uqam.ca
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Personality and Social Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 20 July 2020
Accepted: 28 June 2021
Published: 20 July 2021
Citation:
Albarracin M, Constant A,
Friston KJ and Ramstead MJD (2021)
A Variational Approach to Scripts.
Front. Psychol. 12:585493.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.585493
A Variational Approach to Scripts
Mahault Albarracin1*, Axel Constant2, Karl J. Friston3 and Maxwell James D. Ramstead2
1 Département d’informatique Cognitive, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada,2 Division of Social
Transcultural Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada,3 Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University
College London, London, United Kingdom
This paper proposes a formal reconstruction of the script construct by leveraging
the active inference framework, a behavioral modeling framework that casts action,
perception, emotions, and attention as processes of (Bayesian or variational) inference.
We propose a ﬁrst principles account of the script construct that integrates its
different uses in the behavioral and social sciences. We begin by reviewing the recent
literature that uses the script construct. We then examine the main mathematical and
computational features of active inference. Finally, we leverage the resources of active
inference to offer a formal model of scripts. Our integrative model accounts for the dual
nature of scripts (as internal, psychological schema used by agents to make sense of
event types and as constitutive behavioral categories that make up the social order) and
also for the stronger and weaker conceptions of the construct (which do and do not
relate to explicit action sequences, respectively).
Keywords: script theory, social scripts, variational free-energy principle, active inference, Bayesian reasoning
INTRODUCTION
How are humans able to navigate social situations? As social agents, we take for granted that we
can and do modulate our behavior as a function of what is socially acceptable in certain kinds of
situations. In this paper, we are concerned with explaining social behavior that is shaped according
to social scripts. Social agents must be able to make sense of their social predicaments, identifying
event types and reacting to them appropriately, in ways that cohere with the normative standards
apt for a given social or cultural group. The script concept helps.
The concept of script is valuable because it explains the (implicit and explicit) forms of social
knowledge at play in social actions, and because it allows us to study the interplay between socially
constructed norms and aspects of our biologically hard-wired cognition. Scripts showcase the
wide variety of interpretive frames and allowable action available in a social niche. The notion of
scripts helps us understand that much of what we take to be universal about human behavior is
underwritten by culturally speciﬁc narratives.
The script construct has a long history spanning several disciplines. Scripts have been applied
fruitfully to study human behavior in diﬀerent ﬁelds, from disciplines centered on individual
humans minds and their interactions, such as psychology (Ekblom and Gill, 2016), neuroscience
(Allain et al., 2007), and artiﬁcial intelligence (Abelson, 1981; Tzeng, 2006), to the social sciences,
where it has been used inﬂuentially in ﬁelds like sociology (Goﬀman, 1999, 2009; Mahardale and
Lee, 2013), criminology (Ekblom and Gill, 2016), anthropology (Singleton et al., 2019), and sexology
(Metts and Spitzberg, 1996; McCormick, 2010; Wiederman, 2015). Diﬀerent deﬁnitions of scripts
abound, with their diﬀerent focuses. The concept sometimes is used under diﬀerent names (action
schemas, etc.) (Goddard and Wierzbicka, 2004).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493
fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 2
Albarracin et al. Variational Scripts
The idea that motivates use of the script construct in these
scientiﬁc approaches is, at its core, dramaturgical (Simpson
et al., 1967; Goﬀman, 1999). According to its proponents, what
enables social agents to act in situationally appropriate ways
is a shared set of instructions or normative prescriptions for
situationally appropriate behavior (Metts and Spitzberg, 1996).
The implication of this view is that, in order to act as a cohesive
social group in which every agent knows and enacts their
role, agents must share a common body of knowledge (i.e., a
script) that prescribes situationally appropriate modes of being
(Abelson, 1981). This is metaphorically akin to actors sharing a
dramaturgical script, hence the name of the construct. Scripts
are used in scientiﬁc theories to shed light on how internalized
psychological models are integrated with externalized social
models, by drawing on a pool of common styles of performance
and cognition through contextualized acts (e.g., speech acts) and
their ensued actions driven by goals (St. Clair, 2008).
There are some issues that stand in the way of an integrated
model of scripts across ﬁelds.
The ﬁrst is that the concept gets implemented diﬀerently in
diﬀerent theories and disciplines, which throws doubt on our
ability to provide a unique deﬁnition that can do justice to all
the uses of the term in the literature (Abelson, 1981; Ekblom
and Gill, 2016). Similarly, diﬀerent terms can be used to describe
very similar phenomena across domains of study, like script or
schema, prepended with terms like social, cultural, or cognitive.
Some authors have attempted to unify the concept (Schank and
Abelson, 1977; Shore, 1998). In our view, these attempts have had
a rather limited success, as the varied senses of the term suggest.
In this paper, we focus on two orthogonal distinctions that
we suggest structure discussion on scripts in the literature. The
ﬁrst is a split between “internalist” and “externalist” readings
of the construct of script. On the internalist conceptions,
a script is deﬁned as a cognitive structure that is typically
internal to an agent (e.g., encoded in their brain) and that
harnesses information about typiﬁed behavioral patterns that
are appropriate in speciﬁc social situations (Abelson, 1981;
Waters and Roisman, 2019). On the other, externalist conception,
scripts are cast as the basic fabric from which social institutions
are crafted. On this conception, a script is a set of highly
codiﬁed practices, norms, standards, beliefs, linguistics practices,
and rules that make up an institution (Heemskerk et al.,
2011; Chentsova-Dutton and Ryder, 2020). Some conceptions
are not as easy to split between internalist and externalist,
but the way in which an agent interacts and reproduces a
script does seem to bear elements of this duality nonetheless
(Goddard and Wierzbicka, 2004).
The second is a split between the weak and the strong readings
of script. The readings diﬀer on how explicitly a script prescribes
appropriate courses of action. On the strong reading, a script
is a list of explicit instructions for situationally appropriate
behavior, either neurally encoded (under the internalist reading)
or implicit in conventions maintained by the institution (under
the externalist reading). The strong reading dovetails with work
in motor control that casts the process of motor control as
the execution of a motor representation, which is cast as a
list of explicit instructions for action (Tzeng, 2006). The weak
reading of the script construct relaxes the assumption that a
script prescribes the precise order of events that it entails. A weak
script just encodes or harnesses information about the kinds of
factors that an agent might encounter in a given situation type
(Abelson, 1981).
Besides some early attempts in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence
(e.g., Schank, 1972), there still is not an integrative formal model
that is apt to do justice to all the variegated aspects and uses of
the script construct. This makes it diﬃcult to compare and see
commonalities between various theories of the script.
The aim of this paper is to formalize the notion of script
using the modeling resources of the active inference framework
(Friston et al., 2017a). The hope is to shed light on the
multifarious uses of the construct of script as it is used in
the sciences that study human behavior. Active inference is
relevant here because it may provide the key to formulating an
integrative script construct. Active inference is an increasingly
popular enactive modeling framework that is used to explain
the behavioral dynamics of living creatures, i.e., their patterns
of action, perception, emotions, attention, etc. (Da Costa et al.,
2020; Hesp et al., 2021). Active inference casts all these processes
as Bayesian inference processes. Action selection is cast as the
Bayesian model selection of a preferred sequence of motor
(or autonomic) movements that is informed by the likelihood
of sensory observations; while the environment is cast as
accumulating the traces of intentional actions left by agents
acting together, thereby changing available sensory observation.
Sensory perception and active modiﬁcation of the environment
allow active inference to explain how an ecological niche and
its denizens become attuned to each other’s statistical structure
(Bruineberg et al., 2018; Constant et al., 2019b). Active inference
is an interesting candidate framework to develop a principled,
computational model of the dual nature of scripts, as internal
schema, and as external social order. We will see that active
inference can also accommodate both the strong and the weak
reading of scripts.
The argumentative structure of this paper is as follows. In the
ﬁrst section, we review the internal, external, weak, and strong
readings of the script construct. In the second, we introduce
active inference and review the core tenets of the approach.
Next, we propose a computational interpretation of the weak
and strong, and the internalist and externalist readings of scripts.
We show that the modeling resources of active inference can
be used to derive a formal construct of script that encompasses
the various readings in the literature. We conclude with remarks
on the manner in which the proposed active inference model of
scripts could be used to further research on human behavior.
SCRIPT THEORY: BACKGROUND
Scripts harness the knowledge involved in situationally
appropriate behavior to achieve an intended social goal. Scripts
are especially relevant in situations where there is uncertainty
concerning the intent of the social partner. The appropriateness
of a script is bound to cultural context. Take for instance ﬂirting.
The North-American middle class traditional ﬂirting script has
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493
fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 3
Albarracin et al. Variational Scripts
been aptly described by Metts and Spitzberg (1996). The ﬂirting
script involves signaling one’s intent by incrementally ensuring
that similar intent is shared. This entails:
(1) Engaging in discussion on a topic.
(2) Expressing non-verbal behaviors that do not provide
evidence that the agent will reach the intended goal (sexual
intercourse).
(3) Moving toward topics and behavior related to the intended
goal.
Steps 1 to 3 take the form of engaging in small talk; and if
it is reciprocated, of choosing to ask more personal questions
(e.g., moving from more distant to more personal ones) and
enacting behavior (e.g., increasing closeness) that conforms to
the interaction goal. If one pursues the ﬂirting script, and starts
behaving in a way that is more sexually forward, but their
potential partner does not respond or enacts another script, it
is safer to assume that they are not interested in engaging in a
sexual encounter.
This sequencing says something about the relation between
internalization of scripts and the assumption of normalcy or
universality. In certain subcultures, like the swinger community
(Kimberly, 2016), or gay saunas (Brown et al., 2005; Kimberly,
2016), the reality of the social scripts is equally codiﬁed (e.g., with
speciﬁc locales and ways of acting), but leads to the outcome (sex)
diﬀerently. Scripts speak to social goals, and communicate the
enactment of these shared goals to the people around us.
Internalism: Scripts in the Behavioral
Sciences (Psychology, Neuroscience)
and in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
The most inﬂuential of the social script construct rendition
is an internalist one that comes from its use in cognitive
and social psychology (Schank and Abelson, 1977; Abelson,
1981). The construct has been used to implement the tacit
knowledge that agents have of the social-cultural norms that
determine the appropriateness (c.f., prior probability) of behavior
in a social situation. Scripts are higher-level constructs that
capture fairly general information about how certain tasks are to
be accomplished.
The use of scripts by agents can be broken down into
two phenomena: competence and performance (Royle, 2013).
Competence is the ability of an agent to understand what each
social situation entails, what scripts may be enacted, and what are
the proper cues indicating when to “enter into” a script; while
performance consists in acting on that capacity, leveraging the
perceptual and knowledge-based aspects of the script to bring
about the situationally appropriate sequence (Ekblom and Gill,
2016). Thus, a script is anchored in a speciﬁc social context, and
adapts a pattern of actions to the demands of a situation.
Some features of scripts are recurrent in the literature. They
must be stable in time, learned from experience and drive
behavior (Mahardale and Lee, 2013; Waters and Roisman, 2019).
Abelson (1981) nicely summarizes the main features of behavior
driven by shared scripts:
“Three conditions seem necessary for scripted behavior to occur.
First, the individual must have a stable cognitive representation of
the particular script. Second, an evoking context for the script must
be presented. Third, the individual must enter the script. This third
is the critical condition at the gap between cognition and behavior.
It is assumed that script entry is contingent upon satisfaction of an
action rule attached to the script representation.” (Abelson, 1981,
p. 791, emphasis added).
An agent must be able to navigate a social situation, and
the psychological script concept gets used to explain the kind
of tacit or explicit knowledge at play in the generation of
appropriate actions. The ﬁrst point of Abeldon’s deﬁnition says
that the “representations” (internal models or schema) of the
action sequence to be accomplished must be stable enough to
be deployed by the agent in the generation of context-sensitive
behavior (Abelson, 1981; Waters et al., 2015).
The second says that agents must be able to recognize
situationally speciﬁc cues that indicate the appropriateness of
enacting a script now (what Abelson calls an “ action trigger ”).
Agents must thus be endowed with some knowledge about what
environmental cues indicate in terms of appropriate action; and
this knowledge is harnessed in the script, which contains an
action trigger. Using scripts, the agent may ﬁnd its way in any
situation by understanding which part of the event sequence she
is currently in, and how to move forward (Ekblom and Gill, 2016).
The enactment of a script following an action trigger assumes an
action rule that deﬁnes when to partake in the script (Schank
and Abelson, 1977; Abelson, 1981). These thresholds may, for
instance, comprise role deﬁnitions. A role is entered and may be
replicated in time. Inference about the role of the self, informed
by the script, thus guides performance (Schank and Abelson,
1977). Similarly, observation of the actions of another agent can
help an agent infer their role in a script, and predict the next
actions (Ingelsböck and Schüﬂler, 2019).
Finally, the last point of this deﬁnition says that once the action
trigger is recognized by the agent, a sequence of actions to execute
must be chosen by the agent. This implies a kind of commitment
to the action policy (“entering a script”) by taking on a role in
the script. This entails that an agent should be able to perceive
possibilities for acting according to the script, and accordingly
enact it via performative acts (Mahardale and Lee, 2013).
Modifying the knowledge around the script allows the agent
to change their behavior in turn (Abelson, 1981). The agent learns
variations of the scripts, and has some part in deciding which way
to enact it. Deciding which one to pick depends on the conceptual
clusters that can be found in the local environment. These clusters
are created directly via analogy or conditioning (Abelson, 1981;
Singleton et al., 2019).
Scripts are in this sense similar to narratives (Bouizegarene
et al., 2020). Scripts emerge from interactions with relevant
social others in situations with which the agent is familiar; and
the proximity with narratives comes from the causal relations
between events (Ingelsböck and Schüﬂler, 2019). Scripts harness
knowledge related to contexts by specifying possible connections
between event types. Scripts harness socially shared assumptions
and structure inference that are allowable in a given context
(Waters and Roisman, 2019).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493
fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 4
Albarracin et al. Variational Scripts
In artiﬁcial intelligence, the script construct was employed to
codify the bodies of regimented inference that are employed by
agents in social contexts. The earliest conceptions of social scripts
in artiﬁcial intelligence consisted in semantic networks structured
into goal-oriented sequences (St. Clair, 2008). In this context,
scripts were explicit conceptual representations of expected event
sequences that were activated by textual triggers. These expected
event sequences allow users to bridge gaps in between events
because of the logical (e.g., causal) relations encoded in the event
sequences (Greenberg et al., 1998; St. Clair, 2008).
In summary, in the behavioral sciences and artiﬁcial
intelligence, scripts have been used to account for the accurate
interaction of an agent with their context. The internalist
framework in the social sciences thus focuses on the cognitive
schema, permeated by contextual.
Externalism: Scripts in the Social
Sciences (e.g., Sociology, Anthropology,
Criminology, and Sexology)
On the alternative, externalist reading of the construct, scripts
are related to the existence and maintenance of social institutions
(Ingelsböck and Schüﬂler, 2019). Berger and Luckman compare
institutions to theatrical performances, in which actions are
programmed and are embodied in a set of speciﬁc roles that get
enacted by social actors (Simpson et al., 1967). It is the enactment
of these patterned roles that keeps scripts and the institutions
that they compose alive (Turner and Biddle, 1981). Scripts can
specify actions for more than one agent; and the various clusters
of actions that can be performed by a given agent in a script
is called a role.
In the externalist conception, constrain social experience by
harnessing institutional norms of allowable behavior (Vanclay
and Enticott, 2011). The script construct is here used in a way that
emphasizes the social reality that is constituted by the enactment
of cohesive, institution-speciﬁc modes of acting. Scripts are cast
as the building blocks for coherent communities with shared
values (Wierzbicka, 2002; Singleton et al., 2019). Scripts are
higher level constructs as well on this conception, but these
constructs have a social reality outside the mind of the individual.
This poses a problem. Most psychological theories would
have scripts exist in the mind of individuals, but this does
not explain how they are translated into material reality. By
material reality, we refer to the physical properties of the
world which carry social meaning. While symbols can take
on a material form, not all study of symbol looks at this
manifestation, and focuses rather on immaterial properties. We
wanted to highlight this second side of the study of symbols.
Symbols, materials and culture are intertwined in ways that
make them more complex to study separately. Arguably, they
can be considered diﬀerent pieces of the larger social realm.
Symbols act as building blocks. They allow meaning to be
imbued to units. Materials are often referring to the physical
reality individuals have access to, but they can be also associated
to the direct ecological context an individual is embedded in.
Culture is the matrix which connects and coordinates across
individuals the mapping between materials and symbols. The
solution starts from noticing that social structures emerge from
socially organized psychological phenomena (St. Clair, 2008).
The repeated enactment of scripted actions allows agents to make
reliable inferences about themselves and other agents. Goﬀman
argued that institutions can be understood as pre-negotiated
inferences that ﬁnd their conﬁrmation in the reiﬁcations of
practice and language. That these inferences repeat over time
helps them crystallize, as it were, into a largely shared common
ground (Goﬀman, 1999; Ingelsböck and Schüﬂler, 2019). The
reiteration of structures does not rob agents of their agency:
the agent must take part in the scripts and deal with the
unexpected possibilities by interpreting the patterns accurately
(Binder, 2007; Ingelsböck and Schüﬂler, 2019). Scripts, on
this conception, are thus overarching structures that contain
templates upon which agents can draw for more speciﬁc
performances (Graesser et al., 1980).
Deﬁnitions of scripts in the social sciences diﬀer in terms
of the approaches to the study of cultural organization they
belong to. We can distinguish between three approaches (St.
Clair, 2008): the symbolic approach, the activity theory approach,
and the individualistic approach. The symbolic approach (Adler
et al., 1997; Ratner, 1999) casts individual agents as the main
bearers of power. This power is externalized by the creation and
consolidation of shared symbols. This conception accords much
importance to shared meanings and concepts, and is far less
concerned with the material reality of institutions. Symbols have
a life of their own and allow agents to communicate with others
and to develop an identity. The symbolic designations of things in
the world turns them into mental objects, imbued with meanings
and goals (Adler et al., 1997; Ratner, 1999; St. Clair, 2008).
The activity theory approach (Ratner, 1997, 1999) focuses on
practice (praxis), and casts psychological phenomena as formed
by individuals engaged in social action. This approach, inﬂuenced
by Marxist theory, emphasizes the material reality of the social
world, casting human agency as shaped by the pursuit of meaning
and goals in a material social context. Marxist theory casts a
speciﬁc importance on materialism, and the socially embedded
meaning of the material reality. In Marxism, humans search
for meaning through the lens of social goals. Activity theory
similarly embeds the search for meaning inside the social realm,
and places activity and productions as vectors for understanding
individuals’ relations to materiality. It is also to note that
Leontiev and Vygotsky were both strongly inﬂuenced by Marxist
materialism, which is perceptible in the theory’s focus on material
conditions as social vectors for meaning. This approach studies
social phenomena as a function of how power is divided among
social agents and how actions are deﬁned by this division of
power. Activity theoretic conceptions of the script emphasize
individuals’ interactions with the material world. By focusing on
a goal, and by being constrained by linguistic tools and practice
conventions (i.e., by scripts), humans achieve a stable social order
(St. Clair et al., 2005).
The individualistic approach (Garey and Wikan, 1998; Ratner,
1999) maintains a duality between individuals and culture,
and proposes that the individual has agency in the way that
they objectify culture. Individuals confer meaning that serve
their aim to elements of culture, which they will then use
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493
fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 5
Albarracin et al. Variational Scripts
to further their aims. Their cognitive life is thus shaped by
cultural artifacts, which are objectiﬁed pieces of culture that
they select for themselves and that they can share with other
individuals. Somewhat similar to meme theory (Dawkins, 2016),
this approach views culture as fractured quasi-genetic fragments
that can be used, transformed and spread (Garey and Wikan,
1998; Ratner, 1999; St. Clair, 2008).
Overall, these approaches to cultural organization in social
sciences allow us to portray scripts as a cultural framing. Scripts,
as the order social structures, prescribe what an individual should
do, given his timestep in a given pre-organized script, and the
role they have chosen or was given to embody. This framing is
conveyed by the individuals in a group through language and
common practices. These approaches emphasize the disconnect
between cognitive structures and social practices, which is
bridged in language: performative externalized cognition. By
performative externalized cognition, we mean that this aspect of
cognition is extended to the social realm. Through linguistics,
individuals can share and gather information more eﬃciently,
without having to get the information for themselves. The
interesting phenomenon at play here is the fact that this social
exchange has a weight. Through communicating, individuals
create the reality they seek to exchange. Their enactment of
this linguistic exchange creates the reality, therefore making it
performative. Existence does not happen in a silo, and all thought
or action take place within a context. If the context is constituted
by relevant social others, language can act as the bridge between
self and the social context. This commonality frames what is
possible, and anchors what is possible in a speciﬁc set of goals
(St. Clair, 2008).
The Strong and Weak Conception of
Scripts
Strong Scripts
The way the script construct is used in the literature is further
complicated by another distinction, introduced by Abelson
(1981), between a strong or weak conceptualization of the
construct. The general distinction is that the strong concept
entails that the script represents events and actions to be
performed in a particular order, whereas the weak concept
eschews any such ordinality. The strong concept of script has
more to do with the links between the concepts present in the
script (i.e., their ordering) than the concepts themselves; while
the weak concept is more semantic, and speaks to what is typical
in a kind of social situation.
A strong script refers to the sequences of structured behavioral
events performed by social agents. These can be reorganized
by variations, but overall maintain some similarity in structure
(Leclerc and Wortley, 2013; Ekblom and Gill, 2016). It is this
similarity that enables agents to make inferences about relevant
social others (Berg and Hochstetler, 2016). The order of the
events is paramount in strong scripts, as they are causally related
(Abelson, 1981; Leclerc and Wortley, 2013). Agents are able to
infer the next plausible event or course of action based on the
temporal and causal connections they know to exist between two
categories. The order thus matters because there is a necessary
entailment of the social actions. Here, what Abelson called “event
triggers” become crucial and act as ﬂoodgates, without which the
rest of the script cannot or will not be enacted.
Consider for instance ordering food at a restaurant, which is
covered in Schank and Abelson’s famous CITE script (Schank and
Abelson, 1977). The typical restaurant script in North America
is something like the following: (1) Make a reservation or wait
in line; (2) Be seated by the host; (3) Review the drinks menu
and order drinks; (4) Review the food menu and order food; (5)
Eat food; (6) Pay for services (including a 15% tip). Here, order
matters. For instance, in most swanky restaurants, it would be
considered inappropriate to sit at a table unless ﬁrst instructed
to do so by the host. In European pubs, one typically pays before
eating, whereas in American bars, one pays after eating. Failure to
conform leads to social friction and might also lead to penalties.
Essentially, the strong sense of scripts can be reduced to a
socially coded drive toward goals that also allows agents to infer
each other’s goals (Ekblom and Gill, 2016). Because the scripts
have common sequences that lead toward a common goal, agents
can infer each other’s goals, and infer the next likely actions
for themselves, and by other agents. Knowledge is cached in
the common practices and the expected goals. Thus, we can
consider that a practical aim of scripts and their learning and
transmission is to transfer practice-based knowledge. Navigating
social interactions is enabled by the reiteration of practices, and
optimizes communication between agents. Information is cached
in the scripts, and limits how much any given agent needs to
learn about optimal existence in his context (Goﬀman, 1999;
Ekblom and Gill, 2016).
Weak Scripts
Weak scripts specify the typical features that an agent will
encounter in an event type. The order of the events is not
speciﬁcally important, so much as the semantic proximity and
restrictions oﬀered by the boundaries around a concept (what it
does and does not contain). In this way, semantic relations are
more important than the sequence of causal relations.
Consider for instance the script of going to the library. Some
parts of this overall script have a strong aspect: For instance,
before leaving the library with a book, one must have withdrawn
it from the front desk and registered it under one’s name.
However, many aspects of the library script do not depend on an
ordinal sequence of events. For instance, it is part of the library
script that one should be silent in the library.
Weak scripts are thus, at base, clusters of associations or
contingencies related to speciﬁc events. Event types do not have
to be sequenced ordinally to be semantically connected in this
way. In depicting what is typical in a situation type, weak scripts
oﬀer a cognitive framing related to contextual goals. They adapt
the perceptual ﬁeld, and make salient possible drives toward
actions, and opportunities for roles for the agent (Abelson, 1981;
Tzeng, 2006).
Sets of categories have overlapping characteristics which link
them semantically (Tzeng, 2006). The more common ground
there is between two sets of categories, the more likely two events
drawing from these sets are to be in a given sequence. Thus,
conceptual proximity deﬁnes the overall structure of the weak
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493
fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 6
Albarracin et al. Variational Scripts
script and deﬁnes a conceptual mapping for given situations.
Conceptual mapping refers to the manifold that concepts are
made of. Concepts are embedded nested structures of metonymy.
They are made of layers of referents, all pointing to hierarchies of
smaller or more fundamental ideas. Concepts are essentially webs
of lower level semantic units. One overarching concept is the
speciﬁc conﬁguration of a semantic network, which corresponds
to a speciﬁc mapping of one idea to many. These mappings for
concepts can be diﬀerent. This proximity structure may also help
provide a restructuring eﬀect for the strong sequencing of events
in weak scripts (Abelson, 1981).
Weak scripts thus function as semantic markers of sorts,
enabling an individual to infer how best to adapt to the demands
of a social situation. Speciﬁcally, not all variations of a strong
script are immediately translatable to a situated context. The
weak script allows the agent to ﬁnd the appropriate action, given
the semantic ﬁeld in which they are engaged. Weak scripts are
integrated through practice and help agents imbue situations with
meaning. When this meaning is made salient, it can help an
individual navigate toward the appropriate and shared social goal
(Lydon et al., 1997; Heemskerk et al., 2011).
Script Variations
As mentioned above, weak and strong scripts evince variety in the
way they are integrated and performed. Scripts are polysemous
(Greenhill and Fletcher, 2009). One reason for this polysemy is
that several actions that lead to the same result . There may be
more or less typical ways to achieve a given result (Abelson,
1981). Subsequently, some parts of the scripts are more important
to the completion of the script, and the events in between
these parts can vary. This refers to the gating of strong scripts
by action trigger.
Some parts of the script are not as important, and may be
at times skipped if the situation allows for it. This allows for
several versions of the same overarching script to lead to similar
(i.e., the more important) outcomes (Abelson, 1981). Scripts
may share similar clusters, or event sequences. These may be
linked into tracks or decision trees, which inﬂect at script gates.
Script variations are partly due to the possibility that individual
agents show variability in its interpretation and application.
However, by considering certain parts of the event sequences
to be more important, the possible permutations of scripts
are limited. The conceptual “gravity” around certain concepts
constrains how one may enact any given action possibility
(Schank and Abelson, 1977).
Scripts can also vary because environments vary. The
enactment of any given script will not always have the exact
same form. There is an abstract nature to scripts that has more
to do with the prototypical structure of practice (Ekblom and
Gill, 2016). The same sequence may mean diﬀerent things to
diﬀerent people based on what they previously associated to it.
This intrinsic variation can have eﬀects on practice, or it can
have eﬀects on whether or not an individual chooses to enact a
script in a situation.
This concludes our review and overview of the uses of the
script construct in the recent literature. We now turn to the active
inference approach, which provides us with the tools to formulate
an integrative and formal account of scripts.
ACTIVE INFERENCE: THE ABCs
Introduction to Active Inference
In this section, we leverage the apparatus of the active inference
approach to provide a formal model of scripts that is apt
to account for all the dimensions of the construct discussed
above (internalist, externalist, strong, and weak readings).
Active inference is an increasingly popular behavioral modeling
framework that descends from older, closely related Bayesian
approaches to the brain and behavior, such as predictive coding
(Friston, 2010; Friston et al., 2017b). Active inference casts
perception, learning, cognition, and action as forms of (Bayesian
of variational) inference.
Technically, active inference says that perception, learning,
cognition, and action all function to minimize an information
theoretic quantity called variational free-energy (Friston et al.,
2017a; Friston, 2019). This variational free-energy was ﬁrst
developed in the context of complex statistical inference to
ﬁnesse intractable inference problems (Feynman, 1972). In
this context, we aim as scientists to estimate some unknown
probability distribution; however, the computation of such
probability distributions often requires marginalizing over an
inﬁnite number of states, which makes inference intractable
for analytic (exact) procedures. Instead of computing the
distribution directly, variational inference allows us to write
down a guess about this distribution (the variational or
recognition model); variational inference methods to ﬁnesse this
guess by changing its parameters (i.e., its shape) until it becomes
close enough to the target distribution. This closeness is obtained
by minimizing a variational (free-energy) bound on the evidence
for our (the brain’s) models or hypotheses about how (sensory)
data were caused.
Generically, minimizing variational free-energy minimizes the
discrepancy between the data that one would expect, given some
model of how that data was generated (what is known as a
“generative model”), and the data actually obtained (Feynman,
1972; Beal, 2003; Winn and Bishop, 2005). These methods
were imported into neuroimaging neuroscience for various
imaging modalities (functional magnetic resonance imaging,
electroencephalography, and magnetoencephalography) in the
2000s (Friston et al., 2003; Kiebel et al., 2008). When minimized,
the variational free energy scores the quality of the model in
terms of its evidence, i.e., the probability of those data and that
model. In this context, neuroscientists evaluate the probability of
diﬀerent models for how some neuroimaging data was generated.
This is called dynamical causal modeling (Friston et al., 2003). In
short, the variational free-energy is used to score the probability
of each model, given the data; and the model associated with the
lowest variational free-energy is the one deemed the best, or most
likely to have caused our data.
Active inference applies the same strategy to modeling another
kind of data: the sensory data that is generated by the activity of
living creatures (Friston, 2019). In this context, the variational
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493
fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 7
Albarracin et al. Variational Scripts
free-energy construct is redeployed, now as a measure of the
discrepancy between the observations the agent expected to
make, and the actual sensory states encountered an agent. Active
inference provides a mechanics of belief-driven action: it will
look as if organisms select the actions that minimize free-energy
(Ramstead et al., 2019). That is, according to the active inference
approach, the dynamics (i.e., the behavior) of living systems
serves to garner evidence for their existence as agents (Hohwy,
2016). Successful action in the environment generates sensory
consequences that are consistent with our preferences; active
inference formalizes this idea.
These expectations are harnessed in generative models, which
do most of the heavy lifting in the active inference approach.
A simple generative model is shown in Figure 1 below. This
generative model harnesses a number of diﬀerent probabilistic
beliefs: beliefs about the likelihood of observations, given the
states that cause them (which are denoted A), prior beliefs about
the manner in which states of the world evolve over time (denoted
B), prior preferences over outcomes (C), and beliefs about states
before sampling the world (denoted D).
FIGURE 1 | A simple generative model for policy selection. This schematic
depicts a generative model for policy selection. It represents probabilistic
beliefs about how observations are related to the states that cause them (the
likelihood matrix, which is denoted A), beliefs about the manner in which
states of the world evolve over time (the state transition matrix, denoted B),
and beliefs about states prior to sampling the world (prior beliefs, denoted D).
Preferences over outcomes (C) are not depicted. From Friston et al. (2017b).
For ease of visualization, we do not present the hierarchical structure of the
generative process. The reader should assume that there structure of the
generative process will include multiple levels. The important aspect of this
schematic is to present the manner in which the generative model and the
generative process interact with one another. The only reason we present
multiple levels of the generative model is that two levels allows for a
description of all the inner components of the script. Only one level of the
generative process is needed to describe the external component (even
though we should assume multiple levels of the generative process). The
higher levels of a model constrain possible inference at the lower levels by
unfolding over slower timescales and by setting the prior beliefs about initial
states D at the lower level–that contextualize the ensuing state transitions or
narratives. In such models, posterior estimates of successive states at the
lower level become data or observations for inference at the level above.
A generative model is a statistical model of the causal process
that generated the sensory data (the aptly named generative
process). Model and process are linked at two points: the data
itself, which the world generates; and the actions selected by
the agent, which leave traces in the world and produce typical
sensory consequences. Indeed, the main function of generative
models is to mediate policy selection (or the selection of actions).
This takes a particular form in active inference; namely, as the
realization of beliefs about action. Policy selection is implemented
as the selection of beliefs about state transitions, which reﬂect
knowledge about the consequences of action (i.e., as the selection
among a series of B matrices, each entailing a diﬀerent plan
of action or path into the future). The state transition beliefs
are constructed to incorporate beliefs about the consequences of
action; and an action is a series of such beliefs. Active inference
gets its name from treating action selection as a form inference
about what I must be up to: on the assumption that what I
am doing minimizes variational free-energy, given my beliefs
about what I might be doing and given my sensory (especially
proprioceptive) data, what must I be doing? In some circles, this
is akin to “planning as inference” (Attias, 2003; Botvinick and
Toussaint, 2012; Millidge, 2019).
Importantly, in many applications, the generative models have
a hierarchical or deep structure. Typically, the higher levels
of a model constrain possible inference at the lower levels by
unfolding over slower timescales and by setting the prior beliefs
about initial states D at the lower level–that contextualize the
ensuing state transitions or narratives. In such models, posterior
estimates of successive states at the lower level become data or
observations for inference at the level above.
In active inference, goals are not speciﬁed in terms of preferred
states, but rather in terms of a preference distribution over
outcomes (which is denoted C); that is, in terms of the preferred
consequences of action. Motor control is then based not on
the computation of explicit motor commands, as in optimal
control theoretic formulations, but instead on feedback, in the
form of prediction errors (Friston, 2011). This nicely avoids
having to compute explicit motor commands in an intrinsic
frame of reference (in terms of states of motor eﬀectors, e.g.,
in terms of the stretching and contracting of muscle ﬁbers); for
a discussion of the implications of this for control theory, see
Baltieri and Buckley (2018); Hipolito et al. (2020). In other words,
the goal of an action is speciﬁed in terms of the preferred sensory
consequences of action, rather than in terms of preferred states,
and policies are selected that lead to these outcomes. Technically,
the C vector enters into the calculation of the expected free-
energy G for every policy, and deﬁnes the preferred outcomes
against which actual outcomes are compared in the computation
of the model evidence (negative variational-free energy).
Shared Generative Models and
Sociocultural Dynamics
The active inference framework has been used to explain the
emergence of coordinated group behavior. It was ﬁrst shown
that target patterns (e.g., morphologies) can emerge from the
group behavior of components individually engaging in active
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493
fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 8
Albarracin et al. Variational Scripts
inference–on the condition that all free energy minimizing
correspondents share the same generative model, that is, the same
model structure with the same parameters (the A, B, C, and D
matrices, etc.) (Friston and Frith, 2015; Palacios et al., 2019).
When applied to large scale ensembles, such as cultural human
ensembles, the convergence of behavior based on the sharing of
similar enough generative models is thought to be mediated by
the structure of the environment (Bruineberg et al., 2018), such
as the ways in which culture is materially implemented (Constant
et al., 2018). In this setting, the variational free energy minimum
of the ensemble coincides with the corresponding minimum of
each constituent. Because the environment is constituted by other
constituents like “me” the environment and all of its denizens
become mutually predictable.
On this view, a cultural or social group is a group of agents
that has some common ground of shared cultural traits by virtue
of sharing the same beliefs or expectations about the sensory
consequences of allowable, situationally appropriate behavior.
Agents acquire this body of common knowledge by the structure
and parameters of their shared generative model, based on
available sensory observations generated by the causal structure
and processes of the environment (Constant et al., 2019a). To
account for variations in culture, one needs (among other things)
to account for variations in state transition narratives, leading
to diﬀerentially parameterized generative models, and thus to
diﬀerentially enacted policies (i.e., inference of a course of action
based on the generative model). Variations in outcome sequences,
in turn, result from environment-modifying actions, of both the
explicit and implicit varieties (as in designing a park and leaving
footprints in the snow, respectively).
Crucially for our purposes, recent work has suggested that
generative models can be constructed with priors that dictate
immediately which course of action to pursue upon sensing
certain speciﬁc outcomes. Technically, the parameter allowing for
such precisely inferred, habitised, trigger-based behavior involves
a likelihood mapping between observation and policies, and a
prior belief over policies forming what is known as “deontic
value” (Constant et al., 2019b)” Deontic value is an attribute of
the posterior of a policy. The likelihood (A) and priors (the B,
C, and D) can be learned based on observations. Taken together,
the standard inferential “ABCD” and deontic pathway to policy
selection allows us to talk about policy selection in the context
of cultural group dynamics that form via the exchange of local
speciﬁc sequences of sensory observations on the basis of which
a shared generative model can be learned that underwrites–and
is underwritten by–a shared exchange with a common econiche.
See Figure 2.
In Figure 2, Sequences of hidden states correspond to strong
scripts. Action triggers (deontic cues) are represented by ﬁlled
circles (blue). The ensuing architecture is deﬁned over both
internal (head icon) and external (planet icon) states. Weak
and strong scripts are realized across multiple levels that span
internal and external factors. From 1 to 10: (1) is the prior
belief about initial state (e.g., in the ﬂirting script, it is the
categorical assumptions about the world, or speciﬁcally, the belief
that there are men and women in the world, and that they
will probably present themselves diﬀerently. It is combined with
the likelihood (3) at that same level to infer the latent state
(2). Prior beliefs about transitions at the second level (4) will
contribute to determining what will be the future latent state at
the second level. Here, we represent only one cycle of inference
at the second level. One cycle of inference at the second level
involves two (or hypothetically more) cycles of inference at ﬁrst
level. The inference of the latent state (2) biases the inference of
the ﬁrst state and subsequent states (5 s) (e.g., in the ﬂirting script,
the second level entails the belief that an agent is enacting an
attractive role, being sexually interesting. They assume that their
ﬁrst state will be to engage the ﬂirting with a low level of intimacy)
and the action policy (6) (e.g., you should increase intimacy level
with each transition, but you should start at a low level so as
not to be unattractive) at level one, which themselves combine
a likelihood at level one (7) (e.g., that a given event is mapped
to a low level of intimacy, such as saying hello or asking about
each other’s name). On the side of the external world, there is only
one process in play, which includes the likelihood of observation
and states of the world (11) and the transition between these
states (9). The agent can act on the transitions (downward
thick arrow) to change the sort of outcomes generated by the
world. Crucially, the outcomes (o)–that mediate the interaction
between world and mind–function as deontic cues, to trigger
certain plans or policies, formalized as a prior (denoted omega)
biasing the inference about the ﬁrst hidden state at level two of
the agent’s model. These outcomes form a likelihood between
sensory outcomes and higher-level hidden states (e.g., the agent
can thus check whether or not they have ﬂirted accurately, based
on whether or not their observation conﬁrms that they are still
attractive to their partner, and change or maintain their behavior
accordingly. For instance, if the agent observes that their partner
does not reciprocate their questions, and their body language
does not increase in intimate proximity, the agent may infer at
the second level that the interaction is not attractive and possibly
not leading to sex). We also add expected free-energy (the G
matrix) over the policy (6) at level one, which includes prior
preferences (the C matrix).
AN ACTIVE INFERENCE ACCOUNTS OF
SCRIPTS
We leverage the dual aspect of active inference (i.e., its appeal
to dynamics internal and external to the agent) to dispel the
tension and apparent contradiction between internalist and
externalist renditions of the script construct. Active inference
can accommodate all the dimensions of the script construct
discussed above (i.e., the distinction between strong and weak
modalities and the externalist versus internist conceptions) in a
way that is both systematic and principled. Active inference can
be used just as well to account for the structure and function of
externally realized cognitive functions [e.g., extended cognition
(Clark and Chalmers, 2010; Chalmers, 2019; Constant et al.,
2019a)], as it can be used to describe the internal dynamics of
agents; and it provides the requisite ﬂexibility to accommodate
the representation of both explicit scripted sequences of events
(strong scripts) and typical event type features (weak scripts).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493
fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 9
Albarracin et al. Variational Scripts
FIGURE 2 | Heuristic description of the generative model of the niche and of the agent. This schematic should be read as a heuristic “formal ﬂowchart” of the biasing
relation between priors and likelihood in generative model, rather than as a standard (probabilistic graphical) generative model. Weak scripts correspond to the
knowledge about event types and their relation to sensory data available to the agent. Computationally, these correspond to priors and likelihoods (denoted as
squares 1, 3, 4, 8, 7, 11, 9) that are combined to infer sequences of hidden states and the action policy (denoted as open circles 2, 5, 6, 10). Note that, for instance,
“D1” in the bottom portion of the schematic is not the same as “D1” in the top section since the former is an attribute of the generative process, and the latter is an
attribute of the generative model. We use the notion “D1” in both cases to help the unfamiliar reader to visualize the mirroring relation between the generative
process and model.
We organize the next section as follows: we will examine the
strong and weak conceptions of script under active inference,
and for each, show how externalist and internalist readings can
be accommodated.
Scripts as Shared Conceptual Structures
About Event-Types
The most complicated aspect of the script construct to implement
under active inference pertains to the weak conceptualization of
the scripts. By weak scripts, we refer to semantic connections
between event type concepts. Some concepts are more closely
related than others, creating clusters. Some social goals are
constituted as clusters. By connecting concepts more or less
closely, conceptual clusters oﬀer a cognitive framing related
to contextual goals. The weak scripts are just a manifold of
unordered semantics webs. They are less formal, and less easily
implementable than direct strong scripts, which have a behavioral
and measurable component. For example, if we come back to
the earlier example of ﬂirting, the goal of having sex entails
a variety of conceptual connections. The feelings of attraction,
connection, and mutuality are all connected to the ﬂirting
script. These categories can also be broken down into more
concrete associations. Attraction can be connected to appearance
and personality, which are related to physical attributes or
behavioral traits.
Through this process of association, an agent can map
observations to latent conceptual categories, which crucially
include the kinds of things that one typically does in certain
types of situations. Once the associations are learned, the agent
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493
fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 10
Albarracin et al. Variational Scripts
has adapted their perceptual ﬁeld, and increases the salience of
possible drives toward action and opportunities. By observing
salience cues in the environment, the agent is driven to enact
speciﬁc roles. Hence, weak scripts are closely related to direct
perception and conceptual event type structures.
A conceptual mapping is a statistical probability matrix
over certain sub-concepts. The manifold that forms the larger
concept is a series of probabilities over other concepts. This
follows the prototype theory, where some sub-concepts are more
prevalent a concept, and others less so. This statistical mapping
can be diﬀerent across groups, and create communication
breakdowns. But a niche will share the same probabilistic matrix
for a given concept, making coordination easier. By deﬁning
conceptual mappings, weak scripts deﬁne the probability of
certain categories being connected to certain observations, while
others are not. Consequently, weak scripts increase or decrease
the prior probability that certain kinds of states will be involved
in a given event type. Because this mapping is shared by the niche
(and indeed, might even be encoded in the physical structure of
the environment), the agent can make sense of its environment,
and pick up social cues from the niche. Cognition is oﬄoaded to
the niche since it reliably furnishes those statistical contingencies
over time. The agent has only to pick up and interpret the cues,
and does not have to try to ﬁgure out the connections between all
the possible categories.
From the point of view of active inference, adopting a
script allows an agent to minimize its free-energy both by
enabling them to avoid spending limited resources sampling
elements of the environment at random to ﬁgure out which
social goal to conform to, and also by limiting the occurrence
of errors when trying to achieve that social goal. Technically,
scripts play the role of empirical priors that, in eﬀect, simplify
belief updating by constraining the degrees of freedom used
in modeling exchanges with the (usually prosocial) econiche.
Mathematically, this enables an accurate prediction of sensory
exchange with minimal complexity, which precludes overﬁtting.
In this setting, complexity is the diﬀerence between posterior
and prior beliefs, i.e., the degree of belief updating incurred by
observing a particular outcome. One can see that if the degrees
of freedom of this belief updating are constrained by the right
kind of scripts or priors, then there is less latitude for belief
updating and a more eﬃcient minimization of variational free
energy. A related study by Wirkuttis and Tani (2021) has explored
a similar space, related to dyadic interactions governed by active
inference surprizal reduction. In their design, they had two
robots interact by imitating each other, using active inference.
By giving diﬀerent complexity terms to the robots (tighter and
softer) which in turn leads to diﬀerent agency, the robots will
begin to imitate accurately, and thus coordinate. Without such
terms, the robots will ignore each other. This dyadic structure is
interesting in the speciﬁc case of gender as it hints at hierarchical
expectations. We expand on their model by oﬀering that surprizal
is already limited by existing priors contained in the niche and
integrated by the actors.
The conceptual mappings at play in scripts, like those
that ﬁgure in the generative models of active inference, are
probabilistic. Many mappings are shared through narrative
construction and practice in a niche, but the agent has a
part in the interpretation of those clusters. Variations in the
weak scripts of individuals occur, even when they exist in
the same niche. Alternatively, individuals from diﬀerent niches
are exposed to diﬀerent narratives, and hence adopt diﬀerent
conceptual mappings. This explains why some agents, adopting
diﬀerent scripts, do not perceive the same aﬀordances or
possibilities for action.
With this in place, it becomes possible to implement weak
scripts in a generative model. We submit that weak scripts can
be implemented via the likelihood mappings (A), prior beliefs
(D), and sensory preferences (C) of the agent. Thus, weak
scripts harness beliefs about how the expected salient social
categories ﬁgure in speciﬁc situations (D) and beliefs about how
they generate sensory data (A). In social situations, the relevant
social categories of role and appropriate behavior can only be
inferred, which requires the agent to mobilize the right kind
of knowledge. An agent must infer the proper categories, the
proper associations, and the proper mapping onto observations
in order to navigate a social context adequately and to maximize
her returns by the niche (social capital). This mapping changes
in function of the context. Hence the weak script also feeds one’s
understanding of the context per se.
So far, we have only addressed the internalized aspect of
the weak script. But the weak script can also be externalized
and thereby provides the individual with an ecology of cues
that direct their behavior in situationally appropriate ways. The
niche has a double aspect: it both is the generative process that
causes the agent’s sensory states, and has its own generative
model of the social script, physically and discursively oﬀering
patterned observations to the agent. The agent measures this
against the niche and its model (whether or not other individuals
share a speciﬁc mapping). For instance, in the ﬂirting script,
an agent will interact with another agent. The agent will
present themselves physically to signal to other agents that
they conform to some norms around attractivity, and that
they are interested in a speciﬁc type of agent. Agents in the
niche must be able to read these signals, and possibly also
conform to those norms in order to be recognizable as possible
mates by the ﬁrst agent. If an individual fails to act in a
way that is recognizable (i.e., inferable) by other agents, they
will not achieve their goal. Other agents will not be able to
map appropriate cues on their behavior, and they will either
be rejected, or have to update their model, and adapt to the
current context.
The niche, with its own external generative model of its
denizens, produces observations, patterned in a speciﬁc way so
as to be reliably interpreted by the agents of the niche. For
instance, in the ﬂirting script, showing a positive response to
attempts signals that there is a higher likelihood of the ﬂirting
being mutual. On a larger scale, a bar oﬀering free drinks to
women signals that it promotes a probable heterosexual script of
seduction, and that individuals presenting themselves at the bar
will probably have to conform to a binary gender frame in order
to be legible by one another. By enacting certain social cues that
are legible by each other, agents send deontic cues to the other
members of the group.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493
fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 11
Albarracin et al. Variational Scripts
Scripts as Representations of Typiﬁed
Sequence of Events
We have considered scripts as referring to clusters of categories
that map onto the world, and overlap. They also refer to
sequences of actions. This was previously associated with the
strong sense of scripts. These sequences are causally related,
which means that they are not simply habitual and dependent on
practice, but that they also enable agents to make inferences based
on knowledge of relations between social categories, which might
be interpreted as the hidden factors of a generative model. An
agent faced with having to perform the next step in a behavioral
sequence will not be at a loss about what to do next precisely
because they can infer the causal order of events. The information
contained in the strong scripts promotes the possibility for
variations, since their causal structure is not deterministic or rote,
but probabilistic and open to variation.
Sequencing of the events in the scripts entails a progression
over time–a narrative. The direction of this progression is
prescribed to the agent by a social goal that the agent must achieve
and by the allowable causal order of events. Hence, an individual
must not only be in the proper state at a given time–from the
inferences drawn from the observations–they must expect and
enact suitable transitions as well. Agents must have a model of
how events unfold under normal circumstances, but they must
also be able to act accordingly, and bring about that state to move
to the next causality link, in order to reach for the goal.
We can map these causal sequences in the beliefs about state
transitions (B matrices) and preferences over sensory outcomes
(C). Social goals are represented in terms of their typical sensory
consequences, which are accumulated in the C matrix. Agents
have a model of the likely transitions between states, given by the
goal state. Sharing beliefs about transitions between states makes
the behavior of a social agent more predictable by other agents.
In response, the niche’s actual transition probabilities drive the
expected social responses to an agent’s actions, which can be
considered deontic cues. The agent must not simply predict the
next state, they must also act to manifest those states. By following
each other’s expected scripts, agents send a signal to one another.
What Abelson called the “evoking context” or “action trigger”
pertains to the strong conception of script as well, and might
be implemented in active inference as deontic cues . The agent
receives a cue from the environment as to what action will allow
it to achieve its preferred state by increasing the probability of
a speciﬁc, contextually appropriate policy. Hence, an agent will
scaﬀold policy selection based on prompting and reinforcement
from the deontic cues of the environment.
This allows us to understand how a niche can predict a
certain pattern of behavior, and strive to provide only the relevant
and salient tools. For instance, a bar or pub might provide
women with free alcohol, because seduction patterns tend to
happen in proximity with alcohol and pubs. The availability of
alcohol for women at no cost signals to people interested in
ﬂirting with women that some will be there. It also assumes
that the only customers will not be women, or else the bar
would operate at signiﬁcant losses; thus, the script incorporates
gendered roles. And ﬁnally, it assumes that women are less likely
to be motivated to enter in such places and must be motivated by
an external factor, whereas men will be motivated simply by the
presence of women.
This seemingly benign action has many underlying
assumptions, which end up portraying two very diﬀerent
roles in the same ﬂirting-at-a-pub scripts for men and women,
both in a strong and weak reading. The weak modality of the
script pertains to the categories (hidden factors) present in the
narratives surrounding the pub context. The strong aspect of
the script is suggested in the order of actions drawn from the
narrative relationships between the categories, as discussed in
the introduction. If the women are portrayed as less motivated, it
follows that they are not expected to act overtly or take a leading
role in the ﬂirting script.
In scripted behavior, individuals can be making inferences
on distinct hierarchical levels. At the ﬁrst level, individuals
infer categorical states from direct observations in their social
environment. This state inference is used as an observation
for the second level, at which they infer a role being enacted,
conferring some stability in the script. The agent has to infer
the most likely transition between states at the ﬁrst level, which
will correspond to the next likely event in a social interaction,
translated in category states. At the second level, the next likely
state corresponds to the continuation of the previously inferred
role, or its discontinuation.
The niche both allows the individual to infer the probability
of initial states by oﬀering contextual cues, but will also oﬀer
feedback to the individual both on whether the role is enacted
properly, and what the proper policy to adopt is, in order to
maintain the social script.
The niche also plays a direct role. Providing condoms in
bathrooms makes the usual goal of seduction very salient. Playing
smoother songs by the end of the night responds to the order
of the social script of seduction, where individuals will probably
end their night together (as opposed to starting directly with
sex, and coming back to the bar for post-coital drinks). Dimmed
lights and slow music may act as deontic cues for the agents
to know they are expected to have reached a certain point in
the ﬂirting script. This can be considered by the agent as a
deontic cue. By responding to the scripts, the niche constrains
the social possibilities of the individual by making salient certain
category clusters, and promoting a sequence that, when broken,
has stronger social consequences, and is made more obvious for
the agent. The environment provides thus patterned regimes of
attention to guide the actions of the agent.
DISCUSSION
Our model has some key diﬀerences with previously existing
models, such as Gagnon and Simon’s sexual script construct, or
Abelson and Schank’s script construct, or even Minsky’s frames.
Gagnon and Simon’s sexual script theory addresses the multiple
scales at which scripts are enacted, which is in line with out
model of scripts based on active inference. Although our present
account of scripts entails a model with only two layers, it can
be scaled up to become more granular, such as to encompass
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493
fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 12
Albarracin et al. Variational Scripts
diﬀerent time scales, and to encompass varied cultural packages.
The beauty of our model is that these notions of cultural structure
are no longer blurry. They can be formally deciphered and
diﬀerentiated in terms of the active inference formalism, and we
can study their eﬀects over causal chains.
Another relevant diﬀerence is that we accommodate the two
main dimensions of the script concept, which no other proposed
construct has done heretofore. Sexual scripts are fully internal,
according to Gagnon and Simon. While cultural patterns and
practices act as scaﬀolds that enable the internalization of sexual
scripts, these are fully integrated in the individual’s psyche. Our
model entails no such internal segregation. On our account,
scripts enacted in the shared environment and the material
conditions of the world fully participate in every scripted
situation. Finally, while the scripts of Gagnon and Simon are
restricted to the sexual realm, our model can apply to any
social situation.
Abelson and Schank’s model, on the other hand, is much more
generally applicable. However, it mostly applies to the strong
scripts, as it speciﬁcally concerns the typiﬁed sequence of events
that an individual comes to expect in a given situation type. Such
sequence-emphasizing theories also include schema theories,
such as the gender schema theories proposed by Boston and Levy
(1991), Levy and Boston (1994), which posit that individuals learn
early on what kinds of behavioral sequences are expected of them
based on their assigned gender. This schema theory, however,
extends beyond the scripts concept, and describes psychological
attributes, such as attitudes and preferences, which cannot be
collapsed into scripts. While these attitudes and preferences can
be scripted, they extend outside of the scope of the scripts theory
per se. Our account of scripts does not solely focus on sequencing,
however, it also does not reach out of the symbolic space that
scripts occupy in the psyche.
On the other end of the spectrum, Minsky’s (1975) frame
theory and Bartlett and Bartlett’s (1995) schema theory, followed
by McClelland and Rumelhart’s (1985) schematas, are more
focused on the weak interpretation of scripts, as they oﬀers
a way that we reconstruct incomplete information to paint a
picture and assign meaning to a given context. Minsky’s frames
are slightly more rigid than our conception of weak scripts in
active inference. Speciﬁcally, knowledge needs to be relatively
certain and re-applicable in generic ways (Minsky, 1975). Our
conception of scripts instead relies on statistical probabilities.
There is no need for knowledge to be classiﬁed in particular
categories in order to be semantically linked. Furthermore, these
theories can only account for already-known information and do
not allow for an account of how new concepts are internalized.
Our active inference script theory gives us an account of how
knowledge about the world can be updated as the individual
encounters new social dynamics. A future account will lay
out more clearly how new information is learned in the weak
scripts. Overall, what we can see is that our new conception can
account for the various parts that the previous accounts worked
through separately.
Our proposed formalization of the script construct–via active
inference–allows for interesting avenues in social computing.
Speciﬁcally, we can begin to make predictions about how humans
react to scripts. By clearly identifying the formal role of internal
and external script elements–as well as what weak scripts and
strong scripts entail in a cognitive and ecological structure–we
can begin to leverage the model to identify the moment-to-
moment dynamics of interactions between social agents in a
given context. We can identify how narratives inﬂuence expected
behavior and contextual framing.
Scripts have generally been used as a framework to aid
conceptual analysis. For instance, weak scripts can be used for
in historical analysis to assess contextual relevance (Fleer and
Robbins, 2004), or to analyze codes in literature and art under
the angle of discourse (Tagg, 1992; Sun et al., 2016). Scripts allow
us to frame concepts in the context of their larger associative
networks to predict whether a concept will be negatively or
positively framed, based on shared cultural models and narratives
(Miyamoto and Ma, 2011). They have also been used to allow
behavioral predictions and motivations in larger scale events, like
criminology (Miyamoto and Ma, 2011; Ekblom and Gill, 2016),
or epidemiology (Trostle, 2005).
Understanding cultures in those areas allows researchers
to make predictions about normative sequences and the
consequences of violations of shared norms. However, these
models usually take a very abstract, heuristic approach to scripts,
and mostly use the script construct as a template to guide analysis,
rather than as a relevant prediction tool.
In criminology, the concept of script most often refers to
patterns of scripted behaviors (Hayward and Young, 2004;
Beauregard et al., 2007). These scripts can have an ecological
dimension, but they mostly refer to the strong understanding
of scripts. In our model, such scripts could be more accurately
predicted, leading to preventive actions and risk limitation. But
given our model’s connection to weak scripts as well, working
with oﬀenders to undo thought patterns that may support such
strong scripts would be made easier.
Similarly, epidemiology uses scripts theory to predict the way
individual and group dynamics will inﬂuence the spread of a
disease, or a problematic factor (Gibbs, 2001; Turchik et al.,
2009). As we have seen with the COVID pandemic, such scripts
can become vitally important. Our model can oﬀer precise
predictions as to the adoption of behaviors, and concepts for
diﬀerent populations, and allow us to predict what kinds of
behaviors may be adopted.
For the sexological use of scripts, the ramiﬁcations of our
model can have deep impacts in the way we can approach
patients in therapy. Interpersonal scripts, perceptions and
patterns are inﬂuenced by the ecology of the individual, and
can be rearranged. Keeping these scripts in mind, erotic patterns
can be woven and unwoven as they need to be for diﬀerent
types of pathologies.
With our formal model of scripts, we can map the direct
interaction of an individual with social categories and events, as
well as its concomitants in the shared niche. Those dynamics
could allow not only to model how scripts come to be
widespread–by simulating sensitivity to deontic cues and social
coordination with interlocutors–but also how scripts may come
to change when an agent is faced with a script violation, and
its diﬀerent ramiﬁcations. These violations may be met with
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493
fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 13
Albarracin et al. Variational Scripts
social punishment, or be embraced when they tap into previously
invisible, valuable social reality. This formalism may be scaled up
to simulate agents as the niche, and see how certain patterns of
interactions and co-option may emerge. Finally, the model and
the predicted patterns may be measured against real empirical
data, and falsiﬁed or conﬁrmed to test psychological hypotheses
about adhere to scripts.
An interesting avenue, which we are now pursuing, is to
test these models against the constructs used in the gender and
sexuality studies, which have already used the concept of scripts
with its interpretation from Simon and Gagnon (1984). Our
formal treatment of sexual and gendered scripts may shed new
light on this work and may allow real progress in the clinical
and theoretical ﬁelds of sexology. Gender studies, rooted in
feminist thought, may ﬁnd new ways to critically address more
biological explanations of gendered interactions and gendered
diﬀerences. This is also an interesting avenue to deconstruct
assumptions of the duality between the inﬂuences of nature
and nurture on development, bringing human sciences into the
neo-materialist era.
Future work will be concerned with formalizing the
mathematical model and applying this model to simulations.
These simulations could then be tested against real observed
behavioral data. We can infer from these behavioral data
the potential conceptual mapping that was integrated by an
individual. We can also choose the alternative route of starting
from a conceptual mapping, and deriving behavior, which we can
then test against real data as well.
Our conceptualization of script theory accounts for diﬀerent
structures of information, and thus accounts for the manner in
which agents ﬂexibly adapt to new situations, learn, grow, and
work out uncertainty in their script.
This paper represents the ﬁrst in a multi-step process,
whereby formal models are constructed. The ﬁrst step is
to formalize some informal notions to provide a theoretical
account. We now present some speculation about what
novel predictions this framework should yield. Following
steps include implementing the model, at which point it
becomes possible to make quantitative predictions. We can
thus expect that our model will allow us to predict the
ways in which information on the weak continuum maps
directly to sequences, by having these representations modeled
as the A matrix for the weak script, and the sequencing
as the B matrix. As our model will enable an agent to
decide between changing their model of the world and
changing their actions, scripts will be able to evolve and
integrate new information. The future directions of this
research will allow us to explore how entirely new concepts
get integrated as concepts. We believe that this will be
related to the extent that pre-existing concepts or sub-
symbolic concepts get clustered together. With these tools in
hand, we should be able to predict social dynamics from
large scale groups to interpersonal interactions. We will be
able to untangle the ways in which an individual may be
embedded in their surrounding causing some pathology and
we can highlight the exact paths that lead to systemic and
symbolic inequalities.
One important beneﬁt of our model, beyond its precision, may
be its computational advantages. Speciﬁcally, a lot of complexity
can be smoothed out as constants at diﬀerent levels of state space,
which correspond to diﬀerent rates of change. The interpersonal
level will go much faster than the cultural level, and this cultural
level, at the scale of interpersonal relationships, can essentially be
cast as a prior.
CONCLUSION
The aim of this paper was to propose a formalization of the
script construct using the apparatus of active inference. We
hoped to propose an integrative account of the script construct
that does justice to its sundry uses in the sciences that study
individual and collective human behavior. First, we reviewed
the recent literature that uses scripts. Then, we examined the
active inference approach, a behavioral modeling framework that
casts action, perception, emotions, and attention as processes
of (Bayesian or variational) inference. We then leveraged active
inference to provide a principled, computational model of scripts
that accounted for the dual nature of scripts as internal schema
and as external social order, and for the stronger and weaker
conceptions of the construct (which do and do not relate to
explicit action sequences, respectively).
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author/s.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
MA focused on social scripts theory and its active inference
formulation. MR and AC adapted the active inference
frameworks in terms of the social scripts theory and produced
the ﬁgures for the article. KF specialized ensured that
our interpretation of the model followed the appropriate
mathematical formalism. All authors contributed to the article
and approved the submitted version.
FUNDING
We wish to acknowledge the Wellcome center grant
088130/Z/09/Z for funding this manuscript in open access.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493
fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 14
Albarracin et al. Variational Scripts
REFERENCES
Abelson, R. P. (1981). Psychological status of the script concept. Am. Psychol. 36,
715–729. doi: 10.1037/0003-066x.36.7.715
Adler, P. A., Adler, P., Jessor, R., Colby, A., and Shweder, R. A. (1997). Ethnography
and human development: context and meaning in social inquiry. Contemp.
Sociol. 26:654. doi: 10.2307/2655682
Allain, P., Berrut, G., Etcharry-Bouyx, F., Barre, J., Dubas, F., and Gall,
D. L. (2007). Executive functions in normal aging: an examination of
script sequencing, script sorting, and script monitoring. J. Gerontol.
B Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci. 62, 187–190. doi: 10.1093/geronb/62.
3.p187
Attias, H. (2003). Planning by probabilistic inference. Proceedings of the Ninth
International Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics in Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research R4, 9–16. Available online at: http://proceedings.
mlr.press/r4/attias03a.html
Baltieri, M., and Buckley, C. L. (2018). The modularity of action and perception
revisited using control theory and active inference. Artif. Life Confer. Proc. 30,
121–128.
Bartlett, F. C., and Bartlett, F. C. (1995).Remembering: A study in Experimental and
Social Psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Beal, M. J. (2003). Variational Algorithms for Approximate Bayesian Inference .
Ph.D. thesis. London: University College London.
Beauregard, E., Proulx, J., Rossmo, K., Leclerc, B., and Allaire, J. F. (2007). Script
analysis of the hunting process of serial sex oﬀenders. Criminal Justice Behav.
34, 1069–1084. doi: 10.1177/0093854807300851
Berg, M. T., and Hochstetler, A. (2016). Cognition and crime: oﬀender decision
making and script analyses. Contemp. Sociol. J. Rev. 45, 53–55. doi: 10.1177/
0094306115621526u
Binder, A. (2007). For love and money: organizations’ creative responses to
multiple environmental logics. Theory Soc. 36, 547–571. doi: 10.1007/s11186-
007-9045-x
Boston, M. B., and Levy, G. D. (1991). Changes and diﬀerences in preschoolers’
understanding of gender scripts. Cogn. Dev. , 6, 417–432. doi: 10.1016/0885-
2014(91)90047-H
Botvinick, M., and Toussaint, M. (2012). Planning as inference. Trends Cogn. Sci.
16, 485–488.
Bouizegarene, N., Ramstead, M., Constant, A., Friston, K., and Kirmayer, L. (2020).
Narrative as active inference. PsyArXiv [Preprint] doi: 10.31234/osf.io/47ub6
Brown, G., Maycock, B., and Burns, S. (2005). Your picture is your bait: use and
meaning of cyberspace among gay men. J. Sex Res. 42, 63–73. doi: 10.1080/
00224490509552258
Bruineberg, J., Rietveld, E., Parr, T., van Maanen, L., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Free-
energy minimization in joint agent-environment systems: a niche construction
perspective. J. Theor. Biol. 455, 161–178. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2018.07.002
Chalmers, D. J. (2019). “Extended cognition and extended consciousness, ” inAndy
Clark and His Critics , ed. D. J. Chalmers (Oxford: Oxford University Press),
9–20. doi: 10.1093/oso/9780190662813.003.0002
Chentsova-Dutton, Y. E., and Ryder, A. G. (2020). Cultural models of normalcy
and deviancy. Asian J. Soc. Psychol. 23, 187–204. doi: 10.1111/ajsp.12413
Clark, A., and Chalmers, D. J. (2010). “The extended mind, ” inThe Extended Mind,
ed. R. Menary (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press), 26–42. doi: 10.7551/mitpress/
9780262014038.003.0002
Constant, A., Clark, A., Kirchhoﬀ, M., and Friston, K. J. (2019a). Extended
active inference: constructing predictive cognition beyond skulls. Mind Lang.
Available online at: http://sro.sussex.ac.uk/id/eprint/88369/ (accessed July 15,
2020).
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., Campbell, J. O., and Friston,
K. J. (2018). A variational approach to niche construction. J. R. Soc. Interface
15:20170685. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0685
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., and Friston, K. J. (2019b).
Regimes of expectations: an active inference model of social conformity and
human decision making. Front. Psychol. 10:679. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00679
Da Costa, L., Parr, T., Sajid, N., Veselic, S., Neacsu, V., and Friston, K. J. (2020).
Active inference on discrete state-spaces: a synthesis.arXiv [Preprint]. Available
online at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2001.07203 (accessed Mar 28, 2020).
Dawkins, R. (2016). The Selﬁsh Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ekblom, P., and Gill, M. (2016). Rewriting the script: cross-disciplinary exploration
and conceptual consolidation of the procedural analysis of crime. Eur. J.
Criminal Policy Res. 22, 319–339. doi: 10.1007/s10610-015-9291-9
Feynman, R. (1972). Statistical Mechanics: A Set of Lectures . San Francisco, CA:
Benjamin/Cummings Publishing.
Fleer, M., and Robbins, J. (2004). Broadening the circumference: a socio-historical
analysis of family enactments of literacy and numeracy within the oﬃcial script
of middle class early childhood discourse. Outlines Crit. Pract. Stud. 6, 17–34.
Friston, K. (2011). What is optimal about motor control? [Review of What is
optimal about motor control?]. Neuron 72, 488–498. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.
2011.10.018
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. J. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics. arXiv
[Preprint]. Available online at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.10184 (accessed Jun
24, 2019).
Friston, K. J., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., and Pezzulo, G. (2017a).
Active inference: a process theory.Neural Comput.29, 1–49. doi: 10.1162/neco_
a_00912
Friston, K. J., and Frith, C. (2015). A duet for one. Conscious. Cogn. 36, 390–405.
Friston, K. J., Harrison, L., and Penny, W. (2003). Dynamic causal
modelling. Neuroimage 19, 1273–1302. doi: 10.1016/s1053-8119(03)
00202-7
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., and de Vries, B. (2017b). The graphical brain: belief
propagation and active inference. Netw. Neurosci. (Cambridge Mass.) 1, 381–
414. doi: 10.1162/netn_a_00018
Garey, A. I., and Wikan, U. (1998). Tomorrow, god willing: self-made destinies in
cairo. Contemp. Sociol. 27:81. doi: 10.2307/2654737
Gibbs, A. (2001). Contagious feelings: Pauline Hanson and the
epidemiology of aﬀect. Austr. Hum. Rev. 2001. Available online at:
http://australianhumanitiesreview.org/2001/12/01/contagious-feelings-
pauline-hanson-and-the-epidemiology-of-aﬀect/?utm_source=rss&utm_
medium=rss&utm_campaign=contagious-feelings-pauline-hanson-and-the-
epidemiology-of-aﬀect
Goddard, C., and Wierzbicka, A. (2004). Cultural scripts: what are they and what
are they good for? Intercult. Pragmat. 1, 153–166. doi: 10.1515/iprg.2004.1.2.
153
Goﬀman, E. (1999). The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Gloucester, MA: Peter
Smith Pub Incorporated.
Goﬀman, E. (2009). Relations in Public. Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Graesser, A. C., Woll, S. B., Kowalski, D. J., and Smith, D. A. (1980). Memory for
typical and atypical actions in scripted activities. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Learn.
Mem. 6, 503–515. doi: 10.1037/0278-7393.6.5.503
Greenberg, M. S., Westcott, D. R., and Bailey, S. E. (1998). When believing is seeing:
the eﬀect of scripts on eyewitness memory. Law Hum. Behav. 22, 685–694.
doi: 10.1023/a:1025758807624
Greenhill, A., and Fletcher, G. (2009). “The polysemy of human–computer
interaction, ” inFuture Interaction Design II, eds H. Isomäki and P. Saariluoma
(London: Springer), 175–190. doi: 10.1007/978-1-84800-385-9_9
Hayward, K. J., and Young, J. (2004). Cultural criminology: some notes on the
script. Theor. Criminol. 8, 259–273. doi: 10.1177/1362480604044608
Heemskerk, I., Volman, M., ten Dam, G., and Admiraal, W. (2011). Social scripts in
educational technology and inclusiveness in classroom practice. Teach. Teach.
17, 35–50. doi: 10.1080/13540602.2011.538495
Hesp, C., Smith, R., Parr, T., Allen, M., Friston, K. J., and Ramstead, M. J. (2021).
Deeply felt aﬀect: the emergence of valence in deep active inference. Neural
Comput. 33, 398–446.
Hipolito, I., Baltieri, M., Friston, J. K., and Ramstead, M. J. D. (2020). Embodied
Skillful Performance: Where the Action is . Available online at: http://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/id/eprint/17280 (accessed July 15, 2020).
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 50, 259–285. doi: 10.1111/nous.
12062
Ingelsböck, J., and Schüﬂler, E. (2019). New directions for the concept of the
institutional script. Nano Papers 9, 1–7. doi: 10.14459/2019md1470688
Kiebel, S. J., Garrido, M. I., Moran, R. J., and Friston, K. J. (2008). Dynamic
causal modelling for EEG and MEG.Cogn. Neurodyn. 2, 121–136. doi: 10.1007/
s11571-008-9038-0
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493
fpsyg-12-585493 July 14, 2021 Time: 18:40 # 15
Albarracin et al. Variational Scripts
Kimberly, C. (2016). Permission to cheat: ethnography of a swingers’ convention.
Sex. Cult. 20, 56–68. doi: 10.1007/s12119-015-9309-y
Leclerc, B., and Wortley, R. (2013).Cognition and Crime: Oﬀender Decision Making
and Script Analyses. Abingdon: Routledge.
Levy, G. D., and Boston, M. B. (1994). Preschoolers’ recall of own-sex and other-
sex gender scripts. J. Genet. Psychol.155, 369–371. doi: 10.1080/00221325.1994.
9914787
Lydon, J. E., Jamieson, D. W., and Holmes, J. G. (1997). The meaning of social
interactions in the transition from acquaintanceship to friendship. J. Pers. Soc.
Psychol. 73, 536–548. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.73.3.536
Mahardale, J. W., and Lee, C. B. (2013). Understanding how social and epistemic
scripts perpetuate intersubjectivity through patterns of interactions. Interact.
Learn. Environ. 21, 68–88. doi: 10.1080/10494820.2010.547204
McClelland, J. L., and Rumelhart, D. E. (1985). Distributed memory and the
representation of general and speciﬁc information. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 114,
159–188. doi: 10.1037/0096-3445.114.2.159
McCormick, N. B. (2010). Sexual scripts: social and therapeutic implications. Sex.
Relat. Ther. 25, 96–120. doi: 10.1080/14681990903550167
Metts, S., and Spitzberg, B. H. (1996). Sexual communication in interpersonal
contexts: a script-based approach. Ann. Int. Commun. Assoc. 19, 49–92. doi:
10.1080/23808985.1996.11678928
Millidge, B. (2019). Deep active inference as variational policy gradients. arXiv
[Preprint]. arXiv:1907.03876,
Minsky, M. (1975). “A framework for representing knowledge, ” inThe Psychology
of Computer Vision, ed. P. H. Winston (New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Book).
Miyamoto, Y., and Ma, X. (2011). Dampening or savoring positive emotions: a
dialectical cultural script guides emotion regulation. Emotion 11, 1346–1357.
doi: 10.1037/a0025135
Palacios, E. R., Isomura, T., Parr, T., and Friston, K. (2019). The emergence of
synchrony in networks of mutually inferring neurons. Sci. Rep. 9:6412.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Kirchhoﬀ, M. D., and Friston, K. J. (2019). A tale of two
densities: active inference is enactive inference. Adapt. Behav. 28, 225–239.
doi: 10.1177/1059712319862774
Ratner, C. (1997). In defense of activity theory. Cult. Psychol. 3, 211–223. doi:
10.1177/1354067x9700300207
Ratner, C. (1999). Three approaches to cultural psychology. Cult. Dyn. 11, 7–31.
doi: 10.1177/092137409901100102
Royle, N. J. (2013). An introduction to behavioural ecology. Anim. Behav. 85,
686–687. doi: 10.1016/j.anbehav.2013.01.003
Schank, R. C. (1972). Conceptual dependency: a theory of natural language
understanding. Cogn. Psychol. 3, 552–631. doi: 10.1016/0010-0285(72)90022-9
Schank, R. C., and Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding.
Hillsdale, MICH: Laurence Erlbaum.
Shore, B. (1998). Culture in Mind: Cognition, Culture, and the Problem of Meaning.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Simon, W., and Gagnon, J. H. (1984). Sexual scripts. Society 22, 53–60. doi: 10.
1007/bf02701260
Simpson, G., Berger, P. L., and Luckmann, T. (1967). The social construction
of reality: a treatise in the sociology of knowledge. Am. Sociol. Rev. 32:137.
doi: 10.2307/2091739
Singleton, R., Winskell, K., McLeod, H., Gregg, A., Sabben, G., Obong’o, C., et al.
(2019). Young Africans’ social representations of sexual abuse of power in
their HIV-related creative narratives, 2005-2014: cultural scripts and applied
possibilities. Cult. Health Sex. 21, 63–78. doi: 10.1080/13691058.2018.1448113
St. Clair, R. N. (2008). Social scripts and the three theoretical approaches to culture.
Intercult. Commun. Stud. 4. Available online at: https://web.uri.edu/iaics/ﬁles/
13-Robert-StClair.pdf (accessed July 15, 2020).
St. Clair, R. N., Robert, N., Thomé-Williams, A. C., and Lichang, S. (2005). The role
of social script theory in cognitive blending. Intercult. Commun. Stud. 1, 1–7.
Sun, C., Bridges, A., Johnson, J. A., and Ezzell, M. B. (2016). Pornography and the
male sexual script: an analysis of consumption and sexual relations. Arch. Sex.
Behav. 45, 983–994. doi: 10.1007/s10508-014-0391-2
Tagg, J. (1992).Grounds of Dispute: Art History, Cultural Politics and the Discursive
Field. Minneapolis, Min: University of Minnesota Press.
Trostle, J. A. (2005). Epidemiology and Culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. doi: 10.1017/cbo9780511806025
Turchik, J. A., Probst, D. R., Irvin, C. R., Chau, M., and Gidycz, C. A. (2009).
Prediction of sexual assault experiences in college women based on rape scripts:
a prospective analysis. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 77:361. doi: 10.1037/a0015157
Turner, R. H., and Biddle, B. J. (1981). Role theory: expectations, identities, and
behaviors. Contemp. Sociol. 10, 854–855. doi: 10.2307/2067281
Tzeng, J.-Y. (2006). Matching users’ diverse social scripts with resonating
humanized features to create a polite interface. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud. 64,
1230–1242. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2006.08.011
Vanclay, F., and Enticott, G. (2011). The role and functioning of cultural scripts in
farming and agriculture. Sociol. Ruralis 51, 256–271. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9523.
2011.00537.x
Waters, T., Fraley, R. C., Groh, A. M., Steele, R. D., Vaughn, B. E., Bost, K. K., et al.
(2015). The latent structure of secure base script knowledge. Dev. Psychol. 51,
823–830. doi: 10.1037/dev0000012
Waters, T., and Roisman, G. I. (2019). The secure base script concept: an overview.
Curr. Opin. Psychol. 25, 162–166. doi: 10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.08.002
Wiederman, M. W. (2015). “Sexual script theory: past, present, and future, ” in
Handbooks of Sociology and Social Research , eds J. DeLamater and R. Plante
(Cham: Springer), 7–22. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-17341-2_2
Wierzbicka, A. (2002). Russian cultural scripts: the theory of cultural
scripts and its applications. Ethos 30, 401–432. doi: 10.1525/eth.2002.30
.4.401
Winn, J., and Bishop, C. M. (2005). Variational message passing. J. Mach. Learn.
Res. 6, 661–694.
Wirkuttis, N., and Tani, J. (2021). Controlling the sense of agency in dyadic robot
interaction: an active inference approach. arXiv [Preprint]. arXiv:2103.02137,
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Albarracin, Constant, Friston and Ramstead. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 July 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 585493