Academic Editor: Marialaura Di Tella
Received: 3 June 2025
Revised: 23 July 2025
Accepted: 31 July 2025
Published: 12 August 2025
Citation: Alekseeva, V ., & Ciaunica, A.
(2025). It Is Movement All the Way
Down: Broken Rhythms and
Embodied Selfhood in
Depersonalization. Behavioral Sciences,
15(8), 1090. https://doi.org/
10.3390/bs15081090
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
It Is Movement All the Way Down: Broken Rhythms and
Embodied Selfhood in Depersonalization
Veronika Alekseeva 1,2
 and Anna Ciaunica 2,3, *
1 Department of Psychology and Cognitive Sciences, University of Trento, 38068 Rovereto, Italy
2 INESC-ID/CEECIND Fciencias.ID, GAIPS, Instituto Superior Tecnico, University of Lisbon, Rua Alves Redol,
9, 1000-029/1049-001 Lisbon, Portugal
3 Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, London WC1N 3AR, UK
* Correspondence: a.ciaunica@ucl.ac.uk
Abstract
From the moment we are born, and even before, in the womb, and until our last breath, our
bodies move all the time. Adaptive behaviors necessarily depend not only on the successful
integration of multisensory bodily signals but also on how we move our bodies in the world.
This paper considers the notion of embodied selfhood through the perspective of dynamic
and rhymical coupling between bodily movements and bodily actions. We propose a new
theoretical framework suggesting that the dynamic coupling between bodily movements
and bodily actions in the world are fundamental in constructing and maintaining a coherent
sense of self. To support this idea, we use the Predictive Processing (PP) and Active
Inference frameworks as our background theoretical canvas. Specifically, we will focus
on the phenomenon of somatosensory attenuation in relation to dynamic selfhood and
argue that rhythmic bodily signals such as heartbeats, breathing, and walking patterns are
predictable and, thus, can be smoothly attenuated, i.e., processed in the background. We
illustrate this hypothesis by discussing the case of Depersonalization Disorder as a failure
to self-attenuate self-related information processing, leading to feelings of unreality and
self ‘loss’. We conclude with potential implications of our hypothesis for therapy.
Keywords: self; somatosensory attenuation; active inference; depersonalisation
1. Introduction
From the moment we are born, and even before, in the womb, and until our last breath,
our bodies move all the time, both intentionally and unintentionally. Throughout our life,
we are constantly immersed in a cascade of sensory signals (smells, sounds, images, etc.)
arising from both inside and outside our moving bodies. The fine-grained and flexible
orchestration of these dynamic sensory inputs ‘on the fly’ into a coherent sense of self
is key for successful navigation in an unpredictable and noisy world. Much theoretical
and empirical work has demonstrated that bodily sensations and perceptions scaffold the
familiar subjective experience of being an embodied I, present in the here and now (Apps
& Tsakiris, 2014; Seth, 2013; Limanowski & Blankenburg, 2013; Ciaunica et al., 2021; see
Qin et al., 2020 for a review).
The predominant focus on brain-centered theories of human selfhood has recently
shifted towards more embodied views (Gallagher, 2000; Zahavi, 2005; Legrand, 2006;
Thompson, 2007). Seminally developed by F. J. Varela et al. (1991) and inspired by the
pioneering work of Merleau-Ponty (1945/1962), the key idea is that self-awareness is a
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 https://doi.org/10.3390/bs15081090
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 2 of 23
dynamic phenomenon emerging first and foremost as basic sensory processing within
living organisms such as human bodies situated in a wider environment (de Jaegher &
Di Paolo, 2007; Ciaunica et al., 2021; Bennett et al., 2024). This body-centered refocus
is supported by the substantial empirical evidence outlining the key intertwined role
of dynamic sensorimotor processing and neural processing in constituting human self-
experiences (F. J. Varela et al., 1991; see Qin et al., 2020, for a review). The body also serves
as the primary interface between sensory perception and social cognition, shaping how
we interpret both physical and social realities through bodily cues like posture and gait
(Dapor et al., 2023). The replacement of the solitary homunculus in the brain trying to
“make sense” of the hidden outer worldly and bodily inputs is particularly welcome in
light of growing evidence suggesting a close relationship between brain and body signal
processing related to the self (Damasio, 2000; Park & Tallon-Baudry, 2014).
A robust body of work demonstrated that the mechanisms underlying the interplay
between exteroceptive, interoceptive, and proprioceptive self-related sensory signals are key
to understanding the sense of self and its alterations (Tsakiris, 2017; Park & Blanke, 2019;
Azzalini et al., 2019; Koreki et al., 2021). Multisensory integration refers to the capacity
to accurately integrate information from both (a) exteroceptive systems, which refer to the
classical sensory modalities for perceiving one’s body and the external environment (e.g.,
vision and audition), and (b) interoceptive senses, i.e., the afferent information arising from
within the body (e.g., temperature, itch, pain, cardiac signals) (Craig, 2002; Seth, 2013). In
addition, (c) proprioceptive inputs provide sensory information (i.e., from muscles, joints,
and vestibular organs) about body position and motion in space. Recent research in healthy
adults has revealed interactions between the exteroceptive, interoceptive, and proprioceptive
processing of self-related information (Ainley et al., 2012; Chancel & Ehrsson, 2023).
The key idea is that rather than treating these internal and external sensory streams as
separate contributors to selfhood, it is crucial to highlight their continuous interplay within
a unified system of bodily self-consciousness (Tsakiris, 2017; Park & Tallon-Baudry, 2014;
Park & Blanke, 2019). Hence, a comprehensive understanding of bodily self-consciousness
must incorporate the dynamic contributions of both internal and external signals. More
radically, it has been proposed that interoception may be defined as the integrative inter-
pretation of both internal and external stimuli within a cognitive and emotional context
and not just the internal ones (Quigley et al., 2021; Ainley et al., 2016).
Importantly, our bodily self is a flexible, fluid, and dynamic system, continuously
updated in the face of constant interactions with an everchanging environment (Tajadura-
Jiménez et al., 2015; Stanton & Spence, 2020). A significant body of philosophical, neurosci-
entific, and psychological research has indeed demonstrated that body representations are
malleable and continuously updated by multisensory information received during bodily
interactions with the environment (Legrand, 2006; Tsakiris, 2017; Tajadura-Jiménez et al.,
2012, 2015; Azañón et al., 2016; Brianza et al., 2019; Stanton & Spence, 2020).
For example, studies using the rubber hand illusion (RHI) (Botvinick & Cohen, 1998)
demonstrated how synchronous multisensory inputs can alter the sense of body ownership,
creating a vivid sense that a rubber hand is part of one’s body (Ehrsson et al., 2005; Tsakiris
et al., 2010; Rohde et al., 2011; Suzuki et al., 2013). By contrast, disruptions in this integration,
such as asynchronous inputs, weaken the sense of ownership. In a similar vein, the ‘cardiac
rubber hand illusion’ (Suzuki et al., 2013) demonstrated that the strength of body ownership
can be enhanced by synchronizing visual feedback with interoceptive (cardiac) signals in
time with an individual’s heartbeat. Another study used cardio-visual stimulation in the
Enfacement Illusion (Sel et al., 2017), showing that synchronizing a pulsing shade with
a participant’s heartbeat increased self-identification with a morphed face and enhanced
neural responses to heartbeats, as measured by Heartbeat Evoked Potentials (HEPs).
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 3 of 23
Similarly, the “embreathment” illusion (Monti et al., 2020) demonstrated that mapping
real respiratory patterns onto a virtual body significantly alters corporeal awareness. This
study showed that breathing is equally as crucial as visual appearance for body owner-
ship and even more important for body agency. Also, Kosuge et al. (2023) showed that
respiratory rhythms recalibrate body ownership, where congruency between respiratory
signals and external stimuli facilitated ownership transfer over the fake hand. Interestingly,
Adler et al. (2016) demonstrated that synchronous visuo-respiratory feedback increases
self-location and breathing agency toward a virtual body, even when participants’ breathing
was machine-assisted, highlighting respiratory signals’ interoceptive contributions to bod-
ily self-consciousness. Importantly, both active and passive breathing conditions modulate
self-identification with a virtual body equally during visuo-respiratory synchronization
(Betka et al., 2020).
Previous work outlined the importance of rhythmic physiological activity shaping
neural development in utero and beyond (Bastos et al., 2020; Wolpert & Tallon-Baudry,
2021; Corcoran et al., 2023/2025). Indeed, one important yet overlooked aspect is that
the bodily self is intrinsically related to the processing of self-related signals in relation
not only to the body (F. J. Varela et al., 1991) but, importantly, in relation to the body in
movement. Human bodies are indeed highly dynamic systems, constantly moving both
inside (e.g., heartbeats and breathing) and in the outside world (e.g., footsteps and walking)
to secure survival.
In this theoretical paper, we propose to take a fresh look at the notion of embodied
selfhood by using, as an entrance point, the dynamic coupling between bodily movements
and bodily actions. Specifically, we propose to conceptually distinguish between (a) bodily
movements (e.g., cardiac and respiratory signals). For example, my heart beats all the
time, even when I am asleep or I am in the womb, that is, without explicit conscious
awareness of my movements. Also, when I breathe, my chest is moving following the
inspiration/expiration pace. Bodily movements are thus fundamental and pervasive
aspects of living organisms such as humans. By contrast, (b) bodily actions refer to the
voluntary, agentic, and intentional movements that one may take in the world (Haggard,
2017). For example, I can actively and intentionally reach for a glass of water or walk
to the grocery store or into the woods to obtain food. Importantly, survival depends on
the successful coordination of both bodily movements and bodily actions, in addition to
the flexible multisensory integration of bodily signals from inside and outside the body,
as demonstrated through the RHI. Hence, we need to expand our picture of embodied
selfhood to encompass this intrinsic relationality, coupling movements and actions as a
necessary fundamental component of the self.
This paper proposes a new theoretical framework suggesting that the dynamic cou-
pling of bodily rhythms—inner movements (such as the cardiac cycle) and outer actions
(such as the walking cycle)—is fundamental in constructing and maintaining a coherent
sense of self acting in the world. To support this idea, we use the Predictive Processing (PP)
(Friston, 2005; Clark, 2013; Hohwy, 2013) framework as our background theoretical canvas.
We build upon the observation that, necessarily, living systems are moving systems that
need to effectively couple rhythmical dynamical sensory signals from inside the body (i.e.,
cardiac and respiratory signals) with rhythmical actions in the world (i.e., walking). The
key idea is that it is the process of coupling bodily movements and bodily actions which
facilitates the seamless integration of interoceptive and exteroceptive cues, and not just the
multisensory integration of inner and outer bodily signals. Indeed, bodily movements and
bodily actions in the world ground the body within its volatile environment by keeping a
stable sense of agency and ownership within a precarious homeostatic balance maintained
via energetic exchanges with the environment (Damasio, 2000; Maturana & Varela, 1980).
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 4 of 23
When this fragile balance is disrupted, instead of fixing the self alone, or the individual per
se, one needs to address the relationship between the individuals’ bodily movements and
actions in the physical and social world.
This paper is set up as follows:
In Section 2, we emphasize the dynamic aspect of multisensory integration—
specifically, the importance of coupling bodily actions and bodily movements in con-
stituting our sense of self. In Section 3, we use the PP Bayesian framework to show that
human bodies are indeed biological self-organizing living systems “on the move” and
under constant pressure to resist entropic dissipation, and as such, they live under drastic
time constraints and limited energetic resources (Ciaunica, 2025). Because of these inherent
limitations, human organisms need to learn very early on what information to process or
attend, and what information to dis-attend or attenuate. Hence, the process of “ignoring”
or attenuating sensory information is as key as the process of acquiring information for a
living system such as the human body (Ciaunica et al., 2021; Ciaunica, 2025). Specifically,
we will focus on the phenomenon of somatosensory attenuation in relation to dynamic
selfhood and argue that rhythmic bodily signals such as heartbeats, breathing, and walk-
ing patterns are predictable and, thus, can be smoothly attenuated, i.e., processed in the
background. We illustrate this hypothesis by discussing the case of Depersonalization
Disorder (Sierra & Berrios, 1997) in Sections 4 and 5 as a failure to self-attenuate self-related
information processing, leading to feelings of unreality and self ‘loss’ (Ciaunica et al., 2022;
Ciaunica, 2024). We conclude in Section 6 by discussing the potential implications of this
shift in focus for potential therapy, based on dynamic rhythmical embodied interventions.
2. Living on Rhythms: Coupling Bodily Movements and Bodily Actions
Life is movement and movement is life (Thompson, 2007). Living organisms like
human bodies constantly pulsate to rhythms. The study of sensory visceral signals origi-
nating from inside the body such as cardiac (Craig, 2002; Garfinkel et al., 2015), gastric, and
respiratory (Engelen et al., 2024) rhythmical signals has been recently placed at the very
core of human bodily self-consciousness (Park & Tallon-Baudry, 2014; see also Carpenter
et al., 2025). A significant body of theory and empirical work illustrates that the sense of
a stable and continuous sense of self emerges more robustly from neural representations
of rhythmically patterned visceral signals than from less predictable and transient extero-
ceptive inputs. For example, Park and Blanke (2019) note that signals tied to the hands,
for instance, vary widely depending on our interactions with the environment, producing
relatively brief and irregular neural responses. In contrast, visceral inputs are continuously
conveyed to the brain in cyclical patterns that help maintain self-regulatory processes such
as homeostasis (Damasio, 2000) within a regulated physiological range.
Indeed, there is growing evidence supporting the role of rhythmical visceral signals,
such as cardiac phases, in modulating sensory processing. Studies indicate that sensory
precision for exteroceptive inputs, such as visual and tactile stimuli, fluctuates across the
cardiac cycle. For example, Azevedo et al. (2017) found increased race-driven misidentifi-
cation of weapons during systole, highlighting how interoceptive signals modulate sensory
processing in alignment with baroreceptor activity. Similarly, Galvez-Pol et al. (2020, 2022)
provided evidence that visual and tactile precision is modulated by cardiac phases, with
diastole favoring heightened sensitivity to external stimuli. While we actively spend more
time sensing during systolic periods, Saltafossi et al. (2023) further corroborated these find-
ings, showing phase-dependent variations in multisensory integration. This attenuation
of exteroceptive signals during systole is hypothesized to arise from interoceptive signals
competing with exteroceptive inputs for attentional resources (Ren et al., 2024).
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 5 of 23
This modulation is believed to optimize the sampling of environmental stimuli by
aligning sensory attenuation with periods of increased baroreceptor activity during systole.
Baroreceptor signals, triggered by the pulsatile ejection of blood from the heart, prioritize
internal homeostasis and modulate sensory processing to reduce sensitivity to external
stimuli. This process prevents overstimulation from redundant sensory inputs and en-
hances the capacity to detect novel or salient environmental changes during diastole, when
sensory precision is higher. As we will see shortly in the next section, this phase-dependent
fluctuation in sensory processing aligns with the PP account, allowing for the efficient
allocation of attentional and neural resources (Critchley & Garfinkel, 2018; Al et al., 2020;
Allen et al., 2022).
An examination of the dynamic coupling between cardiac and respiratory signals
and locomotor signals is key to our argumentation here. Indeed, our biological survival
depends on the ability to rhythmically act in the world (i.e., walking and running) to
secure nutrient resources and social support, and these actions are critically linked to the
rhythmical movements of the cardiac and respiratory processes.
Also, a recent study suggested that the relative timing of core body temperature
and melatonin rhythms may be key circadian features linked to depressive symptoms
(Carpenter et al., 2025).
Previous work showed that real-time modulation of the sounds (modulation of sound
frequency spectrum) produced by one’s own footsteps while walking can modify individu-
als’ body perception, emotional states, and even their gait patterns, which constitute an
implicit behavioral indication of changes in body representations (Tajadura-Jiménez et al.,
2015, 2017; Gomez-Andres et al., 2020; see also Ley-Flores et al., 2021, 2022).
Supporting this hypothesis, studies investigating full-body movements during lo-
comotion offer additional insights into the complexity of bodily self-consciousness and
its relation to everyday bodily actions such as walking. For example, cardiac–locomotor
synchronization (CLS) is a well-documented physiological phenomenon wherein heart
rate becomes coupled with locomotor rhythms during movement. Studies have shown
that this synchronization is not just a byproduct of mechanical movement but an emergent
property of the interaction between the cardiac and locomotor systems. Interestingly, Kirby
et al. (1989) demonstrated that during locomotion, the heart rate can become entrained
with the stride rate (the number of steps per minute), particularly at moderate-to-high
exercise intensities. This coupling is hypothesized to optimize blood flow to muscles by
aligning peak arterial pressure with the phase of muscle relaxation, reducing cardiac load
and enhancing endurance performance.
Also, de Carvalho et al. (2021) expanded on this concept by investigating spontaneous
CLS in long-distance runners. They found that at higher running speeds, the heart rate and
step frequency became naturally synchronized, suggesting that CLS emerges in response
to the physiological demands of endurance exercise. Their findings support the idea that
CLS could contribute to improved metabolic efficiency and performance by optimizing
oxygen delivery to working muscles. Rosato et al. (2024) further explored spontaneous
cardiac–locomotor coupling in everyday movement, showing that this synchronization is
not limited to high-intensity exercise but also occurs during natural locomotor activities.
Their study underscores the fundamental role of CLS in maintaining physiological stability
and optimizing energy distribution across different levels of physical exertion.
Further evidence from Kannape et al. (2010) demonstrated that individuals consciously
monitor their body’s spatial location while walking with notably low accuracy, and this
can be systematically influenced by experimental conditions. Extending these findings,
Kannape and Blanke (2012) showed that gait movements—being cyclic, less overtly goal-
directed, and more automatic—differ fundamentally from the more discrete, hand-centered
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 6 of 23
actions typically studied in agency research. This slower, more regular input may align more
closely with the temporal properties of visceral signals, enhancing the efficiency of their
multisensory integration and reinforcing the stable experiential presence of the self. Also,
Kaneno et al. (2024) reported that in static conditions, the impact of interoceptive sensitivity
on body ownership was inconsistent and could not be reliably replicated. However, in
dynamic contexts, such as the moving RHI, voluntary movements played a critical role in
enhancing the sense of agency and ownership.
Taken together, the theoretical and empirical work reviewed so far suggests that
our sense of self crucially depends not only on the multisensory integration of sensory
signals from inside and outside the body but also on the dynamic coupling between bodily
movements and bodily actions. The adaptive relevance of this coupling makes sense from
an evolutionary perspective in a world where living systems need to constantly negotiate
resources with the environment to keep one’s homeostatic balance within the optimal range
for survival (Damasio, 2000). To put it provocatively, it is not enough to statically perceive
a red tomato; it is also important to coordinate bodily movements and bodily actions to
reach the tomato in the real world and eat it. Without these constant engagements with the
world designed to provide the organism with the means to intake energy to resist decay,
the bodily self and human organism would simply disintegrate and die.
3. Sensing and Attenuating the Self Through Movement
The importance of the active and interactive component of embodied selfhood has
been recently linked to the influential Predictive Processing (PP) framework, stipulating that
incoming sensory signals need to be adaptively processed and integrated in order to keep our
bodies’ homeostatic balance within the required limits for survival purposes (Friston, 2005).
Thus, to cope with uncertainty in a potentially threatening environment, the human brain
needs to reliably predict or infer the ‘hidden’ causes of incoming sensory information (Hohwy,
2013; Clark, 2013). This idea builds upon a long tradition going back to the groundbreaking
work of Helmholtz (1866/1962) and Conant and Ross Ashby (1970).
The basic idea is that incoming sensory input is processed by comparing it to (learned
or innate) prior beliefs or expectations about what constitutes typical sensory input, given
‘the kind of creature that I am’ (Ramstead et al., 2019). The brain thus generates probabilistic,
Bayesian, and self- and world models that are constructed moment by moment at various
levels of hierarchical processing. When a prediction does not match ongoing sensory
input, a ‘prediction error’ (PE) results, which may have the effect of updating the initial
prediction. The dynamic, fine-grained, and flexible orchestration of sensory inputs and
inferential processes aims primarily at guiding our perceptions and daily embodied actions
in the world. Through the lens of PP , it has been argued that sensory systems, including
interoception, are shaped by evolutionary pressures to optimize energy efficiency (Ainley
et al., 2016). Indeed, interoceptive signals, such as those indicating energetic deficits,
must integrate with external sensory inputs like vision and smell to coordinate adaptive
behaviors like foraging.
Importantly however—and this is our key point here—adaptive behaviors necessar-
ily depend upon the successful integration of multisensory signals coupled with bodily
movements (i.e., heartbeats, respirations, etc.) and bodily actions. Survival cannot be
achieved without bodily actions in the world, and this aspect is crucially captured by the
Predictive Processing framework. According to the Predictive Processing framework, the
brain actively infers what is causing its incoming sensory inputs based on probabilistic
beliefs about the causal structure of the process (i.e., the causal factors) that generated its
sensory signals or observations (Parr & Friston, 2017). These beliefs are harnessed within a
so-called generative model (see Figure 1). The brain takes two key routes to optimize the
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 7 of 23
evidence for its generative models: (a) by changing (updating) the model to better account
for sensory samples (perceptual inference); (b) selectively sampling sensations that can be
accounted for by the model (Active Inference) (Adams et al., 2013; Friston et al., 2017).
Figure 1. A simple generative model. Quantities in open circles have to be inferred and are updated
in inference (within a given trial), while parameters are updated on the longer timescale of learning
(between trials). Adapted with permission from Sandved-Smith et al. (2021); based on templates
from Hesp et al. (2021).
The difference between the sensory data that is expected under the generative model
and the actual data observed is quantified by a construct called variational free energy
(Ramstead et al., 2019). Heuristically, this free energy can be interpreted as a measure or
approximation of how much (negative model) evidence is provided by our sensory data
for the hypotheses harnessed in the generative model (Friston, 2005). This affords the
theory an inferential or Bayesian aspect: self-evidencing is formally equivalent to tracking
and minimizing the variational free energy that is generated by discrepancies between
predicted and sensed data. In short, self-organizing systems need to constantly prove to
themselves that they exist in a dynamic, constantly changing, and noisy world, by fulfilling
their beliefs about action: they are their own existence proof (Friston, 2018).
From this point of view, we experience ourselves as being endowed with a persisting
self because we reliably infer that the existence of such a self is the most probable cause of
our sensory observations. As Ramstead and colleagues note, the fact that my experiences
seem to have a zero point or origin that I carry along with me as I move my body is best
explained by postulating that there exists a causal factor. This causal factor is an I or self,
which is attached to a body and that is distinct from other selves (Ramstead et al., 2019).
The key idea here is that embodied agents coordinate and maintain probabilistic models
of their worlds or ecological niches, which they use to generate situationally appropriate
forms of behavior (Constant et al., 2018; Ramstead et al., 2019). A very simple generative
model, which is capable of rudimentary, moment-to-moment perceptual inference and
confidence estimation, is depicted in Figure 1.
Here, observations (denoted as o) comprise all the sensory data that is available to
the agent. Hidden states (denoted as s) are hypotheses about what might have caused
the observations and essentially capture the ontology or set of representations that the
agent is using to parse its sensory stream. The parameters modulate the inference process
and harness prior beliefs about the process that generates sensory data. The likelihood
mapping (denoted A) harnesses beliefs about the relation between states and observations:
it is a matrix that lists the probability of some observation, given some state, i.e., the
probability of sensing this, given that that is the case. The model contains a baseline prior
over hidden states (denoted as D), which specifies beliefs about the baseline probability of
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 8 of 23
states, independent of observations. The framework is broadly Bayesian in that it specifies
how to optimally combine prior beliefs about some process with current sensory evidence
(which is what Bayes’ rule formalizes). Posterior beliefs are hypotheses concerned with the
causes of sensory input that are derived by optimally combining prior beliefs about the self
and world and current sensory evidence.
Crucially, it has been argued that in updating the self and world models, much depends
on the ‘precision’ of the (i) prior prediction and (ii) the prediction error (PE) caused by the
incoming sensation (2018). Prior beliefs and sensory data are represented as probability
distributions with mean values (expectations) and precision (inverse variance). (1) If a
prediction error emerges from the contrast of precise sensory data and relatively imprecise
prior beliefs, the mean of the posterior will be closer to the mean of the sensory data. (2) If
the imprecision comes from sensory information, posterior beliefs will be much closer to
prior beliefs (see Yon & Frith, 2021).
Importantly, this multi-layered modeling system needs to ‘decide on the fly’ whether
the weight of the balance—the ’gain’ of the updating process—goes to the (a) sensory
evidence coming from different sensory modality or (b) to the prior beliefs (or expecta-
tions) that the model puts forward. Switching the influence from prior beliefs to sensory
evidence (i.e., prediction errors) or vice versa is implemented via the fine-grained process
of “precision weighting”. Indeed, the system is also trying to predict the precision of PEs:
we have thus first-order representations of the second-order precision of the hierarchical
architecture of the prediction errors. PEs that are expected to convey precise, reliable,
high-quality information are afforded greater precision or weight, such as that they have a
greater influence on perception. This equates to “attending to the right sort of newsworthy
information and attenuating imprecise or ‘fake’ news. ( . . .) It is this mechanistic bridge
between a fundamental computational imperative to properly balance sensory evidence
against (hierarchical) previous expectations and plausible neurobiological mechanisms that
links psychopathology and pathophysiology.” (Friston, 2018, p. 642).
In short, precision optimization is a mechanism that allocates ‘weight’ or ‘gain’ either to
sensory input or PEs higher in the hierarchy . Given that precision-weighted processing works
as a kind of ‘searchlight’, it has been argued that this makes it a “promising candidate for the
mechanism for attention” (Hohwy, 2020, p. 9, original italics). Indeed, the precision of sensory
data and prior beliefs is not fixed: attention is roughly the process of optimizing precision
in neural hierarchies, such that attended locations or objects are afforded higher precision
(Feldman & Friston, 2010). For example, directing attention to a stimulus can increase its
perceived intensity (Liu et al., 2009; Carrasco et al., 2004). Previous work showed that the gain
or post-synaptic responsiveness can be altered by several factors, including fast synchronous
oscillatory activity and/or neuromodulators such as acetylcholine and dopamine, both of
which are implicated in attentional mechanisms (Feldman & Friston, 2010).
It has been recently proposed to significantly broaden the concept of attention in order
to take into account inner bodily states (interoception) as well as dynamic brain–body
coupling (Allen et al., 2022; Quadt et al., 2018). Crucially for our argumentation here, this
process is exactly the opposite of sensory and somatosensory attenuation (Blakemore et al.,
1998; Waszak et al., 2012). Somatosensory attenuation—the process of dampening the self-
generated sensory signals—plays a crucial role in bodily self-awareness and agency and
is critical for distinguishing between self and non-self (Hughes & Waszak, 2011; Horváth,
2015). We typically predict and suppress the sensory consequences of our actions which
explains, for instance, why we cannot tickle ourselves (Blakemore et al., 1998).
Neurophysiological studies revealed reduced activity in the primary somatosensory
cortex during voluntary movements (Bays et al., 2005; Palmer et al., 2016) and show that
the cerebellum, via its functional connectivity with primary and secondary somatosensory
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 9 of 23
areas, actively predicts and attenuates the sensory consequences of self-generated touch
(Kilteni et al., 2019). Findings from recent neuroimaging meta-analyses provide further
support that sensory attenuation is mediated by a cerebellum-centered action prediction
network that suppresses reflexive inputs elicited by self-initiated actions (Gu et al., 2025).
From an Active Inference perspective, sensory attenuation is essential for initiating an
action and making the “self-fulfilling prophecy of acting” come true (Brown et al., 2013).
To ensure that predicted action outcomes align with actual movements, proprioceptive
prediction errors must be attenuated by reducing their precision, preventing contradictory
sensory evidence that could disrupt the sense of agency (Adams et al., 2013; Seth & Friston,
2016). In this way, the stability of self-representation is established, differentiating the
agentic self from external influence.
During sensory attenuation, attention is indeed withdrawn from the expected con-
sequences of movement, such that movement can occur. Sensory attenuation can thus be
regarded as the complement of attention, necessary for generating action: attenuating or
augmenting the gain (precision) afforded to self-generated sensory prediction errors. This
involves the successful suppression of the prediction error signal that would otherwise
drive the system to resolve that prediction error through perception, i.e., by changing the
hypothesis, rather than by making the sensation conform to the hypothesis (Friston, 2018;
Adams et al., 2013; Brown et al., 2013; Seth & Friston, 2016). Thus, with regard to action,
precision weighting entails the attenuation of self-generated sensory evidence.
The key idea here is that obtaining the ‘right’ precision estimates means lowering
them to attenuate sensory evidence, and this holds especially when modeling oneself: “The
temporary attenuation of the precision of sensory “self-evidence”—which is necessary to
entertain an alternative and yet counterfactual, (cf. Seth, 2013) hypothesis about myself—is
effectively a form of “self-attenuation” (Limanowski & Friston, 2020, p. 10). One may call
this basic default mode of self modeling ‘dis-attending’ or ‘transparent self-attending’. By
contrast, attending tout court refers to the process of deliberately attending to a set of states,
thereby rendering them ‘opaque’, i.e., available to attending awareness (Limanowski &
Friston, 2018, 2020).
Previous work demonstrated that failures of self-attenuation are a hallmark of several
psychopathological and altered cognitive states. For example, in schizophrenia, impaired
attenuation of self-generated sensory signals results in their misattribution to external
agents, leading to perceptual distortions and a compromised sense of agency, manifesting
in symptoms such as delusions of control and hallucinations (Shergill et al., 2005; Fletcher &
Frith, 2009; Brown et al., 2013; Leptourgos & Corlett, 2020). The same mechanism has been
recently proposed as fundamental in explaining atypical bodily self-awareness in other self-
disorders such as depersonalization (Ciaunica et al., 2021; see also Sections 5 and 6 below).
This disruption affects only the positive dimension of schizotypy, with reduced atten-
uation of self-generated touch not observed in its negative or disorganized dimensions
(Asimakidou et al., 2022). Similarly, in functional motor and sensory symptoms (‘hysteria’),
aberrantly precise priors override sensory evidence, leading to false percepts or involuntary
movements—a failure of attenuation that parallels the mechanisms proposed in psychosis
(Edwards et al., 2012). In autism, a breakdown in the oxytocin-mediated modulation of
interoceptive and somatosensory precision disrupts attenuation, generating a hypersensi-
tivity to internal states that impairs social engagement and the formation of a coherent self
model (Quattrocki & Friston, 2014). Anxiety-related disruptions in motor control, such as
fear of falling or performance failures, likewise reflect a failure to attenuate proprioceptive
prediction errors. In such cases, excessive attention maladaptively up-weights minor fluc-
tuations in sensory feedback, destabilizing motor predictions and eroding fluency (Harris
et al., 2023).
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 10 of 23
Notably, meditative practices appear to bidirectionally influence self-attenuation de-
pending on their attentional orientation. Excessive attenuation of self-generated signals
underlies deep meditative states that aim to blur or dissolve perceived bodily boundaries,
giving rise to experiences described as “oceanic boundlessness” or “selfless” states (Ciau-
nica et al., 2021; Ciaunica, 2024). In such conditions, the organism is stabilized into a
near-static posture, allowing it to predict its internal bodily states with such precision that
self-related sensory information is processed in the background with minimal conscious
awareness. However, these states are typically short-lived, as even minor physiological
deviations, like an itch or the urge to shift posture, break the illusion and reintroduce the
body into conscious awareness.
By contrast, meditative practices that emphasize sustained attention to bodily sensa-
tions, such as “body-scanning,” may have the opposite effect by amplifying self-related
sensory precision. For example, Poublan-Couzardot et al. (2025) recently explored this
possibility using the force-matching paradigm (Wolpe et al., 2016) to assess somatosensory
attenuation in experienced meditators across a three-week meditation retreat. Their hy-
pothesis was that enhanced interoceptive awareness cultivated during meditation would
reduce somatosensory attenuation, resulting in more accurate force-matching performance.
Indeed, they found that somatosensory attenuation was negatively correlated with mindful-
ness scores. However, the attenuation effect did not significantly change after the intensive
retreat. Interestingly, one interpretation offered by the authors is that they did not consider
movement during the task. Indeed, skilled meditators are trained not only to attend to
bodily sensations but also to monitor their movements. The increased precision of motor
predictions (i.e., stronger motor-related attenuation) during the task may have counteracted
the reduced attenuation of tactile sensory input.
4. Perceiving the World Through Bodily Rhythms
If we start with the observation that our bodies move constantly, then all perception of
the self and world is necessarily performed through the lens of a moving system, rather
than as a static screenshot. This observation is particularly important if we note that visual
perception has been tacitly adopted as the paradigm case of how humans perceive and
relate to the world (Faivre et al., 2017; Ciaunica & Fotopoulou, 2017). Hence, we need
to reconsider our model of perceptual experiences and selfhood in order to consider the
pervasive background of our bodily movements. This important point has been recently
outlined by a number of theorists working on bodily awareness in adults and in early life
(Park & Tallon-Baudry, 2014; Ciaunica, 2016; Bastos et al., 2020; Corcoran et al., 2023/2025).
For example, Engelen et al. (2023) discuss three frameworks to explain how bodily
rhythms like cardiac, respiratory, and gastric cycles interact with brain activity and sample
external inputs. These frameworks are (i) oscillatory synchrony, (ii) predictive coding, and
(iii) multisensory integration. Oscillatory synchrony in the brain is thought to coordinate
large-scale neural dynamics and communication, originally viewed as emerging from
purely neural interactions (F. Varela et al., 2001). Several mechanisms to explain how
oscillations guide information flow such as “communication through coherence” (e.g.,
Fries, 2005, 2015) and “gating by inhibition” (Jensen & Mazaheri, 2010) have been proposed.
The “scaffolding hypothesis” expands this idea by proposing that bodily rhythms—mainly
respiratory and gastric—can serve as carrier waves, creating windows of excitability across
the brain that align with those rhythms (Richter et al., 2017; Rebollo et al., 2018; Tort et al.,
2018). These bodily driven oscillations seem to not depend much on specific physiological
states, and evidence so far is mixed regarding how consistently different brain regions align
to them. This raises questions about how bodily rhythms might functionally couple to
brain activity. A key unresolved issue is how the ‘brain selects’ which neuronal populations
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 11 of 23
synchronize under these rhythms, though vascular pulsatility transduced by astrocytes and
pyramidal cells (Kim et al., 2016; Marina et al., 2020; see Engelen et al., 2023, for a recent
comprehensive discussion) could offer fresh avenues to address this question, especially in
the case of disturbances of self-experiences.
For example, recent findings on brain–body dysconnectivity in schizophrenia provide
compelling evidence that autonomic nervous system activity plays a role in organizing
large-scale cortical function. Specifically, phase–amplitude coupling between heart rate
variability (HRV) and electroencephalographic (EEG) oscillations has been identified as
a key mechanism through which autonomic cycles influence neural excitability (Sargent
et al., 2025). This aligns with the scaffolding hypothesis, suggesting that bodily rhythms,
including cardiac and respiratory cycles, create temporal windows of excitability that mod-
ulate cortical communication. Notably, individuals with schizophrenia exhibit disrupted
HRV-EEG coupling, particularly in the theta and alpha bands, which correlates with deficits
in sustained attention (Sargent et al., 2025). These findings point toward a more integrated
view of neural communication, where bodily rhythms act not just as passive background
noise but as an underlying mechanism that modulates neuronal excitability and functional
connectivity. The evidence of disrupted cardiac-to-cortical modulation in schizophrenia
further supports the view that oscillatory synchrony is shaped by multisystem interactions
rather than purely intracortical mechanisms. This also may explain findings such as the
suppression of neural responses to tactile stimuli during systole as competition between
tactile and baroreceptor inputs.
Neurophysiological findings demonstrate that cardiac signals modulate auditory reg-
ularity processing even in the absence of consciousness (Pelentritou et al., 2025). Crucially,
stronger coordination between heartbeats and brain responses to deviant sounds with
the synchronized heartbeat sequence predicted better chances of coma recovery. These
findings offer empirical support for the idea that interoceptive–exteroceptive coupling
underpins perceptual integration and highlight the fundamental role of rhythmic (i.e.,
cardiac) bodily movements.
As Engelen et al. (2023) note, multisensory integration and the Predictive Processing
frameworks provide distinct explanations for the relationship between bodily rhythms and
self-perception. Multisensory integration focuses on the convergence of interoceptive and
exteroceptive signals, often downplaying the role of rhythmic patterns. While the Predictive
Processing approach accounts for bodily rhythms in shaping self-perception, it treats these
rhythms as just one aspect among many that contribute to the brain’s predictions about
bodily states.
While an extensive discussion is beyond the scope of this paper, it is important to
note that the PP framework allows us to consider that bodily rhythms, due to their high
predictability (i.e., we expect our heart to beat all the time and to breathe all the time),
help align neural oscillations with sensory processing. The advantage of this framework is
that it extends beyond short-term predictions. It integrates allostatic regulations (Sterling,
2014) that anticipate bodily needs based on external contexts and links these predictions to
emotional feelings and, what we argue, the sense of self. This also includes self-disruptions
in conditions such as Depersonalization Disorder (Sierra & Berrios, 1997), where people
feel disconnected from their self and body. We turn to this discussion now.
5. When the Self Becomes Stuck: Altered Somatosensory Attenuation in
Depersonalization
Depersonalization (DP henceforth) is a very common phenomenon that makes people
feel detached from their bodily self (Sierra & Berrios, 1997). DP is the third most common
psychological symptom reported in the general population (after anxiety and low mood)
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 12 of 23
(Simeon et al., 2003). DP is typically characterized by a distressing feeling of being detached
from one’s self, body, and the world: “I look in the mirror and it doesn’t feel like myself
I’m looking at. It’s like I’m floating, not actually experiencing the world, and slowly fading
away into nothing. It’s like I’m on autopilot in somebody’s else body” (Perkins, 2021,
p. 198). DP experiences can be triggered by high stress, severe depression, traumatic life
events, or drug use (Simeon et al., 2003). Remarkably, despite its high prevalence and the
significant distress and social isolation it triggers, the mechanisms underlying the altered
sense of self in DP remain poorly understood.
Alterations in attentional processes at early sensory stages (Guralnik et al., 2007;
Schabinger et al., 2018), abnormal interoception-related attentional processes (Gatus et al.,
2022), and a disrupted integration between interoceptive and exteroceptive processes
(disruption in sensory–motor–affective integration) (Salami et al., 2020; Saini et al., 2022)
lie at the heart of DP phenomenology. The experience of a ‘split’ between the self and
the body at the basic sensory level—strikingly described as feeling trapped in one’s head
(mind) and outside one’s body (Ciaunica et al., 2020)—is one of the most frequently cited
symptoms in DP (Sierra & David, 2011). This separation is responsible for the ensuing
sense of (a) self-detachment, of looking to oneself from the outside, from the “back of one’s
eye sockets”; and (b) unrealness, often and strikingly reported by DP patients as ‘having a
pane of glass’ interposed between one’s self, body, and the world (Simeon & Abugel, 2006;
Ciaunica et al., 2020).
The prevalence of transient episodes of depersonalization is between 34 and 70% in
the general population (Hunter et al., 2004). For example, almost 50% of college students
report DP experiences (see Salami et al., 2020 for a recent review). Previous theoretical
and empirical work demonstrated disrupted physiological responses in patients with DP ,
compared to healthy participants (Dewe et al., 2018; Owens et al., 2015; Sierra et al., 2002).
DP has also been linked to disrupted activity in neuronal regions underlying somatic
processing (Lemche et al., 2013; Medford et al., 2016) and the vestibular system (Jáuregui
Renaud, 2015), which is responsible for providing information about the body’s position in
space (Ferrè & Haggard, 2016).
The mechanisms underlying the interplay between exteroceptive, interoceptive, and
proprioceptive self-related sensory signals are key to understanding the sense of self and
its disturbances (Park & Blanke, 2019; Koreki et al., 2021). The empirical evidence on
interoceptive processing in DP is unclear. For example, some studies found impaired
interoceptive processing (Sedeño et al., 2014), while others found normal interoceptive
accuracy in DP (Michal et al., 2014). Moreover, altered patterns of heartbeat-evoked
potentials have been reported in depersonalization, providing neurophysiological evidence
for impaired cortical representation of bodily signals (Schulz et al., 2015). More recently,
Cavicchioli et al. (2024) have shown that dissociative experiences may stem from imbalances
in temporal integration and segregation of multisensory stimuli (“hyper-segregation” and
“hyper-integration” processes). These findings support the idea that dissociation, an aspect
of DP , is closely tied to the abnormal processing of sensory signals.
Evidence suggests that DP experiences may be more tightly linked to disruptions in
proprioceptive and vestibular processing than to interoception alone. Vestibular dysfunc-
tion or sensory conflicts (e.g., mismatches between vestibular and visual inputs) can induce
feelings of detachment and unreality (Jáuregui Renaud, 2015). While objective interoceptive
accuracy (e.g., heartbeat detection) remains ‘normal’ in DP patients (Michal et al., 2014),
they experience a profound feeling of disembodiment. This apparent paradox suggests
that DP symptoms are connected not with the loss of internal bodily sensations, but rather
with a breakdown in multisensory integration: failure to coherently integrate interoceptive
signals with exteroceptive and proprioceptive inputs to maintain an embodied sense of self.
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 13 of 23
For example, highly trained healthy runners may experience a state of flow where
their sense of bodily sense is enhanced, even though they do not keep track mentally and
pay explicit attention to every single movement they do. Our theory predicts that DP
experiences will decrease after a running session where the individual needs to successfully
coordinate breathing and movement. Another example is movement-based yoga training,
whereby breathing and movement coordination may enhance the sense of self in people
with DP . A straightforward prediction is that people with depersonalization will have more
difficulties in coordinating movement and breathing in yoga sessions. Our theory also
predicts that individuals who are better coordinators of breathing/movement tandem will
also report lower depersonalization experiences after a yoga session.
Despite robust evidence showing that our bodily self is not fixed but is constantly
updated through dynamic sensory feedback, including sound feedback (Tajadura-Jiménez
et al., 2012, 2015; Stanton & Spence, 2020), little is known about the underlying mechanisms
subserving the relationship between self-detachment, bodily movements, and dynamic
sensory feedback in DP . This is surprising because DP experiencers instinctively use proxi-
mal interactions with others and the environment as a compensatory means to ‘get back
into their bodies’: “When the depersonalisation is very deep, (. . .) it feels like that constant
source of interaction is the only thing that allows me to maintain a connection with the
world. I’ll also seek physical contact with whoever I’m with.” (Ciaunica & Charlton, 2018).
It is crucial thus to address this question because, as one person with DP strikingly puts it:
“a disorder that makes you feel invisible is invisible in society” (Perkins, 2021, p. 193).
Importantly, the focus on coupling bodily movements with bodily actions in relation
to altered selfhood in DP can be nicely addressed within the Active Inference framework as
a manifestation of altered somatosensory attenuation (Ciaunica et al., 2022). Specifically, the
key idea is that in typical individuals, highly predictable self-related signals (i.e., “boring”
signals) are down-weighted in precision, allowing the brain to prioritize contextually
relevant external inputs (i.e., “interesting” new information about the world). However, in
DP , all sensory data—internal and external—is experienced with equal intensity, disrupting
the adaptive hierarchy of sensory processing. Consequently, the generative model fails to
categorize non-attenuated self-related signals as belonging to the self. Instead, the model’s
best guess is that these signals are “external”, blurring the boundaries between the self and
the world. Hence, people with DP view themselves as strangers to themselves, as objects
seen from the “outside” (Simeon & Abugel, 2006; Perkins, 2021).
Indeed, the process of precision weighting may become ‘stuck’, and the self-regulatory
balance will lean systematically towards either bottom-up sensory evidence or top-down
prior belief at various hierarchical levels, regardless of the relevant contextual inputs. Such
a system will automatically lose the flexibility afforded by an adaptive modulation to the
incoming sensory information or PEs typically associated with optimal gain and successful
self- and world model updating. Hence, disruptions at the level of precision estimation
may lead to the system’s inability to dis-attend or to process its self model transparently
(Limanowski & Friston, 2020; Ciaunica et al., 2021).
Failures of somatosensory attenuation and consequent abnormal perceptions and
beliefs may lead in turn to self-opacity—the self model becomes ‘opaque’, ‘stands in the
way’ and hinders the direct access to one’s self and the world. Ensuing subjective feelings
of ‘losing touch’ with one’s self, body, and the world may occur (Simeon & Abugel, 2006;
Ciaunica & Charlton, 2018). Indeed, because the precision is inferred, belief updating
about precision at higher levels of the hierarchy may disrupt the inherent transparency
of self modeling. These alterations may trigger attempts to respond by compensatory
hyper-cognitive and hyper-reflexive strategies (Fuchs, 2005). However, these compensatory
strategies disconnect individuals from moving bodies and get them “stuck in the head”,
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 14 of 23
that is, in the mental realm, to the detriment of actively engaging with the world via
embodied interactions.
6. Broken Rhythms in the Self: Implications for Therapy
The world is a highly unpredictable place with one major constant or attractor: the
self. High predictability of self-related sensory signals anchors the healthy sense of self
in effective coupling between bodily movements and bodily actions in the world. Like
all living self-organizing biological systems, human bodies need to engage in energy and
resource exchanges with the physical and social environment, and this process requires
taking constant action in the world while keeping our bodies moving. Unlike mechanical
systems like cars that can be stopped to be “repaired”, living systems cannot stop moving
because a lack of bodily movements (e.g., cardiac signals or breathing) will entail death.
However, because living systems such as human bodies are finite systems resisting entropy
(Damasio, 2000; Friston, 2005; Ciaunica, 2025), it is crucial to strike a balance between what
sensory information to ignore and what sensory information to prioritize on the fly, hence
the vital role of the phenomenon of somatosensory attenuation linked to dynamic embodied
selfhood, which is designed precisely to deal with this fine balance between attending and
dis-attending self- and world-related information in time. To put it provocatively, too much
information kills the information because time and energy are limited in living systems
(Ciaunica, 2025). This means that the finite range of energetic resources we have access to
forces living systems to process information qualitatively rather than quantitatively.
Effective coupling between bodily movements and bodily actions relies crucially on
the temporal coherence of rhythmic signals from both inside and outside the body. For
example, cardiac signals (e.g., cardiac cycle and phase) and walking rhythms (e.g., gait
cycle and phase) need to phase lock to provide a coherent sense of the bodily self in time.
We suggest that somatosensory attenuation allows healthy individuals to dynamically
prioritize contextually relevant external sensory inputs over self-related signals, which are
treated as less salient due to their regularity. As we discussed above, bodily self-awareness
emerges from the dynamic multisensory integration of interoceptive signals (e.g., heartbeat),
proprioceptive feedback (e.g., from walking), and exteroceptive cues (e.g., the sound of
one’s own footsteps). This integration aligns inner and outer rhythms, allowing the body to
feel “anchored” in the world. Additionally, coupling in bodily rhythms requires integration
across multiple temporal scales, including real-time observations (e.g., heartbeat and step
timing), intermediate dynamics (e.g., phase locking in seconds), and higher-level beliefs
(e.g., self-coherence over minutes, hours, and years).
Here, we used the PP framework to suggest that in DP , amplified sensory precision
and persistent prediction errors disrupt this multi-timescale integration. This results in
short-term desynchronization, where, for example, cardiac and walking signals become
misaligned, and long-term fragmentation, impairing the coherence of the self model and
contributing to the feelings of detachment and non-existence characteristic of DP . This
sense of alienation is cemented by a lack of trust in a self model at a higher metacognitive
level. Although individuals with DP “know” they are the agents of their actions, it does
not feel like it. This misalignment between the cognitive and experiential levels exacerbates
the sense of disconnection: “It feels like something else is controlling my hands; like I’m
a puppet, and the words aren’t anything I’m playing an active role in dreaming up. It’s
weird how diametrically opposed my feelings and logic can be”—Perkins (2021).
Indeed, in DP , heightened precision of self-related sensory signals may generate as-
cending prediction errors. These errors arise because it is impossible to predict signals with
both overly high precision and minimal errors, especially for a rigid and dysfunctional
generative self model. As a result, signals that are normally “transparent” and predictable,
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 15 of 23
such as coupled heartbeats and walking rhythms, appear noisy and unstable. This lack
of predictability due to persistent mismatch prevents the model from recalibrating and
synchronizing rhythmical self-related sensory perception. The key idea is that the amplified
precision of sensory signals in DP thus creates “noise” due to ascending errors or vari-
ability in possible signal timing. For instance, over-weighted interoceptive precision may
exaggerate small variations in cardiac rhythm, disrupting the generative model’s ability
to predict the next cardiac phases accurately. Walking rhythms, in turn, may lose their
regularity due to amplified proprioceptive or motor signals or exteroceptive sound, further
destabilizing temporal alignment. As a result, without temporal coherence, interoceptive
and exteroceptive signals remain uncoupled, fragmenting the sense of bodily coherence.
The core argumentative streamline can be summarized as follows:
The sense of self depends on multisensory integration of interoceptive, exteroceptive
and proprioceptive bodily signals. Living systems such as human bodies move constantly,
paced by regular sensorimotor rhythms. Highly predictable sensorimotor rhythmic in-
formation is accompanied by sensory (e.g., proprioceptive) attenuation which is a key
mechanism for a healthy sense of self. Because the world is a constant source of both pre-
dictable and unpredictable information, a healthy sense of self depends on the fine-tuned
regulation of the link between attending and dis-attending self-related bodily signals. The
Predictive Processing view offers a compelling theoretical and computational framework
explaining the mechanisms of sensory attention and sensory attenuation. Here, we sug-
gested that when such attenuation fails in DP , self-caused movements are experienced
no differently from other-caused ones, leading to a phenomenology of detachment from
the body1.
If our hypotheses are correct, then one straightforward prediction is that self-related
signals in DP , including interoceptive signals (e.g., heartbeat) and exteroceptive signals
(e.g., the sound of footsteps while walking), are amplified rather than attenuated as they
should be in adaptive systems. Adopting a Bayesian Active Inference perspective on the
disrupted self in DP—one that emphasizes rhythmic coupling between internal bodily
cycles and outward movement—opens several avenues for both basic research and clinical
intervention. First, viewing the sense of self as an ongoing process of dynamic synchroniza-
tion encourages novel experimental paradigms that jointly measure inner movements like
cardiac or respiratory, and actions like locomotor rhythms, alongside subjective reports of
bodily self-consciousness. Such paradigms could shed light on how coupling mechanisms
evolve over time and how they may be disrupted in disorders like DP .
A second prediction is that training individuals with DP to synchronize their bodily
movements and bodily actions may result in lowering their alienation symptoms, making
them feel more connected with their self and body. We also expect to find synchronization
between cardiac and locomotor signals in typical but not in DP individuals. For example,
there is a robust body of work outlining the key role of cardio-locomotor synchronization
in optimizing blood circulation and hence performance (Kirby et al., 1989; Niizeki et al.,
1996; Niizeki, 2005; Novak et al., 2007; Rouffet et al., 2008; Niizeki & Saitoh, 2014; Takeuchi
et al., 2014; Wittstein, 2016; De Bartolo et al., 2021; Wakeham et al., 2023). We suggest that
examining the dynamic interplay between bodily movements (i.e., cardiac signals) and
bodily actions (i.e., footsteps) in people with low and high occurrences of DP experiences
may help us better understand the disrupted mechanisms underlying DP experiences.
Specifically, if altering the sounds produced by one’s bodily actions changes body percep-
tions and has simultaneous effects on changes inside the body (e.g., heartbeats), then these
modulations may enhance the sense of self and sense of presence in the world in people
experiencing DP . This is because dynamic sensory feedback may increase not only (a) the
feeling of being in control of one’s body and actions but also (b) the malleability of one’s
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 16 of 23
sense of self, allowing people to feel less ‘stuck’ in one’s head (mind) and ‘putting them
back’ into their bodies.
Moreover, therapeutic approaches might benefit from deliberately restoring or en-
hancing rhythmic coherence—for instance, through structured movement practices (e.g.,
dance or gait training) with biofeedback-based interventions that help to synchronize with
cardiac and respiratory signals. However, it is crucial that these interventions remain
implicit rather than explicit, as implicit practices can support the adaptive attenuation of
self-related signals and prevent counterproductive over-attention to them. This aligns with
evidence suggesting that active, embodied engagement recalibrates attention away from
hyper-reflexive self-monitoring, fostering a more fluid integration of internal and external
cues (Ciaunica et al., 2022; Millman et al., 2023).
Finally, and speculatively, we suggest that the common distinction between signals
situated inside and outside the body is potentially misleading in this new framework we
suggest here. For example, treating heartbeats as purely interoceptive signals and visual
stimuli (like seeing one’s own reflection in a mirror) as exclusively exteroceptive tacitly
presupposes a clear-cut distinction between the inner and outer body. Yet, information
about heartbeats can be perceived both interoceptively (through internal bodily sensations)
and exteroceptively (e.g., hearing our own heartbeat or visually observing it on a live
cardiogram or feeling the pounding chest). Similarly, lung activity (i.e., signals originating
inside the body) can also be felt and externally observed through the rise and fall of
our chest. This process is necessarily accompanied by the sound of our breath, creating a
multisensory synchrony between internal sensations, external visual feedback, and auditory
cues. Such synchronization of bodily signals reinforces the coherence of self-perception,
anchoring our sense of ownership and agency over the body. At any point, there cannot be
a gulf between signals coming from inside versus outside the body. In living systems, there
is only one single sensory system: the moving body.
One open question is how exactly (i) altered somatosensory attenuation and (ii) altered
multisensory integration are related to each other, thereby leading to the pathophysiology
in DP . Which one of these mechanisms comes first and entrains the other in shaping the
predictive model of altered selfhood in DP? Indeed, it is important to establish whether
diminished sensory attenuation (diminished downregulation of PE gain) or upregulation
of prediction error gain is fundamental to DP pathophysiology 2. Further work needs to
test these two hypotheses by developing computational models in relation to DP . For the
purpose of this paper, we remain agnostic on which mechanism is more basic and how
exactly they are related. Speculatively however, we suggest that somatosensory attenua-
tion and multisensory integration of self-related information may be two complementary
mechanisms acting in tandem. Living bodies are constantly moving systems and are
constantly integrating multisensory self- and world-related sensory information. There
can be no somatosensory feedback without sensory input and no sensory input without
somatosensory feedback. This is because the world is present before the body is present
and acts as a constant background against which the body negotiates its own existence. The
two mechanisms may be differentiated conceptually, but not biologically, as they inform
each other in tandem. Further work is needed to provide a detailed Predictive Processing
computational model of this idea and its simulations.
7. Conclusions
This paper outlined the importance of embodied and active engagement with the
world in building a coherent sense of self within a volatile environment. We argued
that one overlooked yet crucial aspect of this picture is that our sense of self depends
on adaptively coupling bodily movements and bodily actions. We saw that a promising
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 17 of 23
theoretical framework to address this complex question is provided by the influential
Predictive Processing (PP) and Active Inference frameworks. We highlighted the key role
of striking the balance between sensory attending and sensory dis-attending or attenuating
self-related information as a key component of embodied selfhood in healthy individuals.
The pervasive background of our experiences is not only the embodied self but the moving
embodied self. Specifically, we suggested that precisely because our inner bodily self
is inherently moving and rhythmical, these rhythms are central to our embodied sense
of self and active presence in the world (Park & Tallon-Baudry, 2014; Corcoran et al.,
2023/2025). Crucially, these are also the processes we need to attenuate the most in order
to ensure smooth engagement with the world. Paradoxically, we perceive the world as a
continuous flow precisely because its fluidity is punctuated by rhythms, rollercoasting the
ups and downs of sensory signals into a dynamic harmonious stream. When this coupling
is disrupted, the world and self appear fragmented, as in the case of Depersonalization
Disorder, a condition that makes people feel detached from the self and body. If our
hypotheses are correct, this means that individuals who move more in the world are also
more successful in integrating multisensory self-related information and have a healthier
sense of self. Paradoxically, the more one is actively connected and engaged with the world,
the more one is connected with one’s self. This hypothesis may have a profound impact
on potential therapy for self-disturbances in various conditions such as depersonalization,
psychosis, and schizophrenia, by focusing on repairing the dynamical bridge between the
world and self, rather than the self alone.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.C.; writing—original draft preparation, V .A. and A.C.
writing—review and editing, A.C.; supervision, A.C.; project administration, A.C.; funding acquisi-
tion, A.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by: (i) a Mind &Life EUROPEAN FRANCISCO J. VARELA
RESEARCH AWARD Grant ID Number: Grant # 2021EVA-Ciaunica, Anna to AC; (ii) a Templeton
World Charity Foundation and SSNAP Duke University award n◦ TWCF0384 to AC; (iii) a Fundaçao
para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (FCT) INTERSELF grant under the reference PTDC/FER-FIL/4802/2020;
and a Fundaçao para a Ci ência e a Tecnologia (FCT) CEECIND grant https://doi.org/10.54499/
2020.02773.CEECIND/CP1595/CT0009 to AC.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Maxwell Ramstead for invaluable feedback on our
Predictive Processing model of depersonalization.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Notes
1 We would like to thank the Reviewer for pressing clarification on this point and providing useful feedback on how to better
phrase the argument.
2 We would like to thank one Anonymous Reviewer for pressing clarification on this key point.
References
Adams, R. A., Stephan, K. E., Brown, H. R., Frith, C. D., & Friston, K. J. (2013). The computational anatomy of psychosis. Frontiers in
Psychiatry, 4, 47. [CrossRef]
Adler, J., Schabinger, N., Michal, M., Beutel, M. E., & Gillmeister, H. (2016). Is that me in the mirror? Depersonalisation modulates
tactile mirroring mechanisms. Neuropsychologia, 85, 148–158. [CrossRef]
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 18 of 23
Ainley, V ., Apps, M. A. J., Fotopoulou, A., & Tsakiris, M. (2016). “Bodily precision”: A predictive coding account of individual
differences in interoceptive accuracy. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371(1708), 20160003. [CrossRef]
Ainley, V ., Tajadura-Jiménez, A., Fotopoulou, A., & Tsakiris, M. (2012). Looking into myself: Changes in interoceptive sensitivity
during mirror self-observation. Psychophysiology, 49(11), 1504–1508. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Al, E., Iliopoulos, F., Forschack, N., Nierhaus, T., Grund, M., Motyka, P ., Gaebler, M., Nikulin, V . V ., & Villringer, A. (2020). Heart–brain
interactions shape somatosensory perception and evoked potentials. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 117(19), 10575–10584. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Allen, M., Levy, A., Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2022). In the body’s eye: The computational anatomy of interoceptive inference. PLoS
Computational Biology, 18, e1010490. [CrossRef]
Apps, M. A. J., & Tsakiris, M. (2014). The free-energy self: A predictive-coding account of self-recognition. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews, 41, 85–97. [CrossRef]
Asimakidou, E., Job, X., & Kilteni, K. (2022). The positive dimension of schizotypy is associated with a reduced attenuation and
precision of self-generated touch. Schizophr, 8, 57. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Azañón, E., Tame, L., Maravita, A., Linkenauger, S. A., Ferr è, E. R., Tajadura-Jiménez, A., & Longo, M. R. (2016). Multimodal
contributions to body representation. Multisensory Research, 29(6–7), 635–661. [CrossRef]
Azevedo, R. T., Garfinkel, S. N., Critchley, H. D., & Tsakiris, M. (2017). Cardiac afferent activity modulates the expression of racial
stereotypes. Nature Communications, 8, 13854. [CrossRef]
Azzalini, D., Rebollo, I., & Tallon-Baudry, C. (2019). Visceral signals shape brain dynamics and cognition.Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
23, 488–509. [CrossRef]
Bastos, A. M., Lundqvist, M., Waite, A. S., Kopell, N., & Miller, E. K. (2020). Layer and rhythm specificity for predictive routing.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 117(49), 31459–31469. [CrossRef]
Bays, P . M., Wolpert, D. M., & Flanagan, J. R. (2005). Perception of the consequences of self-action is temporally tuned and event-driven.
Current Biology, 15, 1125–1128. [CrossRef]
Bennett, M., Welsh, S., & Ciaunica, A. (2024). Why is anything conscious? arXiv, arXiv:2409.14545. [CrossRef]
Betka, S., Canzoneri, E., Adler, D., Herbelin, B., Bello-Ruiz, J., Kannape, O. A., Similowski, T., & Blanke, O. (2020). Mechanisms
of the breathing contribution to bodily self-consciousness in healthy humans: Lessons from machine-assisted breathing?
Psychophysiology, 57(8), e13564. [CrossRef]
Blakemore, S., Wolpert, D. M., & Frith, C. (1998). Central cancellation of self-produced tickle sensation. Nature Neuroscience, 1, 635–640.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Botvinick, M., & Cohen, J. (1998). Rubber hands “feel” touch that eyes see. Nature, 391(6669), 756. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Brianza, G., Tajadura-Jiménez, A., Maggioni, E., Pittera, D., Bianchi-Berthouze, N., & Obrist, M. (2019, September 2–6). As light as
your scent: Effects of smell and sound on body-image perception [Conference paper]. INTERACT 2019: 17th IFIP TC 13 International
Conference, Paphos, Cyprus.
Brown, H., Adams, R. A., Parees, I., Edwards, M., & Friston, K. (2013). Active inference, sensory attenuation and illusions. Cognitive
Processing, 14(4), 411–427. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Carpenter, J. S., Crouse, J. J., Shin, M., Tonini, E., Hindmarsh, G., de Haan, Z., Iorfino, F., Robillard, R., Naismith, S., Scott, E. M., &
Hickie, I. B. (2025). Evidence for internal misalignment of circadian rhythms in youth with emerging mood disorders. Journal of
Biological Rhythms, 7487304251349408. [CrossRef]
Carrasco, M., Ling, S., & Read, S. (2004). Attention alters appearance. Nature Neuroscience, 7(3), 308–313. [CrossRef]
Cavicchioli, M., Santoni, A., Chiappetta, F., Deodato, M., Di Dona, G., Scalabrini, A., Galli, F., & Ronconi, L. (2024). Psychological
dissociation and temporal integration/segregation across the senses: An experimental study. Consciousness and Cognition, 124,
103731. [CrossRef]
Chancel, M., & Ehrsson, H. H. (2023). Proprioceptive uncertainty promotes the rubber hand illusion. Cortex: A Journal Devoted to the
Study of the Nervous System and Behavior, 165, 70–85. [CrossRef]
Ciaunica, A. (2016). Basic forms of pre-reflective self-consciousness: A developmental perspective. In S. Miguens, G. Preyer, & C.
Morando (Eds.), Pre-reflective self-consciousness: Sartre and contemporary philosophy of mind (pp. 422–438). Routledge.
Ciaunica, A. (2024). Selfless minds, unlimited bodies? Homeostatic bodily self-regulation in meditative experiences. OSF Preprints.
[CrossRef]
Ciaunica, A. (2025, May 13). The no body problem: Intelligence and selfhood in biological and artificial systems. PsyArXiv Preprints.
[CrossRef]
Ciaunica, A., & Charlton, J. (2018, October 1). When the self slips: What depersonalisation can say about the self. Aeon. Available online:
https://aeon.co/essays/what-can-depersonalisation-disorder-say-about-the-self (accessed on 1 October 2024).
Ciaunica, A., Charlton, J., & Farmer, H. (2020). When the window cracks: Transparency and the fractured self in depersonalisation.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 20, 1–19. [CrossRef]
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 19 of 23
Ciaunica, A., & Fotopoulou, A. (2017). The touched self: Psychological and philosophical perspectives on proximal intersubjectivity
and the self. In C. Durt, T. Fuchs, & C. Tewes (Eds.),Embodiment, enaction, and culture—Investigating the constitution of the shared
world (pp. 173–192). MIT Press.
Ciaunica, A., Roepstorff, A., Fotopoulou, A. K., & Petreca, B. (2021). Whatever next and close to my self—The transparent senses and
the “second skin”. Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 613587. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ciaunica, A., Seth, A., Limanowski, J., Hesp, C., & Friston, K. J. (2022). I overthink-therefore I am not: An active inference account of
altered sense of self and agency in depersonalisation disorder. Consciousness and Cognition, 101, 103320. [CrossRef]
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36,
181–204. [CrossRef]
Conant, R. C., & Ross Ashby, W. (1970). Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that system. International Journal of
Systems Science, 1(2), 89–97. [CrossRef]
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P . L., Campbell, J. O., & Friston, K. J. (2018). A variational approach to niche construction.
Journal of the Royal Society, Interface, 15(141), 20170685. [CrossRef]
Corcoran, A. W., Perrykkad, K., Feuerriegel, D., & Robinson, J. E. (2023/2025). Body as first teacher: The role of rhythmic visceral
dynamics in early cognitive development. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 20(1), 45–75. [CrossRef]
Craig, A. D. (2002). How do you feel? Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of the body. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
3, 655–666. [CrossRef]
Critchley, H. D., & Garfinkel, S. N. (2018). The influence of physiological signals on cognition. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 19,
13–18. [CrossRef]
Damasio, A. (2000). The feeling of what happens: Body, emotion and the making of consciousness. Mariner Books.
Dapor, C., Sperandio, I., & Meconi, F. (2023). Fading boundaries between the physical and the social world: Insights and novel
techniques from the intersection of these two fields. Frontiers in Psychology, 13, 1028150. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
De Bartolo, D., De Giorgi, C., Compagnucci, L., Betti, V ., Antonucci, G., Morone, G., Paolucci, S., & Iosa, M. (2021). Effects of cognitive
workload on heart and locomotor rhythms coupling. Neuroscience Letters, 762, 136140. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
de Carvalho, A. R., Coimbra, R. D. S., Thomas, E. M., Paz, M. C. R., Pellegrini, B., & Peyré-Tartaruga, L. A. (2021). The entrainment
frequency of cardiolocomotor synchronization in long-distance race emerges spontaneously at the step frequency.Frontiers in
Physiology, 11, 583030. [CrossRef]
de Jaegher, H., & Di Paolo, E. (2007). Participatory sense-making: An enactive approach to social cognition. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, 6, 485–507. [CrossRef]
Dewe, H., Watson, D. G., Kessler, K., & Braithwaite, J. J. (2018). The depersonalized brain: New evidence supporting a distinction
between depersonalization and derealization from discrete patterns of autonomic suppression observed in a non-clinical sample.
Consciousness and Cognition, 63, 29–46. [CrossRef]
Edwards, M. J., Adams, R. A., Brown, H., Pareés, I., & Friston, K. J. (2012). A Bayesian account of ‘hysteria’.Brain: A Journal of Neurology,
135 Pt 11, 3495–3512. [CrossRef]
Ehrsson, H. H., Holmes, N. P ., & Passingham, R. E. (2005). Touching a rubber hand: Feeling of body ownership is associated with
activity in multisensory brain areas. Journal of Neuroscience, 25(45), 10564–10573. [CrossRef]
Engelen, T., Schuhmann, T., Sack, A. T., & Tallon-Baudry, C. (2024). The cardiac, respiratory and gastric rhythms independently
modulate corticospinal excitability [Preprint]. bioRxiv. [CrossRef]
Engelen, T., Solcà, M., & Tallon-Baudry, C. (2023). Interoceptive rhythms in the brain. Nature Neuroscience, 26(10), 1670–1684. [CrossRef]
Faivre, N., Arzi, A., Lunghi, C., & Salomon, R. (2017). Consciousness is more than meets the eye: A call for a multisensory study of
subjective experience. Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2017(1), nix003. [CrossRef]
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 4, 1–23. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Ferrè, E. R., & Haggard, P . (2016). The vestibular body: Vestibular contributions to bodily representations.Cognitive Neuropsychology,
33(1–2), 67–81. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Fletcher, P ., & Frith, C. (2009). Perceiving is believing: A Bayesian approach to explaining the positive symptoms of schizophrenia.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10, 48–58. [CrossRef]
Fries, P . (2005). A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: Neuronal communication through neuronal coherence. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 9, 474–480. [CrossRef]
Fries, P . (2015). Rhythms for cognition: Communication through coherence.Neuron, 88(1), 220–235. [CrossRef]
Friston, K. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 360, 815–836. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Friston, K. (2018). Am I self-conscious? (Or does self-organization entail self-consciousness?). Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 579. [CrossRef]
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P ., & Pezzulo, G. (2017). Active inference: A process theory.Neural Computation,
29(1), 1–49. [CrossRef]
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 20 of 23
Fuchs, T. (2005). Corporealized and disembodied minds: A phenomenological view of the body in melancholia and schizophrenia.
Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology, 12(2), 95–107.
Gallagher, S. (2000). Philosophical conceptions of the self: Implications for cognitive science. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4(1), 14–21.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Galvez-Pol, A., McConnell, R., & Kilner, J. M. (2020). Active sampling in visual search is coupled to the cardiac cycle. Cognition, 196,
104149. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Galvez-Pol, A., Virdee, P ., Villacampa, J., & Kilner, J. (2022). Active tactile discrimination is coupled with and modulated by the cardiac
cycle. eLife, 11, e78126. [CrossRef]
Garfinkel, S. N., Seth, A. K., Barrett, A. B., Suzuki, K., & Critchley, H. D. (2015). Knowing your own heart: Distinguishing interoceptive
accuracy from interoceptive awareness. Biological Psychology, 104, 65–74. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Gatus, A., Jamieson, G., & Stevenson, B. (2022). Past and future explanations for depersonalization and derealization disorder: A role
for predictive coding. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 16, 744487. [CrossRef]
Gomez-Andres, A., Grau-Sánchez, J., Duarte, E., Rodriguez-Fornells, A., & Tajadura-Jiménez, A. (2020). Enriching footsteps sounds in
gait rehabilitation in chronic stroke patients: A pilot study. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1467(1), 48–59. [CrossRef]
Gu, J., Buidze, T., Zhao, K., Gläscher, J., & Fu, X. (2025). The neural network of sensory attenuation: A neuroimaging meta-analysis.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 32, 31–51. [CrossRef]
Guralnik, O., Giesbrecht, T., Knutelska, M., Sirroff, B., & Simeon, D. (2007). Cognitive functioning in depersonalization disorder. The
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 195(12), 983–988. [CrossRef]
Haggard, P . (2017). Sense of agency in the human brain.Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 18(4), 196–207. [CrossRef]
Harris, D. J., Wilkinson, S., & Ellmers, T. J. (2023). From fear of falling to choking under pressure: A predictive processing perspective
of disrupted motor control under anxiety. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 148, 105115. [CrossRef]
Helmholtz, H. (1962). Concerning the perceptions in general. In Treatise on physiological optics. Dover. (Original work published 1866).
Hesp, C., Smith, R., Parr, T., Allen, M., Friston, K. J., & Ramstead, M. J. D. (2021). Deeply felt affect: The emergence of valence in deep
active inference. Neural Computation, 33(2), 398–446. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Hohwy, J. (2013). The predictive mind. Oxford University Press. [CrossRef]
Hohwy, J. (2020). New directions in predictive processing. Mind & Language, 35(2), 209–223. [CrossRef]
Horváth, J. (2015). Action-related auditory ERP attenuation: Paradigms and hypotheses. Brain Research, 1626, 54–65. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Hughes, G., & Waszak, F. (2011). ERP correlates of action effect prediction and visual sensory attenuation in voluntary action.
NeuroImage, 56(3), 1632–1640. [CrossRef]
Hunter, E. C., Sierra, M., & David, A. S. (2004). The epidemiology of depersonalisation and derealisation. A systematic review. Social
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 39(1), 9–18. [CrossRef]
Jáuregui Renaud, K. (2015). Vestibular function and depersonalization/derealization symptoms.Multisensory Research, 28(5–6), 637–651.
[CrossRef]
Jensen, O., & Mazaheri, A. (2010). Shaping functional architecture by oscillatory alpha activity: Gating by inhibition. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 4, 186. [CrossRef]
Kaneno, Y., Pasqualotto, A., & Ashida, H. (2024). Influence of interoception and body movement on the rubber hand illusion. Frontiers
in Psychology, 15, 1458726. [CrossRef]
Kannape, O. A., & Blanke, O. (2012). Agency, gait and self-consciousness. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 83(2), 191–199.
[CrossRef]
Kannape, O. A., Schwabe, L., Tadi, T., & Blanke, O. (2010). The limits of agency in walking humans. Neuropsychologia, 48(6), 1628–1636.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Kilteni, K., Houborg, C., & Ehrsson, H. H. (2019). Rapid learning and unlearning of predicted sensory delays in self-generated touch.
eLife, 8, e42888. [CrossRef]
Kim, K. J., Ramiro Diaz, J., Iddings, J. A., & Filosa, J. A. (2016). Vasculo-neuronal coupling: Retrograde vascular communication to
brain neurons. Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 12624–12639. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Kirby, R. L., Nugent, S. T., Marlow, R. W., MacLeod, D. A., & Marble, A. E. (1989). Coupling of cardiac and locomotor rhythms.Journal
of Applied Physiology, 66(1), 323–329. [CrossRef]
Koreki, A., Funayama, M., Terasawa, Y., Onaya, M., & Mimura, M. (2021). Aberrant interoceptive accuracy in patients with schizophre-
nia performing a heartbeat counting task. Schizophrenia Bulletin Open, 2, sgaa067. [CrossRef]
Kosuge, M., Honma, M., Masaoka, Y., Kosuge, S., Nakayama, M., Kamijo, S., Shikama, Y., & Izumizaki, M. (2023). Respiratory rhythm
affects recalibration of body ownership. Scientific Reports, 13(1), 920. [CrossRef]
Legrand, D. (2006). The bodily self: The sensori-motor roots of pre-reflective self-consciousness. Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences, 5(1), 89–118. [CrossRef]
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 21 of 23
Lemche, E., Brammer, M. J., David, A. S., Surguladze, S. A., Phillips, M. L., Sierra, M., Williams, S. C. R., & Giampietro, V . P . (2013).
Interoceptive-reflective regions differentiate alexithymia traits in depersonalization disorder.Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging,
214(1), 66–72. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Leptourgos, P ., & Corlett, P . R. (2020). Embodied predictions, agency, and psychosis.Frontiers in Big Data, 3, 27. [CrossRef]
Ley-Flores, J., Alshami, E., Singh, A., Bevilacqua, F., Bianchi-Berthouze, N., Deroy, O., & Tajadura-Jiménez, A. (2022). Effects of pitch
and musical sounds on body-representations when moving with sound. Scientific Reports, 12(1), 2676. [CrossRef]
Ley-Flores, J., Turmo Vidal, L., Bianchi-Berthouze, N., Singh, A., Bevilacqua, F., & Tajadura-Jiménez, A. (2021, May 8–13).SoniBand:
Understanding the effects of metaphorical movement sonifications on body perception and physical activity. CHI ’21: 2021 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Yokohama, Japan. [CrossRef]
Limanowski, J., & Blankenburg, F. (2013). Minimal self-models and the free-energy principle. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 547.
[CrossRef]
Limanowski, J., & Friston, K. (2018). “Seeing the dark”: Grounding phenomenal transparency and opacity in precision estimation for
active inference. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 643. [CrossRef]
Limanowski, J., & Friston, K. (2020). Attenuating oneself: An active inference perspective on “selfless” experiences. Philosophy and the
Mind Sciences, 1(I), 1–16. [CrossRef]
Liu, T., Abrams, J., & Carrasco, M. (2009). Voluntary attention enhances contrast appearance. Psychological Science, 20(3), 354–362.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Marina, N., Christie, I. N., Korsak, A., Doronin, M., Brazhe, A., Hosford, P . S., Wells, J. A., Sheikhbahaei, S., Humoud, I., Paton, J. F. R.,
Lythgoe, M. F., Semyanov, A., Kasparov, S., & Gourine, A. V . (2020). Astrocytes monitor cerebral perfusion and control systemic
circulation to maintain brain blood flow. Nature Communications, 11, 131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1980).Autopoiesis and cognition: The realization of the living. D. Reidel.
Medford, N., Sierra, M., Stringaris, A., Giampietro, V ., Brammer, M. J., & David, A. S. (2016). Emotional experience and awareness of
self: Functional MRI studies of depersonalization disorder. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 432. [CrossRef]
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of perception (C. Smith, Trans.). Routledge & Kegan Paul. Original work published 1945.
Michal, M., Reuchlein, B., Adler, J., Reiner, I., Beutel, M. E., Vögele, C., Schächinger, H., & Schulz, A. (2014). Striking discrepancy of
anomalous body experiences with normal interoceptive accuracy in depersonalization-derealization disorder. PLoS ONE, 9(2),
e89823. [CrossRef]
Millman, L. S. M., Hunter, E. C. M., Terhune, D. B., & Orgs, G. (2023). Online structured dance/movement therapy reduces bodily
detachment in depersonalisation-derealization disorder. Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice, 51, 101749. [CrossRef]
Monti, A., Porciello, G., Tieri, G., & Aglioti, S. M. (2020). The “embreathment” illusion highlights the role of breathing in corporeal
awareness. Journal of Neurophysiology, 123, 420–427. [CrossRef]
Niizeki, K. (2005). Intramuscular pressure-induced inhibition of cardiac contraction: Implications for cardiac-locomotor synchronization.
American Journal of Physiology—Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology, 288(3), R645–R650. [CrossRef]
Niizeki, K., Kawahara, K., & Miyamoto, Y. (1996). Cardiac, respiratory, and locomotor coordination during walking in humans.Folia
Primatologica, 66(1–4), 226–239. [CrossRef]
Niizeki, K., & Saitoh, T. (2014). Cardiolocomotor phase synchronization during rhythmic exercise. Journal of Physical Fitness and Sports
Medicine, 3(1), 11–20. [CrossRef]
Novak, V ., Hu, K., Vyas, M., & Lipsitz, L. A. (2007). Cardiolocomotor coupling in young and elderly people.Journals of Gerontology
Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 62(1), 86–92. [CrossRef]
Owens, A. P ., David, A. S., Low, D. A., Mathias, C. J., & Sierra-Siegert, M. (2015). Abnormal cardiovascular sympathetic and
parasympathetic responses to physical and emotional stimuli in depersonalisation disorder. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 9, 89.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Palmer, C. E., Davare, M., & Kilner, J. M. (2016). Physiological and perceptual sensory attenuation have different underlying
neurophysiological correlates. Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 10803–10812. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Park, H. D., & Blanke, O. (2019). Coupling inner and outer body for self-consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 23, 377–388.
[CrossRef]
Park, H. D., & Tallon-Baudry, C. (2014). The neural subjective frame: From bodily signals to perceptual consciousness.Philosophical
transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 369(1641), 20130208. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2017). The active construction of the visual world. Neuropsychologia, 104, 92–101. [CrossRef]
Pelentritou, A., Pfeiffer, C., Iten, M., Haenggi, M., Zubler, F., Schwartz, S., & De Lucia, M. (2025). Cardiac signals inform auditory
regularity processing in the absence of consciousness. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
122(20), e2505454122. [CrossRef]
Perkins, J. (2021). Life on autopilot: A guide to living with depersonalisation disorder. Jessica Kingsley.
Poublan-Couzardot, A., Foncelle, A., Abdoun, O., Koun, E., Rossetti, Y., Pagnoni, G., & Lutz, A. (2025). Modulation of sensory
attenuation by intensive meditation practice: An active inference perspective. Neuroscience of Consciousness, 1–16, (submitted).
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 22 of 23
Qin, P ., Wang, M., & Northoff, G. (2020). Linking bodily, environmental and mental states in the self: A three-level model based on a
meta-analysis. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 115, 77–95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Quadt, L., Critchley, H. D., & Garfinkel, S. N. (2018). The neurobiology of interoception in health and disease. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 1428(1), 112–128. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Quattrocki, E., & Friston, K. (2014). Autism, oxytocin and interoception. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 47, 410–430. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Quigley, K. S., Kanoski, S., Grill, W. M., Barrett, L. F., & Tsakiris, M. (2021). Functions of interoception: From energy regulation to
experience of the self. Trends in Neurosciences, 44(1), 29–38. [CrossRef]
Ramstead, M. J. D., Kirchhoff, M. D., Constant, A., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Multiscale integration: Beyond internalism and externalism.
Synthese, 1–30.
Rebollo, I., Devauchelle, A. D., Béranger, B., & Tallon-Baudry, C. (2018). Stomach-brain synchrony reveals a novel, delayed-connectivity
resting-state network in humans. eLife, 7, e33321. [CrossRef]
Ren, Q., Marshall, A. C., Liu, J., & Schütz-Bosbach, S. (2024). Listen to your heart: Trade-off between cardiac interoceptive processing
and visual exteroceptive processing. NeuroImage, 299, 120808. [CrossRef]
Richter, C. G., Babo-Rebelo, M., Schwartz, D., & Tallon-Baudry, C. (2017). Phase-amplitude coupling at the organism level: The
amplitude of spontaneous alpha rhythm fluctuations varies with the phase of the infra-slow gastric basal rhythm. NeuroImage,
146, 951–958. [CrossRef]
Rohde, M., Di Luca, M., & Ernst, M. O. (2011). The rubber hand illusion: Feeling of ownership and proprioceptive drift do not go hand
in hand. PLoS ONE, 6(6), e21659. [CrossRef]
Rosato, A., Larsson, M., Rullman, E., & Düal, S. A. (2024). Evidence of spontaneous cardiac-locomotor coupling during daily activities
in healthy adults. Frontiers in Physiology, 15, 1394591. [CrossRef]
Rouffet, D., Taylor, S., Sparrow, W. A., & Begg, R. (2008, December 15–18).Cardio-locomotor entrainment during walking in young healthy
people: A preliminary study. 2008 International Conference on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Processing
(pp. 347–350), Sydney, NSW, Australia. [CrossRef]
Saini, F., Ponzo, S., Silvestrin, F., Fotopoulou, A., & David, A. S. (2022). Depersonalization disorder as a systematic downregulation of
interoceptive signals. Scientific Reports, 12(1), 22123. [CrossRef]
Salami, A., Andreu-Perez, J., & Gillmeister, H. (2020). Symptoms of depersonalisation/derealisation disorder as measured by brain
electrical activity: A systematic review. Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews, 118, 524–537. [CrossRef]
Saltafossi, M., Zaccaro, A., Perrucci, M. G., Ferri, F., & Costantini, M. (2023). The impact of cardiac phases on multisensory integration.
Biological Psychology, 182, 108642. [CrossRef]
Sandved-Smith, L., Hesp, C., Mattout, J., Friston, K., Lutz, A., & Ramstead, M. J. D. (2021). Towards a computational phenomenology
of mental action: Modelling meta-awareness and attentional control with deep parametric active inference. Neuroscience of
Consciousness, 2021(2), niab018. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sargent, K., Martinez, E., Reed, A., Guha, A., Bartholomew, M., Diehl, C., Chang, C., Salama, S., Subotnik, K., Ventura, J., Nuechterlein,
K., Miller, G., & Yee, C. (2025). Brain–body dysconnectivity: Deficient autonomic regulation of cortical function in first-episode
schizophrenia. Psychological Medicine, 55, e1. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Schabinger, N., Gillmeister, H., Berti, S., Michal, M., Beutel, M. E., & Adler, J. (2018). Detached and distracted: ERP correlates of altered
attentional function in depersonalisation. Biological Psychology, 134, 64–71. [CrossRef]
Schulz, A., Köster, S., Beutel, M. E., Schächinger, H., Vögele, C., Rost, S., Rauh, M., & Michal, M. (2015). Altered patterns of heartbeat-
evoked potentials in depersonalization/derealization disorder: Neurophysiological evidence for impaired cortical representation
of bodily signals. Psychosomatic Medicine, 77(5), 506–516. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sedeño, L., Couto, B., Melloni, M., Canales-Johnson, A., Yoris, A., Baez, S., Esteves, S., Velásquez, M., Barttfeld, P ., Sigman, M., Kichic,
R., Chialvo, D., Manes, F., Bekinschtein, T. A., & Ibanez, A. (2014). How do you feel when you can’t feel your body? Interoception,
functional connectivity and emotional processing in depersonalization-derealization disorder. PLoS ONE, 9(6), e98769. [CrossRef]
Sel, A., Azevedo, R. T., & Tsakiris, M. (2017). Heartfelt self: Cardio-visual integration affects self-face recognition and interoceptive
cortical processing. Cerebral Cortex, 27, 5144–5155. [CrossRef]
Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17, 565–573. [CrossRef]
Seth, A. K., & Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B,
371, 20160007. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Shergill, S. S., Samson, G., Bays, P . M., Frith, C. D., & Wolpert, D. M. (2005). Evidence for sensory prediction deficits in schizophrenia.
The American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(12), 2384–2386. [CrossRef]
Sierra, M., & Berrios, G. E. (1997). Depersonalization: A conceptual history. History of Psychiatry, 8 Pt 2(30), 213–229. [CrossRef]
Sierra, M., & David, A. S. (2011). Depersonalization: A selective impairment of self-awareness. Consciousness and Cognition, 20(1),
99–108. [CrossRef]
Behav. Sci. 2025, 15, 1090 23 of 23
Sierra, M., Senior, C., Dalton, J., McDonough, M., Bond, A., Phillips, M. L., O’Dwyer, A. M., & David, A. S. (2002). Autonomic response
in depersonalization disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59(9), 833–838. [CrossRef]
Simeon, D., & Abugel, J. (2006). Feeling unreal: Depersonalization disorder and the loss of the self. Oxford University Press.
Simeon, D., Knutelska, M., Nelson, D., & Guralnik, O. (2003). Feeling unreal: A depersonalization disorder update of 117 cases. The
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 64(9), 990–997. [CrossRef]
Stanton, T. R., & Spence, C. (2020). The influence of auditory cues on bodily and movement perception. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 3001.
[CrossRef]
Sterling, P . (2014). Homeostasis vs allostasis: Implications for brain function and mental disorders.JAMA Psychiatry, 71(10), 1192–1193.
[CrossRef]
Suzuki, K., Garfinkel, S. N., Critchley, H. D., & Seth, A. K. (2013). Multisensory integration across exteroceptive and interoceptive
domains modulates self-experience in the rubber-hand illusion. Neuropsychologia, 51, 2909–2917. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Tajadura-Jiménez, A., Basia, M., Deroy, O., Fairhurst, M. T., Marquardt, N., & Bianchi-Berthouze, N. (2015, April 18–23).As light as your
footsteps: Altering walking sounds to change perceived body weight, emotional state and gait. 33rd Annual CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 2943–2952), Seoul, Republic of Korea. [CrossRef]
Tajadura-Jiménez, A., Cohen, H., & Bianchi-Berthouze, N. (2017). Bodily sensory inputs and anomalous bodily experiences in complex
regional pain syndrome: Evaluation of the potential effects of sound feedback. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 11, 379. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Tajadura-Jiménez, A., Väljamäe, A., Toshima, I., Kimura, T., Tsakiris, M., & Kitagawa, N. (2012). Action sounds recalibrate perceived
tactile distance. Current Biology, 22(13), R516–R517. [CrossRef]
Takeuchi, S., Nishida, Y., & Mizushima, T. (2014). Effects of synchronization between cardiac and locomotor rhythms on oxygen pulse
during walking. Journal of Sports Science & Medicine, 13(4), 881–887.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in life: Biology, phenomenology, and the sciences of mind. Harvard University Press.
Tort, A. B. L., Brankack, J., & Draguhn, A. (2018). Respiration-entrained brain rhythms are global but often overlooked. Trends in
Neurosciences, 41, 186–197. [CrossRef]
Tsakiris, M. (2017). The multisensory basis of the self: From body to identity to others. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 70,
597–609. [CrossRef]
Tsakiris, M., Carpenter, L., James, D., & Fotopoulou, A. (2010). Hands only illusion: Multisensory integration elicits sense of ownership
for body parts but not for non-corporeal objects. Experimental Brain Research, 204(3), 343–352. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Varela, F., Lachaux, J.-P ., Rodriguez, E., & Martinerie, J. (2001). The brainweb: Phase synchronization and large-scale integration.Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 229–239. [CrossRef]
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991).The embodied mind: Cognitive science and human experience. MIT Press.
Wakeham, D. J., Ivey, E., Saland, S. A., Lewis, J. S., Palmer, D., Morris, M., Bleich, J. L., Weyand, P . G., Brazile, T. L., Hearon, C. M., Jr.,
Sarma, S., MacNamara, J. P ., Hieda, M., & Levine, B. D. (2023). Effects of synchronizing foot strike and cardiac phase on exercise
hemodynamics in patients with cardiac resynchronization therapy: A within-subjects pilot study to fine-tune cardio-locomotor
coupling for heart failure. Circulation, 148(25), 2008–2016. [CrossRef]
Waszak, F., Cardoso-Leite, P ., & Hughes, G. (2012). Action effect anticipation: Neurophysiological basis and functional consequences.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(2), 943–959. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Wittstein, M. W. (2016). Characteristics and coupling of cardiac and locomotor rhythms during treadmill walking tasks [Ph.D. dissertation,
University of North Carolina at Greensboro].
Wolpe, N., Ingram, J. N., Tsvetanov, K. A., Geerligs, L., Kievit, R. A., Henson, R. N., Wolpert, D. M., Cam, C. A. N., & Rowe, J. B. (2016).
Ageing increases reliance on sensorimotor prediction through structural and functional differences in frontostriatal circuits.
Nature Communications, 7, 13034. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Wolpert, N., & Tallon-Baudry, C. (2021). Coupling between the phase of a neural oscillation or bodily rhythm with behavior: Evaluation
of different statistical procedures. NeuroImage, 236, 118050. [CrossRef]
Yon, D., & Frith, C. D. (2021). Precision and the Bayesian brain. Current Biology, 31(17), R1026–R1032. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Zahavi, D. (2005). Subjectivity and selfhood: Investigating the first-person perspective. MIT Press.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.