 
 
Exploring compatibilities between the Free Energy Principle and Heideggerian 
existential phenomenology as alternative dynamic conceptualizations of depression 
 
Disclaimer: This is a preprint version of the article. This is not peer reviewed. Please check for the official 
version. 
 
Abstract 
This paper concerns an interdisciplinary theoretical analysis of the underlying ways the depressed individual is 
related to the world. Specific aspects of this relation, namely time, mood and perception of affordances will be 
characterized. By understanding these relations from both an existential phenomenological Heideggerian 
approach and through the modern neuroscientific paradigm of the Free Energy Principle, we strive to formulate a 
complementary conceptualization of the depressed person’s relation to the world. Furthermore, we argue that this 
interdisciplinary approach bears a synergic coupling, despite obvious epistemic and disciplinary differences. We 
argue that the theories rest upon interestingly compatible theoretical notions of how any individual is related to 
the world. We argue this interdisciplinary conceptualization constitutes an epistemically useful alternative based 
on dynamic assumptions, unlike the conceptualization offered by DSM-5, which we argue is based on dualistic 
assumptions. We argue these underlying assumptions are important to challenge, as recent research, in psychedelic 
treatment of “treatment resistant” depressed patients, provides interesting findings challenging our current view 
of depression. Because experiences of connectedness are the strongest predictor for positive clinical outcomes in 
these trials, we argue that a dynamic characterization of depression is beneficial. We argue that this dynamic 
characterization is beneficial to pursue, as it offers an interdisciplinary approach to understand how the depressed 
individual fundamentally is connected to the world. 
 
Keywords   Depression • Free energy principle • Heideggerian existential phenomenology • Time • Mood • 
Affordances 
 
Authors & Affiliations: 
 
Mathias Houe Andersen1* & Silja Katharina Arenfeldt2* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Department of Psychology and Behavioral Sciences, Aarhus University, Bartholins Allé 11, Aarhus C, 8000, Denmark 
2 Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Palle Juul-Jensens Boulevard 99, Aarhuc N, 8200, Denmark. 
 
1 
 
1 Introduction 
 
Depression is a widespread and serious mental disorder estimated to affect about 280 million people globally 
(WHO, 2017). Despite its massive prevalence, the classic treatment relying on antidepressants and psychotherapy 
leaves behind an estimated 30.9 % treatment-resistant patients in the US (Zhdanava et al., 2021). Meta-analyses 
of placebo-controlled studies find that even single sessions with the alternative treatment of psychedelic therapy 
can reduce depressive symptoms in both medium-term and long-term time scales – benefiting also “treatment-
resistant” depressed individuals (Aday et al., 2020; Andersen et al., 2020; Louma et al., 2020). For this reason, 
psychedelic therapy is referred to by some as a potential paradigm shift in the treatment of depression (Scheidegger 
2021; Watts et al., 2017). In these trials, the strongest predictor of reducing depressive symptoms is the 
phenomenological experience of connectedness to self, others and the world during the psychedelic session 
(Belser et al., 2017; Carhart-Harris et al., 2018; Watts et al., 2017). 
 As connectedness is a particularly complex, multifaceted phenomenon, we have chosen to pursue an 
interdisciplinary theoretical conceptualization of how the depressed person’s fundamental relation to the world 
can be characterized. To investigate this relation, we find it advantageous to take our offset from the two dynamic 
theories – Martin Heidegger's existential ontology (1926/2008) and the Free Energy Principle (FEP) (Friston, 
2005, 2010). Contrary to the general conceptualization of depression focusing on traits of the individual and the 
environment (American Psychiatric Association [APA], 2013), these theories characterize a relation between man 
and world. Where classic treatments of depression, such as antidepressants, are considered symptom relievers of 
isolated diagnostic criteria (Andersen et al., 2020; Carhart-Harris & Goodwin, 2017), the dynamic 
conceptualization of depression demands a treatment of fundamental conditions in the individual's relation to the 
world. We will therefore seek to outline fundamental interdisciplinary compatibilities between the two theories 
regarding how the depressive human world relation can be characterized, despite obvious epistemological 
differences (cf. 6.3). In doing so, we will shortly outline how human world relations are generally characterized 
by each theory. 
 We focus, as described, on the depressed person's relation to the world. This means leaving out the 
relation to others and oneself, which is otherwise included in the concept of connectedness (Carhart-Harris et al., 
2017). Tasks for further work on these omissions are described in section 7. The depressive human world relation 
we seek to conceptualize will be analyzed from three basic aspects, namely time, mood and perception of 
affordances. These aspects are selected with inspiration from Ratcliffe's (2015) common features of depression 
and are found in similar forms in the conceptualization of depression given by FEP theoreticians (Clark et al., 
2018; Fabry, 2019; Kiverstein et al., 2020; Ramstead et al., 2020). 
 
 
2 Cardinal symptoms of depression in the DSM-V 
 
According to the DSM-V (APA, 2013), Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) links two cardinal symptoms to the 
condition. Both must have been present for at least two weeks: 1) Depressed mood almost every day characterized 
by sadness, feelings of emptiness, and feelings of hopelessness; 2) Loss of interest or pleasure (anhedonia) 
 
2 
 
characterized by a decreased interest or pleasure in all or almost all activities most of the day, all days or almost 
every day. 
Nomenclatures such as the DSM-V are criticized for not being able to accommodate phenomenological 
explanations of the relation between man and world (Svenaeus, 2005). Some depressed individuals express a 
comprehensive structural change in their experience of being in the world. E.g. “[...] major depression is the 
startling collapse of a whole structure” (Solomon, 2016). Thus, the world is not just the same with an “added” sad 
mood. The opportunities offered by the world change: “[major depression] is both the new presence of something 
and the total disappearance of somethinsg” (Solomon, 2016). As DSM-V fails to capture such structural changes 
found in the depressive experience, important aspects of depression are overlooked. This could potentially be of 
decisive importance in how depression is treated. Thus, in addition to the two cardinal symptoms in DSM-5, we 
emphasize mapping and analyzing significant parts of the phenomenological experience of depression. 
 
3 The Free Energy Principle 
 
3.1 Introduction 
 
The phenomenon of free energy is linked to the functions of the brain by Karl Friston (Friston, 2005) and later 
developed into an actual theory (Friston & Stephan, 2007). The principle is based on statistical physics and 
information theory, which can be implemented mathematically and mechanically in the organization of 
autopoietic systems – e.g. in the neural structure of the brain (Hohwy, 2013). Furthermore, the theory has led to 
theoretical and empirical work regarding the neural impact of psychedelics in treating depression and other 
psychopathologies (Carhart-Harris, 2018; Carhart-Harris et al., 2014; Carhart-Harris & Friston, 2019).  
 The free energy principle (FEP) postulates that any autopoietic (self-organizing) system must minimize 
its free energy (Friston, 2010) – an expression of entropy or disorder (Ben-Naim, 2007). The brain is seen as a 
hypothesis-generating and -testing machine that actively tries to gather information about the world in order to 
continuously create better hypotheses about the states of the world with the aim of acting adaptively (Friston 2010; 
Hohwy, 2013; Clark, 2015). To minimize free energy, the brain must infer (predict) states of the world by 
indulging in prediction error minimization (PEM), considered the most fundamental function of the brain. Here, 
the brain possesses neural and statistical models, so-called generative models, used to make predictions about 
future input to sensory processing systems. However, aspects of most sensory inputs cannot be fully explained by 
these generative models, why prediction errors occur. Such prediction errors are sought to be minimized by the 
brain and organism via two inseparable mechanisms. 1) Perceptual inference updates the generative models of 
the brain with the aim of improving predictions of sensory input. 2) Active inference regards changing the actions 
of the organism in order to sculpt the sampled sensory inputs, making inputs better fit the predictions. Thereby, 
perception and action are inextricably linked in minimizing prediction errors and optimizing predictions of future 
input generated by the generative model (Parr et al., 2022).  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
3.1.1 The importance of minimizing prediction errors 
 
But why is it necessary to predict the world to avoid entropy (free energy)? Autopoietic systems like living 
organisms can be defined as systems with a high probability of being in a limited set of possible states. Something 
alive does not exist if, e.g., it has a high probability of being spread over the entire universe or fluctuating 
dramatically in body temperature. A high probability of being in a limited set of states is in information-theoretic 
terms referred to as “minimizing statistical surprise”. Statistical surprise is a measure of how unlikely a given state 
of a system is. Examples of high surprisal could be a fish on land, a cell with a low salt balance, or a human being 
with a constantly increased arousal. Any self-organizing system must thus reduce average surprisal over time, 
because if it does not, it will cease to exist (Friston, 2010). Thus, the organism must deal with minimizing its free 
energy in order to minimize surprisal. Though surprisal cannot be assessed or measured directly by the system 
(Hohwy, 2013), under certain assumptions, minimizing prediction error is the same as minimizing free energy. 
3.1.2 Updating the generative model 
The generative model is thought of as being of a purely statistical nature, as it is based on probable correlations 
between states in the world and the predictions of the models (Hohwy, 2013). This is formulated mathematically 
as a Bayesian model (Dayan et al., 1995; Friston, 2012; Holmes & Nolte, 2019). Put in simple terms, the model 
updates its beliefs based on a weighting between information relevant to previous similar situations and 
information relevant in the current situation independent of previously collected information (Knill & Pouget, 
2004). Based on this updating mechanism, the brain attempts to make a model reversion by inferring causal, 
probable processes and states of the world based on sensory input. This is easy for linear processes. But the world 
is complex and often non-linear, which is why the same input can result from different states of the world, and 
different inputs can result from similar states of the world. Thus, the generative model is hierarchically structured 
(Rao & Ballard, 1999), where higher levels of processing deal with spatiotemporal general correlations (such as 
“gravity can make things fall” or characteristic to depressed individuals: “the world is unpredictable and I do not 
have the control to change it” (Chekroud, 2015), while lower levels are concerned with more specific correlations 
(e.g. “the apple I dropped will hit the ground shortly” and according to the depressed: “when I write an assignment, 
I cannot control if it turns out good"). This reflects an aspect of the brain that has long been recognized in 
psychology – namely, that the brain contains a hierarchical structure that progresses from highly specialized 
sensorimotor systems at its lowest levels to flexible, highly integrated systems responsible for processing more 
generalized information at higher levels (Wiest, 2012). 
 Thus, all levels above the lowest level make predictions about the level below until the sensory input is 
received. When this happens, prediction errors (PE) are sent up through the hierarchy, updating the weighting of 
each level's influence on future predictions. Thus, the brain can be said to be arranged in neuro-economically 
efficient ways, as the only thing it needs to “send up” in the hierarchy are PE signals (Friston 2010; Hohwy, 2013; 
Clark, 2015). This updating of models takes place in concert with what the organism experiences and depends on 
the precision attributed to any PE. Precision thereby tells the organism how reliable the received signals are 
(Hohwy, 2013). Accordingly, the causal influence of PE signals on hierarchical processing increases 
proportionally to its precision (Hohwy, 2013) and is assumed to be implemented in the signaling of 
neurotransmitters (Feldman & Friston, 2010; Friston 2010; Quattrocki & Friston, 2014). 
 
4 
 
 Due to different experiences, each person will form idiosyncratic models of the world, depending on 
different sensory inputs processed, different actions performed, and the differences that arise in the weighting of 
generative models. On this basis, one can conceptualize psychopathologies such as depression, which are 
characterized by specific hypotheses about, predictions of, and actions in the world. 
3.2 Depression conceptualized by the Free Energy Principle 
3.2.1 Reward insensitivity and flattening of affordance landscapes 
A meta-analysis by Huys et al. (2013) points out that insensitivity to rewards is associated with anhedonia in 
humans. This insensitivity to rewards correlates with both serotonin depletion and elevated serotonin levels in 
humans (Branchi, 2011; Seymour et al., 2012). However, it must be objected that low concentrations of both 
serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine are frequently associated with MDD (Barret et al., 2016). Thus, 
serotonin activity is thought to be part of a mechanism that represents expected reward value in humans 
(Chekroud, 2015). Due to this reward insensitivity, the generative models of the depressed can no longer be said 
to reflect reward contingencies in interaction with the world, similarly to healthy individuals (Chekroud, 2015). 
 Accordingly, reward insensitivity is presumed to be a central aspect in shaping anhedonia, as this 
insensitivity will structure maladaptive, “reward insensitive” generative models. Reward insensitive generative 
models are maladaptive, because the individual is hampered in its ability to distinguish between beneficial actions 
– a so-called flattening of affordance landscapes (Ramstead et al., 2020). Affordances are defined as the 
possibilities for action that the environment makes available to the individual (Gibson, 1979). Thus, a flat, rather 
than rich affordance landscape means no actions stand out among other actions as beneficial (Kiverstein et al., 
2020). This flattening can be assumed to co-occur with reward insensitivity. Since these generative models are 
worse at predicting which actions will minimize average free energy in the system, the depressed person will act 
in less optimal ways (Friston et al., 2012a). In short, generative models characterized by reward insensitivity, as 
presumed to be the case for depressed individuals, may reflect an inability to perceive adaptive actions that 
minimize entropy. 
 
3.2.2 A depressed mood emerges 
Since anhedonia (reward insensitivity) is a general condition in depression, this will also affect the mood of the 
depressed person, which can be defined as a general feeling directed towards the world as such, rather than specific 
objects (Solomon, 1993). The valence of emotions (positive or negative) is repeatedly associated with the rate of 
changes in free-energy minimization (Joffily & Corricelli, 2013; Kiverstein et al., 2019; Miller et al., 2020; Van 
de Cruys, 2017). Clark et al. (2018) suggest that mood is reflected in the expected general energy minimization 
compared to the actual energy minimization of the system. Accordingly, a positive mood will arise when a greater 
energy minimization is registered than expected. Conversely, a negative mood will arise when less entropy is 
minimized compared to expectations. General empirical support is found for this conceptualization, as happiness 
does not seem to depend specifically on events in a person’s life going well, but more precisely on events in a 
person’s life going better than expected (Rutledge et al., 2014). The opposite picture applies to sadness (Rutledge 
et al., 2014). Thus, mood can be understood as an agent's projections about how adaptive the actions of the agent 
 
5 
 
are. 
 Clark et al. (2018) suggest that pathologically low (depressed) mood in MDD should be understood as a 
prediction of high precision, foreseeing that the agent will encounter an uncertain, changeable environment. By 
tracking changes in the reduction of free energy, mood will provide feedback that allows the agent to account for 
general trends and influences from multiple environmental factors (Eldar et al., 2016). Thus, a global tracking of 
environmental factors constitutes mood. And since the environment is always entropic, it is easy to sample sensory 
information that is mostly unpredictable. 
 Although this prediction is accurate, it is not adaptive, as it does not tell the individual which actions will 
minimize free energy. Thus, the individual will have no opportunity to minimize free energy until the 
characteristic depressed mood and its precise but inapplicable predictions of a changeable environment are 
changed. FEP relates to depressive realism this way. Depressive realism is the general finding that depressed 
individuals on average infer and conclude in more realistically negative rather than positive ways compared to 
non-depressed individuals (Nolen-Hoeksema, 2019). Rather than seeing the world through the positive glow of 
possibilities as healthy individuals, depressed people will more likely predict the unpredictable vicissitudes of the 
world. Thus, this lack of perceiving beneficial, entropy-minimizing actions in the environment is associated with 
the development of a depressed mood. 
  
3.2.3 Active and perceptual inference 
A vicious circle between making these predictions and sampling behavior that confirms the predictions is thereby 
possible. Thus, the predictions are gradually adapted via the interaction of the perception-action cycle between 
expectations for events in the world (priors) and actions carried out by the agent (sampling of sensory input). If 
the depressed expects the world to be a changeable and hostile place, the world will be sampled as a function of 
this through the actions carried out by the depressed agent. 
 Evidence for this connection in depression is found in several studies that show that depressed patients 
spend more time sampling negative stimuli compared to non-depressed individuals (Eizenman et al., 2003; 
Matthews & Antes, 1992; Seth, 2013). Thereby, the learned helplessness in depression, which is a leading 
psychological theory of depression (Nolen-Hoeksema, 2019), can be derived from the model. This is characterized 
by the observation that, after repeated negative events, the individual accepts not to have control over these events, 
even though there will be opportunities to change the events for the better (Nolen-Hoeksema, 2019). Because the 
sampling of the world repeatedly provides an unpredictable input, the depressed person learns to predict a 
changing, unpredictable environment with progressively greater precision. 
 
3.2.4 The role of time 
Our conscious experience of time is characterized by a sense of continuity. E.g. we see an object moving from 
one place to another, rather than seeing the object in one place at a time (Hoerl, 2015). The inference dynamics in 
our hierarchical processing of time utilizes the depth or nestedness of levels in our generative models to give us a 
temporally continuous experience (Ramstead et al., 2020). This depth consists of hierarchically higher levels 
representing more general priors based on larger time scales. These priors are used in attempting to predict the 
 
6 
 
activity of underlying increasingly concerned with the momentary sensory input (Wiese, 2017). This basically 
means that the life narrative of a person could function as priors for the narrative in the current period of a person's 
life, which in turn constitutes priors for how the day is interpreted, which furthermore constitute priors for how 
each individual event is perceived (Friston et al., 2017; Rikhye et al., 2019). 
 We even have a sense of continuity from events of smaller, more local time scales – we experience a 
connection between events that have happened in the recent past and expected events that will happen in the near 
future (Ramstead et al., 2020). This means e.g. that we do not hear one note after another when we hear a song. 
We hear a rhythm and a melody that spreads over larger time scales, and which is therefore based on a deeply 
constructed percept, which is made possible by priors from multiple time scales. 
 Ramstead et al. (2020) argue that the integration of past and future on both short and long scales in our 
experience of time is made possible by events being integrated through action and through policy selection. A 
policy entails a belief about state transitions (Ramstead et al., 2020). That is, a belief that a specific sequence of 
actions can be implemented and change the way states in the world develop over time. The agent selects policies 
based on the expectation that these will result in the least average free energy (Ramstead et al., 2020). 
 Ramstead et al. (2020) thereby argue that the experience of having opportunities to act connects events 
into a continuity on longer time scales. In the non-depressed state, policies will connect the present with the 
memories of the past and the hopes of the future into an integrated whole with the experience of the present. 
Actions available to the individual in the present are connected to past actions that made possible the present 
possibilities of action. Furthermore, future actions will become possible if certain present actions are performed 
(Ramstead et al., 2020). When the expected free energy becomes pathologically imprecise (by possessing a precise 
but surprisal inducing expectation that the states of the world are changeable), affect will decrease (Seth & Friston, 
2016). Thereby, possible actions can seem meaningless to depressed people (Ramstead et al., 2020). For the same 
reason, possible action sequences will still be experienced, but will not be followed, as there will be a great lack 
of certainty in selecting exactly the action sequences that will reduce free energy in the future. The precision of 
the expected free energy will eventually be so low that it cannot drive action anymore (Kiverstein et al., 2020).3 
All policies are experienced as having little or no relative usefulness, and therefore no longer make the agent act. 
In depression, the continuity between the future and the past may therefore seem lost, as the possibility of action 
no longer exists to connect past, present and future into one continuous experience. 
 
4 Heideggerian existential phenomenology 
 
4.1 Introduction 
Heidegger's early thinking in his magnum opus Being and Time (Heidegger, 1926/2008 [BT]) provides a language 
for dealing with fundamental characteristics of man's being in the world through its existential ontological and 
phenomenological analyses. Consequently, these analyses can account for a description of the depressed person's 
experience in and of the world. It has become increasingly common in psychopathology research to include 
phenomenology in order to understand the experience of an illness (Svenaeus, 2005). The practice is not new, 
 
3 This stands as the basic assumption necessary to explain depression within the FEP framework, though this is not the entire 
story – see Hohwy (2013) for a more detailed picture. 
 
 
7 
 
though. Both philosophers have used phenomenology to conceptualize psychopathologies (e.g. interpretations of 
Heidegger in Fuchs, 2013, 2019; Meynen, 2011; Ratcliffe, 2012b, 2013, 2015), and psychiatrists like Karl Jaspers, 
considered one of the fathers of psychiatry, was inspired by the phenomenologist Husserl (Spiegelberg, 1972) – 
Heidegger's teacher. Thus, we consider it reasonable to outline how Heidegger's terminology can conceptualize 
the depressed state as a disturbed human world relation. 
 In short, ontology for Heidegger is the question of what is common to being, while existential refers to 
formal, universal features of being (Wind, 1974). Through a phenomenological analysis of the human being, 
Dasein, Heidegger uncovers a number of existential aspects of Dasein (Wind, 1974). Using phenomenology as a 
method for ontology Heidegger consistently focuses on the way something is (Olesen, 2013), as he defines a 
phenomenon as a distinctive way in which something can be encountered (BT, p. 54). Consequently, Heidegger 
distinguishes between being and beings. Beings are the things and phenomena of which the world consists of, 
while being is that which is not shown by these things and phenomena – that they are (the being of beings). Thus, 
beings presuppose being. That something is in a certain way precedes the substantial entity we tend to focus on 
(BT, p. 26). 
 In line with Heidegger, Ratcliffe (2015) points out that a depressed person does not have an experience 
of something called “depression”, but instead has certain experiences of the depressed way of being. In the next 
sections, we will characterize this way of being by outlining what the basis of human beings is, according to 
Heidegger. We do this in order to describe the phenomenology of depression as a shift in the existential structure 
of Dasein (e.g. Ratcliffe, 2012b, 2015; Solomon, 2016; Svenaeus, 2005). 
 
4.2 Dasein and the world 
According to Heidegger, the concept of man leads to a reification of man, as he is understood as a fixed essence 
regardless of the state the world is in when the individual man lives (Wind, 1974). Instead, by referring to man as 
Dasein (semantically translated, there-being), Heidegger emphasizes the human way of being (BT, p. 78). In 
doing so, Heidegger tries to overcome the traditional dualism between consciousness and the world as separate 
dimensions: Dasein is never isolated from the world, but it is in it – a being-in-the-world (BT, pp. 74-79). By 
virtue of its way of being in the world, Dasein is open to beings and being, including itself (BT, p. 176). 
 According to Heidegger, things in the world can be divided into two categories depending on how Dasein 
relates to them. Present-at-hand entities are things that simply exist as objects with a specific weight, measure, 
etc., but which cannot be used and therefore have no meaning for Dasein (BT, p. 103). Ready-at-hand entities 
have the character of being related to the daily practice of Dasein (BT, p. 105), “in its serviceability, its usability 
and its detrimentality” (BT, p. 184). This can be referred to as practical significance (Ratcliffe, 2015). Only Dasein 
has understood a world in such a way that the world arises as a totality of references or assignments from Dasein's 
being (Olesen, 2013; BT, pp. 107, 121) concerning what something is used for in Dasein's world of practice 
(Olesen, 2013; BT, p. 107). The world thus gets its meaning from human activity (Wind, 1974), which is why it 
predominantly has a ready-at-hand like quality (Olesen, 2013). 
 It is implied in the concept of Dasein that Dasein has never experienced not being in the world. When 
Dasein understands itself, it therefore easily overlooks the importance the world holds for the existence of Dasein: 
that its basic state is a being-in-the-world (BT, p. 368). While this may be the case for non-depressed individuals, 
 
8 
 
Ratcliffe (2015) suggests that the world qualitatively changes for the person at the onset of depression. The 
discrepancy between the world pre-depression and the depressive world reveals that the world exists (Ratcliffe, 
2015). It can no longer be taken for granted, as the depressed person can no longer engage with the world in an 
effortless and unreflective way (Ratcliffe, 2015). This means that the familiar aspect of the world, according to 
Heidegger, that one belongs to it, disappears. This may contribute to the experience of being alienated and isolated 
(Ratcliffe, 2015), which is frequently reported by depressed individuals (e.g. Midgley et al., 2015; Solomon, 2016; 
Svenaeus, 2005). In short, the structure of the human world relation becomes qualitatively different in depression, 
why man as a being in the world must also be perceived differently. In order to clarify this change in the structure 
of the human world relation, the concepts of care and mood will now be elaborated. 
  
4.3 Care 
Dasein is characterized by Heidegger through the ‘existentiale’ of taking care of the world and itself by caring for 
something (Sorge in German) (BT, pp. 83-84, 235-236). Dasein cares for something by acting and relating actively 
and openly to the world it is in (BT, pp. 238-239). The structure of care has several parts, of which we would like 
to elaborate projection and thrownness, as the relation between these is linked to the openness with which Dasein 
can meet the world (BT, pp. 184-185). We suggest that the openness of Dasein is reduced in depression, which is 
elaborated below and in section 4.4. 
 Projection emphasizes that Dasein's existence revolves around understanding, which is characterized by 
projecting (BT, p. 185). The projection consists of anticipating the future by understanding what it entails and can 
be. Meaning that we understand ourselves and what we encounter as possibilities in the future – in this way, 
Dasein is what it is not yet (Olesen, 2013; BT, p. 185). “[Dasein] […] is primarily Being-possible. [Dasein] is in 
every case what it can be, and in the way in which it is its possibilities” (BT, p. 183). Understanding does not arise 
in Dasein as an isolated subject but follows Dasein’s being in a world that is constitutive of Dasein (BT, p. 184). 
 Thrownness refers to Dasein not being able to choose the world it was thrown (born) into (BT, p. 236). 
Dasein cannot control, e.g. the perception of mental disorders held by the culture it is born into. That Dasein in 
this way is already something determined without having chosen it, Heidegger refers to as facticity (BT, p. 236). 
With facticity, Heidegger points out that despite the freedom of its projection, Dasein does not create an existence 
without a foundation. The projection must, in its forwardness, recur back to what Dasein already is (BT, p. 41). 
 Despite its freedom in the projection, Dasein has, according to Heidegger, tendencies to let facticity 
determine its understanding without actively living out its being towards the possibilities (BT, pp. 36, 239, 346-
347). Facticity therefore easily gains the upper hand over freedom. The dominance of facticity can be said to be 
characteristic of depressive phenomenology. E.g. depressed individuals frequently report a sense of not being able 
to get well (Ratcliffe, 2015; Smith & Rhodes, 2015; Solomon, 2016), accompanied by an experience of being 
imprisoned by the condition (Ratcliffe, 2012b, 2015; Solomon, 2016; Wyllie, 2005). 
 According to Ratcliffe (2015), the experience of the present includes an anticipatory (projective) 
structure that makes one susceptible to meaningful change, as the present is contingent. That the present is 
contingent refers to the observation that in anticipation one understands that there is a conditional connection 
between the present action and the future state. According to Wyllie (2005), this type of contingency is lost in 
depression, meaning that one’s anticipation changes. In extreme cases, depressed people experience that nothing 
 
9 
 
good can happen (Midgley et al., 2015; Ratcliffe, 2015; Solomon, 2016; Wyllie, 2005). Thus, the openness to the 
possibility of positive change is restricted, as the anticipation cannot perceive the possibility of positive change 
itself. This manifests itself in hopelessness, and according to Ratcliffe (2015) contributes to the symptom of 
depressed mood. When the anticipation of positive change is weakened, it follows that getting out of depression 
is hindered, contributing to the experience of being imprisoned (Ratcliffe, 2015; Solomon, 2016; Wyllie, 2005). 
  
4.4 Mood 
According to Heidegger, Dasein finds itself in the world through mood (Wind, 1974), providing an overall sense 
of belonging in the world (Ratcliffe, 2015). Mood is not an emotional state, but precedes emotions as a 
fundamental existentiale (Wind, 1974; BT, pp. 172-173). That is, mood constitutes the ways in which things can 
have meaning for us, so that Dasein can aim intentionally at something and possibly act. Thus, mood is essential 
to perceive the opportunities the world can offer (Ratcliffe, 2009). According to Heidegger: “By way of having a 
mood, Dasein ‘sees’ possibilities, in terms of which it is. In the projective disclosure of such possibilities, it already 
has a mood in every case.” (BT, p. 188). Thus, one can never not be in a mood, though mood can change (BT, p. 
173). 
 We suggest that the onset of depression constitutes a shift in mood. This change is, according to Ratcliffe 
(2013, 2015), best described by the terminology of opportunity – a depressive mood opens up fewer and different 
possibilities than a non-depressive mood. Thus, depression is not phenomenologically about a lack of will to act 
towards specific opportunities. Conversely, depressed people often express a partial or global loss of practical 
significance in the world, why most possibilities are not perceived (Midgley et al., 2015; Ratcliffe, 2012b, 2015). 
In other words, things do not offer the usual possibilities for action (Meynen 2011). 
 Anhedonia can, according to Ratcliffe (2015), be explained by how the depressed mood in certain cases 
can reduce the depth or extent to which something can appear significant, as often described by depressed 
individuals (e.g. Solomon, 2016). In extreme cases, nothing will appear more important than anything else. 
Nothing will then matter, since everything is equally (un)important. 
 A world without possibilities is emptied of its attractiveness and appears disconnected: objects are 
recognized as what they are, but the sensation that they are is gone (Meynen, 2011; Ratcliffe, 2012b, 2015; BT, 
p. 106). By this description, we understand that the world of depression acquires a present-at-hand like character: 
without openness to the usefulness of being, Dasein loses its carefully determined relation to things. In this case, 
the depressed person inhabits a world with which she has no relation. This kind of world does not live up to 
Heidegger's definition of world (cf. 4.2). In short, Dasein is without its world, and the depressed person no longer 
feels embedded in the same world as the entities he encounters (Karp, 1996; Ratcliffe, 2015). 
 While certain opportunities are lost, others can be increased, e.g. threat (Karp, 1996; Ratcliffe, 2013, 
2015). When the world does not invite the depressed person to action, he is passively left to whatever the world 
throws at him – a position of helplessness and hopelessness (Ratcliffe, 2015; Wyllie, 2005). Precisely feelings of 
hopelessness characterize the cardinal symptom of MDD, depressed mood. In Heideggerian terminology, the 
depressed is referred to facticity, why his sense of agency crumbles. 
  
 
10 
 
4.5 Temporality 
According to Heidegger, temporality is the condition necessary for Dasein's care in order to explain, understand 
and relate openly to being. Time is the horizon and determines what the openness sees and understands, and how 
the openness sees and understands (BT, p. 39). Depression is usually accompanied by a deviant experience of 
time (e.g. Fuchs, 2013, 2019; Karp, 1996; Ratcliffe, 2012b, 2015; Solomon, 2016; Stanghellini et al., 2017; 
Tellenbach, 1980; Vogel et al., 2018; Wyllie, 2005), which makes precisely Heidegger's emphasis on temporality 
as a response to the meaning of being (BT, p. 39) particularly relevant. Below we present the concept of ecstatic 
time, followed by an analysis of the temporal phenomenology of depression, which we suggest is no longer 
ecstatic. 
 Heidegger opposes what he believes to be the widespread conception of time: an “endless succession of 
nows” at disposal to the subject (BT, p. 377). Instead, Heidegger operates with a concept of time as being ecstatic. 
Ecstatic time expresses itself temporally through its phases: past (or the character of having been), present and 
future (or futurity). The phases constitute the unit of temporality. They are according to Heidegger a unity, rather 
than being atomically separated, as they influence each other: the future, that Dasein as being-possible is turned 
towards, opens up the past in its conditions and limitations for the present (BT, pp. 373-375). Thus, futurity is 
primary compared to the other phases (BT, p. 378), while the dialectics of past and future meets in Dasein in the 
present moment (Wind, 1974). 
 Futurity has a special rank in care-being, according to Heidegger, since Dasein's existence has the 
character of possibility: care aims to preserve the continued possibility, which corresponds to continuing to be 
(BT, pp. 370-371, 375-376). Futurity and the projection (cf. 4.3) are intimately connected. The projection 
expresses being out of the moment, being out of oneself (ecstasy), why Heidegger calls this concept of time ecstatic 
(BT, p. 377). Thus, care-being is ecstatic time being. The ecstasy can be seen e.g. in hoping and expecting. With 
futurity, Heidegger emphasizes an active element – Dasein causes futurity to open up as a horizon through the 
projection of care.  
 Past and present: As mentioned, the future is not an infinite space of possibilities. Carefulness is, 
according to Heidegger, ahead of itself. Before itself, Dasein discovers that it is already something: the past has 
determined the conditions of possibility for the present (e.g. material possessions, cultural movements, etc.), which 
is why the past cannot be declared finished, but actively affects the present (BT, p. 376). This is closely linked to 
Dasein's facticity/thrownness (cf. 4.3). As mentioned at the outset, MDD patients often report a disturbed 
experience of time, especially in being cut off from the future, contributing to experiencing depression as 
something eternal (Ratcliffe, 2012b, 2015; Wyllie, 2005). Within the Heideggerian framework, the dynamics of 
the depressed person's experience of time are now analyzed under three headings: An aimless now, stopped time, 
and lacking the character of having been. 
 An aimless now: Experiencing the future as a closed country has an impact on the experience of existing 
as a being in the present, as this partly depends on a projecting, anticipatory structure (Ratcliffe, 2012b, 2015; 
Wyllie, 2005). If the projects of the future do not exert their influence on the present, the present becomes aimless. 
In Heideggerian terms, an aimless now phenomenologically manifests itself in that Dasein, as a depressed 
presence, cannot relate openly and intentionally to beings (cf. 4.3). The ongoing quality of things and situations 
disappear, as affordances in the world are not awakened if care does not have projects (that project into the future) 
to take care of (cf. 4.3). Without affordances, actions that can cause one to change one's state are sabotaged 
 
11 
 
(Ratcliffe, 2015). Consequently, the ordinary movement of time is inhibited, and the depressed person's existence 
stagnates (Tellenbach, 1980). He is no longer in the process of becoming, as some depressed people report 
(Stanghellini et al., 2017). In Heideggerian terms, Dasein is therefore no longer the being of possibility and the 
ecstatic being of temporality. Dasein cannot take upon itself the projection in the care structure, and therefore 
cannot be the cause of a different future. “When you are depressed, the past and future are absorbed entirely by 
the present moment […]. Being upset [...] is a temporal experience, while depression is atemporal” (Solomon, 
2016, p. 55). 
 Stopped time: That the future as just described is not indicative of the present can, according to Ratcliffe 
(2012b), mean a profound change in the experience of temporal transitioning, as this presupposes a world of 
projects (Fuchs, 2013, 2019). In a world without projects, nothing makes a difference (cf. 4.3), which might be 
why it is difficult for some depressed individuals to tell days apart (Fuchs, 2013, 2019). According to Ratcliffe 
(2012b), time therefore loses its long-term perspective and takes on a cyclical character, where each day starts and 
ends as its own isolated island without connection to and difference from the next. If one day does not lead to the 
next, time itself can be experienced as stopped (Ratcliffe, 2012b; Smith & Rhodes, 2015; Stanghellini et al., 2017). 
“I can't remember days because time is stopped.” “I lost the flow of time” (Stanghellini et al., 2017, p. 132). 
 Lacking the character of having been: According to Heidegger, the future makes use of the past, which 
is why the past is also affected when the future is closed off. When the depressed person cannot project the future, 
it may seem as if he is viewing a being that is over, consistent with the feeling of having died or ceasing to exist 
as expressed by some depressed individuals (Midgley et al. 2015; Ratcliffe, 2012b, 2015) in addition to feeling 
like a detached witness to a life that is over (Ratcliffe, 2012b, 2015; Smith & Rhodes, 2015; Stanghellini et al., 
2017): “The past is experienced as irrevocably established, the present and the future as a repetition of the past” 
(Stanghellini et al., 2017, p. 131). In Heideggerian terms, facticity has taken over freedom – one can see what one 
is made of, but not what one can become. In this way, the past loses its effect on the present, lacking the active 
element that lies in the ecstatic concept of the past possessing the character of having been. 
 
5 Similarities and differences in the interpretation of the depressed human world relation 
 
5.1 The epistemological foundations 
The theories have obvious differences in their ontological and epistemological foundations, stemming from one 
being an existential ontological analysis while the other is not. Heidegger manages at this level of analysis to deal 
with the very preconditions of thinking without reducing the complexity of the human world relation (the being-
in-the-world). Concurrently, the phenomenological method fundamentally wants to avoid “empirical 
contamination” (Svenaeus, 2005). FEP, on the other hand, is an empirically falsifiable and mathematically 
formalized neuroscientific paradigm. The general interpretation of FEP can be said to be based on materialistic 
reductionism (Hohwy, 2013) reducing the human world relation to separate, measurable quantities, often of neural 
activity – a dualistic interpretation typical to classic scientific paradigms (Fuchs, 2013; Svenaeus, 2005). Though 
this can be justified as a scientific-pragmatic necessity in order to make empirical investigations of complex 
psychological phenomena like the mood of depression, we argue that dynamic interpretations of FEP can be found 
 
12 
 
in its ecological-enactivist interpretation. Where the general interpretation of the human world relation in FEP is 
based on a dualism between internal conditions (within the autopoietic system, the human) and external conditions 
(the environment, the world), the ecological-enactivist interpretation of FEP differs. Specifically in interpreting 
the purpose of free energy minimization as the activity of the organism and its ability to act optimally within its 
econiche (Bruineberg & Rietveld, 2014). This stands in great contrast to the general interpretation of FEP, where 
representations of the generative model is the primary subject of investigation. In many ways, this focus on activity 
resembles Heidegger's view of the world as a world of practical significance in which Dasein perceives how things 
can serve the projects of Dasein. 
 Thus, the ecological-enactivist interpreters of FEP and Heidegger pursue different, but nonetheless 
reminiscent dynamic interpretations of the human world relation, where human and world fundamentally are seen 
as inseparable. This is pursued on one hand through dynamic modeling of a physical principle of energy 
minimization of an autopoietic system interacting with its environment (FEP); and on the other hand, through 
existential ontological, phenomenological descriptions of Dasein as temporal possibility in the world (Heidegger). 
Thus, the theories describe dynamics that go beyond what one normally locates as properties of either man or the 
world. It is this overlapping we believe justifies an analysis of similarities in our interdisciplinary interpretation 
of the depressive human world relation. Obvious discipline-bound differences between the interpretations of this 
relation given by the two theories will be touched upon briefly in the following section and elaborated in section 
6.3. 
 Heidegger's and Friston's (2010) descriptions of the close relation between man and world have some 
clear resemblances. Heidegger is known for referring to Descartes' “problem of the external world” – that one 
cannot prove the existence of the outside world – as a pseudo-problem. Formulating the problem is, according to 
Heidegger, only possible by the virtue of Dasein being in the world (Olesen, 2013; BT, pp. 246-250). Dasein as 
being-in-the-world always involves the world (BT, pp. 78-80), which is why they cannot be separate quantities. 
According to Friston (2010), the agent and its neural wiring is a model of the world it finds itself in, as the system 
maximizes evidence for its own existence by minimizing surprisal (Friston, 2010). So-called Markov blanks 
constitute the demarcation between internal and external states and consist of states of perception and action (Parr 
et al., 2020). These states modulate the internal states in order to avoid equilibrium with the environment. It is 
these transverse entropy minimization processes of the perception-action cycle (cf. 3.2.3) that lead us to an 
interpretation of the human world relation in FEP that opposes Descartes' dualistic interpretation. However, the 
demarcation between internal and external states is necessary to speak of a system that relates to its surroundings. 
In the same way, Heidegger does not want to contradict that there is a boundary between Dasein and the world – 
they do not melt together. The difference from the dualistic comprehension consists in describing a dynamic 
relation between man and world, rather than features of each entity. 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
5.2 Different imperatives 
A central divergence between the two theories is Heidegger's emphasis on authenticity (Eigentlichkeit in German). 
Authenticity adds an existential dimension to the description of the human world relation compared to the basic 
characterization of adaptive autopoietic systems offered by the FEP. To live authentically refers to Dasein being 
open in its presence or knowing what conditions its own openness – namely time (Wind, 1974). Thus, living 
authentically and living without psychopathological suffering are not states that overlap or influence each other. 
To live authentically can be unpleasant, which can be seen in Heidegger's understanding of anxiety (cf. footnote 
3). In order for the depressed person to escape his suffering, he does not have to deal with whether he is living 
authentically or not. To return to the One is equally sensible to the depressed person, if not better (Schmid, 2018). 
Thus, our use of Heidegger in relation to depression can be contested, as it does not incorporate the implicit 
Heideggerian existential imperative: live authentically! But for the sake of treating depression, it is simply not a 
primary concern – not being depressed does not equate either living authentically nor unauthentically. 
 
5.3 The basic conceptualization of time 
According to Heidegger, Dasein's openness to the world is based on the impact the future has on the present, as it 
is the projection of possibilities (projects) that arouse relevant affordances in the world, through which care can 
ensure the realization of these possibilities. Dasein's projection must, however, in its ecstatic future orientation 
relate to what the world and Dasein already are (thrownness, facticity and the character of having been). Thus, it 
is originally temporality that enables Dasein to be open to the world, making Dasein a fundamentally temporal 
being (cf. 4.5). The basic function of autopoietic systems, on the other hand, is to adjust to the surroundings with 
the aim of avoiding equilibrium. This is done by inferring the states of the world via predictions of sensory input 
(perceptual inference) and acting in the world in order to optimize these predictions (active inference). Despite 
obvious differences between the two, the weighting of the role of prediction within the FEP framework can be 
said to converge with Heidegger's description of projection, as Heidegger writes that “The primary meaning of 
existentiality is the future” (BT, p. 376). Actively living towards the possibilities in the world based on the future 
Dasein projects can to a large extent be seen as congruent with the principle of active inference. Both 
interpretations include that our thinking and actions are shaped by the predictions we make regarding the future. 
Thus, a basic understanding of the human necessity to live in anticipatory or ecstatic ways in relation to one's 
world is said to be expressed in different but comparable ways by the two theories. 
 
5.4 The broken continuity in depressed time 
According to the FEP and the Heideggerian analysis, there is a congruent but differently formulated 
comprehension of how the perception of affordances/possibility elicits time being experienced as continuous. As 
described within the Heideggeran approach in section 4.3, the lack of anticipated projects in the future during 
depression means that the practical significance of the world diminishes. Things do not seem important to Dasein 
 
14 
 
if they cannot be linked to a project. Consequently, the present becomes aimless, as the projects of the future are 
not indicative of Dasein's present activity. An aimless now disturbs the continuity of time why it can seem stopped. 
According to Ratcliffe (2012b) this is due to the actualization of possibilities through actions that contribute to 
the experience of the transition from future (possibility) to present (action) to past (actualized possibility). 
Heidegger's interpretation of the projection’s influence on the experience of time has conceptual similarities with 
statements made by FEP theoreticians relating to the disturbed sense of temporal continuity in depression, 
claiming that no policy will be perceived as beneficial in terms of reducing free energy. Thus, the sense of 
continuity can be said to be influenced from being able to perceive beneficial policies and seeing the coherence 
of one's actions across past, present and future. 
 A possible objection to the common understanding of a locked past and a blocked future in depression is 
that this stands in contrast to rumination, which often accompanies depression (APA, 2013). “Rumination is a 
form of perseverative cognition that focuses on negative content, generally past and present, and results in 
emotional distress” (Sansone & Sansone, 2012, p. 29). With rumination as a symptom of depression, one can 
point out that time is not fixed in the present: the depressed is engrossed in monotonous thoughts about past events. 
Here, Heidegger's distinction between the past possessing the character of having been or not is useful to 
understand why, despite rumination, time is experienced as stopped for many depressed people. In the 
Heideggerian understanding, the depressed person through rumination relates to the past as a finished time. If the 
past is to have a character of having been as an ecstatic phase of temporality, this requires the past to have an 
effect on the present by informing Dasein what is needed to realize projects of the future (BT, p. 377). As described 
above by both theories, the depressed person is limited in his options for action. Thus, it is difficult to create new 
memories and experiences that can take part in the repertoire of the past. In this way, Dasein is still locked in the 
present, as Dasein can only revisit memories that have no meaningful influence on Dasein’s future course. 
 
5.5 Discrepancies regarding the role of mood 
Before discussing the difference between FEP’s and Heidegger’s notions regarding the function of mood in 
depression, it is worth pointing out that mood within the FEP framework (Clark et al., 2018) and mood in the 
Heideggerian sense are far from being identical. Heidegger (BT, pp. 172-175) understands mood as the very 
prerequisite for perceiving possibilities in the world, making mood the ontological basis for more concrete 
psychological phenomena (such as emotions) to occur at all for Dasein (cf. 4.4). In contrast FEP theoreticians like 
Clark et al. (2018) use the term mood interchangeably as general prerequisite aspects of mood and for mood 
understood as a specific emotion. 
 Furthermore, Heidegger's concept of mood is not a quantitative spectrum ranging from low to high mood, 
but rather entails qualitative differences comparable to moods in a song (Svenaeus, 2005). It is not inconceivable 
that mood, as Clark et al. (2018) suggest, has a negative valence if the agent in this mood anticipates that his 
actions will not be adaptive in minimizing future free energy. Conceptualizing mood as a result of these 
projections is, however, to turn the relation of the concept upside down according to Heidegger's interpretation. 
According to Heidegger, mood connects the subject and world as a being-in-the-world (Fuchs, 2013) by 
constituting Dasein's openness to the world (BT, pp. 175-176). In this way, mood is the very basis for which 
 
15 
 
options the agent can and cannot project, as well as being fundamental to the possible projections made by the 
agent regarding the adaptivity of future actions. 
 According to Clark et al. (2018), mood also functions as feedback to the system regarding how it 
performs compared to how it was expected to perform (cf. 3.2.2). Conversely, mood functioning as feedback is 
simply not part of Heidegger's concept, as mood does not serve the purpose of optimizing the actions of Dasein 
(BT, pp. 175-176). 
 
5.6 A lack of affordances and opportunities in depression 
The concept affordance springs from the Heideggerian term serviceability (BT, e.g. p. 107) and has later informed 
former dominant psychological theories of perception (e.g. Gibson, 1979) and the current dominant theory of 
perception entailed in predictive coding accounts, closely linked with FEP. Thus, despite methodological and 
disciplinary differences, the theories naturally reach a certain degree of uniformity when accounting for the 
connections between affordances and perceived opportunities. 
 Anhedonia can be conceptualized as a lack of affordances in the depressive experience of the world. Both 
the conceptualizations given by Ramstead et al. (2020) within the FEP framework and Ratcliffe's (2015) 
phenomenological analysis suggest this. In the Heideggerian terminology, the ongoing ready-at-hand like 
significance of things will disappear. If this happens to most things in the world, things will appear equally 
(un)important and inviting equally (little) action (cf. 4.4). In such cases, anhedonia is, according to Ratcliffe 
(2015), an expression of the depressed person's perceived distance from the world, the content of which is 
perceived as present-at-hand. Within the FEP framework, it is suggested that affordances perceived by the 
depressed person can be quantified in flat rather than rich affordance landscapes. Flat affordance landscapes 
indicate that the agent cannot perceive possible actions where high confidence in their ability in minimizing future 
free energy can be attributed. This idea converges with Ratcliffe's (2015) phenomenological description of loss of 
depth in perceiving relevant affordances during depression. 
 FEP accounts like Clark et al. (2018) and phenomenological explanations of depression (e.g. Ratcliffe, 
2015; Solomon, 2016) converge regarding the depressed individual's prediction of the future state. According to 
Clark et al. (2018) the depressed person predicts with great precision that the world is an unpredictable place. 
Although the prediction is accurate, it is not adaptive as the person cannot develop action plans that minimize free 
energy. In a similar way, in the phenomenological interpretation, the depressed person shows rigidity in his 
predictions/projection of his own condition – one cannot imagine getting well again (e.g. Midgley et al., 2015; 
Ratcliffe, 2015; Solomon, 2016). It follows that depressed individuals lose a sense of contingency according to 
Wyllie (2005), which might be why they often cannot imagine actions in the present bringing them out of their 
condition in the future. In this way, facticity dominates over the possibility of change (cf. 4.4). From the 
perspective of both theories, the consequence of such rigidity about the development of the future is that the future 
in a certain sense is closed off. If the future is not a place that offers possibilities for a different state, affordances 
to pursue in the present cannot be awakened. This creates a passivity and inactivity that ultimately confirms the 
depressed individual in his prediction regarding the unchanging state of himself and the world. Thus, the theories 
fundamentally agree on the impact of future possibilities on perceived affordances in the present. 
 
 
16 
 
6 Limitations  
6.1 The general validity of phenomenology 
In a critical assessment of Being and Time, Nordentoft (1961) points out that the existentials Heidegger examines 
through his phenomenological method are only provable at the individual level. However, Heidegger assumes 
that all people have the same conditions of existence. Such an assumption cannot be supported. Each individual 
must assess for himself whether these existentials are true in his life. That this can only take place on an individual 
level follows logically from phenomenology as a method, as it is based on a first-person perspective (Nordentoft, 
1961). This criticism spills over into the use of Heidegger in the conceptualization of depression. Although 
Ratcliffe's (e.g. 2009, 2012b, 2015) Heidegger-inspired analysis of the phenomenology of depression may 
resonate with certain individuals, it can never be declared universal before being evaluated by the individual 
person. One cannot scientifically demonstrate a certain structure of being when this is declared not to be 
something, but a way (Olesen, 2013), which is the focal point of the next section. 
6.2 Heidegger and science as activity 
The use of Heidegger in questions of a logical positivist nature borders on standing in opposition to the project of 
Being and Time itself (Svenaeus, 2005). While some have attempted to incorporate Heidegger into empirical 
sciences (e.g. Wheeler, 2005; Ramstead et al., 2020), readers of Heidegger are often fundamentally skeptical of 
such applications (e.g. Ratcliffe, 2012a; Rehberg, 2012). This disagreement consists in what statements regarding 
reality, man is believed to be able to arrive at through scientific endeavors. According to Wheeler (2005), 
Heidegger believes scientific practice to be one of the few human activities that enable us to transcend the context 
of our projects – in doing so we can gain epistemic access to fully objective, actor-independent entities and 
properties. Ratcliffe (2012a) disagrees in this regard. He argues that Wheeler's (2005) interpretation is based on a 
conceptualization of reality that is fundamentally present-at-hand – i.e. that reality is actually given first, while 
science manages to abstract from man's (ready-at-hand) relation to the world. We can approach the world as 
present-at-hand, but Heidegger will point out that this is not an exhaustive characterization (Ratcliffe, 2012a). 
Regardless of scientific ambitions, Dasein cannot go about things without having a meaningful world as 
background (Ratcliffe, 2012a). 
 In our reading of Heidegger, we must agree with Ratcliffe’s (2012a) rather than Wheeler's interpretation. 
Wheeler's conceptualization of the objective world independent of man's relation to things is reminiscent of the 
Kantian division of “reality as it really is” versus “reality as it appears to us” (Kant, 1781/2002). Behind the 
phenomena as they appear to us there is according to Heidegger, essentially nothing (Wind, 1974), why removing 
human activity to get to a raw reality becomes meaningless (BT, pp. 93-94). Dasein cannot acquire an objective, 
timeless perspective on the world, as it is incomprehensible to Dasein (Olesen, 2013). Dasein is only able to 
understand and perceive what something is if it is in relation to Dasein (BT, e.g. pp. 182, 250). According to these 
lines of thought, when science tries to go behind the phenomena, it only uncovers more phenomena, and not being 
itself – a condition Arendt (1978/2019, p. 64) describes as the problem of science as well as for most of the 
philosophical tradition. It is precisely this tradition that Heidegger seeks to break in Being and Time (pp.  46-49). 
 Heidegger's skepticism towards (technological) science is in a way advantageous to him, since his 
existential ontology cannot be tested by any scientific method. How do you examine the existential being, when 
 
17 
 
it is not a thing? However, it is at no time a declared goal for Heidegger that the results of his analysis must be 
scientifically substantiated: with phenomenology, the philosopher seeks to gain a pre-scientific insight produced 
by a pure, intentional consciousness directed at a pre-scientific subject (Wind, 1974). “Pure” meaning an attempt 
at avoiding presuppositions and empirical contamination (Svenaeus, 2005, p. 203). 
 
7 Future work 
Firstly, this paper is limited to not deal with social aspects of depression, why we do not deal with the depressed 
person’s connectedness to others (cf. 1). This could be an interesting task for a Heideggerian analysis as Heidegger 
identifies the concept of the One is an important existential intimately related to other people (Wind, 1974). Thus, 
Heidegger incorporates social aspects in his analysis of Dasein, and these have previously been utilized to 
characterize mental disorders as an existential disturbance in one's openness to normativity (Schmid, 2018). 
 Social characteristics of depression are outlined within the FEP framework i.a. in an evolutionary thesis 
called the social risk hypothesis that considers depression as an evolved adaptive response to threatening social 
conditions (Allen & Badcock, 2003). That depression is closely associated with changes in the social world (Gotlib 
& Hammen, 2014) is empirically well supported (Slavich & Irwin, 2014; Sun et al., 2013; Vialou et al., 2013; 
Weissman et al., 2015). This is particularly interesting to investigate, as conceptual parallels exist between FEP 
and the social risk hypothesis, as social risk technically corresponds to uncertainty referring to expected surprise 
or free energy (Badcock et al., 2017). Thus, the interdisciplinary framework of the present paper, which utilizes 
concepts lent by the Heideggerian analysis and the FEP framework, can with good reason be extended to describe 
a social human world relation. 
 Secondly, connectedness to the self constitutes another major limitation of this paper. We propose that 
connectedness to the self advantageously can include bodily aspects because the relation between the self and 
depression according to Svenaeus' further development of Heidegger's phenomenology focuses on the lived body's 
capacity to resonate with the world (Svenaeus, 2013). This is particularly relevant, as Heidegger remarkably omits 
the body in his analysis of Dasein (BT, p. 143), as he considers the phenomenon of the body to be the most difficult 
(Cerbone, 2000). However, later thinkers inspired by Heidegger, have easily been able to place the body in 
Heidegger's existential ontology (e.g. Fuchs, 2005, 2013; Merleau-Ponty, 1945/1997). Within the FEP framework, 
specialized embodied formulations have been developed (Clark, 2015). Furthermore, computational theorists have 
developed active inference formulations of interoceptive, exteroceptive and proprioceptive inference in general 
(Allen & Friston, 2016) and specifically in relation to depression (Fabry, 2019). Furthermore, the DSM-5 
emphasizes the physicality in the other depression criteria – i.a. in the form of sleep disturbances, fatigue and 
motor agitation/retardation (APA, 2013). Thus, an interdisciplinary framework that includes FEP and post 
Heideggerian phenomenological developments in the notion of depressive bodily relations is not only possible. It 
is indeed necessary to capture the depressed person’s relation to the self. 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
8 Conclusion 
Both theories bring forward the possibility of characterizing a dynamic human world relation relevant to 
reformulating psychopathologies like depression in order to capture how the depressed individual’s connectedness 
to the world is altered. The Free Energy Principle generally conceptualizes the human world relation as a dynamic 
process in a self-organizing system that attempts to minimize entropy from the surroundings by predicting the 
states of the world. To Heidegger, the human world relation constitutes Dasein as a being-in-the-world, where the 
world gets its meaning from Dasein's care. Dasein does this by projecting possibilities of the future based on its 
facticity. The conceptualization of depressed time given by the FEP can be said to be characterized by a 
discontinuous perception of time. This is presumably achieved due to a lack of perceived entropy-minimizing 
affordances affected by the depressive mood. In Heideggerian terms, the depressed person experiences time as 
stopped, as the depressed does not project possibilities for the future. Without these, the world remains without 
affordances, as the world cannot have meaning if Dasein does not have projects to care for. This characterizes the 
depressive mood and its existential structure. Despite differences between the theories, both theories generally 
conceptualize the human world relation in a way where man is living in an anticipatory manner in relation to their 
world. We argue that it is precisely these predictions or projections that determine which affordances/possibilities 
man perceives as relevant in the world – and that this is largely determined by mood. When this temporal or 
anticipatory function is inhibited, the symptomatic experiences of depression follow as experiences of a locked 
now and a lack of perceived affordances and possibilities emerge. 
 
Acknowledgements: We are very grateful to Martin Vestergaard Kristiansen for helpful comments that were of 
great assistance in writing this paper. 
 
Declarations: The authors have no financial or non-financial interests to disclose. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
References 
 
Aday, J. S., Mitzkovitz, C. M., Bloesch, E. K., Davoli, C. C., & Davis, A. K. (2020). Long-term effects 
of psychedelic drugs: A systematic review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 113, 179–
189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.03.017 
Allen, M., & Friston, K. J. (2016). From cognitivism to autopoiesis: towards a computational framework 
for the embodied mind. Synthese, 195(6), 2459–2482. htttps://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-
1288-5 
Allen, N. B., & Badcock, P. (2003). The social risk hypothesis of depressed mood: evolutionary, 
psychosocial, and neurobiological perspectives. Psychological Bulletin, 129(6), 887–913. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.129.6.887 
American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic and Stastical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th 
Edition American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Andersen, K., Carhart‐Harris, R., Nutt, D., & Erritzoe, D. (2020). Therapeutic effects of classic 
serotonergic psychedelics: A systematic review of modern‐era clinical studies. Acta 
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 143(2), 101-118. doi: 10.1111/acps.13249 
Arendt, H. (1978/2019). Åndens liv. Aarhus: Forlaget Klim. (Originalt arbejde udgivet i 1978). 
Badcock, P. , Davey, C., Whittle, S., Allen, N. & Friston, K. (2017). The Depressed Brain: An 
Evolutionary Systems Theory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 21. (3), 182-194. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2017.01.005 
Baltieri, M., & Buckley, C. (2019). The dark room problem in predictive processing and active inference, 
a legacy of cognitivism? The 2019 Conference On Artificial Life . 
 doi: 10.1162/isal_a_00137 
Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S & Hamilton, P.  (2016). An active inference theory of allostasis and 
interoception in depression. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series 
B, Biological Sciences, 371(1708). https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0011 
Belser, A. B., Agin-Liebes, G., Swift, T.C., Terrana, S., Devenot, N., Friedman, H.L., et al. (2017). 
Patient experiences of psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy: an interpretative phenomenological 
analysis. Journal of Humanistic Psychology , 57(4), 354–388. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0022167817706884 
Ben-Naim, A. (2007). Entropy Demystified: The Second Law Reduced to Plain Common Sense, World. 
Scientific, Hackensack, NJ. 
Bennett, M. R., & Hacker, P. M. S. (2003). Philosophical Foundations of Neuroscience. Oxford: 
Blackwell Publishing. 
Berkovich-Ohana, A., Dor-Ziderman, Y., Trautwein, F.-M., Schweitzer, Y., Nave, O., Fulder,                
 S., & Ataria, Y. (2020). The Hitchhiker’s Guide to Neurophenomenology – The Case of 
Studying Self Boundaries With Meditators. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 1680. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01680 
 
20 
 
Branchi, I. (2011). The double edged sword of neural plasticity: increasing serotonin levels leads to both 
greater vulnerability to depression and improved capacity to recover.          
 Psychoneuroendocrinology, 36, 339–351. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2010.08.011 
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J. & Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not a scientist: the free-
energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective, Synthese, 195(6). 
 doi: 10.1007/s11229-016-1239-1. 
Bruineberg, J., & Rietveld, E. (2014). Self-organization, free energy minimization, and optimal grip on 
a field of affordances. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 599. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00599 
Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2018). The entropic brain - revisited. Neuropharmacology, 142,       
 167–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.03.010 
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Erritzoe, D., Haijen, E., Kaelen, M., and Watts, R. (2018). Psychedelics        and 
connectedness. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 235:547–550. 
Carhart-Harris, R. L., & Friston, K. J. (2019). REBUS and the anarchic brain: Toward a unified model 
of the brain action of psychedelics. Pharmacological Reviews, 71(3), 316–344. 
https://doi.org/10.1124/pr.118.017160 
Carhart-Harris, R., & Goodwin, G. (2017). The Therapeutic Potential of Psychedelic Drugs: Past, 
Present, and Future. Neuropsychopharmacology: Official Publication of the American College 
of Neuropsychopharmacology , 42(11), 2105–2113. 
 https://doi.org/10.1038/npp. 2017.84 
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Leech, R., Hellyer, P.  J., Shanahan, M., Feilding, A., Tagliazucchi, E., Chialvo, 
D. R., & Nutt, D. (2014). The entropic brain: a theory of conscious states informed by 
neuroimaging research with psychedelic drugs. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 20. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00020 
Cerbone, D. R. (2000). Heidegger and dasein’s ‘bodily nature’: What is the hidden problematic? 
International Journal of Philosophical Studies , 8(2), 209–230. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09672550050084018  
Chekroud, A. M. (2015). Unifying treatments for depression: an application of the Free Energy Principle. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 153. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00153 
Clark, A. (2015). Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford. 
Clark, J. E., Watson, S., & Friston, K. J. (2018). What is mood? A computational perspective. 
Psychological Medicine, 48(14), 2277–2284. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291718000430 
 Dayan, P., Hinton, G. E., & Neal, R. M. (1995). The Helmholtz machine. Neural Computation, 
7, 889–904. 
Eizenman, M., Yu, L. H., Grupp, L., Eizenman, E., Ellenbogen, M., Gemar, M., & Levitan, D. (2003). A 
naturalistic visual scanning approach to assess selective attention in          major 
depressive disorder. Psychiatry Research , 118(2), 117–128. 
 doi: 10.1016/S0165-1781(03)00068-4 
 
21 
 
Eldar, E. & Rutledge, R. & Dolan, R. & Niv, Y. (2015). Mood as Representation of Momentum. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 20(1), 15–24.   doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2015.07.010. 
Engel, A. K., Friston, K. J., & Kragic, D. (2016). The Pragmatic Turn – Toward Action-Oriented Views 
in Cognitive Science. Strüngmann Forum Reports, (18). 
Fabry, R. (2019). Into the dark room: a predictive processing account of major depressive disorder. 
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences , 19(4), 685-704. 
 doi: 10.1007/s11097-019-09635-4 
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy. Frontiers in        
 Human Neuroscience, 4. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215. 
Friston, K. J. (2005). A theory of cortical responses.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 360(1456), 815–836. doi:10.1098/rstb.2005.1622 
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
11(2), 127–138. doi:10.1038/nrn2787 
Friston K. J. (2012). The history of the future of the Bayesian brain. Neuroimage.       62(2):1230-3. 
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.004. 
Friston, K. J., Rosch, R., Parr, T., Price, C., & Bowman, H., (2017). Deep temporal models and active 
inference. Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews 77, 388-402. 
Friston, K. J., & Stephan, K. E. (2007). Free-energy and the brain. Synthese, 159(3):417–458. 
Friston, K. J., Shiner, T., FitzGerald, T., Galea, J. M.,Adams, R., Brown, H., et al. (2012a). Dopamine, 
affordance and active inference. PLoS Computational Biology, 8(1). 
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002327 
Friston, K. J,, Thornton, C., & Clark, A. (2012b). Free-Energy Minimization and the Dark-Room 
Problem. Frontiers In Psychology, 3. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00130 
Fuchs, T. (2005). Overcoming Dualism. Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 12(2), 115-117. 
https://www.muse.jhu.edu/article/190380. 
Fuchs, T. (2005). Implicit and Explicit Temporality. Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 12(3), 195-
198. doi:10.1353/ppp. 2006.0004. 
Fuchs, T. (2013). Temporality and psychopathology. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 12(1), 
75-104. doi: 
Fuchs, T. (2019). The life-world of persons with mood disorders. In G. Stanghellini, M. R. Broome, A. 
V. Fernandez, P.  Fusar-Poli, A. Raballo, & R. Rosfort (Eds.), Oxford handbook of 
phenomenological psychopathology; oxford handbook of         phenomenological 
psychopathology (pp.  617-633). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
 doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.07.009 
Gibson, J. J. (1979/1986). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. New York:       Psychology 
Press. 
Olesen, S. G. (2013). Vejledning til Heidegger. Odense: Syddansk Universitetsforlag. 
Gotlib, I. H., & Hammen, C. (2014). Handbook of Depression (3. udg.), New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Gregory, R. L. (1980). Perception as hypothesis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 290, 
181-197. 
 
22 
 
Heidegger, M. (2001). Zollikon Seminars: Protocols – Conversations – Letters (eds. M. Boss,  F. 
Trans.Mayr, & R. Askay). Evanston: Northwestern University Press. 
Heidegger, M. (2008). Being and Time. HarperCollins. (Original work published in 1926). 
Helmholtz, H. (1866/1962). Concerning the perceptions in general - Treatise on Physiological Optics, 
3, Dover Publications, New York. (Originalt arbejde udgivet i 1866). 
Hoerl, C. (2015). Seeing Motion and Apparent Motion. European Journal for Philosophy of Science, 
23(3), 676-702. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0378.2012.00565.x 
Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199682737.001.0001 
Holmes, J., & Nolte, T. (2019). “Surprise” and the Bayesian Brain: Implications for Psychotherapy 
Theory and Practice. Frontiers in Psychology, 10. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00592 
Huys, Q. J., Pizzagalli, D. A, Bogdan, R., and Dayan, P.  (2013). Mapping anhedonia onto reinforcement 
learning: a behavioural meta-analysis. Biology of Mood and Anxiety Disorders, 3(1), 12. doi: 
10.1186/2045-5380-3-12 
Joffily, M., & Coricelli, G. (2013). Emotional valence and the free-energy principle. PLoS Computational 
Biology, 9(6). 
Kant, I. (1781/2002). Kritik af den rene fornuft. Frederiksberg: Det lille Forlag. (Originalt arbejde udgivet 
i 1781). 
Karp, D. A. (1996). Speaking of sadness: Depression, disconnection, and the meanings of        
 illness. Oxford University Press. 
Kiverstein, J., Miller, M. & Rietveld, E. (2020). How mood tunes prediction: a neurophenomenological 
account of mood and its disturbance in major depression.          Neuroscience Of 
Consciousness, 2020(1). doi: 10.1093/nc/niaa003 
Kiverstein, J., Rietveld, E., Slagter, & H., Denys, D. (2019). Obsessive Compulsive Disorder: A 
pathology of self-confidence. Trends in Cognitive Science, 23, 369-72. 
Knill, D., & Pouget, A. (2004). The Bayesian brain: the role of uncertainty in neural coding and 
computation. Trends In Neurosciences, 27(12), 712-719.      doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2004.10.007 
Larsen, R. J., Buss, D., M., Wismeijer, A., Song, J., & van den Berg, S. (2021). Personality psychology: 
Domains of knowledge about human nature. McGraw Hill Higher Education. 
Luoma J., Chwyl C., Bathje G. Davis, A., & Lancelotta R. (2020). A Meta-Analysis of  Placebo-
Controlled Trials of Psychedelic-Assisted Therapy. Journal Of Psychoactive Drugs, 52(4), 289-
299. doi: 10.1080/02791072.2020.1769878 
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A computational approach. San-Francisco, CA: Freeman & Co. 
Matthews, G. R., & Antes, J. R. (1992). Visual attention and depression: cognitive biases in the eye 
fixations of the dysphoric and the nondepressed. Cognitive Therapy and Research. 16, 359–371. 
doi: 10.1007/BF01183287 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1945/1997). Kroppens fænomenologi. Frederiksberg: Det lille forlag. (Originalt 
arbejde udgivet i 1945). 
 
23 
 
Meynen, G. (2011). Depression, possibilities, and competence: A phenomenological perspective. 
Theoretical Medicine & Bioethics , 32 (3), 181–193. 
 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11017-010-9171-8 
Midgley, N., Parkinson, S., Holmes, J., Stapley, E., Eatough, V., & Target, M. (2015). Beyond a 
diagnosis: The experience of depression among clinically referred adolescents. Journal of 
Adolescence, 44, 269-279. 
Miller, M., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2020). Embodying addiction: a predictive processing account. 
Brain and Cognition, 138, 1-10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2019.105495 
Neubauer, S., Hublin, J.-J., & Gunz, p.  (2018). The evolution of modern human brain shape. Science 
Advances, 4(1). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aao5961 
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2019). Abnormal psychology, packaged with Connect access cards (8. udgave). 
McGraw-Hill Education. 
Nordentoft, S. (1961). Heideggers opgør med den filosofiske tradition kritisk belyst. København: Hans 
Reitzel. 
Parr, T., Lancelot, D. C., & Friston, K. J. (2020). Markov Blankets, Information Geometry and Stochastic 
Thermodynamics. Philosophical Transactions. Series A. Mathematical, Physical, and 
Engineering Sciences, 378(2164). doi: 10.1098/rsta.2019.0159 
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., & Friston, F. (2022). Active Inference – The Free Energy Principle in Mind, Brain, 
and Behavior. Cambridge Massachusetts: The MIT Press. 
Quattrocki, E., & Friston, K. (2014). Autism, oxytocin and interoception. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 47, 410–430. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.09.012 
Rabinovich, M. I., Friston, K. J., & Varona, P. (2012). Principles of Brain Dynamics: Global State 
Interactions. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, Print. 
Ramstead, M. J. D., & Wiese, W., Miller, M., & Friston, K. J. (2020). Deep neurophenomenology: An 
active inference account of some features of conscious experience and of their disturbance in 
major depressive disorder. [Preprint]. 
Rao, R. P.  N., & Ballard, H. D. (1999). Predictive coding in the visual cortex: A functional           
 interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nature Neuroscience (2), 79-87. 
Ratcliffe, M. (2012a). There Can Be No Cognitive Science of Dasein. I: J. Kiverstein & M. Wheeler 
(eds.). Heidegger and Cognitive Science. New Directions in Philosophy and Cognitive Science 
(pp.  135-156). Basingstoke: Palgrave-Macmillan. doi: 10.1007/978-1-137-00610-3_4 
Ratcliffe, M. (2012b). Varieties of Temporal Experience in Depression. The Journal of Medicine and 
Philosophy 37(2), 114-38. 
Ratcliffe, M. (2013). Why mood matters. In M. A. Wrathall (Ed.), The Cambridge Companion to 
Heidegger’s Being and Time (pp.  157–176). Cambridge University Press. 
Ratcliffe, M. (2015). Experiences of depression: A study in phenomenology. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Rehberg, A. (2012). Heidegger and Cognitive Science - Aporetic Reflections. I: J. Kiverstein, & M. 
Wheeler (Eds.), Heidegger and Cognitive Science. New Directions in Philosophy and Cognitive 
Science (pp.  157-175). Basingstoke: Palgrave-Macmillan. 
 
24 
 
Rikhye, R. V., Guntupalli, J. S., Gothoskar, N., Lázaro-Gredilla, M., & George, D. (2019). Memorize-
Generalize: An online algorithm for learning higher-order sequential structure with cloned 
Hidden Markov Models. In bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/764456 
Rutledge, R. B., Skandali, N., Dayan, P., & Raymond, D. (2014). A computational and neural model of 
momentary subjective well-being. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(33) 
12252-12257. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1407535111 
Sansone, R. A., & Sansone, L. A. (2012). Rumination: relationships with physical health. Innovations in 
Clinical Neuroscience, 9(2), 29–34. 
Scheidegger, M. (2021). Psychedelic Medicines: A Paradigm Shift from Pharmacological Substitution 
Towards Transformation-Based Psychiatry. Ayahuasca Healing And            Science, 43-
61. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-55688-4_3 
Schmid, J. (2018). Disordered existentiality: Mental illness and Heidegger’s philosophy of Dasein. 
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences,  17, 485–502. 
 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-017-9523-1 
Sella, G., & Hirsh, A. E. (2005). The application of statistical physics to evolutionary biology. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102(27), 
9541–9546. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0501865102 
Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 17(11), 565–573. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.007 
Seth A. K., & Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 371(1708). 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0007 
Seymour, B., Daw, N. D., Roiser, J. P., Dayan, P., & Dolan, R. (2012). Serotonin selectively          
 modulates reward value in human decision-making. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official 
Journal of the Society for Neuroscience , 32(17), 5833–5842. 
 https://doi.org/10.1523/jneurosci.0053-12.2012 
Slavich, G. M., & Irwin, M. R. (2014). From stress to inflammation and major depressive disorder: a 
social signal transduction theory of depression. Psychological Bulletin, 140(3), 774–815. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0035302 
Smith, J. A., & Rhodes, J. E. (2015). Being depleted and being shaken: An interpretative 
phenomenological analysis of the experiential features of a first episode of depression. 
Psychology and Psychotherapy. Theory, Research and Practice, 88, 197-209. 
 https://doi-org.ez.statsbiblioteket.dk:12048/10.1111/papt.12034 
Solomon, R. (1993). The passions: Emotions and the Meaning of Life (Revised edition). Cambridge, UK: 
Hakkett. 
Solomon, A. (2016). Noonday demon: An Anatomy of Depression. New York City: Vintage Publishing. 
Spiegelberg, H. (1972). Phenomenology in Psychology and Psychiatry. Evanston:       Northwestern 
University Press. 
 
25 
 
Stanghellini, G., Ballerini, M., Presenza, S., Mancini, M., Northoff, G., & Cutting, J. (2017). Abnormal 
time experiences in major depression: An empirical qualitative study. Psychopathology, 50(2), 
125–140. https://doi.org/10.1159/000452892 
Sun, H., Kennedy, P.  J., Nestler, E. J. (2013). Epigenetics of the depressed brain: role of histone 
acetylation and methylation. Neuropsychopharmacology, 38, 124-137. 
Sun, Z. & Firestone, F. (2020). The Dark Room Problem. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 24(5),   346-
348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.02.006. 
Svenaeus, F. (2005). Phenomenology and Psychiatry: A Contemporary Diagnosis Introducing         
 the Work of Thomas Fuchs. Nordic Journal of Philosophy, 6(2), 202-211. 
https://doi.org/10.1515/SATS.2005.202 
Svenaus, F. (2013). Depression and the Self - Bodily Resonance and Attuned       Being-in-the-World. 
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 20(7-8), 15-32. 
Tellenbach, H. (1980). Melancholy: History of a problem, endogeneity, typology, pathogenesis, clinical 
considerations. Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne. University Press. 
Thompson, E., Lutz, A., & Cosmelli, D. (2005). Neurophenomenology: An Introduction for 
Neurophilosophers. In A. Brook & K. Akins (Eds.), Cognition and the brain: The philosophy 
and neuroscience movement (pp.  40–97). Cambridge University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511610608.003 
Van de Cruys, S. (2017). Affective Value in the Predictive Mind. 10.15502/9783958573253. In book: 
Philosophy and Predictive ProcessingChapter: 24Publisher: MIND GroupEditors: Metzinger, 
Thomas K. and Wiese, Wanja Vialou, V., Feng, J., Robison, A. J., Nestler, E. J. (2013). 
Epigenetic mechanisms of depression and antidepressants action. Annual Review of 
Pharmacology and Toxicology, 53, 59-87. 
Vogel, D. H. V., Krämer, K., Schoofs, T., Kupke, C., & Vogeley, K. (2018). Disturbed experience of 
time in depression-evidence from content analysis. Frontiers in Human                  
 Neuroscience, 12, 66. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2018.00066 
Watts, R., Day, C., Krzanowski, J., Nutt, D., & Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2017). Patients’       accounts of 
increased “connectedness” and “acceptance” after psilocybin for treatment-resistant depression. 
Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 57(5), 520–564. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022167817709585 
Weissman, M., Wickramaratne, P., Nomura, Y., Warner, V., Verdeli, H., Pilowsky, D., Grillon, C., & 
Bruder, G. (2005). Families at High and Low Risk for Depression. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 62(1), 29–36. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.62.1.29 
Wheeler (2005). Reconstructing the Cognitive World: The Next Step.  Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Wiest, G. (2012). Neural and mental hierarchies. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 516. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00516 
Wiese, W. (2017). Action Is Enabled by Systematic Misrepresentations. Erkenntnis, 82, 1233–1252. doi: 
10.1007/s10670-016-9867-x. 
Wind, H. (1974). Erkendelse og eksistens. København: Gyldendal. 
 
26 
 
World Health Organization (2017). Depression and Other Common Mental Disorders: Global Health 
Estimates. https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/254610/WHO-MSD-MER-2017.2-
eng.pdf 
Wyllie, M. (2005). Lived time and psychopathology. Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology, 12(3), 173-
185. doi:https://doi.org/10.1353/ppp. 2006.0017 
Zhdanava, M., Pilon, D., Ghelerter, I., Chow, W., Joshi, K., Lefebvre, P., & Sheehan, J. J.(2021). The 
prevalence and national burden of treatment-resistant depression and     major depressive 
disorder in the United States. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 82(2). 
https://doi.org/10.4088/JCp. 20m13699 
 