Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 1 of 39
Neuroscience
Inference technique for the synaptic
conductances in rhythmically active
networks and application to
respiratory central pattern generation
circuits
Yaroslav I Molkov , Anke Borgmann, Hidehiko Koizumi, Noriyuki Hama, Ruli Zhang, Jeffrey C Smith
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Neuroscience Institute, Georgia State University, Atlanta, United States
• Cellular and Systems Neurobiology Section, NINDS, NIH, Bethesda, United States • Department of Neural and
Muscular Physiology, Shimane University School of Medicine, Izumo, Japan
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_access
Copyright information
eLife Assessment
The paper describes a novel approach for inferring features of synaptic networks
from recordings of individual cells within the network. The paper will be a valuable
contribution to those studying central pattern generators, including those involved in
respiration. However, the theoretical approach to drawing inferences regarding the
underlying synaptic currents is incomplete as it relies on unsupported simplifying
assumptions.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2.sa3
Abstract
Unraveling synaptic interactions between excitatory and inhibitory interneurons within
rhythmic neural circuits, such as central pattern generation (CPG) circuits for rhythmic motor
behaviors, is critical for deciphering circuit interactions and functional architecture, which is
a major problem for understanding how neural circuits operate. Here we present a general
method for extracting and separating patterns of inhibitory and excitatory synaptic
conductances at high temporal resolution from single neuronal intracellular recordings in
rhythmically active networks. These post-synaptic conductances reflect the combined
synaptic inputs from the key interacting neuronal populations and can reveal the functional
connectome of the active circuits. To illustrate the applicability of our analytic technique, we
employ our method to infer the synaptic conductance profiles in identified rhythmically
active interneurons within key microcircuits of the mammalian (mature rat) brainstem
respiratory CPG and provide a perspective on how our approach can resolve the functional
interactions and circuit organization of these interneuron populations. We demonstrate the
versatility of our approach, which can be applied to any other rhythmic circuits where
conditions allow for neuronal intracellular recordings.
Reviewed Preprint
v2 • March 13, 2025
Revised by authors
Reviewed Preprint
v1 • October 25, 2024
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 2 of 39
Introduction
Rhythmic neural circuits, which are ubiquitous in nervous systems (Buzsáki, 2006     ), generate
spatiotemporal patterns of activity by synaptic interactions between neuronal populations, and
unraveling the synaptic inputs to circuit neurons at high temporal resolution in the active
networks is a major experimental problem in neurobiology for understanding circuit functional
dynamics and architecture. Solving this problem ultimately requires electrophysiological methods
to extract dynamic patterns of synaptic conductances in post-synaptic neurons from intracellular
recordings during network activity. These patterns often involve temporally complex excitatory
and inhibitory synaptic inputs, and thus methods to extract these inputs must be able to delineate
the excitatory and inhibitory components, which can be superimposed during circuit activity,
complicating the problem. This study presents a robust and versatile method to extract and
separate inhibitory and excitatory synaptic conductance patterns from intracellular recordings.
The technique is applicable to any periodically active network where the oscillation period
significantly exceeds the interspike intervals of individual neurons. A synaptic conductance
pattern refers to its temporal profile within a single network oscillation cycle. We designed our
method to be compatible with various experimental setups, including current-clamp and voltage-
clamp protocols, by focusing on the fundamental principles of electrophysiology and network
dynamics. Our technique ensures high-resolution temporal profiling of synaptic inputs, making it
adaptable to a wide range of rhythmically active neuronal circuits such as vertebrate and
invertebrate motor pattern generation (CPG) networks (e.g., (Calabrese & Marder, 2024     )), and
cortical circuit rhythms (Yuste et al., 2005     ). This generalizability highlights the potential of our
approach to provide new insights into the functional organization and dynamics of diverse
rhythmic neural circuits. Our approach extends previously proposed methods for extracting
dynamic patterns of input synaptic conductances from intracellular recordings from neurons in a
variety of circuits (Borg-Graham et al., 1998     ; Anderson et al., 2000     ; Shu et al., 2003     ; Berg et
al., 2007     ; Endo & Kiehn, 2008     ; Wright & Calabrese, 2011     ) by providing nearly continuous,
high-resolution readouts of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic conductances that are essential for
deciphering circuit functional interactions.
To illustrate the utility of our technique, we applied this to circuits in the mammalian brainstem
respiratory CPG, which is the fundamental rhythmic neural system that generates and controls
breathing movements that are critical for homeostatic regulation of oxygen, carbon dioxide and
pH in the brain and body (Feldman & Smith, 1995     ; Richter & Smith, 2014     ). These circuits are
continuously active in various experimental preparations and the experimental accessibility of
these circuits provides the opportunity to apply our methods to investigate cellular and network
electrophysiological processes underlying rhythmic motor pattern generation in a physiologically
important mammalian system (Richter & Spyer, 2001     ; Smith et al., 2013     ). The rhythmic
patterns of alternating inspiratory and expiratory phase neuronal activities that coordinate
activity of spinal and cranial motoneurons during breathing originate within interacting pontine-
medullary excitatory and inhibitory circuits in the brainstem (Cohen, 1979     ; Bianchi et al.,
1995     ; Feldman & Smith, 1995     ; Richter, 1996     ; Smith et al., 2013     ). We have targeted specific
respiratory microcircuits in the medulla of mature rat brainstem-spinal cord preparations in situ
containing a variety of neuronal phenotypes and synaptic interactions that are key to the
operation of the respiratory CPG. This allowed us to perform single neuron intracellular
recordings from various neuronal types in different microcircuits, test different recording
protocols to assess the robustness of our approach, and provides examples of how our technique
can extract complex patterns of synaptic conductances at high temporal resolution in different
types of rhythmic neurons. We illustrate how the synaptic conductance profiles throughout the
respiratory cycle imply a “functional connectome” of respiratory circuit interactions,
demonstrating the efficacy of our technique to provide novel information on circuit dynamic
organization and operation.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 3 of 39
Results
The general theoretical aspects of our approach for analyzing neuronal excitatory and inhibitory
conductances from intracellular recordings in rhythmic circuits, and their specific application to
the rhythmically active respiratory circuits, are delineated below. Our objective was to extract
synaptic conductance dependence on the phase of the network activity cycle (hereinafter referred
to as synaptic conductance profiles) representing nearly continuous readouts of excitatory and
inhibitory synaptic inputs from the neuronal recordings throughout a cycle of periodic neural
activity— the respiratory cycle in our illustration. Any periodic activity can be analyzed in the
same way that we describe in this illustration below.
Reconstruction of synaptic inputs from intracellular recordings
The reconstruction of synaptic conductance profiles is based on the current balance equation:
where C is the membrane capacitance, Vm is the membrane potential, gleak and Eleak are the
conductance and the reversal potential of the leak current respectively, gi(t) and ge(t) are
inhibitory and excitatory conductances (subject to retrieval), Ei and Ee are reversal potentials of
inhibitory and excitatory synaptic currents, and Iinj(t) is the injected current. We assume that the
membrane potential of the cell is in instantaneous equilibrium (dVm/dt = 0), which implies that the
membrane time constant C/gleak is much shorter than the time scale of the synaptic conductance
variations. This assumption defines the time resolution of our method. For example, gleak/Cratio in
the respiratory interneurons was found to be in the range of 80 to 120 pS/pF (Koizumi & Smith,
2008     ) corresponding to the membrane time constant values of about 10 ms. Synaptic inputs
originate from the periodically active network. The respiratory cycle period in our in-situ
brainstem rat preparation typically spans approximately 2 seconds (Figure 1     ), yielding a time
resolution of roughly 1/200 of the period. This approach to determining time resolution can be
similarly applied to other systems.
Another important assumption is that Equation (1)      does not include voltage-dependent
currents. This means that the equation is simplified to only consider the passive properties of the
membrane, such as resistance and capacitance. To ensure that voltage-dependent currents are
minimized during therecording, a hyperpolarizing current injection protocol is employed. This
involves injecting a negative current into the neuron, which drives the membrane potential to a
more negative value. In our test recordings the membrane potential typically held between -100
and -60 mV. At this hyperpolarized state, most voltage-gated ion channels are closed, preventing
the activation of voltage-dependent currents.
The phase of the respiratory cycle was defined as a piece-wise linear function of time in the
following way: φ(t) = (t − tk)/(tk+1 − tk), for times t between the time moments of two consecutive
inspiratory phase onsets tk and tk+1. Our approach was based on the idea that in a network
exhibiting periodic dynamics, the synaptic conductances depend on the cycle phase and not on
time explicitly, so that gi,e(t) = gi,e(φ(t)). The respiratory cycle was divided into 100 bins of phase
values, and for each bin the time moments {tik: φ(tki) ∈  [φi, φi+1]} that correspond to phases in the
bin were collected. For each phase bin i of the respiratory cycle, the relationship between the
injected current Iinj(tik) and the membrane potential Vm(tik), where tk are the times that
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 4 of 39Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 4 of 39
Figure 1.
Reconstruction of synaptic conductance profiles.
(A) An example of the intracellular recording from a rhythmic inspiratory neuron (2nd trace from top) during the stepwise
current injection (top trace) protocol that we used for our analyses. Extracellular recording of phrenic nerve activity (PNA,
bottom trace) and integrated PNA (iPNA, 4rd trace from top) are used for reference. The red trace shows a moving median
(MM) filtration with a 0.1s window of the voltage at higher voltage resolution in the 3rd trace. The MM filters out the spikes
while preserving slow voltage waves. (B) Plots of injected current vs. membrane potential of a preBötC inspiratory neuron
corresponding to three selected values of the respiratory cycle phase (φ). Straight lines of the same colors show best linear
fits. The parameters of the fits – the slope and y-intercept – are used to estimate the total resistance and the resting potential,
respectively, for each phase of the cycle. (C) A typical example of the wedge diagram. Red plusses represent parameters of
linear regressions for 100 phase values. The x-coordinate of each point is the total conductance G(φ) = 1/R(φ), and the y-
coordinate is I0(φ) (see Eqs. (2)      and (11)     ). Thick black lines are zero excitation (upper boundary) and zero inhibition
(lower boundary) lines, respectively (see Eqs. (13)      and (14)     ). The slopes of the lines correspond to the reversal
potentials for inhibition and excitation. (D) Calculated dynamic components of synaptic conductances from the same
recording using Eqs. (6     -9     ) as functions of the phase of the respiratory cycle. Two cycles are shown with integer values of
the phase (0, 1, 2) corresponding to a transition from expiration to inspiration. The excitatory synaptic conductance is shown
in red, and the inhibitory conductance is shown in blue.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 5 of 39Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 5 of 39
Figure 1 Supplementary Figure 1.
Linear regressions of the injected current vs. membrane
voltage for different phases of the respiratory cycle.
Shown are the injected current (y-axis) vs. membrane voltage (x-axis) relations for 25 different phases of the respiratory cycle
from a current-clamp recording from a ramp-I preBötC neuron. The phase value is indicated in the bottom right corner of
each plot. This figure illustrates that the phase-specific current-voltage dependencies are almost perfectly linear in a wide
range of voltage values. The exception is the interval of phase values near the transition from inspiration to expiration (0.2-
0.25 for this particular recording) which reflects some cycle-to-cycle variability of the inspiratory phase durations. Less perfect
linear fits near the transitions between respiratory phases manifest as bumps in the error estimates shown by black lines in
Figures 1D     , 3     , 5     , 6     , 7     .
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 6 of 39
correspond to the phase bin, appears fairly linear (see Figure 1B      and Figure 1 Supplemental
Figure 1     ). Therefore, by linear regression we can find the slope and V-intercept of this
dependence in the form:
where φ = (φi + φi+1)/2 is the center of the bin. The slope R(φ) represents the total resistance, the
intercept V0(φ) is the effective resting potential for the phase of the cycle φ, and δVm(tk) are
random fluctuations of the membrane voltage. Total conductance G(φ) was calculated as the
reciprocal of the total resistance, G(φ) = 1/R(φ). The total conductance has static (phase-
independent) and dynamic (phase-dependent) components. The latter is assumed to be a sum of
dynamic components of the inhibitory and excitatory synaptic conductances. Synaptic
conductances can also have static components whose combination cannot be distinguished from a
static conductance of any other nature. Accordingly, we can think of the total conductance as a
superposition of inhibitory and excitatory conductances whose static components form a static
component of the total conductance, and their dynamic components underlie dynamic changes in
the total conductance. Hence, the total current can be thought as a combination of the inhibitory
and excitatory currents:
where Gi (φ) and Ge(φ) are inhibitory and excitatory synaptic conductances, and Ei and Ee are
corresponding reversal potentials. This equation must be fulfilled for any Vm, therefore
Solving this system of equations for the synaptic conductances yields
To find the dynamic components of the synaptic conductances ΔGi(φ) and ΔGe(φ) we subtract their
minimal values over the respiratory cycle:
Finally, we can use the sum of the minimal values found as an estimate for the leak conductance:
Reversal potential estimation
It is possible that during a certain part of the cycle, a neuron receives only one type of synaptic
input, inhibitory or excitatory. Below is how this fact can be exploited for obtaining the estimates
of reversal potentials for inhibition or excitation. For inhibition, after introducing

Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 7 of 39
in (5) and combining (4) and (5) we get:
Since the total excitatory synaptic conductance Ge(φ) is greater or equal to its static component
, from (12) it follows that a straight line on the (G, I)-plane described by
serves as an upper boundary of the reconstructed trajectory {(G(φ), I0(φ)), φ ∈  [0,1]}. If we suppose
that the neuron receives only phase-dependent inhibition in a certain range of phase, i.e., the
excitatory synaptic conductance is equal to its static component in this range,
 , then the
trajectory moves strictly along the line described by (13) which can be referred to as a zero
excitation line. By identifying the upper portion of the trajectory with nearly linear behavior we
can perform linear regression of this portion to find its slope −Ei, and thus estimate the reversal
potential for inhibition (see Figure 1C     ). Similarly, for the phases of the cycle where only
excitatory input is present, we can derive:
Where 
  is a static component of the inhibitory conductance and call it the zero inhibition
line. The latter obviously serves as a lower boundary of the trajectory. Together the zero excitation
and zero inhibition lines form a wedge that bounds the trajectory, so hereinafter we refer to such
plots as wedge diagrams (Figure 1C     ).
Interestingly, the linear upper boundary of the trajectory was seen in almost all recordings
processed implying that, first, during certain phase(s) of the respiratory cycle the interneurons
indeed receive only inhibitory input, and second, we could use the identified parameters of the
zero-excitation line to measure the inhibitory reversal potential. The same approach might be
applied for the determination of the reversal potential for excitation if there was a certain range of
phases when a cell received the excitatory input only. Since Ee is expected to be close to 0 mV, this
would be clearly identifiable by the presence of a nearly horizontal part of the curve serving as a
lower boundary of the same. This kind of behavior was not found in most of the recordings, so, as
commonly accepted, Ee was set to -10 mV in those cases. However, as we demonstrate below,
variation of reversal potentials over a wide range of possible values does not affect the shape of
synaptic conductance profiles qualitatively.
Firing patterns, synaptic input conductances, and inferred
functional connectome of respiratory interneurons: an illustration
For our illustration of extracting synaptic conductances with the above approach, we targeted
neurons in key interacting respiratory circuits located in discrete bilateral regions of the
ventrolateral medulla, specifically in the preBötzinger complex (preBötC) region, which contains
local excitatory and inhibitory circuit neurons critical for generating rhythmic inspiratory activity,
and the adjacent more rostral Bötzinger complex (BötC) region (refer to Figure 2 Supplemental
Figure 1     ), containing neurons generating rhythmic expiratory activity that interact with
preBötC circuits, including by inhibitory circuit connections (e.g., (Lindsey et al., 2012     ; Smith et
al., 2013     ; Molkov et al., 2017     ; Ausborn et al., 2018     ). Thus, targeting these regional
microcircuits allowed us to test our methods for extracting various patterns of excitatory and
inhibitory synaptic inputs in two functionally distinct microcircuits. Also, there are various
electrophysiological phenotypes of respiratory neurons with different patterns of neuronal
spiking activity during the respiratory cycle in these regions, thus providing a diversity of
rhythmic neuronal types to correlate with synaptic input patterns from our analysis, which is
useful for illustrating the utility of our techniques for delineating various functional synaptic
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 8 of 39
interactions. We have used sharp microelectrode intracellular recordings in mature rat brainstem-
spinal cord preparations in situ (see Materials and methods) for our analysis since this approach
allowed us to readily record deep in the brainstem in these targeted regions from multiple
neurons under current- and voltage-clamp with a single electrode. This provides complementary
information to test the robustness of our approach, which should be insensitive to the mode of
intracellular recording. Although our techniques can be applied to any type of rhythmic neuron,
we specifically targeted and analyzed interneurons, verified by immunochemistry (as described
below and in Material and methods), which are the most technically challenging to record from
due to small neuronal sizes and potential recording instability, but are functionally critical for
analyzing synaptic mechanisms of neural activity pattern generation. Thus, we could test how our
technique performs for important neuronal populations under recording conditions that would
likely be encountered for many rhythmic interneuronal circuits in nervous systems.
Firing patterns of respiratory interneurons
Under normal physiological conditions the neuronal activity during the respiratory cycle consists
of three main activity phases [inspiratory (I), post-inspiratory (post-I), and stage 2 or late
expiratory (E2)] that are well documented in the literature (e.g., (Lindsey et al.,2012     ; Richter &
Smith, 2014     ). Previously described respiratory populations based on their specific firing
patterns in relation to these different phases of the cycle (see Figure 2     ) include pre-
inspiratory/inspiratory (pre-I/I), ramping inspiratory (ramp-I), early-inspiratory (early-I), late
inspiratory (late-I), post-inspiratory (post-I) and augmenting expiratory (aug-E, active during E2)
neurons. We have recorded neurons from all these populations (Figure 2     ) and have analyzed
and presented representative synaptic input patterns (Figure 3     ) for each electrophysiological
phenotype. In some cases, as aninformative addition to our electrophysiological analyses, we
labeled the recorded neurons byintracellular injection of biocytin contained in the electrode
recording solution (see Materials and methods) for subsequent histological verification (Figure 2
Supplemental Figure 1     ) of the recording location, interneuron identification, and in some cases
neurotransmitter phenotype by immunohistochemistry (n=34 neurons total labeled). The latter
enabled us to identify inhibitory neurons (glycinergic or GABAergic) (e.g., see Figure 2
Supplemental Figure 2     ) for five of the neuron types (pre-I/I, ramp-I, early-I, post-I, aug-E) as
described below, which aids in circuit analysis and the corroboration of inhibitory inputs from
neurons with particular firing patterns.
Synaptic conductances and functional connectome
of respiratory interneurons. Figure 3     
shows the synaptic conductance profiles of the major interneuronal electrophysiological
phenotypes whose firing patterns are illustrated in Figure 2     . Within one population of the same
electrophysiological phenotype, patterns of synaptic inputs were qualitatively similar, although
there was neuron-to-neuron variability in calculated conductance values and details of the
conductance profiles could vary (Figure 3     ) among multiple examples of each type of recorded
neurons. From these temporal patterns of synaptic conductances, as explained below we infer
functional connectomes or circuit motifs for each electrophysiological phenotype as illustrated in
Figure 4     , which is an important outcome of our analyses. In general, these circuit connections
motifs are constructed by considering that the different components of the synaptic conductance
profiles are formed by convergent inputs from neuronal populations of specific firing phenotypes
and, therefore, can be interpreted as reflecting activity patterns of these pre-synaptic populations.
By matching these activity patterns with patterns of synaptic conductances in the recorded post-
synaptic neurons, we can suggest functional connections between neuronal populations. The
information on inhibitory transmitter phenotype for neurons with different firing patterns was
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 9 of 39Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 9 of 39
Figure 2.
Firing patterns of respiratory interneurons.
The traces are current clamp intracellular recordings from different types of respiratory neurons distinguished by their action
potential firing patterns and activity during different respiratory cycle phases [inspiratory (I), post-I, or late-expiratory/E2
phase]. Extracellular recordings of the phrenic nerve activity (PNA) and central vagus nerve activity (cVNA) are shown below
as reference. The nerve recordings were obtained simultaneously with the pre-I/I neuron recording. All other neuron
recordings were obtained from different experimental preparations and were composited and aligned according to phases of
the cycle as indicated at the top. This was done by deleting segments (as indicated) of the membrane potentials during the
expiratory phases, since the expiratory intervals largely determine the discharge frequencies which are variable between the
in situ preparations, while the inspiratory phase durations are very similar. All neurons included in our study exhibited
rhythmic firing patterns consistent with the three-phase organization of the cycle and can be arranged in this format for
purposes of illustration. Regions of the ventrolateral medulla (preBötC or BötC) where these example recordings were
obtained, as verified histologically (Figure 2 Supplemental Figure 1     ), are indicated.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 10 of 39Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 10 of 39
Figure 2 Supplementary Figure 1.
Respiratory regions of the brainstem ventrolateral medulla and intracellular recording sites.
A.Parasagittal view (neutral red stain) of the lateral medulla indicating regions of the ventral respiratory column (VRC) and
locations of the preBötC and BötC regions of the VRC in the ventrolateral medulla, ventral to nucleus ambiguus (NA) that
were targeted for intracellular recordings. Abbreviations: rVRG and cVRG, rostral and caudal ventral respiratory groups which
also contain neurons of the respiratory CPG; 5 and 7, trigeminal and facial motor nuclei; 7n, facial nerve; SO, superior olivary
nuclei. B. Example of histological reconstruction (confocal fluorescence images) of recorded inspiratory neuron (ramp-I) in
the preBötC region ventral to motoneurons of NAsc (semi-compact division) labeled by immunostaining (red) for choline
acetyltransferase (ChAT). The locations of rhythmic neurons used for our analyses were routinely verified by filling the cells
with neurobiotin by iontophoresis at the end of recording and fluorescently stained (see Methods), and in some cases further
processed for immuno-identification of neurotransmitter phenotype (see Figure 2 Supplemental Figure 2     ). The
immunostaining for ChAT was used as a landmark for regional recording locations, and also to verify that recordings were
obtained from interneurons and not motoneurons. A higher magnification image of neuronal morphology with background
removed is shown in the dashed box at right. C. Example of histological reconstruction (confocal images) of a recorded
expiratory neuron (aug-E) and fluorescently stained in the BötC region ventral to motoneurons of NAc (compact division)
labeled by immunostaining (red) for ChAT. Higher magnification image of labeled neuron (background removed) is shown at
right.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 11 of 39Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 11 of 39
Figure 2 Supplementary Figure 2.
Identification of glycinergic or GABAergic inhibitory neurons.
Examples from separate experiments of neurons filled with neurobiotin during the somatic intracellular recordings, and
subsequent immunohistochemistry with antibodies for glycine or GABA (red fluorescence), and Alexa Fluor 488-Avidin D
conjugate to label neurobiotin. Images shown for the labeled respiratory neuron types in the ventrolateral medullary regions
indicated are fluorescence single-plane confocal images for the glycine or GABA antibody labeling (left panels), neurobiotin
labeling (middle), and superposition images showing double labeling (right). The single imaging planes shown were chosen
to optimize visualization of co-labeling of the somata of the recorded neuron in each case.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 12 of 39Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 12 of 39
Figure 3.
Synaptic conductance profiles of major respiratory neuronal phenotypes.
Each panel depicts how the dynamic components of excitatory (red) and inhibitory (blue) synaptic conductances, normalized
to the maximal value, vary with the cycle phase for an individual neuron. Neuronal firing phenotypes are listed on the top.
Two respiratory cycles are shown so that transitions between the respiratory phases are clearly seen. The inspiratory phases
are highlighted by grey bars. Integer phase values (0, 1, 2) correspond to transitions from expiration to inspiration as
determined by onset of the phrenic motor output recorded simultaneously. The error for each phase value is indicated by a
thick black line in each panel. Each panel is labelled according to the firing pattern of the recorded neuron (A: pre-I/I, B:
ramp-I, C: early-I, D: late-I, E: post-I, F: aug-E).
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 13 of 39
also collected and indeed corroborates that subsets of the presynaptic neurons are inhibitory as
inferred from the conductance profiles, which gives additional confidence in the correlation
between pre-synaptic firing patterns and likely post-synaptic interactions.
To illustrate in more detail how we have reconstructed the circuit connection motifs in Figure
4     , we describe how we interpret and translate the synaptic conductance profiles for each
electrophysiological phenotype.
Pre-I/I cells (n=25 neurons recorded in the preBötC) in all cases received decrementing expiratory
inhibition, and augmenting excitation during late expiration as well as strong ramping inspiratory
excitation (Figure 3A1-5     ). As shown In Figure 4A1     , a straight-forward interpretation of this
pattern of conductances is that the pre-I/I population receives inhibitory inputs from post-I spiking
neurons and excitatory inputs from aug-E and ramp-I populations. Alternatively, since a
combination of aug-E and ramp-I excitatory inputs is qualitatively similar to an input from the
pre-I/I population itself, it is also possible that excitatory pre-I/I neurons are recurrently
interconnected within this population (Figure 4A2     ). These possibilities are not mutually
exclusive, and both connectivity patterns could be expressed in the respiratory circuits. We
labeled 13 of these pre-I/I neurons during recording, two of which were identified as inhibitory
neurons by neurotransmitter immuno-labeling for glycine or GABA (1 glycinergic and 1 GABAergic
neuron identified), which is incorporated in Figure 4F1     .
Neurons with the ramp-I spiking patterns (n=24 recorded in preBötC) also received ramping
inspiratory phase excitation, but unlike some pre-I/I cells, they generally showed strong synaptic
inhibition throughout the post-inspiratory and late-expiratory (E2) phases (Figure 3B1-5     ). Some
of these neurons also received excitatory input during the E2 expiratory/pre-inspiratory phase.
Therefore, it is reasonable to suggest that ramp-I neurons receive inhibitory inputs from post-I and
aug-E populations as well as an excitatory input from pre-I/I neurons (Figure 4B1     ). Another
possibility is that the excitatory ramp-I neurons not receiving excitation during the pre-inspiratory
phase have recurrent excitation within their population (Figure 4B2     ). Four out of 7 of these
neurons were labeled in the preBötC and identified as inhibitory (glycinergic) neurons
(incorporated in Figures 4D1&4E1     ).
All early-I spiking neurons (n=6 in preBötC) showed decrementing expiratory phase inhibition
(Figure 3C1-5     ). Most of these cells also received pre-inspiratory/late expiratory and inspiratory
excitation (Figure 3C1     , 3     -5     ), while some of them did not (Figure 3C2     ), which we
interpret as shown in Figures 4C1      and 4C2     , respectively. The excitatory pre-I/I input can also
be a combination of aug-E and ramp-I excitation as in Figure 4A1     . One of the three labeled
early-I neurons was identified as an inhibitory (GABAergic) neuron (Figure 2 Supplemental
Figure 2     ), corroborating the early-I inhibitory inputs inferred from conductance profiles shown
in Figures 4 D1&2, 4E1&E2, 4F1&F2     .
Synaptic inputs to late-I cells (n=6 in preBötC) were similar to ramp-I neurons (Figure
3D     1     -5     ) plus concurrent, inspiratory phase inhibition. So, in addition to inhibitory inputs
from post-I and aug-E neurons and pre-I/I (in some cases) and ramp-I excitation, they likely receive
inhibitory inputs from early-I spiking neurons (Figure 4D1     ). Some of these cells showed neither
inhibition nor excitation at the end of expiration (Figure 3D2     ), so they might receive no aug-E
inhibition and ramp-I rather than pre-I/I excitation (Figure 4D2     ). These neurons were
infrequently recorded, and none were successfully labeled for neurotransmitter type
identification.
Post-I spiking neurons (n=40: 25 in preBötC, 15 in BötC), that always exhibit a decrementing firing
pattern during expiration, received strong decrementing inhibition during inspiration, and
incrementing inhibition during late expiration (Figure 3E     1     -5     ). They also showed a
relatively weak excitation during post-inspiration, usually accompanied by comparable in
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 14 of 39Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 14 of 39
Figure 4.
Inferred connections between different respiratory interneuronal populations.
By matching the firing phenotype of the receiver neuron and its synaptic inputs we infer possible motifs of interactions
between the functional populations of the active network. In this representation, we assume that the functional connection
between populations is present, if a post-synaptic neuron of a particular firing phenotype has a dynamic component of the
synaptic conductance statistically significantly different from zero (see Materials and methods: Statistical significance) in the
phase range corresponding to the activity pattern of the pre-synaptic population. Here we show two examples of such
inferences for each phenotype representing the most straightforward interpretation of synaptic inputs (A1, B1, C1, D1, E1 and
F1) as well as interactions involving the least number of populations (A2, B2, C2, D2, E2 and F2), reflecting the cell-to-cell
variability in conductance profiles with some neurons within a given electrophysiological phenotype exhibiting the smaller set
of synaptic inputs. Possible inhibitory/excitatory connections are shown by blue/red lines ending with blue circles/red arrows
originating from presynaptic neurons and terminating at the post-synaptic neurons. Inhibitory sources are shown in blue,
and the excitatory sources are shown in red. These circuit motifs are consistent with the patterns of synaptic inputs to the
various neurons, as described in the text for each electrophysiological phenotype, and account for our immuno-histochemical
identification of inhibitory neurons as subpopulations of most of the electrophysiological types as indicated in the text.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 15 of 39Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 15 of 39
Figure 4 Supplementary Figure 1.
Combinatorial circuit schematic.
A.Comprehensive summary of the inferred connectome of the functional respiratory network, implied by the collection of
circuit motifs shown in Figure 4     , incorporating information about proposed synaptic inputs and neurotransmission
between various neuronal populations classified according to their distinct firing pattern phenotypes. This schematic
incorporates all of the possibilities inferred from our conductance analyses, and includes sets of mutual inhibitory
interactions between inhibitory populations (post-I and aug-E; early-I and post-I, early-I and aug-E populations), inhibitory
inputs to excitatory populations (post-I to pre-I/I and ramp-I; aug-E to ramp-I), and the pre-I/I and ramp-I excitatory synaptic
drives. B. A functionally minimal circuit schematic previously suggested by Smith et al. (2007) and shown from model
simulation studies to generate a realistic three-phase rhythmic pattern of neuronal population activity. Similarities of the
circuit interactions depicted in these two schematics include the inhibitory connectome with post-I and aug-E inhibition
distributed throughout the network, the sets of mutual inhibitory interactions, and the strong pre-I/I excitatory inspiratory
drive, while there are clearly additional features in our more elaborate circuit connectome in the new combinatorial
schematic (A), including the inhibitory and excitatory neuronal counterparts and associated circuit interactions for post-I,
aug-E, pre-I/I, and ramp-I neuron populations that were not included in the previous models. This connectivity suggests the
idea that the excitatory subpopulations could drive the activity during their respective cycle phases and could synchronize
activity of their inhibitory counterparts, whereas the inhibitory subpopulations appear to be important participants in
orchestrating phase transitions and maintaining inhibition to other circuit populations during the active phases driven by the
excitatory subpopulations.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 16 of 39
magnitude ramping excitation during inspiration. The corresponding circuit elements
representing inputs to the post-I neurons are shown in Figure 4E1     . Since post-I neurons receive
post-I excitation, it is possible that excitatory post-I cells form a population with recurrent
excitatory interconnections. Besides, some of these neurons did not have any significant excitatory
input during inspiration (Figure 3E3     ). The latter possibilities are shown in Figure 4E2     . Eight
of the 20 post-I neurons labeled (5 in preBötC and 3 BötC neurons) were identified as glycinergic
(Figure 2 Supplemental Figure 2     ), consistent with a previous study (Ezure et al., 2003     ), and
corroborating the post-I inhibitory inputs shown in Figures 4A1&2, 4B1&2, 4C1&2, 4D1&2,
4F1&2     .
Finally, all the aug-E spiking neurons (n=19 recorded: 9 neurons in preBötC, 10 in BötC) received
decrementing inhibitory inputs during expiratory and inspiratory phases as well as an excitatory
input that started in the middle of expiration and incremented towards the end of expiration
(Figure 3F1-5     ). Some of these neurons received pre-inspiratory inhibition. We interpret this as
the aug-E population receiving inputs from early-I, post-I and pre-I/I inhibitory populations and
the excitatory input from aug-E neurons (Figure 4F1     ). Similar to other interpretations, it is also
possible that the excitatory aug-E neurons form a population with recurrent excitation with an
augmenting pattern that matches their activity profile, while some of these neurons do not receive
pre-I inhibition (Figure 4F2     ). Three out of 6 of these neurons labeled were identified as
glycinergic neurons (1 preBötC neuron and 2 BötC neurons) (Figure 2 Supplemental Figure 2     ),
as inferred from the synaptic conductance profiles in Figures 4B1&2, 4C1, 4D1, 4E1     .
Validating reliability of inferred synaptic conductance profiles
Synaptic conductance profiles from current- and voltage-clamp recordings
The traditional way to measure transmembrane currents is by voltage-clamp intracellular
recordings. Using this experimental protocol, the membrane potential of the neuron is held at a
constant level thus maintaining all voltage-dependent membrane currents at their steady states.
Therefore, in voltage-clamp conditions any total current variations result exclusively from time-
varying synaptic inputs, while in the current-clamp protocol variations of the voltage can
potentially be contaminated by transient dynamics of the voltage-gated channels. However, the
implementation of the voltage-clamp protocol is technically far more challenging with sharp high-
impedance microelectrodes than injecting a constant current. By design, our technique is
indifferent to what strategy is used for the injected current variations, so we performed both
current- and voltage-clamp recordings from select neurons (n=10) where the voltage-clamp could
be satisfactorily established following the current-clamp recording in each of these neurons and
compared the results of the synaptic input interferences as a test of the reliability of our methods.
Figure 5      shows the excitatory and inhibitory synaptic conductance profiles extracted from
current-(left) and voltage-clamp (right) segments of the intracellular recordings for 3 different
types of representative neurons. It is evident that the shapes of the conductance profiles as well as
the relationship between the excitatory and inhibitory conductances extracted are very similar.
Quantitative variations in the amplitude of the synaptic inputs are similar to those observed when
using different epochs of the same current-clamp recordings (see below). Thus, we conclude that
our synaptic conductance inferences obtained by current clamp recordings favorably match the
conductance profiles obtained from direct recordings of synaptic currents during voltage clamp.
Uncertainties concerned with estimates of synaptic reversal potentials
As noted, it was not always possible to identify linear portions of GI-contours suitable for reliable
estimation of the reversal potentials. In addition, the procedure described does not imply an
unequivocal way for finding the errors for the reversal potential estimates. Accordingly, for the
synaptic input classification purposes, we varied the reversal potentials in the predefined ranges
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 17 of 39Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 17 of 39
Figure 5.
Comparison of the synaptic conductance profiles
reconstructed from current- and voltage-clamp recordings.
Conductance profiles for three representative preBötC neurons are illustrated (from current-clamp recordings at left and
voltage-clamp recordings from the same neurons at right). Two respiratory cycles are shown for each neuron (post-I, top;
aug-E, middle; ramp-I, bottom panels) with inspiratory phases highlighted by gray bars. Calculated synaptic conductances are
normalized by the estimates of the leak conductance. While the absolute conductance values may vary, the shapes of the
synaptic conductance profiles as well as the relationship between the excitatory and inhibitory conductances are consistent
across these recording protocols.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 18 of 39
when using Eqs. (6)      and (7)      to calculate the synaptic conductances. We used the following
ranges: [-20, 0] mV and [-110, -90] mV for the reversal potentials for excitation and inhibition,
respectively. Figure 6      illustrates that although the absolute values of the conductances vary to
some extent as we vary the reversal potentials, the shape of their reconstructed profiles remains
consistent.
Evaluating the effects of non-stationarity of the intracellular recordings
Our approach implicitly assumes that the intrinsic properties of the recorded neurons do not
change (much) throughout the epoch used for the calculations. To verify the plausibility of this
hypothesis, whenever possible we used two different epochs from the same recordings satisfying
the criteria formulated in the Preprocessing section of the Methods for the complete analysis. We
found that differences between the results for different epochs in most cases were comparable to
those observed in the recordings obtained by current- and voltage-clamp protocols from the same
neuron. Figure 7      shows the results for two adjacent non-overlapping epochs for three different
neurons.
In summary, our evaluation of the major assumptions and potential sources of error with our
procedures for extracting temporal patterns of synaptic conductances, including recording
procedures, and cycle phase-dependent linearity of current-voltage relations (Figure 1
Supplemental Figure 1     ), indicate that the temporal profiles of conductances obtained by our
method are reliable for functional circuit reconstruction as we elaborate further below.
Discussion
In our analyses of synaptic conductance profiles in rhythmically active neurons from neuronal
intracellular recordings, we propose that these profiles represent the convergent synaptic inputs
from many neurons, and therefore represent the synaptic interactions of key functional
populations operating in the active networks, which provides a basis for functional network
reconstruction. Accordingly, a main objective of this study was to establish the utility and
reliability of our technique, based on theoretical analyses and experimental validation, for
extracting and separating profiles of inhibitory and excitatory conductances at high temporal
resolution from intracellular recording data. We demonstrate the efficiency and robustness of our
technique by applying our analyses to infer synaptic inputs to rhythmically active respiratory
neurons comprising key microcircuits within the medullary preBötC and BötC regions of the
brainstem respiratory CPG, which provided a diversity of neuronal electrophysiological
phenotypes in various rhythmic microcircuits to test the performance of our technique. Our
approach extends previously proposed methods for extracting dynamic patterns of synaptic
conductances in post-synaptic neurons in various other neural circuits (Borg-Graham et al.,
1998     ; Anderson et al., 2000     ; Shu et al., 2003     ; Berg et al., 2007     ; Endo & Kiehn, 2008     ;
Wright & Calabrese, 2011     ), by providing higher temporal resolution with nearly continuous
readouts of inhibitory and excitatory synaptic conductances, in our illustration throughout the
respiratory cycle for different respiratory interneuron types. We have obtained previously
unavailable synaptic conductance profiles for the different neuron populations, and illustrate how
this analysis can be used to infer functional interactions and circuit configurations of interneuron
populations, which demonstrates the utility of our technique. Below we further address technical
issues affecting the robustness of our approach, and then discuss the general applicability to
rhythmically active circuits.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 19 of 39Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 19 of 39
Figure 6.
The effect of reversal potential variation on the synaptic input reconstruction results.
We used the recording of the ramp-I neuron shown in Fig. 3B5 and recalculated its synaptic conductances for different
combinations of the inhibitory and excitatory reversal potential values as indicated in each plot. Synaptic conductances are
normalized by the estimates of the leak conductance. While the absolute conductance values vary with the reversal
potentials, the shapes of the synaptic profiles as well as the relationship between the excitatory and inhibitory conductances
are consistent across different values of the excitatory and inhibitory reversal potentials used.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 20 of 39Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 20 of 39
Figure 7.
Non-stationarity of the recordings does not qualitatively
affect the reconstructed profiles of synaptic conductances.
Synaptic conductance profiles calculated using non-overlapping segments of the recordings (left and right) from three
different neurons (post-I, top; aug-E, middle and bottom). The similarities of the conductance profiles for different segments
reflect the stability of the recordings and neuronal intrinsic properties and patterns of synaptic inputs.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 21 of 39
Estimation of reversal potentials
and errors in conductance analysis
We have noted above and evaluated uncertainties concerned with synaptic reversal potentials and
assumptions about stability of the cellular properties and recordings on the inferred synaptic
conductance profiles, but it is important to elaborate certain points. We have used an
experimental preparation and setup that provides optimal stability for sharp electrode
intracellular recordings. We used strict criteria for assessing and accepting the quality and
stability of the recordings. For the most part, our analysis results for a given neuron that meets our
criteria were reproducible for different recording epochs and conditions. We also generated
continuous error estimates for each example shown and confirmed the statistical significance of
conductance values. Regarding stationarity, our results suggest that any differences between the
inferred conductance profiles for different recording epochs and conditions in most cases were
comparable to those between recordings obtained by current- and voltage-clamp protocols.
Most neurons that we have analyzed receive inhibition only during certain parts of respiratory
cycle regardless of whether they are inspiratory or expiratory neuron types. This allowed
retrieving their reversal potentials for inhibition using the approach described in Materials and
methods. Interestingly, the inhibitory synaptic reversal potentials retrieved turned out to vary
significantly among cells between -62 mv and -116 mV. The reversal potential estimates were in
good correspondence with actual reversals of inhibitory events when a cell was hyperpolarized
below the reversal potential. Therefore, regarding the analysis, the results were reliable.
Nevertheless, on average, reversal potentials were much more negative than what would have
been expected. It is well known that in intracellular recordings, the length constant of the neuron
and the distance of the microelectrode from the synaptic inputs determine the measured reversal
potential (Calvin, 1969     ; Spruston et al., 1993     ; Wehr & Zador, 2003     ). For the precise
extraction of inhibitory and excitatory conductances from the total conductance, reversal
potential values may be critical. The variability of the inhibitory reversal potential emphasizes the
need to determine the reversal potential for each neuron separately. Otherwise, a wrong
inhibitory reversible potential value used for the reconstruction may lead to incorrect
conductance profiles. For example, a large positive bias in the inhibitory reversal potential will
have the effect that a part of the inhibitory conductance may be mislabeled as excitatory
conductance and therefore show a pattern of concurrent inhibition and excitation. Our method
for the estimation of inhibitory reversible potential appeared very reliable when compared to the
experimental estimates of the inhibitory reversal potential and essentially excluded the
occurrence of this excitatory conductance artifact.
The absolute values of inhibitory and excitatory conductance calculated by the analysis are
contaminated with an error depending on the length constant of the neuron and the distance of
the microelectrode from the synaptic inputs (Calvin, 1969     ; Wehr & Zador, 2003     ). Importantly,
Wehr and Zador (2003)      show that the estimate of timing of synaptic conductances is reliable and
not influenced by the length constant of the neuron. Therefore, the conductance profiles extracted
with our analysis are qualitatively reliable and the overall time course of inhibitory and excitatory
conductances reflect the overall inhibitory and excitatory inputs to the different
electrophysiological classes of active neurons analyzed.
Implications of reconstructed synaptic conductance
profiles for respiratory functional circuit architecture
Our analysis revealed different sets of inhibitory and excitatory synaptic conductances that are
characteristic for the different populations of respiratory neurons. Indeed, our results suggest that
phasic excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs that result from network interactions of these
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 22 of 39
respiratory neuron populations shape membrane potential trajectories and spiking patterns of the
neurons throughout the respiratory cycle. What can we learn from these results about the
organization and operation of the underlying pattern generation networks?
We have suggested circuit motifs that are consistent with the patterns of synaptic inputs to the
various neurons, and which also account for our immuno-histochemical identification of
inhibitory neurons as subpopulations of most of the electrophysiological types. However, these
circuit elements do not explain the overall dynamical operation of the circuits, particularly how
the rhythm and the orderly generation of the multiple activity phases occurs. A more
comprehensive synthesis of circuit interactions as illustrated below, and ultimately computational
simulation studies (e.g., (Lindsey et al., 2012     ; Molkov et al., 2017     ), are required. In Figure 4
Supplemental Figure 1      we illustrate the construction of a combinatorial circuit schematic of
the functional connectivity from the neuronal population interactions suggested by our collection
of circuit motifs.
Previously, computational models for core circuits of the respiratory CPG including interacting
microcircuits in the preBötC and BötC regions have proposed a network organization with
respiratory neuron population interactions that are capable from simulation studies with models
incorporating circuit architectures (e.g., Figure 4 Supplemental Figure 1B     ) and neuronal and
synaptic biophysical properties to generate a realistic respiratory rhythm and the three-phase
rhythmic pattern of neuron and neuronal population activity (Lindsey et al., 2012     ; Molkov et al.,
2017     ; Rubin, Shevtsova, Ermentrout, Smith, & Rybak, 2009; Rybak et al., 2007). These include the
model proposed by Smith, Abdala, Koizumi, Rybak, and Paton (2007) based on regional circuit
mapping and electrophysiological studies with the mature rat in situ experimental preparation
used in the present studies. Despite its plausibility, this and other models remain speculative
because the experimental evidence for functional connectivity is mostly indirect.
Our cellular-based analysis provides a way of untangling functional connections within the
respiratory CPG and testing computational models. By assuming the origin of these inputs
according to the phase in which they occur, we can draw conclusions on the functional
connections between the key respiratory neuron populations recorded here. Our synaptic
conductance profiles are consistent with multiple features of the network architecture and
interactions proposed by Smith et al. (2007) as illustrated in Figure 4 Supplemental Figure 1B     ,
which was suggested to be a minimal and sufficient circuit configuration to explain how the three-
phase rhythmic respiratory pattern, including activity patterns of key interneuron populations in
the medulla, can be generated. As reconstructed from our synaptic conductance profiles and
collection of circuit motifs, there are new features in our more elaborate circuit connectome in the
new combinatorial circuit schematic in Figure 4 Supplemental Figure 1A      as noted in the
supplemental figure legend. There are likely additional connectivity features that remain to be
uncovered as the catalogue of intracellular recording data and inferred functional interactions is
expanded from further studies. We note that the profiles of neuronal synaptic interactions that we
consider are specific for the in situ reduced rat brainstem-spinal cord system, which has proven to
be an important model system for understanding the operation of core CPG respiratory circuits in
the medulla and pontine reticular formation that are operational in our experimental set-up
(Paton et al., 2022     ), but cannot account for the supra-brainstem and peripheral circuit inputs in
the nervous system in vivo (e.g., Lindsey et al., 2012     ; Smith et al., 2013     ; Paton et al., 2022     ).
Our objective here was to illustrate how our techniques can delineate the functional circuit
interactions in an established core set of circuits in the respiratory CPG as an example of the utility
of our approach that can be generally applied to rhythmic neural circuits as discussed below.
Applicability to other rhythmically active networks
Our method for extracting and separating phasic patterns of inhibitory and excitatory synaptic
conductances from single neuronal intracellular recordings is broadly applicable to rhythmic
circuits which are ubiquitous in nervous systems. Our approach involves phase-based analysis,
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 23 of 39
where the network activity cycle is divided into activity phases to capture dynamic changes of
synaptic input conductances throughout the activity cycle. This approach is relevant for any
circuits with repetitive activity cycles, such as rhythmic CPG motor networks (e.g., (Calabrese &
Marder, 2024     )) and circuits generating cortical rhythms (Yuste et al., 2005     ). The method is
based on the general mathematical framework presented, involving current balance equations
and linear regression to separate excitatory and inhibitory conductances, and therefore is
applicable to different rhythmic neuron types and circuits and is suitable for diverse experimental
setups. By providing high-resolution temporal profiles of synaptic inputs and outputs (below,
based on neuronal spiking patterns), this method enables researchers to infer the functional
connectivity and dynamic interactions within any rhythmically active network.
Applying this method, as we have illustrated for respiratory circuits, to other rhythmic networks
such as locomotor or cortical circuits including sensory processing networks, follows a similar
process for extracting neuronal excitatory and inhibitory inputs during different oscillatory
phases of endogenous or sensory-driven periodic activity. This allows for the inference of
functional synaptic input connections for any targeted neuron populations based on the timing
and strength of the extracted synaptic inputs. In this context, functional populations are defined as
groups of neurons with similar firing patterns with respect to the cycle phase. If the synaptic
conductance profile of a recorded neuron contains a component that mirrors the firing pattern of
a specific population, it can be inferred that there is a functional connection from that population
to the recorded neuron. Similarly, in sensory processing networks, it can reveal how sensory
inputs are synaptically integrated in neurons by examining synaptic conductance patterns in
response, for example, to repetitive stimuli.
The approach that we have described is versatile since it is compatible with various recording
protocols, such as current-clamp and voltage-clamp and different modes of intracellular recording
(sharp electrode or whole-cell patch clamp). We note that our approach to defining functional
connectivity does not provide information on locations of the sources of the synaptic inputs,
although we can infer spiking patterns of the source neurons from the temporal features of the
synaptic conductance profiles. These profiles represent the total synaptic inputs that can arise
from many neurons possibly with short and long-range axonal projections to a given neuron. The
capability of our approach to readout the total synaptic conductance and separate the excitatory
and inhibitory components from all sources at high temporal resolution is a strength of our
approach. These inferred neuronal population connections from the electrophysiological analyses
provided by our technique can be further mapped and corroborated with other functional and
anatomical approaches.
In summary, the versatility of our technique lies in its foundation on basic electrophysiological
principles and adaptability to different rhythmic activities making it a powerful tool for
investigating a wide range of rhythmically active neuronal networks and potentially offering
insights into their functional organization and dynamic operations.
Materials and methods
Animal procedures
All animal procedures were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (Animal Study Proposal #1154-21).
In situ perfused rat brain-stem spinal cord preparation
Experiments were performed using the in situ arterially perfused brainstem-spinal cord
preparations from mature (3–4 weeks old) rats (Paton, 1996     ; Paton et al., 2022     ) following
experimental procedures described in detail in Smith et al. 2007 and modified as described below
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 24 of 39
to provide optimal conditions for intracellular recording. Briefly, preheparinzed (1,000 units, given
intraperitoneally) rats (Sprague-Dawley, 45-70g; male) were anaesthetized deeply with 5%
isoflurane and the portion of the body caudal to the diaphragm was removed. The head and
thorax were immersed in ice-chilled carbogenated Ringer solution and the brain was decerebrated
at a precollicular level. The descending aorta, phrenic nerve, central vagus and hypoglossal nerves
were surgically isolated. The dorsal brainstem was exposed by craniotomy and cerebellectomy. To
achieve the mechanical stability necessary for intracellular recordings, the great veins and heart
were removed. The preparation was transferred to a recording chamber and the descending aorta
cannulated with a double lumen catheter for perfusion and recording of perfusion pressure with a
pressure transducer. A hydraulic damping Windkessel chamber was used in the perfusion circuit
immediately downstream from the output of the roller pump (Watson-Marlow, Wilmington, MA)
to eliminate peristaltic flow pulsations that affect stability of the sharp electrode intracellular
recordings.
Solutions and pharmacological agents
The perfusate contained the following in distilled water: magnesium sulphate (MgSO4 -1.25 mM),
potassium phosphate (KH2PO4 - 1.25 mM), potassium chloride (KCl - 5.0 mM), sodium bicarbonate
(NaHCO3 - 25 mM), sodium chloride (NaCl -125 mM), calcium chloride (CaCl2 - 2.5 mM), dextrose
(10 mM) and polyethylene glycol (0.1785 mM). Vecuronium bromide was added to the perfusate to
block neuromuscular transmission (4 µg/ml; SUN pharmaceutical industries, Bryan, USA). The
perfusate was gassed with 95%O2-5%CO2 and maintained at 31°C. Vasopressin (200–400 pM as
required; APP pharmaceuticals, East Schaumburg, USA) was added to the perfusate to raise and
maintain perfusion pressure at 70–80 mmHg. Unless stated, all chemicals were from Sigma.
Electrophysiological recordings and neuron labeling
Efferent activity of the phrenic (PN) and central vagus (VN) nerves were recorded simultaneously
with glass suction electrodes and their activities were amplified, filtered (0.3–6.0 KHz), rectified
and integrated (50 ms time constant). Sharp microelectrode somatic intracellular recordings were
made in the preBötC and BötC regions. The brainstem was mapped by recording population
activity of neurons in the medulla oblongata with an extracellular electrode (5–10 MOhm) prior to
intracellular recording. The position of the electrode was monitored by software that kept track of
the micromanipulator mechanical coordinates. Once the region of the preBötC or BötC was
identified by rhythmic inspiratory/expiratory population activity, coordinates were saved and in
some cases the brainstem surface was marked with pontamine sky blue dye. Intracellular
recordings were made with fine tipped glass microelectrodes (45 to 70 MOhm) pulled from
borosilicate glass capillaries. The microelectrodes for intracellular recording were driven into the
recording site by a combination DC motor driven micromanipulator with an integrated
piezotranslator (PM10-1, Marzhauser Wetzlar, Germany), allowing high stepping speeds for cell
penetration. A dual current clamp-voltage clamp amplifier (SEC-05X, NPI, Tamm, Germany) was
used to amplify the signals in bridge and discontinuous current clamp (DCC) recording modes.
Discontinuous single electrode voltage clamp (SEVC) recordings were obtained by exploiting the
high switching frequencies and electrode capacity compensation of the SEC-05X system, allowing
high fidelity SEVC recordings with the high resistance sharp microelectrodes used. The
microelectrodes were filled with a solution of 2 M potassium acetate (KAc) and 0.1 M potassium
chloride (KCl) and 4% neurobiotin. During recordings some neurons were labeled by ionophoresis
of neurobiotin into the cell. All recordings were digitized via a CED 1401-plus multi-channel
interface and acquired (6–12 kHz digitization rates) using CED Spike 2 software.
Histological analysis
Transected brain stem was fixed in 4% buffered (0.1 M phosphate buffer) paraformaldehyde for 24
h at 4°C, cryoprotected at 4°C in 30% sucrose, and subsequently coronally sectioned (30 µm thick)
on a freezing microtome. All the floating sections were preincubated for 1 h with 10% donkey
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 25 of 39
serum in PBS and subsequently incubated for 48-72h at room temperature with primary
antibodies: Rabbit anti-Glycine antibody (1:5000; Immunosolution), rabbit anti-GABA antibody
(1:1000; Millipore-Sigma), and goat anti-ChAT antibody (1:500; Chemicon). Labeling for neuronal
ChAT expression was used to label motoneurons of nucleus ambiguous to verify the region where
the neurons were recorded and to confirm that the recordings were obtained from non-
motoneurons. Floating sections were incubated for 2 h at room temperature with a mixture of
donkey anti-rabbit IgG conjugated with Cy5 and donkey anti-goat IgG conjugated with Cy3 (1:500;
Jackson ImmunoResearch). For fluorescence labeling of neurons filled with neurobiotin during
electrophysiological recording, slices were incubated with Alexa Fluor 488-Avidin D (1:500,
Invitrogen). Tissue was mounted on slides and covered with antifading medium. Confocal images
were obtained with a laser-scanning microscope (LSM 510 Meta, Zeiss). Alexa Fluor 488, Cy3, and
Texas Red or Cy5 were detected at 488, 543, and 633 nm emission wavelengths, respectively.
Images were acquired and processed with a Zeiss Zen software and presented as single optical
sections selected from serial optical sections (Z-stacks).
Reconstruction of synaptic inputs from intracellular recordings
Preprocessing
Inhibitory and excitatory synaptic inputs to respiratory neurons were reconstructed from
intracellular recordings using a general approach similar to that described by Berg et al. (2007)     
and others (Borg-Graham et al., 1998     ; Anderson et al., 2000     ; Shu et al., 2003     ; Endo & Kiehn,
2008     ).
During intracellular recordings for conductance measurement and subsequent decomposition of
inhibitory and excitatory inputs, depolarizing and hyperpolarizing current was injected into the
cell in a stepwise manner (Figure 1A     ). The period of time from the onset of the phrenic burst to
the beginning of the next phrenic burst was used as reference cycle. The beginning of a phrenic
burst was determined as 10% of phrenic amplitude in the rectified and low pass filtered (time
constant = 0.05s) extracellular recording. We only analyzed recordings from respiratory neurons
that fulfilled the following criteria: (1) The coefficient of variation of the respiratory cycle period
was <10%; (2) At least three steps of current injections were made during intracellular recording
that were kept constant for at least 5 respiratory cycles each. Neurons with obvious recording
instability such as significant changes in membrane leakage current with a baseline membrane
potential drift were not analyzed. The intracellularly recorded membrane potential Vm(t) was
sampled down from 12.5 kHz to 100 Hz. To eliminate spikes without affecting slow membrane
potential fluctuations the voltage trace Vm(t) was processed using median filtration.
Error estimation
After performing linear regression (2) for each phase bin we have standard errors δR(φ) and
δV0(φ) of the total resistance R(φ) and the resting potential V0(φ) respectively which are defined by
voltage fluctuations and by the number of respiratory cycles in the epoch used for reconstruction.
Based on this we can approximately calculate the standard error for the total conductance δG(φ) =
δR(φ)/R2(φ), which can be used as an overestimate for the errors of both excitatory and inhibitory
conductances since the total conductance is a sum of the two. Calculation of the dynamic
components involves subtraction of the minimal values of the calculated synaptic conductances.
Therefore, the dynamic components’ standard errors can be estimated as 
 ,
where φm is the phase where the corresponding conductance (excitatory or inhibitory) attains its
minimum.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 26 of 39
Statistical significance
Considering the relatively large sample sizes (for each cell analyzed we had 50-200 respiratory
cycles long recordings), we used a one-tailed z-test to confirm statistical significance of the
reconstructed synaptic inputs by testing a null hypothesis that the dynamical component of the
synaptic conductance is zero (no different from its minimal value). Specifically, at each phase of
the respiratory cycle φ for the dynamic components of inhibitory and excitatory conductances we
calculated their z-scores Zi,e(φ) = ΔGi,e(φ)/δΔGi,e(φ), and corresponding p-values. We used p-value <
0.05 criterion to accept the alternative hypothesis that the calculated dynamic component of the
synaptic conductance at a particular phase is statistically significantly greater than zero. In the
latter case, we concluded that the recorded cell received the corresponding type of synaptic input
(excitatory or inhibitory) during the corresponding part of the respiratory cycle (inspiration, post-
inspiration, or late-expiration/pre-inspiration).
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by NIH grants R01 NS057815, R01 NS069220, R01 AT008632, Alexander
von Humboldt Foundation, and the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, NINDS.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 27 of 39
References
Anderson JS, Carandini M, Ferster D. 2000) Orientation tuning of input conductance,
excitation, and inhibition in cat primary visual cortex J Neurophysiol 84:909–926
Ausborn J, Koizumi H, Barnett WH, John TT, Zhang R, Molkov YI, Smith JC, Rybak IA 2018)
Organization of the core respiratory network: Insights from optogenetic and modeling
studies PLoS Comput Biol 14:e1006148
Berg RW, Alaburda A, Hounsgaard J. 2007) Balanced inhibition and excitation drive spike
activity in spinal half-centers Science 315:390–393
Bianchi AL, Denavitsaubie M, Champagnat J. 1995) Central Control of Breathing in Mammals
- Neuronal Circuitry, Membrane-Properties, and Neurotransmitters Physiological Reviews
75:1–45
Borg-Graham LJ, Monier C, Fregnac Y. 1998) Visual input evokes transient and strong
shunting inhibition in visual cortical neurons Nature 393:369–373
Buzsáki G. 2006) Rhythms of the brain Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press
Calabrese RL, Marder E. 2024) Degenerate Neuronal and Circuit Mechanisms Important for
Generating Rhythmic Motor Patterns Physiological Reviews, (in press)
Calvin WH 1969) Dendritic synapses and reversal potentials: theoretical implications of
the view from the soma Exp Neurol 24:248–264
Cohen MI 1979) Neurogenesis of respiratory rhythm in the mammal Physiol Rev 59:1105–
1173
Endo T, Kiehn O. 2008) Asymmetric operation of the locomotor central pattern generator
in the neonatal mouse spinal cord J Neurophysiol 100:3043–3054
Ezure K, Tanaka I, Kondo M. 2003) Glycine is used as a transmitter by decrementing
expiratory neurons of the ventrolateral medulla in the rat The Journal of neuroscience : the
official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 23:8941–8948
Feldman JL, Smith JC, Dempsey JA, Pack AI 1995) Neural Control of Respiratory Pattern in
Mammals: An Overview Regulation of breathing New York: M. Dekker :39–69
Koizumi H, Smith JC 2008) Persistent Na+ and K+-dominated leak currents contribute to
respiratory rhythm generation in the pre-Botzinger complex in vitro J Neurosci 28:1773–
1785
Lindsey BG, Rybak IA, Smith JC 2012) Computational models and emergent properties of
respiratory neural networks Compr Physiol 2:1619–1670
Molkov YI, Rubin JE, Rybak IA, Smith JC 2017) Computational models of the neural control of
breathing Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 9
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 28 of 39
Paton JF 1996) A working heart-brainstem preparation of the mouse J Neurosci Methods
65:63–68
Paton JFR, Machado BH, Moraes DJA, Zoccal DB, Abdala AP, Smith JC, Antunes VR, Murphy D,
Dutschmann M, Dhingra RR, McAllen R, Pickering AE, Wilson RJA, Day TA, Barioni NO, Allen AM,
Menuet C, Donnelly J, Felippe I, St-John WM 2022) Advancing respiratory-cardiovascular
physiology with the working heart-brainstem preparation over 25 years J Physiol 600:2049–
2075
Richter DW, Greger R, Windhorst U 1996) Neural regulation of respiration: rhythmogenesis
and afferent control Comprehensive Human Physiology Berlin: Springer-Verlag :2079–2095
Richter DW, Smith JC 2014) Respiratory rhythm generation in vivo Physiology (Bethesda)
29:58–71
Richter DW, Spyer KM 2001) Studying rhythmogenesis of breathing: comparison of in vivo
and in vitro models Trends Neurosci 24:464–472
Shu Y, Hasenstaub A, McCormick DA 2003) Turning on and off recurrent balanced cortical
activity Nature 423:288–293
Smith JC, Abdala AP, Borgmann A, Rybak IA, Paton JF 2013) Brainstem respiratory networks:
building blocks and microcircuits Trends Neurosci 36:152–162
Spruston N, Jaffe DB, Williams SH, Johnston D. 1993) Voltage- and space-clamp errors
associated with the measurement of electrotonically remote synaptic events J
Neurophysiol 70:781–802
Wehr M, Zador AM 2003) Balanced inhibition underlies tuning and sharpens spike timing
in auditory cortex Nature 426:442–446
Wright TM, Calabrese RL 2011) Patterns of presynaptic activity and synaptic strength
interact to produce motor output J Neurosci 31:17555–17571
Yuste R, MacLean JN, Smith J, Lansner A. 2005) The cortex as a central pattern generator Nat
Rev Neurosci 6:477–483
Author information
Yaroslav I Molkov
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Neuroscience Institute, Georgia State University,
Atlanta, United States
ORCID iD: 0000-0002-0862-1974
For correspondence: ymolkov@gsu.edu
Anke Borgmann
Cellular and Systems Neurobiology Section, NINDS, NIH, Bethesda, United States
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 29 of 39
Hidehiko Koizumi
Cellular and Systems Neurobiology Section, NINDS, NIH, Bethesda, United States
ORCID iD: 0000-0002-7747-3434
Noriyuki Hama
Cellular and Systems Neurobiology Section, NINDS, NIH, Bethesda, United States, Department
of Neural and Muscular Physiology, Shimane University School of Medicine, Izumo, Japan
Ruli Zhang
Cellular and Systems Neurobiology Section, NINDS, NIH, Bethesda, United States
Jeffrey C Smith
Cellular and Systems Neurobiology Section, NINDS, NIH, Bethesda, United States
ORCID iD: 0000-0002-7676-4643
Editors
Reviewing Editor
John Huguenard
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, United States of America
Senior Editor
John Huguenard
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, United States of America
Reviewer #1 (Public review):
Summary:
The paper develops a phase method to obtain the excitatory and inhibitory afferents to
certain neuron populations in the brainstem. The inferred contributions are then compared
to the results of voltage clamp and current clamp experiments measuring the synaptic
contributions to post-I, aug-E and ramp-I neurons.
Strengths:
The electrophysiology part of the paper is sound and reports novel features with respect to
earlier work by JC Smith et al 2012, Paton et al 2022 (and others) who have mapped circuits of
the respiratory central pattern generator. Measurements on ramp-I neurons, late-I neurons
and two types of post-I neurons in Fig.2 besides measurements of synaptic inputs to these
neurons in Fig.5 are to my knowledge new.
Weaknesses:
The phase method for inferring synaptic conductances fails to convince. The method rests on
many layers of assumptions and the inferred connections in Fig.4 remain speculative. To be
convincing, such method ought to be tested first on a model CPG with known connectivity to
assess how good it is at inferring known connections back from the analysis of spatio-
temporal oscillations. For biological data, once the network connectivity has been inferred as
claimed, the straightforward validation is to reconstruct the experimental oscillations (Fig.2)
noting that Rybak et al (Rybak, Paton Schwaber J. Neurophysiol. 77, 1994 (1997)) have already
derived models for the respiratory neurons.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 30 of 39
The transformation from time to phase space, unlike in the Kuramoto model, is not justified
here (L.94) and is wrong. The underpinning idea that "the synaptic conductances depend on
the cycle phase and not on time explicitly" is flawed because synapses have characteristic
decay times and delays to response which remain fixed when the period of network
oscillations increases. Synaptic properties depend on time and not on phase in the network.
One major consequence relevant to the present identification of excitatory or inhibitory
behaviour, is that it cannot account for change in behaviour of inhibitory synapses - from
inhibitory to excitatory action - when the inhibitory decay time becomes commensurable to
the period of network oscillations (Wang & Buzsaki Journal of Neuroscience 16, 6402 (1996),
van Vreeswijk et al. J. Comp. Neuroscience 1,313 (1994), Borgers and Kopell Neural Comput.
15, 2003). In addition, even small delays in the inhibitory synapse response relative to the
pre-synaptic action potential also produce in-phase synchronization (Chauhan et al., Sci. Rep.
8, 11431 (2018); Borgers and Kopell, Neural Comput. 15, 509 (2003)). The present assumption
are way too simplistic because you cannot account for these commensurability effects with a
single parameter like the network phase. There is therefore little confidence that this model
can reliably distinguish excitatory from inhibitory synapses when their dynamics properties
are not properly taken into account.
L..82, Eq.1 makes extremely crude assumptions that the displacement current (CdV/dt) is
negligible and that the ion channel currents are all negligible. Vm(t) is also not defined. The
assumption that the activation/inactivation times of all ion channels are small compared to
the 10-20ms decay time of synaptic currents is not true in general. Same for the displacement
current. The leak conductance is typically g~0.05-0.09ms/cm^2 while C~1uF/cm^2. Therefore
the ratio C/g leak is in the 10-20ms range - the same as the typical docking neurotransmitter
time in synapses.
Models of brainstem CPG circuits have been known to exist for decades: JC Smith et al 2012,
Paton et al 2022, Bellingham Clin. Exp. Pharm. And Physiol. 25, 847 (1998); Rubin et al., J.
Neurophysiol. 101, 2146 (2009) among others. The present paper does not discuss existing
knowledge on respiratory networks and gives the impression of reinventing the wheel from
scratch. How will this paper add to existing knowledge?
Comments on revisions:
The authors have done a good job at revising the manuscript to put this work into the context
of earlier work on brainstem central pattern generators.
I still believe the case for the method is not as convincing as it would have been if the method
had been validated first on oscillations produced by a known CPG model. Why would the
inference of synaptic types from the model CPG voltage oscillations be predetermined? Such
inverse problems are quite complicated and their solution is often not unique or sufficiently
constrained. Recovering synaptic weights (or CPG parameters) from limited observations of a
highly nonlinear system is not warranted (Gutenkunst et al., Universally sloppy parameter
sensitivities in systems biology models, PLoS Comp. Biol. 2007;
www.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030189) especially when using surrogate biological
models like Hodgkin-Huxley models.
In p.2, the edited section refers to the interspike interval being much smaller than the period
of the network. More important is to mention the relationship between the decay time of
inhibitory synapses and the period of the network.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2.sa2
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 31 of 39
Reviewer #2 (Public review):
Summary:
By measuring intracellular changes in membrane voltage from a single neuron of the
medulla the authors describe a method for determining the balance of excitatory and
inhibitory synaptic drive onto a single neuron within this important brain region.
Strengths:
This data-driven approach to exploring neural circuits is well described and could be
valuable in identifying microcircuits that generate rhythms. Importantly, perhaps, this
inference method could enable microcircuits to be studied without the need for time
consuming anatomical tracing or other more involved electrophysiological techniques.
Therefore, I definitely can see the value in developing an approach of this type.
Weaknesses:
There are many assumptions that need to be accepted in order to successfully apply this
technique and I was pleased to see that several of these assumption have been explored by
the authors in this study.
For example, this approach involves assuming the reversal potential that is associated with
the different permeant ions that underlie the excitation and inhibition as well as the
application of Ohms law to estimate the contribution of excitation and inhibitory
conductance. My first concern was that this approach relies on a linear I-V relationship
between the measured voltage and the estimated reversal potential. However, open
rectification is a feature of any I-V relationship generated by asymmetric distributions of ions
(see the GHK current equation) and will therefore be a particular issue for the inhibition
resulting from asymmetrical Cl- ion gradients across GABA-A receptors. The mixed cation
conductance that underlies most synaptic excitation will also generate a non-linear I-V
relationship due to the inward rectification associated with polyamine block of AMPA
receptors. The authors present evidence that over most of the voltage range examined the I-V
relationship is linear and this is a helpful addition.
This approach has similarities to earlier studies undertaken in the visual cortex that
estimated the excitatory and inhibitory synaptic conductance changes that contributed to
membrane voltage changes during receptive field stimulation. However, these approaches
also involved the recording of transmembrane current changes during visual stimulation that
were undertaken in voltage-clamp at various command voltages to estimate the underlying
conductance changes. Molkov et al have attempted to essentially deconvolve the underlying
conductance changes without this information and I am concerned that this simply may not
be possible.
The current balance equation (1) cited in this study is based upon the parallel conductance
model developed by Hodgkin & Huxley. One key element of the HH equations is the inclusion
of an estimate of the capacitive current generated due to the change in voltage across the
membrane capacitance. While the present study takes into account the impact of membrane
capacitance, a deeper discussion on how variations in capacitance across different neuron
types might affect inference accuracy would be useful. Differences in capacitance could
introduce variability in inferred conductances, potentially influencing model predictions.
Studies using acute slicing preparations to examine circuit effects have often been limited to
the study of small microcircuits - especially feedforward and feedback interneuron circuits. It
is widely accepted that any information gained from this approach will always be
compromised by the absence of patterned afferent input from outside the brain region being
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 32 of 39
studied. In this study, descending control from the Pons and the neocortex will not be
contributing much to the synaptic drive and ascending information from respiratory muscles
will also be absent completely. This may not have been such a major concern if this study was
limited to demonstrating the feasibility of a methodological approach. However, this
limitation does need to be considered when using an approach of this type to speculate on the
prevalence of specific circuit motifs within the medulla (Figure 4). Therefore, I would argue
that some discussion of this limitation should be included in this manuscript.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2.sa1
Author response:
The following is the authors’ response to the original reviews.
Public Reviews:
Reviewer #1 (Public review):
Summary:
The paper develops a phase method to obtain the excitatory and inhibitory afferents to
certain neuron populations in the brainstem. The inferred contributions are then
compared to the results of voltage clamp and current clamp experiments measuring the
synaptic contributions to post-I, aug-E, and ramp-I neurons.
Strengths:
The electrophysiology part of the paper is sound and reports novel features with respect
to earlier work by JC Smith et al 2012, Paton et al 2022 (and others) who have mapped
circuits of the respiratory central pattern generator. Measurements on ramp-I neurons,
late-I neurons, and two types of post-I neurons in Figure 2 besides measurements of
synaptic inputs to these neurons in Figure 5 are to my knowledge new.
Weaknesses:
The phase method for inferring synaptic conductances fails to convince. The method
rests on many layers of assumptions and the inferred connections in Figure 4 remain
speculative.
We hope that the additional method justifications now incorporated in the manuscript will
make our method more convincing and change this reviewer’s opinion.
To be convincing, such a method ought to be tested first on a model CPG with known
connectivity to assess how good it is at inferring known connections back from the
analysis of spatio-temporal oscillations.
We respectfully disagree with this critique. Existing respiratory CPG models are based on a
conductance-based formalism. Since the neurons recorded using our approach are typically
hyperpolarized, in the model at the corresponding values of the membrane potential, all
voltage-gated channels will be deactivated. Therefore, the current balance equation used in
this study will closely align with the descriptions used in these models. This alignment will
result in a near-exact correspondence between the synaptic conductance values inferred by
our method and their model counterparts. However, we believe that such a demonstration,
while predetermined to be successful, would not be convincing for a computationally savvy
audience.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 33 of 39
For biological data, once the network connectivity has been inferred as claimed, the
straightforward validation is to reconstruct the experimental oscillations (Figure 2)
noting that Rybak et al (Rybak, Paton Schwaber J. Neurophysiol. 77, 1994 (1997)) have
already derived models for the respiratory neurons.
Running such simulations is beyond the scope of this paper, which focuses on our methods
for extracting synaptic conductances during network activity cycles from intracellular
recordings. However, the existing, largely speculative, respiratory CPG models can be
validated against the "ground truth" of the inferences we present here. To illustrate how our
circuit connection motifs elaborate on existing respiratory CPG models, we have now
included a combinatorial connectivity model in the manuscript derived from the connectivity
motifs in the supplemental figures (Figure 4 Supplemental Figure 1) with comparisons to the
model schematic utilized by Rybak, Smith et al. in simulation studies to simulate a rhythmic
three-phase respiratory pattern. There are conserved mechanistically important connectivity
features between these schematics that it is possible to suggest that our more elaborate
connectivity scheme would almost certainly generate the three-phase patterns of neuronal
firing and network rhythmic activity.
The transformation from time to phase space, unlike in the Kuramoto model, is not
justified here (Line 94) and is wrong. The underpinning idea that "the synaptic
conductances depend on the cycle phase and not on time explicitly" is flawed because
synapses have characteristic decay times and delays to response which remain fixed
when the period of network oscillations increases. Synaptic properties depend on time
and not on phase in the network.
The primary assumption of our method is that all variables within the system are periodic
functions of time. Therefore, the inputs to the recorded neuron, at minimum, are fully
defined by the oscillation's phase. While the transduction of the input into postsynaptic
conductance may have its own time dependence, the characteristic timescale of synaptic
dynamics (10-20 ms, as suggested by the reviewer) is much smaller than the period of
network oscillations. This is certainly true for the test system we are using. This valid
assumption of our method is now further clarified in the revised manuscript.
One major consequence relevant to the present identification of excitatory or inhibitory
behaviour, is that it cannot account for change in the behaviour of inhibitory synapses -
from inhibitory to excitatory action - when the inhibitory decay time becomes
commensurable to the period of network oscillations (Wang & Buzsaki Journal of
Neuroscience 16, 6402 (1996), van Vreeswijk et al. J. Comp. Neuroscience 1,313 (1994),
Borgers and Kopell Neural Comput. 15, 2003).
Our method focuses on recovering synaptic conductances rather than directly measuring
presynaptic inputs. The conversion of presynaptic inputs (spike trains) into postsynaptic
conductances involves its own time scales. This can lead to complex dynamical effects when
synaptic delay or decay times are comparable to the oscillation period. In such cases,
although our conductance calculation remains accurate, we might misinterpret the phase of
the presynaptic input, as it may not align with the phase of the postsynaptic conductance
peak. However, this discrepancy is not significant for applications where the synaptic
delay/decay times are considerably shorter than the oscillation period.
In addition, even small delays in the inhibitory synapse response relative to the pre-
synaptic action potential also produce in-phase synchronization (Chauhan et al., Sci. Rep.
8, 11431 (2018); Borgers and Kopell, Neural Comput. 15, 509 (2003)).
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 34 of 39
The reviewer is referring to a phenomenon involving interspike synchronization that
generates oscillations with very short periods, comparable to synaptic delay times. Our
technique, in contrast, is designed for systems of asynchronously firing neurons forming
functional populations whose oscillations emerge on a much longer time scale or are driven
by periodic stimuli (e.g., sensory input) with a period much longer than the interspike
intervals of individual neurons. The time scale difference we are addressing in our test
system is two orders of magnitude.
The present assumptions are way too simplistic because you cannot account for these
commensurability effects with a single parameter like the network phase. There is
therefore little confidence that this model can reliably distinguish excitatory from
inhibitory synapses when their dynamic properties are not properly taken into account.
As we explained in our previous responses, in our test system, we can reliably resolve post-
synaptic conductance variations at 1/100th of the oscillation period. This is due to a >100X
time scale difference between the oscillation period and the synaptic/membrane decay time
constants. The efficiency of our method in other systems may vary depending on the
relationship between the membrane time constant and the oscillation period. The text now
provides a clearer discussion of the method's resolution.
To interpret post-synaptic conductance profiles in terms of presynaptic inputs (e.g., to
reconstruct connectivity), one should consider the input-to-conductance transduction
processes.We did not aim to provide a general solution for this step in our paper (hence the
title) as these processes may differ for different neurotransmitter systems and involve
individual dynamics. However, in our test system, as discussed, the oscillation period is much
longer than the synaptic decay times of the fast-acting neurotransmitters involved (i.e.,
glutamate, glycine, and GABA). This means that the possible phase difference between
presynaptic neuronal activity and the corresponding postsynaptic conductances is negligible.
This allows for a straightforward interpretation of conductance profiles in terms of the
functional connectivity of the network. In other systems, the situation may, of course, be
different and additional efforts for inferring the presynaptic activity from postsynaptic
conductance profiles may be necessary.
Line 82, Equation 1 makes extremely crude assumptions that the displacement current
(CdV/dt) is negligible and that the ion channel currents are all negligible. Vm(t) is also not
defined. The assumption that the activation/inactivation times of all ion channels are
small compared to the 10-20ms decay time of synaptic currents is not true in general.
Same for the displacement current. The leak conductance is typically g~0.05-
0.09ms/cm^2 while C~1uF/cm^2. Therefore the ratio C/g leak is in the 10-20ms range -
the same as the typical docking neurotransmitter time in synapses.
We have explicitly included capacitive current in the model formulation and described the
time scale separation requirement that justifies our approach. Additionally, we now explain
within the text that the current injection protocol involves hyperpolarizing the recorded
neuron to ensure voltage-dependent currents remain deactivated during the recording. The
remarkable linearity of the current-voltage relationships observed in the vast majority of
recorded neurons provides post-hoc evidence supporting this assumption. For further details,
please refer to our responses to Reviewer 2 and Figure 1 Supplemental Figure 1 as an
example.
Models of brainstem CPG circuits have been known to exist for decades: JC Smith et al
2012, Paton et al 2022, Bellingham Clin. Exp. Pharm. And Physiol. 25, 847 (1998); Rubin
et al., J. Neurophysiol. 101, 2146 (2009) among others. The present paper does not
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 35 of 39
discuss existing knowledge on respiratory networks and gives the impression of
reinventing the wheel from scratch. How will this paper add to existing knowledge?
We appreciate this comment, and in fact, in the original submitted version of this manuscript,
we discussed existing knowledge of respiratory networks, but there was editorial concern
that this material was above and beyond the technical aspects that we were trying to convey
and therefore may detract from the paper as a technical submission. To strike a balance, we
have re-incorporated some of this material in abbreviated form into the Discussion section
“Implications of reconstructed synaptic conductance profiles for respiratory functional
circuit architecture”.
Reviewer #2 (Public review):
Summary:
By measuring intracellular changes in membrane voltage from a single neuron of the
medulla the authors describe a method for determining the balance of excitatory and
inhibitory synaptic drive onto a single neuron within this important brain region.
Strengths:
This approach could be valuable in describing the microcircuits that generate rhythms
within this respiratory control centre. This method could more generally be used to
enable microcircuits to be studied without the need for time-consuming anatomical
tracing or other more involved electrophysiological techniques.
Weaknesses:
This approach involves assuming the reversal potential that is associated with the
different permeant ions that underlie the excitation and inhibition as well as the
application of Ohms law to estimate the contribution of excitation and inhibitory
conductance. My first concern is that this approach relies on a linear I-V relationship
between the measured voltage and the estimated reversal potential. However, open
rectification is a feature of any I-V relationship generated by asymmetric distributions of
ions (see the GHK current equation) and will therefore be a particular issue for the
inhibition resulting from asymmetrical Cl- ion gradients across GABA-A receptors. The
mixed cation conductance that underlies most synaptic excitation will also generate a
non-linear I-V relationship due to the inward rectification associated with the polyamine
block of AMPA receptors. Could the authors please speculate what impact these non-
linearities could have on results obtained using their approach?
In our Figure 1 Supplemental Figure 1, we illustrated that I-V relationships for each
particular phase of the cycle (except for transitions between inspiration and expiration
where our error estimates are greatest) are remarkably linear.
In Author response iamge 1 we compare the I-V dependence for Cl- as predicted by the GHK
equation and its linear approximation using constant conductance and the Cl- Nernst
potential. One can see that in the typical range of voltages used (shown by solid black vertical
lines), the linear approximation appears quite adequate.
Author response image 1.

Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 36 of 39
This approach has similarities to earlier studies undertaken in the visual cortex that
estimated the excitatory and inhibitory synaptic conductance changes that contributed to
membrane voltage changes during receptive field stimulation. However, these
approaches also involved the recording of transmembrane current changes during
visual stimulation that were undertaken in voltage-clamp at various command voltages
to estimate the underlying conductance changes. Molkov et al have attempted to
essentially deconvolve the underlying conductance changes without this information and
I am concerned that this simply may not be possible.
This was why we compared the results of our reconstructions applied to current- and voltage-
clamp recordings from the same neurons and we found, as illustrated, that the synaptic
conductance profiles are qualitatively identical with both techniques.
The current balance equation (1) cited in this study is based on the parallel conductance
model developed by Hodgkin & Huxley. However, one key element of the HH equations is
the inclusion of an estimate of the capacitive current generated due to the change in
voltage across the membrane capacitance. I would always consider this to be the most
important motivation for the development of the voltage-clamp technique in the 1930's.
Indeed, without subtraction of the membrane capacitance, it is not possible to isolate the
transmembrane current in the way that previous studies have done. In the current study,
I feel it is important that the voltage change due to capacitive currents is taken into
consideration in some way before the contribution of the underlying conductance
changes are inferred.
We have incorporated the capacitive current into the initial model formulation and
established explicit requirements for time scale separation. These requirements justify the
application of our method. Specifically, the membrane time constant (C/g ~ 10ms in our test
system) must be substantially shorter than the period of network oscillations (T ~ 2s in our
test system). Under this condition, aggregate variations in synaptic conductances can be
considered slow, allowing us to treat membrane voltage as being in instantaneous
equilibrium. This defines the time resolution of our method. Please refer to our responses to
Reviewer 1 and the revised manuscript text for a more detailed explanation.
Studies using acute slicing preparations to examine circuit effects have often been
limited to the study of small microcircuits - especially feedforward and feedback
interneuron circuits. It is widely accepted that any information gained from this
approach will always be compromised by the absence of patterned afferent input from
outside the brain region being studied. In this study, descending control from the Pons
and the neocortex will not be contributing much to the synaptic drive and ascending
information from respiratory muscles will also be absent completely. This may not have
been such a major concern if this study was limited to demonstrating the feasibility of a
methodological approach. However, this limitation does need to be considered when
using an approach of this type to speculate on the prevalence of specific circuit motifs
within the medulla (Figure 4). Therefore, I would argue that some discussion of this
limitation should be included in this manuscript.
Our experimental brainstem-spinal cord in situ preparation does include important inputs
from the pons that are necessary to generate the 3-phase respiratory pattern (e.g., Smith et al.
(2013). Brainstem respiratory networks: building blocks and microcircuits. Trends Neurosci,
36(3), 152-162), but we agree that other inputs such as from midbrain and cortex as well as
important peripheral afferents are absent, and we have now noted this limitation in the text
at the end of the new section “Implications of reconstructed synaptic conductance profiles for
respiratory functional circuit architecture“. We show specific circuit motifs simply to
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 37 of 39
illustrate how our readout of synaptic conductances from single neurons and the information
on the main neuronal activity patterns in our experimental preparation can be interpreted.
We thought that it would be useful to illustrate and interpret inferred connectivity motifs as
an output of our methodological approach. As we now discuss in the section “Implications of
reconstructed synaptic conductance profiles for respiratory functional circuit architecture”
in response to Reviewer #1, our circuit motifs are consistent with some sets of connections
that have been speculated in the literature, but they also provide some novel information
about connectivity that we have been able to infer for respiratory circuits from the complex
sets of synaptic conductances indicated by our approach.
Recommendations for the authors:
Reviewer #1 (Recommendations for the authors):
Major comments:
(1) My recommendation is to clarify how each neuron population was identified.
Individual populations are very hard to identify based on morphology alone in brain
slices such as Supplemental Figure 1. I assume the authors identified each population
based on their phase difference relative to the inspiratory pulse in the phrenic nerve. This
ought to be clarified.
Neuronal populations were classified based on their firing patterns within the respiratory
cycle. Immunohistochemistry was only used for post-hoc identification of the transmitter
phenotype in select neurons. Specifically, recorded neurons were categorized according to
the phase range of the respiratory cycle in which they fired and their firing pattern during
that range. For example, neurons firing during inspiration (synchronously with the phrenic
nerve) with a progressively increasing firing rate were classified as ramp-I, etc., as illustrated
in the figure depicting phase-dependent firing patterns. This classification is detailed in the
"Firing patterns of respiratory interneurons" sub-section.
It would also be beneficial to discuss the benefits and limitations of using this
preparation relative to brainstem slices and in-vivo preparations (e.g. Moraes et al. J.
Physiol. 599, 3237 (2021)) for measuring live network activity.
We provided the reference to an important recent review (Paton et al. 2022, Advancing
respiratory-cardiovascular physiology with the working heart-brainstem preparation over 25
years. J Physiol, 600(9), 2049-2075) on the benefits and limitations of using the in situ rodent
brainstem-spinal cord preparation employed in our study.
(2) The background on inference methods is similarly thin. The works in line 47 are
mainly experimental characterizations of excitatory and inhibitory cells. Techniques for
estimating network conductances/parameters ought to be covered. One reference that
comes to mind: Armstrong, E. Statistical data assimilation for estimating
electrophysiology simultaneously with connectivity within a biological neuronal network.
Physical Review E 101, 012415, 2020.
Our technique is not intended to estimate synaptic connections between neurons from paired
recordings. Instead, we calculate the dynamics of inhibitory and excitatory synaptic
conductances that result from many concurrent synaptic inputs representing aggregate
activities of the functionally interacting populations. The previous studies that we cited are
the ones that have direct or indirect relation to this paradigm.
(3) How the "patterns of synaptic conductances" in phase diagrams imply the network
connectivity (l.244) is not clear. Are the patterns of "activity patterns" depicted in Figure 2
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 38 of 39
the only neuron populations driving the postsynaptic neurons in Figure 4?
Figure 2 shows all of the basic firing patterns that we have recorded in our experimental
preparation. So, yes, assuming that all periodic inputs in this network originate from within
the network, those 6 populations are the main sources of the corresponding patterns.
The methodology for constructing the networks is unclear,
This is explained in detail in the section "Synaptic Conductances and Functional Connectome
of Respiratory Interneurons". Specifically, when a neuron with a given firing pattern (and
thus belonging to a corresponding population, e.g., pre-I/I) exhibits excitatory or inhibitory
conductance during a particular phase of the respiratory cycle (e.g., inhibition during the first
half of expiration, as in Figure 3A1), we infer that the population with the same firing pattern
receives input from a population with an activity pattern matching the postsynaptic
conductance profile (e.g., the pre-I/I population receives post-I inhibition, as in Figure 4A1).
yet 6 lines later (l.251) the narrative jumps to the conclusion that "the information on
inhibitory transmitter phenotypes...indeed corroborates that subsets of the presynaptic
neurons are inhibitory" and further "conductance profiles, which gives additional
confidence in the correlation between pre-synaptic firing patterns and likely post-
synaptic interactions". The method also blends in empirical information from immune
labelling. It is unclear what method can actually infer on its own.
The functional connections that we were able to infer implied that neurons with specific
firing patterns (e.g., post-I neurons) must include neurons with specific transmitter
phenotypes (e.g., inhibitory). Immune labeling results were used to show that there are
indeed neurons having corresponding firing patterns and neurotransmitter phenotypes. It
has nothing to do with the inference method. It just shows that our assumption about various
inhibitory inputs originating from within the network is plausible.
(4) Figure 3 - why does the Early-I population which is connected by the same mutually
inhibitory links as Post-I and Aug-E within the respiratory CPG have the opposite
conductance activation sequence as post-I and aug-E. Namely, it receives excitatory input
at phases 0,1,2 when post-I and aug-E receive inhibitory input?
We added the section “Implications of reconstructed synaptic conductance profiles for
respiratory functional circuit architecture” discussing the correspondence and
inconsistencies between our findings and existing respiratory CPG models (see Figure 4
Supplemenntal Figure 1). For this specific question, phase 0, 1 and 2 represent the same
phase of the respiratory cycle corresponding to a transition from expiration to inspiration.
According to the Rybak et al. models, the early-I population receives excitation from the pre-
I/I population which is active at the E-I transition and throughout the entire inspiratory phase
of the cycle. This is largely consistent with our findings shown in Figure 3. Also, according to
Rybak et al., post-I and aug-E populations are inhibited by early-I neurons, which is also
consistent with inspiratory inhibition in all examples of these neurons that we show in
Figure 3. As noted in other responses to the reviewers’ comments, we have now discussed in
the “Implications of reconstructed synaptic conductance profiles for respiratory functional
circuit architecture” which covers some comparisons to previously inferred connectivity in
the respiratory network.
Minor comments:
(1) l.39 - The terminology "patterns of inhibitory and excitatory synaptic conductances"
used throughout the manuscript (l.66, 241, 244, 259...) is vague.
Yaroslav I Molkov et al., 2025 eLife. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2 39 of 39
We defined this terminology in the updated version.
(2) Figure 1 what is the integration time of the moving median in Figure 1a?
0.1s. Now included in the figure legend.
(3) L.128 "rhythmic inspiratory neuron" which one is this post-I, aug-E, early-I?
This example demonstrates a pre-I/I firing pattern, as the neuron begins firing slightly before
the phrenic burst and continues throughout inspiration (as defined by phrenic nerve
activity). However, this is merely an arbitrary example used to illustrate the methodology.
The actual firing pattern of the recorded neuron is not considered in any way for synaptic
conductance inference.
(4) Figure 3 What the panel labelling means A1, B1, A2, etc. is not disclosed in the
caption.
These labels are used in the text to refer to specific examples. Now it is explained in the
caption that the letter corresponds to the firing phenotype indicated on the top of each
column and the digit refers to the example number.
(5) L.129/ L.133 - the diagram of the medulla in Supplementary Figure 1 ought to be
inserted early on in the main text when introducing the respiratory CPG, phrenic and
vagal signals.
This is a good suggestion and we have linked this figure specifically to Figure 2 as Figure 2
Supplemental Figure 1 in the main text to better orient readers.
(6) L. 457 - Reference needed on reversal potentials.
We report what we observed, so it is unclear what reference the reviewer means.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.101959.2.sa0