Chapter 5   Gibbs free energy and Helmholtz free 
energy
In chapter 4 it was shown that the total entropy change for an irreversible process is
positive. For a reversible processes it is zero. If the entropy function is used to ad-
dress the question whether or not a given process proceeds spontaneously in a cer-
tain direction, the system and its surroundings  must be taken into consideration.
This, however, is inconvenient situation. It wou ld be better to have a function just
for the system that would indicate whether or not a process is potentially spontane-
ous without a need for considering changes in the surroundings. 
In our example in section 4.2.4 it was shown that sillimanite transformed to an-
dalusite irreversibly. The heat exchange between the system and its surroundings,
however, took place reversibly. In the course of the transformation of sillimanite to
andalusite at 900 K an amount of heat equal to 2903 Jmol
-1 was transferred from the
system to the surroundings in order to keep the temperature of the system constant.
Due to the heat absorption, the entropy of the surroundings increased by
3.23 Jmol-1K-1 (see page 143). From the standp oint of the system, this entropy
change is, however, negative. It is smaller than the change in the entropy of the sys-
tem (-3.10 Jmol-1K-1) that was calculated using the reversible path. Eq. (4.4) can,
thus, be rewritten as follows:
(5.1)
for an irreversible process and 
(5.2)
for a reversible process. 
Under isochoric conditions one has GQrev = dU. Eq. (5.1) can be rewritten, drop-
ping the subscript 'syst', as
(5.3)
dSsyst
GQrev
T--------------–0 !
dSsyst
GQrev
T--------------–0 =
dU TdS–0 
166 5 Gibbs free energy and Helmholtz free energy
and Eq. (5.2) as
(5.4)
In the case of an isobaric processes, GQrev can be replaced by dH and one obtains:
(5.5)
where the sign 'smaller than' designates an irreversi ble process and th e sign 'equal
to' a reversible one.
Eqs. (5.3) through (5.5) can be used to determine whether or not a process is po-
tentially spontaneous without any consideration of any changes in the surroundings.
If (dU - TdS) at constant volume or ( dH - TdS) at constant pressure is smaller than
zero, a process is potentially spontaneous. If ( dU - TdS) or (dH - TdS ) equal zero,
there is thermodynamic equilibrium, and if (dU - TdS) or (dH - TdS) are greater than
zero, a process does not proceed in the given direction. For the sake of convenience,
we introduce dF for (dU - TdS) and dG for (dH - TdS), and we can then write:
(5.6)
and
(5.7)
Integrating Eqs. Eq. (5.6) and Eq. (5.7) yields:
(5.8)
and
(5.9)
The new functions F and G are termed the Helmholtz free energy and the Gibbs
free energy, respectively. Their values are normally expressed in Joules or calories.
Both are functions of state and both can be used to characterize the nature of a pro-
cesses. Their total differentials read:
(5.10)
and
(5.11)
dU TdS–0 . =
dH TdS–0 , d
dF dU TdS– =
dG dH TdS . – =
FU T S – =
GH T S . – =
dF dU TdS– SdT–=
dG dH TdS– SdT . –=