157 
Chapter VII 
Free Convection
§38. The start up mechanism of free convection 
This phenomenon is particularly important in the terrestrial atmosphere 
concerning air pollution. The interest that we have is to study the generating
dynamical mechanism which makes it possible that from a calm situation
in some regions of the atmosphere, huge masses of air start their motion in
order to take advantage of this knowledge in the fight against the atmosphe- 
rical pollution. With the theoretical treatment that will be given to the pro-
blem, we pretend to reach an analytical solution that can be reinforced or 
refuted by the experiment. 
     Let us consider a huge mass of air which is under the influence of a gra-
vitational field. It is known that when in a part of the atmosphere the me-
chanical equilibrium exists, the temperature distribution in those regions 
only depends on the height over the ground level. Also it is known that the 
mechanical equilibrium is not possible if the above mentioned field of 
temperatures is at the same time a function of the other coordinates so that 
obviously, the previous condition is not satisfied. Otherwise, although this 
requirement can be satisfied, it can happen that the mechanical equilibrium
it not obtained if the temperature gradient in the upward direction is direc-
ted downwards and its magnitude is greater than a certain value. 
     The absence of mechanical equilibrium has as a consequence the motion 
of the air. Internal currents appear in it which tend to mix their parts until 
the temperature reaches a constant value in all the volume occupied by the 
air. Such an air motion in Earth´s gravitational field is known by the name 
of thermal or free convection. 
     As it is well known, in the scope of energetical processes it is not pos-
sible to contend with nature, due to the fact that the quantity of energy 
needed to produce and maintain by long temporary period winds of mo-
derate intensity is of such magnitude, that any proposition in this sense 
                                            Free Convection                                             §39158
must be rejected as a viable alternative to reach a substantial improvement 
in the air quality. However, the process of free convection generator of the 
atmosphere motion in certain localized regions, has to be started under cer-
tain minimal energetic conditions that may be possible reproduced in a prac-
tical way with the aid of any workmanship of low ambient impact and 
reasonable cost. Knowing such energy minimal conditions, some practical 
solution can be suggested to prevent in some places the concentration of 
large quantities of contaminants which obstruct the solar radiation;favouring 
this way the condition so that the atmospherical phenomenon called the 
thermal inversion may be produced. If the concentration of contaminants 
in the air could be stopped this would allow the solar energy to pass through 
as far as Earth´s surface where a large part of it would be absorbed to be 
afterwards radiated in the form of heat to the lower layers of the atmos-
phere. The air so heated, starts the free convection characteristic upward 
motion dispersing this way the cloud of contaminants. This is possible due 
to the fact that once the atmosphere starts moving, the solar radiation gives 
the massive expenditure of energy required to maintain the air motion and 
cleaning process. So it is very important to know the physical conditions 
and the minimal energy that have to be produced in order to generate an 
atmospherical stimulus capable of originating the start up mechanism of 
the free convection. 
§39. The conditions so that the mechanical equilibrium be  
        unstable 
So that a mechanical equilibrium exists in any portion of the terrestrial 
atmosphere it is necessary that the following condition is fulfilled 
           grad gp  U .                    (39.1)
     If the Z–axe of the used inertial frame of reference is vertically directed 
upward, the former relation can be written as follows 
              V
g
dz
dp  ;         (39.2)
where g is the acceleration of gravity and V =1 /U  the specific volume. It 
is clear that if the temperature is not constant throughout the air, the resul-