AIEE ON THE MOVE 
Edited by 
Gladys Charitz 
More than  1,000  specialists expected 
at Pacific Energy Conversion Conference 
More than  1,000  leading scientists  and 
engineers will gather  in  San  Francisco, 
Calif.,  August  13-16  to take part  in  the 
Pacific Energy Conversion Conference, 
to be  held  at  the  Fairmont Hotel.  Al­
though  the  conference will  be  held under 
the auspices  of  the  AIEE,  all  interested 
engineers  and  scientists  are  invited  to 
attend, regardless  of  their fields  of  spe­
cialization. 
Heading  the  list  of  speakers will  be 
Dr.  C. C.  Furnas, formerly Assistant 
Secretary  of  Defense  for  Research  and 
Development  and now  chancellor  of  the 
University  of  Buffalo.  In his  keynote talk 
Dr, C. C.  Furnas 
on August  13,  Dr.  Furnas will trace 
developments  in the  fields  of  energy con­
version  and  speculate  on  future applica­
tions. 
Taking  a  good, hard look  at  energy 
conversion from  the  engineer's viewpoint 
is the job  assigned  to W. K.  Davis, vice-
president  for  scientific development, 
Bechtel Corp.  Mr.  Davis served  as di­
rector  of  the  Atomic Energy Commis­
sion's Division  of  Reactor Development 
for several years  and has  been  a  pro­
fessor  of  engineering  at  the  University 
of California  at  Los Angeles. 
NEWEST DEVICES FEATURED 
The 4-day program will concentrate  on 
the newest devices  and  systems  for  the 
direct conversion  of  heat, light,  and 
chemical reactions into electric power. 
The sessions will cover  the  fields  of 
thermionic, thermoelectric, magnetohy-
drodynamic, photovoltaic  and  fuel cell 
generators,  and  energy storage. 
Parallel sessions have been omitted  by 
design  in  order  to  provide maximum  op­
portunity  for all  conference registrants  to 
learn developments  and  application pos­
sibilities  in all  fields  of  direct energy 
conversion, according  to J. C,  Beckett, 
conference chairman. Audience participa­
tion will  be  encouraged through questions 
to be  answered during panel discussions 
at the end  of  each session. 
"This  is a  meeting designed  for  engi­
neers,"  Mr.  Beckett said,  and  emphasized 
that early application depends  on  effec­
tive communication between those work­
ing in the  field  and  those most concerned 
with what energy conversion  can do. 
"The conference,"  he  said, "will provide 
a 2-way street  for  exchange  of  views  and 
information between those creating  new 
systems  and  hardware  and  those facing 
the virtually limitless fields  of  applica­
tion." 
He stressed  the  need  for  self-contained, 
reliable power sources  and  of  smaller, 
lighter weight power plants. 
Working sessions  of the  conference 
will follow this general plan: State  of 
the  art  presentations will  be  made  in  each 
field of direct energy conversion  by  rec­
ognized leaders  in the  conception  and 
implementation  of  each separate field.  Im­
mediately following will  be  panel dis­
cussions with emphasis  on  applications, 
which will permit full discussion  of  ques­
tions from  the  floor. 
CONFERENCE PROGRAM GIVEN 
The tentative conference program fol­
lows: 
MONDAY, AUGUST  13 
β.00  a.m.  Regisfraffon 
10.00  a.m.  Keynote address 
Dr. C. C.  Furnas, chancellor, Univ.  of  BufFalo 
17:00  a.m. Thermionics, General  Session 
Chairman: Herman Miller, General Elec.  Co. 
Thermionic Power Generation 
R. W.  Pidd, General Atomic  Div.  General 
Dynamics Corp. 
7 2;00 Noon  Luncheon 
Address: Engineering Aspects  of  Energy Con­
version 
Speaker:  W. K.  Davis, vice-president. Scien­
tific Development Department, Bechtel Corp. 
2:00 p.m.  Thermionics, General  Session, 
iconf.; 
Theory  and  Experimental Performance  of 
Cesium Thermionic Converters 
G. .V.  Hatsopoulos 
MIT  and  Thermo Electron Engg. Corp. 
3.-00  p.m.  Panel Discussion  on Thermionics 
Moderator:  Dr. G.  N.  Hatsopoulos,  λΠΤ and 
Thermo Electron Engg. Corp. 
Panel: 
H. S.  Webster, General Elec.  Co.,  "Current 
Emission Phenomena" 
H. M.  Ogle, Applied Systems Corp.,  'Tn-
Reactor Tests  of  Plasma Diodes" 
Walter Riechelt, Univ.  of  Calif.  (Los  Ala­
mos), 
Dr. R. W.  Pidd, General Atomic  Div., 
General Dynamics Corp. 
TUESDAY, AUGUST  14 
9:00  a.m.  Photovoltaics, General Session 
Chairman:  E. H.  Hulse, Lawrence Radiation 
Lab.,  Univ.  of  Calif. 
Photovoltaics: State  of  the Art, 1962 
W. R. Cherry, NASA 
N-on-P Solar cells  for  Telstar 
/. M.  Early,  Bell  Tel. Lab. 
10:30  a.m. Pnnel  Discussion  on  Photovoffofcs 
Moderator: Prof  G. L.  Pearson, Stanford Univ. 
Panel: 
Paul Rappaport,  RCA  Labs.,  "The  Status 
of Gallium Arsenide Photovoltaic Cells" 
Dr. J. M.  Denny, Space Technology Labs. 
"Radiation Damage  in  Photovoltaic Con­
verters" 
S. G.  Scott, Applied Systems Corp., "Some 
Considerations  on  Photovoltaic Systems 
Design" 
W. R.  Cherry, NASA 
J. M.  Early, Bell  Tel.  Labs. 
2:00  p.m.  fuel Cells, General Session 
Chairman,  Jay  Froman, Office  of  Naval  Res. 
Hydrocarbon Fuel Cells—a Survey 
H. A.  Liebhafsky,  General Elec.  Co. 
The Fuel Cell Idea  and its  Reduction  to 
Practice 
K. V.  Kordesch, Union Carbide Corp. 
3:30  p.m.  Panel Discussion  on Fuel Cells 
Moderator:  Dr.  C. W.  Tobias, professor  of 
physics, Univ.  of  Calif. 
Panel: 
Dr. D. L.  Douglas, General Elec.  Co., 
"Current Status  of Ion Exchange Membrane 
Fuel Cells" 
B. S.  Baker, Electrochimica Corp.,  "Am-
Uranium-bearing thermionic fuel element material undergoes high temperature  chemis^ 
try tests  at  General Atomic Division  of  General Dynamics  Corp. 
JULY  1962 ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING  · 565 

One of the two 2,500-watt "subgenerators** which make up the largest thermoelectric 
power plant ever constructed is shown under test at the Westinghouse new products 
laboratories 
monia Fuel Cell—an Approach to an 
Economical System" 
Dr. Morris Eisenberg, Electrochimica Corp., 
"The Outlook for Fuel Cells in Transpor­
tation" 
R. E. Henderson, General Motors Corp. 
Dr. K. V. Kordesch, Union Carbide Corp. 
Dr. H. A. Liebhafsky. General Elec. Co. 
7:30 p.m. Eanquei 
Speaker: Dr. J. A. Hutcheson, vice-president— 
engineering, Westinghouse Elec. Corp. 
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 15 
9:00 a.m. Energy Storage, General Session 
Chairman: W. W. Grundel, Elec. Storage 
Battery Co. 
Current Status of Sealed Nickel-Cadmium 
Storage Cells 
U. B.  Thomas,  Bell Tel. Labs. 
Recent Developments on Silver-Cadmium 
Batteries 
Frank Solomon,  Yardney Elec. Corp. 
J 0:30 a.m. Panel Discussion on Energy 
Storage 
Moderator: Dr. Morris Eisenberg, pres., Elec­
trochimica Corp. 
Panel: 
A. F. Daniel, U. S. Army Signal Research 
& Development Lab. "Sealed Alkaline 
Storage Batteries" 
H. N. Seiger, Gulton Ind., "Cycling Be­
havior of Sealed Nickel-Cadmium Batteries" 
Dr. U. B. Thomas, Bell Tel. Labs. 
Dr. Frank Solomon, Yardney Elec. Corp. 
7 2:00 Noon Luncheon 
Address: Future Prospects of Plasma Dynamics 
and Energy Conversion 
Speaker: Dr. Arthur Kantrowitz, Avco-Everett 
Res. Lab. 
2:00 p.m. Thermoefecfrics, General Session 
Chairman: W. G. Evans Westinghouse Elec. 
Corp. 
The Basic Concepts of Thermoelectric Power 
Generation 
R. R.  Heikes,  Westinghouse Res. Labs. 
3:00 p.m. Panel Discussion on Thermoelectrics 
Moderator: Dr. R. R. Heikes, Westinghouse 
Res.  Lab. 
Panel: 
P. H. Klein. Sperry Rand Res. Center, 
"An Economic Approach to the Selection 
of Thermoelectric Materials for Intensive 
Study" 
Dr. R. H. Eustis. Stanford Univ., "Heat 
Transfer Limitations in Thermoelectric 
Generation" 
Dr. C. M. Kelley, Univ. of Denver, "Ther­
moelectric Properties of a Liquid Semi­
conductor System" 
Dr. J. D. Richards, Minn. Mining & Mfg. 
Co. "Materials Selection Criteria for Ther­
moelectric Power Generation" 
P. H. Egli. U.S. Naval Res. Lab. 
THURSDAY, AUGUST 16 
9:00 a.m. Magnefo/i/drocfyrnam/cs, General 
Session 
Chairman: Dr. Robert Parden, Univ. of Santa 
Clara 
Magnetohydrodynamics—Principles, Applica­
tion and State of Development 
R. J. Rosa, Avco-Everett Res. Lab. 
9:45 a.m. Panef Discussion on 
Magnetohydrodynamics 
Moderator: Dr. R. J. Rosa, Avco-Everett Res. 
Lab. 
Panel: 
Dr. G. W. Sutton, General Elec. Co. "Cycle 
Analysis and Efficiencies of MHD Genera­
tors" 
Dr. Daniel Bershader, Lockheed Missiles & 
Space Co., "Conducting Fluid Boundary 
Layers" 
Dr. V. H. Blackman, MHD Research, "Non-
Equilibrium Electron Phenomena in MHD 
Channels" 
Dr. H. H. Woodson. MIT, "MHD AC 
Power Generation" 
Dr. Stewart Way, Westinghouse Res. Labs., 
"Reduction of Operating Temperature in 
MHD Power Plants" 
2:00 p.m. Meeting, Ad Hoc Committee on 
Science and Electronics Division 
Handling of new energy sources 
REGISTRATION FACTS SUPPLIED 
Registration information will go to mem­
bers of AIEE and other societies some 
weeks prior to the conference. However, 
individual requests may be directed to 
W. B. Freeman, registration chairman, 
c/o General Electric Co., 235 Montgom­
ery St., San Francisco 4,  Calif. 
The registration fee is $15 for each 
participant. This includes one bound copy 
of presentations, to be available on ar­
rival at the conference. The fee for stu­
dents is $1 without the bound presenta­
tions,  which may be purchased for $5 
per copy. 
Upon request, assistance will be pro­
vided in arranging visits to such indus­
trial plants and institutions as Lockheed 
Missiles & Space Co., Sunnyvale; Inter­
national Business Machines Corp., San 
Jose;  Hewlett-Packard Co. and Varian 
Associates, Palo Alto; Ampex Corp., 
Redwood City; Stanford Research Insti­
tute,  Menlo Park; Stanford University 
High Voltage Laboratory; University of 
California, Berkeley, and others. 
Only one evening event has been 
scheduled, a social hour and banquet on 
Tuesday, August 14. Otherwise evenings 
will be free for participants and visitors 
to do as they choose, such as inspect and 
discuss the various technical and educa­
tional exhibits, hold informal work ses­
sions,  or visit San Francisco's many world 
known attractions. 
LADIES' ACTIVITIES 
There will be a Hospitality Room for 
the ladies in the Garden Room at the 
Fairmont Hotel. The room will be open 
each morning for coffee, meeting friends, 
for just for relaxing and getting ac­
quainted. 
Brochures, maps, and suggestions will 
be available to encourage you to see and 
explore Chinatown, Fisherman's
 Wharf, 
Coit Tower, Mission Dolores, Fleish-
hacker Zoo, and the De Young Museum, 
as well as the many other unique San 
Francisco points of interest. 
San Francisco women favor lightweight 
wool suits and dresses, and because of 
the breezes from the Bay, a small hat is 
preferable. Comfortable walking shoes 
are recommended for the tour. It would 
be wise to include a dark silk basic dress 
or two-piece costume for that "possible" 
warm day. A lightweight coat or wrap is 
essential. There may be some of the 
city's fog, but a rain coat will not be 
needed. 
Buses will leave the Fairmont Hotel 
at 10:00 a.m. on Tuesday, August 14, 
for a tour of McClelland's very unusual 
Gardenia and Orchid Nursery. Returning 
via the Great Highway along the coast­
line,  you will see San Francisco's beach 
and the Presidio before crossing the 
Golden Gate Bridge. Luncheon will be 
waiting at the Alta Mira in Sausilito, 
overlooking the San Francisco Bay with 
a glorious view of San Francisco and 
the East Bay. 
The cost of the tour and luncheon 
will be $5.50. 
Architectural firm cited 
for United Engineering Center 
The New York Chapter of the Pro­
ducers' Council, Inc., has cited Shreve, 
Lamb & Harmon Associates, architects, 
for the firm's contribution in the con­
struction of the United Engineering 
Center, which overlooks the East River, 
and which now houses AIEE and 18 
other engineering firms (see Electrical 
Engineering, August 1960 issue, p. 
642). 
The New York City architects received 
honorable mention in the commercial 
category, in a citation dated May 23, 
1962. 
Producers' Council is affiliated with 
the American Institute of Architects. 
566 ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING JULY 1962 
