Vol.:(0123456789)
Neurological Sciences (2024) 45:2347–2351 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-024-07395-x
SHORT PAPER
A new perspective on positive symptoms: expression of damage 
or self‑defence mechanism of the brain?
Annibale Antonioni1  · Emanuela Maria Raho2 · Mariachiara Sensi3 · Francesco Di Lorenzo4 · Luciano Fadiga5,6 · 
Giacomo Koch4,5,6
Received: 20 December 2023 / Accepted: 5 February 2024 / Published online: 14 February 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Usually, positive neurological symptoms are considered as the consequence of a mere, afinalistic and abnormal increase in 
function of specific brain areas. However, according to the Theory of Active Inference, which argues that action and percep-
tion constitute a loop that updates expectations according to a Bayesian model, the brain is rather an explorer that formulates 
hypotheses and tests them to assess the correspondence between internal models and reality. Moreover, the cerebral cortex 
is characterised by a continuous “conflict” between different brain areas, which constantly attempt to expand in order to 
acquire more of the limited available computational resources, by means of their dopamine-induced neuroplasticity. Thus, it 
has recently been suggested that dreams, during rapid eye movement sleep (REMS), protect visual brain areas (deprived of 
their stimuli during rest) from being conquered by other normally stimulated ones. It is therefore conceivable that positive 
symptoms also have a functional importance for the brain. We evaluate supporting literature data of a ‘defensive’ role of 
positive symptoms and the relevance of dopamine-induced neuroplasticity in the context of neurodegenerative and psychi-
atric diseases. Furthermore, the possible functional significance of idiopathic REMS-related behavioural disorder as well as 
phantom limb syndrome is examined. We suggest that positive neurological symptoms are not merely a passive expression of 
a damage, but active efforts, related to dopamine-induced plasticity, to maintain a correct relationship between the external 
world and its brain representation, thus preventing healthy cortical areas from ousting injured ones.
Keywords Positive neurological symptoms · Dopamine · Neuroplasticity · Active inference theory · Defensive activation 
theory
Central nervous system (CNS) disorders may cause 
extremely heterogeneous symptoms, including negative, 
i.e. deficit in normal functions, and positive ones, reflect-
ing an abnormal increase in function, according to Reyn-
olds’ distinction (1862). While the pathophysiology of the 
former seems rather obvious, that of the latter may not be 
as trivial. However, this classification exemplifies the tra -
ditional approach to CNS studies, the activities of which 
are interpreted from the perspective of an external observer. 
Indeed, evaluation of CNS alterations has usually been based 
on what could be perceived from the outside, which does not 
necessarily represent the correct interpretation of brain pro-
cesses. Crucially, Buzsáki’s seminal work suggested that the 
CNS is not a mere tool that absorbs and encodes information 
from outside, but rather an explorer that formulates hypoth-
eses and tests them to assess the correspondence between 
internal models and reality [1 ]. Importantly, his interpre-
tation found mathematical support in the active inference 
 * Annibale Antonioni 
 annibale.antonioni@edu.unife.it
1 Doctoral Program in Translational Neurosciences 
and Neurotechnologies, Department of Neuroscience 
and Rehabilitation, University of Ferrara, Via Ludovico 
Ariosto 35, 44121 Ferrara, Italy
2 Department of Neuroscience and Rehabilitation, University 
Unit of Neurology, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy
3 Unit of Neurology, Interdistrict Health Care Department 
of Neuroscience, S. Anna Ferrara University Hospital, 
44124 Ferrara, Italy
4 Non Invasive Brain Stimulation Unit, Istituto Di Ricovero E 
Cura a Carattere Scientifico Santa Lucia, 00179 Rome, Italy
5 Center for Translational Neurophysiology, Istituto Italiano Di 
Tecnologia, 44121 Ferrara, Italy
6 Section of Physiology, Department of Neuroscience 
and Rehabilitation, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, 
Italy
2348 Neurological Sciences (2024) 45:2347–2351
theory (AIT), according to which action and perception 
constitute a loop that updates expectations in accordance 
with a Bayesian model depending on data available from the 
environment and existing knowledge [2]. The implications of 
this new interpretative model have been extensively investi-
gated in the context of functional motor and sensory symp-
toms, i.e. symptoms that arise in a context of alterations in 
functioning of brain networks rather than abnormalities of 
brain structures. Indeed, functional patients not only mani-
fest partial impairment of intentional control over the body 
(i.e. lack of the feeling of being the agents of their move-
ments), but also abnormal a priori beliefs, whereby sensory 
evidence (bottom-up) fails to alter prior expectations (top-
down) [3]. In this context, higher CNS centres must justify 
the emergence of wrong beliefs, as the top-down attentional 
processes generated the expectation, but did not predict its 
content, and functional symptoms emerge in an attempt to 
overcome the mismatch between prediction and outcome [4].
Another important theory for critically reinterpreting the 
implications of positive symptoms comes from an intersting 
explanation for the role of dreams during rapid eye move-
ment sleep (REMS): specifically, the cerebral cortex is char-
acterised by a continuous “conflict” between different brain 
areas, which constantly attempt to expand in order to acquire 
more of the limited available computational resources [5 ]. 
Since the human brain is mainly dedicated to visual func-
tion and visual input is deprived for several hours each day 
due to the sleep–wake cycle, without controlled visual “hal-
lucinations” (i.e. dreams) the visual cortex would risk los-
ing its territories because the other sensory modalities do 
not suffer such a loss during sleep. Of note, due to its high 
cortical neuroplasticity (i.e. the ability of the CNS to change 
activity in response to intrinsic or extrinsic stimuli in both 
physiological and pathological conditions), the visual cortex 
is “colonised” by tactile stimuli after just 40–60′  of visual 
deprivation in healthy subjects, as highlighted by a func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging study [6 ]. Furthermore, 
a positive correlation between cortical plasticity and REMS 
proportion in 25 primate species was shown by Eagleman 
and Vaughn, who called their interpretation “Defensive Acti-
vation Theory” (DAT) in order to emphasise the defensive 
role played by dreams for visual areas [5].
Although highly speculative, these theories might be 
considered as a starting point for critically reinterpreting 
many concepts concerning CNS disorders from a new and 
intriguing perspective. For example, visual hallucinations, 
i.e. perceptions without an external stimulus, are common in 
numerous conditions, including disorders of the visual path-
ways, neurodegenerative (e.g. Alzheimer’s disease (AD), 
Parkinson’s disease (PD), Lewy body dementia (LBD)) and 
psychiatric diseases (e.g. schizophrenia) and delirium [7 ]. 
Albeit heterogeneous, these disorders share an alteration 
of the normal relationship between real objects and their 
brain representation, because of damage in the afferents (e.g. 
lesions in the visual pathway), or in the areas responsible for 
visual processing, due to aggregates of misfolded proteins 
or alterations in the balance between different neurotrans-
mitters and neuromodulators [7 ]. Therefore, according to 
AIT, the CNS’s expectations are not fulfilled, and assum-
ing the DAT approach, it can be hypothesised that the CNS 
attempts to preserve the normal functionality of visual brain 
areas by generating images without external stimuli, but still 
perceived as real by the subject. Thus, visual hallucinations 
are not only a symptom of visual region damage, but also 
perhaps an attempt by the CNS to restore the normal rela-
tionship between object and perception, which is crucial to 
avoid the “conquest” of these areas by other intact ones.
In particular, dopamine, which is a neurotransmitter/
neuromodulator mainly produced by substantia nigra pars 
compacta (SNPC), has been implicated as playing a cru -
cial role in widespread neuroplastic mechanisms [8 ]. Con-
sequently, patients suffering from visual hallucinations are 
often treated with dopamine receptor antagonist drugs [7 ]: 
this pharmacological antagonism of dopamine makes hal-
lucinations disappear, most likely because the neuroplasti -
city aimed at maintaining the correct activities of the visual 
regions is suppressed and the CNS loses its compensation 
mechanisms. In contrast, dopamine receptor agonist drugs, 
which may excessively enhance plasticity mechanisms and 
also lead to an overstimulation of the visual cortex, often 
cause visual hallucinations [9]. Moreover, the role of dopa-
mine-induced plasticity for the integrity of the whole visual 
pathway (since it also plays a critical role for retinal cells) 
[10], is supported by the finding that antipsychotic agents 
were associated with structural impairment of the visual cor-
tex and retina as well as an exacerbation of subjective visual 
perception disorders in a 3-year follow-up in patients with 
first-episode schizophrenia with visual disturbances [11]. 
Moreover, schizophrenic patients often show a dominance 
of the right hemisphere over the left one, characterised by 
alterations in frontal and temporal areas, critical for lan-
guage functions. Furthermore, a correlation between abnor-
malities in the left arcuate fasciculus and auditory-verbal 
hallucinations was highlighted [12]. Thus, it is possible that 
structural and functional alterations in the language network 
of the left hemisphere force the right one to develop com-
pensatory mechanisms, which consistently concern above all 
the auditory-verbal modality, leading to the typical halluci-
nations if predisposing factors, such as alterations in dopa-
minergic circuits with abnormal neuroplasticity, are present.
Regarding visual hallucinations in neurodegenerative dis-
eases, they can occur in particular in synucleinopathies, but 
are not uncommon in diseases with a different pathophysiol-
ogy, including AD. For example, in PD, where a progres-
sive dopamine decline due to a degeneration of the SNPC 
occurs, generally visual hallucinations are experienced at a 
2349Neurological Sciences (2024) 45:2347–2351 
later stage of disease (i.e. when abnormal alpha-synuclein 
accumulation at the cortical and retinal levels is marked) or 
immediately after the introduction of dopamine agonists, in 
a dose-dependent fashion [13]. Conversely, LBD patients 
report characteristic visual hallucinations early on, reason-
ably because of the severe neuropathological alterations in 
the entire visual pathway, which impair visual information 
processing. This selectivity, interestingly, is also supported 
by the fact that the hallucinations of LBD patients are char-
acterised by usually taciturn people [14]. Arguably, the CNS 
mainly needs to simulate inputs related to the most impaired 
sensory modality, whereas, for example the auditory side 
is less affected and, consequently, there is no need for hal-
lucinations in order to speak. Indeed, alpha-synuclein has 
prion-like diffusion through the visual pathway and this 
could explain its preponderant and early involvement in 
LBD (since it is probably the starting point) and its later 
damage (according to Braak’s stages) in PD, justifying their 
different frequency and temporal sequence of visual halluci-
nations [15]. Furthermore, although LBD patients may also 
manifest parkinsonism due to dopaminergic alterations, this 
is not always present and is usually of lesser extent than in 
PD patients [14]. Thus, dopamine needed for CNS compen-
sation is available and visual hallucinations are, consistently, 
predominant from the earliest stages.
Other common manifestations of synucleinopathies are 
sleep disturbances, often early and severe. In their prodromal 
phase, synucleinopathies can manifest as idiopathic REMS-
related behavioural disorder (iRBD), i.e. acted dreams, 
excessive muscle tone and/or phasic muscle contractions 
during REMS, which often evolves into PD, LBD or multi-
system atrophy (MSA) [16]. Importantly, iRBD patients 
demonstrate the same (though less severe) visual changes 
as PD patients (e.g. alterations of colours and stereoscopic 
vision, illusions), but almost exclusively PD patients present 
with hallucinations [17]. This different degree of severity 
could depend on a twofold mechanism: firstly, both condi-
tions seem characterised by neuropathological alterations 
initially localised in CNS areas distant from cortical regions 
(e.g. brainstem) and the alpha-synuclein prion-like progres-
sion could take time, justifying the different degree of sever-
ity of the visual changes depending on the time point, since 
visual areas are initially spared, dopamine deficit is mild 
and, thus, compensation provided by visual hallucinations 
is not necessary at the iRBD stage[16]. Besides, despite the 
abnormal movements, the REMS parameters (e.g. latency, 
density, rate) are not substantially altered during iRBD, 
whereas PD is characterised by significant alterations [16]. 
Thus, REMS might allow the function of visual areas to be 
maintained in the former condition, but not in the latter, 
which leads to the compensatory attempt provided by visual 
hallucinations. This interpretation is also consistent with the 
different latency of symptoms between iRBD leading to PD 
and to LBD: since, in the latter condition, the pathology is 
also at the cortical level, the visual impairment is prominent 
and hallucinations appear early [ 14, 16]. In MSA, mainly 
characterised by a subcortical pathology, visual hallucina-
tions are consistently very rare [18].
On the other side, abnormal movements in iRBD could 
be the equivalent expression in the motor areas of hallu-
cinations in the visual pathway: since alterations in basal 
ganglia and brainstem circuitry compromise motor control 
and the dopamine decrease alters the threshold mechanism 
that selects motor patterns, the normal relationship between 
motor programme and performed action is altered [8 ]. 
According to the AIT and DAT principles and consider -
ing REMS as characterised by relevant neuroplasticity, it 
is possible that these movements are an attempt on the part 
of the CNS to restore the normal motor relations. Consist-
ently, many movements during iRBD (particularly complex 
and voluntary-like ones) depend on the activation of motor 
regions, especially the supplementary motor area, which 
has direct connections with the spinal motor neurons and, 
therefore, bypasses the tonic inhibition that can still be partly 
carried out by the basal ganglia and the sub-laterodorsal teg-
mental nucleus (i.e. the hypothetical iRBD starting point) 
[16]. Lastly, iRBD patients are characterised by increased 
grey-matter density in the hippocampi and parahippocampal 
gyri. Since REMS is crucial for memory function and its 
physiology is altered in iRBD, this could be an attempt to 
enhance the activity normally performed by these regions 
[5, 19]. However, from the AIT and DAT perspective, as in 
the iRBD the relationship between input or output and its 
representation is altered, the CNS could try to compensate 
by enhancing the regions involved in mnestic functions, in 
order to store the correct relationships more consistently. 
Figure 1 summarises this information (see Fig.  1).
Interestingly, as already mentioned, visual hallucinations 
can also occur in AD. In particular, although toxic Aβ oli -
gomers mainly damage cholinergic and serotonergic neurons, 
recent evidence suggests that dopaminergic ones may also be 
vulnerable, especially in advanced stages, and the greater their 
involvement, the faster the cognitive decline [20]. Indeed, 
removing dopamine-induced neuroplastic compensation 
could reasonably worsen patient performance. However, it is 
important to note that, provided the abnormal aggregates do 
not affect the visual cortex, in the moderate-advanced stages, 
patients characteristically do not report visual hallucinations 
[21]. Conversely, in the posterior cortical atrophy AD vari-
ant, characterised by early alterations in the parieto-occipital 
regions, visual hallucinations are more frequent [21]. This 
suggests that the genesis of visual hallucinations is complex 
and multifactorial and requires structural and/or functional 
alterations (e.g. alterations in the balance between neurotrans-
mitters) in the visual regions together with alterations of the 
neuromodulator crucial for the defensive neuroplasticity, i.e. 
2350 Neurological Sciences (2024) 45:2347–2351
dopamine. Finally, neurological symptoms during disorders 
other than neurodegeration can be analyzed within this new 
interpretative framework. For example, in phantom limb syn-
drome, characterised by the persistence of sensations (often 
unpleasant or painful) in body regions that are no longer pre-
sent, e.g. surgically removed limbs [22], according to AIT 
and DAT, the cortical region representing the lost region 
no longer receives sensations from that body area and the 
CNS, therefore, creates a sensory hallucination to “defend” 
its cortical territory. Furthermore, unpleasant sensations elicit 
movements to loosen the cause of the discomfort and it is pos-
sible that the CNS uses this strategy to provoke movements 
in the lost part in order to force the second component of the 
sensorimotor loop to preserve the functionality of its corti-
cal region. Crucially, the aforementioned interpretation fits 
in the hypothesis that this syndrome depends on abnormal 
neuroplastic mechanisms, which may play a maladaptive role 
in such cases [22].
This evidence could lead to the hypothesis that some CNS 
symptoms are not merely a passive expression of an impairment, 
but active attempts to maintain the correct relationships between 
the external world and its brain representation, which are essential 
to ensure that injured cortical areas continue to perform their tasks 
and are not displaced by other normal regions. Reasonably, dopa-
mine, which is fundamental in neuroplastic mechanisms, could 
play a crucial role. To verify this interpretation, future studies 
should assess whether patients with more visual hallucinations 
have better visual function than those with fewer of them, for the 
same underlying neuropathological mechanism. If correct, it will 
allow us to use more cautiously therapies to suppress symptoms 
that might represent a defence mechanism of the CNS and, at the 
same time, offer us the mark of a critical window of opportunity 
to intervene before the damage becomes too pronounced and even 
these possible compensations lose their usefulness.
Acknowledgements In memory of Andrea Antonioni.
Author contribution  Conceptualization: AA; writing—original draft 
preparation: AA; writing—review and editing: AA and EMR; funding 
acquisition: LF; supervision: MS, FDL, LF and GK.
Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di 
Ferrara within the CRUI-CARE Agreement. PRIN 2020 to LF.
Data Availability Data sharing not applicable to this article as no data-
sets were generated or analysed. Figure created with BioRe nder. com.
Declarations 
Competing interests The authors report no competing interests.
Ethical approval and Informed consent The submitted work is origi-
nal and has not been considered for submission to other journals. All 
authors approved the final version.
Fig. 1  Summary of the proposed mechanism based on AIT and DAT 
principles in synucleinopathies. A Under physiological conditions, 
both the afferent and efferent branches of the sensorimotor loop func-
tion properly, which allows brain areas to maintain control over their 
cortical territory. B In iRBD, early damage to the motor network 
compromises the efferent branch of the loop; therefore, movements 
appear in REMS in an attempt to preserve the cortical motor terri-
tory. C As the neuropathological damage progresses, the parieto-
occipital visual areas are impaired and the afferent branch of the loop 
is damaged too; therefore, similarly, visual hallucinations arise with 
a timing dependent on the speed and extent of the cortical damage 
and the availability of dopamine (i.e. LBD > PD > MSA). The arrow 
indicates the temporal sequence of events. Abbreviations: AIT, active 
inference theory; DAT, defensive activation theory; iRBD, idiopathic 
REMS-related behavioural disorder; LBD, Lewy body dementia; 
MSA, multi-system atrophy; PD, Parkinson’s disease; REMS, rapid 
eye movement sleep
2351Neurological Sciences (2024) 45:2347–2351 
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
 1. Buzsáki G (2019) The brain from inside out. Oxford University 
Press
 2. Friston K, FitzGerald T, Rigoli F, Schwartenbeck P, Pezzulo 
G (2017) Active inference: a process theory. Neural Comput 
29(1):1–49. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1162/ NECO_a_ 00912
 3. Hallett M, Aybek S, Dworetzky BA, McWhirter L, Staab JP, 
Stone J (2022) Functional neurological disorder: new subtypes 
and shared mechanisms. Lancet Neurol 21(6):537–550. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S1474- 4422(21) 00422-1
 4. Edwards MJ, Adams RA, Brown H, Pareés I, Friston KJ (2012) 
A Bayesian account of ‘hysteria.’ Brain 135(Pt 11):3495–3512. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ brain/ aws129
 5. Eagleman DM, Vaughn DA (2021) The defensive activation the-
ory: REM sleep as a mechanism to prevent takeover of the visual 
cortex. Front Neurosci 21(15):632853. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ 
fnins. 2021. 632853
 6. Merabet LB, Swisher JD, McMains SA, Halko MA, Amedi A, Pascual-
Leone A, Somers DC (2007) Combined activation and deactivation 
of visual cortex during tactile sensory processing. J Neurophysiol 
97(2):1633–1641. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1152/ jn. 00806. 2006
 7. O’Brien J, Taylor JP, Ballard C, Barker RA, Bradley C, Burns 
A, Collerton D, Dave S, Dudley R, Francis P, Gibbons A, Har -
ris K, Lawrence V, Leroi I, McKeith I, Michaelides M, Naik C, 
O’Callaghan C, Olsen K, Onofrj M, Pinto R, Russell G, Swann 
P, Thomas A, Urwyler P, Weil RS, Ffytche D (2020) Visual hal-
lucinations in neurological and ophthalmological disease: patho-
physiology and management. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
91(5):512–519. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ jnnp- 2019- 322702
 8. Speranza L, di Porzio U, Viggiano D, de Donato A, Volpicelli 
F (2021) Dopamine: the neuromodulator of long-term synaptic 
plasticity, reward and movement control. Cells 10(4):735. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 3390/ cells 10040 735
 9. Möller JC, Eggert KM, Unger M, Odin P, Chaudhuri KR, Oertel 
WH (2008) Clinical risk-benefit assessment of dopamine agonists. 
Eur J Neurol 15(Suppl 2):15–23. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1468- 
1331. 2008. 02214.x
 10. Popova E (2014) Role of dopamine in distal retina. J Comp Phys-
iol A Neuroethol Sens Neural Behav Physiol 200(5):333–358. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00359- 014- 0906-2
 11. Zhuo C, Ji F, Xiao B, Lin X, Chen C, Jiang D, Ma X, Li R, Liu S, 
Xu Y, Wang W (2020) Antipsychotic agent-induced deterioration 
of the visual system in first-episode untreated patients with schizo-
phrenia maybe self-limited: findings from a secondary small sam-
ple follow-up study based on a pilot follow-up study. Psychiatry 
Res 1(286):112906. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. psych res. 2020. 
112906
 12. Ribolsi M, Daskalakis ZJ, Siracusano A, Koch G (2014) Abnor -
mal asymmetry of brain connectivity in schizophrenia. Front Hum 
Neurosci 8:1010. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fnhum. 2014. 01010
 13. Diederich NJ, Fénelon G, Stebbins G, Goetz CG (2009) Hallu-
cinations in Parkinson disease. Nat Rev Neurol 5(6):331–342. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nrneu rol. 2009. 62
 14. Matar E, Ehgoetz Martens KA, Halliday GM, Lewis SJG (2020) 
Clinical features of Lewy body dementia: insights into diagnosis 
and pathophysiology. J Neurol 267(2):380–389. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1007/ s00415- 019- 09583-8
 15. Pérez-Acuña D, Rhee KH, Shin SJ, Ahn J, Lee JY, Lee SJ (2023) 
Retina-to-brain spreading of α-synuclein after intravitreal injec-
tion of preformed fibrils. Acta Neuropathol Commun 11(1):83. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s40478- 023- 01575-0
 16. Dauvilliers Y, Schenck CH, Postuma RB, Iranzo A, Luppi PH, 
Plazzi G, Montplaisir J, Boeve B (2018) REM sleep behaviour 
disorder. Nat Rev Dis Primers 4(1):19. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ 
s41572- 018- 0016-5
 17. Li Y, Zhang H, Mao W, Liu X, Hao S, Zhou Y, Ma J, Gu Z, Chan 
P (2019) Visual dysfunction in patients with idiopathic rapid eye 
movement sleep behavior disorder. Neurosci Lett 709:134360. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. neulet. 2019. 134360
 18. Franciotti R, Delli Pizzi S, Perfetti B, Tartaro A, Bonanni L, 
Thomas A, Weis L, Biundo R, Antonini A, Onofrj M (2015) 
Default mode network links to visual hallucinations: a comparison 
between Parkinson’s disease and multiple system atrophy. Mov 
Disord 30(9):1237–1247. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ mds. 26285
 19. Scherfler C, Frauscher B, Schocke M, Iranzo A, Gschliesser V, 
Seppi K, Santamaria J, Tolosa E, Högl B, Poewe W, SINBAR 
(Sleep Innsbruck Barcelona) Group (2011) White and gray matter 
abnormalities in idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior 
disorder: a diffusion-tensor imaging and voxel-based morphom-
etry study. Ann Neurol 69(2):400–7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ ana. 
22245
 20. Martorana A, Koch G (2014) Is dopamine involved in Alzhei -
mer’s disease? Front Aging Neurosci 6:252. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
3389/ fnagi. 2014. 00252
 21. Suárez-González A, Crutch SJ, Franco-Macías E, Gil-Néciga E 
(2016) Neuropsychiatric symptoms in posterior cortical atrophy 
and Alzheimer disease. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 29(2):65–71. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 08919 88715 606229
 22. Flor H, Nikolajsen L, Staehelin Jensen T (2006) Phantom limb 
pain: a case of maladaptive CNS plasticity? Nat Rev Neurosci 
7(11):873–881. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nrn19 91
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.