Citation: Badcock, P .B.; Davey, C.G.
Active Inference in Psychology and
Psychiatry: Progress to Date? Entropy
2024, 26, 833. https://doi.org/
10.3390/e26100833
Academic Editor: Danny JJ Wang
Received: 7 August 2024
Revised: 20 September 2024
Accepted: 25 September 2024
Published: 30 September 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
entropy
Review
Active Inference in Psychology and Psychiatry: Progress to Date?
Paul B. Badcock 1,2, *
 and Christopher G. Davey 3
1 Centre for Youth Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia
2 Orygen, Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia
3 Department of Psychiatry, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia;
c.davey@unimelb.edu.au
* Correspondence: pbadcock@unimelb.edu.au
Abstract: The free energy principle is a formal theory of adaptive self-organising systems that
emerged from statistical thermodynamics, machine learning and theoretical neuroscience and has
since been translated into biologically plausible ‘process theories’ of cognition and behaviour, which
fall under the banner of ‘active inference’. Despite the promise this theory holds for theorising,
research and practical applications in psychology and psychiatry, its impact on these disciplines has
only now begun to bear fruit. The aim of this treatment is to consider the extent to which active
inference has informed theoretical progress in psychology, before exploring its contributions to our
understanding and treatment of psychopathology. Despite facing persistent translational obstacles,
progress suggests that active inference has the potential to become a new paradigm that promises to
unite psychology’s subdisciplines, while readily incorporating the traditionally competing paradigms
of evolutionary and developmental psychology. To date, however, progress towards this end has
been slow. Meanwhile, the main outstanding question is whether this theory will make a positive
difference through applications in clinical psychology, and its sister discipline of psychiatry.
Keywords: active inference; evolutionary psychology; depression; free energy principle;
psychiatry; psychology
1. Introduction
Arguably , the aim of psychology is ultimately twofold. The first of these aims is to
understand people. The second is to help them. In principle, these two goals are highly
complementary , although in practice, the degree to which progress towards the former
translates into progress toward the latter is open to question. Although we will revisit
this issue later, the aim of this review is to explore the extent to which the active inference
framework has contributed meaningfully to both of these aims, and in so doing, informs the
twin disciplines of psychology and psychiatry . A review of the growing body of work that
has sprung up around active inference in the past decade or so is beyond the scope of this
article, although it must be said that its influence on psychology remains curiously nascent.
With this in mind, we will explore its promise and challenges by considering its application to
two areas of our own interest—namely , global theories of the form and function of the brain
(i.e., an attempt to understand people); and theories of depression, which stand to inform
best-practice approaches to prevention and intervention (i.e., an attempt to help people). By
considering its contributions to progress in both of these fields, we hope to show that the
theory of active inference has the clear potential to unify theorising and research in psychology
as a discipline, before turning to advances in clinical psychology and psychiatry , which are
best positioned to translate this theory into practical applications that help those in need.
2. Understanding the Psyche
Given the wealth of papers that describe how active inference manifests in the brain
and our behaviour, e.g., [1–3], we will not revisit this work here. Put briefly, this model
Entropy 2024, 26, 833. https://doi.org/10.3390/e26100833 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 2 of 26
suggests that living systems are able to actively avoid decay by generating predictive,
self-fulfilling action–perception cycles that ensure we remain within a limited range of
unsurprising phenotypic states (see Figure 1). Having said that, we will now concentrate on
how this framework provides a compelling solution to long-standing debates in psychology
about the ways in which the brain is structured and functions, and the corresponding
mechanics of human development and biobehaviour. To appreciate the potential impact of
Friston’s work on our understanding of how the mind works, it is worth revisiting the state
of play in psychology when his free energy principle first entered the theoretical landscape.
For many years, proponents of global theories of brain function in psychology were
divided into two camps. On the one hand, there were evolutionary psychologists, many
of whom remain staunch advocates of massive modularity, which suggests that the brain
comprises a large collection of functionally specialised modules that have been designed
by natural selection to solve specific adaptive problems [ 4–6]. This model places strong
emphasis on the domain specificity of neural subsystems, and the influence of natural
selection and the ancestral environment on how the contemporary brain is structured and
functions. As a research program, this model translates into two main levels of inquiry.
Following Marr [ 7], one first needs to attend to the computational level of analysis by
identifying the adaptive problem in the ancestral environment that a given trait has been
designed by selection to solve; one must then address the algorithmic level of explanation
by identifying the various (environmental and physiological) inputs and (cognitive and
behavioural) outputs that enable the trait to solve that adaptive problem [8,9].
This approach has been criticised for promoting human essentialism and genetic
determinism, as well as its failure to account for neural plasticity, individual differences,
and domain-general processes [10–13]. Not unfairly, the massive modularity hypothesis
has itself been criticised for pitching a naïve and neurobiologically implausible model of
the brain [10,14–17]. For this reason, some evolutionary psychologists have turned towards
more sophisticated network-based models of brain function, e.g., [18–20]. It should also
be recognised that the utility of evolutionary psychology as a research heuristic largely
rests on the phenotypic gambit, which allows us to analyse the adaptive function of a given
trait without requiring an understanding of the neurobiological mechanisms responsible
for producing it [21,22]. This points to the importance of distinguishing between massive
modularity as an explanatory claim about the form and function of the brain and its clear
value as a research heuristic [16]. Regardless of how the brain is structured and functions,
natural selection and other evolutionary forces are key to understanding why we think and
act in the ways that we do [23–28].
Meanwhile, the other side of the meta-theoretical divide has been dominated by de-
velopmental psychologists, who maintain that the structure of the brain emerges from the
experience-dependent self-organisation of neural circuits over time [29,30]. Unlike massive
modularity, this view suggests that infants only begin with a highly limited set of innate,
genetically-specified predispositions, which allows recursive interactions between these
lower-level systems and the environment to produce the functional organisation of the
brain and its highly flexible, domain-general capacities over the course of ontogeny [31].
Central to this view is the theory of self-organisation, which refers to the emergence of stable,
higher-order functional patterns from dynamical interactions between multiple lower-order
components intrinsic to a dynamical system [ 32–34]. Although this developmental ap-
proach can be commended for its neurobiological plausibility, its clear neglect of Darwinian
dynamics runs the risk of robbing theorists in the field of a fully accepted explanation for
the adaptive properties of all biological systems, humans or otherwise [6,23,35,36].
Developmental approaches are well positioned to tell us how phenotypic traits emerge
over the life course, but they are less equipped to answer ultimate questions about why such
traits emerge, particularly those that are evidently species-typical, cross-cultural, reliably
transmitted across successive generations, and demonstrably adaptive. That notwithstanding,
there has been ample debate about the relative merits and pitfalls of both schools of thought
for many years now (e.g., [4,37–39]), so we will not delve into these here. Suffice it to say ,
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 3 of 26
there remains staunch disagreement between those who argue that natural selection is the
principal mechanism driving human cognition and behaviour, and those who champion the
causal primacy of self-organisation and developmental constructionism, robbing psychology
of a clear consensus regarding a unified global brain theory to unite its subdisciplines.
This is not to say that attempts have not been made to synthesise the two. In particular,
proponents of evolutionary developmental biology (and its sister discipline of evolutionary
developmental psychology [ 40,41]) have forwarded epigenetic modes of inheritance as an
adaptive, intermediary step between evolution and development, such as cellular epige-
netic inheritance, socially mediated learning, and for humans, symbol-based information
transmission [42–44]. These allow adaptive behaviours and phenotypic modifications to
be transmitted to offspring without directly altering the genome, thereby supplying new
targets for selection. Similarly, others have emphasised the key role that culture plays
in shaping human phenotypes over evolutionary time [ 45–49]. By concentrating their
critiques upon the ‘Sante Barbara school’ of evolutionary psychology, and its commitment
to the massive modularity hypothesis, developmentalists and other critics have tended to
overlook the broader paradigm of evolutionary psychology, which embraces the synergistic
relationship between evolutionary and developmental processes, while still attributing
causal primary to the influence of selection [23].
In this vein, others have also argued that natural selection and self-organisation
are best seen as commensurate and complementary (e.g., [ 33,50–52]). This evolutionary
systems perspective suggests that in order to explain a given trait, one needs to combine an
ultimate analysis with a proximate one—a Darwinian approach is required to explainwhy a
particular phenotypic trait has evolved, while self-organisation allows us to explain how it
emerges and operates [23,51]. To date, evolutionary systems theorists have largely focused
on complex adaptive systems, which—like the brain—adapt to the environment through a
process of selection that recruits the outcomes of locally interacting components within that
system to select a subset for replication or enhancement [53]. Under this view, Darwinian
principles can be reframed as a dynamical process of variation-selection-retention that
pervades all self-organising systems [50,54–56].
Altogether, there is good reason to believe that metatheoretical tensions in psychology
can be resolved by adopting an integrative, evolutionary systems approach to under-
standing human phenotypes, which weds theorising in evolutionary and developmental
psychology to explain the brain and our behaviour across temporal and spatial scales. One
way to operationalise this approach is to organise different paradigms in psychology ac-
cording to Tinbergen’s seminal four levels of biological inquiry: adaptive function, phylogeny,
ontogeny, and mechanism [57]. Each of these levels involves both a temporal dimension
(ranging from evolutionary time through to real-time processes) and a systemic dimension
(ranging from all Homo sapiens to an individual in situ). Here, different paradigms are seen
to be complementary, because they concentrate differentially on four interrelated levels
of analysis—functional hypotheses for adaptive, species-typical traits (e.g., evolutionary
psychology); explanations for intergenerational, phylogenetic processes that drive evolu-
tionary change and underpin our flexible adaptation to local eco-niches (e.g., evolutionary
developmental biology and psychology); explanations for individual development (e.g.,
developmental psychology); and mechanistic explanations for real-time biobehavioral
phenomena, which roughly fall under the purview of the sub-disciplines [23,58]. Although
they are often pitched against each other, these different levels of analysis should instead
be treated as distinct, alternative and valid perspectives of the same whole [ 59]. Mean-
while, the non-substantive meta-theory of evolutionary systems theory, which centres on
the dynamic interplay between selection and self-organisation, is capable of synthesis-
ing theorising across the psychological sciences by encapsulating all four of Tinbergen’s
questions [18,23,60].
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 4 of 26
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 26 
 
 
2. Understanding the Psyche 
Given the wealth of papers that describe how active inference manifests in the brain 
and our behaviour, e.g., [1–3], we wi ll not revisit this work here. Put brie ﬂy, this model 
suggests that living systems are able to actively avoid decay by generating predictive, self-
fulﬁlling action–perception cycles that ensure we remain within a limited range of unsur-
prising phenotypic states (see Figure 1). Having said that, we will now concentrate on 
how this framework provides a compelling solution to long-standing debates in psychol-
ogy about the ways in which the brain is structured and functions, and the corresponding 
mechanics of human development and biobehaviour. To appreciate the potential impact 
of Friston’s work on our understanding of how the mind works, it is worth revisiting the 
state of play in psychology when his free energy principle ﬁrst entered the theoretical 
landscape.  
For many years, proponents of global theories of brain function in psychology were 
divided into two camps. On the one hand, there were evolutionary psychologists, many of 
whom remain staunch advocates of massive modularity, which suggests that the brain com-
prises a large collection of functionally specialised modules that have been designed by 
natural selection to solve speciﬁc adaptive problems [4–6]. This model places strong em-
phasis on the domain speciﬁcity of neural subsystems, and the inﬂuence of natural selection 
and the ancestral environment on how the contemporary brain is structured and func-
tions. As a research program, this model translates into two main levels of inquiry. Fol-
lowing Marr [7], one ﬁrst needs to attend to the computational level of analysis by identi-
fying the adaptive problem in the ancestral environment that a given trait has been de-
signed by selection to solve; one must then address the algorithmic level of explanation by 
identifying the various (environmental and physiological) inputs and (cognitive and be-
havioural) outputs that enable the trait to solve that adaptive problem [8,9].  
 
Figure 1. The free energy principle. (A): Schematic of the quantities that deﬁne free energy, includ-
ing the internal states of a system, µ (e.g., a brain), and quantities that entail the system’s exchanges 
with the environment; incl uding its sensory input, s = g(η,a) + ω, and actions, a, which change the 
ways in which the system samples its environmen t. Here, environmental states are described by 
Figure 1. The free energy principle. (A): Schematic of the quantities that define free energy , including
the internal states of a system,µ (e.g., a brain), and quantities that entail the system’s exchanges with the
environment; including its sensory input,s = g(η,a) + ω, and actions,a, which change the ways in which
the system samples its environment. Here, environmental states are described by equations of motion,
η˙ = f(η,a) + ω, which capture the dynamics of (hidden) states extraneous to the system,η, while ω
refers to random fluctuations. Under this scheme, internal states and action work in tandem to minimise
free energy , which reflects a function of sensory input and the probabilistic representation (variational
density),q(η:µ), that internal states encode. External and internal states are also statistically separated by
a Markov blanket, which entails both ‘sensory’ states and ‘active’ states. Internal states are affected by , but
cannot influence, sensory states, while external states are affected by , but cannot influence, active states,
which creates a conditional independence between the system and its environment. (B): Alternative
equations that capture the minimisation of free energy . With respect to action, free energy can only be
reduced by the system’s selective sampling of (predicted) sensory input, increasing the accuracy of its
predictions. Conversely , optimising internal states (i.e., perception) minimises divergence by rendering
the representation an approximate conditional density on the hidden causes of sensory input. This
reduces the free energy bound on surprise, which means that the system can avoid surprising sensations
through action. Reprinted from “Answering Schrödinger’s question: A free-energy formulation”, by
Ramstead et al. [60] (p. 4). Copyright 2018 by Elsevier.
Although this perspective makes sense of the meta-theoretical structure of psycho-
logical science, its plausibility also rests on finding a compatible, evidence-based theory
of the brain. However, at the time active inference first appeared in the psychological
literature, both major camps in psychology continued to disagree on a suitable candidate.
Nevertheless, there were still some emerging points of agreement about the brain’s ar-
chitectural properties. Both developmental and evolutionary psychologists converged
on the idea that the lowest or most peripheral levels of the cortical hierarchy comprised
relatively segregated, highly specialised neurocognitive mechanisms responsible for sensori-
motor processing (so called ‘domain-specific’ systems), while its higher, deeper or more
central layers consisted of developmentally plastic, highly integrated (‘domain-general’)
mechanisms [27,61]. These are widely distributed subsystems that respond flexibly to input
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 5 of 26
received from multiple lower levels, feed information downstream for further processing,
and underlie the executive cognitive functions unique to humans [18,62].
There are intersecting strands of theory and evidence to support this view. For example,
large meta-analyses of task-based neuroimaging data provide evidence for domain general
systems, by showing that distinct regions of the brain have different functional partners
in different contexts (e.g., [10,11]). Similarly, responses to unimodal sensory input have
been found to be affected by information processed by other sensory modalities, with
latencies suggesting that inputs in one modality directly influence early responses to
stimuli presented to another [63]. This provides clear evidence of functional integration,
even at the level of the sensorium. Conversely, high-resolution structural connectivity
findings have found that specialised motor tasks have a distinct, structural (segregated or
modular) counterpart, providing evidence of domain specificity [64–66].
Focusing now on the brain’s hierarchical structure, wide-ranging studies of structural
and functional connectivity have confirmed that the brain instantiates aself-similar hierarchy,
where a given node comprises a network of smaller interacting nodes at a lower hierarchical
level, ranging from macroscopic brain regions down to neurons [ 65,67–69]. Consistent
with this, both comparative and human studies have shown that a hierarchical structure
is a hallmark of the mammalian brain, which mirrors phylogeny by progressing from
highly segregated sensorimotor hierarchies found in all mammals through to the more
recent, highly distributed association areas found in primates [ 14,70]. On the one hand,
natural selection ensures the development of highly specialised sensorimotor networks
in infancy, which function as ‘neurodevelopmental anchors’ that allow the progressive
development of domain-general association regions [ 62,71]. On the other hand, these
association regions enhance evolvability by allowing us to respond flexibly to rapidly
changing environments. Others have presented evidence that the structure of the brain
echoes the complementary relationship between evolution and development (e.g., [14]),
with different levels of Tinbergian timescales reflected across nested levels of the brain—
ranging from the genes inherited from our ancestors; to the epigenetic transcription factors
that shape gene expression; to the epigenesis of neural networks over development; and
ending with the long-range connections that underwrite daily consciousness [72].
Crucially, the brain’s hierarchical structure also replicates the hierarchically nested
structure of causal regularities in the environment, with its lower, more peripheral layers
encoding rapid environmental fluctuations associated with sensorimotor processing and
stochastic effects, while its higher, more central layers encode increasingly slower regulari-
ties related to longer-term contextual changes [73–76]. A hierarchical organisation is also a
key property of complex adaptive systems [77,78]—it enhances evolvability by extending
the parameter range for self-organised criticality, a dynamical state that optimises informa-
tion processing and is therefore favoured by selection [79]. Notably, it also enables a system
to solve problems by recursively combining solutions to subproblems, with simulation
studies of evolving networks showing that a hierarchical structure adapts faster to new
environments than non-hierarchical ones [80].
Such findings notwithstanding, psychological scientists from both sides of the meta-
theoretical divide were struggling to agree upon a global theory of the brain that was able
to reconcile their debates about the causal primacy of evolutionary versus developmental
processes. This underscored the need to seek a suitable candidate in neuroscience.
3. Active Inference: A New Direction for Psychological Science?
Although the idea had been brewing in the literature for some time (e.g., [ 2,81,82]),
the publication of Friston’s [1] outline of the free energy principle and the active inference
framework proffered a genuine solution to the meta-theoretical stalemate that has long
plagued psychology. To begin, its alignment with predictive processing in neuroscience
supplied an empirically robust process theory that could explain the hierarchical structure
and functioning of the brain. Briefly, this suggests that the brain reflects a hierarchical
inference machine that reduces uncertainty about the causes of sensory input by minimising
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 6 of 26
its prediction errors (see [83,84]). To do this, the brain attempts to optimise its predictions
about the world by minimising discrepancies between incoming sensory inputs and top-
down, neuronally encoded predictions. Prediction errors are also weighted by theirprecision,
which relates to the reliability afforded to various beliefs or sources of sensory evidence, and
involves neuromodulatory mechanisms (e.g., affecting attentional selection) that determine
the relative influence of ascending (error) vs. descending (representation) signals on belief-
updating [85,86]. Although this predictive processing account provides an empirically
verifiable and strongly supported theory of the structure and functioning of the brain, it
must be said that its interest is limited for many psychologists, who are more concerned
with our behaviour.
Here is where the explanatory scope of active inference comes into its own. It not only
supplies cognitive and behavioural scientists with a formally expressible and empirically
testable model of neurocognitive processing, it also explains how such processes relate to
action (and indeed, vice versa). In a nutshell, the idea that everything we think and do arises
from the need to optimise our predictions about the world and behave in ways that fulfil
them is elegant and profound [18,87]. Of particular interest to evolutionary psychologists, it
is also clear that the theory accommodates Darwinian processes. Echoing Schrödinger [88],
active inference rests on the observation that all living systems preserve their integrity by
actively revisiting a small number of (expected and highly probable) phenotypic states.
Unexpected or ‘surprising’ states, which are incongruous with the characteristic states of the
organism, must be avoided in order to resist thermodynamic decay—take the prototypical
example of a fish out of water [ 1]. Thus, an organism’s evolutionary drive to maintain
survival by sustaining functional physiological states (i.e., homeostasis and allostasis)
translates into a proximal avoidance of surprising states [ 1]. In line with evolutionary
systems theory, the biological imperative to avoid such states is an outcome of Darwinian
processes: self-organising systems that could resist thermodynamic decay by actively
avoiding surprising phase-transitions have been favoured by natural selection [2]. Natural
selection reduces surprise by endowing a small number of attractive (i.e., adaptive) states
with innate value, which minimises surprise by ensuring an organism seeks out expected
states that are consistent with its phenotype and environment [1,89]. Natural selection can
therefore be seen as a process of Bayesian model selection that minimises the free energy of
different species’ phenotypes (i.e., generative models; [55,60]).
By leveraging these insights to combine progress in cognitive neuroscience with evolu-
tionary and developmental perspectives in psychology , the brain can be reframed in terms of
an evolved,hierarchically mechanistic mind(HMM): a (situated and embodied) complex adap-
tive system that actively minimises the variational free energy (and therefore entropy) of (far
from equilibrium) phenotypic states via self-fulfilling action–perception cycles, which are me-
diated by dynamic interactions between hierarchically organised (functionally differentiated
and differentially integrated) neurocognitive mechanisms [18,58]. This hypothesis connects
most closely with evidence in network neuroscience that the brain instantiates a self-similar
hierarchy [65,68,90], along with more recent claims in the active inference literature that the brain
consists of hierarchically nested Markov blankets [91,92]. The HMM is distinctive, however,
in that it places evolutionary dynamics front and centre by emphasising the causal role of
species-typicaladaptive priors—namely , neurophysiologically instantiated Bayesian beliefs about
our characteristic phenotypic and environmental states that have been shaped by selection to
ensure that our action–perception cycles keep us within the adaptive bounds of unsurprising
states [18,58,93]. Such evolutionary priors arise from the reliable transmission of adaptive
(surprise-reducing) policies from one generation to the next, extending from innate, genetically
inherited priors sculpted by natural selection, through to developmentally-open prior expec-
tations that depend on the repeated assembly of reliably recurrent ontogenetic resources that
arise from reciprocal interactions between (epi)genetic processes canalised by natural selection,
developmental processes that unfold over the life course and situational activities in species-
typical, real-time environments [93]. In short, adaptive priors allow our generative models of
the world to be sculpted adaptively by natural selection, reliably passed on from one generation
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 7 of 26
to the next, and successively optimised by neurodevelopment and learning [18]. Meanwhile, the
non-substantive process theory of active inference can be used to integrate ecobiopsychosocial
dynamics across temporal and spatial scales, ranging from the evolution of our species through
to the thoughts and actions of an individual in real time (see Figure 2).
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 26 
 
 
priors sculpted by natural selection, through to developmentally-open prior expectations 
that depend on the repeated assembly of reliably recurrent ontogenetic resources that 
arise from reciprocal interactions between (epi)genetic processes canalised by natural se-
lection, developmental processes that unfold over the life course and situational activities 
in species-typical, real-time environments [93]. In short, adaptive priors allow our gener-
ative models of the world to be sculpted adaptively by natural selection, reliably passed 
on from one generation to the next, and successively optimised by neurodevelopment and 
learning [18]. Meanwhile, the non-substantive process theory of active inference can be 
used to integrate ecobiopsychosocial dynamics across temporal and spatial scales, ranging 
from the evolution of our species through to the thoughts and actions of an individual in 
real time (see Figure 2).  
 
Figure 2. The Hierarchically Mechanistic Mind. The human brain instantiates an evolved and em-
bodied complex adaptive system (i.e., a generative model) that actively minimises variational free-
energy by generating self-fulﬁlling action–perception cycles, which are mediated by dynamic inter-
actions between hierarchic ally organised neurocognitive subsystems [18]. This system emerges 
from causal interactions between ecobiopsychosocial dynamics that unfold across various spatio-
temporal scales. Formally, these dynamics can be described in terms of the timescales over which 
free-energy minimisation optimises the state (i.e., perception), conﬁguration (i.e., action), connectivity 
(i.e., learning and attention), anatomy (i.e., neurodevelopment), and phenotypes (i.e., neural (micro)evo-
lution) of biological agents that belong to a given class or species (e.g., Homo sapiens). Under this 
formalism, (( ) , | )ii iF sa m μ  reﬂects the free energy of the (action dependent) sensory data, (( ) )s at
, and states, µ, of the i-th agent, ims∈ , that belongs to a subgroup, sc∈ , of class, c. Action, a, 
governs the sampling of sensory data, while the physical states of the phenotype, µ, encode (prob-
abilistic or Bayesian) beliefs and accompanying expectations (i.e., means or averages) . In real time, 
neurocognition entails two dynamically coupled processes. The ﬁrst, which encompasses perception 
and action, optimises neuronal and eﬀector dynamics to attune the organism to its environment, by 
minimising prediction errors (resp. free energy) based on a generative model of the hidden causes 
of sensory data. The second process, which relates to learning and a ttention, optimises synaptic 
strength and eﬃciency over seconds to hours to encode th e precision of prediction errors and the 
causal structure of the environment in the sensorium. Over the course of development, human gen-
erative models are optimised by activity-dependent pruning and the maintenance of brain struc-
tures and connections that are transmitted (epi)genetically. Over longer timescales, average free en-
ergy is optimised over generations of individuals who belong to a particular subgroup (e.g., kin) of 
a given class (i.e., conspeci ﬁcs), through the intergenerational tr ansmission of adaptive priors. Fi-
nally, natural selection optimises the average free energy over time and individuals who belong to 
a given class (i.e., conspeciﬁcs) through the eﬀects of selective pressure on their generative models. 
Reprinted from “The mechanics of evolution: Phyl ogeny, ontogeny, and adap tive priors”, by P.B. 
Badcock, 2024, Physics of Life Reviews, 50, p. 54. Copyright 2024 by Elsevier. 
Figure 2. The Hierarchically Mechanistic Mind . The human brain instantiates an evolved and
embodied complex adaptive system (i.e., a generative model) that actively minimises variational free-
energy by generating self-fulfilling action–perception cycles, which are mediated by dynamic interac-
tions between hierarchically organised neurocognitive subsystems [18]. This system emerges from
causal interactions between ecobiopsychosocial dynamics that unfold across various spatiotemporal
scales. Formally, these dynamics can be described in terms of the timescales over which free-energy
minimisation optimises the state (i.e., perception), configuration (i.e., action), connectivity (i.e., learn-
ing and attention), anatomy (i.e., neurodevelopment), and phenotypes (i.e., neural (micro)evolution) of
biological agents that belong to a given class or species (e.g., Homo sapiens). Under this formalism,
F(s(ai), µi
mi) reflects the free energy of the (action dependent) sensory data, s(a(t)), and states, µ,
of the i-th agent, mi ∈ s, that belongs to a subgroup, s ∈ c, of class, c. Action, a, governs the sampling
of sensory data, while the physical states of the phenotype, µ, encode (probabilistic or Bayesian)
beliefs and accompanying expectations (i.e., means or averages). In real time, neurocognition entails
two dynamically coupled processes. The first, which encompasses perception and action, optimises
neuronal and effector dynamics to attune the organism to its environment, by minimising prediction
errors (resp. free energy) based on a generative model of the hidden causes of sensory data. The
second process, which relates to learning and attention, optimises synaptic strength and efficiency over
seconds to hours to encode the precision of prediction errors and the causal structure of the environ-
ment in the sensorium. Over the course of development, human generative models are optimised by
activity-dependent pruning and the maintenance of brain structures and connections that are trans-
mitted (epi)genetically. Over longer timescales, average free energy is optimised over generations of
individuals who belong to a particular subgroup (e.g., kin) of a given class (i.e., conspecifics), through
the intergenerational transmission of adaptive priors. Finally, natural selection optimises the average
free energy over time and individuals who belong to a given class (i.e., conspecifics) through the
effects of selective pressure on their generative models. Reprinted from “The mechanics of evolution:
Phylogeny, ontogeny, and adaptive priors”, by Badcock et al. [93] (p. 54). Copyright 2024 by Elsevier.
On such grounds, Friston has clearly brought to light a promising solution to debates
surrounding the fundamentals of the mind and our behaviour that have been waged in
psychology for decades. Unlike the massive modularity hypothesis, here was a model that
provided evolutionary psychologists with a neurobiologically plausible theory of cognition
and behaviour, which clearly allowed for adaptationism. It was also capable of incorporat-
ing phylogenetic processes—those intergenerational, between-group dynamics responsible
for producing evolutionary novelties and change [93], which should satisfy evolutionary
developmental psychologists. As a theory of biological self-organisation [60,94,95], it should
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 8 of 26
also sit well with developmentalists, providing a readily generalisable principle to explain
neurodevelopmental processes—namely , the optimisation of human generative models (i.e.,
embodied brains) through activity-dependent pruning and the maintenance of structures
and connections in the brain that are transmitted (epi-)genetically . Finally , under simplifying
statistical assumptions, the theory is reducible to a simple hypothesis that can be readily
extended across psychology’s sub-disciplines: cognition and behaviour work in concert to
optimise our predictions about the world and ensure that we fulfil them. Simply put, we all
strive to minimise our uncertainty .
Presumably, this should have inspired the rapid uptake of Friston’s ideas across
the discipline and provided both evolutionary and developmental theorists with some
much-needed common ground. To this day, however, psychology appears to remain
mired in Kuhn’s pre-paradigmatic stage of scientific progress [96], largely owing to persistent
divisions between evolutionary psychologists and proponents of the standard social science
model [97]. Arguably, then, the discipline is still in need of a new paradigm that can bring
these schools together. Although we believe that active inference is well equipped to satisfy
this need, the question remains as to whether it will attract the attention it deserves.
4. Active Inference in Psychology: Progress to Date?
There has been a rapid uptake of active inference in psychology over recent years,
which is impressive given how recently the model has emerged in the literature. In lit-
tle over a decade, this theory has grown from being an esoteric global brain theory in
computational neuroscience to a productive and fully generalisable research heuristic for
understanding our minds and behaviour. To cite just a few examples, researchers have
already applied this framework to explain subjective psychological phenomena, ranging
from emotional states [98–101], illusions [102,103], and perceptual awareness [104], through
to consciousness itself [105–109]. Conceptually, it is also consonant with prevailing schools
of thought across the subdisciplines, such as clinical, cognitive, behavioural, social, and eco-
logical psychology, by furnishing the requisite theoretical tools to incorporate foundational
theories like representationalism [58], reinforcement learning [110], environmental affor-
dances [111,112], self vs. other representations [113,114], and both dyadic and cooperative
communication [115,116]. This is just a snapshot—more in-depth summaries of progress in
the field can be found in dedicated volumes on the application of active inference across
the cognitive sciences [3,84,117].
Altogether, the literature to date suggests that active inference has the clear potential to
synthesise theorising and research across psychology’s subdisciplines, while also providing
an explanatory framework that is evidence-based, biologically plausible, and able to resolve
polarising debates between evolutionary and developmental psychologists by furnishing
an agnostic, formal model of biobehavioural processes that equally accommodates Dar-
winian and developmental dynamics. However, progress toward a paradigm shift has been
disappointingly slow. To date, applications of active inference have been wide-ranging but
piecemeal, and seldom grounded in empirical studies conducted in real world settings.
Instead, the vast majority of work has relied on conceptual and computational models,
which are only tested in silico [118,119]. As of last year, the number of empirical studies in
the active inference literature had barely reached double figures, with most addressing re-
search questions in computational psychiatry instead of testing unique predictions derived
from active inference itself [118].
Meanwhile, few if any of the major players in evolutionary and developmental psychol-
ogy have adopted active inference. Luminaries responsible for establishing evolutionary
psychology as a paradigm in the early 1990s have yet to take up this theory, and even the
latest generation of influential thinkers in the field have neglected its clear synergies with
adaptationism. Seminal thinkers in developmental psychology have also overlooked its
explanatory scope, despite its emphasis on developmental self-organisation. Even lead-
ing developmentalists poised at the forefront of the intersection between psychology and
neuroscience are sceptical of global brain theories such as predictive coding and active
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 9 of 26
inference, e.g., [10,11], regardless of their impressive empirical support. More surprisingly
still, advocates of evolutionary systems theory have remained curiously silent on the ex-
planatory fruits of this theory, despite its emphasis on Darwinian dynamics operating upon
self-organising systems [60,94,120,121].
This is not to say that such ignorance only goes one way. The influence of Darwinian
dynamics and the key role played by adaptive priors in generating the form and function
of living systems is decidedly under researched in the active inference literature. Beyond a
smattering of our own contributions on adaptive priors [18,58,116,122–124], other work is
limited, which tends to focus on formal models of evolutionary processes tested in silico
(e.g., [55,120,121]). A clear shortfall of these models is that they overlook the importance of
intergenerational dynamics (e.g., epigenetic inheritance) [125], which lie at the intersection
between phylogeny and ontogeny, providing the grist for microevolution [ 93]. Nor are
they tailored to model the sheer complexity of human systems. We are also unaware of any
works in the field that have tried to capture the ways in which the environmentally nested
biobehavioural patterns that unfold across the course of ontogeny reflect adaptive, recursive
patterns of active inference over time. Admittedly, some theorists have applied the theory
to development in utero [126] and attachment dynamics in infancy [127], but these models
are rudimentary and go no further than the first steps on our ontogenetic journey. Curiously,
researchers specialising in active inference have also yet to tackle personality differences—a
fundamental source of study for evolutionary and developmental psychologists alike [128].
It is clear, then, that proponents of active inference and psychological scientists still have
much to learn from each other.
At this point, it should also be recognised that many of the key themes highlighted by active
inference have been echoing through the chambers of psychology for over 50 years. Perhaps
the most exemplary case iscontrol theory, a model of self-regulating systems introduced to the
field by Carver and Scheier in the 1980s. Inspired by Wiener’s seminal work on Cybernetics
in 1948 [129], this paradigm hinges on the mechanism ofnegative feedback loops, which function to
actively reduce perceived deviations from a given comparison value [130]. Under this framework,
a system’s input function is the perception of a present condition, which is compared against
an internal point of reference, or acomparator(e.g., goals). When discrepancies are perceived
between the present state and the reference value, a behaviour is enacted (i.e., the output function),
which aims to reduce the discrepancy between perceived and desired outcomes by changing
the system’s environment [130]. Much like active inference, control theory suggest that cycles
of action and perception create a closedloop of control—iterative comparisons between goals
(e.g., adaptive priors) and environmental feedback determine cognitive activities that regulate
actions, which serve to minimise deviations between current states and desired outcomes [131].
Notably , Carver and Sheier were also heavily influenced by Powers’ foundational work on what
has widely become known asperceptual control theory[132], which has itself been forwarded as
a unifying concept for psychology’s subdisciplines [133]. According to this view , behaviour is
ultimately determined by the need to control perceptions—we constantly compare our actual
perceptions against our desired perceptions or goals, and then act upon the world to achieve
greater congruence between them. It goes without saying that both these schools of thought suit
active inference to a T—an important parallel that has been discussed before (e.g., [106,134,135]).
Akin to the HMM, they also both rest on the idea that control systems are inherently hierarchical:
higher-level goals determine the comparators (sub-goals) for lower-level control systems, allowing
for complex behaviour by coordinating the functioning of lower levels, with a view to achieve
desired (adaptive) states [130,132,136].
Around the time cybernetics was introduced to the scientific community , there were other
theoretical developments in psychology’s subdisciplines, which foreshadowed key principles
that have since been espoused by the active inference community . T ake, for example, ecological
psychology , which stemmed from the foundational works of Gibson [137,138], Barker [139],
and Bronfenbrenner [140,141]. This relational approach looks at the ways in which action and
perception emerge from reciprocal organism–environment relationships over time [142]. Emphasis
is placed onenvironmental affordances, which refer to mutually reinforcing dynamics between
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 10 of 26
the abilities and expectations of an organism and aspects of its environment [138,143]. In line
with active inference, ecological psychologists advocate a pragmatic, action-oriented approach
to cognition, exploring the ways in which environmental affordances influence behavioural
policy selection to achieve desired ends [142]. Around the same time, Bowlby—arguably one
of the first evolutionary psychologists—proposedattachment theory, which suggests that early
interactions between primary caregivers fundamentally shapes an individual’s expectations and
behaviours in social relationships over the life course [144]. Subsequent work, first championed by
Ainsworth, has evidenced the manifold ways in which secure, anxious, or avoidant attachment
styles arise from attachment patterns observed in childhood, creating self-fulfilling cycles of
relational expectations and behaviours that significantly impact later relationships and mental
health [145,146]. Themes that are highly reminiscent of active inference had also cropped up in
cognitive psychology , as exemplified by Rescorla’s work on prediction in learning theory [147,148].
Rescorla revised models of classical conditioning at the time by showing that the strength of a
conditioned response relies upon the predictability of the conditioned stimulus, relative to the
unconditioned stimulus. Contrary to his contemporaries, Rescorla described conditioning in
terms of the learning of relationships between events to allow an organism to represent and
predict its environment, underscoring the key role played by expectation and prediction in
learning processes [147,149]. This mirrors active inference, of course, but also much broader ideas
in cognitive science, extending from those initially developed by Helmholtz [150] through to
contemporary advances in predictive processing [117].
There are no doubt other examples of subdisciplinary insights that pre-empted ac-
tive inference—our brief review of the literature here is intended to be illustrative, not
exhaustive. However, despite the emergence of these common themes at the time, such
research remained highly fragmented, and psychological scientists were slow to join the
dots. This is understandable—each of these camps suffered from the theoretical fragmenta-
tion that plagues psychology, obstructing cross-fertilisation and growth between different
paradigms in the field [23,151]. Returning to our earlier point, the benefit of active inference
is that it provides a clear, meta-theoretical solution to the disciplinary inertia that has long
been driven by sub-disciplinary divisions. It does so by offering the requisite conceptual
and methodological tools to generate and test hypotheses specific to different research
domains, while providing a common language for meaningful collaboration and scientific
advancement across the discipline of psychology itself. Indeed, it is worth noting that
active inference has already been applied to the paradigms raised above, ranging from
control theory [134,135] to the study of attachment dynamics [ 152] and the influence of
environmental affordances on our predictions and behaviour [121]. This clearly speaks to
its integrative power by evincing its capacity to incorporate and explain widely accepted
phenomena highlighted by disparate paradigms.
Altogether, we hope it is clear by now that active inference and major paradigms in
psychology reflect two sides of the same coin. The former provides an evidence-based,
non-substantive process theory of the form and functioning of the brain, while research
in psychology helps us explain, substantively, both how and why humans think and act
in the ways we do [ 18,58]. In practice, this calls for a dialectical relationship between
computational and cognitive neuroscience, on the one hand, and research in psychology, on
the other, favouring their mutual enlightenment by allowing insights gleaned from one to
inform and constrain theorising and research in the other [21,153–155]. For neuroscientists,
this requires experimental designs that can isolate the specific psychological factors that
govern various patterns of hierarchical brain activity across different contexts. Examples
include meta-analyses of task-based fMRI activation studies to characterise the functional
fingerprints of particular brain regions across different tasks [10,11], and the development
of cognitive ontologies that systematically map interrelations between particular cognitive
functions and their corresponding patterns of brain dynamics [ 156–158]. Sophisticated
longitudinal designs are also required, which combine neuroimaging studies on human
brain maturation with biobehavioural and social measures to explore how different devel-
opmental contexts produce stable individual differences in perceptual biases and active
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 11 of 26
inference [58,159,160]. Comparative, cross-cultural, computational, and dynamical ap-
proaches in evolutionary psychology are also necessary if active inference theorists wish to
identify and unpack the particulars of our species-typical adaptive priors [58,161]. Finally,
computational models and simulation studies enable us to model how different levels of
dynamical activity interact [37,60,162,163], allowing researchers to explore how the biobe-
havioural phenomena described and studied by psychologists reflect adaptive free energy
minimisation within and across spatiotemporal scales. The outcomes of such analyses can
then be confirmed by experimental work and other real-world observations [18,161,164].
Conversely, and as we have stressed already, active inference offers a formal and
empirically tractable process theory of the human brain, mind, and behaviour to psycholo-
gists. Although the mathematical apparatus that underwrites this theory is inaccessible to
many [165,166], as we alluded to earlier, it can be translated more simply into an elegant
heuristic that can be leveraged by researchers across psychology’s subdisciplines: cognition
and behaviour work together to minimise our exposure to surprise [58]. Our lives reflect
a dynamic, self-fulfilling prophecy of sorts—everything we think and do stems from the
biological imperative to optimise our predictions about causal regularities in our eco-niche,
and to behave in ways that confirm them [18,87,94,167]. Like others before us, we believe
this elegant idea offers a promising common language to synthesise and explain diverse
findings across the discipline of psychology.
Obstructively , though, active inference is still plagued by translational issues, presumably
arising from its origins in statistical thermodynamics and machine learning. This has led to
concerted attempts to make its models and methods more accessible, such as step-by-step tutorials
on how to apply active inference to real-world experimental settings (e.g., [3,166]). Such attempts
have largely fallen on deaf ears, however, with little more than a handful of real-world empirical
applications appearing in the literature to date [118]. Despite its clear explanatory scope, active
inference remains largely neglected by psychological scientists, suggesting an element of insti-
tutional inertia that is typical of any discipline poised on the edge of a paradigm shift [96]. Still,
as more come to understand this theory , and translate it into innovative empirical designs, one
gets the sense that this paradigm shift is certainly plausible. Unfortunately , however, we suspect
that this is still a long way off. As a whole, psychologists are highly sceptical of grand unifying
theories [151], and outside of this field, active inference has received its fair share of critiques
(e.g., [168–172]), which have yet to be fully addressed by its proponents. Such debates aside, our
own view is that active inference deserves widespread advocacy , but the challenge remains to
validate it empirically and meaningfully implement it in real-world settings. This returns us to the
second main aim of psychology—the issue of whether active inference stands to help people.
5. Active Inference in Clinical Psychology and Psychiatry: Is It Helping People?
Of all the subdisciplines of psychology, active inference has arguably borne the ripest
fruit in clinical psychology, and even more so in its disciplinary sibling of psychiatry. This
raises the second question driving our discussion—has the theory made significant inroads
with respect to the second main goal of psychology: our attempts to help people?
In the active inference literature, theories of psychopathology are typically framed
in terms of false inference, e.g., in the case of hallucinations and delusions, inferring that
something is there when it is not [173–175]. Although much of this work has focused on
psychosis (e.g., [176–179]), here, we will concentrate on advances relating to depressive
disorders—first, because this relates to our own field of research; and second, because the
prevalence and disease burden of these disorders is so high that if we want to help people,
concentrating on depression is clearly a priority. How, then, can depression be framed in
terms of false inference?
Broadly speaking, active inference accounts of depressed mood and negatively va-
lenced affective states centre upon inferences about the uncertainty or volatility of the world
and how the body is managed in the face of such uncertainty. Technically, such inferences
are conceptualised in terms of the reliability or confidence (i.e., the precision) attributed to
top-down prior beliefs and sources of incoming sensory evidence [180–182]. Physiologically,
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 12 of 26
such inferences are influenced by neuromodulation: neurotransmitters such as dopamine
and serotonin modulate the gain of neuronal message-passing to amplify or attenuate infor-
mation [176,183]. This will occur according to the degree of confidence in one’s generative
models, and corresponds psychologically to the selective attention or sensory attenuation
of evidence for one’s Bayesian beliefs. According to this framework, negatively valenced
states are thought to be associated with increases in uncertainty [ 184–186], prompting
an organism to update its prior beliefs by overweighing interoceptive inputs over prior
experiences, which has the effect of heightening sensitivity to environmental change [100].
So, how does this very general claim relate to depression? A range of proposals
have emerged from the literature, which will only be afforded brief attention here. The
first distinction to point out is a temporal one—clearly, depression is not just a negatively
valenced emotional reaction: it is a pervasive mood state that persists over longer timescales
and shapes our affective responses to real-time contexts. Picking up on this, Clark, Watson
and Friston have argued that mood states reflect a hyperprior, which encodes the expected
long-term average of short-term (emotional) fluctuations in precision by determining the
set-point of neuromodulatory mechanisms (e.g., dopaminergic and serotenergic systems)
that govern the sensitivity of our responses to prediction errors [187]. The central idea here
is that neural systems not only maintain estimates of the confidence or precision of their
prior beliefs about outcomes, but also estimates of confidence in their beliefs about that
precision (i.e., the extent to which the unknowns are known) [119]. In other words, moods
determine the precision afforded to the confidence we have in our emotional states. Under
this scheme, depression is thought to be associated with a stable prior belief that uncertain
or unpredictable outcomes are likely (i.e., low precision beliefs), an expectation that in itself
is afforded a high degree of confidence or precision (i.e., there is high confidence in high
uncertainty) [119]. This can progress to a chronic, self-perpetuating negative affective state
that resists change and can develop into depressive disorder.
Following this logic, depressive disorders have been argued to arise from aberrant intero-
ceptive predictions that originate from the agranular visceromotor cortex [175,188–190]. These
abnormalities can arise from exposure to sustained distress and generate false predictions about
the body’s upcoming autonomic, metabolic and immunological needs that chronically activate
physiological stress responses. This, in turn, can result in sickness behaviours such as pervasive
negative affect and fatigue, which reduces energy expenditure and can lead to the amotivational
and neurovegetative symptoms that characterise depressive disorders [188].
Another perspective suggests that depression reflects a self-fulfilling prophecy arising from
alterations in top-down expectations that negatively bias predictions and down-regulate reward
processing (e.g., [100,113,191]). According to this view , depression is associated with a loss
of confidence in descending predictions [192], the dysregulation of precision weighting [193],
and overly precise prior expectations for depressive schemas, including strong expectations of
self-worthlessness and that the world is uncontrollable [119]. These proposals resemble compu-
tational models of reinforcement learning in psychiatry and biology [194,195], suggesting that
depression emerges from successive discrepancies between actual and expected reward outcomes
(i.e., prediction errors), thereby entrenching (empirical) prior beliefs that rewards are unlikely . This
goes on to inhibit reward-approach behaviours.
Although we agree with these insights, a prevailing issue with these accounts is that
they are highly neurocentric: they do not situate the phenotype within the organism’s
broader socioenvironmental milieu, which arguably drives such deleterious neurophys-
iological changes in the first place. Here, we take a leaf from the book of the enactivists
by explaining free-energy-minimising processes in terms of the dynamic interplay of
body–mind–environment relations [196–198]. Previously, we have lent this dynamical
perspective a distinctly Darwinian lens, which directs attention to how these depressogenic
neurocognitive mechanisms and behaviours have been designed by selection to allow us to
adaptively minimise free energy by reducing the volatility or unpredictability of our local
social ecology [122]. Why is it that we all have the capacity to become depressed? Surely it
must serve some adaptive function? Proponents of active inference are all clearly coming
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 13 of 26
to grips with the various neurobiological mechanisms that underpin depression, but how
do these neurocognitive processes result in adaptive changes in our behaviour, which lead
to more propitious socioenvironmental changes? Although these models tell us what hap-
pens in depressed states, they say little about their adaptive function or the environmental
conditions that produce them. Curiously, though, when compared to other promising
models of brain structure and function (e.g., hierarchical predictive processing [83,84]), the
behavioural component of active inference is particularly unique, not to mention of great
interest and utility to psychological scientists. It is surprising, then, that most of the theories
on depression have largely neglected this component—beyond emphasising, of course, the
downregulation of reward-approach behaviour and other vegetative features of depression,
such as sickness behaviours [189].
To address this oversight, we have previously leveraged insights gleaned from evo-
lutionary psychology, along with a wealth of supportive findings spanning psychology,
psychiatry, and neuroscience, to highlight the key role of social contexts in depression
(for other reviews, see [199–201]). According to this evolutionary systems perspective, the
mild-to-moderate levels of depressed mood that we all experience from time to time reflect
an adaptive, socially risk-averse strategy that reduces socioenvironmental volatility when
sensory cues suggest an increased likelihood of non-preferred (surprising) interpersonal
outcomes, such as rejection, defeat, or interpersonal loss [122]. To achieve this function, the
depressive response engenders adaptive changes in perception: it increases the precision af-
forded to incoming social stimuli, which facilitates perceptual inference and learning about
the social world; while also reducing confidence in top-down social predictions, which has
the effect of suppressing confident, reward-approach behaviours that run the risk of further
exposure to deleterious outcomes (e.g., anhedonia and social withdrawal). Importantly, a
unique prediction of this model is that depressed states also generate adaptive signalling
behaviours that return the individual to social homeostasis, either by eliciting interpersonal
support (e.g., reassurance-seeking) or by defusing conflict with others (e.g., submissive
behaviours). We have already provided a proof of concept for this prediction by leveraging
active inference to demonstrate these adaptive interpersonal dynamics in silico (see [124]),
while the capacity of depressive behaviours to elicit interpersonal support from friends and
family has long been observed empirically, at least for those exhibiting mild to moderate
depressed states [199,202,203]. From this perspective, more severe depression can be seen
as a failure to attract interpersonal support or enact other compensatory mechanisms, with
excessive reassurance seeking leading to a mutually reinforcing exacerbation of symptoms
and risk of rejection [204,205].
Another key distinction between our model and other theories of depression in the
active inference literature is that depressed states will not, in the most part, instantiate
false inference. Rather, normative depressed states can be thought to reflect adaptive active
inference, which cause changes in the self and others that minimise socioenvironmental
volatility. It is only when these normative depressogenic mechanisms go astray—typically
on account of prolonged socio-environmental stress—that these adaptive patterns collapse
into self-perpetuating cycles of false inference and dysfunctional behaviour.
T o elaborate, the model described here furnishes a plausible explanation for how normative
depressed states can lead to the sorts of severe, maladaptive depressive responses that are the
foci of others in the active inference literature. Namely , when the adaptive depressive response
fails, ongoing discrepancies between actual and preferred social outcomes over time (i.e., chronic
prediction errors) can entrench aberrant prior beliefs that social rewards are unlikely (e.g., shame,
low self-worth, pessimism), which can, in turn, perpetuate risk-averse depressive behaviours
(e.g., social withdrawal) and result in a self-fulfilling cycle of dysfunction (e.g., learned helplessness;
see [191,206]). From a developmental perspective, this model also accommodates established
findings that vulnerability to depressive illness later in life often stems from early exposure to social
stress (e.g., abuse or neglect [207–209]), on the grounds that early developmental insults are likely
to promote prior beliefs that social outcomes are uncontrollable, which heightens the sensitivity of
stress response systems to interpersonal stress (e.g., inflammatory immune responses) [122,210].
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 14 of 26
Although this perspective does not sit at odds with other models of depression in
the active inference literature, what makes it distinctive is that its focus on the social envi-
ronment affords unique insights into the free energy minimising properties of depressed
states. Importantly, such insights can be translated into empirically testable predictions. For
example, one elegant way to test our hypothesis would be to leverage electrophysiological
methods that capture prediction error minimisation (e.g., trial-by-trial fluctuations in P300
amplitudes) [211,212] to examine the responses of depressed versus nondepressed individ-
uals who are exposed to unpredictable social (versus asocial) stimuli [122]. The provision of
evidence from such designs that depressed individuals respond differently to unexpected
social stimuli than non-depressed participants would go some way toward evincing the
validity of our hypothesis over its contemporaries. Incidentally, indirect support for this
prediction has already been gleaned from similar designs comparing the electrophysiologi-
cal responses of depressed versus non-depressed participants to unexpected social stimuli
(e.g., [213,214]).
Of course, this model of depression also begs broader research questions, which require
sophisticated empirical designs that present an outstanding challenge for active inference
theorists. Presuming, for the sake of our argument, that the hypothesis presented here is
correct, what are the hierarchical neurocognitive mechanisms responsible for depressive
responses to unexpected social stimuli? This question, in itself, can be decomposed into
further research avenues. What are the functional roles of the brain regions associated
with depression and the patterns of effective connectivity between these regions that serve
to minimise social prediction errors? How is the precision of social prediction errors
differentially modulated by neurotransmitters like serotonin and dopamine? It is also
known that sex differences in susceptibility to depression are strongly associated with
hormonal changes and differential brain development in adolescence [215,216]. To what
extent are these changes associated with heightened sensitivity to socioenvironmental
volatility? Similarly, how do (epi)genetic and developmental influences shape individual
differences in the precision weighting of social prediction errors? More broadly still, there
have been no explorations in the active inference literature to date on the deleterious effects
of neuroticism—a biologically driven, species-typical endophenotype that predisposes
people to all sorts of psychopathological outcomes, not just depression [217–219].
To tackle such issues, greater integration between modelling approaches in active infer-
ence and observational and longitudinal methodologies in developmental psychopathology
is required to explore the manifold ways in which developmental (and particularly social)
contexts influence brain development and bias perceptual inference. To our knowledge,
however, there are no existing modelling attempts that directly apply active inference
to multiscale, developmental data already collected from real-world samples—such as
the Dunedin Multidisciplinary Health and Development study [220] and the Australian
Temperament Project [221,222]. In our opinion, methods gleaned from computational
psychiatry are likely to hold the most promise when attempting to map such sophisticated
patterns across various data sets (also see [123,124]), in order to improve our understanding
of the various neurocognitive and behavioural mechanisms that underlie depression—
including both its normative, functional states, and the development of its maladaptive
manifestations, when such mechanisms go awry.
Although we are guilty of the same neglect, our analysis here suggests a clear need
to test predictions derived from extant models of depression in the active inference liter-
ature with available empirical methodologies. As discussed, however, direct empirical
assessments of active inference based on real-world data remain surprisingly few and far
between [118], no doubt due in part to the barriers that arise when translating abstract
informational–theoretic principles into realistic experimental designs based on biophysical,
cognitive and/or behavioural observations [166]. Despite its unique explanatory promise,
without further empirical progress in this area, the extent to which active inference adds
meaningfully to what we already know about depression remains to be seen.
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 15 of 26
By now, the discerning reader will have observed that we have yet to discuss whether
advances in active inference have resulted in meaningful progress in our attempts to actu-
ally help people. Naturally, by increasing our understanding of psychopathology, we stand
to develop more targeted and effective methods for prevention, assessment, diagnosis
and treatment. But has any of this been translated into clinical practice? Returning to the
example of our theory of depression, it is readily apparent that it has clinical implications
that have not yet been realised. First, it calls for the need to develop diagnostic and assess-
ment tools that can reliably differentiate socially mediated depressive responses from other
depressive outcomes, thereby informing targeted and more effective interventions [122].
Again, we believe that methods born from computational psychiatry are likely to prove
key here, but so far, these have yet to eventuate in novel technologies and tools that can be
readily implemented in clinical practice.
Importantly, our theory also has practical implications for the prevention and success-
ful management of depression, which do not stem naturally from other active inference
models. By emphasising the importance of the social environment in explaining the aetiol-
ogy and phenomenology of depression, the model suggests that such efforts should strive
to minimise socioenvironmental volatility—by correcting dysfunctional, overly pessimistic
top-down interpersonal beliefs (e.g., via CBT [223,224]); by changing behaviours that ex-
pose the individual to sources of social uncertainty (e.g., through use of interpersonal
psychotherapy to promote adaptive, reparatory responses to social stress; [122]); and/or by
altering the individual’s environment to reduce exposure to interpersonal volatility and
encouraging engagement with prosocial environments (e.g., through prevention and early
intervention efforts that facilitate improvements in social relationships; e.g., [225]). At the
same time, this does not preclude other recommendations in the active inference literature
that psychopharmacological interventions should be used to adjust erroneous predictions
and behaviours stemming from maladaptive, self-perpetuating hyperpriors (e.g., depressed
mood), by modulating, for example, the precision afforded to social data [124]. Most antide-
pressant medications modify the effects of monoamine neurotransmitters such as serotonin
and noradrenaline, thereby influencing their modulatory effects on precision weighting
and altering the balance between the influence of predictive models versus prediction
errors. More recent agents, such as ketamine, also show promise as a means of rapidly
affecting brain models directly by altering the excitatory–inhibitory balance enacted by
glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons [226].
These advances, however, have not sprung from active inferenceper se, but its flexibility
and explanatory power has still allowed researchers to map this framework onto such theo-
ries and findings, occasionally supporting these models with proof-of-principle simulation
studies (which may or may not have real-world validity). So far, then, models applying
active inference to psychopathology and its treatment have largely been speculative, with
researchers tending to superimpose this theory onto pre-existing models of depression and its
treatment. With this in mind, what does active inference bring to the table that makes a unique
difference, besides simply explaining why extant theories of mental disorder in psychology
and psychiatry , and their best-practice interventions, work so well?
As discussed, there are also significant translational obstacles facing active inference
that have little to do with the veracity of the theory and more to do with its grounding in
machine learning and statistical thermodynamics, which are unfamiliar and inaccessible
for the majority of psychologists and psychiatrists [166]. Despite the remarkable and rapid
advances in computational psychiatry in recent years, paradigms like active inference
and reinforcement learning have yet to be translated into readily accessible assessment,
diagnostic and treatment tools that clinicians can reliably use in their daily practice. For
all their predictive and computational power, one must also wonder whether attempts in
computational psychiatry will ever compare to the expert judgement, clinical skills and
predictive accuracy of any highly trained and experienced clinician.
This is a moot point, of course, since approaches in computational psychiatry are
geared towards augmenting clinicians’ practice, instead of replacing their expertise. In this
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 16 of 26
vein, we are particularly encouraged by the development of diagnostic technologies that
leverage active inference to inform clinical decisions, such as the use of OpenAI Gym to
design computer games with diagnostic utility [227]. Otherwise, there is much to be gained
from collaborations between active inference experts in computational psychiatry, not to
mention those in fields like machine learning and artificial intelligence (e.g., [ 228–230]),
and experts in clinical psychology and psychiatry who have already capitalised on tech-
nologically advanced clinical tools that assist with assessment, diagnosis and symptom
management. A fitting example is the work of Nicholas Allen and his team on a mental
health smartphone app designed for young people that tracks their biometric, personal
communication, social media and experiential sampling data to map their mental health
status in real time, provide support through responsive online therapeutic interventions,
and report back to their treating clinicians if these data indicate need or risk [231,232]. Im-
proving these computational techniques with active inference models of psychopathology
promises to make a real difference to assessment, diagnosis and treatment on the ground.
Meanwhile, the conceptual reducibility of active inference to the need to minimise
uncertainty or stress readily lends itself to clinical applications [185]. Under this transdi-
agnostic framework, the success of all evidenced-based psychotherapies, and their corre-
sponding cognitive and behavioural techniques, arguably rests on their ability to correct
cognitive patterns of false inference and corresponding behaviours that exacerbate socioen-
vironmental volatility. We have already hinted at existing attempts in the active inference
literature to explain the mechanisms of widely endorsed psychotherapies, including the
use of CBT (e.g., [224,233]), mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (e.g., [234]); interpersonal
psychotherapy (e.g., [122]), and psychodynamic approaches [235–237] to correct faulty pat-
terns of perceptual inference, from the top down. Conversely, behavioural approaches offer
a viable means to break such patterns by adjusting the feedback from the sensorium and
social world to successively reinforce more adaptive expectations about the stability of the
individual’s eco-niche, from the bottom up [224]. Notably, the theory has also been applied
to the therapeutic alliance itself [238–240], suggesting its utility as an explanatory scheme
to those who work in clinical practice. Despite such progress, we find it surprising that
the traditions in psychology that seem to have the most in common with active inference,
particularly control theory and attachment theory, have largely been neglected by the active
inference community, despite coming with their own tried and tested psychotherapeutic
approaches (e.g., [130,241–244]). Again, this speaks to a poverty of communication between
members of this community and proponents of highly consonant schools in psychology,
obstructing the erudition of both.
That being said, we believe there is already good reason for scientific practitioners to
adopt active inference in their clinical practice. First, it promises to inform a therapist’s
understanding of their client’s symptoms and the dysfunctional biobehavioural and social
patterns they exhibit, along with their choice of therapeutic strategies, to facilitate successful
treatment [245]. In this vein, active inference provides a convincing account of the multiple
levels through which different treatments operate, which can work directly at the synapse
and also by attending to psychosocial factors. Combining treatments that operate at
different levels might be the best approach in many cases, with their interactions creating
synergies that drive better treatment outcomes. A recent development in depression
treatment attests to this. Psychedelic medicines such as psilocybin and LSD activate
serotonin receptors directly, inducing profound changes to the sensorium by producing
a ‘relaxation’ of the precision weighting of prediction errors [ 246]. The medication is
offered with psychotherapy and has antidepressant effects that emerge during the dosing
session and last for weeks afterwards [247]. The active inference framework allows us to
make sense of this: the therapy provides a safe and containing setting (reducing social
uncertainty), while the psilocybin acts to adjust the precision-weighting of the brain’s
predictive models. The more plastic brain is then amenable to embedding the reweighted
precisions in the ensuing therapy sessions.
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 17 of 26
More ambitiously still, the clear association between psychopathology and socioenvi-
ronmental stress speaks to a need to prevent and manage mental ill-health in the broader
population by working to resolve uncertainty in community contexts. On the one hand,
this reinforces the value of universal, selective and early intervention approaches that
effectively prevent conditions like depression by facilitating improvements in social envi-
ronments [225]. On the other hand, it appeals more broadly to health service design and
community development efforts that endeavour to provide secure, socially predictable
environments that promote resilience in the face of short-term fluctuations in interpersonal
volatility. A clear example here is the design of psychiatric inpatient units that minimise
uncertainty by promoting exposure to the sorts of environments favoured by adaptive
priors geared towards social inclusion and natural environments. These are just ideas at
this stage, but we are sure that many would agree that the evidence-informed explanatory
apparatus of active inference is capable of accommodating them and creating new avenues
for progressing towards them.
Despite such cause for optimism, it must be said that, to date, the impressive gains
active inference has made in our attempts to understanding people have done little to
inform our attempts to help them. Beyond our own work with colleagues, we also are
unaware of any other contributions in the active inference literature that explicitly adopt
an evolutionary systems approach in psychology to inform models of psychopathology
and its treatment. As we have attempted to demonstrate in our discussion of depression,
this synthetic, multidisciplinary approach offers important insights into our understanding,
prevention and treatment of depression that are not afforded by other models in the active
inference literature, highlighting the need for greater integration between evolutionary psy-
chology and active inference models in psychiatry. That being said, intradisciplinary frag-
mentation is endemic to the human sciences [248], a problem that has long been recognised
in psychology [151,249]. Compounding matters, the majority of therapeutic approaches
in clinical psychology and psychiatry attempt to address proximal causes—namely, dys-
functional neurobiological, cognitive and/or behavioural patterns—while the diagnostic
categories upon which such approaches are based are themselves atheoretical [ 250,251].
The need to address these shortfalls has inspired the growth of complementary fields, such
as developmental psychopathology and evolutionary psychiatry [252–255], although the
extent to which they have been taken up by those providing mental health care, let alone
proponents of active inference, is very much open to question. Finally, the lack of progress
in this area is further complicated by the need for greater theoretical integration between
active inference and psychology more generally, as we have already discussed at some
length. It is no wonder, then, that applications of active inference to clinical psychology
and computational psychiatry also show poor integration with the broader explanatory
frameworks proffered by psychology. Indeed, a consistent theme running throughout our
discussion is the clear need for greater communication between those who belong to the
active inference community and both psychologists and psychiatrists at large. Ultimately,
our aim here is to inspire more of these conversations, in the hope of seeing innovative,
elucidating and gainful outcomes that ultimately benefit those in need of help.
6. Conclusions
When attempting to canvas the influence of a field as burgeoning as active inference
in the much broader disciplines of psychology and psychiatry, there are bound to be
oversights, and we hope that the field is progressing at a faster pace than we are aware. For
our part, we will return to where we began with the two main aims of psychology, and
the extent to which active inference has progressed them. There is no question that this
theory furnishes unique and powerful conceptual tools that are capable of explaining all
patterns of human biohehaviour—tools, no less, that are both neurobiologically plausible
and empirically supported models based on mathematical principles [18,58]. In its ability
to help us understand people, we contend that active inference takes us one step further
than evolutionary psychology, providing a new paradigmatic candidate that is capable
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 18 of 26
of incorporating its insights, while also integrating developmental and more proximate,
biopsychosocial explanations for cognition and behaviour. By the same token, active
inference is a non-substantive, formal theory of phenotypic mechanics, which demands
recourse to substantive research across psychology to inform these content-free models
with evidence-based theories that describe how particular patterns of surprise-reducing
policies manifest in humans. Here, evidence-informed evolutionary hypotheses are likely
to prove key to understanding broadly generalisable, species-typical human traits, while
analysing the complex ways in which active inference manifests over the course of ontogeny
requires insights gleaned from developmental psychology and psychopathology. In our
view, the challenge here is to transcend translational obstacles and disciplinary divisions by
calling for greater collaboration between proponents of active inference and psychological
scientists to furnish the former with process theories of cognition and behaviour grounded
in real-world empirical evidence, and the latter with a biologically plausible, formal theory
of all biobehavioural patterns—psychopathological or otherwise. Arguably, the need for
greater integration between active inference and research in psychology remains as alive
today as it was over a decade ago. Still, progress in the field is swift and quickening, and we
hope that it is only a matter of time before we see a genuine change in the metatheoretical
landscape of psychology that synthesises the two.
Having said that, we will close by returning to the second main aim of psychology—has
the theory of active inference actually helped people? To date, it is fair to say that it has
achieved very little—owing in large part to its technical inaccessibility but also to the slow
and steady pace of research in clinical psychology and psychiatry . It took many years for Beck
and colleagues to accrue the necessary clinical evidence behind CBT before its ubiquitous
uptake in mental health care, the development of tolerable and effective psychotropics for
severe mental disorders is still in progress, and any new form of psychotherapy has to be
manualised and supported by sufficient clinical trials to be broadly taken up by practitioners.
As such, progress in clinical applications of active inference is likely to take some time. In
our opinion, the most immediate and promising opportunity centres on combining active
inference approaches in computational psychiatry [163,182] with extant digital technologies for
mental health care, such as the effortless assessment of risk states tool [231]. More ambitiously
still, there is genuine potential for active inference to inform models of mental health service
design, community development and large-scale social programs, by emphasising the need
to sculpt our institutions around the human need for social homeostasis and environmental
certainty . Despite their ambitiousness, we believe that active inference holds enough promise
to see such developments eventually come to light.
Author Contributions: P .B.B. was responsible for the conception of the article and wrote the first and
final drafts. C.G.D. provided comments and produced the penultimate draft. All authors have read
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank David McAleavey and Adam Safron for their helpful
comments on earlier drafts. We would also like to thank Karl Friston for his assistance with the
formulations in Figure 2—and wish him many happy returns!
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Friston, K. The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2010, 11, 127–138. [CrossRef]
2. Friston, K.; Kilner, J.; Harrison, L. A free energy principle for the brain. J. Physiol. 2006, 100, 70–87. [CrossRef]
3. Parr, T.; Pezzulo, G.; Friston, K.J. Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior ; MIT Press:
Cambridge, MA, USA, 2022.
4. Barrett, H.C.; Kurzban, R. Modularity in cognition: Framing the debate. Psychol. Rev. 2006, 113, 628–647. [CrossRef]
5. Buss, D.M. Evolutionary Psychology: The New Science of the Mind, 5th ed.; Routledge: New York, NY, USA, 2016.
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 19 of 26
6. Frankenhuis, W.E.; Ploeger, A. Evolutionary psychology versus Fodor: Arguments for and against the massive modularity
hypothesis. Philos. Psychol. 2007, 20, 687–710. [CrossRef]
7. Marr, D. Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation and Processing of Visual Information ; Freeman:
San Francisco, CA, USA, 1982.
8. Al-Shawaf, L. Levels of analysis and explanatory progress in psychology: Integrating frameworks from biology and cognitive
science for a more comprehensive science of the mind. Psychol. Rev. 2024, Advance online publication. [CrossRef]
9. Cosmides, L.; Tooby, J. Beyond intuition and instinct blindness: Toward an evolutionarily rigorous cognitive science.Cognition
1994, 50, 41–77. [CrossRef]
10. Anderson, M.L. Pr écis of after phrenology: Neural reuse and the interactive brain. Behav. Brain Sci. 2016, 39, e120. [CrossRef]
11. Anderson, M.L. After Phrenology: Neural Reuse and the Interactive Brain; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2021.
12. Buller, D.J. Adapting Minds: Evolutionary Psychology and the Persistent Quest for Human Nature; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2005.
13. Rose, H.; Rose, S. Alas Poor Darwin: Arguments Against Evolutionary Psychology; Random House: New York, NY, USA, 2010.
14. Anderson, M.L.; Finlay, B.L. Allocating structure to function: The strong links between neuroplasticity and natural selection.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2014, 7, 918. [CrossRef]
15. Egeland, J. Making sense of the modularity debate. New Ideas Psychol. 2024, 75, 101108. [CrossRef]
16. Stephen, I.D. Putting the theory before the data: Is “massive modularity” a necessary foundation of evolutionary psychology?
Front. Psychol. 2014, 5, 1158. [CrossRef]
17. Zerilli, J. Against the “system” module. Philos. Psychol. 2017, 30, 231–246. [CrossRef]
18. Badcock, P .B.; Friston, K.J.; Ramstead, M.J. The hierarchically mechanistic mind: A free-energy formulation of the human psyche.
Phys. Life Rev. 2019, 31, 104–121. [CrossRef]
19. Barrett, L.; Pollet, T.V .; Stulp, G. From computers to cultivation: Reconceptualizing evolutionary psychology. Front. Psychol.
2014, 5, 867. [CrossRef]
20. Elimari, N.; Lafargue, G. Network neuroscience and the adapted mind: Rethinking the role of network theories in evolutionary
psychology. Front. Psychol. 2020, 11, 545632. [CrossRef]
21. Badcock, P .B.; Ploeger, A.; Allen, N.B. After phrenology: Cause for a paradigm shift in cognitive science? Behav. Brain Sci.
2016, 39, 10–11. [CrossRef]
22. Klasios, J. Our computational nature: Comment on Barrett et al. Front. Psychol. 2014, 5, 1348. [CrossRef]
23. Badcock, P .B. Evolutionary systems theory: A unifying meta-theory of psychological science.Rev. Gen. Psychol.2012, 16, 10–23. [CrossRef]
24. Crawford, C.B.; Krebs, D. Foundations of Evolutionary Psychology; Erlbaum: Mahwah, NJ, USA, 2008.
25. Dunbar, R.I.M.; Barrett, L. (Eds.) Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2007.
26. Ellis, B.J.; Bjorklund, D.F. (Eds.) Origins of the Social Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and Child Development ; The Guilford Press:
New York, NY, USA, 2005.
27. Geary, D.C. The Origin of Mind: Evolution of Brain, Cognition, and General Intelligence ; American Psychological Association:
Washington, DC, USA, 2005.
28. Pinker, S. How the Mind Works; Norton: New York, NY, USA, 1997.
29. Karmiloff–Smith, A. Beyond Modularity: A Developmental Perspective on Cognitive Science; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1992.
30. Quartz, S.R. The constructivist brain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 1999, 3, 48–57. [CrossRef]
31. Karmiloff-Smith, A. Development itself is the key to understanding developmental disorders.T rends Cogn. Sci.1998, 2, 389–398. [CrossRef]
32. Kelso, J.S. Dynamic patterns: The Self-Organization of Brain and Behavior; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1995.
33. Lewis, M.D. The promise of dynamic systems approaches for an integrated account of human development. Child Dev.
2000, 71, 36–43. [CrossRef]
34. Smith, L.B.; Thelen, E. Development as a dynamic system. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2003, 7, 343–348. [CrossRef]
35. Burke, D. Why isn’t everyone an evolutionary psychologist? Front. Psychol. 2014, 5, 910. [CrossRef]
36. Machery, E.; Barrett, H.C. Essay review: Debunking Adapting Minds. Philos. Sci. 2006, 73, 232–246. [CrossRef]
37. Frankenhuis, W.E.; Panchanathan, K.; Clark Barrett, H. Bridging developmental systems theory and evolutionary psychology
using dynamic optimization. Dev. Sci. 2013, 16, 584–598. [CrossRef]
38. Greenberg, G.; Partridge, T.; Mosack, V .; Lambdin, C. Psychology is a developmental science. Int. J. Comp. Psychol.
2006, 19, 185–205. [CrossRef]
39. Lickliter, R.; Honeycutt, H. Developmental dynamics: Toward a biologically plausible evolutionary psychology.Psychol. Bull.
2003, 129, 819. [CrossRef]
40. Geary, D.C.; Bjorklund, D.F. Evolutionary developmental psychology. Child Dev. 2000, 71, 57–65. [CrossRef]
41. Bjorklund, D.F.; Pellegrini, A.D. Evolutionary Developmental Psychology ; American Psychological Association:
Washington, DC, USA, 2002.
42. Anastasiadi, D.; Venney, C.J.; Bernatchez, L.; Wellenreuther, M. Epigenetic inheritance and reproductive mode in plants and
animals. Trends Ecol. Evol. 2021, 36, 1124–1140. [CrossRef]
43. Jablonka, E.; Lamb, M.J. Inheritance Systems and the Extended Evolutionary Synthesis; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2020.
44. Jablonka, E.; Raz, G. Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance: Prevalence, mechanisms, and implications for the study of heredity
and evolution. Q. Rev. Biol. 2009, 84, 131–176. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 20 of 26
45. Henrich, J. The Secret of Our Success: How Culture is Driving Human Evolution, Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us Smarter;
Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, USA, 2015.
46. Heyes, C. New thinking: The evolution of human cognition. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2012, 367, 2091–2096. [CrossRef]
47. Heyes, C. Pr écis of cognitive gadgets: The cultural evolution of thinking. Behav. Brain Sci. 2019, 42, e169. [CrossRef]
48. Laland, K.N.; Odling-Smee, J.; Feldman, M.W. Niche construction, biological evolution, and cultural change. Behav. Brain Sci.
2000, 23, 131–146. [CrossRef]
49. Wilson, D.S.; Madhavan, G.; Gelfand, M.J.; Hayes, S.C.; Atkins, P .W.; Colwell, R.R. Multilevel cultural evolution: From new
theory to practical applications. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2023, 120, e2218222120. [CrossRef]
50. Caporael, L.R. Evolutionary psychology: T oward a unifying theory and a hybrid science.Annu. Rev. Psychol.2001, 52, 607–628. [CrossRef]
51. Kenrick, D.T. Evolutionary psychology, cognitive science, and dynamical systems: Building an integrative paradigm. Curr. Dir.
Psychol. Sci. 2001, 10, 13–17. [CrossRef]
52. Kenrick, D.T.; Li, N.P .; Butner, J. Dynamical evolutionary psychology: Individual decision rules and emergent social norms.
Psychol. Rev. 2003, 110, 3–28. [CrossRef]
53. Levin, S. Complex adaptive systems: Exploring the known, the unknown and the unknowable. Bull. Am. Math. Soc.
2003, 40, 3–19. [CrossRef]
54. Ao, P . Emerging of stochastic dynamical equalities and steady state thermodynamics from Darwinian dynamics.Commun. Theor.
Phys. 2008, 49, 1073–1090. [CrossRef]
55. Campbell, J.O. Universal Darwinism as a process of Bayesian inference. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 2016, 10, 49. [CrossRef]
56. Wilson, D.S. Two meanings of complex adaptive systems. In Complexity and Evolution: Toward a New Synthesis for Economics ;
Wilson, D.S., Kirman, A., Eds.; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2016; pp. 31–46.
57. Tinbergen, N. On aims and methods in ethology. Z. Für Tierpsychol. 1963, 20, 410–433. [CrossRef]
58. Badcock, P .B.; Friston, K.J.; Ramstead, M.J.; Ploeger, A.; Hohwy, J. The hierarchically mechanistic mind: An evolutionary systems
theory of the human brain, cognition, and behavior. Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 2019, 19, 1319–1351. [CrossRef]
59. Witherington, D.C.; Lickliter, R. Integrating development and evolution in psychological science: Evolutionary developmental
psychology, developmental systems, and explanatory pluralism. Hum. Dev. 2016, 59, 200–234. [CrossRef]
60. Ramstead, M.J.D.; Badcock, P .B.; Friston, K.J. Answering Schrödinger’s question: A free-energy formulation. Phys. Life Rev.
2018, 24, 1–16. [CrossRef]
61. Finlay, B.L.; Uchiyama, R. Developmental mechanisms channeling cortical evolution. Trends Neurosci. 2015, 38, 69–76. [CrossRef]
62. Buckner, R.L.; Krienen, F.M. The evolution of distributed association networks in the human brain. Trends Cogn. Sci.
2013, 17, 648–665. [CrossRef]
63. Spence, C. Crossmodal correspondences: A tutorial review. Attention Percept. Psychophys. 2011, 73, 971–995. [CrossRef]
64. Hütt, M.T.; Kaiser, M.; Hilgetag, C.-C. Perspective: Network-guided pattern formation of neural dynamics. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B
Biol. Sci. 2014, 369, 20130522. [CrossRef]
65. Kaiser, M.; Hilgetag, C.-C.; Kötter, R. Hierarchy and dynamics of neural networks. Front. Neuroinform. 2010, 4, 4–6. [CrossRef]
66. Taylor, P .N.; Wang, Y.; Kaiser, M. Within brain area tractography suggests local modularity using high resolution connectomics.
Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 39859. [CrossRef]
67. Breakspear, M.; Stam, C.J. Dynamics of a neural system with a multiscale architecture. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.
2005, 360, 1051–1074. [CrossRef]
68. Meunier, D.; Lambiotte, R.; Bullmore, E.T. Modular and hierarchically modular organization of brain networks.Front. Neurosci.
2010, 4, 200. [CrossRef]
69. Park, H.J.; Friston, K. Structural and functional brain networks: From connections to cognition.Science2013, 342, 1238411. [CrossRef]
70. Gu, S.; Satterthwaite, T.D.; Medaglia, J.D.; Yang, M.; Gur, R.E.; Gur, R.C.; Bassett, D.S. Emergence of system roles in normative
neurodevelopment. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2015, 112, 13681–13686. [CrossRef]
71. Badre, D. Cognitive control, hierarchy , and the rostro–caudal organization of the frontal lobes.T rends Cogn. Sci.2008, 12, 193–200. [CrossRef]
72. Changeux, J.-P . Climbing brain levels of organisation from genes to consciousness.Trends Cogn. Sci. 2017, 21, 168–181. [CrossRef]
73. Friston, K.; Buzs áki, G. The functional anatomy of time: What and when in the brain.T rends Cogn. Sci.2016, 20, 500–511. [CrossRef]
74. Haken, H. Synergetics. Phys. Bull. 1977, 28, 412. [CrossRef]
75. Kiebel, S.J.; Daunizeau, J.; Friston, K.J. A hierarchy of time-scales and the brain. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2008, 4, e1000209. [CrossRef]
76. Murray, J.D.; Bernacchia, A.; Freedman, D.J.; Romo, R.; Wallis, J.D.; Cai, X.; Padoa-Schioppa, C.; Pasternak, T.; Seo, H.; Lee, D.;
et al. A hierarchy of intrinsic timescales across primate cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 2014, 17, 1661–1663. [CrossRef]
77. Haken, H. Principles of Brain Functioning: A Synergetic Approach to Brain Activity, Behaviour and Cognition ; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1996.
78. Holland, J.H. Hidden Order: How Adaptation Builds Complexity; Addison Wesley: Redwood City, CA, USA, 1995.
79. Hesse, J.; Gross, T. Self–organized criticality as a fundamental property of neural systems.Front. Syst. Neurosci.2014, 8, 46–59. [CrossRef]
80. Mengistu, H.; Huizinga, J.; Mouret, J.B.; Clune, J. The evolutionary origins of hierarchy .PLoS Comput. Biol.2016, 12, e1004829. [CrossRef]
81. Friston, K.J. Learning and inference in the brain. Neural Netw. 2003, 16, 1325–1352. [CrossRef]
82. Friston, K.J. A theory of cortical responses. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 2005, 360, 815–836. [CrossRef]
83. Clark, A. Whatever next? Predictive Brains, Situated Agents, and the Future of Cognitive Science. Behav. Brain Sci.
2013, 36, 181–253. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 21 of 26
84. Hohwy, J. The Predictive Mind; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2013.
85. Bastos, A.M.; Usrey, W.M.; Adams, R.A.; Mangun, G.R.; Fries, P .; Friston, K.J. Canonical microcircuits for predictive coding.
Neuron 2012, 76, 695–711. [CrossRef]
86. Friston, K. Does predictive coding have a future? Nat. Neurosci. 2018, 21, 1019–1021. [CrossRef]
87. Hohwy, J. The self–Evidencing brain. Noûs 2016, 50, 259–285. [CrossRef]
88. Schrödinger, E. What is Life? Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1944.
89. Friston, K.; Ao, P . Free energy, value, and attractors. Comput. Math. Methods Med. 2012, 2012, 937860. [CrossRef]
90. Sporns, O. Small-world connectivity, motif composition, and complexity of fractal neuronal connections. Biosystems
2006, 85, 55–64. [CrossRef]
91. Friston, K.J.; Fagerholm, E.D.; Zarghami, T.S.; Parr, T.; Hipólito, I.; Magrou, L.; Razi, A. Parcels and particles: Markov blankets in
the brain. Netw. Neurosci. 2021, 5, 211–251. [CrossRef]
92. Hipólito, I.; Ramstead, M.J.; Convertino, L.; Bhat, A.; Friston, K.; Parr, T. Markov blankets in the brain.Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.
2021, 125, 88–97. [CrossRef]
93. Badcock, P .B. The Mechanics of evolution: Phylogeny, ontogeny, and adaptive priors. Phys. Life Rev. 2024, 50, 53–56. [CrossRef]
94. Friston, K. Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 2013, 10, 20130475. [CrossRef]
95. Palacios, E.R.; Razi, A.; Parr, T.; Kirchhoff, M.; Friston, K. On Markov blankets and hierarchical self-organisation.J. Theor. Biol.
2020, 486, 110089. [CrossRef]
96. Kuhn, T.S. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions; Chicago University: Chicago, IL, USA; Chicago Press: Chicago, IL, USA, 1962.
97. Zagaria, A. Is evolutionary psychology a scientific revolution? A bibliometric analysis. Adapt. Hum. Behav. Physiol.
2024, 10, 31–49. [CrossRef]
98. Hirsh, J.B.; Mar, R.A.; Peterson, J.B. Psychological entropy: A framework for understanding uncertainty–Related anxiety. Psychol.
Rev. 2012, 119, 304–320. [CrossRef]
99. Barrett, L.F. The theory of constructed emotion: An active inference account of interoception and categorization. Soc. Cogn. Affect.
Neurosci. 2017, 12, 1–23. [CrossRef]
100. Joffily, M.; Coricelli, G. Emotional valence and the free–Energy principle. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2013, 9, e1003094. [CrossRef]
101. Smith, R.; Parr, T.; Friston, K.J. Simulating emotions: An active inference model of emotional state inference and emotion concept
learning. Front. Psychol. 2019, 10, 2844. [CrossRef]
102. Brown, H.; Adams, R.A.; Parees, I.; Edwards, M.; Friston, K. Active inference, sensory attenuation and illusions. Cogn. Process.
2013, 14, 411–427. [CrossRef]
103. Rood, T.; van Gerven, M.; Lanillos, P . A deep active inference model of the rubber-hand illusion. In Active Inference: First
International Workshop 2020, IWAI 2020, Co-Located with ECML/PKDD 2020, Ghent, Belgium, 14 September 2020; Proceedings 1 ;
Springer International Publishing: New York, NY, USA, 2020; pp. 84–91.
104. Parr, T.; Corcoran, A.W .; Friston, K.J.; Hohwy , J. Perceptual awareness and active inference.Neurosci. Conscious.2019, 2019, niz012. [CrossRef]
105. Hobson, J.A.; Friston, K.J. Consciousness, dreams, and inference: The Cartesian theatre revisited. J. Conscious. Stud. 2014, 21, 6–32.
106. Safron, A. The radically embodied conscious cybernetic Bayesian brain: From free energy to free will and back again. Entropy
2021, 23, 783. [CrossRef]
107. Vilas, M.G.; Auksztulewicz, R.; Melloni, L. Active inference as a computational framework for consciousness. Rev. Philos. Psychol.
2022, 13, 859–878. [CrossRef]
108. Whyte, C.J.; Smith, R. The predictive global neuronal workspace: A formal active inference model of visual consciousness.
Prog. Neurobiol. 2021, 199, 101918. [CrossRef]
109. Wiese, W. Toward a mature science of consciousness. Front. Psychol. 2018, 9, 693. [CrossRef]
110. Friston, K.; Daunizeau, J.; Kiebel, S. Reinforcement learning or active inference? PLoS ONE 2009, 4, e6421. [CrossRef]
111. Ramstead, M.J.; Constant, A.; Badcock, P .B.; Friston, K.J. Variational ecology and the physics of sentient systems.Phys. Life Rev.
2019, 31, 188–205. [CrossRef]
112. Constant, A.; Ramstead, M.J.; Veissiere, S.P .; Campbell, J.O.; Friston, K.J. A variational approach to niche construction.J. R. Soc.
Interface 2018, 15, 20170685. [CrossRef]
113. Moutoussis, M.; Fearon, P .; El–Deredy, W.; Dolan, R.J.; Friston, K.J. Bayesian inferences about the self (and others): A review.
Conscious. Cogn. 2014, 25, 67–76. [CrossRef]
114. Moutoussis, M.; Trujillo–Barreto, N.J.; El–Deredy, W.; Dolan, R.J.; Friston, K.J. A formal model of interpersonal inference.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2014, 8, 160. [CrossRef]
115. Friston, K.; Frith, C. A duet for one. Conscious. Cogn. 2015, 36, 390–405. [CrossRef]
116. Vasil, J.; Badcock, P .B.; Constant, A.; Friston, K.; Ramstead, M.J. A world unto itself: Human communication as active inference.
Front. Psychol. 2020, 11, 417. [CrossRef]
117. Clark, A. Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2015.
118. Hodson, R.; Mehta, M.; Smith, R. The empirical status of predictive coding and active inference. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.
2023, 157, 105473. [CrossRef]
119. Smith, R.; Badcock, P .; Friston, K.J. Recent advances in the application of predictive coding and active inference models within
clinical neuroscience. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 2021, 75, 3–13. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 22 of 26
120. Friston, K.; Friedman, D.A.; Constant, A.; Knight, V .B.; Fields, C.; Parr, T.; Campbell, J.O. A variational synthesis of evolutionary
and developmental dynamics. Entropy 2023, 25, 964. [CrossRef]
121. Pezzulo, G.; Parr, T.; Friston, K. The evolution of brain architectures for predictive coding and active inference.Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. B 2022, 377, 20200531. [CrossRef]
122. Badcock, P .B.; Davey, C.G.; Whittle, S.; Allen, N.B.; Friston, K.J. The depressed brain: An evolutionary systems theory.Trends
Cogn. Sci. 2017, 21, 182–194. [CrossRef]
123. Constant, A.; Badcock, P .; Friston, K.; Kirmayer, L.J. Integrating evolutionary, cultural, and computational psychiatry: A multilevel
systemic approach. Front. Psychiatry 2022, 13, 763380. [CrossRef]
124. Constant, A.; Hesp, C.; Davey, C.G.; Friston, K.J.; Badcock, P .B. Why depressed mood is adaptive: A numerical proof of principle
for an evolutionary systems theory of depression. Comput. Psychiatry 2021, 5, 60–80. [CrossRef]
125. Jablonka, E. The evolutionary implications of epigenetic inheritance. Interface Focus 2017, 7, 20160135. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
126. Ciaunica, A.; Constant, A.; Preissl, H.; Fotopoulou, K. The first prior: From co-embodiment to co-homeostasis in early life.
Conscious. Cogn. 2021, 91, 103117. [CrossRef]
127. Santaguida, E.; Bergamasco, M. Attachment theory in an active inference framework: How does our inner model take shape?
In International Workshop on Active Inference; Springer Nature: Cham, Switzerland, 2022; pp. 179–191.
128. Ploeger, A.; Van Der Maas, H.J.L.; Raijmakers, M.E.J. Is evolutionary psychology a metatheory for psychology? A discussion of
four major issues in psychology from an evolutionary developmental perspective. Psychol. Inq. 2008, 19, 1–18. [CrossRef]
129. Wiener, N. Cybernetics: Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1948.
130. Carver, C.S.; Scheier, M.F. Control theory: A useful conceptual framework for personality–social, clinical, and health psychology.
Psychol. Bull. 1982, 92, 111–135. [CrossRef]
131. Lord, R.G.; Levy, P .E. Moving from cognition to action: A control theory perspective.Appl. Psychol. 1994, 43, 335–367. [CrossRef]
132. Powers, W.T. Behavior: The Control of Perception; Aldine: Chicago, IL, USA, 1973.
133. Marken, R.S.; Mansell, W. Perceptual control as a unifying concept in psychology.Rev. Gen. Psychol. 2013, 17, 190–195. [CrossRef]
134. Baltieri, M.; Buckley, C.L. The modularity of action and perception revisited using control theory and active inference. In Artificial
Life Conference Proceedings; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2018; pp. 121–128.
135. Goekoop, R.; De Kleijn, R. Permutation entropy as a universal disorder criterion: How disorders at different scale levels are
manifestations of the same underlying principle. Entropy 2021, 23, 1701. [CrossRef]
136. de Hullu, E. Exploring the perceptual control hierarchy . InThe Interdisciplinary Handbook of Perceptual Control Theory: Living in the Loop,
1st ed.; Mansell, W ., de Hullu, E., Huddy , V ., Scholte, T., Eds.; Academic Press Inc.: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2023; V olume 2, pp. 3–28.
137. Gibson, J.J. The Senses Considered As Perceptual Systems; Houghton Mifflin: Boston, MA, USA, 1966.
138. Gibson, J.J. The Ecological Approach To Visual Perception; Houghton Mifflin: Boston, MA, USA, 1979.
139. Barker, R.G. Ecological Psychology: Concepts and Methods for Studying the Environment of Human Behavior; Stanford University Press:
Redwood City, CA, USA, 1968.
140. Bronfenbrenner, U. Toward an experimental ecology of human development. Am. Psychol. 1977, 32, 513–531. [CrossRef]
141. Bronfenbrenner, U. The Ecology of Human Development: Experiments by Nature and Design ; Harvard University Press:
Cambridge, MA, USA, 1979.
142. Heft, H. An ecological approach to psychology. Rev. Gen. Psychol. 2013, 17, 162–167. [CrossRef]
143. Chemero, A. Radical Embodied Cognition; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2009.
144. Bowlby, J. Attachment and Loss (No. 79); Random House: New York, NY, USA, 1969.
145. Bretherton, I. The origins of attachment theory: John Bowlby and Mary Ainsworth. Dev. Psychol. 1992, 28, 759–775. [CrossRef]
146. Mikulincer, M.; Shaver, P .R.; Pereg, D. Attachment theory and affect regulation: The dynamics, development, and cognitive
consequences of attachment-related strategies. Motiv. Emot. 2003, 27, 77–102. [CrossRef]
147. Rescorla, R.A. Pavlovian conditioning: It’s not what you think it is. Am. Psychol. 1988, 43, 151–160. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
148. Rescorla, R.A.; Solomon, R.L. Two-process learning theory: Relationships between Pavlovian conditioning and instrumental
learning. Psychol. Rev. 1967, 74, 151–182. [CrossRef]
149. Sutton, R.S.; Barto, A.G. Toward a modern theory of adaptive networks: Expectation and prediction. Psychol. Rev.
1981, 88, 135–170. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
150. von Helmholtz, H.L.F. Concerning the perceptions in general. In Helmholtz on Perception: Its Physiology and Development ;
Warren, R.M., Warren, R.P ., Eds.; Wiley: New York, NY, USA, 1866; pp. 171–203.
151. Henriques, G. A New Unified Theory of Psychology; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2011.
152. Cittern, D.; Nolte, T.; Friston, K.; Edalat, A. Intrinsic and extrinsic motivators of attachment under active inference. PLoS ONE
2018, 13, e0193955. [CrossRef]
153. Barrett, L.F. The future of psychology: Connecting mind to brain. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 2009, 4, 326–339. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
154. Pfeifer, J.H.; Allen, N.B. Arrested development? Reconsidering dual-systems models of brain function in adolescence and
disorders. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2012, 16, 322–329. [CrossRef]
155. Crone, E.A.; Ridderinkhof, K.R. The developing brain: From theory to neuroimaging and back. Dev. Cogn. Neurosci.
2011, 1, 101–109. [CrossRef]
156. Murtazina, M.S.; A vdeenko, T.V . The constructing of cognitive functions ontology .Procedia Comput. Sci.2021, 186, 595–602. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 23 of 26
157. Poldrack, R.A. Mapping mental function to brain structure: How can cognitive neuroimaging succeed? Perspect. Psychol. Sci.
2010, 5, 753–761. [CrossRef]
158. Price, C.J.; Friston, K.J. Functional ontologies for cognition: The systematic definition of structure and function.Cogn. Neuropsychol.
2005, 22, 262–275. [CrossRef]
159. Bouizegarene, N.; Ramstead, M.J.; Constant, A.; Friston, K.J.; Kirmayer, L.J. Narrative as active inference: An integrative account
of cognitive and social functions in adaptation. Front. Psychol. 2024, 15, 1345480. [CrossRef]
160. Huys, Q.J.; Dayan, P . A Bayesian formulation of behavioral control. Cognition 2009, 113, 314–328. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
161. Daunizeau, J. A plea for “variational neuroethology”: Comment on “Answering Schrödinger’s question: A free-energy formula-
tion”. Phys. Life Rev. 2018, 24, 56–58. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
162. Chiel, H.J.; Beer, R.D. The brain has a body: Adaptive behavior emerges from interactions of nervous system, body and
environment. Trends Neurosci. 1997, 20, 553–557. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
163. Friston, K.J.; Stephan, K.E.; Montague, R.; Dolan, R.J. Computational psychiatry: The brain as a phantastic organ. Lancet Psychiatry
2014, 1, 148–158. [CrossRef]
164. Ramstead, M.J.; Badcock, P .B.; Friston, K.J. Variational neuroethology: Answering further questions: Reply to comments on
Answering Schrödinger’s question: A free–Energy formulation. Phys. Life Rev. 2018, 24, 59–66. [CrossRef]
165. Manrique, H.M.; Friston, K.J.; Walker, M.J. ‘Snakes and ladders’ in paleoanthropology: From cognitive surprise to skillfulness a
million years ago. Phys. Life Rev. 2024, 49, 40–70. [CrossRef]
166. Smith, R.; Friston, K.J.; Whyte, C.J. A step-by-step tutorial on active inference and its application to empirical data. J. Math.
Psychol. 2022, 107, 102632. [CrossRef]
167. Hesp, C.; Ramstead, M.; Constant, A.; Badcock, P .; Kirchhoff, M.; Friston, K. A multi-scale view of the emergent complexity of
life: A free-energy proposal. In Evolution, Development and Complexity: Multiscale Evolutionary Models of Complex Adaptive Systems;
Springer International Publishing: New York, NY, USA, 2019; pp. 195–227.
168. Aguilera, M.; Millidge, B.; Tschantz, A.; Buckley, C.L. How particular is the physics of the free energy principle?Phys. Life Rev.
2022, 40, 24–50. [CrossRef]
169. Biehl, M.; Pollock, F .A.; Kanai, R. A technical critique of some parts of the free energy principle.Entropy2021, 23, 293. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
170. Colombo, M.; Wright, C. First principles in the life sciences: The free-energy principle, organicism, and mechanism. Synthese
2021, 198, 3463–3488. [CrossRef]
171. Sims, A. A problem of scope for the free energy principle as a theory of cognition. Philos. Psychol. 2016, 29, 967–980. [CrossRef]
172. Williams, D. Is the brain an organ for free energy minimisation? Philos. Stud. 2022, 179, 1693–1714. [CrossRef]
173. Adams, R.A.; Vincent, P .; Benrimoh, D.; Friston, K.J.; Parr, T. Everything is connected: Inference and attractors in delusions.
Schizophr. Res. 2022, 245, 5–22. [CrossRef]
174. Schwartenbeck, P .; Friston, K. Computational phenotyping in psychiatry: A worked example.eNeuro2016, 3, 0049-16.2016. [CrossRef]
175. Stephan, K.E.; Manjaly, Z.M.; Mathys, C.D.; Weber, L.A.; Paliwal, S.; Gard, T.; Tittgemeyer, M.; Fleming, S.M.; Haker, H.; Seth,
A.K.; et al. Allostatic self-efficacy: A metacognitive theory of dyshomeostasis-induced fatigue and depression. Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 2016, 10, 550. [CrossRef]
176. Adams, R.A.; Stephan, K.E.; Brown, H.R.; Frith, C.D.; Friston, K.J. The computational anatomy of psychosis. Front. Psychiatry
2013, 4, 47. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
177. Benrimoh, D.; Parr, T.; Adams, R.A.; Friston, K. Hallucinations both in and out of context: An active inference account. PLoS ONE
2019, 14, e0212379. [CrossRef]
178. Jeganathan, J.; Breakspear, M. An active inference perspective on the negative symptoms of schizophrenia. Lancet Psychiatry
2021, 8, 732–738. [CrossRef]
179. Knolle, F .; Sterner, E.; Moutoussis, M.; Adams, R.A.; Griffin, J.D.; Haarsma, J.; T averne, H.; Goodyer, I.M.; Fletcher, P .C.; Murray , G.K. Action
selection in early stages of psychosis: An active inference approach.J. Psychiatry Neurosci.2023, 48, E78–E89. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
180. Seth, A.K.; Friston, K.J. Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.
2016, 371, 20160007. [CrossRef]
181. Smith, R.; Kuplicki, R.; Feinstein, J.; Forthman, K.L.; Stewart, J.L.; Paulus, M.P .; Tulsa 1000 investigators; Khalsa, S.S. A Bayesian
computational model reveals a failure to adapt interoceptive precision estimates across depression, anxiety, eating, and substance
use disorders. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2020, 16, e1008484. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
182. Friston, K. Computational psychiatry: From synapses to sentience. Mol. Psychiatry 2023, 28, 256–268. [CrossRef]
183. Edwards, M.J.; Adams, R.A.; Brown, H.; Parees, I.; Friston, K.J. A Bayesian account of ‘hysteria’.Brain2012, 135, 3495–3512. [CrossRef]
184. Linson, A.; Parr, T.; Friston, K.J. Active inference, stressors, and psychological trauma: A neuroethological model of (mal) adaptive
explore-exploit dynamics in ecological context. Behav. Brain Res. 2020, 380, 112421. [CrossRef]
185. Peters, A.; McEwen, B.S.; Friston, K. Uncertainty and stress: Why it causes diseases and how it is mastered by the brain.
Prog. Neurobiol. 2017, 156, 164–188. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
186. Lyndon, S.; Corlett, P .R. Hallucinations in posttraumatic stress disorder: Insights from predictive coding. J. Abnorm. Psychol.
2020, 129, 534–543. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
187. Clark, J.E.; W atson, S.; Friston, K.J. What is mood? A computational perspective.Psychol. Med.2018, 48, 2277–2284. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
188. Barrett, L.F.; Simmons, W.K. Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2015, 16, 419–429. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 24 of 26
189. Barrett, L.F.; Quigley, K.S.; Hamilton, P . An active inference theory of allostasis and interoception in depression.Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2016, 371, 20160011. [CrossRef]
190. Paulus, M.P .; Feinstein, J.S.; Khalsa, S.S. An active inference approach to interoceptive psychopathology.Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol.
2019, 15, 97–122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
191. Chekroud, A.M. Unifying treatments for depression: An application of the Free Energy Principle.Front. Psychol.2015, 6, 153. [CrossRef]
192. Arnaldo, I.; Corcoran, A.W.; Friston, K.J.; Ramstead, M.J. Stress and its sequelae: An active inference account of the etiological
pathway from allostatic overload to depression. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2022, 135, 104590. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
193. Krupnik, V . Depression as a failed anxiety: The continuum of precision-weighting dysregulation in affective disorders.
Front. Psychol. 2021, 12, 657738. [CrossRef]
194. Adams, R.A.; Huys, Q.J.; Roiser, J.P . Computational psychiatry: Towards a mathematically informed understanding of mental
illness. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 2016, 87, 53–63. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
195. Nettle, D.; Bateson, M. The evolutionary origins of mood and its disorders. Curr. Biol. 2012, 22, R712–R721. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
196. Constant, A.; Clark, A.; Kirchhoff, M.; Friston, K.J. Extended active inference: Constructing predictive cognition beyond skulls.
Mind Lang. 2022, 37, 373–394. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
197. Robertson, I.; Kirchoff, M.D. Anticipatory action: Active inference in embodied cognitive activity .J. Conscious. Stud.2019, 27, 38–68.
198. Tison, R.; Poirier, P . Communication as socially extended active inference: An ecological approach to communicative behavior.
Ecol. Psychol. 2021, 33, 197–235. [CrossRef]
199. Allen, N.B.; Badcock, P .B. The social risk hypothesis of depressed mood: Evolutionary, psychosocial, and neurobiological
perspectives. Psychol. Bull. 2003, 129, 887–913. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
200. Slavich, G.M.; Irwin, M.R. From stress to inflammation and major depressive disorder: A social signal transduction theory of
depression. Psychol. Bull. 2014, 140, 774. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
201. Watt, D.F. The separation distress hypothesis of depression–an update and systematic review. Neuropsychoanalysis
2023, 25, 103–159. [CrossRef]
202. Fowler, C.; Gasiorek, J. Depressive symptoms, excessive reassurance seeking, and relationship maintenance. J. Soc. Pers. Relatsh.
2017, 34, 91–113. [CrossRef]
203. Hagen, E.H. Evolutionary theories of depression: A critical review. Can. J. Psychiatry 2011, 56, 716–726. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
204. Joiner, T.E.; Metalsky , G.I.; Katz, J.; Beach, S.R. Depression and excessive reassurance-seeking.Psychol. Inq.1999, 10, 269–278. [CrossRef]
205. Starr, L.R.; Davila, J. Excessive reassurance seeking, depression, and interpersonal rejection: A meta-analytic review. J. Abnorm.
Psychol. 2008, 117, 762–775. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
206. Kube, T.; Schwarting, R.; Rozenkrantz, L.; Glombiewski, J.A.; Rief, W. Distorted cognitive processes in major depression:
A predictive processing perspective. Biol. Psychiatry 2020, 87, 388–398. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
207. Brown, J.; Cohen, P .; Johnson, J.G.; Smailes, E.M. Childhood abuse and neglect: Specificity of effects on adolescent and young
adult depression and suicidality. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 1999, 38, 1490–1496. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
208. Infurna, M.R.; Reichl, C.; Parzer, P .; Schimmenti, A.; Bifulco, A.; Kaess, M. Associations between depression and specific childhood
experiences of abuse and neglect: A meta-analysis. J. Affect. Disord. 2016, 190, 47–55. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
209. Mandelli, L.; Petrelli, C.; Serretti, A. The role of specific early trauma in adult depression: A meta-analysis of published literature.
Childhood trauma and adult depression. Eur. Psychiatry 2015, 30, 665–680. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
210. Kumari, M. International comparisons of social differences in inflammatory markers: Different patterns, same drivers?
Brain Behav. Immun. 2020, 84, 4–5. [CrossRef]
211. Kolossa, A.; Fingscheidt, T.; Wessel, K.; Kopp, B. A model–based approach to trial–by–trial P300 amplitude fluctuations.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2013, 6, 359. [CrossRef]
212. Mars, R.B.; Debener, S.; Gladwin, T.E.; Harrison, L.M.; Haggard, P .; Rothwell, J.C.; Bestmann, S. T rial–by–trial fluctuations in the
event–related electroencephalogram reflect dynamic changes in the degree of surprise.J. Neurosci.2008, 28, 12539–12545. [CrossRef]
213. Nicolaisen-Sobesky, E.; Paz, V .; Cervantes-Constantino, F.; Fernández-Theoduloz, G.; Pérez, A.; Martínez-Montes, E.; Kessel, D.;
Cabana, Á.; Gradin, V .B. Event-related potentials during the ultimatum game in people with symptoms of depression and/or
social anxiety. Psychophysiology 2023, 60, e14319. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
214. Zhang, D.; Shen, J.; Bi, R.; Zhang, Y.; Zhou, F.; Feng, C.; Gu, R. Differentiating the abnormalities of social and monetary reward
processing associated with depressive symptoms. Psychol. Med. 2022, 52, 2080–2094. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
215. Naninck, E.F.G.; Lucassen, P .J.; Bakker, J. Sex differences in adolescent depression: Do sex hormones determine vulnerability?
J. Neuroendocrinol. 2011, 23, 383–392. [CrossRef]
216. Slavich, G.M.; Sacher, J. Stress, sex hormones, inflammation, and major depressive disorder: Extending Social Signal T ransduction Theory
of Depression to account for sex differences in mood disorders.Psychopharmacology2019, 236, 3063–3079. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
217. Badcock, P .B.; Moore, E.; Williamson, E.; Berk, M.; Williams, L.J.; Bjerkeset, O.; Nordahl, H.M.; Patton, G.C.; Olsson, C.A.
Modeling gene-environment interaction in longitudinal data: Risk for neuroticism due to interaction between maternal care and
the Dopamine 4 Receptor gene (DRD4). Aust. J. Psychol. 2011, 63, 18–25. [CrossRef]
218. Ormel, J.; Jeronimus, B.F.; Kotov, R.; Riese, H.; Bos, E.H.; Hankin, B.; Rosmalen, J.G.; Oldehinkel, A.J. Neuroticism and common
mental disorders: Meaning and utility of a complex relationship. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 2013, 33, 686–697. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 25 of 26
219. Servaas, M.N.; Van Der Velde, J.; Costafreda, S.G.; Horton, P .; Ormel, J.; Riese, H.; Aleman, A. Neuroticism and the brain: A
quantitative meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies investigating emotion processing. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2013, 37, 1518–1529.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
220. Poulton, R.; Moffitt, T.E.; Silva, P .A. The Dunedin Multidisciplinary Health and Development Study: Overview of the first 40
years, with an eye to the future. Soc. Psychiatry Psychiatr. Epidemiol. 2015, 50, 679–693. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
221. Edwards, B.; Hawkins, M.; Letcher, P .; Little, K.; Macdonald, J.; Oberklaid, F.; O’Connor, M.; Olsson, C.A.; Prior, M.; Sanson, A.;
et al. The Australian Temperament Project: The First 30 Years; Institute of Family Studies: Melbourne, Australia, 2013.
222. Olsson, C.A.; Letcher, P .; Greenwood, C.J.; McIntosh, J.E.; Barker, S.; Olsson, C.M.; Macdonald, A.J.; Spry, A.E.; Hutchinson, D.;
Ryan, J.; et al. The Australian Temperament Project Generation 3 study: A population-based multigenerational prospective cohort
study of socioemotional health and development. BMJ Open 2022, 12, e061854. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
223. Krupnik, V . Bayesian approach to psychotherapy integration: Strategic modification of priors. Front. Psychol. 2019, 10, 356.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
224. Smith, R.; Moutoussis, M.; Bilek, E. Simulating the computational mechanisms of cognitive and behavioral psychotherapeutic
interventions: Insights from active inference. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 10128. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
225. Filia, K.; Eastwood, O.; Herniman, S.; Badcock, P . Facilitating improvements in young people’s social relationships to prevent or
treat depression: A review of empirically supported interventions. Transl. Psychiatry 2021, 11, 305. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
226. Luscher, B.; Feng, M.; Jefferson, S.J. Antidepressant mechanisms of ketamine: Focus on GABAergic inhibition. InRapid Acting Antidepressants:
Advances in Pharmacology; Duman, R.S., Krystal, J.H., Eds.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2020; pp. 43–78.
227. Cullen, M.; Davey, B.; Friston, K.J.; Moran, R.J. Active inference in OpenAI Gym: A paradigm for computational investigations
into psychiatric illness. Biol. Psychiatry: Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging 2018, 3, 809–818. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
228. Albarracin, M.; Hip ólito, I.; Tremblay, S.E.; Fox, J.G.; Ren é, G.; Friston, K.; Ramstead, M.J. Designing explainable artificial
intelligence with active inference: A framework for transparent introspection and decision-making. In International Workshop on
Active Inference; Springer Nature: Cham, Switzerland, 2023; pp. 123–144.
229. Lanillos, P .; Meo, C.; Pezzato, C.; Meera, A.A.; Baioumy, M.; Ohata, W.; Tschantz, A.; Millidge, B.; Wisse, M.; Buckley, C.L.; et al.
Active inference in robotics and artificial agents: Survey and challenges. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2112.01871.
230. Pezzulo, G.; Parr, T.; Cisek, P .; Clark, A.; Friston, K. Generating meaning: Active inference and the scope and limits of passive AI.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 2024, 28, 97–112. [CrossRef]
231. Lind, M.N.; Byrne, M.L.; Wicks, G.; Smidt, A.M.; Allen, N.B. The effortless assessment of risk states (EARS) tool: An interpersonal
approach to mobile sensing. JMIR Ment. Health 2018, 5, e10334. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
232. McNeilly , E.A.; Mills, K.L.; Kahn, L.E.; Crowley , R.; Pfeifer, J.H.; Allen, N.B. Adolescent social communication through smartphones:
Linguistic features of internalizing symptoms and daily mood.Clin. Psychol. Sci.2023, 11, 1090–1107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
233. Hauke, G.; Lohr, C. Piloting the update: The use of therapeutic relationship for change—A free energy account. Front. Psychol.
2022, 13, 842488. [CrossRef]
234. Manjaly, Z.M.; Iglesias, S. A computational theory of mindfulness based cognitive therapy from the “bayesian brain” perspective.
Front. Psychiatry 2020, 11, 404. [CrossRef]
235. Chamberlin, D.E. The active inference model of coherence therapy. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2023, 16, 955558. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
236. Holmes, J. Friston, free energy, and psychoanalytic psychotherapy. Entropy 2024, 26, 343. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
237. Holmes, J.; Nolte, T. “Surprise” and the Bayesian brain: Implications for psychotherapy theory and practice. Front. Psychol.
2019, 10, 592. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
238. Kim, J.; Esteves, J.E.; Cerritelli, F.; Friston, K. An active inference account of touch and verbal communication in therapy.
Front. Psychol. 2022, 13, 828952. [CrossRef]
239. Krupnik, V . The therapeutic alliance as active inference: The role of trust and self-efficacy .J. Contemp. Psychother.2023, 53, 207–215. [CrossRef]
240. McParlin, Z.; Cerritelli, F.; Friston, K.J.; Esteves, J.E. Therapeutic alliance as active inference: The role of therapeutic touch and
synchrony. Front. Psychol. 2022, 13, 783694. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
241. Alsawy, S.; Mansell, W.; Carey, T.A.; McEvoy, P .; Tai, S.J. Science and practice of transdiagnostic CBT: A Perceptual Control Theory
(PCT) approach. Int. J. Cogn. Ther. 2014, 7, 334–359. [CrossRef]
242. Culver, N.C.; Vervliet, B.; Craske, M.G. Compound extinction: Using the Rescorla–Wagner model to maximize exposure therapy
effects for anxiety disorders. Clin. Psychol. Sci. 2015, 3, 335–348. [CrossRef]
243. Heard, D.; McCluskey, U.; Lake, B.Attachment Therapy with Adolescents and Adults: Theory and Practice Post Bowlby; Routledge:
Oxford, UK, 2018.
244. Steele, H.; Steele, M. (Eds.) Handbook of Attachment-Based Interventions; Guilford Publications: New York, NY, USA, 2017.
245. Davey, C.G. Understanding and explaining depression: From Karl Jaspers to Karl Friston. Aust. N. Z. J. Psychiatry 2024, 58, 5–9.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
246. Carhart-Harris, R.L.; Friston, K.J. REBUS and the anarchic brain: Toward a unified model of the brain action of psychedelics.
Pharmacol. Rev. 2019, 71, 316–344. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
247. Goodwin, G.M.; Aaronson, S.T.; Alvarez, O.; Arden, P .C.; Baker, A.; Bennett, J.C.; Bird, C.; Blom, R.E.; Brennan, C.; Brusch, D.; et al.
Single-dose psilocybin for a treatment-resistant episode of major depression.N. Engl. J. Med.2022, 387, 1637–1648. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
248. Balietti, S.; Mäs, M.; Helbing, D. On disciplinary fragmentation and scientific progress. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0118747. [CrossRef]
249. Y anchar, S.C.; Slife, B.D. Pursuing unity in a fragmented psychology: Problems and prospects.Rev. Gen. Psychol.1997, 1, 235–255. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2024, 26, 833 26 of 26
250. Follette, W.C.; Houts, A.C. Models of scientific progress and the role of theory in taxonomy development: A case study of the
DSM. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 1996, 64, 1120–1132. [CrossRef]
251. Tsou, J.Y. DSM-5 and psychiatry’s second revolution: Descriptive vs. theoretical approaches to psychiatric classification.
In The DSM-5 in Perspective: Philosophical Reflections on the Psychiatric Babel ; Demazeux, S., Singy, P ., Eds.; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2015; pp. 43–62.
252. Lewis, M.; Miller, S.M.; Sameroff, A.J. (Eds.)Handbook of Developmental Psychopathology; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany , 1990.
253. Nesse, R.M. Evolutionary psychiatry: Foundations, progress and challenges.World Psychiatry2023, 22, 177–202. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
254. Rutter, M.; Sroufe, L.A. Developmental psychopathology: Concepts and challenges.Dev. Psychopathol.2000, 12, 265–296. [CrossRef]
255. Stevens, A.; Price, J. Evolutionary Psychiatry: A New Beginning; Routledge: Oxford, UK, 2015.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.