Keep your interoceptive streams under control: An active inference
perspective on anorexia nervosa
Laura Barca 1 & Giovanni Pezzulo1
# The Psychonomic Society, Inc. 2020
Abstract
Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a psychiatric disorder primarily characterized by “restriction of energy intake relative to requirements
leading to a significantly low body weight in the context of age, sex, developmental trajectory, and physical health ” (DSM-5,
n.d.). Here, we propose a novel interpretation of food restriction of AN, which elaborates on recent accounts of the brain as a
predictive machine, continuously inferring and controling incoming signals, including bodily signals – i.e., interoceptive (active)
inference. In this perspective, the extreme eating restrictions characterizing AN may serve the fundamental role of keeping under
control (i.e., reducing excessively high levels of) interoceptive uncertainty, above and beyond controlling and mitigating con-
cerns for body weight. In other words, noisy interoceptive streams may instantiate active strategies (i.e., eating restrictions) that
amplify autonomic hunger signals, to minimize interoceptive uncertainty and maintain a more coherent sense of (interoceptive)
self.
Keywords Anorexia nervosa . Interoception . Active inference . Uncertainty . Starvation . Self-coherence . Cognitive control
Introduction
Eating disorders, and in particular anorexia nervosa (AN), are
widespread in the Western world. Despite extensive research,
the mechanisms underlying AN and its striking eating restric-
tion have still not been elucidated. AN is defined as “as y n -
drome in which the individual maintains a low weight as a
result of a preoccupation with body weight, construed either
as a fear of fatness or pursuit of thinness ” (National
Collaborating Centre for Mental Health (UK), 2004).
Several theories of AN thus focus on the psychological
mechanisms responsible for the excessive concern for body
weight. Cognitive theories of anorexia, as well as phenome-
nological reports from anorectic patients (Nordbø, Espeset,
Gulliksen, Skårderud, & Holte, 2006), suggest that the “need
for control” of body size or weight might be central to eating
restriction. In this perspective, AN patients would instantiate a
series of “strategies” that keep their body size and weight
under control,p o s s i b l yt oc o m p l yw i t he x t e r n a l l yd e f i n e de s -
thetic standards.
However, other psychological accounts of AN move be-
yond the centrality of concerns for body size and weight, and
suggest the importance of investigating additional explana-
tions for the fact that AN patients exert control over their
bodies. For example, the control-based theory of anorexia
posits that eating restriction acts as a mechanism to compen-
sate for a sense of ineffectiveness and a lack of self-control.I n
other words, for anorectic patients, exerting control over their
bodies would be motivating and rewarding per se, as it signals
high efficacy (Fairburn et al., 1999; Fairburn & Harrison,
2003;F r o r e i c he ta l . ,2016), rather than being a way to control
body size and weight. Since self-efficacy relates to the ability
to produce (desired) outcomes with sufficient certainty, this
theory also suggests that anorectic patients may have prob-
lems dealing with excessive (outcome) uncertainty. In keeping
with this, a growing body of empirical research suggests that
difficulties in tolerating uncertainty might be central to the
alteration of eating behaviors. The construct of “Intolerance
of Uncertainty”– a predisposition to negatively perceive and
respond to uncertain informa tion and uncertain situations
(Ladouceur et al., 2000) – is now considered a transdiagnostic
vulnerability factor of different pathologies (Kesby et al.,
2017) and of emotional disorders on the whole (Shihata
et al., 2016). Compared to healthy controls, individuals with
eating disorders have higher levels of intolerance of uncertain-
ty as measured with a validated scale (Buhr & Dugas, 2002),
* Laura Barca
laura.barca@istc.cnr.it
1 Institute of Cognitive Science and Technologies, ISTC-CNR, Via
San Martino della Battaglia, 44, 00141 Rome, Italy
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13415-020-00777-6
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2020) 20:427 –440
Published online: 7 February 2020
self-report symptoms description (Barca & De Marchis,
2018), and are more distressed after the completion of a prob-
abilistic task with varying levels of difficulty and uncertainty
(Sternheim et al., 2011). Additionally, among individuals with
disordered eating, anorectic patients had higher levels of in-
tolerance of uncertainty than bulimic patients (Sternheim
et al., 2011). A strong correlation between ratings of intoler-
ance of uncertainty and alexithymia has been reported
(Abbate-Daga et al., 2015), suggesting a possible role of this
dimension on socio-emotional dysfunctions occurring in ano-
rectic patients.
Other psychological theories point to the idea that in ano-
rectic patients, the intolerance of uncertainty may be specific
(or at least more pronounced) for bodily and emotional pro-
cessing, with significant effects for the sense of self and for
social interactions. Constructivist theories, for example, sug-
gests that the emotional dimension of anorectic patients would
be characterized by ambiguous feeling states elicited during
(real or perceived) aversive social interactions. These feelings
cannot be integrated within the diachronic narrative of the self
and cause the perception of a loss of internal self-coherence
(Mahoney & Granvold, 2005). Similarly, it has been proposed
that a deficit in cognitive structures related to personal identity
might be the central feature of AN, leading to a vague and
indefinite perception of the self (Guidano, 1987). Recent em-
pirical evidence provides some support for the hypothesized
deficits in the socio-emotional dimension of anorectic pa-
tients. For example, in sentence-completion tasks describing
ambiguous social scenarios, anorectic patients exhibit a nega-
tive bias (i.e., a higher number of negative interpretations)
with respect to controls (Cardi et al., 2017). Other studies with
anorectic patients report a misperception of social cues
(Ambwani et al., 2016) and a diminished communication of
(positive) emotions via facial expression (Leppanen et al.,
2017).
In sum, the body of literature reviewed above suggests that
concerns with uncertainty, and the need to control it, may be
key to understanding eating disorders and in particular AN.
While the sources of uncertainty are potentially plentiful, in
the case of AN the most relevant ones might be specifically
related to bodily events; which in turn may have cascading
effects across multiple domains (emotional, social, and related
to the self). Following this line of reasoning, we advance a
novel proposal to explain how food restriction in AN may
help dealing with uncertainty, and specifically with uncertain-
ty arising from bodily information (i.e., noisy interoceptive
processing and ambiguous feeling states) and the ensuing
low self-coherence. The key idea that we advance is that food
restriction can be used as an intentional – yet unconscious –
strategy to control (minimize) interoceptive uncertainty, above
and beyond controlling body size and weight.
In the following sections, we further specify our proposal
by linking it to both empirical evidence and formal theories of
brain function. First, we review the recent literature on the
processing of bodily and interoceptive information in AN,
which provides some background to the idea that dealing with
excessive bodily (interoceptive) uncertainty may be a central
concern in AN. Second, we briefly review a formal perspec-
tive on brain function – Active Inference – and explain how its
mechanisms permit formulation of existing accounts of AN
and its associated deficits. Third, we use Active Inference to
introduce our novel proposal and the idea that starvation may
be used to keep the excessive interoceptive uncertainty under
control – and this, in turn, produces several maladaptive con-
sequences, as the striking behavioral manifestation character-
izing AN.
Bodily and interoceptive processing
in anorexia nervosa
Bodily information is central to understanding our own emo-
tional experiences, and part and parcel of “higher-order” per-
ceptual and cognitive processes (Craig, 2003; Pezzulo et al.,
2015a; Seth, 2013; Seth et al., 2012; Yu et al. 2020). The
information that anorectic patients gather from their bodies
appears compromised in many ways, with relevant implica-
tions for their emotional and social processing. For example,
severe disturbances in body representation are well document-
ed in AN (Gadsby, 2017;K e i z e re ta l . ,2013; Riva & Gaudio,
2018; Spitoni et al., 2015) .Ab o d yr e p r e s e n t a t i o ni sa na b -
stract perceptual representation of different characteristics of
the body (i.e., its shape, the size of the body parts, and their
position in space) and their integration into a whole entity. The
cortical representations of our body and its parts are continu-
ously updated by experiences gathered by different senses, as
shown by its malleability to congruent multisensory stimula-
tions. Thus, if the tactile stimulation of the hand (hidden from
sight) is carried out in visual congruence on that of a fake
hand, it can create an effect of incorporation of the fake hand
and misallocation of the real hidden one, the so-called “rubber
hand illusion” (Botvinick & Cohen, 1998). Tactile stimulation
is often used as an implicit measure of body representation
(Keizer et al., 2011); and applied to AN patients, it revealed
that their bodily distortion is not generalized but rather specific
to the horizontal plane, with wider representations of horizon-
tal tactile stimuli compared to vertical ones (Spitoni et al.,
2015). This altered body representation is so pervasive that
its effects go beyond perception, affecting body-scaled action,
so that when asked to pass through a door-like opening, ano-
rectic patients take a shoulder angle greater than their current
body-size, but in line with their size overestimation (Keizer
et al., 2013). However, healthy women with low self-esteem
and body-image concern perform similarly to anorectic pa-
tients in an egocentric motor-imagery task, questioning the
specificity of distorted body image to AN (Irvine et al.,
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2020) 20:427 –440428
2019). Sensorial information gathered from the skin (e.g., the
sense of touch) is also altered. Specifically, the perception of a
particular type of touch – affective touch – appears to be re-
duced in individuals with AN, with reduced pleasantness spe-
cifically associated with slow stimulation of unmyelinated
tactile C (CT) afferents (Crucianelli et al., 2016).
A growing body of evidence indicates that “inner-body”
(i.e., interoceptive) information appears to be altered in an-
orexia. Interoception is the processing of afferent signals from
internal organs of our body (e.g., stomach and bowels, heart-
beat and breathing) leading to the perception and adaptive
regulation of drive states, such as hunger and thirst, and of
somatically relevant states such as effort and fatigue levels. In
addition, interoceptive processing is considered to be key to
the correct processing of emotional processes, of a sense of
bodily self and of self-coherence (Craig, 2010;S e t h&
Tsakiris,2018). In keeping, there is a growing consensus that
interoceptive and visceral signals specifically related to eating
(e.g., incoming signals from the gastrointestinal tract) may be
particularly important for cognition, emotion, consciousness,
and the definition of a subject-centered frame of reference
(Azzalini et al., 2019); and all the above processes may be
impaired if interoceptive streams are corrupted. There is a
growing consensus in connection various interoceptive
deficits with anorexia nervosa (see Badoud & Tsakiris, 2017,
for a review). The discrimination between sensations and feel-
ings, and between hunger and satiety, is compromised in AN
(Fassino et al., 2004). This might be (at least partially) related
to alteration in gastrointestinal motility. (Bluemel et al., 2017)
measured postprandial gastrointestinal motor and sensory
functions (i.e., gastric volumes, antral motility, breath sam-
ples, and sensations scores) at regular time intervals, in pa-
tients with disordered eating. AN patients had slower gastric
emptying than obese and control participants and increased
visceral sensation of fullness and lower sensation of hunger
than the other groups. Interestingly, such differences de-
creased after a weight rehabilitation program, suggesting that
they might be secondary to eating habits and psychiatric co-
morbidities.
The above studies suggest that AN is associated with im-
pairments of interoceptive processing, but a comprehensive
empirical assessment of these impairments remains elusive.
One reason is that different facets of interoceptive processing
are often discussed and measured in different ways, e.g., in
terms of interoceptive accuracy (i.e., the accurate perception
of interoceptive signals, sometimes measured with heartbeat
counting), awareness (i.e., the meta-cognitive awareness of
interoceptive accuracy, or the confidence in one ’s own inter-
oceptive accuracy), and sensibility (i.e., the self-evaluated in-
teroceptive belief, measured via questionnaire), and the re-
cently developed concept of interoceptive predictive error ,
gathered from the difference between interoceptive accuracy
and interoceptive sensibility measures (Young et al., 2017).
These different aspects of interoception are dissociable and
differently related to eating behavior. For example, emotional
eaters have higher interoceptive accuracy but lower
metacognitive insight onto their interceptive abilities (Young
et al., 2019). Emotional eating was also associated with higher
interoceptive prediction e rror, which, in keeping with
Garfinkel et al. ( 2016), has been interpreted as resulting from
a failure to correctly incorporate afferent “bottom-up” intero-
ceptive signals with top-down predictions. In the case of AN,
interoceptive accuracy and sensibility are both altered
(Pollatos et al., 2008) and differently prone to change through
therapy (Fischer et al., 2016). Additional support for the idea
of altered (central) interoceptive processing in AN comes from
functional imaging studies of remitted AN participants, dem-
onstrating the increased activation of the right anterior insula
during the anticipation and processing of pain stimuli, and
interpreted as the suppression of the physiological feedback
of pain (Strigo et al., 2013; see also the disconnection model
of the insula of Nunn, Frampton, Fuglset, Törzsök-
Sonnevend, & Lask, 2011).
In sum, we have reviewed recent evidence indicating that
AN patients may experience a fundamental deficit of intero-
ceptive processing, which manifests in highly uncertain inter-
oceptive and bodily information, plausibly magnified in the
visceral and gastric domains. The excessively high level of
bodily and interoceptive uncertainty may pose fundamental
challenges for the formation of an accurate body representa-
tion as well as for the adaptive regulation of physiological
needs, emotional processing, social interaction, and a unitary
sense of (bodily) self. It is exactly these kinds of challenges
that – we propose – AN patients may strive to avoid, by
selecting behaviors such as starvation that are apparently mal-
adaptive but at least permit exerting some control over inter-
oceptive streams, thus potentially contributing to restoring
more appropriate bodily and self models.
To explain how eating restrictions may play a role in
controlling interoceptive uncertainty in AN, we appeal to
Active Inference, a formal framework that explains goal-
directed behavior and cognition from the perspective of a
predictive brain (Friston, 2010; Friston et al., 2017;P e z z u l o
et al., 2015b). Active Inference has been widely used to
explain various psychopath ological conditions, such as
symptoms of perception, schizophrenia, psychosis, hysteria,
and more (Adams et al., 2013 ; Corlett et al., 2019 ;
Edwards et al., 2012;P a u l u s ,2019;P a u l u se ta l . , 2019a;
Pezzulo et al. 2019a; Pezzulo et al. 2019b;P o w e r se ta l . ,
2017; Sterzer et al., 2018). Below, we briefly summarize
the main constructs of Active Inference that are central to
our proposal and illustrate how they may help to concep-
tualize AN-related deficits, as conceptualized in different
theories that emphasize the control of body weight and
size, intolerance of uncertainty, and the control of uncertain
interoceptive streams (our proposal).
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2020) 20:427 –440 429
An active inference perspective on anorexia
nervosa and its deficits
Active Inference assumes that the brain uses an internal
(generative) model to continuously infer and control
exteroceptive signals coming from the external environment,
proprioceptivesignals associated witho our body movements
and interoceptive signals from inside the body, e.g., from our
internal organs. It does so to achieve the overall goal of min-
imizing prediction error (more formally, free energy)o rt h e
difference between (top-down) predictions from the genera-
tive model and (bottom-up) sensory signals from the periph-
ery (Friston, 2010). This can be accomplished in two ways.
First, by updating descending predictions to make them more
similar to lower levels of sensory signals (i.e., changing one ’s
mind about what one is perceiving). Second, by performing
actions that change sensory samples and make them more
similar to the predictions previously generated (e.g., changing
what one is perceiving, as in the case of saccadic eye move-
ments in visual perception). These two processes are called
perceptual inference and Active Inference , respectively
(Friston et al., 2017).
Importantly, the role prediction errors have in perceptual
inference and active inference depends on their quality or
precision(formally, an inverse variance): the most informative
(high precision) signals are more weighted and havev a greater
influence on the computations, whereas uninformative (low
precision) signals are less weighted or ignored. The preci-
sion-weighting mechanism is key for balancing appropriately
prior beliefs and sensory stimuli, as the signals that are
assigned more (less) precision change prior beliefs to a greater
(lesser) extent. Failures in precision-weighting have been as-
sociated with various pathological conditions. If prediction
errors are incorrectly assigned a low precision, prior beliefs
will dominate the inference and will not be updated appropri-
ately. This might produce misperceptions, including “false
symptoms” (Henningsen et al., 2018; Van den Bergh et al.,
2017) or psychosis (Sterzer et al., 2018). Prior beliefs might
also conform to aversive or highly unpredictable social inter-
actions, as suggested for depressive mood (Badcock et al.,
2017).
Keeping body weight and size under control
from an Active Inference perspective
As noted above, in Active Inference, prior beliefs are impor-
tant not just for perceptual inference but also for action selec-
tion and control – as they can play the role of goals (or
setpoints), i.e., variables that the agent will try to keep under
control. Normally, Active Inference balances the benefits and
costs of various, hierarchically organized goals (e.g., higher
social and cognitive and lower homeostatic goals) rather
optimally, ensuring that behaviors having maladaptive conse-
quences (e.g., starvation) are not selected (Pezzulo et al.,
2018b). However, under certain conditions, these goals may
fail to be correctly balanced, because (as in the perceptual
examples above) some of them may enjoy excessively high
precision. For example, an excessively precise prior belief
about which body size is to be pursued (e.g., a very thin body)
might determine the choice of eating restrictions that would
eventually make this state of affairs true, down tuning other,
undesired (e.g., homeostatic) consequences, which would fail
to be sufficiently attended to, or integrated, during action se-
lection. In sum, in Active Inference, maladaptive behavior
associated with psychiatric syndromes including AN may be
due to the failure to appropriately balance (the precision of)
goals at different hierarchical levels – e.g., higher-level cog-
nitive goals such as complying with some esthetic canon, or of
“being in control,” versus lower level drives such as maintain-
ing a correct homeostasis or allostasis (Pezzulo et al., 2015b;
Stephan et al., 2016; Sterling, 2012). Under certain maladap-
tive circumstances, these priors might not only enjoy too
much precision but also fail to be correctly updated over time
(e.g., while the person keeps losing weight), hence becoming
inflexible and leading to continuance of inappropriate behav-
ior. This schematic description provides an example of the
ways Active Inference may help to conceptualize cognitive
accounts of AN deficits that focus on patients' excessive con-
cerns with body weight.
Intolerance of uncertainty from an Active
Inference perspective
Active Inference may also help conceptualize the “intolerance
of uncertainty” associated with AN – which is the main focus
of this article. During action selection, Active Inference auto-
matically balances two factors: an economic (or extrinsic) val-
ue, associated with goal-directed behavior and the achieve-
ment of rewarding states; and an epistemic (or intrinsic) value,
associated with information-seeking behavior and the reduc-
tion of uncertainty (Friston et al., 2015). This implies that
Active Inference constantly balances exploitation and explo-
ration; and depending on contextual conditions, it may favor
action plans that pursue economic value (i.e., yields the
highest reward) or epistemic value (i.e., yields the highest
information gain), or a combination of both. Interestingly,
there are situations in which the action plan that yields the
highest reward cannot be selected with sufficient confidence
until one has reduced uncertainty first. For example, one may
not be able to judge whether or not to attend a party, until he/
she is sufficiently certain about who else has been invited
(e.g., whether or not he/she will meet somebody undesired).
In these situations, Active Inference mandates the selection of
action plans whose first (epistemic) part resolves the
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2020) 20:427 –440430
uncertainty (e.g., try to know who was invited) and whose
second part makes the choice on the base of the novel infor-
mation (e.g., decide whether or not to attend, depending on
who else was invited).
The inference leading to the balance of epistemic,
uncertainty-minimizing versus economic, reward-
maximizing action plans can, however, become maladaptive,
for several reasons. Normally, an Active Inference agent
would consider the quality of its information sources in the
decision about whether or not to attend to them and immedi-
ately ceases to gather imprecise information or information
that has no epistemic value or information gain (Parr &
Friston, 2017). However, a person having excessive levels of
uncertainty-intolerance (e.g., excessively high and inflexible
prior beliefs about the precis ion of his/her information
sources) may indulge in excessive attempts to reduce his/her
uncertainty even when this is very costly or impossible. In the
long run, these failed attempts to reduce uncertainty may lead
to beliefs of low self-efficacy, when the latter is evaluated
against standards that are excessively high.
Furthermore, a person excessively concerned with reduc-
tion of uncertainty may put into place strategies that would
reduce uncertainty in the short term, but can be maladaptive in
the long term. Imagine a person who is organizing a party and
has some uncertainty about, for example, how the party will
unfold in time, and whether it will be appreciated. She can
reduce this uncertainty by specifying all the details of the party
– until she is confident enough that the party will meet her
expectations. However, like any other real-world problem,
organizing a party entails multiple sources of uncertainty,
some of which may be difficult or impossible to reduce –
hence requiring the person to deal with situations that entail
some residual uncertainty and risk of failure. If the person is
excessively concerned with reduction of uncertainty, she may
indulge in compulsive attempts to control environmental fac-
tors that are either irrelevant or beyond her reach. Another
maladaptive strategy to keep uncertainty under control con-
sists of performing repetitive actions, as they diminish the
uncertainty (and entropy) of action outcomes – at the cost of
having poor adaptive value. Performing repetitive behaviors is
a defining trait of obsessive-compulsive disorder, which has a
high co-morbidity with eating disorders, suggesting a poten-
tial trans-diagnostic vulnerability to uncertainty. Finally, one
may also momentarily deal with uncertainty by learning inter-
nal models that are poorly differentiated, (e.g., models that use
a single variable to explain everything and hence can assimi-
late virtually any stimulus – at the cost of being almost use-
less) and by reducing his/her exposition to contexts that are by
definition more uncertain, such as novel contexts. The prob-
lem with all these strategies is that while they may succeed in
reducing uncertainty in the short term, they are degenerate
solutions deprived of long-term adaptive benefits (and hence,
under normal conditions, avoided in Active Inference).
Furthermore, these degenerate solutions all reduce drastically
epistemic and exploratory behavior, which is instead manda-
tory for an Active Inference agent to learn adaptive models
(Friston et al., 2015; Tschantz et al., 2019). In other words,
these strategies all prevent agents from experiencing events
that bring information gain and are important for learning to
control efficaciously their environment – thus pushing the
agents into a small, controllable corner of their ecological
niche (e.g., in a dark room (Friston et al., 2012)).
Interoceptive processing and starvation
from an Active Inference perspective
So far, we discussed how Active Inference may provide a
mechanistic ground to various theories of AN, which empha-
size excessive concerns with body weight and size or intoler-
ance of uncertainty. Here, we expand the analysis of the latter
point – intolerance of uncertainty – to the interoceptive do-
main, in order to introduce our novel proposal on the starva-
tion symptom of AN, which we conceptualize as a way to
keep the uncertainty of interoceptive streams under control.
For this, we first need to briefly introduce the Active Inference
perspective on interoceptive inference and its deficits.
Active Inference applies not just to the estimation and con-
trol of external states, but also to the estimation and control of
interoceptive streams (e.g., heartbeat, visceral organs) and
physiological processes – which are key for autonomic regu-
lation, emotional experience (Iodice et al., 2019; Pezzulo,
2013; Pezzulo et al., 2018b, 2015b; G. Pezzulo et al., 2018),
the construction of the self (Seth, 2013), and the emergence of
pathological conditions (Barrett et al., 2016; Friston et al.,
2014;M u r p h ye ta l . ,2017;P a u l u se ta l . ,2019a; Quadt et al.,
2018). According to theories of interoceptive inference (Seth,
2013 ; Seth & Friston, 2016)a n d Embodied Predictive
Interoception Coding (EPIC) (Barrett & Simmons, 2015), in-
teroceptive processing uses the same constructs of Active
Inference described above for perception and action. In this
perspective, interoception is not a purely bottom-up process
but critically engages brain predictions about the inner state of
the body. Descending interoceptive predictions about bodily
states play a key regulatory role, as they engage autonomic
reflexes (an example of internally directed Active Inference)
while ascending interoceptive signalsinform and update these
predictions, generating a circular causality. The mismatch be-
tween predictions and sensory signals creates interoceptive
prediction errors, which are precision-weighted in the same
way as exteroceptive prediction errors.
This Active Inference account of interoceptive inference
provides the starting point of our explanation of the starvation
behavior characterizing restrictive AN. We propose that a key
factor in the etiology of AN is a specific deficit of interocep-
tive processing, with intero ceptive streams that are
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2020) 20:427 –440 431
excessively noisy (i.e., have low signal-to-noise ratio). Noisy
interoceptive streams are dangerous for homeostatic control as
they can entail poor perception (or misinterpretation) of bodily
states (Petersen et al., 2014) and prevent the development of
accurate and well-differentiated internal models, e.g., models
that correctly distinguish signs of low versus high hunger,
thirst, and fatigue. Furthermore, if one assumes that interocep-
tive processing is key to the formation of self models (Seth,
2013), then noisy interoceptive streams may lead to a dimin-
ished sense of central coherence and a blurred perception of
the self (Fig. 1, panel a).
Noisy interoceptive streams may also significantly impair
one's ability to successfully engage in social interactions. In
these situations, AN patients may experience streams of un-
certain feeling states, rendering them unable to correctly infer
“social causes” for the observed behavior (e.g., is this person
friendly or not?), hence rendering the whole social situation
aversive. In turn, this would produce a further lack of internal
coherence, as the social experiences and the ensuing emotions
cannot be easily integrated within a diachronic narrative of the
self. Finally, over time, Active Inference would also assign
noisy interoceptive streams a low precision (because, as noted
above, attending them does not reduce uncertainty); and this
entails the person progressively devoting less and less atten-
tion to his/her bodily signals, thus preventing the correct
updating of bodily and self models. In sum, noisy interocep-
tive streams may induce a cascade of problems that span im-
mediate adaptive action selection, the construction of bodily,
social, and self models. Starvation may stem from an attempt
to remedy this situation: it may be selected as a purposive
regulatory behavior aimed at reducing interoceptive
uncertainty.
In this perspective, individuals with AN might use food
restrictions to actively amplify their interoceptive signals of
hunger (Fig. 1, panel b) hence reducing at least in part their
excessive uncertainty. In Active Inference, the reduction of
uncertainty would entail short-term benefits, of at least two
kinds: first, it might increase the epistemic value (and infor-
mation gain) of interoceptive information; second, it might
have some hedonic effect, under the assumption that predic-
tion error minimization is associated with positive affect
(Joffily & Coricelli, 2013). The reduction of uncertainty may
entail longer-term benefits, too, by helping restore a more
precise and coherent model of bodily signals and sense of self
and more adaptive homeostatic and allostatic loops, providing
some relief from the distress of allostatic misregulations and
inefficacy. These advantages – all of which are related to the
epistemic dimension of Active Inference – may be responsible
for the (seemingly paradoxical) maintenance egosyntonic na-
ture of the disorder (Gregertsen et al., 2017), above and be-
yond the pragmatic goal of maintaining a low body weight.
Yet, using starvation as a way to reduce interoceptive un-
certainty has severe consequences. The most obvious ones
relate to maladaptive homeostatic regulation and loss of body
weight and size, but there is more than that. The artificial
increase of the precision of interoceptive signals may only
partially solve the problem of uncertainty, especially if there
is some fundamental deficit that renders interoceptive streams
excessively noisy. Consider, as a rough analogy, a situation in
which one raises the volume of a radio transmitting a mixture
of a song and background noise – and both the signal (the
song) and the noise levels increase. Such situations may im-
pair the development of correct bodily models.
Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of the hypothesis that starvation may serve
to control the uncertainty of interoceptive streams in anorexica nervosa
(AN) patients. Panel A: AN patients receive noisy interoceptive infor-
mation from their “inner bodies” and thus cannot correctly discriminate
them or form well-differentiated interoceptive generative models. In the
long run, this may result in a blurred perception of the self (or poor body-
and self-models). Panel B: AN patients may strategically use starvation
to actively amplify their interoceptive signals, making them less uncertain
and contributing to restore a precise and well-differentiated model of the
body and the self
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2020) 20:427 –440432
Furthermore, the overuse of repetitive strategies (like starv-
ing) prevents the generation of variable outcomes that bring
information gain and are therefore essential for the correct
learning and update of internal models (Tschantz et al.,
2019). This comes at the risk of rendering bodily models
poorly differentiated, inflexible, and ultimately detached from
reality. With time, precision computations in AN may become
divorced from optimality (i.e., signal-to-noise ratios), too, and
assign excessively high precision to some interoceptive sig-
nals (e.g., gastric signals) even when they remain noisy. When
these signals enter in the multisensory integration that is nec-
essary to estimate somatic and homeostatic variables, they
may be incorrectly weighted more than other signals (e.g.,
pain, touch) that are potentially more reliable. Not only this
may produce disorders of body perception but also disorders
of homeostatic regulation, which in interoceptive inference
theories is based on a correct estimate of somatic and homeo-
static variables (Seth & Friston, 2016).
In sum, we propose that the active control of interoceptive
signals via food restrictions may be a key mechanism in the
etiology of AN. In individuals with AN, starvation may be
actively used to reduce interoceptive uncertainty to acceptable
levels, also potentially contributing to the development of less
fragmented models of bodily signals and of the self. This
strategy also has several maladaptive consequences but is
not “irrational” from the perspective of an Active Inference
agent that puts a premium on low levels of uncertainty. Active
Inference may help to shed light on the most paradoxical
aspect of starvation in AN: the fact that it is maintained, de-
spite it preventing correct homeostatic processes that consti-
tute the most important pragmatic imperatives for living or-
ganisms. In Active Inference, there are epistemic imperatives
(e.g., lowering hidden state uncertainty) that are equally im-
portant as pragmatic imperatives – and that under specific
maladaptive conditions may become dominant.
We believe that our proposal provides new insights for both
guiding empirical research and refining computational models
to unveil the mechanisms underlying the complexity of AN.
At the same time, it raises important interrogatives that remain
to be investigated in future research. An open question is
whether individuals with AN have specific deficits with re-
gard to hunger-related signals or broader interoceptive signals;
and in the latter case, why do they actively control hunger
signals, as opposed to other interoceptive signals. A possible
explanation is that actively controlling hunger sensations by
limiting food intake may be much simpler than controlling
other internal bodily signals – which is in general not straight-
forward. This would imply that despite AN being an eating
disorder, it may not be necessarily (or exclusively) related to
the eating domain. Indeed, the active control mechanism
discussed here might also account for the co-occurrence of
self-injury behavior in some individuals with AN (Claes
et al., 2015).
Another related question is under which conditions the ne-
cessity to keep interoceptive uncertainty under control leads to
AN. Indeed, there are various ways to control interoceptive
uncertainty – and even specifically noisy gut sensations –
besides starvation. In principle, one can obtain more precise
hunger-related sensations by eating more (to produce a con-
stant “satiety signal ”) rather than by starving (to produce a
constant “hunger signal”). The choice of which specific be-
havioral strategy to use to reduce interoceptive uncertainty
(e.g., starving vs. excessive food consumption, possibly lead-
ing to forms of obesity) may depend on prior preferences (e.g.,
for a certain body weight or size). This perspective may help
reconcile our view with cognitive theories that emphasize
concerns for body weight and size in AN patients: these con-
cerns may be amongst the driving factors that determine the
choice of starvation as the preferred strategy to reduce intero-
ceptive uncertainty.
Yet another research question is whether, and to what ex-
tent, the basic mechanisms of homeostatic and allostatic reg-
ulation are impaired in individuals with AN. In general, in
Active Inference, homeostatic drives and goals correspond
to very precise priors at some deep hierarchical level, which
generate top-down predictions about (for example) gut and
other signals indicating satiety (Pezzulo et al., 2015b). When
one experiences interoceptive signals incompatible with such
predictions (i.e., gut signals indicating that one is not satiated)
a precise prediction error is propagated upward in the hierar-
chy that needs to be minimized. Since the above survival-
related priors are very precise and hence virtually cannot be
revised, the only way to minimize prediction error is by feed-
ing – to make the interoceptive signal more similar to the prior
prediction. In our proposal, we emphasized that individuals
with AN may experience imprecise interoceptive signals and
prediction errors, which would render their estimate of inter-
oceptive state more uncertain and their homeostatic and
allostatic regulation less adaptive. It remains to be investigated
in future research whether other aspects of regulatory intero-
ceptive loops may be impaired in AN individuals; for exam-
ple, whether the precision of their priors is misregulated and
whether the imprecise interoceptive streams depend on funda-
mental physiological problems with interoceptive channels or
misregulations of precision computations.
Discussion
We proposed a novel account of the most striking manifesta-
tion of anorexia nervosa (AN): starvation. In this account,
food restriction is a strategy to deal with high uncertainty
within interoceptive streams. By limiting food intake until
starvation, AN individuals maximize the gain of their auto-
nomic signals of hunger, thus reducing (to some extent) their
interoceptive uncertainty and possibly regaining their sense of
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2020) 20:427 –440 433
self-coherence and self-control – at the expense of possible
homeostatic misregulations.
Our proposal is fundamentally different from previous ac-
counts of AN, as it posits that eating restrictions stem from an
adaptive strategy to deal with excessive interoceptive uncer-
tainty, above and beyond the control of body size and weight.
In Active Inference terms, starvation would serve the
epistemic imperative to keep (interoceptive) uncertainty under
control – at the expense of another, pragmatic imperative to
maintain a correct homeostasis.
Another important aspect that distinguishes our proposal
from previous accounts is our conceptualization of AN as a
disorder of interoceptive processing and of the self, rather than
merely of body image (see also Amianto, Northoff, Abbate
Daga, Fassino, & Tasca, 2016). Indeed, we argue that (noisy)
afferent bodily signals are central to the development of the
pathology, and subsequently contribute to its maintenance. In
this perspective, our proposal aims to combine the
computational-level constructs of Active Inference (and inter-
oceptive inference within it) with psychological-level theories
of cognitive control and self-coherence; and more specifically,
with a constructivist perspective that grounds self-models into
interoceptive streams and consider the extreme need to control
eating to be the key maintaining factor of AN (Fairburn et al.,
1999; Surgenor et al., 2002).
There are several lines of evidence supporting our Active
Inference account of AN. Individuals with AN show high
levels of alexithymia and neurobiological markers of intero-
ceptive dysregulation (Kessler et al., 2006; Strigo et al., 2013),
raising the possibility that they have an impaired ability to
access or process interoceptive information. The altered dis-
tribution of fixation patterns associated with the estimation of
body-size (Cornelissen et al., 2016) might be evidence of a co-
occurring failure in actively sampling perceptual information
to reduce sensory uncertainty. Furthermore, the tendency of
AN patients to evaluate themselves from a third-person per-
spective, or “self-objectification” (Dakanalis et al., 2017),
might be a vicarious mechanism that uses visuo-perceptual
information to compensate interoceptive (Pollatos et al.,
2008) and central coherence deficits (Hamatani et al., 2018).
Interoceptive models of disordered eating have been de-
scribed in the literature (see Klabunde et al., 2017, for such
an account of bulimia nervosa), but this is the first model that
specifically focuses on the etiopathological mechanisms of
AN. Interestingly, in parallel to our proposal, a recent review
of the trans-diagnostic role of interoception in psychiatric dis-
orders briefly mentions the case of AN; and specifically that
“AN patients may have context-specific (e.g., hunger state)
hyper-precise priors that generate strong expectations about
visceral sensations. Importantly, it may be the selection of
particular actions in response to these hyper-precise priors
(e.g., starvation to avoid the actual sensing of visceral sensa-
tions) that forms one core feature of the psychopathology ”
(Paulus et al., 2019b). While Paulus et al. ’s and our accounts
start from a similar conceptual framework, they provide sub-
stantially different explanations of AN deficits (i.e., correct
sensations but hyper-precise priors vs. high interoceptive un-
certainty) and of starvation (i.e., avoidance vs. active amplifi-
cation of visceral sensations). At this stage, both proposals are
speculative and additional evidence is required to adjudicate
amongst them – or to combine them. Indeed, it is possible that
hyper-precise priors and high interoceptive uncertainty may
root AN in different patient populations, reflecting the hetero-
geneity of the disorder. One possible way to distinguish be-
tween these possibilities would be stimulating the insular cor-
tex of AN patients to modulate the precision of interoceptive
signals, as recently described by (Sagliano et al., 2019) – as
this manipulation should affect patients ’ interoceptive pro-
cessing in our proposal, but not necessarily in Paulus et al. ’s
account (where interoceptive signals would be largely ig-
nored, regardless of their effective precision). In principle,
according to our proposal, restoring precise interoceptive sig-
nals might contribute to preventing or abolishing starvation
(and other aspects of AN); but designing interoceptive manip-
ulations that are efficacious on clinical populations may be
problematic.
Another theoretical proposal that is related to ours is the
idea that depression and persistent negative affective feelings
stem from a misregulation of allostasis, which is (at least in
part) caused by noisy (or otherwise unreliable) afferent inter-
oceptive signals and prediction errors (Barrett et al., 2016).
The co-morbidity between AN and depression suggests that
uncertainty in interoceptive streams may be a trans-diagnostic
trait in both. However, the attitude towards such uncertainty
may be different in AN and depression: while some aspects of
AN, such as starvation (but also potentially compulsive be-
havior and self-injury), are better characterized as active
strategies to minimize interoceptive uncertainty, depression
seems to be associated with a more passive attitude, potential-
ly leading towards a mental, and sometimes also a physical,
withdrawal from the world (Barrett et al., 2016).
A prediction that stems from our proposal is that experi-
mental manipulations that interfere with the correct cortical
processing of visceral sensations (e.g., gastric sensations) in
non-pathological individuals might impact their emotional
processing, as measured for example using topographical
bodily representations (Khalsa et al., 2018; Nummenmaa
et al., 2014), as well as the execution to body-scale action
(Keizer et al., 2013). Similar effects may be produced with
experimental manipulations that artificially increase the uncer-
tainty of interoceptive channels. However, inducing intero-
ceptive uncertainty (either centrally or peripherally) is chal-
lenging, especially given the tendency of the interoceptive
system to maintain homeostasis for survival. One possibility
might be to induce electrical interference at brain regions
integrating bodily states, as the insula. In Pollatos et al.
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2020) 20:427 –440434
(2016) transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) over the an-
terior insula hampered the accurate perception of cardiac and
respiratory signals. If we consider such declined perception of
sensory signal as a proxy of interoceptive uncertainty, we
would predict that a higher level of interoceptive uncertainty
(induced, e.g., by TMS stimulation of anterior insula) in non-
clinical populations might affect the recognition of one own
and others' emotions, such as for example faces expressing
different types of emotions (Pezzulo et al., 2018a;Y ue ta l .
2020) as well as performance in social decision-making tasks,
given the centrality of the insular cortex in social dynamics
(Rogers-Carter & Christianson, 2019). Analogously, manipu-
lations that target (increase interoceptive uncertainty of) other
bodily and visceral sensations, including gastric sensations,
may potentially induce (reduced and transient) forms of eating
disorders. On the other hand, if an interoceptive deficit under-
lies the development of food restriction in AN, then training
aimed at reducing interoceptive uncertainty might have cas-
cading effects on food restriction. (Boswell et al., 2015)s u g -
gest that “interoceptive exposure” techniques that were effec-
tive in the cases of anxiety and fear-related disorders might be
useful in treating eating disorders, too. However, it is impor-
tant to note that the basic understanding of which (or how
many) of the different facets of interoception are compromised
in AN needs to be prioritized in order to program effective
treatments.
Future directions
One of the strengths of our proposal is that it is grounded in a
general framework that describe s formally the interactive dy-
namics of predictive and sensor y signals in the brain: Active
Inference. Our proposal deliberatively focuses on a specific
mechanism – starvation behavior of t he restrictive type AN –
and highlights its (paradoxical) adaptive benefits within an
Active Inference scheme, which puts the minimization of inter-
oceptive uncertainty at a premium. However, as reviewed in the
Introduction, there are many alternative perspectives on AN
(reflecting its complexity). Our proposal is not necessarily in-
compatible with but can be complementary to other proposals
that focus on cognitive factors such as (for example) concerns
with body size, culturally induced esthetic canons, or broad
forms of compulsion and uncertainty-avoidance, even outside
the interoceptive domain. These different proposals share some
common features (as highlighted by our analysis in Active
Inference terms) but focus on different, potentially complemen-
tary mechanisms for the acquisition and maintenance of AN. It
remains to be clarified in future research which of these mech-
anisms is more fundamental f or AN and how they give rise to
the multiplicity of its symptoms. For example, there is no doubt
that (a concern for) the body plays an important role in eating
disorders; but while some theori es consider this concern to be
the driving force of AN, others co nsider it to be manifestations
of the need to restore central coherence and sense of a unitary
self (see also Surgenor et al., 2002). As our knowledge of AN
progresses, we will be able to better disentangle between these
possibilities – or also combine them into more sophisticated
formal models, as it is questionable whether one single mech-
anism would provide a complete account of multifarious psy-
chiatric disorders such as AN.
A possible way to advance our understanding of the inter-
oceptive system in clinical and non-clinical populations might
be by using bodily and interoceptive illusions to determine
whether and how different individuals organize their bodily
sensations within a coherent “interoceptive schema” (Iodice
et al., 2019). By systematically considering whether patient
groups are sensitive or insensitive to different bodily and in-
teroceptive illusions, it may be possible to map the specific-
ities of their misperceptions. For example, studying to what
extent anorectic patients are sensitive to full-body illusions
created with visuotactile stimulation (Carey et al., 2019)a n d
respiratory congruency (Monti et al., 2019) might shed light
on the malleability of their hierarchical organization of inter-
oceptive variables. The degree to which patients with disor-
dered eating might be sensitive to such manipulations is not
clear yet, as mixed results have been reported. In Carey et al.
(2019 ), for example, participants with eating disorder
vulnerability did not differ from controls in the degree of their
embodiment, nor were differentially affected by affective and
non-affective touch. But in Keizer et al. ( 2016)b o t hs y n c h r o -
nous and asynchronous tactile stimulation during full-body
illusion enhanced the embodiment of an avatar, affecting also
estimation of body size of anorectic patients. The specific (in)
sensitivity of anorectic patients to bodily and interoceptive
illusions remains to be systematically investigated.
Another important objective for future research is charac-
terizing more precisely the developmental trajectory of AN.
Intra-family factors likely play a central role in the develop-
ment of a sense of self-coherence and of competence. Eating
disorders might be rooted in (critical events undermining) the
first stages of infant development, when individuals form
models of their individual bodies and self, as differentiated
from the rest of the world. Deficits of interoceptive processing
during this developmental stage – either due to endogenous
causes or as the consequence of being exposed to critical
events – may impair the formation of accurate body and self
models, which in turn may impair the correct identification of
one’s own emotions (e.g., alexithymia) and lower interocep-
tive sensitivity (Murphy et al., 2017). By having less precise
and more malleable body-representations, patients with
AN may be less able to form a coherent sense of self
"from the inside" (as measured for example by the ex-
perience of changes in self-other boundaries in response
to multisensory stimulatio n (Tajadura-Jiménez &
Tsakiris, 2014 )), thus potentially increasing the
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2020) 20:427 –440 435
importance of other (e.g., social) sources of information
to define the self.
Finally, it is important to map more systematically theories
of AN at different levels of analysis, which consider social,
cognitive, neurobiological, physiological, and metabolic pro-
cesses. For example, a comprehensive account of AN should
clearly identify specific dysregulations of basic homeostatic,
appetitive, and aversive systems, as mediated (at least in part)
by neuromodulators such as dopamine and serotonin – at o p i c
that is currently actively discussed (Kaye et al., 2013). Our
explanation of the starvation symptom of AN does not neces-
sarily require dysregulations of reward or punishment systems
in the brain – as it may depend on the epistemic imperative or
reducing uncertainty under Active Inference. However, extend-
ing our current model to also co ver potential dysregulations of
drive and reward systems and to consider the roles of
neuromodulators is an important objective for future research.
Furthermore, we foresee the future development of our model
to extend its scope to metabolic and endocrinological dysfunc-
tions, which are receiving increa sing interest in relation to an-
orexia and other psychopathological conditions (Watson et al.,
2019). This is in keeping with rece nt integrative accounts of
psychopathologies that consider multiple dysfunctions at the
cortical, neuroendocrine, psychological, and behavioral levels
(see Gorwood et al.,2016, for a review). In the case of anorexia,
it has been proposed that the disorder might be a maladaptive
“biopsychosocial” response to interpersonal stress events root-
ed in early life experiences (Cardi et al., 2018)a n dm a yb e
coupled with genetic and biological factors. In this
perspective, Connan et al. (2003) proposed that genetic factors
and primary interpersonal/affective experiences (i.e., attach-
ment style) jointly induc e a dysregulation of the hypothalam-
ic-pituitary-adrenal(HPA) axis and subsequent poorly regulat-
ed stress response. Aberrant HPAaxis response induces (among
other things) elevated release of corticotrophin-releasing
hormone (CRH), which is associated with AN symptoms such
as loss of appetite and weight. A more comprehensive model of
AN should also focus on the important roles of metabolic hor-
mones, such as ghrelin (originating from the gastrointestinal
and pancreatic cells) and leptin(originating from adipose cells),
which are both involved in appetite regulation and homeostasis
(Wu & Kral, 2004) and dysfunctional eating (Grzelak et al.,
2017). These metabolic hormones are central to energy regula-
t i o ni nt h eb r a i na n dh a v eb e e nr e c e n t l ys u g g e s t e dt oa l s op l a ya
role in the socio-affective dimension (MacCormack &
Muscatell,2019). Typically, the plasma level of ghrelin is high
before a meal (in signaling the need for food intake) and de-
crease after food consumption. Anorectic patients present a
series of dysfunction in ghrelin expression, with higher levels
of ghrelin and impaired post-prandial modulations (i.e., delayed
or decreased after meal consumption) (see for Schalla &
Stengel, 2017, for a review). In the light of our model, high
levels of ghrelin might be considered as an increase in sensory
signal originated from the gut, but further research is needed to
develop such a hypothesis.
Conclusion
In sum, neurobiological, cognitive, and social factors (among
others) co-occur in the etiology and maintenance of AN –
probably, with a different weight depending on the develop-
mental stage of the disorder – and an open objective for future
research should assess their relations and relative importance.
We believe that the adoption of a formal framework to refine
the theoretical proposals and render their prediction more
quantitative can be helpful, and hope that our illustrative ex-
amples using Active Inference may be a first step in this
direction.
Acknowledgements We thank Matthew Sims for valuable discussions
and comments on an earlier version of the article.
Author contributions LB and GP conceptualized the manuscript; LB
drafted the manuscript; GP revised it critically for computational content;
LB and GP provided final approval for publication.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest The author declares that the research was conducted
in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
References
Abbate-Daga, G., Quaranta, M., Marzola, E., Amianto, F., Fassino, S.,
2015. The Relationship between Alexithymia and Intolerance of
Uncertainty in Anorexia Nervosa. Psychopathology 48, 202 –208.
https://doi.org/10.1159/000381587
Adams, R.A., Stephan, K.E., Brown, H.R., Frith, C.D., Friston, K.J.,
2013. The Computational Anatomy of Psychosis. Frontiers in
Psychiatry 4. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2013.00047
Ambwani, S., Berenson, K.R., Simms, L., Li, A., Corfield, F., Treasure,
J., 2016. Seeing things differently: An experimental investigation of
social cognition and interpersonal behavior in anorexia nervosa. The
International Journal of Eating Disorders 49, 499 –506. https://doi.
org/10.1002/eat.22498
Amianto, F., Northoff, G., Abbate Daga, G., Fassino, S., Tasca, G.A.,
2016. Is Anorexia Nervosa a Disorder of the Self? A
Psychological Approach. Frontiers in Psychology 7. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00849
Azzalini, D., Rebollo, I., Tallon-Baudry, C., 2019. Visceral Signals Shape
Brain Dynamics and Cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 23,
488–509. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.03.007
Badcock, P.B., Davey, C.G., Whittle, S., Allen, N.B., Friston, K.J., 2017.
The Depressed Brain: An Evolutionary Systems Theory. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 21, 182 – 194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.
2017.01.005
Badoud, D., Tsakiris, M., 2017. From the body ’s viscera to the body ’s
image: Is there a link between interoception and body image
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2020) 20:427 –440436
concerns? Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 77, 237 –246.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.03.017
Barca, L., Marchis, M.D., 2018. The case of Sofia: an example of the
dynamic properties of the therapeutic relationship. 10.31219/osf.io/
s3m6p
Barrett, L.F., Quigley, K.S., Hamilton, P., 2016. An active inference the-
ory of allostasis and interoception in depression. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological
Sciences 371. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0011
Barrett, L.F., Simmons, W.K., 2015. Interoceptive predictions in the
brain. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 16, 419 –429. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nrn3950
Bluemel, S., Menne, D., Milos, G., Goetze, O., Fried, M., Schwizer, W.,
Fox, M., Steingoetter, A., 2017. Relationship of body weight with
gastrointestinal motor and sensory function: studies in anorexia
nervosa and obesity. BMC Gastroenterology 17, 4. https://doi.org/
10.1186/s12876-016-0560-y
Boswell, J.F., Anderson, L.M., Anderson, D.A., 2015. Integration of
Interoceptive Exposure in Eating Disorder Treatment. Clinical
Psychology: Science and Practice 22, 194 –210. https://doi.org/10.
1111/cpsp.12103
Botvinick, M., Cohen, J., 1998. Rubber hands “feel” touch that eyes see
[8]. Nature 391, 756. https://doi.org/10.1038/35784
Buhr, K., Dugas, M.J., 2002. The Intolerance of Uncertainty Scale: psy-
chometric properties of the English version. Behaviour Research
and Therapy 40, 931 –945. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0005-7967(01)
00092-4
Cardi, V ., Tchanturia, K., Treasure, J., 2018. Premorbid and Illness-
related Social Difficulties in Eating Disorders: An Overview of the
Literature and Treatment Developments. Current
Neuropharmacology 16, 1122 – 1130. https://doi.org/10.2174/
1570159X16666180118100028
Cardi, V ., Turton, R., Schifano, S., Leppanen, J., Hirsch, C.R., Treasure,
J., 2017. Biased Interpretation of Ambiguous Social Scenarios in
Anorexia Nervosa. European Eating Disorders Review the Journal
of the Eating Disorders Association 25, 60 –64. https://doi.org/10.
1002/erv.2493
Carey, M., Crucianelli, L., Preston, C., Fotopoulou, A., 2019. The Effect
of Visual Capture Towards Subjective Embodiment Within the Full
Body Illusion. Scientific Reports 9, 2889. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-019-39168-4
Claes, L., Islam, M.A., Fagundo, A.B., Jimenez-Murcia, S., Granero, R.,
Agüera, Z., Rossi, E., Menchón, J.M., Fernández-Aranda, F., 2015.
The Relationship between Non-Suicidal Self-Injury and the UPPS-P
Impulsivity Facets in Eating Disorders and Healthy Controls. PLoS
One 10, e0126083. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0126083
Connan, F., Campbell, I.C., Katzman, M., Lightman, S.L., Treasure, J.,
2003. A neurodevelopmental model for anorexia nervosa. Physiol.
Behav., Proceedings from the 2002 Meeting of the Society for the
Study of Ingestive Behavior (SSIB) 79, 13 –24. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0031-9384(03)00101-X
Corlett, P.R., Horga, G., Fletcher, P.C., Alderson-Day, B., Schmack, K.,
Powers, A.R., 2019. Hallucinations and Strong Priors. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 23, 114 – 127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.
2018.12.001
Cornelissen, K.K., Cornelissen, P.L., Hancock, P.J.B., Tovée, M.J., 2016.
Fixation patterns, not clinical diagnosis, predict body size over-
estimation in eating disordered women and healthy controls. The
International Journal of Eating Disorders 49, 507 –518. https://doi.
org/10.1002/eat.22505
Craig, A.D., 2003. Interoception: the sense of the physiological condition
of the body. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 13, 500 –505.
Craig, A.D.B., 2010. The sentient self. Brain Structure & Function 214,
563–577. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-010-0248-y
Crucianelli, L., Cardi, V ., Treasure, J., Jenkinson, P.M., Fotopoulou, A.,
2016. The perception of affective touch in anorexia nervosa.
Psychiatry Research 239, 72 – 78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
psychres.2016.01.078
Dakanalis, A., Clerici, M., Bartoli, F., Caslini, M., Crocamo, C., Riva, G.,
Carrà, G., 2017. Risk and maintenance factors for young women ’s
DSM-5 eating disorders. Archives of Women's Mental Health 20,
721–731. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00737-017-0761-6
D S M - 5[ W W WD o c u m e n t ] ,n . d .U R Lhttps://www.psychiatry.org/
psychiatrists/practice/dsm(accessed 6.26.19).
Edwards, M.J., Adams, R.A., Brown, H., Pareés, I., Friston, K.J., 2012. A
Bayesian account of “hysteria.” Brain: A Journal of Neurology 135,
3495–3512. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws129
Fairburn, C.G., Harrison, P.J., 2003. Eating disorders. The Lancet 361,
407–416. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(03)12378-1
Fairburn, C.G., Shafran, R., Cooper, Z., 1999. A cognitive behavioural
theory of anorexia nervosa. Behaviour Research and Therapy 37, 1 –
13.
Fassino, S., Pierò, A., Gramaglia, C., Abbate-Daga, G., 2004. Clinical,
psychopathological and personali ty correlates of interoceptive
awareness in anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and obesity.
Psychopathology 37, 168–174. https://doi.org/10.1159/000079420
Fischer, D., Berberich, G., Zaudi g, M., Krauseneck, T., Weiss, S.,
Pollatos, O., 2016. Interoceptive Processes in Anorexia Nervosa in
the Time Course of Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy: A Pilot Study.
Frontiers in Psychiatry 7, 199. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2016.
00199
Friston, K., 2010. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory?
Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 11, 127 – 138. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nrn2787
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., Pezzulo, G.,
2017. Active Inference: A Process Theory. Neural Computation
29, 1–49. https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00912
Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., Pezzulo,
G., 2015. Active inference and epistemic value. Cognitive
Neuroscience 6, 187 –214. https://doi.org/10.1080/17588928.2015.
1020053
Friston, K., Thornton, C., Clark, A., 2012. Free-energy minimization and
the dark-room problem. Front Percept Science 3, 130. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00130
Friston, K.J., Stephan, K.E., M ontague, R., Dola n, R.J., 2014.
Computational psychiatry: the brain as a phantastic organ. Lancet
Psychiatry 1, 148 – 158. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(14)
70275-5
Froreich, F.V ., Vartanian, L.R. , Grisham, J.R., Touyz, S.W., 2016.
Dimensions of control and their relation to disordered eating behav-
iours and obsessive-compulsive symptoms. Journal of Eating
Disorders 4, 14. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40337-016-0104-4
Gadsby, S., 2017. Distorted body representations in anorexia nervosa.
Consciousness and Cognition 51, 17 –33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
concog.2017.02.015
Garfinkel, S.N., Tiley, C., O ’Keeffe, S., Harrison, N.A., Seth, A.K.,
Critchley, H.D., 2016. Discrepa ncies between dimensions of
interoception in autism: Implications for emotion and anxiety.
Biological Psychology 114, 117 – 126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biopsycho.2015.12.003
Gorwood, P., Blanchet-Collet, C., Chartrel, N., Duclos, J., Dechelotte, P.,
Hanachi, M., Fetissov, S., Godart, N., Melchior, J.-C., Ramoz, N.,
Rovere-Jovene, C., Tolle, V ., Viltart, O., Epelbaum, J., 2016. New
Insights in Anorexia Nervosa. Frontiers in Neuroscience 10, 256.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2016.00256
Gregertsen, E.C., Mandy, W., Serpell, L., 2017. The Egosyntonic Nature
of Anorexia: An Impediment to Recovery in Anorexia Nervosa
Treatment. Frontiers in Psychology 8, 2273. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fpsyg.2017.02273
Grzelak, T., Dutkiewicz, A., Paszynska, E., Dmitrzak-Weglarz, M.,
Slopien, A., Tyszkiewicz-Nwafor, M., 2017. Neurobiochemical
and psychological factors influencing the eating behaviors and
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2020) 20:427 –440 437
attitudes in anorexia nervosa. - PubMed - NCBI. Journal of
Physiology and Biochemistry 73, 297 – 305. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s13105-016-0540-2
Guidano, V .F., 1987. Complexity of the Self: A Developmental Approach
to Psychopathology and Therapy. Guilford Press.
Hamatani, S., Tomotake, M., Takeda, T., Kameoka, N., Kawabata, M.,
Kubo, H., Ohta, M., Tada, Y ., Tomioka, Y ., Watanabe, S., Inoshita,
M., Kinoshita, M., Ohmori, T., 2018. Impaired central coherence in
patients with anorexia nervosa. Psychiatry Research 259, 77 –80.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2017.09.086
Henningsen, P., Gündel, H., Kop, W.J., Löwe, B., Martin, A., Rief, W.,
Rosmalen, J.G.M., Schröder, A., van der Feltz-Cornelis, C., Van den
Bergh, O., EURONET-SOMA Group, 2018. Persistent Physical
Symptoms as Perceptual Dysregulation: A Neuropsychobehavioral
Model and Its Clinical Implications. Psychosomatic Medicine 80,
422–431. https://doi.org/10.1097/PSY .0000000000000588
Iodice, P., Porciello, G., Bufalari, I., Barca, L., Pezzulo, G., 2019. An
interoceptive illusion of effort induced by false heart-rate feedback.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 201821032.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1821032116
Irvine, K.R., McCarty, K., McKenzie, K.J., Pollet, T.V ., Cornelissen,
K.K., Tovée, M.J., Cornelissen, P.L., 2019. Distorted body image
influences body schema in individuals with negative bodily atti-
tudes. Neuropsychologia 122, 38 – 50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuropsychologia.2018.11.015
Joffily, M., Coricelli, G., 2013. Emotional valence and the free-energy
principle. PLoS Computational Biology 9, e1003094. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003094
Kaye, W.H., Wierenga, C.E., Bailer, U.F., Simmons, A.N., Bischoff-
Grethe, A., 2013. Nothing tastes as good as skinny feels: the neuro-
biology of anorexia nervosa. Trends in Neurosciences 36, 110 –120.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2013.01.003
Keizer, A., Elburg, A. van, Helms, R., Dijkerman, H.C., 2016. A Virtual
Reality Full Body Illusion Improves Body Image Disturbance in
Anorexia Nervosa. PLoS ONE 11, e0163921. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0163921
Keizer, A., Smeets, M.A.M., Dijkerman, H.C., Uzunbajakau, S.A., van
Elburg, A., Postma, A., 2013. Too fat to fit through the door: first
evidence for disturbed body-scaled action in anorexia nervosa dur-
ing locomotion. PLoS One 8, e64602. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0064602
Keizer, A., Smeets, M.A.M., Dijkerman, H.C., van den Hout, M.,
Klugkist, I., van Elburg, A., Postma, A., 2011. Tactile body image
disturbance in anorexia nervosa. Psychiatry Research 190, 115–120.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2011.04.031
Kesby, A., Maguire, S., Brownlow, R., Grisham, J.R., 2017. Intolerance
of Uncertainty in eating disorders: An update on the field. Clinical
Psychology Review 56, 94 –105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2017.
07.002
Kessler, H., Schwarze, M., Filipic, S., Traue, H.C., von Wietersheim, J.,
2006. Alexithymia and facial emotion recognition in patients with
eating disorders. The International Journal of Eating Disorders 39,
245–251.
Khalsa, S.S., Hassanpour, M.S., Strober, M., Craske, M.G., Arevian,
A.C., Feusner, J.D., 2018. Interoceptive Anxiety and Body
Representation in Anorexia Nervosa. Frontiers in Psychiatry 9.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00444
Klabunde, M., Collado, D., Bohon, C., 2017. An interoceptive model of
bulimia nervosa: A neurobiological systematic review. Journal of
Psychiatric Research 94, 36 – 46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpsychires.2017.06.009
Ladouceur, R., Gosselin, P., Dugas, M.J., 2000. Experimental manipula-
tion of intolerance of uncertainty: a study of a theoretical model of
worry. Behaviour Research and Therapy 38, 933 –941. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0005-7967(99)00133-3
Leppanen, J., Dapelo, M.M., Davi es, H., Lang, K., Treasure, J.,
Tchanturia, K., 2017. Computerised analysis of facial emotion ex-
pression in eating disorders. PLoS ONE 12, e0178972. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0178972
MacCormack, J.K., Muscatell, K.A., 2019. The metabolic mind: A role
for leptin and ghrelin in affect and social cognition. Social and
Personality Psychology Compass https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.
12496
Mahoney, M., Granvold, D.K., 2005. Constructivism and psychotherapy.
World Psychiatry 4, 74 –77.
Monti, A., Porciello, G., Tieri, G., Aglioti, S.M., 2019. “Embreathment”
illusion reveals hierarchical influence of respiratory, visual and spa-
tial signals on corporeal awareness. 10.31234/osf.io/cn9s3
Murphy, J., Brewer, R., Catmur, C., Bird, G., 2017. Interoception and
psychopathology: A developmental neuroscience perspective.
Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 23, 45 –56. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.dcn.2016.12.006
National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health (UK), 2004. Eating
Disorders: Core Interventions in the Treatment and Management
of Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimi a Nervosa and Related Eating
Disorders, National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence:
Guidance. British Psychological Society (UK), Leicester (UK).
Nordbø, R. H. S., Espeset, E. M. S., Gulliksen, K. S., Skårderud, F.,
Holte, A., 2006. The meaning of self-starvation: Qualitative study
of patients’perception of anorexia nervosa. Int J Eat Disord 39, 556–
564. https://doi.org/10.1002/eat.20276
Nummenmaa, L., Glerean, E., Hari, R., Hietanen, J.K., 2014. Bodily
maps of emotions. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 111, 646 –651. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1321664111
Nunn, K., Frampton, I., Fuglset, T.S., Törzsök-Sonnevend, M., Lask, B.,
2011. Anorexia nervosa and the insula. Medical Hypotheses 76,
353–357. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mehy.2010.10.038
Parr, T., Friston, K.J., 2017. Working memory, attention, and salience in
active inference. Scientific Reports 7, 14678.
Paulus, M.P., 2019. Driven by Pa in, Not Gain: Computational
Approaches to Aversion-Related Decision Making in Psychiatry.
Biological Psychiatry. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2019.08.
025
Paulus, M.P., Feinstein, J.S., Khalsa, S.S., 2019a. An Active Inference
Approach to Interoceptive Psychopathology. Annual Review of
Clinical Psychology 15, 97 –122. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
clinpsy-050718-095617
Paulus, M.P., Feinstein, J.S., Khalsa, S.S., 2019b. An Active Inference
Approach to Interoceptive Psychopathology. Annual Review of
Clinical Psychology 15, 97 –122. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
clinpsy-050718-095617
Petersen, S., Schroijen, M., Mölders, C., Zenker, S., Van den Bergh, O.,
2014. Categorical interoception: perceptual organization of sensa-
tions from inside. Psychological Science 25, 1059–1066. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0956797613519110
Pezzulo, G., 2013. Why do you fear the Bogeyman? An embodied pre-
dictive coding model of perceptual inference. Cognitive, Affective,
& Behavioral Neuroscience
Pezzulo, G., Barca, L., Friston, K.J., 2015a. Active inference and
cognitive-emotional interactions in the brain. The Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 38, e85. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0140525X14001009
Pezzulo, G., Iodice, P., Barca, L., Chausse, P., Monceau, S., Mermillod,
M., 2018a. Increased heart rate after exercise facilitates the process-
ing of fearful but not disgusted faces. Scientific Reports 8, 398.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-18761-5
Pezzulo, G., Maisto, D., Barca, L., Van den Bergh, O., 2019a. Perception
and misperception of bodily symptoms from an Active Inference
perspective: Modelling the case of panic disorder. (preprint). Open
Science Framework. https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/dywfs
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2020) 20:427 –440438
Pezzulo, G., Maisto, D., Barca, L., Van den Bergh, O., 2019b. Symptom
Perception From a Predictive Processing Perspective. Clinical
Psychology in Europe e35952.
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., Friston, K., 2018b. Hierarchical Active Inference:
A Theory of Motivated Control. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 22,
294–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.01.009
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., Friston, K.J., 2015b. Active Inference, homeostat-
ic regulation and adaptive behavioural control. Progress in
Neurobiology
Pollatos, O., Herbert, B.M., Mai, S., Kammer, T., 2016. Changes in in-
teroceptive processes following brain stimulation. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological
Sciences 371. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0016
Pollatos, O., Kurz, A.-L., Albrecht, J., Schreder, T., Kleemann, A.M.,
Schöpf, V ., Kopietz, R., Wiesm ann, M., Schandry, R., 2008.
Reduced perception of bodily signals in anorexia nervosa. Eating
Behaviors 9, 381–388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eatbeh.2008.02.001
Powers, A.R., Mathys, C., Corlett, P.R., 2017. Pavlovian conditioning –
induced hallucinations result from overweighting of perceptual
priors. Science 357, 596 – 600. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
aan3458
Quadt, L., Critchley, H.D., Garfinkel, S.N., 2018. The neurobiology of
interoception in health and disease. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1428, 112 –128. https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.
13915
Riva, G., Gaudio, S., 2018. Locked to a wrong body: Eating disorders as
the outcome of a primary disturbance in multisensory body integra-
tion. Consciousness and Cognition 59, 57 –59. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.concog.2017.08.006
Rogers-Carter, M.M., Christianson, J.P., 2019. An insular view of the
social decision-making network. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews 103, 119 –132. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.
06.005
Sagliano, L., Magliacano, A., Parazzini, M., Fiocchi, S., Trojano, L.,
Grossi, D., 2019. Modulating interoception by insula stimulation:
A double-blinded tDCS study. Neuroscience Letters 696, 108 –113.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2018.12.022
Schalla, M.A., Stengel, A., 2017. The Role of Ghrelin in Anorexia
Nervosa. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 1 –16. doi:
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms19072117
Seth, A.K., 2013. Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied
self. Trends in Cognitive Sciences https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.
2013.09.007
Seth, A.K., Friston, K.J., 2016. Active interoceptive inference and the
emotional brain. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
of London. Series B, Biological Sciences 371. https://doi.org/10.
1098/rstb.2016.0007
Seth, A.K., Suzuki, K., Critchley, H.D., 2012. An Interoceptive
Predictive Coding Model of Cons cious Presence. Frontiers in
Psychology 2. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00395
Seth, A.K., Tsakiris, M., 2018. Being a Beast Machine: The Somatic
Basis of Selfhood. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 22, 969 –981.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.08.008
Shihata, S., McEvoy, P.M., Mullan, B.A., Carleton, R.N., 2016.
Intolerance of uncertainty in emotional disorders: What uncer-
tainties remain? Journal of Anxiety Disorders 41, 115 –124. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2016.05.001
Spitoni, G.F., Serino, A., Cotugno, A., Mancini, F., Antonucci, G.,
Pizzamiglio, L., 2015. The two dimensions of the body representa-
tion in women suffering from Anorexia Nervosa. Psychiatry
Research 230, 181 –188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2015.
08.036
Stephan, K.E., Manjaly, Z.M., Mathys, C.D., Weber, L.A.E., Paliwal, S.,
Gard, T., Tittgemeyer, M., Fleming, S.M., Haker, H., Seth, A.K.,
Petzschner, F.H., 2016. Allostatic Self-efficacy: A Metacognitive
Theory of Dyshomeostasis-Induced Fatigue and Depression.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnhum.2016.00550
Sterling, P., 2012. Allostasis: a model of predictive regulation. Physiology
&B e h a v i o r1 0 6 ,5–15.
Sternheim, L., Startup, H., Schmidt, U., 2011. An experimental explora-
tion of behavioral and cognitive–emotional aspects of intolerance of
uncertainty in eating disorder patients. Journal of Anxiety Disorders
25, 806–812. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2011.03.020
Sterzer, P., Adams, R.A., Fletcher, P., Frith, C., Lawrie, S.M., Muckli, L.,
Petrovic, P., Uhlhaas, P., V oss, M., Corlett, P.R., 2018. The
Predictive Coding Account of Psychosis. Biological Psychiatry 84,
634–643. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2018.05.015
Strigo, I.A., Matthews, S.C., Simmons, A.N., Oberndorfer, T., Klabunde,
M., Reinhardt, L.E., Kaye, W.H., 2013. Altered insula activation
during pain anticipation in individuals recovered from anorexia
nervosa: evidence of interoceptive dysregulation. The International
Journal of Eating Disorders 46, 23 –33. https://doi.org/10.1002/eat.
22045
Surgenor, L.J., Horn, J., Plumridge, E.W., Hudson, S.M., 2002. Anorexia
nervosa and psychological control: a reexamination of selected the-
oretical accounts. European Eating Disorders Review 10, 85 –101.
https://doi.org/10.1002/erv.457
Tajadura-Jiménez, A., Tsakiris, M., 2014. Balancing the “inner” and the
“outer” self: Interoceptive sensitivity modulates self –other bound-
aries. Journal of Experimental Psychology. General 143, 736 –744.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0033171
Tschantz, A., Seth, A.K., Buckley, C.L., 2019. Learning action-oriented
models through active inference. bioRxiv 764969. https://doi.org/
10.1101/764969
Van den Bergh, O., Witthöft, M., Petersen, S., Brown, R.J., 2017.
Symptoms and the body: Taking the inferential leap. Neuroscience
and Biobehavioral Reviews 74, 185 –203. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2017.01.015
Watson, H.J., Yilmaz, Z., Thornton, L.M., Hübel, C., Coleman, J.R.I.,
Gaspar, H.A., Bryois, J., Hinney, A., Leppä, V .M., Mattheisen, M.,
Medland, S.E., Ripke, S., Yao, S., Giusti-Rodríguez, P., Hanscombe,
K.B., Purves, K.L., Adan, R.A. H., Alfredsson, L., Ando, T.,
Andreassen, O.A., Baker, J.H., Berrettini, W.H., Boehm, I., Boni,
C., Perica, V .B., Buehren, K., Burghardt, R., Cassina, M., Cichon,
S., Clementi, M., Cone, R.D., Courtet, P., Crow, S., Crowley, J.J.,
Danner, U.N., Davis, O.S.P., Zwaan, M. de, Dedoussis, G.,
Degortes, D., DeSocio, J.E., Dick, D.M., Dikeos, D., Dina, C.,
Dmitrzak-Weglarz, M., Docampo, E., Duncan, L.E., Egberts, K.,
Ehrlich, S., Escaramís, G., Esko, T., Estivill, X., Farmer, A.,
F a v a r o ,A . ,F e r n á n d e z - A r a n d a ,F . ,F i c h t e r ,M . M . ,F i s c h e r ,K . ,
Föcker, M., Foretova, L., Forstner, A.J., Forzan, M., Franklin,
C.S., Gallinger, S., Giegling, I., Giuranna, J., Gonidakis, F.,
Gorwood, P., Mayora, M.G., Guillaume, S., Guo, Y ., Hakonarson,
H., Hatzikotoulas, K., Hauser, J., Hebebrand, J., Helder, S.G.,
Herms, S., Herpertz-Dahlmann, B., Herzog, W., Huckins, L.M.,
Hudson, J.I., Imgart, H., Inoko, H., Janout, V ., Jiménez-Murcia, S.,
J u l i à ,A . ,K a l s i ,G . ,K a m i n s k á ,D . ,K a p r i o ,J . ,K a r h u n e n ,L . ,
Karwautz, A., Kas, M.J.H., Kennedy, J.L., Keski-Rahkonen, A.,
Kiezebrink, K., Kim, Y .-R., Klareskog, L., Klump, K.L., Knudsen,
G.P .S., Via, M.C.L., Hellard, S.L., Levitan, R.D., Li, D., Lilenfeld,
L., Lin, B.D., Lissowska, J., Luykx, J., Magistretti, P.J., Maj, M.,
Mannik, K., Marsal, S., Marshall, C.R., Mattingsdal, M., McDevitt,
S., McGuffin, P., Metspalu, A., Meulenbelt, I., Micali, N., Mitchell,
K., Monteleone, A.M., Monteleone, P., Munn-Chernoff, M.A.,
Nacmias, B., Navratilova, M., Ntalla, I., O ’Toole, J.K., Ophoff,
R.A., Padyukov, L., Palotie, A., Pantel, J., Papezova, H., Pinto, D.,
Rabionet, R., Raevuori, A., Ramoz, N., Reichborn-Kjennerud, T.,
Ricca, V ., Ripatti, S., Ritschel, F., Roberts, M., Rotondo, A.,
Rujescu, D., Rybakowski, F., S antonastaso, P., Scherag, A.,
Scherer, S.W., Schmidt, U., Schork, N.J., Schosser, A., Seitz, J.,
Slachtova, L., Slagboom, P.E., Landt, M.C.T.S.-O. ‘t, Slopien, A.,
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2020) 20:427 –440 439
Sorbi, S., Świątkowska, B., Szatkiewicz, J.P., Tachmazidou, I.,
Tenconi, E., Tortorella, A., Tozzi, F., Treasure, J., Tsitsika, A.,
Tyszkiewicz-Nwafor, M., Tziouvas, K., van Elburg, A.A., van
Furth, E.F., Wagner, G., Walton, E., Widen, E., Zeggini, E.,
Zerwas, S., Zipfel, S., Bergen, A.W., Boden, J.M., Brandt, H.,
Crawford, S., Halmi, K.A., Horwood, L.J., Johnson, C., Kaplan,
A . S . ,K a y e ,W . H . ,M i t c h e l l ,J . E . ,O l s e n ,C . M . ,P e a r s o n ,J . F . ,
Pedersen, N.L., Strober, M., Werge, T., Whiteman, D.C.,
Woodside, D.B., Stuber, G.D., Gordon, S., Grove, J., Henders,
A.K., Juréus, A., Kirk, K.M., Larsen, J.T., Parker, R., Petersen, L.,
Jordan, J., Kennedy, M., Montgomery, G.W., Wade, T.D.,
Birgegård, A., Lichtenstein, P., Norring, C., Landén, M., Martin,
N.G., Mortensen, P.B., Sullivan, P.F., Breen, G., Bulik, C.M.,
2019. Genome-wide association study identifies eight risk loci and
implicates metabo-psychiatric origins for anorexia nervosa. Nature
Genetics 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-019-0439-2
Wu, J. T., Kral, J. G., 2004. Ghrelin. Integrative neuroendocrine peptide
in health and disease. Annals of Surgery 4, 464 –74.
Young, H.A., Gaylor, C.M., de Kerckhove, D., Watkins, H., Benton, D.,
2019. Interoceptive accuracy moderates the response to a glucose
load: a test of the predictive coding framework. Proceedings of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 286, 20190244. https://doi.
org/10.1098/rspb.2019.0244
Young, H.A., Williams, C., Pink, A.E., Freegard, G., Owens, A., Benton,
D., 2017. Getting to the heart of the matter: Does aberrant intero-
ceptive processing contribute towards emotional eating? PLoS ONE
12, e0186312. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0186312
Yu, A.A.N., Iodice, P., Pezzulo, G., Barca, L. (2020, January 29). Bodily
Information and Top-Down Affective Priming Jointly Affect the
Processing of Fearful Faces. Preprint retrieved from https://doi.org/
10.31234/osf.io/h76a9
Publisher’sn o t e Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2020) 20:427 –440440