  
 
PERSPECTIVE 
  
Please do not adjust margins 
Please do not adjust margins 
Received 00th January 20xx, 
Accepted 00th January 20xx 
DOI: 10.1039/x0xx00000x 
 
 
Intelligent Soft Matter: Towards Embodied Intelligence 
Vladimir A. Baulin a,b,*, Achille Giacometti c, Dmitry A. Fedosovd, Stephen Ebbens e, Nydia R. 
Varela-Rosalesf, Neus Feliu g, Mithun Chowdhury h, Minghan Hu i, Rudolf Füchslin j, Marjolein 
Dijkstrak, Matan Mussel l, René van Roij m, Dong Xie n, Vassil Tzanov o, Mengjie Zu p, Samuel 
Hidalgo-Caballeroq, Ye Yuan r, Luca Cocconi s, Cheol -Min Ghim t, Cécile Cottin -Bizonneu, M. 
Carmen Miguelv, Maria Jose Esplandiuw, Juliane Simmchenx, Wolfgang J. Paraky, Marco Wernerz, 
Gerhard Gompperaa, Martin M.  Hanczycbb,cc 
Intelligent soft matter lies at the intersection of materials science, physics, and cognitive science, promising to change how 
we design and interact with materials. This transformative field aims to create materials with life -like capabilities, such as 
perception, learning, memory, and adaptive behavior. Unlike traditional materials, which typically perform static or predefined 
functions, intelligent soft matter can dynamically interact with its environment, integrating multiple sensory inputs, retaining 
past experiences, and making decisions to optimize its responses. Inspired by biological systems, these materials leverage the 
inherent properties of soft matter such as flexibility, adaptability, and responsiveness to perform functions that mimic cognitive 
processes. By synthesizing current research trends and projecting their evolution, we present a forward -looking perspective 
on how intelligent soft matter could be constructed, with the aim of inspiring innovations in areas such as biomedical devices, 
adaptive robotics, and beyond. We highlight new pathways for integrating sensing, memory and actuation with  low -power 
internal operations, and we discuss key challenges in realizing materials that exhibit truly  “intelligent behavior“ . These 
approaches outline a path toward more robust, versatile, and scalable materials that can potentially act, compute, and “think” 
through their inherent intrinsic material properties--moving beyond traditional smart technologies that rely on external control. 
 
Introduction 
The field of Intelligent Soft Matter (ISM) aims to develop 
materials with advanced capabilities, such as perception, 
memory, learning, and adaptive responses ---features 
traditionally attributed only to living organisms. The 
transformative potential of ISM lies in its a bility to 
autonomously interact with and adapt to its environment through 
self-learning and adaptive mechanisms that harness the inherent 
stochasticity of  large numbers of interacting units 1. ISM holds 
the promise of enabling a wide range of applications,  ranging 
from sentient nanoscale robotics capable of navigating complex 
biological environments2,3  to dynamically adaptive systems that 
optimize their performance in real -time4,5, to materials that  not 
only sense but also actively modify their surroundings, and to 
neuromorphic platforms for material -based cognition 6 and 
thermodynamic computing 7–9. As such it requires combining 
aspects of materials science, physics, cognitive science, and 
engineering.  
While the initial development of ISM is rooted in the quest to 
mimic the complexity and efficiency of biological systems such 
as neural networks 10–13, its potential may go well beyond mere 
biomimetics. The ultimate vision is to create soft matter agents 
with fully synthetic intelligence, capable of functionalities that 
may not even have biological analogues. Similar to macroscale 
soft robotics 1,14, intelligent soft matter should go significantly 
beyond passive adaptability towards more sophisticated levels of 
a. Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona, Spain  
b. Active Inference Institute, Davis, California, USA  
c. Dipartimento di Scienze Molecolari e Nanosistemi, Universita` Ca’ Foscari Venezia, Via 
Torino 155, 30172 Venezia, Italy  European Centre for Living Technology (ECLT) Ca’ 
Bottacin, Dorsoduro 3911, Calle Crosera, 30123 Venice, Italy . 
d. Forschungszentrum Juelich Germany  
e. Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering University of Sheffield Sheffield S1 
3JD, UK  
f. AIST-AIMR, Tohoku University, Sendai 980 -8577, Japan.  
g. Zentrum für Angewandte Nanotechnologie CAN, Fraunhofer - Institut für Angewandte 
Polymerforschung IAP, Hamburg, Germany.  
h. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai -400 076, India  
i. Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Systems (IRIS), Swiss Federal Institute of Technology 
(ETH) Zurich, Switzerland  
j. Zurich University of Applied Sciences, Zurich, Switzerland  
k. Debye Institute for Nanomaterials Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands  
l. Department of Physics,  Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa , Israel  
m. Institute for Theoretical Physics, Utrecht University, The Netherlands  
n. University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK  
o. Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona, Spain  
p. Institute of Science and Technology, Vienna, Austria  
q. ESPCI, Paris, France  
r. Hiroshima University, Japan  
s. Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self -Organization, Göttingen, Germany  
t. Departments of Physics and Biomedical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science 
and Technology, Ulsan 44919, South Korea  
u. University Lyon, Lyon, France  
v. Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain  
w. Catalan Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (ICN2), CSIC and BIST, Campus 
UAB, Bellaterra,Barcelona  
x. University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK  
y. Universität Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany  
z. Leibniz-Institut für Polymerforschung Dresden e.V., Dresden, Germany  
aa. Forschungszentrum Juelich Germany  
bb. Department of Cellular, Computational and Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of 
Trento, Via Sommarive 9, Povo, Trento 38123, Italy.  
cc. Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of New Mexico, 
Albuquerque, NM 87106, USA . 
PERSPECTIVE Soft Matter 
2 | Soft Matter , 20 25 , 00 , 1 -3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 
 
 
material intelligence, characterized by emergent behaviour and 
evolving functionalities in response to environmental  cues15. 
Emergent agency in such systems 16 arises when the collective 
interactions of numerous nanoscale components give rise to 
system-level behaviours that exhibit goal -directed action s17 or 
decision-making capabilities that are absent in the individual 
constituents. This sophisticated adaptivity is fundamentally 
rooted in the stochastic reorganization of micro - and nanoscale 
components18,19, allowing for the probabilistic emergence and 
evolution of functional capabilities in response to environmental 
stimuli. For instance, self -assembling peptide structures exhibit 
dynamic morphological changes in response to localized 
chemical signals 20, demonstrating a sophisticated level of 
responsiveness that can be harnessed for molecular information 
processing.  
Current research in intelligent matter showcases the potential for 
cognitive-like behaviours, primarily demonstrated through 
macroscopic systems, such as  shape -changing robots and self -
healing materials 7,14. However, these macroscopic approaches 
often rely on a  separation of functional layers: sensing, memory, 
and actuation 21, which poses severe limitations when scaled 
down to the microscale 22. At smaller dimension, the intricate 
orchestration and communication required between numerous 
specialized components become increasingly inefficient due to 
the high number of interactions  and the growing influence of 
interfacial effects23. Thus, the future of intelligent soft matter lies 
in constructing systems from a vast number of similar, 
interacting units where complex functionalities, such as sensing, 
memory, and actuation, emerge intrinsically and are distributed 
throughout the mater ial. These systems should not require 
intricate hierarchical control or the integration of distinct, 
specialized components. Instead, their emergent behaviour will 
additionally capitalize on intrinsic stochasticity and its 
manifestations, such as thermodyn amic fluctuations, phase 
transitions, and self-assembly processes.     
Specific examples : Realizing this vision requires the design of 
materials where function is inherently integrated in a distributed 
way rather than externally added on. For example,  
• The behaviour of active liquid crystals exhibiting spontaneous 
flows and pattern formation can be viewed through the lens of 
stochasticity leading to emergent computation 24. Another 
work25 illustrates how cholesteric liquid crystal fingers can 
perform geometric and logical computations. Utilizing 
voltage-controlled reorientation in thin films of liquid crystals, 
the presented system achieves computational tasks through 
the manipulation of t opological defects. Specifically, the 
authors showcase the material's capacity for approximating 
Voronoi diagrams and implementing one -bit half-adder logic 
through engineered defect collisions. More broadly, the large-
scale self -organization of topological  defect networks in 
nematic liquid crystals can be manipulated to create stable, 
periodic patterns 26 showing potential for distributed sensing 
and information processing. 
• Networks of responsive nanoparticles exhibit remarkable 
capabilities to sense changes in their surroundings and 
anticipate future states based on past experiences, enabling 
proactive responses. Thus, a nanoparticle -based computing 
architecture that utilizes nanoparticles as hardware and DNA 
strands as software can be used to create programmable logic 
circuits27. This architecture allows for the formation of 
nanoparticle neural networks capable of performing complex 
computations, including Boolean logic operations. 
Analogously, a nanograin network memory device 28  that 
utilizes reconfigurable percolation paths can exhibit synaptic 
behaviours, such as potentiation and habituation.  
• Self-assembling polymers can adapt locally for distributed 
responses and memory29, allowing a single detection event to 
trigger widespread material changes, such as switching from 
hydrophobic to hydrophilic states. Similarly, nucleic acids 
structures offer a promising avenue for programming 
distributed information processing.  
• Dynamic colloidal assemblies, such as magnetic droplets at 
the air-liquid interface30, form highly ordered patterns that can 
be precisely controlled using external magnetic fields. 
Similarly, acoustic signalling can similarly enable collective 
perception and control in active particles31 showing how local 
actions can create overall control within a system. These 
assemblies exemplify adaptive materials capable of 
computation and responsiveness to their environment.  
• A nanopore interface for higher -bandwidth DNA 
computing32, can be used for real -time data processing and 
enhances the throughput of DNA -based computational 
systems.  
Such distributed systems, composed of vast numbers of 
interacting units, promise ISM systems with unprecedented 
levels of autonomy, decentralization, and adaptability, blurring 
the traditional distinction between inorganic substrates and 
living systems. Thermodynamic machines with predictive 
capabilities draw inspiration from Maxwell's demon – a 
conceptual device that highlights how information can be 
utilized to seemingly circumvent thermodynamic limitations, 
rather than to violate them directly. The rig orous framework of 
"information thermodynamics" addresses Maxwell’s demon 
paradox by explicitly quantifying the thermodynamic costs of 
measurement and information erasure33, therefore preserving the 
second law of thermodynamics while also providing 
fundamental limits for device performance and operational 
energy expenditure34–36.  
Boltzmann machines are an interesting theoretical concept37 that 
illustrate how entropic contributions in a magnetic system with 
fine-tuned couplings between spins could be exploited to 
generalize scattered input data – and generate new random and 
plausible data examples with a similar distribution. Here, the 
right balance between susceptibility for new input patterns and 
the minimal memory required for their generalization have a 
traceable route to the thermodynamics of phase transitions in 
magnetic systems 38,39 . Boltzmann machines are different from 
feed forward artificial neural networks through their 
bidirectionality - a feature that allows for recurrence and the 
internal, iterative restructuring of input information. Alone, 
experimental realizations of this m athematical model currently 
seem unrealistic. 
While the physical intelligence paradigm represents a significant 
step towards harnessing material physics, many current 
Soft Matter  PERSPECTIVE 
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 Soft Matter ., 20 25 , 00 , 1 -3 | 3 
 
 
examples, including those reviewed under the physical 
intelligence umbrella 6 often focus on physically implementing 
functions specified by human design. This includes realization 
of logic gates 40,41 , stor age of  predefined states 42, executi on of  
pre-programmed responses 43, or the use of external control 
systems to orchestrate complex behaviours44,45 . 
This perspective seeks to build upon and refine the concept of 
intelligence in materials by focusing specifically on emergent 
material intelligence. We argue for a deeper integration in which 
intelligent behaviors emerge fundamentally and autonomously 
from the material's intrinsic physics. This approach leverages 
nonlinearity, stochasticity, self -organization, and adaptive 
feedback operating far from e quilibrium. Rather than relying 
primarily on externally imposed designs or algorithms within a 
physical substrate, intelligence should arise naturally from these 
inherent properties. The emphasis shifts from physical encoding 
of designed function towards physical generation of emergent 
function. 
While this vision of nanoscale material intelligence is 
compelling, its practical realization presents profound scientific 
and engineering challenges:  how can we rationally design 
material architectures that effectively adapt to dynamically 
changing envir onments? How can we reliably harness the 
principles of stochasticity and the collective behaviour of vast 
numbers of nanoscale replicas to achieve complex behaviour 
with prediction?  How do we imbue materials with the capacity 
to learn from past interactio ns and make autonomous decisions 
based on their accumulated experiences and real -time 
perception?  This perspective addresses these critical challenges, 
outlining a roadmap for the future of ISM.  
Main Capabilities of Intelligent Soft Matter 
For soft matter system to exhibit material intelligence, it must 
possess a minimal level of structural complexity (Fig. 1). 
 
Figure 1 Four key capabilities  essential for Intelligent Soft Matter.  
 
1. Perception and Sensing 
To respond adaptively, an ISM system must sense its 
environment, interpret stimuli, and prioritize actions 
accordingly.  
Desirable functions and capabilities include: 
(i) Global Response Integration : ISM should be capable of 
processing multiple types of sensory inputs, such as pressure, 
temperature, or chemical gradients, and synthesizing these into a 
coherent response. For example, soft robots that utilize 
continuous fluid flow for integrated control can process multiple 
sensory inputs and respond effectively, achieving robust control 
without complex discrete valving46. 
(ii) Selective Attention/Filtering:  This feature enables the 
material to selectively respond to certain stimuli while filtering 
out irrelevant signals or noise, focusing on significant 
environmental changes. Neuromorphic principles realized in 
physical networks, like criticality, are hypoth esized to optimize 
sensitivity and dynamic range, effectively filtering information 
based on relevance 47,48. Physical systems exhibiting 
thresholding, like damage-indicating microcapsules49,50, perform 
basic filtering based on stimulus intensity.  
(iii) Dynamic Sensory-Actuator Coupling: ISM requires tight, 
dynamic coupling between sensing and actuation via internal 
feedback loops. This allows for continuous monitoring and 
iterative adjustment, modulating responses based on ongoing 
interactions. While many current systems separate sensing and 
actuation51,  materials exhibiting self -regulation, like 
homeostatic chemical systems 52 or chemo -mechanical 
oscillators29, demonstrate intrinsic coupling where the sensed 
internal state directly drives actuating processes.  
(iv) P redictive capabilities through self -regulation can 
emerge when the material's intrinsic physical dynamics and 
internal feedback mechanisms embody anticipatory processes, 
without resorting to external algorithmic prediction. Essential 
functionalities include: 
a) Anticipatory State Dynamics . The material's internal state 
evolution, governed by its physical laws and interaction history, 
can implicitly predict likely future configurations or 
environmental interactions. For instance, viscoelastic materials 
subjected to repeated stress cycles can  develop an internal 
structure (memory encoded in polymer conformations or spring 
rest lengths) that reflects the history of applied loads. Subsequent 
relaxation dynamics are then guided by this acquired structure, 
causing the system to more rapidly find previously visited low -
energy states, effectively anticipating stable configurations 
based on past experience53. Similarly, the internal memory state 
of the slime mold  Physarum polycephalum , encoded in its 
tubular network hierarchy after encountering a nutrient source, 
guides its future migration towards that location, embodying a 
prediction of resource availability based on past encounters 54. 
Active matter systems operating near critical points may also 
exhibit anticipatory dynamics, where long -range correlations 
allow the system to "sense" impending global changes based on 
local fluctuations48,55 . 
b) Physical Goal Embodiment and Error Correction . Self-
regulation often involves maintaining a system's state around an 
intrinsic physical setpoint (e.g., minimum free energy, target 
morphology, homeostatic chemical concentration). Deviation 
from this setpoint acts as an implicit prediction error, drivin g 
physical dynamics that reduce the discrepancy. Self -healing 
materials exemplify this: sensing damage (a deviation from the 
intact state) triggers corrective processes (e.g., reactant release, 

PERSPECTIVE Soft Matter 
4 | Soft Matter , 20 25 , 00 , 1 -3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 
 
 
chain diffusion) aimed at restoring the original low -energy, 
structurally sound state29,56 . Theoretical frameworks like Active 
Inference formalize this, suggesting that biological systems 
minimize prediction errors relative to an internal generative 
model representing preferred (e.g., physiologically viable) 
states57–59. 
c) Learned Predictive Response through Material 
Adaptation. Material systems possessing intrinsic plasticity can 
adapt their internal structure or parameters based on experience, 
effectively learning a predictive model of interactions. Nanowire 
networks function as reservoirs whose dynamics encode input 
history, a llowing trained readouts to perform prediction tasks; 
embedding the learning within the network itself via intrinsic 
plasticity is a key goal 10,12 . Biological sensory adaptation, such 
as in bacterial chemotaxis where the methylation state of 
receptors adapts based on ligand history, allows the system to 
predict future concentrations relative to the adapted baseline and 
respond primarily to changes 60,61 . Chemical reaction networks 
can also be designed or evolved to learn predictive responses 
based on input patterns 62,63 . This learned predictive capacity 
arises directly from the adaptation of the material's physical or 
chemical state. 
 
2. Memory and Ability to Learn 
For soft matter to exhibit cognitive functions beyond reactive 
behaviours, it must  possess a physical memory and be capable 
of memory and learning . This component allows the material 
to retain information about past stimuli and adapt future 
responses, accordingly, enhancing its adaptability over time. 
Important criteria within this category include:  
(i) Memory Encoding and Recall : Intelligent soft matter can 
encode and retrieve information based on past interactions, such 
as deformation patterns or exposure to particular substances. 
Materials could employ phase -change elements or deformation -
based memory systems to store and recal l specific states. 
Hydrogels can retain and forget information based on thermal 
stimulation, showcasing how soft materials can encode and 
retrieve information based on past interactions 64. A 
thermomechanical local-probe technique has achieved ultrahigh 
storage density in thin polymer films, allowing data storage, 
retrieval, and erasure 65. This concept is linked to memory and 
entropy generation in non -equilibrated polymers, where the 
stochasticity and fluctuations in polymer chain conformations  
retain historical information that impacts their current 
behaviour66. 
(ii) Self -Regulation and Environment Adaptation : By 
recognizing trends in environmental inputs, the material can 
build predictive models that enable it to anticipate and prepare 
for future stimuli, adjusting pre-emptively to maintain stability 
and resilience52.  
(iii) Self-Repair and Learning : Self-repair mechanisms, a key 
feature of adaptive materials, enable the material to mend itself 
and develop resistance to recurring stressors, effectively 
‘learning’ from repeated exposure67. This capability is essential 
for long -term functionality in changing or challenging 
environments.  
(iv) Adaptive Pattern Recognition : Through the ability to 
identify recurring input patterns, intelligent soft matter can 
dynamically adjust its behaviour or structure to align with 
predictable environmental cycles, enhancing its utility in 
applications where environmental conditions fluctuate 
periodically68. 
 
3. Actuation 
ISM must interact with its environment in a meaningful and self-
directed way, making "actuation" an inherent property of the 
material itself. This involves moving beyond the mere 
replication of rigid robotic functions by passive compliant 
components, toward generating “embodied actuation” with self -
sustained actions driven by the material's intrinsic properties and 
dynamics. This approach enables adaptive and self -regulating 
behaviours that fundamentally differ from existing 
implementations. 
(i) Soft Robotic Actuation: Current soft robotic actuators, while 
offering unprecedented flexibility and adaptability in shape and 
movement, often require complex external control systems and 
high power inputs2,46. Future directions in ISM actuation should 
minimize dependence on such external controllers by designing  
materials with inherent actuation capabilities based on their 
structure,  exploiting self -organization instead of hard-coded 
actuator arrangements for predefined mechanical operations 2,69. 
The emphasis should not just be on designing better "actuators" 
that perform motion under stimuli in preprogrammed patterns. 
Instead, the focus should be on designs that possess inherent self-
actuation properties through the physical and chemical 
components of a material structure. In such designs, actions 
should emerge from the intrinsic properties of the system itself, 
rather than relying on pre -designed modules. These modules 
often use external electrical hardware to power motion via 
external control o r require separate components for every 
functional task, which limits system integration.  To address this 
limitation one could explore architectures where the system 
relies on self -actuation  through its structure for targeted, 
dynamic responses based on self -regulation using basic, well -
established, and robust physical principles for action ou tput31,70 . 
(ii) Programmable Morphological Transformations : Beyond 
simple actuation mechanisms that are mostly limited to single 
mode mechanical deformations and responses for  basic motions 
and linear actuator displacements or volume expansion -
contraction and/or  stiffness switch, truly intelligent soft matter 
demands a greater repertoire of dynamic morphological 
transformations64. Future research directions must therefore seek 
to engineer materials capable of more sophisticated and 
controlled shape changes, with a wider range of accessible 
kinematic behaviours that are tuneable according to desired 
complex functional actions by exte rnal interventions. This will 
likely be based on the new and better use of reversible material 
transitions, such as liquid crystals with electric or optical control 
or magnetically actuated polymeric systems, where the material 
can deform into multiple shapes in response  to external stimuli, 
rather than preprogrammed, single -output responses for each 
input signal2,24 . 
Soft Matter  PERSPECTIVE 
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 Soft Matter ., 20 25 , 00 , 1 -3 | 5 
 
 
The next level of material design, beyond current capabilities, 
requires implementing  fully programmable shape morphing 
metastructures, especially using buckling transitions, deploying 
hierarchical designed systems with complex topology and 
geometries or nonlinear mechanical behaviours of soft materials 
and structures. This transformative approach can build on recent 
advances in material science and soft robotics including new 
methods that couple self -organization with programmable 
response patterns7,40,71 . 
 
4. Decision making and communication 
The decision-making and communication  capabilities of 
intelligent soft matter enable complex, coordinated behaviours 
and distributed processing across the material’s network. This 
component allows for collaborative actions within and across 
materials, fostering autonomous operation in sophisticated 
settings. Key aspects of this component include:  
(i) Distributed Decision -Making: This criterion involves 
decentralizing control across the material, allowing individual 
nodes or regions within the material to make local decisions that 
collectively influence the overall behaviour 72,73 . This distributed 
system ensures flexibility and resilience, akin to biological 
networks74–76. 
(ii) Self -Organizing Communication Pathways:  Adaptive 
communication channels form spontaneously within the 
material’s structure, enabling efficient signal transmission 54. 
These pathways can evolve with usage, optimizing for quicker 
responses and reducing internal communication delays, 
potentially mediated by physical fields or network 
restructuring12,31 . 
(iii) Integration in networks:  When multiple intelligent soft 
matter units are present, they can interact indirectly via 
mechanical, electrical, or chemical signalling 44,77 . This 
interaction enables coordinated group responses 31,78,79 , allowing 
the material to perform tasks that require cooperation or shared 
objectives80, simulating social behaviours in biological 
systems73. 
Concepts Defining Material Intelligence 
Intelligent Soft Matter draws inspiration from and aims to 
implement several foundational principles observed in complex 
adaptive systems, enabling sophisticated functionalities  (Fig. 2). 
(i) Self-organization, manifests as the spontaneous emergence 
of ordered structures and patterns from local interactions, 
mirroring phenomena seen across scales from lipid bilayer 
formation to the crystallization of colloids 81. This principle 
allows ISM to create functional architectures without direct 
external templating, offering robustness and adaptability.  
 
Figure 2. Four main principles of Intelligent Soft Matter  
(ii) Emergent agency  refers to how  macroscopic behaviours, 
exhibiting goal-directedness or decision -making capacity, arise 
from the collective interactions of numerous simpler 
components. This is analogous to the coordinated movements of 
bird flocks 55 or the problem -solving capabilities of ant 
colonies82, where individual units follow basic rules but the 
group accomplishes complex tasks. In ISM, this could manifest 
as a swarm of nanoparticles autonomously navigating a gradient 
or a self-healing material collectively repairing damage.  
(iii) Active Inference58 suggests a design principle for intelligent 
systems, including materials, whereby they shall operate so as to 
minimize surprise or prediction error.  This is achieved by 
continuously refining an internal model of their environment and 
acting upon the world to validate this model. At a material level, 
this translates to dynamically adapting structural configurations 
or properties to better match and ant icipate environmental 
changes. For example, a stimuli -responsive polymer network 
that swells or contracts in response to temperature can be viewed 
as actively inferring the environmental temperature and 
adjusting its state to minimize the deviation from its 'expected' 
state83. Thus, active inference provides a powerful theoretical 
lens for understanding how agentic systems (with a boundary 
between internal states and external sensory layer)  can embody 
perception (sensing environmental cues), information processing 
(updating the internal model), and adaptive behaviour 
(modifying its state). 
(iv) Self-referential evaluation  posits a level of sophistication 
where materials not only react to external stimuli but also assess 
their own internal state and its relationship to the environment. 
This introduces a crucial element of intrinsic motivation and 
allows for actions that are  not strictly stimulus-response driven. 
Drawing parallels with concepts in cognitive science like 
metacognition in biological systems or intrinsic reward 
mechanisms in reinforcement learning84. This suggests an ability 
for the material to evaluate its own performance or stability and 
make decisions based on this internal assessment. For instance, 

PERSPECTIVE Soft Matter 
6 | Soft Matter , 20 25 , 00 , 1 -3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 
 
 
imagine a material that not only heals damage 56 but also learns 
from past damage events to proactively reinforce vulnerable 
areas, demonstrating an action informed by its 'awareness' of its 
own structural integrity and environmental stressors. While still 
largely theoretical in materials science, the i mplementation of 
self-referential evaluation would signify a significant step 
towards truly autonomous and context -aware intelligent soft 
matter, blurring the lines between engineered and biological 
intelligence. 
Challenges and Opportunities 
The path to realizing the full potential of ISM is fraught with 
significant challenges, primarily revolving around material 
complexity, scalability, integration, and the realization of higher-
order cognitive functions (Fig. 3). The most difficult challenge s 
are related to overcoming current limitations of using specific 
designs with separated components for action (as in micro-bots), 
sensors (as seen in membrane -based chemical detectors), and 
memory (in the electrical or structural states of simple materials). 
Future implementations need to generate new architectures with 
true complexity to enable truly self -organizing systems with 
adaptivity. Any architecture must go beyond specific functional 
component units, such as single -modality-responsive sensors or 
hard-wired actuators. The primary goal is to develop materials 
that can exhibit higher -order capabilities. These include 
cognitive abilities such as dynamic responses, memory with 
feedback for learning, and adaptability at small spatial scales. 
Additionally, such materials should possess self -sustainability, 
moving far beyond pre-set responsivity. Such new directions call 
for exploring new types of design where information can be 
transduced and processed in an emergent manner, without 
relying on rigid hierar chical control. This can be achieved by 
designing all modular components to have a dynamic response 
based on coupled local processes specific to each element. These 
components should also interact in a more complex, highly 
integrated, and self -evolving man ner. Instead of following a 
static and fixed response based on a predefined pathway, they 
should adapt and evolve beyond what is currently demonstrated. 
 
Figure 3. Challenges and opportunities in design of Intelligent Soft Matter  
 
Complex Behaviours and Higer-Order Cognitive Functions 
While current implementations demonstrate some form of 
functional behaviour, such as mechanically active robots 2, self-
sensing membranes 32, and memristor -based circuits 9,85,86, these 
systems often exhibit behaviours which have predictable nature. 
Thus, they lack the features necessary to implement more than 
one set of functional operations via a rigid pre -set pathway and 
cannot possess abilities that are inherent to complex cog nitive 
mechanisms. Present materials often rely on external electrical 
signals to switch response patterns rather than to control them by 
intrinsic properties of the material and its internal dynamic states. 
Therefore, most currently used experimental setu ps in ISM 
respond in pre -programmed manner to specific environmental 
changes or stimulus -action-based feedback using an 
implemented design that limits complex behaviours. Moreover, 
existing experimental systems often lack the integration of 
essential prope rties, such as self -evaluation and the selective 
processing of information, which are fundamental, for example, 
in living systems. 
This raises a question regarding the definition of "material 
intelligence." Existing prototype devices, often categorized as 
"intelligent materials," are more accurately described as 'smart' 
or 'actively responsive' entities. While demonstrating 
sophisticated responses to specific stimuli and exhibiting 
complex functionality (dynamic shape change, memory storage, 
signal processing, and accurate actuation), these 
implementations are constrained by their dependence on external 
control and preprogrammed mechan isms, which prevent the 
demonstration of fully adaptable responses 2,9,31. These 
limitations arise from a lack of intrinsic feedback, non -linear 
dynamics, and adaptive or self -regulatory properties. A critical 
shortcoming is the absence of mechanisms for internal selection 
or adaptation based on previously stored information. As a result, 
these systems exhibit predetermined pathways that lack dynamic 
interaction between the material and external inputs beyond what 
has been pre -programmed through external protocols, such as 
light signals or pressure patterns. 
Thus, it will be paramount for future investigations, to focus on 
design frameworks which have at their basic operational level a 
built-in, local feedback control with the ability of modifying their 
parameters over time based not on external intervention b ut 
rather by integrating sensory information and actions as a single 
system with local functional parts. For example, when a stimulus 
is detected by a sensor, rather than relying on some pre -
programmed rule to dictate the system responses, the sensor 
itself must respond with a self -adapting behaviour by actively 
changing its internal parameters or states, while maintaining 
structural integrity and robust responses over longer timescales. 
Such processes are employed by living organisms (for instance, 
when se nsing and adapting with local memory, coupled with 
continuous energy harvesting).  
Similarly, living biological systems perform at their best by an 
integration of external information with local internal 
adaptation56. For such purposes the building block components 
themselves need to possess many degrees of freedom, and 
integrate multiple functional behaviours within the smallest 

Soft Matter  PERSPECTIVE 
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 Soft Matter ., 20 25 , 00 , 1 -3 | 7 
 
 
possible scale units by proper organization of its materials, 
composition and self-assembling processes20,32.  
Future frameworks must explore mechanisms beyond relying 
solely on classical electrical or optical signalling pathways, 
which often require centralized processing units and substantial 
external energy inputs. This approach is often inefficient and 
creates bottlenecks for truly autonomous operations that could 
occur also by coupling nontrivial fo rms of information 
transduction in micro components. Therefore, future research 
should prioritize designing systems with minimal dependence on 
external power or central controllers 87,88. An emphasis must be 
placed on locally driven processes  that leverage on inherently 
available resources from a variety of internal material or physical 
and chemical properties rather than complex external or added 
components.  
This pathway encourages exploration of signal propagation 
based on material -based processes which directly transduce a 
stimulus into a set of actions or a memory with time dependent 
characteristics for autonomous functional devices. We also must 
exclude th e need for externally powered/controlled 
digital/software components that rely on additional dedicated 
systems which typically consume a lot of energy for their 
operation and processing.  
Another aspect is the criticality which can be an essential part of 
the design. Operating near criticality is often assumed to be 
advantageous for efficient computing 48,89. However, simpler 
systems functioning outside the critical regime can be more 
easily controlled and may still offer sufficient computational 
capabilities for many applications 90,91. Consequently, future 
research should investigate the role of criticality in intelligent 
soft materials and determine whether it is a fundamental 
requirement or simply one approach among many.  
Transitions between ordered and disordered states of cognizant 
systems are of considerable importance also for explicit models 
of neural connectivity. There, one may ask how  high sensitivity 
for input patterns and the ability to switch  focus between task s 
can be achieved 92. There are indications that the optimally 
trained state is found between an overly ordered state 
(overtraining) and a noisy state (undertraining), referred to as the 
"edge of chaos" 93–95 by means of a Frobenius norm -based 
criterion. The boundary between dominance of order and noise  
is close to the optimally trained state 96, where the neural 
network's prediction is most informative for any new data  
presented at the inputs. 
New architectures and fabrication techniques should create 
devices that display emergent behaviour while optimizing and 
minimizing the energy needs, material requirements and 
complexity. It should be an implementation of a real internal 
logic that directly  impacts the material's physics rather than the 
translation of sensor output via algorithmic calculation.  
The proposed method to achieve this high -level cognitive 
function demands exploration of new directions that involve 
designing a material by taking its self -organization dynamics 
with local energy sources and memory not as mere input -output 
transduction pa rameters or isolated functionalities of distinct 
units, but by making all these aspects as intrinsic components.  
Our focus here extends and refines classical views on embodied 
intelligence97,98  emphasizing that the physical body and its 
interactions are not mere peripherals but integral components of 
cognitive processing. It highlights the potential for intelligence 
to emerge even more deeply within the material substrate itself, 
potentially minimizing or even eliminating the need for a 
distinct, separable 'controller' or 'brain' -like component.  While 
classical embodied intelligence often analyzes how a given 
(often biologically inspired) morphology facilitates computation 
performed elsewhere (e. g., in a neural controller), we are 
specifically interested in scenarios where the material's physics 
performs the computation, stores the relevant history (memory), 
and drives the adaptive response intrinsically 1,63 .  
The evolution (learning) in such structures should not require 
direct external intervention or external instructions but instead 
rely on local feedback loops. Thus, in these systems, intelligence 
must occur through the material’s inherent nature and physic s, 
and can be considered as ”material -based intelligence” using 
embodied strategies and autonomous behaviours based on the 
system’s physics as key components for complex responses . 
 
Material Complexity 
Biological systems self-assemble precisely and reproducibly into 
a target structure to fulfil their functions. Examples range from 
proteins to nucleic acids, membrane channels, and vesicles. This 
self-assembly process is a remarkable result of a wide range of 
reversible interactions (hydrophilic -hydrophobic, electrostatic , 
hydrogen-bonds, van der Waals, etc.), each with very different 
energy scales and ranges of action, all of which conspire to 
achieve a unique and remarkably precise result. The holy grail of 
material science nowadays is to attempt to reproduce this process 
artificially across scales. Figure 4 illustrates several examples of 
soft matter systems that conform certain aspects of ISM . 
Figure 4. Matrix of visual impressions of material and shape complexity: (a) 
Polyelectrolyte filled non -biodegradable polyelectrolyte capsules in optical phase 
contrast microscopy see ref. 99. (b) TEM image of tobacco mosaic virus (c) optical 
micrograph of a microalgae (d) SEM micrograph of Janus Au/ Pt colloidal particles 
(CNRS), scale bar 1 mm. (e) SEM micrograph of BiVO4 particle (f) SEM image 

PERSPECTIVE Soft Matter 
8 | Soft Matter , 20 25 , 00 , 1 -3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 
 
 
of Nafion based nanopillar arrays, see ref. 79 (with permission from the Royal 
Society of Chemistry). (g) SEM micrograph of SiO2 spheres (h) SEM micrograph 
of Au plates (i) SEM micrograph of assembles iron hydroxide rods, unless 
otherwise indicated, all scale bars are 2 mm .  
Most existing systems exhibit limitations regarding the precise 
spatial organization of multiple, varied building elements that 
may work together in a synergistic way to obtain multi -
functional behaviour, as it is seen in biological systems 2,2,70. 
Hierarchy: Traditional engineering tends toward homogeneity 
within materials, and while hierarchical systems exist, they are 
usually built via top -down manufacturing by assembling 
components from diverse origins based on pre -determined 
functional units rather than exploiting synergistic properties 
emerging at smaller scales using bottom -up approaches. Often, 
they rely heavily on digital signal control, using specific types of 
electrical/optical/mechanical interfaces. While this enables h igh 
functionality and performance, it can compromise system 
efficiency or restrict device behaviour by a rigid structural 
design. Therefore, the challenge of achieving material 
complexity lies in designing systems from their core structure to 
enable higher -level self -assembly with minimal components, 
through simple chemical and/or physical couplings at the 
molecular level, leading to the emergence of system -wide 
coordinated dynamics rather than a complex set of steps. Such a 
process is based on the exploita tion of existing material 
properties, rather than the introduction of external controllers 
and operations performed by separated units. It involves 
rethinking architecture to focus on integration rather than 
connection. 
Yet, some indications of simple systems that may pave the way 
along these lines do exist and are well known. For instance, 
amphiphilic block copolymers 100 represents a simple 
paradigmatic example of a subunit that can be functionalized to 
achieve a target structure. Even simple synthetic polymers 
appear to share some similarities with biopolymers 101 and their 
self-assembly seems to obey some universal phase behaviour102.  
Liquid Environments and Hydrodynamic Interactions.   In 
many soft -matter systems, particles are suspended in a liquid. 
This has important consequences for the dynamics, even in 
passive suspensions. However, in active, non -equilibrium 
systems it also affects structure and self-organization, in contrast 
to p assive systems, where the structural properties are 
independent of the dynamics, a fundamental principle of 
statistical physics. In intelligent active systems, hydrodynamic 
flows and interactions affect the  behavior in many ways 103 –105: 
(i) Propulsion flows can lead to repulsion or attraction of 
neighboring microswimmers (an example is the hydrodynamic 
starvation of fish larvae, as hydrodynamics pushes away the food 
they are trying to capture). (ii) Steering flows, which are required 
for active reorientation, can modify the motion of neighboring 
particles. (iii) Hydrodynamically generated torques can change 
the orientation of nearby particles (implying, for example, that 
particles cannot move cohesively through alignment steering 
alone, but in addition speed adaptation is also required). (iv) 
Generation of strong fluid jets, swirls, and active turbulence due 
to clustering and swarm formation of many self -steering 
particles. This poses significant challenges for intelligent agents 
navigating and maneuvering in liquid environments, as they 
must overcome adverse hydrodynamic effects and instead aim to 
exploit hydrodynamic forces to their own advantage.  
Functional integration:  A key challenge in achieving true 
material complexity is integrating essential capabilities (Fig. 1) 
within a single unit or a small group of component units. These 
units must contain multi-stimuli-responsive parts while enabling 
synergistic effects betwe en them. Instead of relying on 
sequential, non -coupled blocks, the system should facilitate 
different types of energy transductions. This approach ensures 
that the output or behaviour of one part directly influences 
another at its co re without requiring additional systems such as 
controllers, feedback mechanisms, or computers. Such 
functional integration is rather complex and may require creation 
of novel chemical or physical interfaces where materials 
mutually influence each other fo r more complex information 
exchange9.  
Current experimental realizations of complex behaviour are 
typically achieved through the assembly of independent 
units72,106 –110, each contributing a well-defined part or step in the 
overall cycle. This creates devices that perform  operations or 
behaviours in a step wise manner at discrete spatial and temporal 
points but lack the ability to dynamically  couple behaviours 
through self-organized processes, as is commonly  observed in 
living matter, which features inherent feedbacks and cross -
communication capabilities56,88.  
Beyond centralised control: Future designs should also explore 
mechanisms by which different responses are triggered by 
external parameters with graded behaviours rather than binary 
states. This could involve local signal processing units where the 
output of one stage will become t he input of the other using a 
network structure with multiple interactions and pathways to 
modulate responses. In doing so, it would emulate important 
aspects of biological material behaviour, which rely on coupled 
information pat hways to achieve higher performance while 
minimizing noise from the local environment111.  
We need new architectures that explore designs where all 
structural components contribute to functionality, rather than 
relying on specialized functional units. This approach would 
reduce the number of components needed to achieve functional 
complexity, al lowing shared functions to emerge from the 
architecture itself. Additionally, local nonlinear responses to 
various stimuli should be achieved by altering the material’s 
internal structure, which in turn changes the system’s behaviour. 
Finally, the design s hould move beyond singular response 
mechanisms to develop multimodal responsive materials, not 
only by acting and changing mechanical or electrical properties 
based on a specific trigger but also responding through the all -
encompassing variety of material capabilities when exposed to 
multiple simultaneous types of triggers. Therefore, an important 
criterion would be creation of material systems that can respond 
through multiple modalities such as light, temperature, 
mechanical or chemical stimuli,  all aris ing from similar or 
interacting structures that act on local parts of the material 
itself32.  
A future direction must also prioritize designs, which promote 
new levels of dynamic changes with both spatial or  temporal 
features to create versatile functional behaviour rather than 
Soft Matter  PERSPECTIVE 
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 Soft Matter ., 20 25 , 00 , 1 -3 | 9 
 
 
discrete changes with limited scope. Furthermore, these 
functional parameters should appear spontaneously without 
explicit external programming or guidance, i.e. the system 
should show the capacity to create dynamic configurations that 
can also self-regulate locally, maintaining  robust, efficient and 
predictable operation while performing sophisticated 
behaviours20,31. 
 
Energy Management 
One of the definitions of embodied intelligence as a goal-directed 
exchange of energy and information 112 suggests that  it is 
fundamentally grounded in the physical processes of energy 
transduction, utilization, and information acquisition required to 
achieve goals within environmental constraints . As explored in 
recent works 113,114 , the thermodynamic costs associated with 
sensing, computation, actuation, and adaptation are not merely 
overheads but fundamental constraints shaping intelligent 
behavior. Biological systems, driven by evolutionary pressures, 
exemplify extreme energy effi ciency, providing a benchmark 
and inspiration for ISM. Therefore, designing ISM requires 
moving beyond simply supplying power towards optimizing the 
entire energy workflow from harvesting ambient energy to 
minimizing dissipation during information processi ng and 
maximizing useful work output, all within the framework of 
achieving the system's objectives. 
Energy harvesting : Energy autonomy stands as a critical yet 
often under -addressed factor in current ISM prototypes 36,115 . 
While there are examples of energy harvesting materials at small 
scales such as those converting light or chemical energy into 
driving forces for micro robotics, it is generally inferred that 
energy efficiency is  an advantage of minimal computational 
units70. However, most research on ISMs has not properly 
quantified the energy requirements for system operation, nor 
have these systems been explicitly designed to harvest power for 
perpetual operation. This limitation is notable because, in most 
instances, pres ent ISM implementations are heavily dependent 
on external energy sources to power their actuation, sensing, and 
computational processes 9,88. This external reliance not only 
limits scalability for real -world deployment but also inherently 
undermines true autonomy, particularly in situations requiring 
long-duration operation in remote locations or resource -
constrained scenarios. A fundamental s hift in design approach 
should focus, instead, on integrating self -powering mechanisms 
directly within the material architecture. By analogy, in living 
organisms, self-sufficiency for energy needs and homeostasis is 
a fundamental requirement for their surv ival in absence of 
continuous and direct “human control” 56,69 . Therefore, any 
practical implementation of “cognitive and adaptive 
characteristics at material level” requires incorporation of 
efficient processes that harness energy directly from the 
environment without externally supplied energy sources that 
pose maj or operational limitations 9,88. For example, biological 
systems can harvest energy from their environment through 
photosynthetic or oxidative mechanisms. 
Non-equilibrium states : A critical aspiration for advanced 
material intelligence, is the ability to maintain complex 
organization and function persistently far from thermodynamic 
equilibrium116,117 . This requires a continuous energy throughput 
to counteract the universal tendency towards decay and disorder 
dictated by the second law of thermodynamics 35,118 . 
Consequently, any material system exhibiting autonomous 
adaptation, computation, or self-maintenance must operate as an 
open system, harnessing energy fluxes to sustain a non-
equilibrium steady state (NESS) or to engage in dynamic, non -
equilibrium processes119. 
However, maintaining NESS and performing functional tasks 
incurs thermodynamic costs, fundamentally linked to energy 
dissipation and entropy production 34,36,120 . This presents a 
significant challenge and a key differentiator between current 
"smart" materials and the vision of cognizant matter. Many 
contemporary active or responsive materials, while functional, 
are often highly dissipative or energy -intensive. For  example, 
memristive and nanowire networks consume energy during state 
switching and readout 10,121,122 ; electrothermal actuation in soft 
robots often suffers from significant heat loss 51,123 ; and 
chemically propelled microswimmers typically exhibit very low 
chemo-mechanical energy conversion efficiencies due to viscous 
dissipation at low Reynolds numbers70,124,125 . 
Furthermore, many current systems operate robustly only within 
narrow, externally maintained parameter regimes. The trade -off 
between the energy required for processing (e.g., switching a 
state, performing a computation, achieving a certain accuracy) 
and the robustness or reliability of the outcome often limits the 
adaptability and broad applicability of these systems 87,126 . This 
reliance on precisely controlled external conditions contrasts 
sharply with biological systems that maintain function across 
wider ranges, often by dynamically regulating their internal state 
and energy usage.  Therefore, a crucial direction for advancing 
material intelligence is the development of materials and systems 
capable of achieving optimally working NESS. This implies 
minimizing unnecessary energy dissipation while maximizing 
functional performance ( e.g., computational accuracy, adaptive 
capacity, robustness) within the constraints imposed by physics.  
Active local units : Future design should also consider 
implementation of active, local units that serve as energy 
transducers of locally available chemical and mechanical energy 
and rely on internal dynamic mechanisms of materials for core 
operations instead of using any active external control 
components with their specific hardware requirements (such as 
batteries and microcontrollers) 61,127,128. Ideal targets for the 
design of intelligent soft matter systems should focus on minimal 
energy designs. These materials should be capable of exploiting 
gradients or other environmental energy sources, such as 
mechanical stress, light, temperature variation, and chemical/pH 
gradients. This energy would be used to power memory storage, 
computation, and actions. 
For instance, in active photonic -based materials, coupling with 
light energy can enable  multispectral light harvesting and wave 
modulation.  Newly designed materials with self -organized 
structures may convert radiation  from diverse wavelengths into 
localized internal energy, while  also exhibiting dynamic 
material-based behaviours129. This approach eliminates the need 
for external electrical sources to deliver energy to  localized 
regions or to trigger specific actions. Instead, energy supply 
PERSPECTIVE Soft Matter 
10  | Soft Matter , 20 25 , 00 , 1 -3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 
 
 
becomes an autonomous integrated process driven by internal 
chemical, thermodynamic, or photonic mechanisms embedded 
as internal building blocks within the material’s architecture.  
As a result, we must go beyond existing concepts of actively 
driven materials to those that extract power from their 
environments. Power extraction must also occur locally, with  
appropriate management of energy production (chemical, optical 
or electrical), transport, and consumption at the micro level of an 
intelligent material, rather than relying on  external devices 
coupled to an electronic system for power. 
The interplay between entropy and information processing  
is central to understanding the emergence of intelligence in soft 
matter. Entropy production, traditionally a measure of disorder, 
is reformulated as a driving force for self -organization, in direct 
relation with information, where the processing and stor age of 
information become thermodynamically relevant 
operations87,130 . As highlighted by fluctuation theorems and 
minimal models in stochastic thermodynamics 58, minimizing 
entropy production – or, dually, maximizing entropy under 
constraints–becomes a crucial principle in understanding the 
energetic costs associated with accurate and reliable information 
handling. In polymer systems, for instance, non -equilibrium 
states, representing a form of a ”memory”, can be understood as 
states of reduced conformational entropy, stabilized over long 
timescales, reflecting the system's past history and interaction 
with external parameters such as shear rate, evaporation rate,  
mechanical stress or temperature 8,66,131,132 . Exploiting the 
inherent link between information and entropy could lead to the 
development of material -based computational platforms. These 
platforms would enable efficient, low -power data processing in 
complex and dynamic environments. Instead of relying solely on 
algorithms, they would harness their own physical and chemical 
properties for adaptation and optimized responses. These 
responses would be intrinsic to the system's architecture rather 
than merely externally added or pre-programmed elements. 
Sensing, recording, actuation, and communication (Fig. 1) in any 
intelligent system are inherently thermodynamic processes that 
necessitate a continuous flow of information and energy 126. 
These fluxes must be carefully balanced, or "budgeted" at the 
mesoscale levels within any given design, for the functional 
material system to efficiently transduce, propagate and utilize 
energy and information within each operation cycle and to avoid 
undesirable dissipation for scalable low-power implementations. 
Such balance is naturally achieved in living systems through 
metabolic pathways 69, where energy fluxes are optimized to 
sustain cellular functions. Therefore, any new generation of 
“cognizant” material systems will also need to integrate these 
fundamental rules if  truly high efficiency, scalable and robust 
technological outcomes are expected---mirroring, in that context, 
a more natural biological blueprint. 
For example, quality -dissipation trade -offs128 represent a 
fundamental principle for designing energy-efficient and reliable 
ISM systems 36. According to thermodynamic uncertainty 
relations, improved functional performance, such as enhanced 
sensing accuracy or faster information transfer rates, must be 
compensated by increased entropy production (dissipation) and 
higher energy expenditure wit hin the system 88. This implies an 
intrinsic thermodynamic cost associated with “intelligence” of 
material operations, particularly in non -equilibrium conditions. 
It highlights the critical importance of energy optimization 
strategies in ISM design, where the balance between 
computational a ccuracy, response speed, and energetic cost 
determines the efficiency and practicality of such technologies36. 
 
Integration Complexity 
Integration complexity, along with material compatibility is a 
considerable limitation to further implementation of complex 
and truly self -organizing materials. Most devices lack 
hierarchical component organizations and a clear control of 
component interfa ce ( i.e. a high level of architectural 
heterogeneity using multiple functional parts) by usually 
depending on uniform structures with limited types of signal 
transfer and without spatial organization. To enhance such 
integrated behaviour, we need materials  design strategies where 
structural elements, as well as their functions and properties, are 
combined through new design rules that do not require rigid pre-
determined assembly protocols, allowing for an easy production 
or design of complex architectures. Further limitations stem from 
separated approaches where sensors and actuators have specific 
designs and are put together in a single device, leading to 
bottlenecks in performance due to their material/electrical 
compatibilities  or due to lack of integrat ion of  a single “active 
element” ( e.g. material system which possesses all properties, 
not separately created in multiple isolated areas) 2,58,133. Instead, 
to have better outcome in terms of integration at a system level, 
such architecture requires creating modules with all functions in 
same building blocks. Ideally each part of an integrated unit 
would have also their own inherent mechanisms to ch ange its 
structure and adapt for different functions locally.  For example, 
this could be a set of molecules (proteins, peptides) creating 
tuneable interactions among themselves that act like integrated 
circuit-based logic but all are coupled by material d esign and 
responses, that should also act as transducers with minimal 
external parts or components to be wired or controlled using 
external computation resources. The current implementation 
strategies that rely on multilayer structures or multi steps are also 
challenging in their manufacturing throughput and system 
fragility or limitations due to component complexity for large -
scale implementation. Furthermore, such limited degree of 
component interactions reduces greatly the potential 
functionality of such system if compared with biological models 
where different protein or DNA chains with multiple levels and 
degrees of connections are employed.  We need integration 
without compromising any individual functional performance in 
any module but with their mutual connections playing a new role 
by a modular approach that gives versatility to the whole design 
paradigm.   
Several examples of integration and material compatibility have 
been realized. For example, the colloidal assembly strategy 
allows for the integration of different functional agents and 
responsive mechanisms within a single system, resulting in 
multi-functional colloidal assemblies for complex tasks such as 
drug delivery 134–137 or elasto -active structures 138 leveraging 
nonlinear elasticity for directed movement.    
Soft Matter  PERSPECTIVE 
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 Soft Matter ., 20 25 , 00, 1 -3 | 11  
 
 
Hierarchical structures, such as fractals, have been demonstrated 
to enable multi -band operation s in antenna design 139. This 
principle extends to plasmonic sensors, where fractal designs of 
plasmon nanoparticles have been extensively explored to 
achieve multi -wavelength sensing capabilities 129,140,141. 
Analogously, fractal nano resonators exhibit 142 a broadband 
frequency response spectrum with high quality factor resonance 
peaks. These localized vibration modes can potentially function 
as multi -band mechanical sensors, capable of simultaneously 
measuring force, mass, or chemical compounds. Furthermor e, 
the broadband spectrum of these mechanical fractal resonators 
opens possibilities for multi-band energy harvesting. Fabricating 
such devices using CMOS piezoelectric materials, as is 
achievable with Piezoelectric Micromachined Ultrasonic 
Transducers (PM UTs)143, also allows miniaturization of these 
devices. The feasibility of this concept has also recently been 
verified at the macroscale144,145. 
Integrated sensing and actuation allow materials to respond 
dynamically to environmental changes, enhancing their 
adaptability and functionality. Precise manipulation of soft 
matter units, such as cells and microdroplets, can be achieved 
with active dielectrophoretic (DEP) forces. Spatial and temporal 
modulation of the applied electric fields allows real-time control 
over particle movement, enabling tasks such as sorting, trapping, 
and assembly within microfluidic devices 146. Insulator -based 
dielectrophoresis (iDEP) facilitates particle manipulation 
without the need for embedded electrodes, making it particularly 
valuable for bioengineering applications, including diagnostics 
and tissue engineering. A critical parameter for f ine mechanical 
control in these systems is the zeta potential, which depends on 
the surface charge of particles and influences their stability, 
aggregation, and interactions between different phases in the 
system. Accurate measurement of zeta potential is essential for 
designing and optimizing intelligent soft matter building 
blocks147. Electrokinetic actuation could significantly expand the 
potential for creating intelligent soft matter capable of reacting 
and adapting to dynamic, noisy environments.  
Another platform for programming decision -making in 
autonomous soft matter is the liquid droplet system that can be 
designed to be sensitive to various environmental signals such as 
pH and salt gradients and translate this external information into 
droplet motion148,149.  Both passive droplets that purely respond 
to external stimuli through chemotaxis150 and active droplets that 
contain chemical potential for autonomous motion are good 
examples of the integration of sensing and actuation. The next 
steps in developing these system would be to demonstrate 
decision-making in the presence of various stimuli a nd changes 
of internal state of the droplets148,151. 
As mentioned, chemically triggered mechanisms are key 
ingredients for conferring autonomy to micro- and nanosystems. 
For instance, catalytic reactions occurring at the surfaces of nano 
and micron scale soft matter particles suspended in fluid, provide 
various mechanisms for the production of rapid motion, which 
rely on self-generated gradients70. It is well established that the 
details of the catalytic reaction, the catalyst distribution, the 
overall shape and size of the soft matter, and the surrounding 
environment properties can be used to control the type of motion 
produced.  Demonstrations include the ability to engineer the 
relative amount of translational and rotational thrust, bias motion 
with respect to gravitational fields, and exploit topographical 
guidance152.  External stimuli such as magnetic fields can 
alternatively be used to steer catalytically propelled devices in 
3D paths, but with reliance on external actuation and 
control45.        
Additionally, new scenarios for chemical gradient activation are 
emerging in the field, such as polymeric micro/nanosystems 
activated by ion -exchange reactions127. These approaches offer 
alternative strategies to catalytic methods, which can sometimes 
be limited by issues like salt tolerance or the availability of 
innocuous fuels, especially challenging for bio applications 153. 
For instance, it has been demonstrated that asymmetric 
ionomeric micro/nanostructures are active, regenerable 
swimmers that are activated by salts. These structures can 
interact with one another, generate gradients, sense local 
conditions, self -organize, adapt their velocity, and form 
collective behaviors, such as motile swarms that change speed in 
response to their size  and shape79. These systems have the 
advantage of being versatile in terms of manufacture, size, and 
shape, and they can be modularly coupled with different 
inorganic, organic, and biomaterials to enhance their sensing 
capabilities and multifunctionality. Furthermore,  they can be 
equipped with components that induce oscillatory reactions, 
which provide dynamic regulatory and feedback mechanisms. 
Oscillatory reactions can generate spatial or temporal patterns, 
such as chemical waves, which can be harnessed for encoding 
information or guiding the nanomotors in specific tasks. For 
example, periodic changes in chemical gradients could control 
propulsion speed, directionality, or interaction strength with 
other particles. By coupling with shared oscillatory fields, 
multiple nanomotors could enhance collective behaviours, such 
as synchronized oscillations or dynamic clustering. This 
coordination could lead to emergent intelligence, enabling the 
system to exhibit complex problem -solving or adaptive 
behaviours. 
Emergent dynamics and self -organization in ensembles of self -
steering cognitive active particles 154,155  addresses the question 
how the properties and interactions of individual cognitive 
particles – such as vision-guided pursuit, parallel alignment with 
neighbours, and resulting steering torques 78,156,157 determine the 
cohesion and collective behaviour of crowded systems and 
swarms81,156,158. It will take some time to design and engineer 
microbots which have all these functionalities, and “millibots” 
are more likely candidates where this can be achieved in the 
foreseeable future, but it is important to explore types of 
emergent collective beh aviours in simulations now, in order to 
provide guidelines for microbot design. Ensembles of active self-
steering particles can self -organize into dynamic structures that 
exhibit cognitive functions, such as learning from task 
performance and adaptation to  changing environmental 
conditions. The emergence of such coordinated functionalities 
from simple constituent behaviours underscores the potential of 
decentralized intelligence (also called distributed computing) in 
achieving sophisticated material respons es without centralized 
control. 
PERSPECTIVE Soft Matter 
12  | Soft Matter , 20 25 , 00 , 1 -3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 
 
 
In the context of intelligent systems, navigation would ideally be 
performed autonomously, without external guidance, to enable 
soft matter devices to identify and seek their own target 
locations128.  While the full manifestation of this goal may 
require incorporation of memory and processing capacity, it is 
interesting to explore the limits that can be achieved using only 
a responsive and local environment sensing material.  One 
example is catalytic micro-swimmers, that expand and contract 
in response to local pH variations.  These devices were shown to 
be able to autonomously accumulate in low pH regions and 
autonomously modulate the release rate of encapsulated cargo159. 
This mechanism can enable devices to follow a stimulus that 
moves and varies in strength with time, and so provides a useful, 
responsive navigation capacity.  Envisaged augmentations to this 
system include incorporating autonomous temporal responses 
via enzymatic “clock” reactions and using variations in the 
encapsulated cargo release rate to facilitate collective behaviour 
via intra-device signalling, in analogy to quorum sensing.  
 
Scalability 
A crucial aspect for the next step in material intelligence is 
scalability and how to keep device operational ranges in 
extended scale with a reliable architecture design. Practical 
challenges in scaling include limitations of top -down 
nanofabrication meth ods that often demand expensive 
cleanroom resources, hindering high -throughput production of 
systems at nanoscales 40. Mass production and consistent 
replication of complex, hierarchical architectures with a large 
number of interconnected components and precise control over 
local properties and geometries remain a major obstacle to 
overcome.  
Self-organization-based techniques that rely on basic physical or 
chemical driving forces could address this challenge by allowing 
building blocks to spontaneously arrange through interactions at 
the component level or with the environment, leading to 
macroscopic behaviours without many intermediate steps during 
their fabrication 24. While self -organization techniques offer 
pathways to scalable manufacturing, achieving reliable and 
reproducible control over emergent behaviours and material 
qualities at large scales is another set of challenges for scaling 
that must be solved98. 
Scaling down to micro - and nanoscales introduces further 
fundamental and technical constraints, related to the increasing 
influence of thermal fluctuations and stochasticity at smaller 
dimensions, which are often neglected or simplified at larger 
scales. At reduced scales, standard methods based on classical, 
digital electronics for precise control, and high energy efficiency 
may also become less viable. In these regimes, quantum effects, 
molecular-level interactions, and surface forces become 
dominant, dem anding new fabrication methods that must go 
beyond current high -resolution printing and nanofabrication 
limits9,27.  
To build scalable material designs, new minimal units that can 
interact by using common mechanisms rather than very limited 
single-component-specific interactions should be favoured, with 
an emphasis on modularity with a simple set -up procedure 
without the need of calibration with specific environmental 
control (i.e. use more natural physics/chemistry phenomena as 
much as possible as control mechanisms). A good 
implementation should aim at low resource requirement such as: 
using inexpensive and robust (stab le at different 
experimental/operating conditions) starting materials and 
reactions, low temperature implementation, and a minimization 
of waste products. 
 
Durability and Stability 
Another important limitation  for present soft “intelligent 
materials” is related to longevity or robustness during complex, 
diverse and variable operating settings. Often materials are 
fragile, have limited stability during environmental changes, or 
show fast degradation under physic al or chemical harsh 
treatments.  
Moreover, any realistic system should also possess a level of 
noise resilience for variations in its chemical and electrical 
properties due to long operations times or large volume systems. 
The new material implementation must then adopt  approaches 
that create some form of implicit auto calibration of the materials 
by incorporating components with adaptive capabilities that 
account for system changes, such as using active polymer chain 
configurations (i.e. materials that adopt energetically favorable 
shapes  and return to them even when  perturbed ) for memory 
storage or in self -regenerating or healing matrices ( e.g. self-
assembling of material where the materials can self-organize and 
also produce  components of their own matrix to restore previous 
structures). Locally available free energy should be used to 
maintain functionality under dynamic and variable conditions of 
operations to maximize system performance and stability during 
the full operation range without failure. In contrast, to achieve 
such robu st behaviour, it is also necessary that materials or 
building units that will act as the "components” (sensors, 
processing or memory units) of this system possess inherent 
material-based properties that allow them to self-calibrate locally 
based on interna l dynamical parameters without reliance on an 
external process.  
For intelligent soft matter to be practically viable, future systems 
must extend beyond mere responsiveness and exhibit robust, 
self-improving, and stable operation over extended 
durations56,133 . This necessitates a shift towards material 
architectures capable of self -regulation, wherein the system 
autonomously maintains functionality and stability in the face of 
perturbations, damage, and dynamically changing operational 
environments20,35 . Such robustness might be achieved through 
exploring designs that draw inspiration from self -regulating 
biological systems 70. For instance, materials with inherent 
structural self -regulation could be implemented via dynamic 
crystallization, self -limiting chemical reactions, or leveraging 
non-linear feedback mechanisms in phase -separated fluids and 
solid-state systems to ensure longevity and reliability without 
constant external adjustments 24,160 . A central challenge lies in 
developing materials with inherent physical properties that 
robustly respond to external and internal signals in a consistent 
manner over long time periods while maintaining their functional 
integrity without degradation, much  like biological systems 
Soft Matter  PERSPECTIVE 
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 Soft Matter ., 20 25 , 00, 1 -3 | 13  
 
 
maintain homeostasis even when facing complex and changing 
environmental pressures. 
Conclusions 
ISM is set to transform materials science, not only by integrating 
cognitive capabilities traditionally associated only with living 
systems, but also by introducing groundbreaking potential for 
autonomous, adaptive, and self -aware materials. While current 
research predominantly focuses on macroscopic demonstrations 
of sensing, actuation, and memory, we invite the exploration of 
the unique opportunities that emerge at the nanoscale. We argue 
for a paradigm shift that embraces intrinsic stochasticity and 
fluctuations as integral design elements, propelling the 
development of intelligent soft matter capable of advanced 
functionalities by exploiting the huge numbers of interacting 
units available at the nanoscale. Unlike traditional materials, 
ISM moves beyond p assive responsiveness towards dynamic, 
evolving functionalities, either by mimicking the sophisticated 
behaviour of biological systems, or by embedding synthetic 
intelligence within the material itself. The interplay of 
distributed processing, complex netw ork topologies, and the 
inherent material dynamics of intelligent soft matter establishes 
the foundation for novel computational paradigms and versatile 
sensing and actuation functionalities, with no analogues in 
traditional approaches. This form of distri buted control, 
combined with non -linear system dynamics, unlocks the 
potential for self-learning and adaptation, enabling   a variety of 
cognitive behaviours to emerge without the need for a central 
control or "brain".  
This perspective delves into the thermodynamic foundations, 
bio-inspired designs, advanced material developments, and 
computational intelligence that underpins this new frontier. By 
addressing current challenges and highlighting future directions, 
we envis ion a future where intelligent soft matter integrates 
seamlessly with our world, enabling transformative applications 
across diverse fields. 
Author contributions 
All the authors participated in preparation, creation of the manuscript, 
specifically writing the initial draft. 
Conflicts of interest 
There are no conflicts to declare. 
Data availability 
No primary research results, software or code have been 
included, and no new data were generated or analysed as part of 
this perspective paper. 
Acknowledgements 
The work is the result of the SoftComp Topical workshop on 
Intelligent Soft Matter, Salou 2025 
(https://softmat.net/intelligent-soft-matter/) financed by 
SoftComp Network of Excellence (https://eu -softcomp.net/). 
Various AI tools were used for preparation of the manuscript: 
language models Google Gemini 2.0 series  and Discovery 
Engine ( https://explore-the-unknown.vercel.app) for literature 
processing, structuring contributions, finding concept overlaps 
and summarizing  according to procedure explained in 
https://github.com/vbaulin/IntelliDE/. 
Notes and references 
1 D. Harrison, W. Rorot and U. Laukaityte, Front. Neurorobot., 
DOI:10.3389/fnbot.2022.880724. 
2 H. Lu, M. Zhang, Y. Yang, Q. Huang, T. Fukuda, Z. Wang and Y. 
Shen, Nat Commun, 2018, 9, 3944. 
3 W. Hu, G. Z. Lum, M. Mastrangeli and M. Sitti, Nature, 2018, 
554, 81–85. 
4 H. Zhang, X. Guo, J. Wu, D. Fang and Y. Zhang, Science 
Advances, 2018, 4, eaar8535. 
5 G. Bordiga, E. Medina, S. Jafarzadeh, C. Bösch, R. P. Adams, V. 
Tournat and K. Bertoldi, Nat. Mater., 2024, 23, 1486–1494. 
6 M. Sitti, Extreme Mechanics Letters, 2021, 46, 101340. 
7 F. Soto, A. Tsui, S. Surappa, R. Ahmed, J. Wang, U. Kılınç, D. 
Akin and U. Demirci, Advanced Intelligent Systems, 2023, 5, 
2300043. 
8 M. Crepaldi, C. Mohan, E. Garofalo, A. Adamatzky, K. 
Szaciłowski and A. Chiolerio, Advanced Materials, 2023, 35, 
2211406. 
9 H. Tanaka, M. Akai-Kasaya, A. TermehYousefi, L. Hong, L. Fu, 
H. Tamukoh, D. Tanaka, T. Asai and T. Ogawa, Nat Commun, 
2018, 9, 2693. 
10 A. Loeffler, A. Diaz-Alvarez, R. Zhu, N. Ganesh, J. M. Shine, T. 
Nakayama and Z. Kuncic, Science Advances, 2023, 9, eadg3289. 
11 S. Luo, L. Shao, D. Ji, Y. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Wu, D. Kong, M. 
Guo, D. Wei, Y. Zhao, Y. Liu and D. Wei, Nano Lett., 2023, 23, 
4974–4982. 
12 Z. Kuncic, I. Marcus, P. Sanz-Leon, R. Higuchi, Y. Shingaya, 
M. Li, A. Stieg, J. Gimzewski, M. Aono and T. Nakayama, in 
2018 IEEE 18th International Conference on Nanotechnology 
(IEEE-NANO), 2018, pp. 1–3. 
13 S. Yang, J. Wang, X. Hao, H. Li, X. Wei, B. Deng and K. A. 
Loparo, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learning Syst., 2022, 33, 
2801–2815. 
14 C. Kaspar, B. J. Ravoo, W. G. Van Der Wiel, S. V. Wegner and 
W. H. P. Pernice, Nature, 2021, 594, 345–355. 
15 M. Stern, S. Dillavou, D. Jayaraman, D. J. Durian and A. J. Liu, 
APL Machine Learning, 2024, 2, 016114. 
16 Y. Xi, T. Marzin, R. B. Huang, T. J. Jones and P.-T. Brun, Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 2024, 121, e2410654121. 
17 D. R. Masila and R. Mahore, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary 
Journal of Nonlinear Science, 2023, 33, 093131. 
18 S. Osat and R. Golestanian, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2023, 18, 79–85. 
19 J. F. Yang, T. A. Berrueta, A. M. Brooks, A. T. Liu, G. Zhang, 
D. Gonzalez-Medrano, S. Yang, V. B. Koman, P. Chvykov, L. N. 
LeMar, M. Z. Miskin, T. D. Murphey and M. S. Strano, Nat 
Commun, 2022, 13, 5734. 
20 Z. Chen, J. M. Linton, S. Xia, X. Fan, D. Yu, J. Wang, R. Zhu 
and M. B. Elowitz, Science, 2024, 386, 1243–1250. 
21 The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? | Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, https://www.nature.com/articles/nrn2787, 
(accessed September 29, 2024). 
PERSPECTIVE Soft Matter 
14  | Soft Matter , 20 25 , 00 , 1 -3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 
 
 
22 K. S. Riley, S. Koner, J. C. Osorio, Y. Yu, H. Morgan, J. P. 
Udani, S. A. Sarles and A. F. Arrieta, Advanced Intelligent 
Systems, 2022, 4, 2200158. 
23 J. F. Yang, A. T. Liu, T. A. Berrueta, G. Zhang, A. M. Brooks, 
V. B. Koman, S. Yang, X. Gong, T. D. Murphey and M. S. Strano, 
Advanced Intelligent Systems, 2022, 4, 2100205. 
24 S. Aya, P. Salamon, N. Eber, A. Buka and F. Araoka, Advanced 
Materials Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000139. 
25 A. Adamatzky, S. Kitson, B. D. L. Costello, M. A. Matranga and 
D. Younger, Phys. Rev. E, 2011, 84, 061702. 
26 Y. Sasaki, V. S. R. Jampani, C. Tanaka, N. Sakurai, S. Sakane, 
K. V. Le, F. Araoka and H. Orihara, Nat Commun, 2016, 7, 13238. 
27 S. Kim, N. Kim, J. Seo, J.-E. Park, E. H. Song, S. Y. Choi, J. E. 
Kim, S. Cha, H. H. Park and J.-M. Nam, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, 
eabb3348. 
28 H.-C. Lee, J. Kim, H.-R. Kim, K.-H. Kim, K.-J. Park, J.-P. So, J. 
M. Lee, M.-S. Hwang and H.-G. Park, Light Sci Appl, 2023, 12, 
118. 
29 H. Kim, M. S. Baker and S. T. Phillips, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 
3388–3392. 
30 Q. Wang, L. Yang, B. Wang, E. Yu, J. Yu and L. Zhang, ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 1630–1637. 
31 A. Ziepke, I. Maryshev, I. S. Aranson and E. Frey, arXiv, 2024, 
preprint, arXiv:arXiv:2410.02940, DOI: 
10.48550/arXiv.2410.02940. 
32 K. Zhang, Y.-J. Chen, D. Wilde, K. Doroschak, K. Strauss, L. 
Ceze, G. Seelig and J. Nivala, Nat Commun, 2022, 13, 4904. 
33 S. Toyabe, T. Sagawa, M. Ueda, E. Muneyuki and M. Sano, 
Nature Phys, 2010, 6, 988–992. 
34 J. M. R. Parrondo, J. M. Horowitz and T. Sagawa, Nature Phys, 
2015, 11, 131–139. 
35 T. Sagawa, Thermodynamics of Information Processing in Small 
Systems, Springer Japan, Tokyo, 2013. 
36 C. Dieball and A. Godec, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2023, 130, 087101. 
37 G. E. Hinton, Boltzmann Machines: Constraint Satisfaction 
Networks that Learn, Carnegie-Mellon University, Department of 
Computer Science, 1984. 
38 A. Morningstar and R. G. Melko, Journal of Machine Learning 
Research, 2018, 18, 1–7. 
39 M. Aguilera and M. G. Bedia, Front. Neurorobot., 
DOI:10.3389/fnbot.2018.00055. 
40 P. Jiao, J. Mueller, J. R. Raney, X. (Rayne) Zheng and A. H. 
Alavi, Nat Commun, 2023, 14, 6004. 
41 Ž. Kos and J. Dunkel, Science Advances, 2022, 8, eabp8371. 
42 T. Louvet, P. Omidvar and M. Serra-Garcia, arXiv, 2024, 
preprint, arXiv:arXiv:2409.20425, DOI: 
10.48550/arXiv.2409.20425. 
43 M. Bayat, H. Mardani, H. Roghani-Mamaqani and R. 
Hoogenboom, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2024, 53, 4045–4085. 
44 J. Wang, G. Wang, H. Chen, Y. Liu, P. Wang, D. Yuan, X. Ma, 
X. Xu, Z. Cheng, B. Ji, M. Yang, J. Shuai, F. Ye, J. Wang, Y. Jiao 
and L. Liu, Nat Commun, 2024, 15, 8853. 
45 I. S. M. Khalil, V. Magdanz, S. Sanchez, O. G. Schmidt and S. 
Misra, International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, 2015, 
12, 2. 
46 M. Gepner, J. Mack, F. Giorgio-Serchi and A. A. Stokes, in 2024 
IEEE 7th International Conference on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft), 
2024, pp. 511–518. 
47 N. Srinivasa, N. D. Stepp and J. Cruz-Albrecht, Front. 
Neurosci., DOI:10.3389/fnins.2015.00449. 
48 J. O’Byrne and K. Jerbi, Trends in Neurosciences, 2022, 45, 
820–837. 
49 M. Hu, Z. Ma, M. Kim, D. Kim, S. Ye, S. Pané, Y. Bao, R. W. 
Style and L. Isa, Advanced Materials, 2024, 2410945. 
50 C. Calvino and C. Weder, Small, 2018, 14, 1802489. 
51 A. P. Sabelhaus, R. K. Mehta, A. T. Wertz and C. Majidi, Front. 
Robot. AI, 2022, 9, 888261. 
52 Z. Huang, K. Lei, D. He, Y. Xu, J. Williams, L. Hu, M. McNeil, 
J. M. Ruso, Z. Liu, Z. Guo and Z. Wang, CAAI Trans Intell 
Technol, 2018, 3, 40–48. 
53 C. L. Buckley, T. Lewens, M. Levin, B. Millidge, A. Tschantz 
and R. A. Watson, Entropy, 2024, 26, 765. 
54 M. Kramar and K. Alim, Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 2021, 118, e2007815118. 
55 A. Cavagna, A. Cimarelli, I. Giardina, G. Parisi, R. Santagati, F. 
Stefanini and M. Viale, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 2010, 107, 11865–11870. 
56 R. P. Wool, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 400–418. 
57 K. Friston, Nat Rev Neurosci, 2010, 11, 127–138. 
58 G. Pezzulo, T. Parr and K. Friston, Biological Psychology, 2024, 
186, 108741. 
59 K. Friston, L. Da Costa, N. Sajid, C. Heins, K. Ueltzhöffer, G. 
A. Pavliotis and T. Parr, Physics Reports, 2023, 1024, 1–29. 
60 G. H. Wadhams and J. P. Armitage, Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol, 
2004, 5, 1024–1037. 
61 P. Sartori, L. Granger, C. F. Lee and J. M. Horowitz, PLoS 
Comput Biol, 2014, 10, e1003974. 
62 P. Banda, C. Teuscher and M. R. Lakin, Artificial Life, 2013, 19, 
195–219. 
63 L. Lin and M. Keidar, arXiv, 2021, preprint, 
arXiv:arXiv:2109.02735, DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2109.02735. 
64 C. Yu, H. Guo, K. Cui, X. Li, Y. N. Ye, T. Kurokawa and J. P. 
Gong, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 2020, 117, 18962–18968. 
65 P. Vettiger, G. Cross, M. Despont, U. Drechsler, U. Durig, B. 
Gotsmann, W. Haberle, M. A. Lantz, H. E. Rothuizen, R. Stutz 
and G. K. Binnig, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnology, 2002, 1, 39–55. 
66 M. Madhusudanan and M. Chowdhury, The Journal of Chemical 
Physics, 2024, 160, 014904. 
67 B. W. K. Ang and C.-H. Yeow, Soft Robotics, 2022, 9, 1144–
1153. 
68 Y. Luo, X. Xiao, J. Chen, Q. Li and H. Fu, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 
6734–6743. 
69 S. J. Bryant and B. B. Machta, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2023, 131, 
068401. 
70 S. J. Ebbens, Current Opinion in Colloid & Interface Science, 
2016, 21, 14–23. 
71 N. Xia, D. Jin, C. Pan, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, L. Su, J. Zhao, L. 
Wang and L. Zhang, Nat Commun, 2022, 13, 7514. 
72 M. Rubenstein, A. Cornejo and R. Nagpal, Science, 2014, 345, 
795–799. 
73 D. March-Pons, E. E. Ferrero and M. C. Miguel, Phys. Rev. Res., 
2024, 6, 043205. 
74 I. D. Couzin, Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2009, 13, 36–43. 
75 M. Levin, BioEssays, 2024, 47, e202400196. 
76 P. McMillen and M. Levin, Commun Biol, 2024, 7, 1–17. 
77 K. Son, K. Bowal, L. Mahadevan and H.-Y. Kim, arXiv, 2024, 
preprint, arXiv:arXiv:2411.08163, DOI: 
10.48550/arXiv.2411.08163. 
78 R. S. Negi, R. G. Winkler and G. Gompper, Soft Matter, 2022, 
18, 6167–6178. 
79 J. Fraxedas, D. Reguera and M. J. Esplandiu, Faraday Discuss., 
2024, 249, 424–439. 
80 A. Puy, E. Gimeno, J. Torrents, P. Bartashevich, M. C. Miguel, 
R. Pastor-Satorras and P. Romanczuk, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A., 2024, 121, e2309733121. 
81 T. Schmickl, M. Stefanec and K. Crailsheim, Sci Rep, 2016, 6, 
37969. 
82 G. Theraulaz, E. Bonabeau, S. C. Nicolis, R. V. Solé, V. 
Fourcassié, S. Blanco, R. Fournier, J.-L. Joly, P. Fernández, A. 
Grimal, P. Dalle and J.-L. Deneubourg, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 2002, 99, 9645–9649. 
Soft Matter  PERSPECTIVE 
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 Soft Matter ., 20 25 , 00, 1 -3 | 15  
 
 
83 K. Uto, K. Yamamoto, S. Hirase and T. Aoyagi, Journal of 
Controlled Release, 2006, 110, 408–413. 
84 J. Schmidhuber, IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental 
Development, 2010, 2, 230–247. 
85 T. M. Kamsma, J. Kim, K. Kim, W. Q. Boon, C. Spitoni, J. Park 
and R. Van Roij, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 2024, 121, 
e2320242121. 
86 T. M. Kamsma, W. Q. Boon, T. ter Rele, C. Spitoni and R. van 
Roij, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2023, 130, 268401. 
87 P. Sartori and S. Pigolotti, Phys. Rev. X, 2015, 5, 041039. 
88 R. L. Stamps, R. B. Popy and J. van Lierop, arXiv, 2024, 
preprint, arXiv:arXiv:2401.12211, DOI: 
10.48550/arXiv.2401.12211. 
89 C. G. Langton, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 1990, 42, 12–
37. 
90 C. Fernando and S. Sojakka, in Advances in Artificial Life, eds. 
W. Banzhaf, J. Ziegler, T. Christaller, P. Dittrich and J. T. Kim, 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 588–597. 
91 M. Mussel and G. Marcucci, Physics of Fluids, 2024, 36, 
046111. 
92 G. R. Yang, M. R. Joglekar, H. F. Song, W. T. Newsome and X.-
J. Wang, Nat Neurosci, 2019, 22, 297–306. 
93 L. Zhang, L. Feng, K. Chen and C. H. Lai, arXiv, 2021, preprint, 
arXiv:arXiv:2107.09437, DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2107.09437. 
94 L. Feng, L. Zhang and C. H. Lai, arXiv, 2020, preprint, 
arXiv:arXiv:1909.05176, DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1909.05176. 
95 S. Zhang, A. Patel, S. A. Rizvi, N. Liu, S. He, A. Karbasi, E. 
Zappala and D. van Dijk, arXiv, 2024, preprint, 
arXiv:arXiv:2410.02536, DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2410.02536. 
96 H. S. Seung, H. Sompolinsky and N. Tishby, Phys. Rev. A, 1992, 
45, 6056–6091. 
97 R. Pfeifer, F. Iida and M. Lungarella, Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 2014, 18, 404–413. 
98 R. Pfeifer, M. Lungarella and F. Iida, Science, 2007, 318, 1088–
1093. 
99 M. Skiba, R. R. Reszegi, Y. Huang, S. Roy, J. Han, D. Brückner, 
C. Sanchez-Cano, Y. Zhao, M. Hassan, N. Feliu, G. Falkenberg 
and W. J. Parak, Advanced Functional Materials, 2025, 35, 
2408539. 
100 S. Jain and F. S. Bates, Science, 2003, 300, 460–464. 
101 C. J. D. Foumthuim, T. Arcangeli, T. Škrbić and A. Giacometti, 
Soft Matter, 2024, 20, 6507–6527. 
102 T. Arcangeli, T. Škrbić, S. Azote, D. Marcato, A. Rosa, J. R. 
Banavar, R. Piazza, A. Maritan and A. Giacometti, 
Macromolecules, 2024, 57, 8940–8955. 
103 O. S. Pak and E. Lauga, J Eng Math, 2014, 88, 1–28. 
104 S. Goh, R. G. Winkler and G. Gompper, Commun Phys, 2023, 6, 
1–11. 
105 S. Goh, E. Westphal, R. G. Winkler and G. Gompper, Phys. Rev. 
Res., 2025, 7, 013142. 
106 T. Thorsen, S. J. Maerkl and S. R. Quake, Science, 2002, 298, 
580–584. 
107 R. B. Fair, Microfluid Nanofluid, 2007, 3, 245–281. 
108 P. W. K. Rothemund, Nature, 2006, 440, 297–302. 
109 Y. Ke, L. L. Ong, W. M. Shih and P. Yin, Science, 2012, 338, 
1177–1183. 
110 M. B. Elowitz and S. Leibler, Nature, 2000, 403, 335–338. 
111 L. Koehler, P. Ronceray and M. Lenz, Phys. Rev. X, 2024, 14, 
041061. 
112 D. E. Koditschek, Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and 
Autonomous Systems, 2021, 4, 1–33. 
113 S. A. Katiyar, L. Y. Lee, F. Iida and S. G. Nurzaman, Soft 
Robotics, 2023, 10, 365–379. 
114 K. Ghazi-Zahedi, D. F. B. Haeufle, G. Montúfar, S. Schmitt and 
N. Ay, Front. Robot. AI, DOI:10.3389/frobt.2016.00042. 
115 L. G. Wright, T. Onodera, M. M. Stein, T. Wang, D. T. 
Schachter, Z. Hu and P. L. McMahon, Nature, 2022, 601, 549–
555. 
116 K. J. Friston, T. Parr, C. Heins, A. Constant, D. Friedman, T. 
Isomura, C. Fields, T. Verbelen, M. Ramstead, J. Clippinger and 
C. D. Frith, Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 2023, 
105500. 
117 X. Yang, M. Heinemann, J. Howard, G. Huber, S. Iyer-Biswas, 
G. Le Treut, M. Lynch, K. L. Montooth, D. J. Needleman, S. 
Pigolotti, J. Rodenfels, P. Ronceray, S. Shankar, I. Tavassoly, S. 
Thutupalli, D. V. Titov, J. Wang and P. J. Foster, Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U.S.A., 2021, 118, e2026786118. 
118 A. Ciaunica, M. Levin, F. E. Rosas and K. Friston, Topics in 
Cognitive Science, 2023, 00, 1–23. 
119 E. I. Goettems, text, Universidade de São Paulo, 2024. 
120 L. Ziyin and M. Ueda, Phys. Rev. Res., 2023, 5, 013039. 
121 P. Yao, H. Wu, B. Gao, J. Tang, Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, J. J. Yang 
and H. Qian, Nature, 2020, 577, 641–646. 
122 M. Crepaldi, C. Mohan, E. Garofalo, A. Adamatzky, K. 
Szaciłowski and A. Chiolerio, arXiv, 2022, preprint, 
arXiv:arXiv:2211.08152, DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2211.08152. 
123 D. Rus and M. T. Tolley, Nature, 2015, 521, 467–475. 
124 A. Nsamela, A. I. Garcia Zintzun, T. D. Montenegro-Johnson 
and J. Simmchen, Small, 2023, 19, 2202685. 
125 Y. Alapan, B. Yigit, O. Beker, A. F. Demirörs and M. Sitti, Nat. 
Mater., 2019, 18, 1244–1251. 
126 Q. Yu, A. B. Kolomeisky and O. A. Igoshin, Journal of The 
Royal Society Interface, 2022, 19, 20210883. 
127 M. J. Esplandiu, D. Reguera and J. Fraxedas, Soft Matter, 2020, 
16, 3717–3726. 
128 L. Cocconi, B. Mahault and L. Piro, New J. Phys., 2025, 27, 
013002. 
129 F. De Nicola, N. S. Puthiya Purayil, V. Miŝeikis, D. Spirito, A. 
Tomadin, C. Coletti, M. Polini, R. Krahne and V. Pellegrini, Sci 
Rep, 2020, 10, 6882. 
130 C. C. Govern and P. R. Ten Wolde, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A., 2014, 111, 17486–17491. 
131 R. P. Thedford, F. Yu, W. R. T. Tait, K. Shastri, F. Monticone 
and U. Wiesner, Advanced Materials, 2023, 35, 2203908. 
132 G. Reiter, The Journal of Chemical Physics, 2020, 152, 150901. 
133 D. Zhang, P. Yi, X. Lai, L. Peng and H. Li, Nat Commun, 2024, 
15, 344. 
134 M. Hu, H.-J. Butt, K. Landfester, M. B. Bannwarth, S. Wooh 
and H. Thérien-Aubin, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3015–3022. 
135 M. Hu, N. Reichholf, Y. Xia, L. Alvarez, X. Cao, S. Ma, A. J. 
deMello and L. Isa, Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 1641–1648. 
136 M. Hu, X. Shen, D. Tran, Z. Ma and L. Isa, J. Phys.: Condens. 
Matter, 2023, 35, 435101. 
137 B. J. Nelson and S. Pané, Science, 2023, 382, 1120–1122. 
138 Y. Xi, T. J. Jones, R. Huang, T. Marzin and P.-T. Brun, arXiv, 
2024, preprint, arXiv:arXiv:2404.10614, DOI: 
10.48550/arXiv.2404.10614. 
139 N. Cohen, in Professional Program Proceedings. Electronic 
Industries Forum of New England, IEEE, Boston, MA, USA, 
1997, pp. 43–49. 
140 T. Westerhout, E. Van Veen, M. I. Katsnelson and S. Yuan, 
Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 97, 205434. 
141 S. Gottheim, H. Zhang, A. O. Govorov and N. J. Halas, ACS 
Nano, 2015, 9, 3284–3292. 
142 V. Tzanov, J. Llobet, F. Torres, F. Perez-Murano and N. Barniol, 
Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 811. 
143 E. Ledesma, I. Zamora, F. Torres, A. Uranga, V. Tzanov, N. 
Barniol, E. Marigo and M. Soundara-Pandian, in 2019 20th 
International Conference on Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and 
Microsystems & Eurosensors XXXIII (Transducers & Eurosensors 
XXXIII), 2019, pp. 655–658. 
PERSPECTIVE Soft Matter 
16  | Soft Matter , 20 25 , 00 , 1 -3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20 25 
 
 
144 J. Ding, D. Zhou, M. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Sun, H. Pu, Q. Pan and B. 
Wang, Applied Physics Letters, 2024, 124, 114105. 
145 W. Kwak and Y. Lee, Applied Energy, 2021, 282, 116121. 
146 C. J. Lentz, S. Hidalgo-Caballero and B. H. Lapizco-Encinas, 
Biomicrofluidics, 2019, 13, 044114. 
147 S. Hidalgo-Caballero, C. J. Lentz and B. H. Lapizco-Encinas, 
Electrophoresis, 2019, 40, 1395–1399. 
148 N. Horibe, M. M. Hanczyc and T. Ikegami, Entropy, 2011, 13, 
709–719. 
149 M. M. Hanczyc, T. Toyota, T. Ikegami, N. Packard and T. 
Sugawara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9386–9391. 
150 J. Čejková, M. Novák, F. Štěpánek and M. M. Hanczyc, 
Langmuir, 2014, 30, 11937–11944. 
151 M. M. Hanczyc and T. Ikegami, Artificial Life, 2010, 16, 233–
243. 
152 S. J. Ebbens and D. A. Gregory, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 
1931–1939. 
153 M. J. Esplandiu, D. Reguera, D. Romero-Guzmán, A. M. 
Gallardo-Moreno and J. Fraxedas, Nat Commun, 2022, 13, 2812. 
154 H. Löwen and B. Liebchen, arXiv, 2025, preprint, 
arXiv:arXiv:2501.08632, DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2501.08632. 
155 Z. Liu and M. Dijkstra, Soft Matter, 2025, 21, 1529–1544. 
156 G. Gompper, H. A. Stone, C. Kurzthaler, D. Saintillan, F. 
Peruani, D. Fedosov, T. Auth, C. Cottin-Bizonne, C. Ybert, E. 
Clement, T. Darnige, A. Lindner, R. E. Goldstein, B. Liebchen, J. 
Binysh, A. Souslov, L. Isa, R. di Leonardo, G. Frangipane, H. Gu, 
B. J. Nelson, F. Brauns, M. C. Marchetti, F. Cichos, V.-L. Heuthe, 
C. Bechinger, A. Korman, O. Feinerman, A. Cavagna, I. Giardina, 
H. Jeckel and K. Drescher, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 
DOI:10.1088/1361-648X/adac98. 
157 S. Goh, R. G. Winkler and G. Gompper, New J. Phys., 2022, 24, 
093039. 
158 R. S. Negi, R. G. Winkler and G. Gompper, Phys. Rev. 
Research, 2024, 6, 013118. 
159 R. A. Archer, J. R. Howse, S. Fujii, H. Kawashima, G. A. 
Buxton and S. J. Ebbens, Advanced Functional Materials, 2020, 
30, 2000324. 
160 X. Zhao, L.-M. Peng, Y. Chen, X.-J. Zha, W.-D. Li, L. Bai, K. 
Ke, R.-Y. Bao, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 
1230–1241. 
 