Vol.:(0123456789)
Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-021-03075-x
1 3
A critical analysis of Markovian monism
Majid D. Beni1 
Received: 30 September 2020 / Accepted: 4 February 2021 / Published online: 16 February 2021 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. part of Springer Nature 2021
Abstract
Free Energy Principle underlies a unifying framework that integrates theories 
of origins of life, cognition, and action. Recently, FEP has been developed into a 
Markovian monist perspective (Friston et al. in BC 102: 227–260, 2020). The paper 
expresses scepticism about the validity of arguments for Markovian monism. The 
critique is based on the assumption that Markovian models are scientific models, 
and while we may defend ontological theories about the nature of scientific mod-
els, we could not read off metaphysical theses about the nature of target systems 
(self-organising conscious systems, in the present context) from our theories of 
nature of scientific models (Markov blankets). The paper draws attention to differ -
ent ways of understanding Markovian models, as material entities, fictional entities, 
and mathematical structures. I argue that none of these interpretations contributes to 
the defence of a metaphysical stance (either in terms of neutral monism or reductive 
physicalism). This is because scientific representation is a sophisticated process, and 
properties of Markovian models—such as the property of being neither physical nor 
mental—could not be projected onto their targets to determine the ontological prop-
erties of targets easily.
Keywords Free energy principle · Markovian monism · Fictional models · 
Mathematical models
1 Introduction
Following in footsteps of Hermann von Helmholtz, Friston and colleagues have 
launched a strong research program that subsumes theories of perception, cogni-
tion, action, and life under the umbrella of Free Energy Principle (Buckley et  al. 
I thank two anonymous reviewers of this journal for their insightful comments. Also, Wanja Wiese 
read an earlier draft of this paper and provided precious comments. All of these debts are gratefully 
acknowledged.
 * Majid D. Beni 
 mbeni@metu.edu.tr
1 Department of Philosophy, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
6408 Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427
1 3
2017; Constant et  al. 2018; Friston, 2009; Friston et  al. 2012). Free energy is an 
upper bound on surprise—which is the negative log probability of an outcome—
given a generative model—which is a model of probabilistic dependencies between 
causes and consequences (Friston 2010, pp. 1–3). According to FEP, self-organising 
systems draw on approximate Bayesian inferences to reach non-equilibrium steady-
state. Organisms resist the natural tendency to disorder by minimising the occur -
rence of surprising events, whose occurrence does not provide evidence for organ-
isms’ generative models. Informally, this is stated by saying that self-organising 
systems are self-evidencing, in the sense that they garner evidence for their exist-
ence (Hohwy 2014). By staying in states with low surprise, organisms maximise 
their survival, and organisms mainly minimise their surprise by minimising vari-
ational free energy, which is an upper bound on surprise. In this fashion, FEP under-
pins a fundamental groundwork for explaining “how a biological system, exposed 
to random and unpredictable fluctuations in its external milieu, can restrict itself 
to occupying a limited number of states, and therefore survive in some recognis-
able form”(Friston 2012, p. 2100). FEP has been applied to the Bayesian theories of 
brain and cognition (Friston and Stephan 2007).
The philosophical implications of FEP have been discussed extensively by emi-
nent philosophers (Clark 2016a; Gallagher and Allen 2016; Hohwy 2013). But 
FEP-theorists remained content with providing general promissory insights into the 
possible scientific basis of forthcoming philosophical solutions. The situation has 
changed somewhat dramatically in Friston et al. (2020) recent statement of a meta-
physical perspective on consciousness, and as such their recent enterprise is worthy 
of admiration. Their offered metaphysical perspective is named Markovian monism. 
Markovian monism holds that Markov blankets are the type of thing/property that 
constitutes both mind and matter, and in this sense, their metaphysical monism is 
dubbed Markovian. In a brave statement of the metaphysical component of their the-
sis, Friston et al. (2020, p. 1) submit that “fundamentally, there is only one type of 
thing and only one type of irreducible property”. Markov blankets form the “calcu-
lus of belief” which is not only a nice scientific-mathematical model of conscious-
ness but also provides a clear metaphysical statement and can shed light on “current 
philosophical debates” (ibid).
The virtues of the Markovian account of consciousness notwithstanding, it fails 
to support the monist stance with valid arguments and Friston et al. industrious use 
of information geometry (which will be discussed later in this paper) does not con-
tribute to the construction of a solid ontological perspective on consciousness. The 
paper substantiates this critical point through an analysis of the relationship between 
scientific models—as the vehicle of scientific representations—on the one hand, and 
their targets—conscious self-organising systems, in this case—on the other hand. I 
construe ‘Markovian models’ as material/fictional/mathematical models and argue 
that none of these interpretations provides the requisite basis for defending a monist 
stance. The critique is stated in the hopes of motivating the FEP-theorists to improve 
the present statement of Markovian monism.
The paper is structured in the following way. In Sect. 2, I outline Markovian mon-
ism and show how an objective evaluation of Markovian monism requires pondering 
the question of the relationship between scientific models and their target systems. 
6409
1 3Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427 
In Sect.  3, I provide some preliminaries about scientific modelling. I also explain 
that scientific representation is usually an indirect relation, which does not warrant 
deriving conclusions about the ontological properties of target systems based on the 
properties of scientific models. Then I consider different ways of construing Marko-
vian models. In Sect.  4, I construe Markovian models as material models but argue 
that this construal does not back up metaphysical monism. In Sect.  5 I construe 
Markovian models as fictional entities and reach the same conclusion as Sect.  4. In 
Sect. 6 I construe Markovian models as mathematical models and reach the same 
conclusion. We cannot read off ontological features of the target system (i.e., con-
sciousness) from the ontological status of Markovian models. In Sect.  7, I assess 
Friston et al. remark on the affinity of Markovian monism with structural realism in 
the philosophy of science and argue that Markovian monism could not be defended 
in the spirit of structural realism. This demonstrates that Markovian monism cannot 
be defended as a form of (reductive) materialism. Section  8 demonstrates that Fris-
ton et al.’s possible defence of neutral monism is marred by a fallacy. Section  9 is 
the conclusion.
2  Modelling the origin of consciousness
FEP-theorists were toying with the philosophical question of what is conscious-
ness (Hobson and Friston 2014; Solms and Friston 2018). And indeed an interest-
ing theory of (self-)consciousness has evolved out of the theoretical framework of 
FEP. Almost all organisms can model the states of the world to themselves to some 
extent, but only some of them can be (self-)conscious. The difference between these 
two types of organisms (with and without consciousness) is that organisms that are 
capable of (self-)consciousness not only model their environment but can also model 
their expectations about the future states and consequences of their actions. Such 
organisms can form temporally thick or deep models of their environment (Friston 
2018, p. 579). Such organisms can perform active inferences. The notion of ‘active 
inference’ models the distribution of posterior beliefs over action, under the prior 
belief that action will minimise free energy in future (Friston 2018, p. 279). This 
definition provides a basis for explicating intentionality and agency, in the sense that 
the relevant organisms can perform purposeful behaviour, and choose the right sort 
of policies for surviving in the world (Friston et al. 2010, 2015).
We are going to contextualise the role of Markov blankets in FEP shortly. But 
before that, I have to remark that there are various ways of construing the onto-
logical implications of FEP. Some interpretations regard FEP as a fundamental 
hypothesis or theory with somewhat realist tendency to represent nomic relations 
between the brain and the environment (Allen and Friston 2016; Wiese and Metz-
inger 2017). However, it is also possible to argue that being an axiom or postulate 
that is grounded in theoretical physics and biology makes FEP a scientific principle 
(Colombo and Wright 2018). In this vein, it may be (and indeed has been) argued 
that FEP provides a principled explanation that serves as a guide to which things 
may or may not accord, rather than a hypothesis that provides a bona fide description 
6410 Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427
1 3
of target systems.1 This alternative does not need to support realism, meaning that 
it does not assume that Bayesian networks or Markovian models that are invoked by 
FEP are representing features of the target systems. Below, I shall unpack ramifica-
tions of this point.
At least according to some interpretations, understanding FEP as a principle 
might pose a challenge to claims about FEP’s explanatory power. For example, it 
could be contended that FEP basically amounts to tautologies and thus it is liable 
to the objection from triviality (Klein 2018). However, construing FEP as a mere 
principle that is devoid of realist implications does not necessarily need to under -
mine the explanatory power or scientific credentials of FEP. For example, it can still 
be assumed that the information-theoretic framework of FEP provides a common 
intellectual ground for researchers from various fields of expertise to offer piecemeal 
explanations of mechanisms of self-maintenance and self-organisation (Colombo 
and Wright 2018). As such, the scientific status of FEP will remain unscratched, 
even without tying the explanatory framework of FEP to realist interpretations. In 
fact, one does not even need to be a critic of FEP to appreciate the appeal of defla-
tionary, non-realist interpretations of the FEP. For example, van Es and Hipolito 
(2020) confute both representationalist and non-representationalist varieties of a 
realist reading of FEP. Similarly, Ramstead et al (2020) have endeavoured to develop 
a non-realist construal of FEP and profess agnosticism about the ontic status of neu-
ral representations under FEP (more on this in next sections).
The short discussion in the previous paragraph does not intend to challenge the 
scientific value or explanatory prowess of FEP. It simply draws attention to the fact 
that there are different perspectives on ontological implications of FEP, and not all 
interpretations are in line with a realist characterisation of FEP. We shall attend to 
the role of Markov blankets in the statement of the FEP-based account of conscious-
ness soon, but as we will shortly see (with reference to (Bruineberg et al. 2020)), 
the characterisation of Markov blankets too is prone to diverse ontological inter -
pretations. Non-realist interpretations of Markov blankets, when substantiated ade-
quately, provide grounds for scepticism about Markovian monism, which projects 
properties of the Markovian models to their target systems.
Be that as may, deep or thick models are at the centre of the FEP-based account 
of self-consciousness, which explains how some organisms can register the internal 
structure of the subject of the phenomenal experience (Friston 2018; Hobson and 
Friston 2014; Solms 2019; Solms and Friston 2018). Organisms with deep models 
can conceive of different consequences of their actions, and this bestows upon their 
self-evidencing processes a counterfactual richness. They could choose one particu-
lar course of action amongst several possible ones (Friston 2018, p. 6). In this vein, 
a self-conscious system is defined as “a system that can simulate multiple futures, 
under different actions, and select the action that has the least surprising outcome” 
(Friston 2018, p. 5).
There were insightful discussions of the philosophical implications of FEP (Bit-
bol and Gallagher 2018; Clark 2016b; Hohwy 2014). But the metaphysical question 
1 I thank one of the reviewers of this journal for bringing this point to my attention.
6411
1 3Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427 
of the nature of consciousness have been rarely addressed in the literature. FEP-the-
orists modestly remained content with making general remarks on possible evolving 
solutions to the philosophical problems (Solms and Friston 2018), but they did not 
hold strong philosophical stances. An interesting straightforward FEP-based meta-
physical account of consciousness has been presented only recently (Friston et al. 
2020). It is dubbed Markovian monism, and it is worthy of a detailed examination.
The general insight behind Markovian monism is that dualism is orthogonal to 
the formal approach to modelling mental properties and consciousness by Markov 
blankets (Friston et al. 2020, p. 17). Friston et al. (2020) provide a detailed math-
ematical-Markovian formulation of the self-organising systems that can exhibit 
consciousness, and they conclude that “there is only one type of thing and only 
one type of irreducible property” that is modelled by Markov blankets (p.1). More 
importantly, according to Friston et al. formalism is not just an instrument of mod-
elling what we think we may know about the target systems, but it tells something 
interesting about the origins of mind and consciousness (ibid, also see the title of 
their paper). What is lost in this glamorous elaboration of Markovian models of con-
sciousness is that Markovian models are scientific models, and their relationship 
with their target systems is prone to philosophical interpretations.
The critical insight of the present paper is that we cannot infer the nature of a tar-
get system solely based on what we know about the nature of scientific models that 
represent it. More generally, the critical point can be stated in terms of a question; 
how could a scientific model (and a formal one at that) establish a metaphysical the-
sis (such as monism) or confute another thesis (such as dualism) about the ontologi-
cal status of consciousness in self-organising systems. Interestingly enough, Friston 
et al. acknowledge that the issue of incompatibility of (property) dualism or lending 
support to monism is not only a matter of formalism but also a matter of “interpreta-
tion” (Friston et al. 2020, p. 18). This subtle remark opens up Pandora’s Box.
Markov blankets are configurations of spaces in Bayesian networks, where they 
connect nodes that form a blanket which separates a sub-space in the network from 
the rest of the network. A Markov blanket of a node consists of its parents, its chil-
dren, and other parents of its children. States inside are independent of the states 
outside, given the relevant Markov blankets. Friston et al. (2020, Section 3) use Lan-
gevin formalism and Density Dynamics to weave Markov blankets into FEP and its 
account of prediction error minimisation. This formulation unifies basic insights of 
reinforcement learning, infomax, and the Bayesian brain theory (Friston et al. 2020, 
p. 7 ff.). Those fine details do not need to be reviewed here. Suffice it to say that 
Friston et al. construct their calculus of belief in terms of information geometry, and 
they use information length to measure the depth of temporal aspect of self-organi-
sation and model the dynamical interaction between sensory states and active ones.
Friston et al. use information geometry to model the difference between ‘prob-
ability distribution about things’—which model belief states—and ‘probability dis-
tribution of things’—which model physical objects. In this fashion, their calculus 
could map belief states onto their target in the external world. The informational/
probabilistic model of the relationship between ‘probability distribution about 
things’ and ‘probability distribution of things’ describes the way that the brain rep-
resents the external world to itself. It explains how the brain’s internal models are 
6412 Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427
1 3
coupled with their target systems in the external world. Markov blankets demarcate 
internal states from external states. Inside each Markov blanket, sensory states are 
separated from active states (where sensory states are independent of internal states 
whereas active states are independent of external states). However, it should be 
remarked that although internal and external states are independent, this independ-
ency is conditional to the extent that internal and external states indirectly influence 
each other in a loop via exchanges between active and sensory states 2 (where active 
states correspond to children of internal states and sensory states are represented as 
the parents of internal states). It is also worth mentioning that there is a disparity 
between various ontological interpretations of Markov blankets (this is similar and 
related to the aforementioned disparity between realist and non-realist interpreta-
tions of FEP). I draw on Bruineberg et al. (2020) recent study of Markov blankets to 
pinpoint this disparity.
Bruineberg et al. (2020) remarked the divergence between ontic interpretations of 
Markov blankets in terms of the difference between Pearl blankets and Friston blan-
kets. Pearl blankets as being presented by Judea Pearl (1988), are powerful formal 
modelling tools that can regiment conditional independencies/separations in Bayes-
ian networks (of considerable size). Friston blankets (Friston 2013) on the other 
hand are associated with an ontological perspective on the nature of the relationship 
between organisms and their environments. That is to say, Friston blankets aim to 
provide truth-apt (my term) descriptions of the patterns of dependencies and inde-
pendencies between the organism and its environment. The ontological assumption 
here is that the properties of blankets can be projected onto their target systems. 
Despite being neatly supported by insights into cognitive psychology and evolution-
ary biology, the ontological insight that underlies Friston blankets would benefit 
from further criticism and discussion. Part of recent literature engages in this discus-
sion by remarking that the metaphysically laden conception of Friston blankets can-
not be justified only on the basis of the formalism of Markov blankets (Bruineberg 
et al. 2020, p. 19), (also van Es 2020; van Es and Hipolito 2020).
Let me recap quickly. According to Bruineberg et al.’s interpretation, there is a 
significant difference between Pearl’s and Friston’s respective characterisation of 
Markov blankets. Pearl’s version does not look beyond the formalism itself. Fris-
ton’s (2013) characterisation, on the other hand, projects some of the properties of 
the blankets onto their target systems. But the realist implications of this imputation/
projection must be pondered cautiously because there is no monolithic ontologi-
cal reading of the relationship between scientific models (such as Markovian mod-
els) and their target systems. The present paper develops a variation of this critical 
theme.
After regimenting the capacity of organisms to represent their environment in 
terms of information geometry, Friston et al. proceed to demonstrate that the same 
probabilistic/informational mapping relation could be invoked to model expected 
surprise as the set of beliefs that organisms hold about the consequences of their 
actions and their future. In this context, temporal aspect is represented by density 
2 I thank one of the reviewers of this journal for bringing this point to my attention.
6413
1 3Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427 
dynamics of the intrinsic states of self-organising systems. By constructing an 
information-geometrical model of the temporal length of organisms’ insights into 
the consequences of their actions, Friston et  al. propose to provide a measure for 
consciousness; organisms with short temporal trajectories (or shallow temporal 
models) react reflexively to stimulus, whereas organisms with long (deep) tempo-
ral models could perform pre-mediated adaptive action. In this fashion, the Marko-
vian approach could model intentionality, agency, consciousness and self-conscious 
states. The development of information geometry—consisting of adding a metric for 
measuring the distance to informational states space—and using it to measure free 
energy minimisation is a great feat. However, from the philosophical point of view, 
the most intriguing aspect of their 2020 paper is that it has been developed into a 
straightforward metaphysical stance on consciousness; namely Markovian monism. 
Friston et al. claim that finding the “right” structure and function is “metaphysically 
sufficient” for [identifying] consciousness (Friston et al. 2020, p. 20). But how could 
we ensure that we found the right structure, and why should identifying the structure 
be sufficient for identifying the metaphysical nature of consciousness?
My reservation about Markovian monism is this; Friston et al. submitted that for 
the mathematical equations to be adopted as models of the scientific phenomena, 
they must be interpreted in the right way (Friston et al. 2020, p. 18). A part of this 
process consists of pairing properties of the mathematical structure with the proper -
ties of the target system, by ascribing quantities and numerical values to the target 
system which embeds the phenomenon under study. Interpreting the mathematical 
structure and imputing it to the target system could take place quite formally, say, 
via partial isomorphism (more on this topic later). However, in order to develop this 
formal procedure into a defence of a metaphysical thesis, we must go well beyond 
the interpretation of formal structures and ponder the question of ontological proper-
ties of target systems (not ontological properties of scientific models). As an exam-
ple, a small-world network (in terms of Watts and Strogatz 1998) could be invoked 
to predict the rate of transmission and scope of patterns of the spread of COVID-19 
in the real world. We must interpret the vertices in the graphs as human beings and 
edges as patterns of social relations to pair properties of the small-world network 
with properties of human communities. However, the process of interpretation does 
not tell us much about the biochemical constitution of the viruses, or their ontologi-
cal status, for that matter. The step from finding the adequate models of phenomena 
to making ontological claims is rather a long one.
3  On scientific models and representations
To a first approximation, it may be assumed that Markov Blankets are not model-
ler’s tools but objective features of things with separable internal and external states. 
For example, Friston has recently declared that “The Markov blanket is not some 
statistical device by which we come to observe or model the world—it is a necessary 
attribute of a universe that can be carved into things” (Friston 2019, p. 176). But I 
think we can take Friston’s words here with a pinch of salt. Markov blankets are not 
objective features of things or the universe but mathematical Bayesian models that 
6414 Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427
1 3
can be used to represent some (possibly) objective features of the universe. When 
elaborating on the mentioned view, Friston also clearly remarks that “in quantum 
mechanics, a Markov blanket is necessary to distinguish between the state of a sys-
tem and the system performing a measurement. In statistical mechanics, the Markov 
blanket enables us to talk about thermodynamic systems in contact with a heat res-
ervoir. Finally, in classical mechanics, Markov blankets are necessary to distinguish 
massive bodies that exert forces on each other” (ibid). But we know that if we scru-
tinise quantum states or states of a thermodynamic system or macroscopic states of 
bodies and forces, we do not find anything such as Markov Blankets there. Rather, 
we will find (almost) separable internal and external spaces that could be modelled 
efficiently by invoking Markov blankets. As such, Markov blankets, along with 
Bayesian models, Gaussian functions, and network models are modeller’s tools, and 
arguably, Friston et al. (2020) use Markov blankets to model features of self-organ-
ising systems. This means that Markov blankets are formal tools in the modeller’s 
toolbox. The modeller may use these tools to regiment the constellation of integra-
tion and optimisation of information. A similar point has been recently brought to 
light by Van Es and Hipolito (2020), who provide a detailed argument to the effect 
that the role of the modeller and her socio-cultural context must be taken into con-
sideration when we speak of an organism’s ability to instantiate a model relative 
to its phenotype. The important question is, what kind of ontological conclusions 
we can derive from use of Markovian models in the context of the study of life and 
cognition? Before going further, I offer some platitudes about the nature of scientific 
modelling and scientific representations.
There are various philosophical stances on the relationship between models and 
their targets, in terms of direct or indirect representations. In this paper, I take it 
for granted that representations via scientific models are indirect. 3 This view has 
been defended by Michael Weisberg (Weisberg 2007a, b) and Peter Godfrey-Smith 
(2006), among others. Weisberg (2013, 2007b) specifies modelling as the indirect 
way of studying and analysing the world. Frigg and Nguyen (2016) argue that indi-
rect representation via scientific models consists of states of denotation, exempli-
fication, keying up and imputation. For the sake of simplicity, I generally assume 
that the process of scientific representation includes stages of interpretation of mod-
els and their application to the target systems. Indirect representation is germane to 
modelling procedures. Modelling process includes a great amount of idealisation, 
approximation, and abstraction. Because scientific models represent the features of 
3 There are also philosophers who assume that scientific models represent their targets directly, by ena-
bling us to imagine the target of the model, in the same way that a statue or literary piece enable us to 
imagine a person (say, in statue of Napoleon) or a situation (Napoleonic wars, in War and Peace) respec-
tively (Toon 2012). The important factor in spotting the relation between the model and its target is their 
similarity. A problem with this account of similarity is that, as I have argued elsewhere, in (Beni 2019 
Section 2.5), it is too vague to provide a clear and detailed understanding of mechanisms of representa-
tion, at least in comparison with some other clearly stated accounts of scientific representation. Also, as 
Frigg and Naguyen (2016, p. 233), it is unclear how imagining that the target possesses certain properties 
on the basis of what the model says provides a foothold for attributing such features to the target system 
in an objective way. So, I assume that scientific representation is indirect.
6415
1 3Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427 
reality indirectly (if at all), we cannot simply project properties of models to reality. 
I build upon this insight to show that the argument that presents Markovian monism 
as a metaphysically significant thesis is invalid. To the extent that I can see, Friston 
et al. (2020) may use Markovian models in one of these three ways;
A. Markovian models are used in the sense of material entities.
B. Markovian models are fictional entities.
C. I think the most viable construal of Markovian models is to understand them as 
mathematical objects. This construal is more intriguing, not least because it lures 
us into the discussion of the relationship between mathematical models and the 
real systems that are represented by them. Friston et al. (2020) about structural 
realism, too, is in harmony with this line of interpretation. I shall speak exten-
sively about this construal in this paper and relate it to the discussion of structural 
realism in Sect. 7 of this paper.
The general insight behind my critique is this: regardless of the ontological cat-
egory which subsumes the models, models are surrogates that represent their tar -
gets (Swoyer 1991), and as such models cannot be the true subjects of ontological 
commitments. This point is elementary, but ignoring it could undermine otherwise 
interesting metaphysical projects. I shall unfold this point regarding different types 
of scientific models in the next three sections.
4  As physical models
Friston et al. (2020 Section 13) advocate a reductive materialist construal of con-
sciousness. How could Markovian models be used to support reductive materialists? 
One possible (although not promising) way of doing this may consist of showing 
that Markovian models and their target systems are types of the same ontological 
category, namely physical objects. Below, I shall provide some examples of material 
models.
Phillips and Newlyn’s hydraulic model of economy is a fine example of physi-
cal models (Morgan and Boumans 2004). A hydraulic pump is a physical object, 
and for the hydraulic model to work, properties of the economic systems must be 
identified with hydraulic properties of the pump. In this context, the interpretation 
of the model fixes the representational relation between a litre of water and the cur -
rency (in the monetary sense). Another good example is John Kendrew’s plasticine 
model of myoglobin (Kendrew et al. 1958). Myoglobin is an oxygen-binding iron-
binding protein in globular cells of many mammals. The concentration of myoglobin 
in red blood cells of some mammals such as whales make them capable of hold-
ing their breath for long periods. To represent the structure of myoglobin, Kendrew 
constructed a plasticine model. As its name indicate, the structure of myoglobin is 
moulded from a huddled rope of plasticine set upon few metal rods (de Chadarevian 
2018, p. 1140). The epistemic/explanatory benefits of the model are quite remark -
able. Although the modellers draw on the electron density data to construct the rope 
6416 Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427
1 3
model, the model itself is not simply a summary of these data. That is to say, the 
model is not simply “a tool to communicate effectively the information the data con-
tained. The model provided epistemic access to the tertiary structure of the molecule 
in a way that the electron density data alone could not” (Frigg and Nguyen 2016, p. 
226). However, despite its explanatory and predictive virtues, the rope model does 
not mean to indicate that myoglobin is actually made of plasticine. The question 
then is how serious are the ontological implications of the physical models? Let us 
apply this to our discussion of Markovian monism.
At times, FEP-theorists indeed imply that Markov blankets are physical models. 
For example, Ramstead et al. argue that Markovian models could be understood as 
“a physical transcription of causal regularities in its eco-niche that has been sculpted 
by reciprocal interactions between self-organisation and selection over time” (Ram-
stead et al. 2017, p. 5). Similarly, Pezzulo and Levin (2017) argue that Markov blan-
kets are nested in the brain at the level of individual neurons, small neural networks 
and big functional networks. In the body, too, the Markov blankets are nested in 
the organisation of cells, organs and the whole body. For example, organic cells 
(in sensory epithelia) embody the function of the intermediate (sensory) states of 
the Markov blankets. (Pezzulo and Levin 2017, p. 2). More recently, (when dis-
cussion ideas from Allen and Friston (2016)) Bruineberg et al. (2020, p. 21) have 
argued that Markov blankets have been at times equated with physical boundaries 
that distinguish a system from its environment. These assertions may indicate that 
Markov blankets are physical entities. However, there are reasons for not assuming 
that Markovian models are physical objects. Firstly, as I will argue in the next two 
sections, to the extent that FEP-theorists remarks are concerned, Markovian models 
could be as well identified with fictional and mathematical entities (so, there is no 
consensus that they are physical objects). Moreover, almost everything with inter -
nal and external states could be modelled in terms of Markov blankets, and almost 
everything has internal and external states. It follows that all things (or at least all 
things that can be measured) are made of Markov blankets. I shall provide an exam-
ple immediately.
Kirchhoff et al. (2018) provide a detailed Markovian model of a set of coupled 
Huygens’ pendulums which exemplify coupled random dynamical systems. The 
oscillating systems are suspended from a moving beam, which serves as a Markov 
blanket. In this setting, “motions of the two pendulums are statistically independent 
of one another conditioned on the motion of the beam. … Each pendulum can be 
understood as a generative model of the other, where the probabilistic mapping from 
hidden causes (the dynamics of the black clock) to sensory observations (for the 
grey clock) is mediated by the beam, i.e. the Markov blanket states of the clocks” 
(Kirchhoff et  al. 2018, p. 5). While Markov blankets do not seem to be physical 
models of Huygens’ pendulums, or they are nested in the clocks or are identical with 
oscillating systems suspended from moving rafters. However, according to Kirchhoff 
et al. using theories of optimisation to model the dynamical behaviour of the system 
in terms of a Markov blanket allows us to recognise the system as an agent that 
garners evidence for its existence. But then again, others such as Bruineberg et al. 
(2020 Sect.  6) contest the realist reading by pointing out that the reading conflates 
between a formal framework and a metaphysically laden interpretation of formalism 
6417
1 3Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427 
(they call these Pearl blankets and Friston blankets respectively, see Sect.  2 of this 
paper). Without intending to endorse Bruineberg et al.’s terminology, I just second 
their point that “realist reading cannot be justified by just following from the math-
ematics” (Bruineberg et al. 2020, p. 41). Instead, it would be more sensible to con-
sider Markovian models as scientific models used by modellers to represent target 
systems that are not made of Markovian models (for discussion see van Es 2020).
At any rate, Markovian models are not physical objects, but even if Markovian 
models were material objects, we could not ensure that there is any ontological affin-
ity between the nature of Markovian models, on the one hand, and their target sys-
tems, on the other hand. That is to say, we could not ensure that consciousness falls 
under the same ontological category that includes Markovian models, and thus we 
could not conclude that consciousness is physical too (obviously, such an argument, 
even when available, would have been vainly circular). In short, even if Markovian 
models had been material objects, we would not have been able to conclude that 
consciousness (as the target system) is material too. We still needed to demonstrate 
that consciousness is made of the same material stuff that (in a possible scenario) 
constituted Markov blankets. However, not only Markov blankets are not material 
things, there is no reason to assume that consciousness would share the ontic nature 
of Markov blankets, even if Markovian models were physical.
5  As fictional models
Let us assume that Markov Blankets are not concrete physical objects. It could be 
incontrovertibly confirmed that if we explore actual brains of organisms we do not 
find any actual, concrete Markov Blankets ingrained in their flesh and blood. But 
we could still assume that Markov blankets are fictional objects. There are various 
ways of conceiving of scientific models as fictional objects (Frigg 2010; Frigg and 
Nguyen 2016; Salis 2019).
According to one approach, developed in (Toon 2012) amongst other places, sci-
entific models are just props in the game of make-believe. These props can be used 
to mandate those who engage in the game to imagine certain things about the target 
system, without intending to convey any metaphysical implications about the target 
systems. Under the fictionalist approach, “[r]epresentation is explained in terms of 
there being the prescription to imagine certain things about the target […]. At the 
same time vehicles, understood as ‘secondary systems’ [i.e., models], are rendered 
otiose, which dissolves any metaphysical questions about these systems” (Frigg and 
Nguyen 2016, p. 233). Thus, ontological features of the target systems cannot be 
inferred on the basis of scientific models. Another statement of fictionalism, devel-
oped in Contessa’s (2010) work, indicates that like fictions, scientific models have 
an author (or modeller), meaning that they are constructed by a modeller for spe-
cific purposes. Moreover, at least some scientific models have characteristics that are 
similar to characteristics of physical models, but unlike material models, fictional 
models do not exist. Sherlock Holmes was said to be a smoker, without actually 
existing (Contessa 2010, p. 218). In the scientific context too, models may serve as 
non-existing things that describe properties of things that exist. On such grounds, 
6418 Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427
1 3
Contessa argues that fictional characters from novels and fictional scientific mod-
els are both types of the same ontological kind, namely imaginary possible objects 
(Contessa 2010, p. 219). In this light, scientific assertions, say about the existence 
of electrons, are to be understood as parts of a fiction that serves to produce useful 
empirical results. Let us see how fictionalism applies to Markovian monism.
There is some textual evidence for construing Markovian models of conscious-
ness as fictional models. For example, when using Langevin formalism to charac-
terise Markovian models, Friston et al. submit that if we model adaptive behaviour 
of a creature by Markovian blankets, “it will look as if it is acting to minimise its 
particular surprisal (or variational free energy). In other words, it will look as if it is 
trying to minimise the surprisal, expected following an action” (Friston et al. 2020, 
p. 13 emphasis added). Markov blankets could be deployed as ingredients of fic-
tions to produce empirically adequate models of self-consciousness. On the same 
note, Ramstead et al. (2020) have recently defended a non-realist interpretation of 
the explanatory role of neural representations under FEP. This interpretation con-
siders neural representations as fictions that provide a scientifically useful way of 
describing mechanisms of cognition and action, without making any commitments 
to the reality or existence of such mechanisms. In the same vein, van Es and Hipolito 
(2020) submit a detailed examination of both representational and non-representa-
tional interpretations of the functioning of generative models to argue that neither 
of these interpretations supports a realist reading of FEP. (Interestingly enough, this 
is because the realist interpretation ignores the role of agents—or modellers—who 
manipulate Bayesian models and project them to target systems (van Es and Hipolito 
2020 Section 3.1)). On a more positive note, elements of FEP could be construed 
along the lines of an outright instrumentalist approach which recognises the explan-
atory power of FEP without burdening it with problematic realist assumptions. The 
general insight behind the endorsement of instrumentalism is that “from the fact that 
it is possible to model a process, it does not necessarily follow that the target phe-
nomenon represents the intellectual tools we use to model it” (van Es and Hipolito 
2020, p. 21). Below, I shall apply this insight to Markovian monism.
Let us assume that Markovian models, as elements of FEP, are indeed pieces of 
useful scientific stories that make the operation of cognitive systems understanda-
ble. But, and instrumentalist-fictionalist reading of Markov blankets hardly supports 
Markovian monism. That is to say, the consequences of considering Markovian 
models of consciousness as fictional models would be rather dire for Markovian 
monism. If Markovian models are fictional entities, we could not use them to infer 
the ontological nature of consciousness, which, allegedly, is not a fictional entity 
(in the same way that we could not infer much about the ontic status of any actual 
divine being based on the description of Greek gods in Hesiod’s Theogony (assum-
ing that it is a work of fiction)). The fictionalist construal of Markovian models does 
not contribute to cementing monism about consciousness. If Markovian models are 
just useful fictions or efficient modelling tools in the modeller’s toolbox, then apply-
ing them to provide empirically adequate representations of target systems does 
not warrant deriving conclusions about the ontological status of the target systems. 
Thus Markovian monism cannot receive the requisite support, and it would remain a 
groundless metaphysical thesis.
6419
1 3Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427 
6  As mathematical models
Markovian models do not seem to be material objects, and construing them as fic-
tional entities does not support monism about consciousness either. Finally, we may 
consider Markovian models as mathematical objects. There is ample textual evi-
dence for this construal. Friston et al. (2020, p. 1) submit that their enterprise aims 
to:
describe constructs from information theory and physics that place certain 
constraints on the dynamics of self-organising creatures, such as ourselves. 
These constraints lend themselves to an easy interpretation in terms of beliefs 
and intentions; provided one defines their meaning carefully about the math-
ematical objects at hand.
Mathematical models are ubiquitous in sciences, as modern science widely draws 
on mathematical formalism to describe natural phenomena. In the philosophy of sci-
ence, too, there is a strong tendency to invoke set/model-theoretic constructs to rep-
resent natural phenomena (Suppes 1967; van Fraassen 1970).
A conspicuous example of mathematical models is Volterra’s model of fluctua-
tion of predator–prey dynamics (Volterra 1926). The predator–prey dynamics con-
sists in the coexistence between two associated biological species, where the indi-
vidual members of one of the species feed upon the members of the other species. 
Fishing had ceased in the Adriatic Sea during WWI. The number of fishes was sup-
posed to increase as a result of the suspension of fishing during the war. In reality, 
though, the opposite was the case. Voltera’s model can explain the phenomenon. It 
holds that “the proportional rate of increase of the eaten species diminishes as the 
number of individuals of the easting species increases, while the augmentation of 
the easting species increases with the increase of the number of individuals of the 
eaten species” (Volterra 1926, p. 558). I follow Weisberg (2007b, p. 210) to state 
the formula in terms of the dynamics of the relationship between the size of the 
prey population (V) and abundance of predators (P). In the equation, r stands for the 
growth rate preys and m is the death rate of the predators’ population.
This mathematical model explained the decrease of fishes and predicted that 
resumption of heavy fishing would lead to an increase in the number of fishes in the 
mentioned context (the post-war Adriatic Sea). The model accommodates plausi-
ble explanations (of the decrease in the prey population) and provides novel predic-
tions (that heavy fishing will lead to augmentation of fishes). In light of the mod-
el’s explanatory power and its innovative prediction, it could be granted that this 
model describes the ‘right’ sort of mathematical structures. (As I remarked before, 
Friston et al. assume that finding the right structure and function is enough for the 
dV
dt = rV − (aV )P
dP
dt = b(aV)P − mP
6420 Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427
1 3
metaphysical identification of consciousness). How does that bear on the question of 
the ontology of sea creatures?
Differential equations are mathematical objects. Relationship between models and 
their targets could be regimented in fine mathematical terms too, namely in terms of 
(partial) isomorphism (da Costa and French 2003; van Fraassen 1980). There are 
mathematical realists (such as Pythagoreans and Platonists) who embrace metaphys-
ical realism about mathematical entities and structures, and there are also philoso-
phers who deny that mathematical objects exist (Field 1989). However, although not 
irrelevant, realism/antirealism about mathematical objects is not directly related to 
scientific realism. That is to say, in the context of Volterra’s model, it is the exist-
ence of fishes and sharks (as the targets of the models), rather than the existence 
and properties of mathematical objects, that matter to the scientific realist. From 
the scientific realist point of view, ontological commitments should not be made to 
mathematical entities such as differential equations but to sea creatures and perhaps 
to natural kinds and categories that subsume sea creatures. If realism could be pro-
fessed in the present context at all, it would endorse ontological commitments to 
entities such as fishes and sharks (in the first place) and perhaps commitments to 
natural kinds of preys and predators. In this context, scientific realism (or antireal-
ism, for that matter) is concerned with the ontic status of the individual organisms 
(and perhaps natural kinds of preys and predators) which could not be derived from 
what our mathematical models of phenomena divulge about their target systems.
To return Markovian monism, Markov blankets may indeed provide the ‘right’ 
sort of models for consciousness in self-organising systems. But Markovian mod-
els are mathematical objects—it is indeed why Markovian models are neither men-
tal nor physical models—and they do not provide any insight into the metaphysical 
nature of consciousness. Interestingly enough, Friston et  al. seem to be anticipat-
ing this point. After outlining their information geometry, which grounds Marko-
vian Models, they (2020, p. 17) ask does the formalism indicate that “all systems 
with a Markov blanket have a mind […]? Are such systems conscious?” and to this, 
they answer that “The formalism itself does not answer these questions: different 
metaphysical interpretations of the existence of a dual information sssgeometry are 
possible. In fact, one might ask whether it has any metaphysical significance what-
soever” (ibid). This scepticism, if genuine, would run against the grain of Friston 
et al. (2020, p. 17) optimism about the implications of their theory about the origins 
of mind and consciousness, or its success in dealing with the hard problem.
Before going further, let me provide another textual evidence for a deflationary 
understanding of FEP which identifies variational Bayesian networks as mathemati-
cal models. Ramstead et al. (2020) (whose fictionalist approach has been alluded to 
in Sect. 5 of this paper) develop a variation of their instrumentalism into a deflation-
ary account that specifies neural representations in terms of mathematical models. 
Although this deflationary account does not deny the existence of neural representa-
tions, it takes an overly antirealist attitude towards their content, where it is assumed 
that representations are not individuated by their content but by the mathematical 
functions that realize them (Ramstead et al. 2020, p. 12). According to Ramstead 
et al. there is a dark side to this deflationary reading, which (obviously) trivialises 
cognitive content and reduces its explanatory role to a heuristic one (this is because 
6421
1 3Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427 
the content can help the scientists to make sense of mathematical descriptions of 
various mechanisms and normal conditions that rule over them (Ramstead et  al. 
2020, p. 14)). In my opinion (and possibly in Ramstead et al.) this problem of the 
deflationary reading is not grave enough to discredit it. But again, if this construal 
of the representational mechanisms of FEP and its ingredients is correct, the conse-
quences for Markovian monism could be rather grave. Given the general non-real-
ist tendency of the deflationary account, the approach indicates that ontic status of 
minds and their phenomenal features could not be just directly read off from the 
mathematical formalism that constitutes the essence of FEP. That is to say, even if 
we grant that mathematical functions are reliable enough for fleshing out semantic 
aspects of cognition, we cannot infer much from them about the nature of the con-
sciousness. Let me elaborate.
When interpreted appropriately, Markovian models ascribe some structure or 
function to consciousness. As Friston et  al. (2020, p. 20) acknowledge, this may 
indicate that the FEP-based account fails to deal with the hard problem of con-
sciousness, which demands something more than the specification of the struc-
ture of consciousness. But after acknowledging this, they immediately add that “if 
consciousness is a vague concept (as suggested by our interpretation of Markovian 
monism), then the right structure and functions can be metaphysically sufficient for 
consciousness…” (ibid). But even if we could find the right structure of the class of 
mathematical models that represent consciousness, we would be none the wiser the 
metaphysical status of consciousness. I will elaborate on this point in the next sec-
tion, with an eye to Friston et al.’s reference to structural realism.
7  Structural realism
In the conclusion of their paper, Friston et al. remark that their Markovian monism is 
compatible with Structural Realism (SR). SR is a successful theory of contemporary 
philosophy of science which indicates that epistemological or/and ontological com-
mitments are to be made based on the structure of theories, not their form (Ladyman 
1998; Worrall 1989). There is not enough space in this paper to review philosophi-
cal motives that led to the formation of SR. Suffice it to say that structural real-
ists usually build upon set/model-theoretic structures to regiment their conception 
of theories and scientific representations (Bueno et al. 2002; French 2006). That is 
to say, structural realists assume that model theory provides the right formal frame-
work for regimenting the structure of scientific theories. Friston et al.’s development 
of information geometry and statement of the criterion of information length make it 
especially compatible with SR.4 However, finding the right formal framework is not 
enough for dealing with the question of the metaphysical status of the target systems. 
4 Informational spaces do not by default include a geometry or the notion of distance. To incorporate 
geometry into information theory, Friston et al. (2020, p. 17) have supplied their information theory with 
“a metric tensor—such that small displacements in state space can be associated with a metric of dis-
tance.” The result is a Riemannian geometry of statistical manifolds which embeds the Gaussian prob-
ability density of the FEP-based models of belief states and causes of beliefs in the external states. This 
approach is quite in line with SR and its strategy of structural regimentation of representations.
6422 Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427
1 3
There should exist an independent argument for substantiating the metaphysical 
claim. Friston et al.’s main argument for establishing the metaphysical component 
of their thesis rests on the distinction between the intrinsic and the extrinsic types of 
information geometry. The former kind of information geometry is “inherent in the 
information length based upon time-dependent probability densities over internal 
states. This information length characterises the system or creature in terms of itin-
erant, self-organising density dynamics that forms the basis of statistical mechan-
ics in physics, i.e., a physical, material, or mechanical information geometry that 
is intrinsic to the system” (Friston et al. 2020, p. 11). On the other hand, extrinsic 
information geometry refers to belief distributions over external states. Part of Fris-
ton et al.’s grounds for Markovian monism rests on the assumption that the intrinsic 
information geometry is prior to the extrinsic information geometry, in the following 
sense: in order to interpret internal states as representations of probability distribu-
tions (over external states, given blanket states), one actually has to consider proper-
ties of ensembles of internal states (e.g., the average activity of a neural population). 
This presupposes that a more fine-grained description of internal states—which only 
describes probabilities of internal states, but not probabilities represented by internal 
states—is available, given that “It is tenable to associate physics (in the sense of 
quantum, statistical and classical) mechanics with the intrinsic information geom-
etry. Indeed, this is common parlance in statistical physics” (Friston et al. 2020, p. 
25). Accordingly, one could argue that the more fine-grained description picks out 
things that are ontologically more fundamental (Wiese, personal communication). I 
can see the charm of using the intrinsic information geometry to substantiate Marko-
vian monism (given that this geometry may provide a fine-grained description of 
fundamental ontological units). However, the claim is open to debate in the follow -
ing sense.
In the case of SR, structural realists extensively use a model-theoretic concep-
tion of scientific theories on grounds that the model-theoretic approach “wears 
its structuralist commitments on its sleeves” (French 2014, p. vii). However, this 
does not mean that metaphysical claims of structural realism are dependent on the 
choice of model-theoretic framework. Arguably it is possible to use other formal 
frameworks such as category theory (Halvorson 2012) or first-order logic (French 
2014 Section  2.9 on Ramsey sentence) to regiment scientific representations. The 
choice of the model-theoretic structures as the right sort of vehicle for regiment-
ing the scientific representations does not substantiate the ontological thesis of SR, 
which is supposed to be substantiated on independent grounds (in the philosophy 
of science, there are different ways of fleshing out such independent grounds. For 
example, it could be assumed that if the representations were dislodged from real-
ity, the remarkable empirical success of scientific theories would have been a matter 
of coincidence in cosmic scales (Smart 1963). Because this is not the case, scien-
tific theories are truth-apt and veridical). Although structural realists use set/model-
theoretic structures to regiment scientific representations, they are not epistemologi-
cally/ontologically committed to mathematical structures. If they were committed 
to mathematical structuralism, they had to advocate some sort of Pythagorean or 
Platonist ontology, which is not the case (French 2014, p. 10). Rather they mark 
a distinction between the representational role of mathematical structures and the 
6423
1 3Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427 
ontologically constitutive role of physical structures, and they make their ontological 
commitments to physical structures, not formal structures (French 2006; Ladyman 
2007). Therefore, although sometimes it has been suggested that structural realists 
are concerned with the ontology and epistemology of scientific models (Contessa 
2010, p. 216), SR only uses set/model-theoretic structures for representational pur -
poses. Ontological commitments to physical structures are supposed to be backed up 
by independent reasons (see French 2011). Back to the context of FEP, Friston et al. 
(2020) reliance on information geometry makes their theory particularly compat-
ible with a structural realist reading. However, the choice of the intrinsic informa-
tion geometry does not provide any insight into the mental/physical/neutral nature of 
consciousness. While we may procure independent philosophical arguments for any 
of these stances, Friston et al.’s fine development of Markovian models and informa-
tion geometry does not contribute to establishing metaphysical monism.
8  A cartesian fallacy?
Despite what Friston et al.’s claim about the compatibility of their view with reduc-
tive materialism, I think it could be matched best with neutral monism. In fact, their 
paper also includes some indication of the incompatibility of Markovian monism 
with physicalism. For example, in the conclusion of their paper, they argue that:
Note, the claim here is that physics (i.e., statistical thermodynamics) super -
venes on the same statistical manifold as belief updating. This superveni-
ence—on the same statistical manifold—from which both information geom-
etries inherit their structure could be read as the philosophical formulation of 
the mathematical conjugacy implied by intrinsic and extrinsic information 
geometries. (Friston et al. 2020, p. 24).
This means that Markovian models do not supervene on physical structures and 
are not reducible to them. Rather, physical structures are reducible to the neutral 
mathematical structures that underpin both physical and mental properties but 
are neither material nor mental. Therefore, Markovian monism could hardly be 
reconciled with any standard form of reductive materialism, and it meshes more 
nicely with neutral monism. But unfortunately, there is no good argument for 
associating Markovian monism with neutral monism either. Friston et al. do not 
concede a neutral monist reading of their theory, because they think that neutral 
monism mandates commitments to realism and panpsychism. I do not think these 
are good reasons for defying neutral monism. The source of my scepticism about 
a neutral monist reading of Friston et al.’s theory is something else. Below, I will 
draw attention to a fallacy that is inherent to Friston et al.’s defence of monism.
A possible defence of a neutral monist stance could be outlined in the follow -
ing manner:
There are two conjugate ways in which things that exist can be described: 
either from the perspective of the intrinsic information geometry or from 
the perspective of the extrinsic information geometry. Under the assumption 
6424 Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427
1 3
that neither perspective is privileged, one would have to conclude that real-
ity is, fundamentally, ontologically neutral. (Friston et al. 2020, p. 18).
But the argument is invalid. This is because from the fact that our formal 
descriptions are silent about the (mental/material) nature of specific things, it 
does not follow that those things do not fall under one of the categories of the 
mental or the material (or both!). Ironically enough, Descartes partly built his 
substance dualism on a similar invalid argument. In A Discourse on the Method of 
Correctly Conducting One’s Reason and Seeking Truth in the Sciences, Descartes 
([1637] 2008, p. 29) concludes that his essence (or the essence of any human 
being, for that matter) is thinking and a thinking being is not dependent on mate-
rial things. Descartes argument is that while he knows he is thinking (or doubt-
ing), he is unaware of any connection between his thoughts and bodily mecha-
nisms that may underpin them. But the problem is that from the ignorance of 
the underpinning physical mechanisms of thought, it does not follow that such 
mechanisms do not exist or thinking is independent of such mechanisms. Simi-
larly, in the context of Markovian monism, from the fact that our formal descrip-
tion of energy minimisation is neither formal nor material, it does not follow that 
consciousness and mental properties are neutral commodities.
9  Concluding remark
The Free Energy Principle not only underpins interesting accounts of life, cogni-
tion, and action but arguably it could also lead to a fascinating theory of (self-)
consciousness of self-organising systems. Recently, Friston et  al (2020) have 
endeavoured to develop this insight into Markovian monism, which presumably 
provides a metaphysical stance on consciousness. In this paper, I expressed scep-
ticism about the validity of Markovian monism as a plausible metaphysical thesis. 
To substantiate my point, I discussed different ways in which Markov Blankets 
could represent or model consciousness. I construed Markovian models as mate-
rial models, fictional models, and mathematical ones, and argued that none of 
these interpretations lends support to a metaphysical perspective on conscious-
ness in terms of either neutral monism or reductive materialism. As such, despite 
its scientific merits, the present statement of Markovian monism hardly leads to a 
viable metaphysical theory of consciousness or a good reply to the hard problem.
References
Allen, M., & Friston, K. J. (2016). From cognitivism to autopoiesis: towards a computational frame-
work for the embodied mind. Synthese. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122 9-016-1288-5.
Beni, M. D. (2019). Cognitive structural realism: A radical solution to the problem of scientific repre-
sentation. Berlin: Springer.
6425
1 3Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427 
Bitbol, M., & Gallagher, S. (2018). The free energy principle and autopoiesis: Comment on “Answer -
ing Schrödinger’s question: A free-energy formulation” by Maxwell James Désormeau Ram-
stead, Paul Benjamin Badcock, Karl John Friston. Physics of Life Reviews.
Bruineberg, J., Dolega, K., Dewhurst, J., & Baltieri, M. (2020). The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets. 
1–47.
Buckley, C. L., Kim, C. S., McGregor, S., & Seth, A. K. (2017). The free energy principle for action 
and perception: A mathematical review. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 81, 55–79. https ://
doi.org/10.1016/J.JMP.2017.09.004.
Bueno, O., French, S., & Ladyman, J. (2002). On representing the relationship between the math-
ematical and the empirical. Philosophy of Science, 69, 497–518.
Clark, A. (2016a). Surfing uncertainty. Oxford University Press. https ://doi.org/10.1093/acpro 
f:oso/97801 90217 013.001.0001.
Clark, A. (2016b). Busting out: Predictive brains, embodied minds, and the puzzle of the evidentiary 
Veil. Noûs. https ://doi.org/10.1111/nous.12140 .
Colombo, M., & Wright, C. (2018). First principles in the life sciences: the free-energy principle, 
organicism, and mechanism. Synthese. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122 9-018-01932 -w.
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., Campbell, J. O., & Friston, K. J. (2018). A 
Variational approach to niche construction. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface, 15(141), 
20170685. https ://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0685.
Contessa, G. (2010). Scientific models and fictional objects. Synthese, 172(2), 215–229. https ://doi.
org/10.1007/s1122 9-009-9503-2.
da Costa, N. C. A., & French, S. (2003). Science and Partial Truth. Oxford University Press. https ://
doi.org/10.1093/01951 5651X .001.0001.
de Chadarevian, S. (2018). John Kendrew and myoglobin: Protein structure determination in the 
1950s. Protein Science, 27(6), 1136–1143. https ://doi.org/10.1002/pro.3417.
Descartes, R. (2008). A discourse on the method of correctly conducting one’s reason and seeking 
truth in the sciences (I. Maclean (ed.)). Oxford University Press. https ://globa l.oup.com/acade  
mic/produ ct/a-disco urse-on-the-metho d-97801 99540 075?cc=ir&lang=en&.
Field, H. (1989). Realism, mathematics, and modality. Blackwell.
French, S. (2006). Structure as a weapon of the realist. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society (Hard-
back), 106(1), 170–187. https ://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2006.00143 .x.
French, S. (2011). Metaphysical Underdetermination: why worry? Synthese, 180(2), 205–221. https ://
doi.org/10.1007/s1122 9-009-9598-5.
French, S. (2014). The Structure of the World: metaphysics and representation. Oxford University 
Press.https ://doi.org/10.1093/acpro f:oso/97801 99684 847.001.0001.
Frigg, R. (2010). Models and fiction. Synthese, 172(2), 251–268. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122  
9-009-9505-0.
Frigg, R., & Nguyen, J. (2016). The fiction view of models reloaded. The Monist, 99(3), 225–242. 
https ://doi.org/10.1093/monis  t/onw00 2.
Friston, K. J. (2009). The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the brain? Trends in Cognitive Sci-
ences, 13(7), 293–301. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005.
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neurosci-
ence, 11(2), 127–138. https ://doi.org/10.1038/nrn27 87.
Friston, K. J. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy, 14(11), 2100–2121. 
https ://doi.org/10.3390/e1411 2100.
Friston, K. J. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 10(86), 20130475.
Friston, K. J. (2018). Am I self-conscious? Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 579. https ://doi.org/10.3389/
FPSYG .2018.00579 .
Friston, K. J. (2019). Beyond the desert landscape. In Andy Clark & His Critics (Eds.), Matteo 
Colombo, Elizabeth Irvine, & Mog Stapleton (pp. 174–190). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., Kilner, J., & Kiebel, S. J. (2010). Action and behavior: a free-energy formu-
lation. Biological Cybernetics, 102(3), 227–260. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s0042 2-010-0364-z.
Friston, K. J., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., & Pezzulo, G. (2015). Active infer -
ence and epistemic value. Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(4), 187–214. https ://doi.org/10.1080/17588 
928.2015.10200 53.
Friston, K. J., Samothrakis, S., & Montague, R. (2012). Active inference and agency: Optimal control 
without cost functions. Biological Cybernetics, 106(8–9), 523–541. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s0042 
2-012-0512-8.
6426 Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427
1 3
Friston, K. J., & Stephan, K. E. (2007). Free-energy and the brain. Synthese, 159(3), 417–458. https ://doi.
org/10.1007/s1122 9-007-9237-y.
Friston, K. J., Wiese, W., & Hobson, J. A. (2020). Sentience and the origins of consciousness: From 
cartesian duality to Markovian monism. Entropy, 2020(22), 516–516. https ://doi.org/10.3390/E2205 
0516.
Gallagher, S., & Allen, M. (2016). Active inference, enactivism and the hermeneutics of social cognition. 
Synthese. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122 9-016-1269-8.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2006). The strategy of model-based science. Biology & Philosophy, 21(5), 725–740. 
https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1053 9-006-9054-6.
Halvorson, H. (2012). What scientific theories could not Be*. Philosophy of Science, 79(2), 183–206. 
https ://doi.org/10.1086/66474 5.
Hobson, A. J., & Friston, K. J. (2014). Consciousness, Dreams, and Inference: The Cartesian theatre 
revisited. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 21(1–2), 6–32.
Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind. Oxford University Press.https ://doi.org/10.1093/acpro 
f:oso/97801 99682 737.001.0001
Hohwy, J. (2014). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs, 50(2), 259–285. https ://doi.org/10.1111/nous.12062 .
Kendrew, J. C., Bodo, G., Dintzis, H. M., Parrish, R. G., Wyckoff, H., & Phillips, D. C. (1958). A three-
dimensional model of the myoglobin molecule obtained by x-ray analysis. Nature, 181(4610), 662–
666. https ://doi.org/10.1038/18166 2a0.
Kirchhoff, M. D., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K. J., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov blankets of 
life: autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal of the Royal Society, Inter -
face, 15(138), 20170792. https ://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0792.
Klein, C. (2018). What do predictive coders want? Synthese, 195(6), 2541–2557. https ://doi.org/10.1007/
s1122 9-016-1250-6.
Ladyman, J. (1998). What is structural realism? Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A, 
29(3), 409–424. https ://doi.org/10.1016/S0039 -3681(98)80129 -5.
Ladyman, J. (2007). On the identity and diversity of objects in a structure. In Proceedings of the Aristote-
lian Society, Supplementary Volumes (Vol. 81, pp. 23–43). https ://doi.org/10.2307/20619 100
Morgan, M. S., & Boumans, M. J. (2004). Secrets Hidden by Two-Dimensionality: The Economy as a 
Hydraulic Machine.
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems. In Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent 
systems. Elsevier. https ://doi.org/10.1016/c2009 -0-27609 -4
Pezzulo, G., & Levin, M. (2017). Embodying Markov blankets: Comment on “Answering Schrödinger’s 
question: A free-energy formulation” by Maxwell James Désormeau Ramstead et al. Physics of Life 
Reviews. https ://doi.org/10.1016/J.PLREV .2017.11.020.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2017). Answering Schrödinger’s question: A free-
energy formulation. Physics of Life Reviews. https ://doi.org/10.1016/J.PLREV .2017.09.001.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., & Hipólito, I. (2020). Is the free-energy principle a formal theory of 
semantics? From variational density dynamics to neural and phenotypic representations. Entropy, 
22(8), 889. https ://doi.org/10.3390/e2208 0889.
Salis, F. (2019). The new fiction view of models. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science. https 
://doi.org/10.1093/bjps/axz01 5.
Smart, J. J. C. (1963). Philosophy and Scientific Realism. In ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL.
Solms, M. (2019). The hard problem of consciousness and the free energy principle. Frontiers in Psy -
chology. https ://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg .2018.02714 .
Solms, M., & Friston, K. J. (2018). How and why consciousness arises: Some considerations from phys-
ics and physiology. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 25(5–6), 202–238.
Suppes, P. (1967). What is a scientific theory? In S. Morgenbesser (Ed.), Philosophy of Science Today 
(pp. 55–67). Basic Books. https ://www.googl e.com/_/chrom e/newta b?espv=2&ie=UTF-8.
Swoyer, C. (1991). Structural representation and surrogative reasoning. Synthese, 87(3), 449–508. https ://
doi.org/10.1007/BF004 99820 .
Toon, A. (2012). Similarity and scientific representation. International Studies in the Philosophy of Sci-
ence, 26(3), 241–257. https ://doi.org/10.1080/02698 595.2012.73173 0.
van Es, T. (2020). Living models or life modelled? On the use of models in the free energy principle. 
Adaptive Behavior. https ://doi.org/10.1177/10597 12320 91867 8.
van Es, T., & Hipolito, I. (2020). Free-Energy Principle, Computationalism and Realism: a Tragedy.
van Fraassen, B. C. (1970). On the extension of beth’s semantics of physical theories. Philosophy of Sci-
ence, 37(3), 325–339. https ://doi.org/10.1086/28831 1.
6427
1 3Synthese (2021) 199:6407–6427 
van Fraassen, B. C. (1980). The Scientific Image. Oxford University Press. https ://doi.org/10.1093/01982 
44274 .001.0001
Volterra, V. (1926). Fluctuations in the abundance of a species considered mathematically. Nature, 
118(2972), 558–560. https ://doi.org/10.1038/11855 8a0.
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature, 393(6684), 
440–442. https ://doi.org/10.1038/30918 .
Weisberg, M. (2007a). Forty years of ‘the strategy’: levins on model building and idealization. Biology & 
Philosophy, 21(5), 623–645. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1053 9-006-9051-9.
Weisberg, M. (2007b). Who is a Modeler? The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 58(2), 
207–233. https ://doi.org/10.1093/bjps/axm01 1.
Weisberg, M. (2013). Simulation and similarity using models to understand the world. Oxford University 
Press.
Wiese, W., & Metzinger, T. (2017). Vanilla PP for Philosophers: A Primer on Predictive Processing. 
https ://doi.org/10.15502 /97839 58573 024
Worrall, J. (1989). Structural realism: the best of both worlds? Dialectica, 43(1–2), 99–124. https ://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1746-8361.1989.tb009 33.x.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps andinstitutional affiliations.