fpsyg-11-607917 December 9, 2020 Time: 15:6 # 1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 04 December 2020
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.607917
Edited by:
Albert Newen,
Ruhr University Bochum, Germany
Reviewed by:
Mateusz Wozniak,
Central European University, Hungary
Shaun Gallagher,
University of Memphis, United States
*Correspondence:
Majid D. Beni
mbeni@metu.edu.tr;
davoody1980@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Theoretical and Philosophical
Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 18 September 2020
Accepted: 13 November 2020
Published: 04 December 2020
Citation:
Beni MD (2020) An Algorithmic
Metaphysics of Self-Patterns.
Front. Psychol. 11:607917.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.607917
An Algorithmic Metaphysics of
Self-Patterns
Majid D. Beni*
Department of Philosophy, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
The paper draws on an algorithmic criterion to demonstrate that the self (as initially
described in Shaun Gallagher’s a pattern theory of self) is a composite, scattered, and
patterned object. It also addresses the question of extendedness of the self-pattern.
Based on the criteria drawn from algorithmic complexity, I argue that although the self-
pattern possesses a genuinely extended aspect (and in this sense, the self-pattern is
minimally extended) the self-pattern and its environment do not constitute a genuine
composite object.
Keywords: coupling, constitution, composition, compressibility, free energy principle, self-pattern
INTRODUCTION1
This paper does not intend to present a general theory of extendedness. Instead, it focuses on
a speciﬁc case to address the question of the relations between the self and its environment at
a fundamental level. The paper endorses the criterion of compressibility-cum-simplicity as the
yardstick of the extendedness of the self. The general intuition behind this move from the theory
of extended cognition to the discussion of extendedness of the self is this: the self is a cognitive
agent par excellence , and if we unravel the issue of the extendedness of the self adequately (in
terms of complexity and simplicity of patterns) we will acquire deep insights into the criterion
of extendedness of cognition. I conceive of the relationship between the self and its extension
in terms of Gallagher’s (2013) “A Pattern Theory of Self ” (also see Kyselo, 2014; Beni, 2016;
Gallagher and Daly’s, 2018).
Although Gallagher and colleagues speak extensively about the dynamical relations between
aspects of the self-pattern (the extended aspect included), they do not address the issue of the
ontological state of the patterned self and its aspects. The only exception is their expressed sympathy
for Dennett’s (1991) theory of real patterns (Gallagher and Daly’s, 2018, p. 2). The paper considers
the self as a composite object and asks two important questions;
1. Is the extended aspect constitutive of the self(-pattern)? If that is the case, there is some
purchase for the extendedness of the self under the pattern theory.
2. Do the self-pattern and the environment constitute a genuine composite object?
The notion of “constitution” that is used in the present paper is diﬀerent from Gallagher’s
view of “constitution.” This paper regards “constitution” as a matter of composition, whereas
Gallagher (2018) speaks of “dynamical constitution.” “Dynamical constitution” is a term of art,
and it could be (and indeed has been) explicated in terms of reciprocal (or circular) causality.
Others have defended this view before. Kirchhoﬀ (2015), for example, identiﬁes “constitution” with
1The paper has beneﬁted a lot from the contribution of two referees of this journal, the editor, and steve elliot, these debts
are gratefully acknowledged.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 December 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 607917
fpsyg-11-607917 December 9, 2020 Time: 15:6 # 2
Beni Metaphysics of Self-Patterns
diachronic causal coupling. Kirchhoﬀ ’s view is in harmony with
the extended-enactivist approach (as well as with Gallagher’s
use of dynamical gestalt). However, I have some reservations
about how to construe the “causal coupling” relation in more or
less familiar metaphysical terms. I shall unpack this reservation
in the remainder of the paper, but for the time being suﬃce
to say that the concern about the causal-coupling notion of
constitution is discussed under the coupling-constitutive fallacy
(Aizawa, 2010). The fallacy holds that the causal coupling relation
is not suﬃcient for the constitution. And although Gallagher
does address the causal-constitution fallacy (Gallagher, 2018),
in agreement with the enactivist approach (Kirchhoﬀ, 2015), he
eventually renounces the compositional view on “constitution”
and eradicates the diﬀerence between the notion of “constitution”
and “causality” and argues that “dynamical couplings of brain-
body-environment constitute the mind” (Gallagher, 2018, p. 208).
As I say, I do not engage in a fundamental debate about
the plausibility of enactivism. Nor do I claim that Gallagher’s
approach simply begs the question of extendedness of the
mind. I just claim that his dedication to enactivism and
extendedness are not well supported enough. That is to say,
despite the remarkable success of enactivism and extendedness
in making sense of psychological theories (Varela et al., 1991;
Barsalou, 2008; Pezzulo et al., 2012; Bitbol and Gallagher,
2018), these approaches have not been developed into a well-
supported metaphysical stance, say, about the objecthood or
reality of the extended objects. This does not need to mean
that the dynamical (causal-coupling) conception of constitution
is generally wanting. Indeed, Gallagher does provide a rather
detailed critical discussion of the new mechanist roots of
the constitution-coupling notion of constitution (Bitbol and
Gallagher, 2018; Gallagher, 2018) 2. But the problem is that
this approach does not expansively elaborate on the ontological
aspects of the extended objects. I take a compositional stance
on the question of constitution. In defense of this move, I can
say that the compositional stance could be developed into a
clear metaphysical interpretation of real patterns as well as self-
patterns. At the same time, this proposal is unassuming, in the
sense that it does not intend to deny the viability of dynamical
approaches. Nor does it claim the ultimate superiority of the
compositional approach.
Perhaps it was wise, on Gallagher’s part, to take enactivism
as a basic perspective whose soundness does not need to be
supported by further philosophical argument. But I assume that
the compositional view on the constitution (that gives rise to the
notorious coupling-constitution fallacy) is as respectable as the
rival stance. The present paper pays allegiances to the classical
compositional view. It could be granted that a compositional
view on the constitution of the self and its relationship with its
environment deserves to be heard out too. I pinpoint the need
for a compositional approach with a reference to the coupling-
constitutive fallacy before going further.
The question of the constitutive/coupling relation between
the self and the environment is dictated with an eye to
a serious challenge to the theory of extended cognition
2I owe this important remark to one of the reviewers of this paper.
(Clark and Chalmers, 1998); for the challenge, see Aizawa, 2010;
Adams and Aizawa, 2012). I suggest that the criteria of
compressibility and simplicity of patterns provide precious
insight into the question of extendedness of the self. The
proposed criteria are inspired by Steve Petersen’s (Petersen, 2013,
2019) algorithmic metaphysics of the composition of objects (and
more originally, by Dennett’s (1991) theory of real patterns, as
well as Ladyman and Ross’s (2007) engagement with the idea
of real patterns). Dabbling in algorithmic metaphysics in this
fashion, I provide answers to the two abovementioned questions.
I argue that;
- In answer to (1) above, the extended aspect is constitutive
of the self-pattern. The answer is backed up by the criterion
of compressibility and its minimal and maximal clauses (as
inspired by Petersen’s work). I submit that the self-pattern
is a composite object constituted by various aspects.
- In answer to (2) above, I suggest that the self-pattern and
the environment do not constitute a composite object. I
substantiate this point by invoking the same criteria of
compressibility and simplicity. I draw on Friston et al.’s
theory of selfhood under the Free Energy Principle to
present the criteria of compressibility and simplicity of the
self to substantiate my claim.
The paper is structured in the following way. I use a broad
brush to sketch some platitudes about the extended cognition
thesis as well as the coupling-constitution fallacy. Then I focus on
Gallagher’sa pattern theory of the self and expose the question
of the relationship between various contributors to the self
(the cognitive aspect and the extended aspect included). Then
I outline Petersen’s patternist criterion of being a composite
object and show that the self-pattern is a scattered composite
object that subsumes various aspects, elements, and factors as its
constituents (the extended aspect included). This provides some
purchase for defending a minimal account of the extendedness of
the self-pattern (only in the sense that the self has an extended
aspect). Then I show that the self-pattern and the environment
do not constitute a composite pattern (in an ontologically
signiﬁcant way). The conclusion is that although the self-pattern
is minimally extended, the extendedness only amounts to a
coupling relation between the self-pattern and its environment
but not to a genuine form of constitution.
THE EXTENDED COGNITION AND THE
COUPLING-CONSTITUTION FALLACY
According to the extended cognition thesis, to fulﬁll our cognitive
goals, we depend on elements in our environment, including the
“technological gadgets with which we regularly and uncritically
interact” (Carter and Kallestrup, 2019, p. 1). The insight into
the integration between the cognitive abilities of the organic
agents and (presumably) non-organic (or extra-organismic)
devices led to the philosophical belief that the extra-organismic
devices constitute a non-negligible part of the cognitive process
(Clark and Chalmers, 1998). The environmental factors are
not only coupled with cognitive processes, they also constitute
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 December 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 607917
fpsyg-11-607917 December 9, 2020 Time: 15:6 # 3
Beni Metaphysics of Self-Patterns
parts of these cognitive processes. According to Clark and
Chalmers (1998, p. 8):
If, as we confront some task, a part of the world functions
as a process which, were it done in the head, we would
have no hesitation in recognizing as part of the cognitive
process, then that part of the world is (so we claim) part of
the cognitive process.
Despite its natural appeal, the extended mind thesis has been
targeted by the objection from the coupling-constitution fallacy
(Adams and Aizawa, 2008, 2009; Aizawa, 2010). The objection
is based on a denial: all external resources causally interact with
cognitive systems are not integrated with cognitive systems.
The main argument behind the extended mind thesis seems
to be something like this: Assume that X is a cognitive process.
X is causally dependent on Y and is mutually interacting with
it to fulﬁll its cognitive goals (meaning that Y is not dangling
at the end of the causal chain and is included in the loop).
It follows that X and Y form an integrated cognitive process.
The argument is allegedly based on some fallacy: from the
fact that X and Y are causally connected, it does not follow
that X and Y form an integrated cognitive process, given that
causation simpliciter is not enough for supporting the claim
about the constitution of the system (Aizawa, 2010, p. 333). One
reason for this pessimism is that “constitution” is considered
to be synchronic whereas causality needs to be diachronic. The
pessimism could as well be based on some deeper skepticism
about the capacity of “causality” to be the universal glue of
constitution [As it happens, skepticism about the status of
causality ﬁnds its way into the work of some notable pattern
theorists (Ladyman and Ross, 2007, chapter 5)]. Be that as may,
according to Adams and Aizawa (2008, p. 91) “It simply does
not follow from the fact that process X is in some way causally
connected to a cognitive process that X is thereby part of that
cognitive process.”
There are various sorts of reactions to the coupling-
constitution fallacy (Wilson, 2004, 2010; Clark, 2008; Rowlands,
2009; Walter and Kyselo, 2009; Piredda, 2017). Advocating an
enactivist approach, Gallagher himself considered the coupling-
constitution fallacy shortly and let it down rather easily.
He asserts that the “diachronic conception of constitution
that includes reciprocal causal relations” can be adopted by
the enactivist, extended-mind approach, which supports a
dynamical and holistic conception of cognition (Gallagher,
2018, p. 207). It is by no means a shortcoming of Gallagher’s
approach that it depends on a causal-coupling conception
of constitution. This dynamical conception is well-supported
enough (Kirchhoﬀ, 2015; Kirchhoﬀ and Kiverstein, 2019).
So, instead of trading oﬀ intuitions about the (undeniable)
appeal of enactivism, I suggest a rather operational (i.e.,
algorithmic) criterion of testing the metaphysical viability of
extendedness. In this respect, the endeavor of this paper is
diﬀerent from the preceding debates of critics and advocates
of enactivism and the extended mind theory who do not
provide a clear demarcation criterion for distinguishing genuine
cases of constitution from cases of coupling simpliciter.
Let me elaborate.
The question of extendedness is this: where to draw the
boundaries of cognition? The thesis of extendedness indicates
that there are no sharp boundaries between the cognitive
system and its environment, and the cognitive system and its
environment constitute an entity. I submit that the philosophy of
selfhood provides a good framework for unraveling the question
of extendedness. The self is the cognitive agent par excellence,
and the question of extendedness could be rephrased in terms
of how to draw the boundaries that separate the self-pattern
from its environment. The discussion will be continued in
the next section.
A PATTERN THEORY OF SELF
I address the question of extendedness of the self in the context
of Gallagher’s (2013) a pattern theory of self (I call it the pattern
theory but without any speciﬁc philosophical intentions). The
pattern theory of the self has been discussed expansively (Kyselo,
2014; Newen, 2018; Beni, 2019a,b). While the choice of “the
pattern theory” in the context of the present enquiry is to some
extent arbitrary, the theory provides a nice venue for pursuing
the question of extendedness. This is because the pattern theory
stipulates the existence of an extended aspect of the self.
Gallagher states the pattern theory of self in the following
manner: “According to the pattern theory, a self is constituted by
some characteristic features or aspects that may include minimal
embodied, minimal experiential, aﬀective, intersubjective,
psychological/cognitive, narrative, extended, and situated
aspects” (Gallagher, 2013, p. 1 emphasis added). According to
this approach, what is called the self is a cluster concept that
includes a suﬃcient number of features. Despite speaking of
aspects of the self, Gallagher endeavors to “stay plural about
the concept of self ” (Gallagher, 2013, p. 1). If so, the so-called
aspects (as being organized into certain patterns according to
Gallagher) are not models of something (i.e., the self) that has its
independent existence. The point about the existence is rather
important in the context of our paper (which is concerned with
metaphysical issues).
The self is not a simple entity with its independent existence.
However, it is not obvious that the self-pattern does not exist
at all (I will follow Gallagher, 2013 and use “self-pattern” and
“self ” interchangeably). The pattern theory does not advocate a
form of eliminativism about the self (Metzinger, 2003). The self-
pattern is not non-existent in the context of the theory. What
manner of existence does the self-pattern possess then? From the
metaphysical point of view, we can assume that the self-pattern
(which is neither independently existent nor totally non-existent)
exists as a composite object, constituted by the menagerie of
various aspects and elements. The self-pattern and its aspects and
elements do not exist independently of one another. In this paper,
I argue that the elements and aspects of the self are constitutive of
the self-pattern, which is a scattered composite object.
To a ﬁrst approximation, Gallagher’s deﬁnition of “self-
pattern” does not provide a clear insight into the ontological
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 December 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 607917
fpsyg-11-607917 December 9, 2020 Time: 15:6 # 4
Beni Metaphysics of Self-Patterns
status of the self. Gallagher suggests that “what we call
self consists of a complex and suﬃcient pattern of certain
contributors, none of which on their own is necessary or
essential to any particular self ” (Gallagher, 2013, p. 3). What
is the relation between contributors of the self? The pattern
theory emphasizes the diversity of aspects and elements of the
self. However, it does not account for the relation between
aspects quite suﬃciently, meaning that it oﬀers “no account of
the individual as explanatory whole” (Kyselo, 2014, p. 1). In
other words, despite acknowledging the existence of meaningful
dynamical relations between self-patterns, Gallagher’s account
“doesn’t develop a full theory about how the various elements of
the pattern of self are connected” (Beni, 2016, p. 3,731). Although
these objections are directed at the pattern theory in the ﬁrst
place, they also bear on the issue of the extendedness of the
self. To support an extended conception of the self we need to
accept that the self always latches onto the ecological and/or social
environment, and the unit of analysis is the self-environment
(Gallagher, 2013, p. 4). But if the pattern theory fails to produce
a full account of the relationship between diﬀerent aspects of
the self, trivially it would fail to explain how extended (and
situated) contributors are indeed component parts of the self-
pattern in a constitutive sense. Accordingly, the pattern theory
would fail to account for the extendedness of the self-pattern.
This could be a signiﬁcant blow to the extended cognition
thesis as well as a general objection to the pattern theory. That
said, I have to immediately add that Gallagher and Daly oﬀer
some interesting strategies for accounting for the relationship
between diverse aspects of the self. The most promising of
their suggested strategies (in my opinion) consists of invoking
predictive processing and the free energy principle. Why is
this the case? Patterns that are at issue in the pattern theory
are speciﬁed in terms of dynamical system theory. Gallagher’s
insight into that subject receives support from some important
works such as (Schöner and Kelso, 1988; Kelso, 2016). However,
this paper assumes that it could be also worthwhile to invoke
comprehensive and unifying formal framework under which to
model relations between diverse aspects of the self (as well as
the relation between the self and the environment). The Free
Energy Principle (FEP) seems to underpin such a comprehensive,
unifying framework. The dynamic approach too endeavors to
account for the emergence of the patterned behavior under
generative self-organizing processes (Schöner and Kelso, 1988;
Kelso, 2016). FEP can be used in the same spirit to achieve
the same goal with remarkable formal precision and empirical
success. In view of the mathematical vigor and empirical success
of the FEP , it seems that FEP provides a suitable theoretical
framework for bolstering Gallagher’s account of the relationship
between aspects of self-patterns.
The Free Energy Principle (FEP) and predictive processing,
characterized in terms of Bayesian models of minimization of
variational free energy, are the unifying theoretical framework
that accounts for perception, cognition, and action (Friston, 2010;
Hohwy, 2013; Clark, 2016). In order to survive, organisms must
remain in non-equilibrium steady states . This means that they
must avoid getting into unpredicted situations. The probabilistic
description of the dynamics of systems in non-equilibrium steady
states is developed into two kinds of descriptions. According to
Ramstead et al. (2020, p. 6):
First, the system can be described in terms of the ﬂow of the
system’s statesóthat are subject to random ﬂuctuationsó
in which case, we can formulate the ﬂow in terms of a path
integral formulation, as a path of least action. Equivalently,
we can describe the non-equilibrium steady-state in terms
of the probability of ﬁnding the system in some state when
sampling at any random time.
According to this formulation, self-organizing systems
(in terms of intrinsic geometry) evolve toward some non-
equilibrium steady-state density which can be interpreted as a
statistical or generative model (in terms of its extrinsic geometry).
In this fashion, we could characterize the joint probability
density over internal states and external states (Ramstead et al.,
2020, p. 9). Within this context, variational free energy is an
information-theoretic measure that provides an upper bound on
surprise. Entropy is “[t]he average surprise of outcomes sampled
from a probability distribution or density” (Friston, 2010, p. 1).
Living systems minimize their free energy by staying in a small
set of environmental states. A ﬁsh needs to stay in the water
because a ﬁsh out of water will ﬁnd itself in a surprising state.
Staying in a limited number of states enables organisms to
form approximately precise predictions of the environment. This
makes the organisms’ interactions with the environment eﬃcient.
The organism can minimize its free energy either via adjusting
its models (that’s predictive coding) or via action (that’s active
inference). It can minimize its free energy by either changing
its internal models of the environment based on evidence that is
sampled actively or by acting on the environment and changing
the environmental states to make them match its predictions.
When applied to the brain, the theory holds that the brain could
get approximate representations of the causal structure of the
environment by minimizing prediction errors 3. Below, I shall
unpack this remark.
The brain forms generative models 4 of the environment and
through top-down processing in a hierarchical organization
represents the real world. In case of discrepancy between
predictions and actual sensory inputs, the brain minimizes
its prediction errors and ﬁnesses its generative models (or
the organism changes the environmental states to match the
predictions) (Friston and Stephan, 2007). FEP and predictive
processing are used to provide viable models of selfhood
(Limanowski and Blankenburg, 2013; Apps and Tsakiris,
2014; Limanowski and Friston, 2020). At least for some
organisms, having a representation of the self in generative
models is indispensable to the multisensory integration in
3Not all representatives of predictive processing would agree to using
“representations” in this context. A radical embodied approach would deny that
internal models or inner simulacrums play a signiﬁcant role in PP. But moderate
advocates of emboidement such as Clark conceds that models (which embed
representations) do not need to be totally eliminated from predictive processing.
According to Clark’s moderate version of embodiment, “it is surely that very
model-invoking schema that allows us to understand how it is that these looping
dynamical regimes arise and enable such spectacular results” (Clark, 2016, p. 293).
4Generative models are internal probabilistic models that the brain uses to update
its posterior models.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 December 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 607917
fpsyg-11-607917 December 9, 2020 Time: 15:6 # 5
Beni Metaphysics of Self-Patterns
both exteroceptive and interoceptive streams. On such grounds,
Gallagher and Daly’s (2018, p. 8) argue that FEP and predictive
processing characterize the dynamical relations that bring
together otherwise diverse self-patterns. Let us see how this aﬀects
the extendedness of the self.
Because there are dynamical relations between self-patterns, it
can be assumed that the extended aspect is somewhat connected
to other aspects of the self. But does this mean that the extended
aspect is a constituent of the self (in contrast, it could be assumed
that it is related to other self-aspects loosely and without forging
any strong ontological bonds? Gallagher and Daly’s elaboration
on dynamical relations between self-patterns is silent about this.
Moreover, aside from a ﬂeeting reference to Dennett’s (1991)
theory of real patterns, Gallagher and Daly do not explicate their
view on the existence of the self-pattern. The question of (modes
of) the existence and reality of the self needs to be treated with
adequate technical tools.
Gallagher and Daly’s characterization of dynamical relations
between aspects of the self indicates that Gallagher is not
committed to the existence of a class of totally diversiﬁed and
disintegrated self-contributors. Nor does he conceive of the self-
pattern in terms of a classical substance. This puts the ontological
status of the self-pattern in a twilight zoon. Inspired by Gallagher
and Daly’s, (2018 p. 2) remark on the Dennettian tendency
of their view, I suggest that the self is a scattered composite
pattern that is constituted by diverse aspects, the extended aspect
included. I use metaphysical tools that are congenial to Dennett’s
(1991) theory of real patterns to substantiate my stance on the
existence and reality of the self as a composite pattern. It is true
that at times Dennett seems something of a pragmatist about
the reality of the pattern, and doesn’t oﬀer any heavy ontology 5.
However, Dennett (1983, p. 380) is clear that he is not a ﬁctionalist
about theoretical posits such as the center of gravity. This is
because these posits play an explanatory function (and thus could
be embraced based on some indispensability argument). The
result is a moderate metaphysical stance that cannot be described
in simple terms of realism vs. instrumentalism. According to
Dennett, his real patterns theory “is clearer than either of
the labels [meaning realism and instrumentalism], ” so he just
leaves “that question to anyone who still ﬁnds illumination in
them” (Dennett, 1991, p. 51). This approach is in harmony with
Petersen’s take on algorithmic metaphysics. Petersen submits that
“I must confess that I am sympathetic not only to Dennett’s
patternist proposal, but also to this metaontological stance [of
Dennett’s, which has been just cited]” (Petersen, 2019, p. 3). I
suggest that this metaphysical enterprise can be applied to deal
with the question of the extendedness of the self-pattern.
More light will be shed on this topic if we ponder the two
following questions:
1. Is the extended aspect constitutive of the self-pattern?
2. Do the self-pattern and the environment constitute a
genuine composite object?
We need to know more about the metaphysics of composed
patterns before providing viable answers to these questions.
5I thank one of the reviewers of this journal for reminding me of this point.
AN ALGORITHMIC METAPHYSICS OF
COMPOSITION
We can address the question of how to draw the boundaries of
a cognitive system if we could tell when two systems that are
coupled form an integrated system. This question resembles the
question of composition, which asks when we can claim that some
objects constitute a new object. This paper takes a compositional
stance on constitution.
Generally, the question of the composition provides
metaphysical insights into the thesis of extendedness. It
may be assumed that there are no composite objects at all,
or it may be assumed that any mereological sum constitutes
an integrated object. Between these two extremes, there
are moderate varieties; some pluralities (such as atoms of
hydrogen and oxygen) constitute a new object (such as a
molecule of water) and some other pluralities (such as the
compound of the pear tree in my yard and the Taj Mahal)
do not constitute a new object 6. In this context, Petersen is
advocating a compositional conception of constitution (Petersen,
2013, p. 312). According to this approach, for an object to
be constituted/composed by some pluralities, there must exist
some degree of “connectedness” or “integrity” between the
pluralities (Simons, 2000, p. 290). Integrity and connectedness
are conditions that need to be satisﬁed by constitution. This
is because without integrity and connectedness the aggregates
would be assembled into an arbitrary sum. In this sense,
I adopt a compositional stance on constitution (Mark the
similarity of the problem of composition/constitution to the
problem of the relation between self-contributors and aspects.
The general insight of this paper is that from a metaphysical
point of view, the self can be identiﬁed with a scattered
composite pattern).
There have been signiﬁcant attempts at invoking information-
theoretic frameworks for identifying the structure of reality,
or more technically, real patterns (Dennett, 1991; Ross, 2000;
Ladyman and Ross, 2007). According to Dennett’s statement of
the patternist approach, “A pattern exists in some data-is-real-
if there is a description of the data that is more eﬃcient than
the bit map, whether or not anyone can concoct it” (Dennett,
1991, p. 34). Interestingly enough, Dennett’s conception of real
patterns is in line with Gallagher and Daly’s conception of
self-patterns [Referring to Dennett’s pattern theory, Gallagher
indicates that “the self has the scientiﬁcally useful reality of a
pattern” (Gallagher and Daly’s, 2018, p. 2)]. I shall ﬂesh out this
6To the question composition, van Inwagen provides a simple answer in terms of
organicism, which holds that “the activity of the xs constitutes a life or the xs are
the current objects of a history of maintenance” (van Inwagen, 1995, p. 138). Xs
that constitute a life do compose exactly an organism (ibid, p. 91). Of course, the
organicist criterion of composition can lead to a rough and ready answer to the
question of how to draw the boundaries of cognitive systemsóobviously by laying
the boundaries of cognition (or composition of the object) on the boundaries of
the organism’s body. But for one thing, the criterion precludes the possibility of
extended cognition into non-organismic objects too trivially (perhaps based on an
unsubstantiated prejudice in favor of being organic). Moreover, organicism may
be construed to indicate that only living organisms and mereological simples exist,
but there are no non-living composite objects such as tables and chairs. This view,
called “the denial” by van Inwagen (1995, p. 1) is too radical to be justiﬁed easily.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 December 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 607917
fpsyg-11-607917 December 9, 2020 Time: 15:6 # 6
Beni Metaphysics of Self-Patterns
proposal with an eye to its use for dealing with the question
of the self (as a composite reality) and its metaphysical aspects.
This proposal draws a connection between the metaphysical
deﬁnition of objects (as patterned or structured entities) and
their description in terms of compressibility (compressible
objects are patterned). Patterns that are described by compressed
programs are indispensable to viable representations of the
world. Dennett generally implies that the patterns could be
characterized based on Kolmogorov complexity. James Ladyman
and Don Ross have used the ideas of logical depth 7 and
projectibility to characterize the patterns. Projectible patterns,
say Ladyman and Ross, are real patterns in the dataset 8,9.
Petersen (2013, 2019) characterizes real patterns by invoking
algorithmic information theory (and more speciﬁcally, in terms
of Kolmogorov complexity).
Petersen’s goal is to show how the patternist approach can
make sense of “composition” which is metaphysically a vague and
mysterious notion. Kolmogorov complexity [K (x)] eﬃciently
represents the main insight behind Dennett’s and Ladyman and
Ross’s views on the representation of reality. Here, the notion
of incompressibility (in terms of Kolmogorov complexity or
logical depth, which are arguably translatable to one another)
provides a criterion of the constitution of an object, given that
“To be is to be a real pattern” (Ladyman and Ross, 2007,
p. 233). The relevance of the present discussion to the issue
of extendedness is this: the criterion of being a real composite
could be used to determine whether the biological cognitive
system and the environment form a real composite entity.
More speciﬁcally, I argue that the criterion can be used to
make sense of the integrity and connectedness of the extended
aspect with the rest of the self-pattern. We need to show that
the extended aspect is constitutive of the self. Then we can
conclude that the self-pattern is minimally extended. Below, I
shall furnish more details about the criterion of being a composite
patterned object.
According to Petersen (2013, 2019) the criterion of being a
real pattern (characterized in terms of Kolmogorov complexity)
can demarcate what is a genuine composite object from the
mere sum of independent objects or patterns. According to
7Logical depth is deﬁned as “a normalized quantitative index of the execution
time required to generate the model of the real pattern in question by a near
incompressible universal computer program, that is, one not itself computable as
the output of a signiﬁcantly more concise program” (Ladyman and Ross, 2007,
p. 220).
8According to this proposal:
To be is to be a real pattern; and a pattern x →y is real iﬀ
(i) it is projectible; and
(ii) it has a model that carries information about at least one pattern P in
an encoding that has a logical depth less than the bitmap encoding of P ,
and where P is not projectible by a physically possible device computing
information about another real pattern of lower logical depth than x →y
(Ladyman and Ross, 2007, p. 233).
9It has been contended that this criterion of projectibility cannot demarcate real
patterns (or at least partial non-redundant patterns) from patterns simpliciter
(Beni, 2017; Suñé and Martínez, 2019). But these considerations do not deter
us from continuing our pursuit, because our present enquiry is not concerned
with the association between non-compressibility and reality (more on this later
in the paper).
Petersen’s proposal, an aggregate of objects is itself a real object
if there is some kind of integrity and connectedness between
its component parts. In other words, real composite objects are
simpler than the sum of their independent component parts. In
this fashion, Kolmogorov complexity can be incorporated into
an ontological criterion of what is real. According to Petersen,
given that “compressibility” corresponds to “simplicity, ” there
is ontological gain when there is some gain in a pattern. This
deﬁnition provides insights into the internal integrity of genuine
composite objects. This is because “to compose, a compressible
region must be referenced by the best compression of the totality
in which the region resides” (Petersen, 2019, p. 10). I unfold the
technical details immediately.
Complexity and simplicity are deﬁned in terms of the
processing of information in a universal Turing machine, which
is an abstract device that can model any computable algorithm
in a discrete domain. A Turing machine is constituted by a
ﬁnite program. It can manipulate a tape (which is a linear
list of cells), and it has a head. The machine can ﬁll each
cell with any of the symbols from a speciﬁed set of variables,
and it can move the head to any speciﬁc cell. Based on such
simple operations, a Turing machine can model everything in
the discrete domain that is intuitively computable. A universal
Turing machine can model the behavior of any other Turing
machine (Vitanyi, 2009). The relation between the notions of
“Turing computation” and “Kolmogorov complexity” is this:
Kolmogorov complexity of an object consists of the length of the
shortest program (i.e., shortest input) that produces that object,
assuming that the program is processed by a ﬁxed universal
preﬁx Turing machine [not all theorists agree that the domain
of computable should be discrete (Hutter, 2008)]. The Turing
machine program is the description of that object, and an object
that has such a shortest description is considered to be simple.
Technically, for the string x, the program p provides the shortest
description, if when processed by the universal Turing machine
U P outputs x. Under that supposition, the shortest description is
provided by
KU (x) : =minp{l(p) :U(p) =x}
l(p) submits the length of p in bits (Hutter, 2008). The
deﬁnition of complexity that is at issue here is compatible with the
deﬁnition of logical depth as stated above. And Petersen builds
upon the formal deﬁnition of Kolmogorov complexity to address
the metaphysical question of objecthood in a world that includes
some fundamental objects and simple properties (this world also
accommodates the succession of time). The question is this: could
there be composite objects in this world. This leads us to another
important question: what is the criterion of demarcating genuine
composite objects from compounds that do not constitute
genuine objects. To ﬁnd answers to these questions, Petersen
develops an algorithmic-compositional concept of “constitution”
for both objects and their properties (Petersen, 2013, p. 312).
I cite Petersen (2013, pp. 308ñ309) to show how Kolmogorov
complexity is developed into a criterion of being a composite
object. Let l ∈L be any interval and xl be a composite function
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 December 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 607917
fpsyg-11-607917 December 9, 2020 Time: 15:6 # 7
Beni Metaphysics of Self-Patterns
restricted to that interval. x#l designates the length of x plus some
small constant that denotes the computational overhead;
xl is a composite objectif and only if
1. KU (xl) < x#l (the compressible clause).
2. There is no partition of l into intervals {l 1... ln} such that∑
i KU(xli) ≤KU(xl) (the minimal clause).
3. There is no interval l’ containing l such that KU (xl’)
≤KU(xl) (the maximal clause).
Minimal clause indicates that If x has a sub-region that does
not contribute to the compressibility of the remainder, then the
diverse components in x do not constitute anything (Petersen,
2019, p. 13). Consider two objects (such as the pear tree and the
Taj Mahal, call them o1 and o2) that do not constitute a genuine
composite object (call it o3 which is equal to o1 ∪o2). As Petersen
argues, although o 3 is compressible, it is not an object because
of the minimal clause, given that KU(o1)+KU(o2) ≤KU(o3)
(Petersen, 2013, pp. 309ñ310). Thus, the union of the pear tree
and the Taj Mahal is not a genuine object. On the other hand,
maximal clause indicates that “parts must each be simpler than
wholes, but wholes must be simpler than all their parts taken
separately” (Petersen, 2019, p. 15). Consider the possibility of
breaking the program that describes o1 into two substrings o1R
and o1L (representing the right and left substrings). That is to
say, o 1 = o 1R U o 1L. It might be assumed that the same kind
of argument that was mentioned to rule out o 3 as a genuine
object could be used to rule out o 1 too, by indicating that
it runs afoul of the minimal clause (instead o1R and o1L are
genuine objects). The branches and the trunk of the same pear
tree (or its atoms) could be modeled as separate objects, and
it could be assumed that the pear tree itself is not a genuine
object. The maximal clause excludes this option by preventing
the arbitrary division of proper objects. That is to say, o1R and
o1L are not proper objects. Although in principle we may be
able to decompose the pear tree into the independent classes
of its branches and its trunk, there is no gain in simplicity or
ontology of decomposing the tree in this fashion. Let us see
how this applies to the question of constitution of the self and
its extendedness.
IS THE SELF A COMPOSITE OBJECT?
Petersen (2019, p. 5) submits that “Seeking to minimize Bayesian
surprise on higher-order parameters is basically just pattern
extraction.” FEP is stated in terms of Shannon information theory
(rather than Kolmogorov complexity). But there are formal
links between Shannon information theory and Kolmogorov
complexity (Grunwald and Vitanyi, 2004). At any rate, FEP and
predictive processing are used to characterize the self. The self is
a composite pattern. It is compressible in sense of Kolmogorov
complexity and logical depth.
According to Gallagher, the self does not have an independent
existence. But from the point of view of algorithmic metaphysics,
the question is not about the independent existence of the
self but the composition of the self. This is in line with a
compositional metaphysical view. The question that we must
attend to is this: Is the self-pattern simpler or more compressible
than the sum of its independent contributors . A positive answer
to this question indicates that aspects are constituting the self,
instead of loosely hanging together, and it would follow that
the self has a genuinely extended aspect. This follows from the
application of the metaphysical criterion of compositionality.
Below, I explain how these three clauses apply to the issue of
extendedness of the self.
As to the ﬁrst clause, it could be easily granted that the self-
pattern is compressible. But does this mean that the self is a
composite pattern? According to the minimal clause, if the self
is a genuine composite object, the sum of independent aspects of
the self cannot be simpler (or more compressible) than the self.
It could be the case that the extended aspect and the cognitive
aspect are each simpler than the self as a composite object, but
the sum of all involved self-contributors is not simpler or less
complex than the self-pattern (see the maximal clause in the
previous section). Together, the minimal and maximal clauses
indicate that for the self to be a genuine composite object (or
pattern), its description must be simpler and shorter than the sum
of descriptions of diverse self-aspects and contributors. There
is nothing in the deﬁnition of self-patterns that preclude this
possibility. Take Newen et al.’s conception of patterns, which is
adopted by Gallagher (2013):
A feature F is constitutive for a pattern X if it is part of at
least one set of features which is minimally suﬃcient for a
token to belong to a type X. “Minimally suﬃcient” means
that these features are jointly suﬃcient for the episode to be
of type X, but if one of them were taken away the episode
would no longer count as an instance of X (Newen et al.,
2015, p. 195).
This deﬁnition does not indicate that separate aspects have
their independent existent, or the sum of independent self-
contributors is more endurable, compressible, or simpler than
the self as a composite pattern. That is to say, although the self
does not have an independent existence, self-aspects are even less
capable of having their independent existence. In this sense, it
could be assumed that self-aspects are constituting the self, and
the self-pattern is ontologically more fundamental than separate
self-aspects. This provides an insight into the constitution of the
self. A more technical demonstration can be oﬀered in terms of
the FEP-based characterization of the self.
FEP is indeed formulated in terms of Shannon information
theory, rather than Kolmogorov complexity 10. Even so, the FEP-
based account considers the self as a theoretical posit that can
reduce the complexity of our explanation of various aspects
and elements. The sum of separate self-aspects cannot explain
cognition and action of a person in a simple and uniﬁed
way. This means that the sum of explanations that diverse
self-aspects produce is more complex than their integrated
explanation under the rubric of FEP. The general insight
10The diﬀerence between Shannon theory of information (which provides the
theoretical foundation of FEP) and Kolmogorov complexity is that the former
models the randomness of the source of information whereas the latter describes
the randomness of the object itself (Grunwald and Vitanyi, 2004, p. 3).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 December 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 607917
fpsyg-11-607917 December 9, 2020 Time: 15:6 # 8
Beni Metaphysics of Self-Patterns
here is that the self is formed around the idea that “one’s
own body is the one which has the highest probability of
being ‘me’ as other objects are probabilistically less likely
to evoke the same sensory inputs” (Apps and Tsakiris,
2014, p. 6). Therefore, stipulating the self as a theoretical
posit maximizes the simplicity of cognitive and biological
mechanisms by minimizing the overall information conveyed
in the system (that is the entropy 11 of the system that
represent the distribution of probabilities that represent the
structure of the environment). In words of Apps and Tsakiris,
“the notion that there is a ‘self ’ is the most parsimonious
and accurate explanation for sensory inputs. In mathematical
terms, this parsimonious accuracy is exactly the quantity
that is optimized when minimizing free energy or prediction
error” (Apps and Tsakiris, 2014, p. 89). Gallagher and Daly
build upon this fundamental insight to substantiate their view
on the existence of meaningful dynamical relations between
diverse self-aspects12.
A high-level description of the self as a uniﬁed entity
can explain how minimizing the discrepancy between
the generative models and the environment (and one’s
own body) generates perception and cognition. The sum
of independent self-aspects fails to explain the organism’s
representational and active capacities with the same amount
of simplicity and fruitfulness. If that is true, then the self
is more than just a cluster concept (as Gallagher’s original
pattern theory in 2013 paper indicates). Self indeed lacks
an independent existence, but it contributes to simpler
explanatory schemes in ways that remain beyond the sum
of diverse self-aspects.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that Petersen’s deﬁnition
of composite objects allows for the existence of scattered
objects. For example, it indicates that although there are
no strong bonds between water molecules that constitute a
cloud, the cloud can be recognized as a composite object,
albeit a scattered one (Petersen, 2013, p. 311, 2019, p. 8).
In this fashion, the self can be identiﬁed as a scattered
composite pattern. This is because stipulating the self
leads to a less complex description of the organization of
multiple self-aspects. I shall unfold the consequences for the
extendedness of the self.
From our discussion in this section, it follows that the
extended aspect is not just loosely hanged to the aggregate
of other independent self-aspects. The extended aspect, along
with other elements, constitute the self. This means that the
self is minimally extended. The extended aspect is not just
11Formally, entropy is deﬁned in terms of the amount of information that an
observer would gain after receiving a given message. For a random variable X,
Shannon entropy is deﬁned as:
HX =
∑
x∈X
px log 1/px
12Once more, please note that because FEP and predictive processing are stated in
terms of Shannon information theory, they are not concerned with the complexity
of the object (so much as the source of information). However, FEP conveys clear
implications about the simplicity that the assumption of the existence of the self
brings to the explanation of cognition and action (not the same could be told of
diverse self-patterns).
coupled with other aspects, they constitute a genuinely composite
entity, in the sense that is at issue in the compositional view
on constitution.
It is worth repeating that Gallagher takes an enactivist stance
on the question of constitution, and explicates it in terms
of “reciprocal causal relations” (Gallagher, 2018). Accordingly,
Gallagher ignores the coupling-constitution fallacy and takes
the viability of the extended mind approach for granted.
While I do not challenge the validity of the enactivist stance,
I do not think philosophical fundamental stances would be
justiﬁed, conﬁrmed, or veriﬁed easily. One can embrace them
by pondering a number of various considerations, such as
simplicity, fruitfulness, etc. While I do not challenge the general
plausibility of the enactivist stance, but I think the compositional
view deserves to be taken seriously too. Gallagher’s theory
does indicate that the self includes an extended embodied
aspect, albeit without appealing to a compositional criterion
of constitution. It might indeed be possible to understand the
cluster concept of the self (which also embeds an extended
aspect) in terms of a dynamical gestalt, constituted by reciprocal
causal relations (and thereby by a coupling relation with the
environment) rather than compositionality) 13. This paper does
not aim to refute the enactivist approach. It only aspires
to provide a metaphysically well-posed alternative to it. This
is stated in terms of a criterion of compositionality, and
it has the edge over the dynamical systems approach in
the following way: the dynamical system approach cannot
set a meaningful distinction between causally related clusters
that do constitute an object (such as the self) from causal-
coupling relations that do not constitute an object (such as the
compound of the self and the environment). The compositional
approach can set such a distinction. I understand that the
advantage that I attribute to the compositional approach may
not persuade the enactivist to embrace my proposal. I simply
state the compositional criterion to argue that the self and the
environment constitute a composite system, without claiming
the absolute superiority of this construal over enactivism
(the paper is rather unassuming in this sense). In the next
section, I will consider the question of the extendedness of
the self by asking whether the “self-environment” is a genuine
composite entity.
DO THE SELF AND THE ENVIRONMENT
CONSTITUTE AN OBJECT?
As we have already seen, the self can be characterized in
terms of FEP and predictive processing. There are ecological
and enactivist construals of predictive processing and active
inference (Bruineberg et al., 2016; Gallagher and Allen, 2016).
Predictive processing and FEP are concerned with the state of
homeostasis, which is the state of stable internal equilibrium of
the organism with the environment. The ecological construal of
FEP and predictive processing represent the relation between
the organism and its environment in terms of dynamical
13I thank one of the reviewers of this journal for pointing out this to me.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 December 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 607917
fpsyg-11-607917 December 9, 2020 Time: 15:6 # 9
Beni Metaphysics of Self-Patterns
coupling of the organism with the eco-niches and its windows
of aﬀordance. There are also ecological and enactivist theories
of the self and “mineness” in terms of active inference under
FEP (Kiverstein, 2018). The question of extendedness of the
self is this: Do the self and the environment constitute a
genuine composite object, or they are just coupled together?
The point that “[t]he organism embodies in its biological
organization a hierarchically structured model of its own
existence in its environment, or equivalently its being-in-the-
world” (Kiverstein, 2018, p. 2) could be appreciated rather
easily in the context of the pattern theory of the self. This is
because (according to what we saw in the previous section)
the self-pattern includes an extended aspect. But this is not
quite enough for establishing the point that the self and the
environment are component of a genuine composite object. I
shall clarify immediately.
Self-organizing systems are minimizing their free energy
by garnering evidence for their inbuilt generative models.
They are self-evidencing in the sense that they endeavor to
actively garner evidence for their existence (Hohwy, 2014).
And some of these self-evidencing organisms are speciﬁed as
“selves” or as “subjects of minimal phenomenal experiences”
under FEP (Limanowski and Blankenburg, 2013; Kiverstein,
2018). One way of ﬂeshing out this is by assuming that
FEP can be used to describe the self as a subject of
phenomenal experience. Selves are capable of modeling their
expectations about the future states and the consequences of
their actions (Friston, 2018, p. 579). Selves (as subjects) can
model diﬀerent consequences of their actions for themselves
and choose one particular course of action amongst several
possible ones (Friston, 2018, p. 6). In other words, we need
to have models of ourselves as trajectories with non-linear
eﬀects on our sensory input. This accounts for perceptual
unity in a wide time-perspective (Hohwy, 2013, chapter 10).
According to Hohwy:
Action arises when prediction error minimization
happens by acting on the world while sticking with one’s
counterfactual about the world. For this kind of strategy
to be feasible we need an ordering of policies for how to
go about minimizing error in this way. Such policies are
expectations about how ﬂows of error are minimized as
we move through the world. These expectations must rely
on hypotheses under a hierarchical model of ourselves
including our own mental states as coherent and unitary
causal trajectories (Hohwy, 2013, p. 255).
In this vein, a self-conscious system is deﬁned as “a system
that can simulate multiple futures, under diﬀerent actions, and
select the action that has the least surprising outcome” (Friston,
2018, p. 5). But does this mean that the self is a component
of a genuine composite entity (call it the self-environment
compound), in a way that is demanded by a strong version of the
extended thesis?
A strong version of the extended thesis can be stated like this:
the self is extended to the environment, and the self-environment
compound is constituted by both the environment and the self
as its constituents. If so, the existence of the self depends on
its role as a constituent of the self-environment compound. To
substantiate this claim within the patternist framework we must
be able to show that the self-environment compound is simpler or
more compressible than the sum of the self and the environment
as independent entities.
Let us grant that the self-environment compound is
compressible (this means that we can grant the compressible
clause). However, it is not the case that the self-environment
compound is simpler or has a more independent existence than
the sum of independent componentsónamely the self and the
environment. I shall unfold this remark immediately.
The self and its aspects are described via Markovian models
(Friston et al., 2020; Parr et al., 2020). Markov blankets are
networks in Bayesian spaces that register a separation between
sensory states and active ones, given that sensory states are
independent of internal states and active states are independent
of external states. Friston et al. (2020) weaved Markovian
blankets into a framework of information geometry. The result
is an informational/probabilistic description of the way that
the brain represents the external world to itself based on
the relationship between “probability distribution about things”
and “probability distribution of things” (Friston et al., 2020).
Their description of the brain-world relationship accommodates
representation of expected surprise as the set of beliefs that
organisms hold about the consequences of their actions in
the world (this provides a basis for phenomenal aspects of
the minimal self). Not only Markovian models (with separable
internal and external spaces) describe the relationship between
the brain and the world, they also model notions of agency,
consciousness, and deliberate pre-meditated action (as the
properties of the minimal self).
To return to the discussion of compressibility (and minimal
and maximal clauses), when constructing their models of
consciousness and agency Friston et al. (2020), employed an
information geometry that includes a metric for measuring the
distance to informational states space. Why this is relevant
to the issue of compressibility? Because the information-
theoretic measure provides a formal criterion for dealing with
the question of compressibility and simplicity. To explicate
compressibility and simplicity in information geometry, we
should consider the following question. Which of the two
classes of entities is simpler or more compressible? The self-
environment compound or the sum of the self and the
environment as separate entities? Not only the self-environment
as a composite entity is less simple than the self and the
environment (and their sum), the formal statement of the self and
its phenomenal aspects indicates that they are not constituents
of the self-environment compound (in the compositional sense).
Using Markovian models indicates that to be modeled, the
self, as a self-evidencing organism, must be described as
an entity with rather clear boundaries that separate it from
its environment.
On the same subject, an advocate of the enactivist, extended
mind approach does not need to assume that Markov blankets
are only in the business of separating inside from outside.
Markov blankets can be also used to show how inside and
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 December 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 607917
fpsyg-11-607917 December 9, 2020 Time: 15:6 # 10
Beni Metaphysics of Self-Patterns
outside are connected (or coupled). Once more, the disagreement
about the issue of “constitution” and its relation with “causal
coupling” raises its head. For the enactivist, who assumes
that causal coupling is enough for the constitution, Markovian
models are venues of extension of cognition (and selfhood).
However, for those who advocate the compositional view of
constitution, the coupling relation is not enough for establishing
the extendedness of the self.
The signiﬁcance of the barrier or the evidentiary boundary
between the self and the environment has been emphasized by
Hohwy (2007, 2013). The point about the use of Markovian
models in describing the brain-world relationship cements
the importance of the barrier between the self with its
environment (Hohwy, 2017; Kirchhoﬀ et al., 2018). It is possible
to see Markov blankets as the venue of dynamical interaction
between the organism and its environment. Even so, there
is a solid construal which represents Markov blankets as
separating boundaries that seclude the organism (or its self )
from the environment. Although the self is not completely
secluded from the environment by boundaries of skin and
skull (Kirchhoﬀ et al., 2018; Kiverstein and Rietveld, 2018),
the use of the Markov blanket implies that there are staunch
boundaries between the self and its environment. This is
in line with Hohwy’s (2013, 2014, 2017) representationalist
construal of FEP. According to this construal, the brain is
secluded from the world, and it infers the state of the world
from beyond an inferential veil. The Markov blanket here sets
robust boundaries that separate the self from its environment.
Aside from Hohwy’s construal, Friston and colleagues have
suggested that the Markov blanket could contribute to separating
boundaries (Friston et al., 2020; Parr et al., 2020). This
latter construal (which presents the Markov blanket as a
dividing boundary) is in harmony with assuming that the self
and the environment do not constitute a non-decomposable
composite entity.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
The paper invoked the criteria of simplicity and complexity of
real patterns to deal with two speciﬁc questions.
1. Is the extended aspect constitutive of the self-pattern? If this
is the case, there is some purchase for the extendedness of
the self under the pattern theory.
2. Do the self and the environment constitute a genuine
composite object?
Applying the criteria that are drawn from Petersen’s
algorithmic metaphysics, I argued that while there is some basic
purchase for arguing that the self is minimally extended, the self
and the environment do not constitute a real composite object.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author/s.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author conﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work and
has approved it for publication.
REFERENCES
Adams, F., and Aizawa, K. (2008). The Bounds of Cognition: The Bounds of
Cognition. Hoboken, NJ: Blackwell Publishers, doi: 10.1002/9781444391718
Adams, F., and Aizawa, K. (2009). “Why the mind is still in the head, ”
in The Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition , eds P. Robbins and
M. Aydede (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 78ñ95. doi: 10.1017/
CBO9780511816826.005
Adams, F., and Aizawa, K. (2012). Why the Mind Is Still in the Head: The
Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 78ñ95. doi: 10.1017/cbo9780511816826.005
Aizawa, K. (2010). The coupling-constitution fallacy revisited. Cogn. Syst. Res. 11,
332ñ342. doi: 10.1016/j.cogsys.2010.07.001
Apps, M. A. J., and Tsakiris, M. (2014). The free-energy self: a predictive coding
account of self-recognition. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 41, 85ñ97. doi: 10.1016/J.
NEUBIOREV.2013.01.029
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Ann. Rev. Psychol. 59, 617ñ645. doi:
10.1146/annurev.psych.59.103006.093639
Beni, M. D. (2016). Structural realist account of the self. Synthese 193, 3727ñ3740.
doi: 10.1007/s11229-016-1098-9
Beni, M. D. (2017). Structural realism, metaphysical uniﬁcation, and the ontology
and epistemology of patterns. Int. Stud. Philos. Sci. 31, 285ñ300. doi: 10.1080/
02698595.2018.1463691
Beni, M. D. (2019a). Structuring the Self. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Beni, M. D. (2019b). An outline of a uniﬁed theory of the relational self: grounding
the self in the manifold of interpersonal relations. Phenomenol. Cogn. Sci. 18,
473ñ491. doi: 10.1007/s11097-018-9587-6
Bitbol, M., and Gallagher, S. (2018). The free energy principle and autopoiesis.Phys.
Life Rev. 24, 24ñ26. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2017.12.011
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., and Rietveld, E. (2016). The anticipating
brain is not a scientist: the free-energy principle from an ecological-
enactive perspective. Synthese 16, 1ñ28. doi: 10.1007/s11229-016-
1239-1
Carter, J. A., and Kallestrup, J. (2019). Varieties of cognitive integration. Noûs
19:nous.12288. doi: 10.1111/nous.12288
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action, and Cognitive
Extension. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2016). Surﬁng Uncertainty . Oxford: Oxford University Press, doi: 10.
1093/acprof:oso/9780190217013.001.0001
Clark, A., and Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind. Analysis 58, 7ñ19. doi:
10.1093/analys/58.1.7
Dennett, D. C. (1983). Intentional systems in cognitive ethology: the
“Panglossian paradigm” defended. Behav. Brain Sci. 6, 343ñ355.
doi: 10.1017/S0140525X00016393
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Real patterns. J. Philos. 88, 27ñ51.
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nat. Rev
Neurosci. 11, 127ñ138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. J. (2018). Am I self-conscious? Front. Psychol. 9:579. doi: 10.3389/
FPSYG.2018.00579
Friston, K. J., and Stephan, K. E. (2007). Free-energy and the brain. Synthese 159,
417ñ458. doi: 10.1007/s11229-007-9237-y
Friston, K. J., Wiese, W., and Hobson, J. A. (2020). Sentience and the origins of
consciousness: from cartesian duality to markovian monism. Entropy 22:516.
doi: 10.3390/E22050516
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 December 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 607917
fpsyg-11-607917 December 9, 2020 Time: 15:6 # 11
Beni Metaphysics of Self-Patterns
Gallagher, S. (2013). A pattern theory of self. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7:443. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2013.00443
Gallagher, S. (2018). “New mechanisms and the enactivist concept of constitution, ”
in The Metaphysics of Consciousness (207–220) , ed. M. P. Guta (London:
Routlege), 207ñ220. doi: 10.4324/9781315104706-13
Gallagher, S., and Allen, M. (2016). Active inference, enactivism and the
hermeneutics of social cognition. Synthese 16, 1ñ22. doi: 10.1007/s11229-016-
1269-8
Gallagher, S., and Daly, A. (2018). Dynamical relations in the self-pattern. Front.
Psychol. 9:664. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00664
Grunwald, P., and Vitanyi, P. (2004). Shannon information and kolmogorov
complexity. arXiv [Preprint]. http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0410002 (accessed
October 10, 2019).
Hohwy, J. (2007). The sense of self in the phenomenology of agency and perception.
Psyche 13, 1ñ20.
Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind . Oxford: Oxford University Press, doi:
10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199682737.001.0001
Hohwy, J. (2014). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 50, 259ñ285. doi: 10.1111/nous.
12062
Hohwy, J. (2017). “How to entrain your evil demon, ” inPhilosophy and Predictive
Processing, eds T. Metzinger and W. Wiese (Frankfurt: MIND Group), doi:
10.15502/9783958573048
Hutter, M. (2008). Algorithmic complexity. Scholarpedia 3:2573. doi: 10.4249/
scholarpedia.2573
Kelso, J. A. S. (2016). On the self-organizing origins of agency. Trends Cogn. Sci.
20, 490ñ499. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2016.04.004
Kirchhoﬀ, M. D. (2015). Extended cognition & the causal-constitutive fallacy:
in search for a diachronic and dynamical conception of constitution. Philos.
Phenomenol. Res. 90, 320ñ360. doi: 10.1111/phpr.12039
Kirchhoﬀ, M. D., and Kiverstein, J. (2019). Extended Consciousness and Predictive
Processing: A Third-Wave View. Abingdon: Routledge.
Kirchhoﬀ, M. D., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K. J., and Kiverstein, J. (2018).
The Markov blankets of life: autonomy, active inference and the free energy
principle. J. R. Soc. Interface 15:20170792. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0792
Kiverstein, J. (2018). Free Energy and the self: an ecologicalñenactive
interpretation. Topoi 39, 559ñ574. doi: 10.1007/s11245-018-9561-5
Kiverstein, J., and Rietveld, E. (2018). Reconceiving representation-hungry
cognition: an ecological-enactive proposal. Adapt. Behav. 26, 147ñ163. doi:
10.1177/1059712318772778
Kyselo, M. (2014). The body social: an enactive approach to the self.Front. Psychol.
5:986. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00986
Ladyman, J., and Ross, D. (2007). Every Thing Must Go. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199276196.001.0001
Limanowski, J., and Blankenburg, F. (2013). Minimal self-models and the free
energy principle. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7:547. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00547
Limanowski, J., and Friston, K. (2020). Attenuating oneself. Philos. Mind Sci. 1:6.
doi: 10.33735/phimisci.2020.I.35
Metzinger, T. (2003). Being no One: The Self-Model Theory of Subjectivity .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Newen, A. (2018). The embodied self, the pattern theory of self, and the predictive
mind. Front. Psychol. 9:2270. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02270
Newen, A., Welpinghus, A., and Juckel, G. (2015). Emotion recognition as pattern
recognition: the relevance of perception. Mind Lang. 30, 187ñ208. doi: 10.1111/
mila.12077
Parr, T., Da Costa, L., and Friston, K. J. (2020). Markov blankets, information
geometry and stochastic thermodynamics. Philos. Transact. R. Soc. A
378:20190159. doi: 10.1098/rsta.2019.0159
Petersen, S. (2013). Toward an Algorithmic Metaphysics. Berlin: Springer, 306ñ317.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-44958-1_24
Petersen, S. (2019). Composition as pattern. Philos. Stud. 176, 1119ñ1139. doi:
10.1007/s11098-018-1050-6
Pezzulo, G., Barsalou, L. W., Cangelosi, A., Fischer, M. H., McRae, K., and Spivey,
M. J. (2012). Computational grounded cognition: a new alliance between
grounded cognition and computational modeling. Front. Psychol. 3:612. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00612
Piredda, G. (2017). The mark of the cognitive and the coupling-constitution fallacy:
a defense of the extended mind hypothesis. Front. Psychol. 8:2061. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2017.02061
Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., and Hipólito, I. (2020). Is the free-energy
principle a formal theory of semantics? From variational density dynamics
to neural and phenotypic representations. Entropy 22:889. doi: 10.3390/
e22080889
Ross, D. (2000). “Rainforest realism: a dennettian theory of existence, ” inDennett’s
Philosophy, eds A. Brook and D. Thompson (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press),
147ñ168. doi: 10.7551/mitpress/2335.003.0010
Rowlands, M. (2009). Extended cognition and the mark of the cognitive. Philos.
Psychol. 22, 1ñ19. doi: 10.1080/09515080802703620
Schöner, G., and Kelso, J. A. S. (1988). Dynamic pattern generation in behavioral
and neural systems. Science 4847, 1513ñ1520. doi: 10.1126/science.328
1253
Simons, P. (2000). Parts: A Study in Ontology . Oxford: Oxford University Press,
doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199241460.001.0001
Suñé, A., and Martínez, M. (2019). Real patterns and indispensability. Synthese 19,
1ñ16. doi: 10.1007/s11229-019-02343-1
van Inwagen, P. (1995). Material Beings . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
doi: 10.7591/9781501713033
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., and Rosch, E. (1991). The Embodied Mind: Cognitive
Science and Human Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vitanyi, P. (2009). Turing machine.Scholarpedia 4:6240. doi: 10.4249/scholarpedia.
6240
Walter, S., and Kyselo, M. (2009). Fred adams, ken aizawa: the bounds of cognition.
Erkenntnis 71, 277ñ281. doi: 10.1007/s10670-009-9161-2
Wilson, R. A. (2004).Boundaries of The Mind: The Individual in the Fragile Sciences:
Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wilson, R. A. (2010). “Extended vision, ” inPerception, Action and Consciousness ,
eds N. Gangopadhyay, M. Madary, and F. Spicer (New York: Oxford University
Press).
Conﬂict of Interest: The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Beni. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 December 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 607917