RESEARCH
Active Inference and Auditory Hallucinations
David Benrimoh1, Thomas Parr1, Peter Vincent1, Rick A. Adams2,3, and Karl Friston1
1Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, UK
2Division of Psychiatry, University College London, London, UK
3Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, London, UK
Keywords: Bayesian, active inference, schizophrenia, psychosis, hallucinations
ABSTRACT
Auditory verbal hallucinations (AVH) are often distressing symptoms of several
neuropsychiatric conditions, including schizophrenia. Using a Markov decision process
formulation of active inference, we develop a novel model of AVH as false (positive)
inference. Active inference treats perception as a process of hypothesis testing, in which
sensory data are used to disambiguate between alternative hypotheses about the world.
Crucially, this depends upon a delicate balance between prior beliefs about unobserved
(hidden) variables and the sensations they cause. A false inference that a voice is present,
even in the absence of auditory sensations, suggests that prior beliefs dominate perceptual
inference. Here we consider the computational mechanisms that could cause this imbalance
in perception. Through simulation, we show that the content of (and conﬁdence in) prior
beliefs depends on beliefs about policies (here sequences of listening and talking) and
on beliefs about the reliability of sensory data. We demonstrate several ways in which
hallucinatory percepts could occur when an agent expects to hear a voice in the presence
of imprecise sensory data. This model expresses, in formal terms, alternative computational
mechanisms that underwrite AVH and, speculatively, can be mapped onto neurobiological
changes associated with schizophrenia. The interaction of action and perception is
important in modeling AVH, given that speech is a fundamentally enactive and interactive
process—and that hallucinators often actively engage with their voices.
INTRODUCTION
The phenomenology of auditory verbal hallucinations (AVH) is rich and heterogeneous
(McCarthy-Jones et al.,2014), but at its simplest, it involves the perception of a voice in the
absence of (verbal) auditory data. Bayesian theories of brain function (Friston,2010)p r o v i d ea
waytooperationalizethisnotion.Hallucinationscanbeconceptualized,inBayesianterms,as
representing false (positive) inference (Adams, Stephan, Brown, Frith, & Friston,2013;B r o w n ,
Adams, Parees, Edwards, & Friston,2013; Corlett & Fletcher,2009; Powers, Mathys, & Corlett,
2017; Teufel, Fletcher, & Davis,2010; Teufelet al.,2015).Theinference thata voice is present
in the absence of auditory input implies that internally generated “prior” beliefs about the
presence of stimuli dominate perception, even in the absence of supportive sensory evidence.
This suggests that overly precise (conﬁdent) prior beliefs (Friston,2005) could be important
in the genesis of schizophrenic hallucinations. A complementary perspective (Adams et al.,
2013) is that false inference may be due to a down-weighting of the precision of sensations
an open access journal
Citation: Benrimoh, D., Parr, T.,
V i n c e n t ,P . ,A d a m s ,R .A . ,&F r i s t o n ,K .
(2018). Active inference and auditory
hallucinations. Computational
Psychiatry, 2, 183–204. https://doi.org/
10.1162/cpsy_a_00022
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1162/cpsy
_a_00022
Received: 2 May 2018
Accepted: 3 October 2018
Competing Interests: The authors
declare no conﬂict of interest.
Corresponding Author:
David A. Benrimoh
david.benrimoh@mail.mcgill.ca
Copyright: ©2018
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Published under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International
(CC BY 4.0) license
The MIT Press
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
(i.e., silence) that contradict the expected percept (i.e., a voice). Both forms of imbalance lead
to excessive conﬁdence in prior beliefs relative to sensory evidence. A Bayesian approach
to understanding hallucinations affords an opportunity for the construction of computational
models of the phenomenon, which could shed light on information processing deﬁcits in
schizophrenia and suggest potential neural mechanisms for further investigation.
A growing body of empirical work has investigated whether an overcounting of prior
beliefs relative to sensory evidence may underlie some psychotic phenomena. Vercammen
a n dA l e m a n(2010) conducted a behavioral experiment in healthy volunteers in which sub-
jects were presented with sentences whose ﬁnal “word” was predictable and overlaid with
white noise, less predictable and overlaid with white noise, or simply white noise. They found
that “top-down” hallucinations—deﬁned as hearing a word that was not present but was
predicted by the semantic context—were positively correlated with participants’ hallucina-
tion proneness. Powers et al. (2017) found that subjects with hallucinations (with or with-
out psychosis—the latter being healthy voice hearers) were both more likely than non–voice
hearerstoexperiencehallucinationsengenderedbyPavlovianconditioning.ABayesianmodel
of these data indicated that hallucinating subjects had increased weighting of perceptual be-
liefs relative to sensory evidence. Teufel et al. (2015) found that people in early psychosis and
those high in psychosis-like traits made greater use of prior knowledge when making deci-
sions about ambiguous two-tone images (here the prior knowledge was conferred by showing
colorversionsoftheimages).Finally,Cassidyetal.( 2018)haveshownrecentlythatthereisan
overweightingofpriorexpectations(inconditionsofuncertainty)inunmedicatedpatientswith
schizophrenia in an auditory task—and that this was both correlated with striatal dopamine
release and could be induced by administration of amphetamine. As such, there is accumu-
lating evidence that an overweighting of prior beliefs relative to sensory evidence relates to
AVH; what is less clear is what kinds of priors may underwrite the development of AVH (given
that most of the priors in the aforementioned experiments were supplied by the investiga-
tors).Previouscomputationalmodels—focusingonperception—havesimulatedhallucinatory
percepts via computational “lesions,” leading to the dissociation between sensations (input
information) and percepts (outputs) that underwrite hallucinations. Hoffman and McGlashan
(2006) produced a neural network model of hallucinations. This network was designed to
model speech perception and was found to hallucinate when the model’s “working memory”
layer was disrupted by overly pruning the connections between artiﬁcial neurons (i.e., dis-
sociating percepts and sensations). To translate this idea to a Bayesian setting, we must intro-
duce the concept of a generative model. This is a probabilistic model that expresses the
(subpersonal) beliefs that the brain holds about the way in which its sensations are gener-
ated. Sensations can be dissociated from percepts if there is low conﬁdence or precision (high
variance) ascribed to sensory evidence. This low precision renders posterior beliefs about the
causes of sensations poorly constrained by sensory evidence. Adams et al. (2013) demon-
strated the face validity of this notion through simulating birdsongs under a hierarchical pre-
dictive coding model. In their simulations, they showed that, when an expected sequence in a
song is omitted, a reduction of the precision of the likelihood (probability of sensations given
their causes) produced a false percept (hallucination). Crucially, both the Hoffman and Adams
models contain sequences of words or sounds and produced hallucinations in the context of
degraded perceptual processing.
Theseformalmodelsserveasafoundationformorecompletecomputationalaccountsof
auditory hallucinations. However, neither takes the active nature of perception into account.
In this article, we argue for the importance of action, noting that the experience of auditory
hallucinations is often in the form of a dialog with a voice, in which the hallucinating person
Computational Psychiatry 184
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
may take an active role (i.e., speaking to or attempting to ignore the voice). So, in addition to
the degraded perceptual processing of sensory input, our model’s perceptual inferences also
depend upon its beliefs about how it interacts with another (speaking) agent. In addition, we
will use a discrete state formulation that is more consistent with the discrete nature of lan-
guage (words, sentences, etc.) than the continuous formulations used in previous work. These
two agendas (the prominence of action and the discrete formulation) are naturally modeled
using a Markov decision process (MDP). This serves as the generative model for a synthetic
subject who engages in active (Bayesian) inference (Mirza, Adams, Mathys, & Friston,2016;
Parr & Friston,2017). We begin with a brief overview of active inference before specifying the
generative model we have used and show how altering this model can lead to hallucinations.
Note that here we explore only one possible computational alteration that could underpin
AVH; we discuss some alternative mechanisms in the discussion. We conclude with a (spec-
ulative) discussion of the neurobiological plausibility of this model—and its implications for
understanding the link between pathophysiology and psychopathology.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Active Inference
Under active inference, agents use a generative model to infer the causes of their sensory
experiences. Crucially, agents are equipped with the ability to act (e.g., sample their environ-
ment) to gather evidence for their beliefs about those causes. Formally, this means agents act
to minimize their variational free energy (Friston, Kilner, & Harrison,2006). Technically, free
energy is a variational approximation to the surprise, surprisal, self-information, or the nega-
tive log (marginal) likelihood of an observation under an internal model of the world (Friston,
2012). Crucially, surprise or self-information is negative Bayesian model evidence. This means
that self-evidencing is the same as minimizing variational free energy. The free energy can be
written as (seeTable 1for a list of variables)
F
= −EQ(˜s)[ln P(˜o, ˜s) − ln Q(˜s)]. (1)
Here F is the free energy,˜o is the sequence of observations through time,s are unobserved
or hidden states, andQ is an approximate probability distribution overs. P is the generative
Table 1. Variables used
Variable Description
Aa, Ap Likelihood matrix (superscript denotes auditory or proprioceptive)
Ba, Bp Transition matrix (superscript denotes auditory or proprioceptive)
oaτ, op
τ Outcomes (agent observations; superscript denotes auditory or proprioceptive)
π Policies
ζ Likelihood precision
γ Prior precision over policies
s Hidden state (superscripts can be used to denote modality and subscripts
to denote parameterization)
G Expected free energy
F Free energy
C Prior preferences matrix
D Beliefs about initial state
Computational Psychiatry 185
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
model that expresses beliefs about how sensory data are generated, that is, the co-occurrence
of observations and hidden states. It is this that takes the form of a MDP.
Markov Decision Process and Generative Model AMDPisaframeworkformodelingthebeliefs
of agents who, like us, navigate environments in which they have control over some variables
but not over others. MDPs have two important types of hidden variables that need to be in-
ferred by the agent: hiddenstates and hiddenpolicies.B yhidden, we mean those variables
that cannot be directly observed. The hidden statess
τ represent the beliefs of an agent about
the causes of her sensations; for our purposes, these are “speaking” (or not) and “listening to
a voice present in the environment” (or not). The hidden states are inferred from the sensory
outcomes o
τ (where τ indexes time): auditory input being present (or not) and speech move-
ments(i.e.,proprioception)beingpresent(ornot).Putsimply,thehiddenstateof“listeningtoa
voice”impliesoutcomesintheauditorydomainonly;thehiddenstateof“speaking”(notethat
theagentdoesnotautomatically“know”itisspeaking:Itmustinferit)impliesoutcomesinthe
proprioceptive domain only. Given that our agent employs sensory attenuation, when speak-
ing, it reduces the precision of the auditory modality, which may affect its inference about
the auditory state of the world. This means that speaking involves attending away from the
auditory domain (to attenuate any auditory evidence that one is in fact not speaking). Instead
of inﬂuencing outcomes directly, speaking modulates the precision of outcomes, given the
listening state.
The probability of a sensory observation, given a hidden state, can be expressed as a
likelihood matrix with elementsP
(oτ = i|sτ = j)= Aij . For the proprioceptive modality in
our model, this was simply an identity matrix (mapping speaking to proprioception). For the
auditory modality, the likelihood matrix is
¯A
a = 1
Z (I2 + exp(−30))ζ. (2)
Here Z is a normalizing constant (i.e., partition function) that ensures that each column in
this matrix sums to 1.ζ is the likelihood precision.1 I indicates the identity matrix;exp(−30)
denotesasmallamountofimprecision(addedtoeachelementofthematrixtoavoidnumerical
overﬂow).Thebarnotationmeansthat Aa hasbeennormalized(subscriptdenotestheauditory
modality). Asζ increases, this mapping comes to resemble the identity matrix. As it decreases,
theprobabilitiesbecomeclosetouniform,andthemappingbecomesmoreuncertain.Inother
words, even if one knows the hidden state of the world, all outcomes are equally likely.
Crucially, this formulation allows the ﬁdelity of the mapping between states and out-
comes to be modulated byζ (see Figure 1for a graphical illustration of this). In continuous
state space formulations of active inference, optimizing the equivalent quantity is the process
of attending, for example, attention to a sensory channel increases its precision (Feldman &
Friston, 2010). Decreased likelihood precision is analogous to a reduction in signal to noise.
Previously, we have shown that synthetic subjects tend to “ignore” low-precision mappings,
as thesecontainrelatively impreciseinformation (Parr &Friston,2017;cf. thestreetlight effect,
Demirdjian et al.,2005).
When “I am speaking,” we set the auditory likelihood matrix to have equal probabilities
for both listening and not listening to simulate “sensory attenuation.” This is the reduction
1 When the outcomes are sensory samples, the likelihood precision plays a role of a sensory precision in
predictive coding formulations.
Computational Psychiatry 186
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
Figure 1. Effect of likelihood precision on state–outcome mapping.Top:Arelativelypreciselike-
lihood matrix (high likelihood precisionζ) leads to a high-ﬁdelity mapping between the state,s,
and the outcome,o (in this case, if the state is equal to 1, then the probability of the outcome
being equal to 1 is 0.9). Black = precise belief; gray = uncertainty regarding belief; white = very
imprecise belief. Blue box highlights the probabilities of the outcomes associated with an arbitrary
state.Bottom:Inthiscase,thelikelihoodmatrixhasbeenmademuchlessprecise(allofitsentriesare
now equal probabilities), corresponding to a low likelihood precisionζ. This leads to an uncertain
state–outcome mapping.
of the precision afforded to self-generated sensory stimuli (i.e., the inability to tickle one-
self; Blakemore, Wolpert, & Frith,2000; Shergill, Bays, Frith, & Wolpert,2003). Sensory atten-
uation is a fundamental aspect of intentional behavior, because it protects prior (intentional)
beliefs about acting from sensory evidence that the act is not being executed (Brown, Adams,
Parees, Edwards, & Friston,2013). In effect, this means that while speaking, the presence and
absence of sounds are deemed equally likely. This means I can maintain the belief that “I am
speaking”intheabsenceofanyauditoryevidencetothecontrary.Hencetheagent’sinference
about the current state depends only on prior beliefs. The complement of this is that, if an
agent is listening and not speaking, it must deploy a higher level of likelihood (i.e., sensory)
Computational Psychiatry 187
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
precision to “attend” to its conversational partner. In short, only when the agent is listening
can the likelihood precision affect the mapping between sensations (outcomes) and percepts
(states). SeeEquation 2and Figures 2and 3.
The second type of hidden variable is the policy. Each policy is a sequence of actions
that an agent can pursue. Crucially, the policy that the agent is currently pursuing must be
inferred (Botvinick & Toussaint,2012). Policies are simply various combinations of actions
(e.g., listening or speaking) that, in our case, mimic the ﬂow of a conversation. For example,
theagentcouldtaketurnslisteningandspeaking,couldengageinamonologue,orcouldlisten
for the whole trial. This is closely related to formulations of active inference for birdsong, in
whichbeliefsaboutthenarrativeofagivensongaresharedbytwobirds(Friston&Frith, 2015).
In this article, the implicit “turn taking” is determined by the sequence of choices our agent
pursues, as in real conversations.
The subject’s states change over time according to a probability transition matrix, con-
ditioned upon the previous state and the policy,π, currently being pursued. This matrix is
deﬁned asB
(u)ij = P(sτ+1 = i|sτ = j, u = π(τ)). In other words, the policy inﬂuences, via
its effect on probability transitions, how a state at a given time step changes to become the
state at the next. We constrained these policies so that deciding to listen requires one to stop
talking, and vice versa. Heuristically, we consider listening as an action to be a composite
of mental and physical actions: all the things one might do when expecting to hear someone
speak (i.e., pay attention, turn your head to hear better, etc.; Holzman,1972).
Figure 2. Neuronal message passing. This schematic illustrates the form of the (variational) mes-
sage passing implied by active inference. Here sensory observationsoτ inform beliefs about states
under each policysπτ (and this depends on the likelihood precision,ζ). These reciprocally inﬂu-
ence beliefs about states in the past and future. Beliefs about states under each policy are used to
compute the expected free energy for each policy. This informs the beliefs about policies,π, and is
modulated by precision over policies,γ. Beliefs about policies are combined with beliefs about the
states under each policy to compute the marginal beliefs about states (averaged under all policies),
s
τ. By manipulatingγ, ζ,a n dπ, we sought to induce changes insτ. Bold terms represent vector
quantities; italics are model parameters.A is the likelihood matrix;B is the state transition matrix;C
is the prior preferences matrix.G is the expected free energy.H is the entropy ofA. The ﬁlled circle
containing oτ is sensory data (outcomes).
Computational Psychiatry 188
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
Figure 3. Generative model. Here the generative model is presented more explicitly. In blue are
thehiddenstatesforlisteningornotlisteningandtheirassociatedoutcomes—hearingornothearing
a voice. Mapping between states and outcomes occurs via the likelihood matrixA. This is either
the mapping fromEquation 2or (when the hidden state for speaking has been inferred) a matrix
with equal entries to simulate sensory attenuation (the reduction of auditory likelihood precision
during speaking, to prevent inference that one is not speaking but listening). In pink are the hidden
states for speaking or not speaking, mapped via identity matrices to the speaking or not speaking
proprioceptive outcomes. Transitions between hidden states are accomplished via the transition
matrices B
a and Bp.
The subject was paired with a generative process that determined the sensory input she
experienced: an environment that produces alternating sounds and silences. Whenever she
chose to speak, this generated sound at the next time step (and attenuated the likelihood pre-
cision). Whenever the subject chose to listen, the likelihood precision was determined by
Equation2 atthenexttimestep.Inthisway,oursubjectinteractedwiththe(simple)generative
process in the environment, generating sequences of sounds and silences dependent on both
the environment and her actions.
The synthetic subject began the simulation with a probability distribution over possible
initial hidden states,D
i = P(s1 = i). In our simulations, all initial states were equally likely.
The subject is also equipped with a probability distribution over possible outcomes, which
sets itsprior preferences, C
τi = P(oτ = i). These prior preferences inﬂuence policy choice by
makingsomeoutcomes—andthereforethepoliciesthattendtoleadtothoseoutcomes—more
likely than others. In general, priors can be learned (empirical priors) or be “hardwired” into a
phenotypebythepressuresofnaturalselection(Friston, 2010).Inthisarticle,priorpreferences
didnotdifferbetweenoutcomes(i.e.,therewereﬂatpriorsoveroutcomes).Thismeansthatthe
imperatives for action (i.e., talking and listening) were driven purely by epistemic affordances,
namely, the imperative to resolve uncertainty about states of affairs in the world (see later).
Note that making the probability distributions over either initial states or preferred outcomes
unequal did not affect the nature of the model’s hallucinations.
Importantly, there is also a prior probability distribution over policies. In this scheme,
policies are treated as alternative models and are chosen via Bayesian model selection, where
the policy selected leads to the lowest expected free energy,G
(π). This is equivalent to saying
that agents choose the policies that are most likely to resolve uncertainty (such as choosing
Computational Psychiatry 189
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
to make a saccade to an informative location). Formally, one can express a prior belief over
policies as
P(π)= σ(−γ · G(π)). (3)
Here the expectedfree energyunderalternative policies is multiplied bya scalarγ andpassed
through a softmax function (i.e., normalized exponential) to return a prior distribution over
policies. In this setting,γ is a sensitivity or inverse temperature parameter that signiﬁes the
precision,or conﬁdence,theagenthasaboutitsbeliefsaboutpolicies.Howconﬁdentanagent
isaboutitspoliciesaprioriwillhaveanimpactontherelativeweightingofsensoryinformation
when the agent tries to infer its policy. The balance of likelihood and policy precisions will,
in turn, determine whether sensory data—or the agent’s inferred policy—contribute most to
the agent’s beliefs about states (i.e., listening to a voice or speaking). This policy precision
is important in the current context, as midbrain dopamine has been suggested to be its
in vivo homolog (Schwartenbeck, FitzGerald, Mathys, Dolan, & Friston,2015). Before we can
describe the form of expected free energy under each policy, we need to consider the form of
the posterior beliefs.
Tosimulateactiveinferenceinatractablemanner,weadoptamean-ﬁeldapproximation
(Friston & Buzsaki,2016) to update approximate posterior beliefsQ about hidden variables:
Q
(˜s, π)= Q(π) ∏
τ
Q(sτ | π). (4)
This formulation allows for independent optimization of each factor on the right-hand side of
Equation 4and for the expression of the free energy under a given policy as
F(π)= EQ[ln Q(˜s | π) − ln P(˜o, ˜s | π)]. (5)
Free energy scores the information gained via observation. This poses a problem for policy
selection: Policies should be chosen to reduce free energy in the future, but one can only
deﬁne the free energy with respect to the present or the past (i.e., the times for which the agent
has access to observations). To remedy this, we use the free energy expected under the policy
to guide policy selection:
G
(π)= E ˜Q[ln Q(˜s | π) − ln P(˜o, ˜s | π)],
˜Q(˜o, ˜s | π)= Q(˜s | π)P(˜o | ˜s),
P(π)= σ(−G(π)).
(6)
Having speciﬁed the generative model (seeFigure 4)—and in particular the prior beliefs
about policies—in terms of expected free energy, it is relatively straightforward to derive belief
update equations that underwrite perception and action. These equations of up-to-date pos-
terior beliefsQ
(˜s, π) in response to new observations provide a minimization of free energy.
Crucially, the posterior belief computed at one time step becomes the (empirical) prior for the
next. We have argued previously (e.g., de Vries & Friston,2017) that these update equations
(aka variational message passing) can be interpreted in terms of neuronal message passing.
The architecture of this message passing implies a connectivity scheme that closely resembles
thefunctionalarchitectureofcortico-subcorticalloops(Friston,Rosch,Parr,Price,&Bowman,
2017).
Computational Psychiatry 190
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
In the foregoing, posterior beliefs about states are conditioned upon the policy pursued
(consistent with the interpretation of planning-as-model-selection). We can marginalize out
this dependence on policies (through Bayesian model averaging) to obtain a belief about
hidden states:
Q
(sτ)= ∑π Q(sτ | π)Q(π). (7)
Equation 7is crucial because it means that beliefs about states (to the left of the equation)
depend upon beliefs about the policy being pursued (the terms on the right, which corre-
spond to the approximate probability distribution over policies, and over states, given poli-
cies). This is a fundamental observation that further ties perception to action. This speaks to a
quintessentially enactive aspect of hallucinations—which we wanted to understand through
simulations.
In Silico Hallucinations
Given the deﬁnition of hallucinations outlined earlier, how might we induce hallucinations
in our model? Our aim is to dissociate inferred states or beliefs about the world from sensory
constraints. Given that the mapping between states and outcomes depends on the likelihood
matrix and its likelihood precision parameterζ, we can hypothesize the following:
1. Decreasing likelihood precisionζ will affect the mapping between states and outcomes,
with reducedζ leading directly to a disconnect between the inferred state and the out-
come(Equation2).Thisfollowsbecausedecreasing ζ isequivalenttoreducingtheconﬁ-
denceinsensoryinformation,impairingtheuseofsensoryevidencetoinformperceptual
synthesis.
2. Increasing the prior precision over policiesγ will change the prior distribution over
policies (Equation 3) and hence the posterior beliefs about policiesQ
(π) and, therefore,
inferredstatesthroughmodelaveraging( Equation7).Putsimply,anincreasedpolicypre-
cision will bias perceptual inference away from sensory evidence and toward its current
action.
3. Changing the policy space will also changeQ
(π) and therefore affect the state inferred
through model averaging (Equation 7). Removing one or more policies may change
which policy is inferred to be most likely, which in turn will affect state estimation.
RESULTS: SIMULATIONS
Reducing Likelihood Precision Leads to False Positive Inferences
Inference about hidden states (e.g., “listening to a voice” or not) depends on both outcomes
(whether sound is present) and policies (whether one is speaking or listening). We hypothe-
sizedthatdecreasing ζ couldcausefalseinferencesthroughastate–outcomedissociation.We
additionally noted that, as inferences about states depend upon policies via Bayesian Model
Averaging (see earlier), the inferred state will be inﬂuenced by the policy set. InFigure 5,w e
present the ﬁnding that reducingζ moderately, from baseline, leads to perceptual “confusion”
(i.e., posterior beliefs are ambiguous about which state is in play); further reducing the like-
lihood precision leads to a false positive inference, namely, the belief that the subject was
listening in the absence of sound. The reason for this reversal is that the subject has inferred
that it is following a policy consistent with the presence of heard speech. This induces an
empirical prior belief that she is listening to something, despite the fact that there is nothing
to hear, leading the agent to infer that she is actually hearing a sound in the environment. In
the high-precision condition, this belief is corrected by precise sensory evidence—even if the
Computational Psychiatry 191
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
Figure 4. An imprecise likelihood matrix can cause false positive inference.The plots shown in this ﬁgure illustrate posterior beliefs about
hidden states. True outcomes are noted above each trial. Darker colors mean greater probabilities of each state. Here we show that decreasing
likelihood precisionζ (from left to right,ζ = 0.7; 0.525; 0.3) can lead to a false inference about the state of the world. Note that all other
parameters were unchanged across these three simulations. Here we are looking at the beliefs of the agent about whether or not it is listening.
In this example, it should listen (black box) and not listen (white box) in an alternating pattern to match the true outcomes of sound and
no sound, respectively. Note that as there is an identity likelihood mapping between states and outcomes for speaking, the proprioceptive
outcomes also indicate what the agent has inferred (i.e., whether it believes it is or is not speaking). In the leftmost ﬁgure, the agent infers
the state of the world correctly, as reﬂected in its very certain beliefs (black squares) about states that correspond to external reality. In the
middle ﬁgure, we have decreased the precision of the likelihood matrix, leading to uncertainty about whether or not the agent is in a listening
state at the third and ﬁfth time points; this decreased certainty is represented by the gray coloring over both possible states. In the third ﬁgure,
a further decrease inζ has led the agent to believe ﬁrmly that it is in the “listening to a voice” state (dark boxes at the third and ﬁfth time
points). These are the hallucinations (red circles). ForFigures 4–6, the lower part of each panel, labeled “policies,” represents the inferences
(posterior probabilities), over time, by the agent about which policy she is pursuing. Darker shading represents increasing probabilities. Each
row represents an alternative policy. Plotted between the columns are the actions (listening or speaking) that would be selected during the
transition between the preceding and the next time step, if the policy in that row were to be followed (i.e., in this ﬁgure, if Policy 1 is selected
at the end of Time Step 3, the agent would choose to listen during Time Step 4). Note that the legend of icons is conserved for all ﬁgures.
Computational Psychiatry
192
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
agent chooses to listen, she should be able to infer when silence is present and conclude that
she is not actually listening to anything in the environment. Low precision allows the (false)
prior belief to dominate, producing a false inference. This illustrates that low precision has a
permissiveeffectonhallucinations.Aswewillseeinthethirdresult,thiseffectofreducedlike-
lihood(i.e.,sensory)precisionishighlydependentonthepolicyspace;reductionoflikelihood
precision does not lead to hallucinations inall policy spaces.
Increasing Prior Precision over Policies Can Elicit Hallucinations in the Presence of Reduced
Likelihood Precision
We next demonstrate that increasing policy precision induces hallucinations in the presence
of a permissive imprecise likelihood mapping between states and outcomesζ a n das u i t a b l e
policy space. This effect is shown inFigure 5. Given normalγ,al o w e rζ leads to some con-
fusion at the last time step, but there is a weak (unconﬁdent) belief in the not listening state,
and as such, the agent concludes, accurately, that it has not heard a voice. Increasingγ then
causes a switch to the (inaccurate) belief that a voice was heard.
Only a few policy spaces showed this effect of changingγ. This demonstrates an im-
portant ﬁnding: The generation of hallucinations is highly context dependent. More formally,
the different policy options determine which policy is ultimately inferred. The most probable
policy under the resulting approximate posterior distributionQ
(π) has sensory consequences
that might be consistent with, or may conﬂict with, the sensory evidence. False inference is
induced by the latter. As such, hallucinations can only occur when the agent is equipped with
a policy space likely to conﬂict with the sensory evidence (hence the policy space depen-
dence of the effect of increasingγ). The degree to which the winning policy inﬂuences state
expectations depends uponγ, which gives rise to more precise posteriors over policies. It is
important to note again the permissive effect of unattenuated likelihood precision; at baseline
ζ, increasing the prior precision over policies does not induce hallucinations. This is because
conﬂict between policy and sensory evidence is more likely to be resolved in the winning
policy’s favor if the inﬂuence of sensory evidence is down-weighted by a low precision.
Hallucinations Are Context Dependent
Figure 6demonstrates the importance of the policy space in determining whether an agent
willhallucinate.Weequippedanagentwithasetofsixpoliciesanddecreased ζ inastepwise
manner, producing high-, moderately decreased, and low-precision conditions. With the full
policy space (Figure 6, top row), the agent inferred a policy that induced no hallucinations.
It did begin to stop hearing its own voice at one time at the lowest likelihood precision; this
was enabled by the sensory attenuation associated with self-generated speech and by the way
in which our policies are set up to be oppositional (which contributed to the attenuation).
To illustrate the mechanisms by which certain policy spaces predispose to hallucinations, we
“lesioned” the policy space by deleting the policy originally inferred by the agent (Figure 6,
bottom row). This left policies that are worse explanations for active exchange with the same
environment.Thesubjectwiththeremainingﬁvepoliciesdidnothallucinateatahigh ζ butdid
hallucinatewhen ζ waslowered.Thisfollowedadose–responserelationship—atamoderately
decreased ζ, the subject was confused about the state she was in but did not experience frank
hallucinations.Thelesionedpolicyspacelefttheagentunabletoappealtothepolicythatbetter
accounted for evidence in the auditory environment. When she was not able to use sensory
information to correct her beliefs—about the actions to pursue (the low likelihood precision
condition)—she was forced to infer a policy that led to a hallucination (Figure 6, bottom left).
Computational Psychiatry 193
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
Figure 5. Increasing prior precision over policies given a noisy likelihood matrix can induce hal-
lucinations. Darker boxes represent increasing levels of conﬁdence. True outcomes are represented
above each trial. On the left, an agent with a somewhat imprecise sensory mapping (likelihood
precision ζ = 0.525) but a low prior precision over policies [γ = exp(64)] is uncertain about the
state of the world and makes incorrect inferences (the inferred state does not concord with the out-
come) at the second, third, and fourth time steps; at the third time step, the agent has hallucinated
(infers it is listening to a voice when there is no voice present). Effects of low likelihood precision
are denoted by the blue box. Ifγ is increased [γ = exp(
−64)], the agent begins to hallucinate at
the ﬁfth time step as well (red rectangle). Note that this does not occur with baseline likelihood
precision (γ = 0.7).
The subject hallucinated at the third time step because of the following sequence of events.
At the second time step, she used the relatively precise information from the proprioceptive
domain (which is not affected by the reduced likelihood precision in the auditory domain) to
infer that she was speaking. Given that she was not speaking at the third time step, this left two
plausible policies that allowed for speaking at the second and not speaking at the third time
steps. Both of these mandated listening to a voice at the third time step, even though none was
Computational Psychiatry 194
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
Figure 6. Context sensitivity of synthetic hallucinations.At high likelihood precision, outcomes dominate state inference; at low likelihood
precision, priors derived from policies dominate and hallucinations can occur in a policy-dependent manner. This ﬁgure demonstrates that
only certain policy spaces can lead to hallucinations, and only in the presence of permissively low likelihood precision. When the agent has
a relatively large policy space (top row) and likelihood precision is reduced (left to right likelihood precisionζ = 0.7, 0.525, 0.3), the agent
correctly infers the presence of externally generated speech. When likelihood precision is high (left), it believes that it is able to listen (third
time step) while generating speech. This is inconsistent with the policies and indicates that precise sensory evidence dominates the empirical
priors derived from policy selection. At a sufﬁciently low likelihood precision (right), beliefs about the policy dominate sensory evidence
about states, and this causes our agent to believe that she was not listening, having selected the speak policy. This is permitted by the sensory
attenuation we have associated with the speaking state and the oppositional nature of our policies (which contributed to the attenuation). On
the plots of posterior probabilities of policies over time, we see that the agent has inferred that she is pursuing the second policy by the fourth
time step. As such, the agent has concluded that this policy is the most likely given the data observed and the actions taken. If this policy is
removed (bottom row), this agent now no longer has access to Policy 2 and has selected alternative policies. This poses no problem when
likelihood precision is high (left), as sensory evidence again dominates the inference. When precision is low, however, this policy does not
explain the data well, leading to a hallucination at the third time step (highlighted in red).
Computational Psychiatry
195
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
present. The subject was unable to use the imprecise auditory information to correct the prior
engenderedbythepolicy.Thekeypointoftheseresultsisthatdifferentpolicyspacesareprone
to different kinds of false inference under low likelihood precision—while false inference may
occur in any policy space when the likelihood precision has been reduced, given the same
environment and initial conditions, different policy spaces produce different kinds of false
inference.
DISCUSSION
Wesimulatedafreeenergy–minimizingagentusingaMDPformalismthatengagedinasimple
turn-takingconversation.Weperformedthreeinsilicoexperimentsonthissyntheticsubjectto
induce hallucinations (false positive inferences). We found that decreasing auditory precision,
given a vulnerable policy space, could induce hallucinations, as could increasing the prior
precision over policies in the presence of low likelihood precision. We found that the effect of
bothdecreasedlikelihoodprecisionandincreasedprior precision—overpolicies—was highly
dependentonthepoliciesavailabletotheagent,withonlyasubsetofpolicyspacesproducing
speciﬁcally falsepositive inference. Here we discuss our ﬁndings and relate them to possible
underlying neurobiology.
Precision and Prior Beliefs
Our ﬁrst ﬁnding was that decreasing likelihood precisionζ can lead to hallucinations—in
fact, no hallucinations in any of our simulations could occur without this deﬁcit.ζ affects
the (likelihood) mapping between states and outcomes. By attenuating the precision of this
mapping, sensory evidence has less inﬂuence on belief updating; in other words, perception
is dissociated from sensation. This is consistent with attractor and neural network models that
produce hallucinations via similar means (Adams et al.,2013; Hoffman & McGlashan,2006).
Aswewillseeshortly,theeffectsofareduced ζ dependonthepolicyspace;simplydecreasing
ζ does not always produce falsepositive inference.
Oursecondﬁndingwasthatincreasingthepriorprecisionoverpoliciesalsoledtohallu-
cinations,givenreducedlikelihoodprecision.Thisisbecausebeliefsaboutpolicies(e.g.,“now
is my turn to listen”) are a source of prior beliefs about states (e.g., “I am hearing a voice”),
which may be imposed on perception. This emphasizes the conﬂict between likelihood (i.e.,
sensory) and policy (i.e., prior) precision. An agent with strong (precise) prior beliefs about the
actions it will take hallucinates because it is unable to correct for this prior belief using impre-
cise sensory evidence. An interesting consequence of this is that the form false inferences take
becomes highly dependent on the action plans entertained.
Our third ﬁnding was that deleting the policy originally inferred by the agent to explain
her actions (given the environment) leads her to hallucinate, given low likelihood precision;
thatis,theagenthallucinateswhenshedoesnothaveaccesstoamodeloftheworldthatdoes
not bias toward false positive inference and cannot use sensory information to correct false
positive inferences under this poor model (note that the deleted “best” model of the world
shownheredoesnotnecessarilyresultinperfectinference;itisonlya relatively bettermodel).
Our model differs from previous models by incorporating actions speciﬁed by the policies
employed by our simulated subject. As such, reduced likelihood precision is not sufﬁcient to
generate a hallucination (seeFigure 6), and we were able to generate policy spaces that did
not support false positive inference at low likelihood precision. Crucially, it is the interaction
between likelihood precision and beliefs about the policy that then impacts the state the agent
Computational Psychiatry 196
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
infers. This can be stated succinctly as follows: Agents will respond to reduced likelihood
precision in a policy space–dependent manner.
The nature of this interaction is important. As in existing Bayesian accounts of halluci-
nations, our approach requires the imposition of (empirical) prior beliefs on perception. We
propose a source for these empirical prior beliefs—beliefs about actions. By bringing in poli-
cies, we show how pathological empirical priors (over states) can develop from beliefs about
“what would happen if I were to do that.” In short, we suggest that the balance between prior
beliefs and sensory evidence can be framed as a balance between the conﬁdence in plans of
action and in the sensory consequences of these actions. An interesting consequence of this
is that the form false inferences take becomes highly dependent on the plans selected.
Thuswearriveataconceptualizationofauditoryhallucinationsasrequiringsomedefect
inpolicyspace(apolicyspacevulnerabletohallucinations,potentiallywithanincreasedprior
precision) and decreased likelihood precision, which renders it impossible for sensory evi-
dence to prevent the emergence of a false positive percept. This ﬁts comfortably with Bayesian
accounts of auditory hallucinations as resulting from prior beliefs about hearing a sound dom-
inating over sensory evidence that a sound is not present.
Previous empirical work supports the hypothesis that both clinical and nonclinical pos-
itive symptoms are associated with greater reliance on priors relative to sensory evidence
(Cassidy et al.,2018;P o w e r se ta l . ,2017; Teufel et al.,2015), in particular, priors about voices
in those who hear voices (Alderson-Day et al.,2017).
Conversely, many other phenomena in schizophrenia have been related to an increased
weighting of sensory evidence relative to prior beliefs—the opposite imbalance (Adams et al.,
2013). Reduced vulnerability to certain perceptual illusions, such as the hollow-mask illusion,
is another key element of schizophrenia phenomenology and has been found in patients with
positivesymptoms(Notredame,Pins,Denève,&Jardri, 2014).Classically, perceptualillusions
have been explained as obtaining when a prior belief (e.g., a bias toward detecting convex
faces) dominates over sensory evidence (e.g., a concave face). This would seem to imply a
weakening of priors in schizophrenia, allowing for a resistance to illusions. Indeed, Jardri and
Denève (2013) used a belief propagation model (another Bayesian message-passing scheme)
to show one way in which sensory evidence could come to dominate prior beliefs in the dis-
order. They proposed that a failure of interneurons to inhibit messages that have been passed
up the hierarchy could lead to the content of those same messages being passed back down
the hierarchy, in effect, mistaking sensory evidence for a prior belief and thus overweighting
it. Likewise, an overweighting of sensory precision in a predictive coding hierarchy (as in
Adamsetal., 2013)wouldhavethesameeffect.Inadditiontothesepurelyperceptualtasks,an
increased relative weighting of sensory evidence also accounts for sensorimotor (e.g., loss of
smooth pursuit gain and failure to attenuate self-produced sensations; Shergill, Samson, Bays,
Frith, & Wolpert,2005), electrophysiological (e.g., diminished oddball responses), and belief-
updatingchanges(Jardri&Denève, 2013)inschizophrenia.Theapparentdiscrepancybetween
abnormally precise prior beliefs and a failure of sensory attenuation is resolved by noting that
afailuretoattenuatesensoryprecisiondoesnotpreclude—andmayevenleadto—arelatively
high prior precision (Adams et al.,2013). We now consider this in more detail.
Howcantheseapparentlyconﬂictingﬁndingsberesolved?Onepotentialexplanation—
developed in Sterzer et al. (2018)—notes that the cortical hierarchy is many levels deep and
that prior beliefs in sensorimotor hierarchies are themselves contextualized by priors higher in
Computational Psychiatry 197
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
the hierarchy. For example, the perceptual (predictive coding) hierarchies modeled by Adams
et al. (2013), in which prior beliefs are relatively imprecise, essentially correspond to the like-
lihood matrix in the current model (i.e., perceiving a voice). Thus auditory sensations may
be more vivid (increased sensory precision), but their content may be harder to resolve (de-
creased intermediate precision), and therefore they may be more easily dominated by beliefs
about the speech narratives at a higher level. Indeed, increased sensory precision may give
resulting hallucinations their realistic, “out-loud” quality.
The key element of both this and our previous modeling work is that for one to halluci-
nate, one’s prior beliefs must be unconstrained by incoming sensory evidence at some level
of perceptual synthesis; that is, (empirical prior) precision must be reduced somewhere in the
perceptual hierarchy. Our previous (predictive coding) model of birdsong could hallucinate
only when sensory precision was reduced. While some auditory hallucinations are vague and
ill formed, many have clear speech content, which in Bayesian terms must reﬂect priors of
some sort. The model in this article is an initial attempt to show how beliefs about dialog
with other agents are good candidates for such priors. Indeed, a propensity for dialog was the
only attribute of inner speech associated with AVH proneness in a large population sample
(McCarthy-Jones & Fernyhough,2011).
Of course, there are numerous possible sources of priors for auditory hallucinations.
Cluster analysis of phenomenological surveys indicates four different kinds (McCarthy-Jones
et al.,2014): nonverbal, memories of a voice, one’s own voice, and another’s voice. So aside
from prior beliefs about other agents, one’s memories and inner speech are also likely sources
ofpriorsinAVH,andinthosewithpsychosis,delusionalbeliefsarelikelytointeractwiththese
mechanisms.Theideathatone’sowninnerspeechcouldcontributetoAVHislongestablished
and stems from the inﬂuential idea of a corollary discharge (i.e., descending predictions) fail-
ure in schizophrenia (Feinberg,1978; Frith & Done,1989). One difference between these
accounts and current formulations—in terms of precision—is that in the case of motor pas-
sivity symptoms, an imprecise prediction is dominated by (precise) sensory evidence; in our
AVH model, an imprecise likelihood is dominated by a prior belief. Clearly these failures of
precision weighting may coexist in a deep hierarchy.
It is also realistic to suppose that delusional ideas may arise in circumstances of higher
sensory precision (i.e., overly salient prediction errors causing unwarranted belief updates),
but it is hard to think of fully formed delusions as anything but (high-level) prior beliefs held
with undue precision. Delusions may also therefore arise from a similar pattern of altered
precisions at different hierarchical levels. To address this empirically, it may be necessary to
designtasksthatcanprobetheprecisionbeliefsatsensory,intermediate,andhighhierarchical
levels (Karvelis, Seitz, Lawrie, & Seriès,2018).
Of course, other accounts could also be addressed. It is possible that precision imbal-
ances are speciﬁc to different sensorimotor modalities—although work in the visual domain
seems to argue against this (Schmack et al.,2013; Teufel et al.,2015). It is also possible that
it is easier for subjects with schizophrenia to learn “empirical” perceptual priors over short
timescales (e.g., if greater variance permits greater belief updating) but then harder to main-
tain their precision over time.
Action and Planning
The current formulation distinguishes itself from previous models of AVH by incorporating
action. In our model—and in active inference more generally—perception depends upon
Computational Psychiatry 198
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
action, and what one perceives will depend on the balance between priors and the out-
comes solicited by actions. As such, for a false positive inference to ensue, it is necessary for
the policy that contributes to that inference to have a strong posterior probability, which is
more likely to be the case if it has a greater prior probability. Both of our policy-related manip-
ulations would have the effect of increasing this prior probability—this is caused directly by
increasing prior precision over policies and indirectly by reducing the number of competing
policies.
Our model’s use of action differentiates it somewhat from the “inner speech” models
described earlier, which posit that hallucinations occur via the misattribution of self-generated
internalspeechasbeinggeneratedbyothers(Allen,Aleman,&McGuire, 2007).Inourmodel,
hallucinations are generated to satisfy expectations of external speech derived from active
perception. This generation is perhaps more in line with the phenomenology of AVH, which
do not always take the form of one’s own thoughts that can be misattributed to another: They
canhaverichcontentthatcantaketheform ofconversationsorthatcanhavethegrammatical
structure of another’s speech (i.e., heard as “you” or “she/he” instead of “I”), and they can
have their own personas (making them seem less like thoughts whose source was simply mis-
attributed). That being said, as noted earlier,dialogic inner speech may certainly be one of the
priors that drive AVH (McCarthy-Jones & Fernyhough,2011). This may have implications for
understanding the perceived loss of agency that often (but not always; McCarthy-Jones et al.,
2014) accompanies AVH. We hope to explore this aspect in further work.
The inclusion of action, and the context of a dialog as opposed to the recognition of
sequences of previously learned words, sets our model apart from Hoffman and McGlashan
(2006). This is a key difference, because hallucinations can take the form of a conversational
partner in schizophrenia. This indicates that the genesis and maintenance of hallucinations
is unlikely to be solely sensory-perceptual in nature. The conversational aspect is naturally
modeledusingourapproach,asitisadiscretetimemodel,consistentwiththesequentialform
ofaconversation.Afurtherattractionisthat,asDietrichandMarkman( 2003)argued,discrete
representations are needed to allow for complex cognitive processes, such as categorization,
which are likely relevant to psychotic phenomena.
False Positives and False Negatives
Interestingly, Hoffman and McGlashan (2006) predicted—based on their simulations—that
patients with hallucinations would fail to detect words at a higher rate than nonhallucinators.
They conﬁrmed this effect in a psychophysics study of hallucinating and nonhallucinating
patients with schizophrenia-spectrum disorders as well as healthy controls. Furthermore, this
effectwasstrongerwhensensorystimuliweredegraded(whichcanberegardedasanexternal
modulation of the precision of the stimuli). Our model reproduces this latter effect—lower
likelihood precision led to speech detection errors (i.e., inferring “not listening” when the true
state was that sound was present) in several of our simulations.
Neurobiological Plausibility
Active inference can be formulated in terms of neurobiologically plausible processes (Friston,
FitzGerald, Rigoli, Schwartenbeck, & Pezzulo,2016). We can therefore draw some tentative
parallels between the requisite neuronal computations and the pathophysiology that may
underlie hallucinations.Figure 7shows the MDP model mapped onto a putative functional
architecture. Here we have represented auditory outcomes,o
a, in Wernicke’s area. Wernicke’s
areaisakeyregionfortherecognitionofsequencesofphonemesasconstitutingwords(Ardila,
Computational Psychiatry 199
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
Figure 7. Putative mapping of Markov decision process (MDP) model to neurobiology.This ﬁg-
ure shows the MDP model mapped onto putative neurobiology. This mapping should not be taken
too seriously but serves as an illustration of how our model may relate to underlying functional
anatomy. Here we have placed auditory outcomes,oa, in Wernicke’s area. Wernicke’s is con-
nected via the arcuate fasciculus to the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). The arcuate fasciculus repre-
sents the likelihood mapping between outcomes and auditory states,s
a, which are located in IFG.
Proprioceptive outcomes,op, are located in primary somatosensory cortex and map to propriocep-
tive states (representation of whether or not one is speaking),sp, in laryngeal motor cortex (LMC).
States in IFG and LMC inform the selection of policies assigned to the striatum; the blue lines rep-
resent corticostriatal connections between IFG and striatum and LMC and striatum. The nucleus
basalis represents cholinergic signaling, and the likelihood precisionζ modulates (blue arrow) the
state–outcome mapping in the auditory modality. The ventral tegmental area/substantia nigra (VTA)
represents dopaminergic signaling, encodes the prior precision over policiesγ, and modulates the
striatum (light blue arrow).
Bernal, & Rosselli,2016) and, as such, is a good candidate for one of the earliest processing
centers in the brain capable of representing the presence or absence of meaningful speech.
Wernicke’s area is connected via the arcuate fasciculus (which represents the likelihood map-
ping,
Aa, for the auditory modality) to the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), where auditory statessa
may be inferred. IFG is an important part of the language network and has been suggested as a
source of priors during speech recognition (Sohoglu, Peelle, Carlyon, & Davis,2012)a n dt h e
selectionofsemanticinformation(Grindrod,Bilenko,Myers,&Blumstein, 2008)andhasbeen
implicated in AVH in fMRI studies (Raij et al.,2009). In addition, a dynamic causal modeling
study by ´Curˇci´c-Blake et al. (2013) found reduced connectivity from Wernicke’s to Broca’s
areas that correlated with patient AVH status, further supporting our model. Proprioceptive
outcomes, o
p, are assigned to primary somatosensory cortex and map viaAp to proprioceptive
states, sp, in laryngeal motor cortex (LMC; Simonyan & Horwitz,2011). Expected states in IFG
Computational Psychiatry 200
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
and LMC inform the selection of policies, as performed by the striatum, which is well rec-
ognized to be involved in action planning. Under a neuronal process theory associated with
active inference, probability distributions over policies are usually represented in the striatum,
connected to expected states in the cortex via cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical loops (Friston,
Rosch et al.,2017). Policy precision is often considered to be the computational homolog of
dopamine (Schwartenbeck et al.,2015) and is represented here by the ventral tegmental area
(VTA). Likelihood or sensory precisionζ, which may represent the computational homolog of
acetylcholine (Dayan & Yu,2001;V o s s e le ta l . ,2014), is located in the nucleus basalis (Liu,
Chang, Pearce, & Gentleman,2015).
Let us consider the potential neurobiological correlates of our modulation ofζ, γ,a n d
π. Anticholinergic drugs like scopolamine can induce auditory hallucinations (Perry & Perry,
1995);muscarinicagonistshavebeenshown,insmallstudies,toimprovepsychoticsymptoms;
and dysfunction of the muscarinic system is hypothesized to play a role in schizophrenia (for a
review,seeRaedler,Bymaster,Tandon,Copolov,&Dean, 2006).Thusthereissomemerittothe
ideathatthereduced ζ inourmodelmayrepresentacholinergicdefect.However,theintegrity
ofgray(Ohietal., 2016)andwhitematter(includingthearcuatefasciculus)iscompromisedin
schizophrenia (´Curˇci´c-Blake et al.,2015; Gavrilescu et al.,2010), as is synaptic efﬁcacy and
NMDA receptor function (Coyle & Tsai,2004). These abnormalities are also candidates for
reduced likelihood precision, as they may represent a failure to propagate ascending sensory
information.
In psychosis, there is increased presynaptic synthesis and release of striatal dopamine
(see Howes & Kapur,2009). This increase in striatal dopamine release may correspond to an
increase in precision of policiesγ, though this requires much more empirical validation.
Finally, what is the potential signiﬁcance in neurobiological terms of our manipula-
tion of the policy space? Policies could be encoded in the cortex, selected in the striatum
throughcortico-striatalloops,andaccessedbyotherregionsofcortexviacortico-corticalcon-
nections. Synaptic loss within these areas or functional dysconnections between state- and
policy-representing regions could effectively reduce the policy space (see Friston, Brown,
Siemerkus, & Stephan,2016, for a discussion of the disconnection hypothesis of schizophre-
nia). It is therefore interesting to note that reductions in frontal and temporal gray matter
and reduced synaptic density are features of schizophrenic illness (for a review, see Faludi
&M i r n i c s ,2011).
Limitations
Onelimitationofourmodelisthatitassumesadialogicstructure.Whilethisallowedustopro-
duceanagentthatcanactinsteadofonlyperceivingprelearnedstimuli,itdoesnotnecessarily
reﬂect all cases of AVH—as these do not always have a dialogic component. Real patients can
hallucinate in many contexts, but our model produces hallucinations strictly in the context
of an ongoing conversation. We acknowledge that our model is not a comprehensive model
ofcommunicationorlanguage,inthatouragentchoosestospeakorlistenonlyasafunctionof
thepolicysheinfersandinreactiontoherconversationalpartner’sactions.Shedoesnotspeak
or listen to minimize uncertainty beyond the proprioceptive and auditory domains; that is, the
agentdoesnotuselanguagetoimpartmeaningortosatisfypriorpreferences(i.e.,askingques-
tionstoresolveuncertainty).Ouragentthereforedoesnotproperlyemploylanguagebutrather
a simple form of turn-taking behavior that reﬂects aspects of language in a rudimentary way.
Anotherlimitationisthat,forsimplicity,werestrictedourpolicyspacestobeoppositional—an
Computational Psychiatry 201
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
agent could only choose to listen or to speak, but not both. However, the purpose of the
simulation was to demonstrate the importance ofactive perception, not to comment on spe-
ciﬁc sequences of inferred actions that may exist in vivo. In addition, we only employed two
states,anditisunclearifourﬁndingswouldgeneralizetoagentswithhigherdimensionalstate
and policy spaces. Our model simulates the emergence of hallucinations given overly strong
priors and a permissively low likelihood precision. While this may be attractive for disorders
like schizophrenia, it may be less appropriate for the description of hallucinations in patients
losing their sight (Charles Bonnet syndrome) or hearing, where decreased likelihood precision
caused by a dysfunctional sensory apparatus allows priors to dominate (without there being
any abnormality of the priors), leading to hallucinations (Friston,2005). As such, this model
represents onlyone way in which false positive inferences can be generated.
Future Directions
In the future, we hope to produce an agent that can modulate its own policy space, perhaps
under the inﬂuence of affective or memory-related cues from a simulated medial temporal
lobe. This would help to explain how an agent might sculpt a hallucinogenic policy space,
perhaps when constrained to reduce that space over time to simulate overpruning. We hope
to construct models with more complex state spaces to simulate language or conversations. A
more complete model may also allow us to investigate the content of hallucinations and how
they respond to context. We hope to design tasks that test model predictions that could be
completed during fMRI to probe neurobiological correlates.
CONCLUSION
We have simulated hallucinations using a Markov decision process, under an active infer-
ence framework. Hallucinations, deﬁned as false positive inferences, emerged with decreased
likelihood precision, combined with a high prior precision over policies or a hallucinogenic
policy space. In other words, hallucinations occurred when aberrant but strongly held priors
over policies entailed predictions about sensory states that could not be corrected because
of imprecise sensory information. This leads to a “precise (prior) belief, imprecise (sensory)
evidence” view of AVH. Agents that hallucinate do so because they believe that only certain
sequences of events are likely, and they are unable to use sensory information to update these
beliefs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
AllsimulationswererunusingtheDEMtoolboxincludedintheSPM12package.Thisisopen-
accesssoftwareprovidedandmaintainedbytheWellcomeTrustCenterforNeuroimagingand
can be accessed here:http://www.ﬁl.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm12/.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
David A. Benrimoh: Conceptualization: Lead; Software: Equal; Visualization: Equal; Writing–
originaldraft:Lead;Writing—review&editing:Equal.ThomasParr:Conceptualization:Equal;
Software: Equal; Supervision: Equal; Visualization: Equal; Writing—review & editing: Sup-
porting.PeterVincent:Conceptualization:Supporting;Writing—review&editing:Supporting.
RickA.Adams:Conceptualization:Supporting;Supervision:Equal;Writing—review&editing:
Equal. Karl Friston: Methodology: Lead; Software: Supporting; Supervision: Equal; Writing–
review & editing: Supporting.
Computational Psychiatry 202
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
FUNDING INFORMATION
DBissupportedbyaRichardandEdithStraussFellowship(McGillUniversity)andtheFondsde
Recherche due Quebec–Santé (FRQS). TP is supported by the Rosetrees Trust (Award Number
173346). RAA is supported by the Academy of Medical Sciences (AMS-SGCL13-Adams) and
the National Institute of Health Research (CL-2013–18–003). KJF is a Wellcome Principal Re-
search Fellow (Ref: 088130/Z/09/Z).
REFERENCES
Adams, R. A., Stephan, K. E., Brown, H. R., Frith, C. D., & Friston,
K. J. (2013). The computational anatomy of psychosis.Frontiers
in Psychiatry, 4, 1–26.
Alderson-Day, B., Lima, C. F., Evans, S., Krishnan, S.,
Shanmugalingam, P., Fernyhough, C., & Scott, S. K. (2017). Dis-
tinctprocessingofambiguousspeechinpeoplewithnon-clinical
auditory verbal hallucinations.Brain, 140, 2475–2489. https://
doi.org/10.1093/brain/awx206
Allen, P., Aleman, A., & McGuire, P. K. (2007). Inner speech mod-
els of auditory verbal hallucinations: Evidence from behavioural
andneuroimagingstudies. International Review of Psychiatry,19,
407–415.
Ardila, A., Bernal, B., & Rosselli, M. (2016). The role of Wernicke’s
areainlanguagecomprehension. Psychology & Neuroscience,9,
340–343.
Blakemore,S.J.,Wolpert,D.,&Frith,C.(2000).Whycan’tyoutickle
yourself? Neuroreport, 11, R11–16.
Botvinick,M.,&Toussaint,M. (2012). Planningasinference. Trends
in Cognitive Science, 16, 485–488.
Brown,H.,Adams,R.A.,Parees,I.,Edwards,M.,&Friston,K.(2013).
Active inference, sensory attenuation and illusions. Cognitive
Processing, 14, 411–427.
Cassidy, C. M., Balsam, P. D., Weinstein, J. J., Rosengard, R. J.,
Slifstein, M., Daw, N. D., . . . Horga, G. (2018). A perceptual
inference mechanism for hallucinations linked to striatal do-
pamine. Current Biology, 28, 503–514.https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cub.2017.12.059
Corlett, P. R., & Fletcher, P. C. (2009). Computational psychiatry: A
Rosetta Stone linking the brain to mental illness.The Lancet Psy-
chiatry, 1, 399–402.
Coyle, J. T., & Tsai, G. (2004). NMDA receptor function, neuroplas-
ticity, and the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. InInternational
review of neurobiology(pp. 491–515). New York, NY: Academic
Press.
´Curˇci´c-Blake, B., Liemburg, E., Vercammen, A., Swart, M.,
Knegtering, H., Bruggeman, R., & Aleman, A. (2013). When
Broca goes uninformed: Reduced information ﬂow to Broca’s
area in schizophrenia patients with auditory hallucinations.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 39, 1087–1095.https://doi.org/10.1093/
schbul/sbs107
´Curˇci´c-Blake, B., Nanetti, L., van der Meer, L., Cerliani, L.,
Renken, R., Pijnenborg, G. H. M., & Aleman, A. (2015). Not on
speaking terms: Hallucinations and structural network discon-
nectivity in schizophrenia. Brain Structure and Function, 220,
407–418.
Dayan, P., & Yu, A. J. (2001). ACh, uncertainty, and cortical in-
ference. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(pp. 189–196). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Demirdjian, D., Taycher, L., Shakhnarovich, G., Grauman, K., &
Darrell, T. (2005). Avoiding the “streetlight effect”: Tracking
by exploring likelihood modes. In Tenth IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision(Vol.1,pp.357–364). NewYork,
NY: IEEE.
de Vries, B., & Friston, K. J. (2017). A factor graph description
of deep temporal active inference. Frontiers in Computational
Neuroscience, 11, Article 95.
Dietrich, E., & Markman, A. B. (2003). Discrete thoughts: Why
cognition must use discrete representations.Mind & Language,
18, 95–119.
Faludi,G.,&Mirnics,K. (2011). Synapticchangesinthebrainofsub-
jects with schizophrenia.International Journal of Developmental
Neuroscience, 29, 305–309.
Feinberg, I. (1978). Efference copy and corollary discharge: impli-
cations for thinking and its disorders.Schizophrenia Bulletin, 4,
636–640.
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-
energy. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 4, Article 215.
Friston,K.J.(2005).Hallucinationsandperceptualinference. Behav-
ioral and Brain Sciences, 28, 764–766.
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A uniﬁed brain theory?
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2), Article 2787.
Friston, K. (2012). Prediction, perception and agency.International
Journal of Psychophysiology, 83, 248–252.
Friston, K., Brown, H. R., Siemerkus, J., & Stephan, K. E. (2016).
Thedysconnectionhypothesis.Schizophrenia Research,176(2–3),
83–94.
Friston, K., & Buzsaki, G. (2016). The functional anatomy of time:
What and when in the brain.Trends in Cognitive Science, 20,
500–511.
Friston,K.,FitzGerald,T.,Rigoli,F.,Schwartenbeck,P.,&Pezzulo,G.
(2016). Active inference: A process theory.Neural Computation,
29, 1–49.
Friston, K., & Frith, C. (2015). A duet for one.Consciousness and
Cognition, 36, 390–405.
Friston, K., Kilner, J., & Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle
for the brain.Journal of Physiology (Paris), 100, 70–87.
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., & de Vries, B. (2017). The graphical brain:
Belief propagation and active inference.Network Neuroscience,
1, 1–34.
Computational Psychiatry 203
Precise Beliefs, Imprecise Evidence Benrimoh et al.
Friston, K. J., Rosch, R., Parr, T., Price, C., & Bowman, H. (2017).
Deep temporal models and active inference.Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews, 77, 388–402.
Friston,K.,Schwartenbeck,P.,Fitzgerald,T.,Moutoussis,M.,Behrens,
T., & Dolan, R. (2013). The anatomy of choice: Active inference
and agency.Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, Article 598.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00598
Frith, C. D., & Done, D. J. (1989). Experiences of alien control in
schizophrenia reﬂect a disorder in the central monitoring of an
action. Psychological Medicine, 19, 359–363.
Gavrilescu, M., Rossell, S., Stuart, G. W., Shea, T. L., Innes-Brown,
H . ,H e n s h a l l ,K . ,...Egan, G. F. (2010). Reduced connectivity
of the auditory cortex in patients with auditory hallucinations: A
resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.Psy-
chological Medicine, 40, 1149–1158.
Grindrod, C. M., Bilenko, N. Y., Myers, E. B., & Blumstein, S. E.
(2008). The role of the left inferior frontal gyrus in implicit se-
mantic competition and selection: An event-related fMRI study.
Brain Research, 1229, 167–178.
Hoffman,R. E., & McGlashan, T. H.(2006).Usingaspeechperception
neural network computer simulation to contrast neuroanato-
mic versus neuromodulatory models of auditory hallucinations.
Pharmacopsychiatry, 39, 54–64.
Holzman, P. S. (1972). Assessment of perceptual functioning in
schizophrenia. Psychopharmacologia, 24(1), 29–41.
Howes, O. D., & Kapur, S. (2009). The dopamine hypothesis of
schizophrenia: Version III—the ﬁnal common pathway.Schizo-
phrenia Bulletin, 35, 549–562.
Jardri,R.,&Denève,S. (2013). Circularinferencesinschizophrenia.
Brain, 136, 3227–3241.
Karvelis, P., Seitz, A. R., Lawrie, S. M., & Seriès, P. (2018, May 14).
Autistic traits, but not schizotypy, predict increased weighting
of sensory information in Bayesian visual integration.eLife, 7,
Article e34115.https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.34115
Liu, A. K. L., Chang, R. C.-C., Pearce, R. K. B., & Gentleman,
S. M. (2015). Nucleus basalis of Meynert revisited: Anatomy, his-
tory and differential involvement in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s
disease. Acta Neuropathologica, 129, 527–540.
McCarthy-Jones, S., & Fernyhough, C. (2011). The varieties of inner
speech: Links between quality of inner speech and psychopatho-
logical variables in a sample of young adults.Consciousness and
Cognition,20, 1586–1593.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2011.
08.005
McCarthy-Jones, S., Trauer, T., Mackinnon, A., Sims, E., Thomas, N.,
& Copolov, D. L. (2014). A new phenomenological survey of au-
ditory hallucinations: Evidence for subtypes and implications for
theory and practice.Schizophrenia Bulletin, 40, 231–235.
Mirza, M. B., Adams, R. A., Mathys, C. D., & Friston, K. J. (2016).
Scene construction, visual foraging, and active inference.Fron-
tiers in Computational Neuroscience,
10, Article 56.
Notredame, C.-E., Pins, D., Denève, S., & Jardri, R. (2014). What
visual illusions teach us about schizophrenia.Frontiers in Inte-
grative Neuroscience,8,Article63. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.
2014.00063
Ohi, K., Matsuda, Y., Shimada, T., Yasuyama, T., Oshima, K., Sawai,
K . ,...K a w a s a k i ,Y .(2016). Structural alterations of the supe-
rior temporal gyrus in schizophrenia: Detailed subregional differ-
ences. European Psychiatry, 35, 25–31.
Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2017). Uncertainty, epistemics and active in-
ference. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 14(136). https://
doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0376
Perry, E. K., & Perry, R. H. (1995). Acetylcholine and hallucinations:
Disease-related compared to drug-induced alterations in human
consciousness. Brain and Cognition, 28, 240–258.
Powers, A. R., Mathys, C., & Corlett, P. R. (2017). Pavlovian
conditioning–induced hallucinations result from overweight-
ing of perceptual priors.Science, 357, 596–600.https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.aan3458
Raedler, T. J., Bymaster, F. P., Tandon, R., Copolov, D., & Dean,
B. (2006). Towards a muscarinic hypothesis of schizophrenia.
Molecular Psychiatry, 12, 232–246.
Raij,T.T.,Valkonen-Korhonen,M.,Holi,M.,Therman,S.,Lehtonen,
J., & Hari, R. (2009). Reality of auditory verbal hallucinations.
Brain, 132, 2994–3001.
Schmack, K., de Castro, A. G.-C., Rothkirch, M., Sekutowicz, M.,
R ö s s l e r ,H . ,H a y n e s ,J . - D . ,...S t e r z e r ,P .(2013). Delusions and
the role of beliefs in perceptual inference. Journal of Neuro-
science, 33, 13701–13712.https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
1778-13.2013
Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T. H. B., Mathys, C., Dolan, R.,
& Friston, K. (2015). The dopaminergic midbrain encodes the
expected certainty about desired outcomes.Cerebral Cortex, 25,
3434–3445.
Shergill,S.S.,Bays,P.M.,Frith,C.D.,&Wolpert,D.M. (2003). Two
eyes for an eye: The neuroscience of force escalation.Science,
30, 187.
Shergill, S. S., Samson, G., Bays, P. M., Frith, C. D., &
Wolpert, D. M. (2005). Evidence for sensory prediction
deﬁcits in schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162,
2384–2386.
Simonyan,K.,&Horwitz,B.(2011).Laryngealmotorcortexandcon-
trol of speech in humans.Neuroscientist, 17, 197–208.
Sohoglu, E., Peelle, J. E., Carlyon, R. P., & Davis, M. H.
(2012). Predictive top-down integration of prior knowledge dur-
ingspeechperception. Journal of Neuroscience,32,8443–8453.
Sterzer, P., Adams, R. A., Fletcher, P., Frith, C., Lawrie, S. M., Muckli,
L., . . . Corlett, P. R. (2018). The predictive coding account
of psychosis.Biological Psychiatry, 84, 634–643.https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biopsych.2018.05.015
Teufel, C., Fletcher, P., & Davis, G. (2010). Seeing other minds:
Attributedmentalstatesinﬂuenceperception. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 14, 376–382.
Teufel, C., Subramaniam, N., Dobler, V., Perez, J., Finnemann, J.,
Mehta, P. R., . . . Fletcher, P. C. (2015). Shift toward prior
knowledgeconfersaperceptualadvantageinearlypsychosisand
psychosis-prone healthy individuals.Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 112, 13401–13406.
Vercammen, A., & Aleman, A. (2010). Semantic expectations can
induce false perceptions in hallucination-prone individuals.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 151–156. https://doi.org/10.1093/
schbul/sbn063
Vossel,S.,Bauer,M.,Mathys,C.,Adams,R.A.,Dolan,R.J.,Stephan,
K. E., & Friston, K. J. (2014). Cholinergic stimulation enhances
Bayesian belief updating in the deployment of spatial attention.
Journal of Neuroscience, 34, 15735–15742.
Computational Psychiatry
204