1
Bohlen L, et al. BMJ Open 2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094747
Open access 
Effect of osteopathic manipulative 
treatment on comorbid depressive 
symptoms in patients with chronic low 
back pain: study protocol for a 
randomised controlled trial
Lucas Bohlen    ,1,2 Michael Eggart,3 Bruno Müller- Oerlinghausen,4,5 
Jürgen Lorenz    ,6 Robert Schleip,7,8 Torsten Liem,1,9 Francesco Cerritelli    ,10,11 
Jorge E Esteves,10,12 Meike Shedden- Mora    ,13,14 Tobias Schmidt1,15
To cite: Bohlen L, Eggart M, 
Müller- Oerlinghausen B, 
et al. Effect of osteopathic 
manipulative treatment 
on comorbid depressive 
symptoms in patients with 
chronic low back pain: study 
protocol for a randomised 
controlled trial. BMJ Open 
2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2024-094747
 ► Prepublication history 
and additional supplemental 
material for this paper are 
available online. To view these 
files, please visit the journal 
online (https://doi.org/10.1136/ 
bmjopen-2024-094747).
Received 08 October 2024
Accepted 30 June 2025
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Lucas Bohlen;  
 lbohlen@ osteopathie- schule. de
Protocol
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2025. Re- use 
permitted under CC BY- NC. No 
commercial re- use. See rights 
and permissions. Published by 
BMJ Group.
ABSTRACT
Introduction Chronic low back pain (CLBP) and 
depressive symptoms (DS) are highly prevalent, 
burdensome, costly and comorbid health conditions. 
Osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT) was shown 
to improve pain and disability in patients with CLBP; 
however, the effect on comorbid DS remains less certain. 
Interestingly, CLBP and DS seem to be associated with 
changes in interoception, which may be reversed by OMT.
Methods and analysis The study protocol proposes a 
single- blinded, parallel- group, randomised controlled trial 
to investigate the effect of OMT on clinical symptoms 
(depression, pain and disability) and interoceptive 
functions (interoceptive accuracy, sensibility and 
awareness) in patients with CLBP and comorbid DS. A 
sample of 60 adult subjects with CLBP and comorbid 
DS shall be recruited from osteopathic, orthopaedic and 
physiotherapeutic practices and educational institutes for 
osteopathy, sports science, psychology and medicine in 
Hamburg, Germany. Participants will be randomly allocated 
(1:1 ratio) to receive six 45 min treatment sessions of 
either OMT (standard- OMT group) or sham treatment 
imitating OMT (sham- OMT group). Primarily, symptoms 
of depression, pain and disability will be assessed with 
the Beck’s Depression Inventory, Second Edition (BDI- II), 
Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) and Oswestry Disability Index 
(ODI). Secondarily, interoceptive accuracy, sensibility 
and awareness will be evaluated using the Heartbeat 
Tracking Task (HTT), Multidimensional Assessment of 
Interoceptive Awareness (MAIA- 2) and confidence- 
accuracy correspondence (CAC). Ancillary, the therapeutic 
alliance will be investigated with the Helping Alliance 
Questionnaire. Data will be collected at baseline (t0), the 
first, third and sixth treatment sessions (t1, t3, t6) and at 
3 months follow- up (t7). The findings will be analysed for 
between- group differences using descriptive (mean and 
SD) and inductive statistics (mixed analysis of variance). It 
is hypothesised that standard- OMT, compared with sham- 
OMT, will reduce depression, pain and disability (BDI- II, 
NRS, ODI) and increase interoceptive accuracy, sensibility 
and awareness (HTT, MAIA- 2, CAC) in patients with CLBP 
and comorbid DS.
Ethics and dissemination The study was approved by 
the ethics committee of the Medical School Hamburg 
(MSH- 2023/288). The anonymised dataset will be 
published in an online repository, and the results will be 
published in peer- reviewed scientific journals.
Trial registration number DRKS00031694.
INTRODUCTION
Background
Low back pain and major depressive disorder
Low back pain (LBP) and major depres-
sive disorder (MDD) are highly prevalent, 
burdensome and costly conditions that 
contribute substantially to the global disease 
burden.1–4 Across the world, LBP was esti-
mated to account for 568.4 million preva-
lent cases and 63.7 million years lived with 
disability,1 whereas MDD seems to account for 
246 million prevalent cases and 49.4 million 
disability- adjusted life- years.2 LBP and MDD 
are among the most expensive health condi-
tions, accounting for healthcare spending of 
US$134.5 and US$67.5 billion, respectively, 
STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THIS STUDY
 ⇒ First trial investigating the effect of osteopathic 
treatment on the symptoms and interoception of 
patients with chronic low back pain and comorbid 
depressive symptoms.
 ⇒ A randomised controlled trial will be implemented, 
and the sample size has been calculated, which rep-
resents the gold standard.
 ⇒ Osteopathic and sham treatments are based on 
previous literature and reported according to estab-
lished guidelines.
 ⇒ The study will be single- blinded as manual thera-
pists cannot be adequately blinded.
 ⇒ Eligibility and harms must be precisely defined and 
closely monitored to ensure patient safety.
2
Bohlen L, et al. BMJ Open 2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094747
Open access 
in the USA alone. 4 While these conditions are major 
health problems on their own, they frequently co- occur. 
LBP and MDD seem to show a bidirectional comorbidity, 
as evidenced by the longitudinal prospective association 
reported between these conditions (LBP was prospec-
tively associated with MDD and vice versa).5 For example, 
patients with LBP have a higher risk and prevalence of 
depressive symptoms (DS),6 7 which were associated with 
higher pain and disability levels as well as lower recovery 
rates.8 In terms of treatments, patients with LBP or MDD 
will likely receive physical or mental health interventions, 
respectively. Among others, LBP can be treated with phys-
ical and manual therapies (eg, exercise), whereas MDD 
can be treated with psychological and pharmacological 
therapies (eg, psychotherapy).9 10 Still, the available treat-
ment approaches are (mostly) moderately effective. In 
patients with LBP, the effect sizes for improvements of 
pain are large for exercise therapy (standardised mean 
difference (SMD): 1.40) and moderate for manual therapy 
(SMD: 0.72), whereas the effect sizes for improvements of 
disability are moderate for both exercise therapy (SMD: 
0.71) and manual therapy (SMD: 0.52). 11 In patients 
with MDD, the effect sizes for the improvement of DS 
are small for antidepressants (SMD: 0.17–0.48), 12 and 
small to large for psychotherapies (SMD: 0.32–0.81). 13 
Despite available and effective treatments for LBP and 
MDD, many patients do not respond to therapy 14 15 and 
the burden of these conditions has only increased during 
the past decades.16 17 However, interestingly, it was shown 
that exercise interventions commonly applied to patients 
with LBP may also improve MDD, 18 whereas psycholog-
ical interventions commonly applied to patients with 
MDD may also improve LBP.19 Hence, to reduce the high 
prevalence, burden and comorbidity of LBP and MDD, it 
was proposed to initiate multidisciplinary collaborations 
between physical and mental healthcare specialists. 20 
Recently, osteopathy was proposed as a potential thera-
peutic approach to complement these multidisciplinary 
collaborations.21
Osteopathy
Osteopathy is a person- centred healthcare approach 
that combines manual treatment and informed advice. 22 
Patients primarily consult osteopaths for musculoskeletal 
pain conditions like LBP,23 which are manually treated with 
osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT). 24 OMT was 
shown to be safe and effective for patients with musculo-
skeletal disorders.25 26 Specifically, osteopathic care seems 
to improve spinal pain conditions. 27 For example, OMT 
was shown to reduce pain and disability in patients with 
chronic LBP (CLBP). 28–30 However, although most orig-
inal studies report reduced pain and improved function 
in patients with CLBP after OMT,31–37 a recent high- quality 
clinical trial reported smaller changes and scrutinised 
the clinical meaningfulness of these effects. 38 Further -
more, the literature is limited by small sample sizes, no 
long- term follow- ups and heterogeneity between studies 
(regarding the interventions, controls and measures). 28 
In contrast, the effect of OMT on DS remains less certain. 
While an earlier systematic review found mixed evidence 
for the effect of OMT on DS in patients with chronic 
pain,39 a recent meta- analysis reported improved DS after 
OMT, particularly in pain populations. 40 However, these 
reviews were mostly based on clinical trials that applied 
diverse manual therapy approaches, which were not 
clearly defined as OMT.39 40 Regarding OMT, some orig-
inal studies reported no effect of OMT on DS, 41–47 while 
others showed significant improvements, 48–50 which may 
differ between single osteopathic techniques. 51 Particu-
larly in patients with CLBP, OMT was shown to reduce 
DS.35 52 53 Nonetheless, patients with CLBP and comorbid 
DS seem to respond less to OMT (in terms of pain reduc-
tion and functional improvement) than patients with 
CLBP showing no comorbid DS. 54 In sum, the literature 
remains limited, partially inconsistent and heteroge-
neous.39 40  Thus, future research is required, 40 particu-
larly on the effect of OMT on comorbid DS in patients 
with CLBP.22 Conceptually, this research avenue appears 
reasonable because both CLBP and DS seem to be asso-
ciated with changes in interoception, 55 56  whereas the 
effects of OMT (on DS) might be mediated by (the effects 
on) interoception.21 40
Interoception
In recent years, the role of interoception in health condi-
tions has been increasingly recognised57 as abnormalities 
in interoception seem to underlie both mental health and 
chronic pain conditions.55 58 Specifically, the current liter-
ature shows that patients with chronic pain conditions 
(like LBP) and mental health conditions (like MDD) show 
reduced interoceptive accuracy compared with healthy 
controls.55 56  Consequently, it has been suggested that 
treatment approaches targeting interoception may benefit 
physical and mental health conditions.59 60 Among others, 
an approach that seems to affect interoceptive pathways 
is affective touch, which activates C- tactile (CT) fibres. 61 
Interestingly, the stimulation of CT fibres may improve 
chronic pain (preliminary evidence) and DS (theoret-
ical perspective) via interoceptive mechanisms. 62 63  For 
example, massage therapies have demonstrated an anti-
depressant effect,64 65 specifically, in patients with chronic 
back pain who receive massage using gentle touch to 
activate CT- fibres.66 67 Hence, it was speculated that ther -
apeutic approaches that use touch, such as OMT, may 
benefit physical and mental health conditions showing 
interoceptive dysfunctions by activating CT fibres and 
modulating interoceptive pathways. 21 68–70 Indeed, OMT 
produces hyper- parasympathetic and anti- inflammatory 
effects, which seem to be mediated by interocep-
tion.68 71 72 More specifically, osteopathic treatment might 
modulate interoceptive pathways by activating CT fibres 
through touch. 73–76 Beyond theoretical perspectives, it 
has been shown that osteopathic treatments influence 
interoceptive brain areas in healthy subjects and patients 
with CLBP.71 72 77  However, the effect of OMT on intero-
ceptive outcomes remains mixed. While some studies 
3
Bohlen L, et al. BMJ Open 2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094747
Open access
showed either no effect, 78 a non- significant increase 79 
or a significant increase 80 in interoceptive accuracy of 
healthy subjects after diverse osteopathic techniques, 
another study reported increased interoceptive accuracy 
after OMT in patients with CLBP. 72 In turn, interocep-
tive sensibility in patients with pain was not changed by a 
single session of OMT.81 Hence, further research on the 
effects of OMT on interoceptive accuracy and sensibility 
is needed, and pilot trials have already been run.51
Rationale
Taken together, OMT was shown to be effective for 
patients with CLBP. However, the evidence is less certain 
regarding the effect of OMT on DS. Both LBP and DS 
seem to be associated with altered interoception. In 
turn, OMT seems to modulate interoceptive pathways. 
Thus, we hypothesise that OMT may improve CLBP and 
comorbid DS by restoring interoceptive dysfunctions. 
The theoretical basis for these assumptions was derived 
from the fields of predictive coding and active inference. 
Specifically, it has been proposed that chronic pain 82–84 
and depression85–87 are characterised by (high precision) 
prior interoceptive predictions (beliefs), which are not 
updated when confronted with (low precision) actual 
interoceptive information (likelihood) that disconfirms 
the expectations; instead, the beliefs are confirmed 
through active inference (producing the expected sensa-
tions through autonomic activity). 21 In turn, we specu-
lated that OMT may produce interoceptive information 
that mismatches interoceptive expectations (ie, predic-
tion errors), which will be minimised by perceptual 
inference (updating prior beliefs based on actual infor -
mation), thereby reducing the symptoms.21 88 In sum, we 
speculate that CLBP and DS are associated with active 
inference processes that produce the expected symptoms 
(due to strong prior beliefs predicting pain and depres-
sion), whereas OMT may initiate perceptual inference 
processes that update these prior beliefs (by providing 
strong sensory information that contradicts prior beliefs), 
thus alleviating the symptoms (figure 1).21
Objectives
Against this background, we aim to investigate the effect 
of OMT (standard- OMT group), compared with sham 
treatment imitating OMT (sham- OMT group), on the 
clinical symptoms (depression, pain and disability) and 
interoceptive functions (interoceptive accuracy, sensi-
bility and awareness) of patients with CLBP and comorbid 
DS. It is hypothesised that standard- OMT will significantly 
improve (1) DS (decrease Beck’s Depression Inventory, 
Figure 1 An embodied, predictive and interoceptive framework to osteopathy and mental health (based on Bohlen et al21). (A) 
A patient with chronic pain and comorbid depressive symptoms through the lens of active inference. Due to past experiences 
with pain and depression, the patient’s generative model has produced a belief (prior) that predicts physical and mental states 
associated with pain and depression as the likely causes of uncertain, and even harmless, interoceptive information (likelihood). 
The resulting mismatch (prediction error) between expected and actual (eg, harmful and harmless) interoceptive information 
will likely be minimised using active inference. Thus, the expected interoceptive information is produced through action (eg, 
of the autonomic nervous system) to make the prediction of interoceptive information associated with pain and depression 
come true. Hence, the generative model affords high precision (confidence) to the belief (prior and prediction), and low 
precision to the sensory information (likelihood and prediction error), thereby shifting perception towards expectation (putatively 
maintaining symptoms through active inference). (B) An osteopathic treatment for a patient with chronic pain and comorbid 
depressive symptoms through the lens of perceptual inference. The osteopathic treatment provides surprising and harmless 
interoceptive information (likelihood), which is not linked to physical and mental states associated with pain and depression, 
thereby contradicting the belief (prior). The resulting mismatch (prediction error) between expected and actual (eg, harmful and 
harmless) interoceptive information will likely be minimised using perceptual inference. Thus, the belief (prior) is updated based 
on the actual interoceptive information (likelihood) provided during osteopathic treatment, thus revising future predictions to 
not expect interoceptive information associated with pain and depression. Hence, the generative model affords high precision 
(confidence) to the sensory information (likelihood and prediction error), and low precision to the belief (prior and prediction), 
thereby shifting perception away from expectation (putatively alleviating symptoms through perceptual inference).
4
Bohlen L, et al. BMJ Open 2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094747
Open access 
Second Edition, (BDI- II) score), (2) pain (decrease 
Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) score) and (3) disability 
(decrease Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) score) as 
well as (4) interoceptive accuracy (increase Heartbeat 
Tracking Task (HTT) score), (5) interoceptive sensibility 
(increase Multidimensional Assessment of Interoceptive 
Awareness (MAIA- 2) score) and (6) interoceptive aware-
ness (increase confidence- accuracy correspondence 
(CAC) score) compared with sham- OMT.
Trial design
This study protocol proposes a randomised controlled 
trial (RCT) with a parallel- group design (1:1 allocation 
ratio), which represents the gold standard for trials inves-
tigating the effect of healthcare interventions. 89 The 
research proposal is reported according to the Standard 
Protocol Items: Recommendations for Interventional 
Trials statement, and the checklist can be found in the 
online supplemental material 4.1.90
METHODS: PARTICIPANTS, INTERVENTIONS AND OUTCOMES
Study setting
The study will be conducted in the university outpatient 
clinic for sports and exercise medicine of the Medical 
School Hamburg (MSH) in Hamburg, Germany. The 
study started on 15 July 2024 and is aimed to end on 31 
December 2025.
Eligibility criteria
The study will recruit female and male adults with CLBP 
and comorbid DS. To be eligible, subjects must report 
pain in the lumbar region (International Classification of 
Diseases, 10th revision (ICD- 10), F.54.5) for ≥3 months 
(chronic) without a recognised underlying pathology 
(non- specific) and with comorbid DS.91 More specifically, 
participants must demonstrate clinically relevant base-
line levels of depression (BDI- II: ≥7), pain (NRS: ≥3) and 
disability (ODI: ≥15).92 93 The minimal BDI- II score was 
chosen because patients with CLBP show mean BDI- II 
scores of 7.8±6.06 94 and the cut- off value for clinically 
relevant DS in medical conditions ranges between 7 and 
20.93 95  The minimal NRS and ODI scores were chosen 
because they reflect threshold values that are commonly 
used as inclusion criteria in LBP trials. 92 To ensure that 
subjects do not fulfil the diagnosis of a moderate or severe 
major depression or bipolar affective disorder (based on 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 
Fifth Edition (DSM- 5)), a structured diagnostic interview 
(Diagnostic Interview for Mental Disorders (DIPS)) will 
be conducted at baseline (online supplemental materials 
2.19 and 2.20). 96 The DIPS was shown to be reliable 97 
and valid.98 The interviews will be conducted by trained 
personnel closely supervised by a licensed psychological 
psychotherapist and professor for clinical psychology 
and psychotherapy (MS- M). Based on the DIPS, partici-
pants will be included if they are diagnosed with subclin-
ical DS, mild depressive episode (ICD- 10, F.32.0), or 
recurrent depressive disorder with a current mild depres-
sive episode (ICD- 10, F.33.0), and excluded if they are 
diagnosed with moderate or severe depressive episode 
(ICD- 10, F.32.1–3) or bipolar affective disorder (ICD- 10, 
F.31). Participants who will be diagnosed with moderate, 
severe or bipolar depression at baseline cannot partici-
pate in the trial. They will receive feedback on their diag-
nosis, followed by brief guideline- based information on 
treatment options.99 If they wish, they will be referred to 
the university outpatient clinic for psychotherapy at the 
MSH for further diagnosis and treatment. Notably, if the 
DS deteriorates during the study (defined as BDI- II score 
>20), a new DIPS will be conducted, and the subject will 
be excluded from participation if a moderate, severe 
or bipolar depressive disorder is diagnosed (termina-
tion criteria). Furthermore, children/adolescents (<18 
years) and older adults (>60 years) will be excluded 100 
due to differences in the symptomatology of CLBP and 
DS between age groups. 101 102 Subjects will be prohib-
ited from participation if they report: (1) pregnancy, (2) 
malignancy, (3) obesity (body mass index (BMI): >30), (4) 
trauma, surgeries or diseases of the spine (eg, fractures, 
spinal fusion or spondylolisthesis), (5) mental disorders 
(other than depression), (6) substance abuse/depen-
dence, (7) active suicidal ideation, (8) short duration of 
DS (<2 weeks), (9) systemic conditions (eg, inflammatory, 
immunological or rheumatological diseases) or (10) an 
inability to provide informed consent (eg, due to insuf-
ficient language skills).92 103 Regarding substance abuse/
dependence, subjects with diagnosed substance use disor-
ders (current or in past 12 months), including alcohol 
use disorder, are not eligible to participate in this study. 
Still, caffeine and tobacco consumption are permitted, 
whereas alcohol consumption of more than two drinks 
a day for men and one drink a day for women is not 
permitted (based on recommendations from104).
Interventions
Participants will be randomly allocated into an interven-
tion group and a control group. Both groups will receive 
six treatment sessions applied once weekly for 45 min in 
the same facility. The interventions in both groups will 
be delivered individually and face- to- face (without equip-
ment). In the intervention group, OMT will be provided, 
which refers to the individualised application of manual 
osteopathic techniques to alleviate somatic dysfunctions 
(standard- OMT group). In the control group, sham treat-
ment will be provided, which refers to the standardised 
application of light touch to imitate OMT (sham- OMT 
group). The interventions are reported according to the 
Template for Intervention Description and Replication 
(TIDieR) and Recommendations for the Development, 
Implementation and Reporting of Control Interventions 
in Efficacy and Mechanistic Trials of Physical, Psycho-
logical and Self- Management Therapies (CoPPS) state-
ments, and a checklist combining both statements can 
be found in the online supplemental material 4.2. 105 106 
Both groups will undergo an anamnesis, inspection and 
5
Bohlen L, et al. BMJ Open 2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094747
Open access
manual diagnosis. However, the diagnostic findings will 
only be treated individualised with OMT in the stan-
dard- OMT group, whereas the sham- OMT group will 
receive standardised light touch independent of the 
diagnostic findings. Further information about the anam-
nesis, inspection and diagnosis is provided in the online 
supplemental material 1.2. Eight osteopaths (all treat 
both groups) with similar characteristics (ie, age, training 
and experience) will apply the osteopathic and sham 
treatments. Each subject will receive treatment from the 
same practitioner over the course of the study (to enable 
a solid patient- therapist relationship). The therapists will 
be instructed to establish a similar therapeutic relation-
ship with participants from both groups,71 by adhering to 
factors that are essential for an advantageous therapeutic 
alliance (eg, empathy, positive esteem and consensus on 
goals).107 Personal interactions (eg, small talk) and patient 
management approaches (eg, advice) will be allowed in 
both groups (and should not differ). More specifically, 
patient management approaches commonly used in oste-
opathy will be individually tailored to the participants 
(and their conditions) of both groups, including advice 
on nutrition, exercise and lifestyle. Importantly, the 
anamnesis, inspection, diagnosis, treatment plan, inter -
ventions (standard- OMT and sham- OMT), and patient 
management approaches will be documented using a 
form that can be found in the online supplemental mate-
rial 2.1. Furthermore, non- adherence of participants with 
the interventions and modifications to the interventions 
will be documented by the therapists. In contrast, the 
adherence and fidelity of providers with the interven-
tions will not be recorded. A consensus training will be 
conducted before the study. The control group (treated 
with sham- OMT) will be offered a single session of OMT 
after the trial (undocumented and free of charge) to 
improve recruitment and retention rates. Further infor -
mation about the interventions (ie, similarities and differ-
ences) is provided in online supplemental material 1.3.
Standard-OMT
The intervention group will receive an individualised 
osteopathic treatment, which refers to the application of 
‘OMT’ to alleviate somatic dysfunctions (standard- OMT 
group). In general, OMT can be defined as a manual 
treatment approach that applies touch and manual 
forces.21 108 It comprises various manual techniques like 
manipulation, mobilisation, massage and stretching. 109 
Furthermore, verbal communication may be used in 
conjunction with touch to reinterpret sensory infor -
mation (and update prior beliefs). 110 Beyond manual 
approaches, osteopathic care involves patient manage-
ment approaches, including advice on nutrition, exercise 
and lifestyle. 22 Further information about osteopathy is 
provided in online supplemental material 1.1. In this 
study, standard- OMT will be individualised for each 
participant. This person- centred approach was chosen, 
although it cannot be adequately controlled, because it 
reflects the real- world application of OMT111 and adheres 
to clinical recommendations for chronic pain and depres-
sion.112 113 More specifically, the osteopath will choose 
freely which manual treatment and patient management 
approaches to apply for each subject. Standard- OMT 
may comprise all types of osteopathic techniques defined 
by the Glossary of Osteopathic Terminology, including 
manipulation, mobilisation, myofascial release, muscle 
energy, soft tissue, counterstrain, lymphatic pump, 
balanced ligamentous tension, stretching, massage, 
cranial and visceral techniques. 108 These manual tech-
niques aim to alleviate somatic dysfunctions (ICD- 10, 
M99.0),114 which are characterised by palpable signs of 
tissue texture abnormalities, asymmetry, restricted range 
of motion and tenderness (TART).115 Thus, OMT will be 
applied to peripheral tissues manually diagnosed with 
somatic dysfunction (based on TART), which could be 
linked to the patient’s condition (eg, in LBP) based on 
clinical reasoning. 24 Although the manual treatment of 
somatic dysfunctions will vary individually, the specific 
osteopathic techniques used should largely be outlined 
in established textbooks.116–119
Sham-OMT
The control group will receive a standardised sham treat-
ment, which refers to the application of ‘light touch’ 
to imitate OMT (sham- OMT group). In general, sham 
conditions in manual therapy trials are difficult to imple-
ment due to challenges like the impossibility of double- 
blinding.120 It is particularly challenging to identify the 
active ingredient of complex interventions like osteop-
athy and to provide comparable treatment to both groups 
(except for the component under investigation). 105 121 
Indeed, active and sham interventions show limited simi-
larity in manual therapy trials. 122 Still, recent proposals 
and guidelines provide novel and valuable resources. 105 
121 In this study, sham- OMT comprises the standardised 
application of light manual touch to predefined (not 
based on palpatory findings) bodily areas (including the 
feet, legs, knees, thighs, pelvis, abdomen, chest, shoulder, 
arm, elbows, forearms, hands, lumbar and thoracic spine, 
neck and head) 38 without using specific techniques, 
procedures or treatment intention.71 The sham treatment 
procedure was developed by Nguyen et al.38 Therein, light 
touch will be applied for five seconds per body region (to 
prevent tissue response to the mechanical stimulus) using 
spread- out hands (to reduce focalisation of force). 38 The 
sham treatment aims to mimic the characteristics of OMT 
in terms of the area and time of contact, the positioning 
of the patient as well as the type of touch, pressure and 
movement as far as possible. Except for the application 
of OMT, the sham- OMT group should receive identical 
care (in terms of anamnesis, inspection, diagnosis, verbal 
communication and patient management approaches) 
compared with the standard- OMT group. The stan-
dardised sham- OMT procedure, as developed and 
reported by Nguyen et al, 38 is outlined in online supple-
mental material 1.4.
6
Bohlen L, et al. BMJ Open 2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094747
Open access 
Concomitant care
Participants are permitted to receive concomitant care 
for CLBP and/or DS, which may include pharmaco-
logical, non- pharmacological and psychotherapeutic 
interventions (eg, pain killers, antidepressants, phys-
ical therapy and cognitive–behavioural therapy). The 
type and duration of the therapeutic interventions 
each participant receives will be reported at enrolment 
(together with the demographic data) using a form that 
can be found in online supplemental material 2.2. More-
over, the dosage of these interventions must remain 
constant throughout the trial and will be monitored 
before each trial session. Subjects showing variation in 
the dosage of concomitant care during the trial will be 
excluded from participation.
Outcomes
Symptoms (primary outcomes)
The primary outcomes (DS, pain and disability) are listed 
in order of their relevance, as previous studies have called 
for further research on the effect of OMT on DS, 39 40  
while the effect of OMT on pain and disability in patients 
with CLBP is relatively well researched (but still requires 
further high- quality studies).28 The English and German 
versions of the primary outcome measures can be found 
in online supplemental materials 2.3- 2.8.
Depressive symptoms
DS will be measured (at t0, t1, t3, t6 and t7) with the BDI- II, 
which is a 21- item self- report questionnaire (with a 4- point 
Likert scale) that ranges from 0–13 (minimal depression), 
14–19 (mild depression), 20–28 (moderate depression) 
and 29–63 (severe depression). 123 The German version 
of the BDI- II will be used, which showed high internal 
consistency, test–retest reliability, convergence validity 
(with the PHQ- 9) and discriminant validity (between 
patients in remission and non- remission).124 The BDI- II 
was chosen to measure comorbid DS in patients with 
CLBP because it is widely used, corresponds to diagnostic 
(DSM) criteria, and assesses cognitive, affective, somatic 
and vegetative symptoms of depression.125 The minimally 
clinically important difference (MCID) for DS on the 
BDI- II ranges between 5 and 11 points93 and will be ≥5 in 
this study.125
Pain
Pain will be measured (at t0, t1, t3, t6, and t7) with the NRS, 
which is an 11- point self- report scale ranging from 0 (no 
pain) to 10 (worst pain imaginable). 126 The NRS showed 
excellent test–retest reliability and high construct validity 
(with the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS)) in patients with 
chronic pain.127 The NRS was recommended to evaluate 
pain intensity in LBP, despite inconsistent findings for 
test–retest reliability and construct validity in this popu-
lation, because other measures lack superiority over the 
NRS.128 The MCID for the NRS in LBP was defined to be 
≥2,129 which will be used in this study.
Disability
Disability will be measured (at t0, t1, t3, t6 and t7) using the 
ODI, which is a 10- item self- report questionnaire (with a 
6- point Likert scale) that ranges between 0 (no disability) 
and 100 (worst disability). 130 The German version of the 
ODI will be used, which showed excellent internal consis-
tency, excellent test–retest reliability and good convergent 
validity (with the Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire 
(RMDQ)) in patients with CLBP.131 However, there is no 
compelling reason to prefer the ODI over other common 
measures for LBP- specific disability like the RMDQ, which 
shows lower reliability but higher validity. 132 The MCID 
for LBP on the ODI ranges between 4 and 16 points 130 
and will be ≥10 in this study.133
Interoception (secondary outcomes)
The secondary outcomes (interoceptive accuracy, sensi-
bility and awareness) are listed in order of their rele-
vance, as previous studies have primarily investigated 
interoceptive accuracy (higher objectivity and compa-
rability),72 78–80  and (to a lesser extent) interoceptive 
sensibility (lower objectivity and comparability), 81 while 
interoceptive awareness has not been investigated in the 
field of osteopathy. The English and German versions of 
the secondary outcome measures can be found in online 
supplemental materials 2.9- 2.14.
Interoceptive accuracy
Interoceptive accuracy will be measured (at t1, t3, t6 and t7) 
using the HTT, which evaluates how accurately subjects 
can detect their own heartbeat by comparing actual 
and perceived heartbeats. 134 Specifically, subjects will be 
instructed to count their heartbeats (without manual 
palpation) over a period of 25, 30, 35, 40, 45 and 50 s 
(in random order, with 30 s of rest between trials) and 
report them verbally to the investigators. 135 Simultane-
ously, heartbeats will be measured objectively using elec-
trocardiography (with CardioSecur). 136 Based on the 
subjective and objective assessment of heartbeats, the 
interoceptive accuracy scores will be calculated as follows: 
 1−
(
nbeatsreal − nbeatsreported
)
/
(
nbeatsreal + nbeatsreported
)
/2  , 
and the six trials will be averaged (scores range between 0 
and 1, with higher scores indicating higher accuracy).135 136 
Although questions about the validity of the HTT remain, 
the measure is commonly used and provides comparable 
results.137 138
Interoceptive sensibility
Interoceptive sensibility will be measured (at t 1, t3, t6 and 
t7) using the MAIA- 2 questionnaire, which is a 37- item 
self- report questionnaire with 8 subscales that are rated 
on a 6- point Likert scale. 139 Scores will be calculated 
for each of the subscales (higher scores indicate higher 
interoceptive sensibility): (1) Noticing (eg, “When I am 
tense, I notice where the tension is located in my body”); 
(2) Not- distracting (eg, “I ignore physical tension or 
discomfort until they become more severe”); (3) Not-  
worrying (eg, “When I feel physical pain, I become 
7
Bohlen L, et al. BMJ Open 2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094747
Open access
upset”); (4) Attention regulation (eg, “I can pay atten-
tion to my breath without being distracted by things 
happening around me”); (5) Emotional awareness (eg, 
“I notice how my body changes when I am angry”); (6) 
Self- regulation (eg, “When I feel overwhelmed, I can find 
a calm place inside”); (7) Body listening (eg, “I listen for 
information from my body about my emotional state”) 
and (8) Trusting (eg, “I trust my body sensations”). 140 In 
this study, we will use the German version of the MAIA- 2, 
which was validated in a sample of patients with MDD 
and showed acceptable internal consistency for the 
subscales.141 Similarly, there are different MCIDs for each 
subscale, and we will adhere to these values outlined in 
Eggart et al.141
Interoceptive awareness
Interoceptive awareness will be evaluated (at t 1, t3, t6 and 
t7) by calculating the CAC. Specifically, participants will 
rate their confidence for the HTT (perceived accuracy 
of the response) on an 11- point scale (for each of the 
six trials) ranging from 0 (not confident, total guess) to 
10 (very confident, full perception). 135 Additionally, the 
interoceptive measures may be used to model intero-
ceptive prediction errors by calculating the discrepancy 
between the (1) HTT and MAIA- 2 (interoceptive (trait) 
prediction error) and (2) HTT and CAC (interoceptive 
(state) prediction error).142
Clinical and demographic data (additional outcomes)
At baseline (t 0), clinical and demographic data will be 
collected from participants. This will include informa-
tion about the subject’s age, sex, height, weight, educa-
tion, employment, smoking and prior experience with 
OMT as well as the duration of symptoms (CLBP and 
DS), concomitant care and medication. The clinical and 
demographic data will be recorded with a form that can 
be found in the online supplemental material 2.2.
Therapeutic alliance (ancillary outcome)
Ancillary, the therapeutic alliance will be measured (at 
t3 and t 6) using the Helping Alliance Questionnaire 
(HAQ), which is an 11- item self- report questionnaire 
(with a 6- point Likert scale). 143 There are two subscales, 
which are informative of the ‘satisfaction with thera-
peutic outcome’ (items: 2, 3, 4, 5, 11), and the ‘relation 
to the therapist’ (items: 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10). 144 The German 
version of the HAQ will be used, which showed high 
internal consistency but low convergent validity (with the 
Inventory of Interpersonal Problems) in patients with 
persistent depressive disorder.144 In this study, the HAQ 
for patients (not therapists) will be used and no MCID 
will be defined. This is because we aim to detect putative 
differences in the therapeutic alliance between groups 
to determine if contextual factors may be responsible for 
potential between- group differences. The English and 
German versions of the HAQ can be found in online 
supplemental materials 2.15 and 2.16.
Feasibility (pilot outcomes)
In a pilot run with twenty subjects (ten per group), the 
feasibility of the trial will be investigated by means of the 
retention of the subjects, safety of the interventions and 
satisfaction of the subjects with the interventions. The 
safety of the interventions will be investigated by dividing 
the number of adverse events that occurred until follow- up 
through the number of subjects at follow- up (per group) 
and multiplying the resulting number by 100. 145 This 
adverse events rate (in percentage) must be ≤6% to be 
considered feasible.33 The retention of participants in the 
trial will be assessed by dividing the number of subjects 
at baseline by the number of subjects at follow- up and 
multiplying the resulting number by 100. 145 This reten-
tion rate (in percentage) must be ≥80% to be considered 
feasible.146 The patient satisfaction with the interven-
tions will be evaluated (at t 7) by asking participants the 
following question at follow- up: “How satisfied are you with 
the treatment?” The participants will be asked to rate their 
overall satisfaction with the treatment on an 11- point scale 
ranging from 0 (extremely dissatisfied) to 10 (extremely 
satisfied).147 To be feasible, the average satisfaction score 
must not be <4 in both groups. The English and German 
versions of the forms to assess adverse events and patient 
satisfaction can be found in online supplemental mate-
rials 2.17, 2.18 and 2.23, 2.24.
Participant timeline
The schedule for the enrolment, interventions and 
assessments is depicted in table 1. All measurements are 
performed before the interventions.
Sample size
A prospective power analysis was carried out to deter -
mine the sample size for this RCT. 148 The required 
sample size was calculated with G*Power. 149 150 There-
fore, a trial investigating the effect of massage on 
depression in subjects with back pain was used. 67 The 
analysis used BDI- II scores. Based on an assumed type 
I error level of 0.05, a statistical power of 95%, a mean 
difference of −11.04 (intervention group) and –0.29 
(control group), a pooled SD of 10.06, and using a 
two- tailed test, a total sample size of 48 participants 
was calculated. Considering an estimated drop- out of 
20%, the sample size for a future RCT was determined 
to be 58 participants. Hence, a sample of 30 subjects 
per group (N=60) should be recruited.
Recruitment
Participants will be recruited through posters and flyers, 
which will be posted at various osteopathic, orthopaedic 
and physiotherapeutic practices as well as educational 
institutes for osteopathy, sports science, psychology and 
medicine in Hamburg, Germany. Furthermore, the 
posters will be shared on social media and websites. It is 
expected that a sufficient sample of subjects with CLBP 
and DS will be recruited from these facilities because 
8
Bohlen L, et al. BMJ Open 2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094747
Open access 
patients frequently consult osteopaths for LBP 23 and use 
complementary therapies for DS.151
Patient and public involvement
Patients and/or the public were not involved in the 
design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans 
of this research.
METHODS: ASSIGNMENT OF INTERVENTIONS
Allocation
Sequence generation
Simple randomisation will be used to allocate subjects 
into an intervention group (standard- OMT) and a control 
group (sham- OMT) (1:1 ratio, n=30). The allocation 
schedule will be based on random computer- generated 
numbers (http://www.randomization.com). Notably, this 
approach is at risk of generating an unbalanced sample 
and investigators must closely monitor the distribution 
across groups.152
Allocation concealment mechanism
The group allocation (as determined by randomisation) 
will be concealed from subjects, outcome assessors and 
statisticians. Therefore, sealed envelopes will be used to 
inform the therapists about the group allocation of the 
participants.
Implementation
The randomisation sequence and allocation concealment 
will be generated and ensured by a principal investigator 
(TS), while the outcome assessors and statisticians will be 
blinded to the process.
Blinding
The trial will be single- blinded. The participants, statis-
ticians and outcome assessors will be blind to the condi-
tions. However, the therapists will not be blinded because 
of the recognised impossibility of blinding manual ther -
apists in clinical trials (ie, practitioners must always be 
aware of the manual approaches they apply with their 
hands).120 Participants will be asked at follow- up (t7) if 
they think they were part of the intervention or control 
group (to assess blinding concealment). More specifi-
cally, participants will be asked: “Did you think you received 
the osteopathic or sham treatment?”. For both groups, the 
number of subjects that guessed the condition incorrectly 
will be divided by the total number of subjects, which will 
then be multiplied by 100.
METHODS: DATA COLLECTION, MANAGEMENT AND ANALYSIS
Data collection methods
Participants will provide informed consent, demographic 
(age, sex, height, weight, education, employment, 
smoking and prior experience with OMT as well as the 
duration of CLBP and DS, concomitant care and medica-
tion), and clinical data (BDI- II, NRS and ODI) at the base-
line (t0) to determine eligibility and evaluate intergroup 
comparability. The trial will be carried out over 18 weeks, 
comprising a 6- week trial (with one treatment session per 
week) and a 3- month follow- up.38 Primary and secondary 
outcomes will be collected before treatment at the first, 
third and sixth session (t 1, t 3 and t 6) and at follow- up 
3 months after the sixth session (t 7), while the ancillary 
outcome will be collected before treatment at the third 
and sixth session (t3 and t6) and the pilot outcomes will be 
Table 1 Participant timeline
Baseline
First 
session
Second 
session
Third 
session
Fourth 
session
Fifth 
session
Sixth 
session Follow- up
t0 t1 t2 t3 t4 t5 t6 t7
Enrolment Screening X
Consent X
Randomisation X
Demographics X
DIPS X
Interventions Standard- OMT X X X X X X
Sham- OMT X X X X X X
Outcomes BDI- II, NRS, ODI X X X X X
HTT, MAIA- 2, CAC X X X X
HAQ X X
AEs X X X X X X X
BC, PS X
AEs, adverse events; BC, blinding concealment; BDI- II, Beck's Depression Inventory, Second Edition; CAC, confidence- accuracy correspondence; 
DIPS, Diagnostic Interview for Mental Disorders; HAQ, Helping Alliance Questionnaire; HTT, Heartbeat Tracking Task; MAIA- 2, Multidimensional 
Assessment of Interoceptive Awareness- 2; NRS, Numeric Rating Scale; ODI, Oswestry Disability Index; OMT, osteopathic manipulative treatment; 
PS, patient satisfaction; Sham- OMT, Control Group receiving Sham Treatment; Standard- OMT, Intervention Group receiving Osteopathic Treatment.
9
Bohlen L, et al. BMJ Open 2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094747
Open access
collected before treatment at all sessions (t1–t6) and/or at 
follow- up (t7) (table 1).
Data management
All data will be stored electronically at the university and 
will be secured by password protection. Confidentiality 
will be ensured as the data will be pseudonymised and a 
coding list will be stored separately (on paper in a lock-
able cabinet). Only the principal investigator (LB) will 
have access to the coding list. After 5 years, the coding 
list will be destroyed, and all data will be anonymised. 
Storing the coding list for 5 years enables the researchers 
to contact the participants in case of abnormal findings 
or for recruitment in future studies. Data sharing will 
follow the FAIR Data Principles (Findable, Accessible, 
Interoperable and Reusable). 153 The anonymised data 
will be published permanently in the online repository 
‘Open Science Framework’ (https://osf.io).
Statistical methods
Data will be analysed with descriptive and inductive statis-
tics using IBM SPSS Statistics (V.28.0.1.1). Descriptive 
statistics for all outcomes, groups and time points will be 
presented by mean and SD. Furthermore, the BMI will 
be calculated, using the participants’ weight (kilogram 
(kg)) and height (metres (m)), as follows: BMI=kg/m 2. 
Inductive statistics will use the outcomes as dependent, 
and interventions as independent, variables. The signif-
icance level will be set at p<0.05. Baseline data (clin-
ical and demographic characteristics) will be tested for 
between- group differences (intergroup comparability) 
using descriptive statistics. Outcome data (symptoms and 
interoception) will be tested for between- group differ -
ences using a mixed analysis of variance. In detail, the 
primary (BDI- II, NRS and ODI) and secondary outcomes 
(HTT, MAIA- 2 and CAC) will be assessed for between- 
group differences at t1, t3, t6 and t7. The ancillary outcome 
(HAQ) will be evaluated for between- group differences at 
t3 and t6. No subgroup analyses are planned, and missing 
data will be omitted (listwise deletion).154
METHODS: MONITORING
Data monitoring
A data monitoring committee will not be implemented, 
because they are not needed for early- stage trials assessing 
symptom relief. 155 The trial will be stopped and termi-
nated if serious adverse events arise in more than three 
participants, or mild and moderate adverse events arise 
in more than a quarter of the participants. Notably, active 
and acute suicidality represents a serious adverse event 
and termination criteria, leading to the termination of 
the subject’s trial participation. The handling of adverse 
events is outlined below.
Harms
There are risks to the participants (due to the inter -
ventions) that need to be considered. On the one 
hand, OMT appears to be safe for people with CLBP as 
adverse events are mostly mild or moderate (eg, short- 
lived musculoskeletal complaints like pain in the treat-
ment area, bruising, headache, fatigue and stiffness) 
and serious side effects are rare (eg, discs herniation, 
cauda equina syndrome, arterial wall dissection, neuro-
logical impairment, stroke or death). 25 156  157 On the 
other hand, the harms of OMT for people with DS are 
largely unclear. Hence, in this study, safety protocols will 
be implemented to detect and manage adverse events. 
Subjects will be asked about harms to their physical and 
mental health before each trial session and at follow- up. 
The investigators will assess and report any adverse events 
(including the type, location, severity, onset, functional 
limitation and actions taken and needed) using a desig-
nated form that can be found in online supplemental 
materials 2.17 and 2.18 (including English and German 
versions). Additionally, participants will be instructed to 
report harms that occur outside the trial sessions (and 
up to 3 months after the trial) by email or telephone 
(pending their severity). Importantly, subjects will have 
an emergency telephone number to communicate harms 
to the investigators and receive immediate care for phys-
ical or mental adverse events that may arise. In detail, the 
emergency number for adverse events will be available 
for the entire trial, including the follow- up (18 weeks), 
during standard working hours (Monday to Friday 
between 9:00 and 17:00 hours). The emergency number 
will be operated by a listed general practitioner (TS). For 
physical adverse events, the general practitioner (TS) 
will assess the participants. If mild or moderate physical 
adverse events occur, the physician will offer medical or 
osteopathic treatment. If severe physical adverse events 
occur, the participant will be referred to further medical 
or emergency care. For psychological adverse events, the 
general practitioner (TS) will forward the participant by 
telephone to a psychological psychotherapist (MS- M) 
using a different telephone number. If mild or moderate 
psychological adverse events occur, the psychotherapist 
will offer psychological treatment. If severe psychological 
adverse events occur, the participant will be referred to 
psychiatric or emergency care. If a participant reports 
suicidal ideation or attempted suicide during the study, 
the investigators and therapists will follow the Standard 
Operating Procedure for suicidality of the MSH (online 
supplemental materials 2.21 and 2.22).
Auditing
Not applicable.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION
Research ethics approval
This study protocol was approved by the ethics committee 
of the MSH (MSH- 2023/288). Further, the trial will 
adhere to the ‘Declaration of Helsinki’.158
Protocol amendments
Important modifications of the study protocol after trial 
registration, ethical approval and/or publication of the 
10
Bohlen L, et al. BMJ Open 2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094747
Open access 
study protocol will be documented and reported in the 
publication of the trial results. In general, changes to the 
study protocol can be tracked via the protocol version 
identifier.
Consent or assent
Informed consent will be obtained from voluntary partic-
ipants before the trial by the principal investigators (LB 
and TS). Participants will be briefed about the scope of 
the research and the requirements and risks associated 
with participation (in lay language, until the informa-
tion is understood). 159 Further, it will be ensured that 
subjects can revoke their consent for participation at any 
time without negative consequences. 160 Data will only be 
used for the purposes outlined in the information sheets. 
However, the anonymised data will be published in the 
online repository ‘Open Science Framework’ (https:// 
osf.io) and might therefore be reused or reanalysed in 
the future. Model sheets for the ‘Participant Informed 
Consent Form’ and the ‘Participant Information Sheet’ 
can be found in online supplemental materials 3.1–3.4 
(including English and German versions).
Confidentiality
Confidentiality will be ensured by pseudonymisation 
and subsequent anonymisation of the collected data. In 
other words, identifying information from participants 
will be stored separately from the research data to secure 
the privacy of participants. 161 Only a principal investi-
gator (LB) will have access to the identifying informa-
tion of participants. After 5 years, the coding list will be 
deleted, and all data will be anonymised. Data will only be 
published in anonymised form.
Access to data
All investigators will have access to the pseudonymised 
dataset during the trial and the public will have access to 
the anonymised dataset after trial completion; however, 
the identifying information can only be accessed by one 
of the principal investigators (LB). Furthermore, the trial 
will adhere to the general data protection regulation 162 
and participants will retain ownership of the data they 
provide and can request its deletion or anonymisation 163 
until the completion of the trial, after which the data will 
be anonymised and published in the online repository 
‘Open Science Framework’ (https://osf.io).
Ancillary and post-trial care
After the study, the control group (treated with 
sham- OMT) will be offered a single session of OMT to 
improve recruitment and retention rates.
Dissemination policy
The results of the trial will be published in peer-  
reviewed scientific journals. The data will be made 
accessible in the online repository ‘Open Science 
Framework’ (https://osf.io) after trial completion. 
The contributors to this study protocol will be authors 
of the publication. Other investigators may join the 
study and team of authors if they make significant 
contributions to the implementation of the study 
and/or preparation of the manuscript.
Author affiliations
1Research Department, Osteopathie Schule Deutschland, Hamburg, Germany
2Institute of Interdisciplinary Exercise Science and Sports Medicine & Institute 
for Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Medical School Hamburg, Hamburg, 
Germany
3Center for Mental Health, Immanuel Hospital Rüdersdorf, Brandenburg Medical 
School Theodor Fontane, Rüdersdorf, Germany
4Charité University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany
5Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, Brandenburg Medical School Theodor 
Fontane, Neuruppin, Germany
6Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Life Science, University of 
Applied Sciences, Hamburg, Germany
7Professorship of Conservative and Rehabilitive Orthopaedics, TUM School of 
Medicine and Health, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
8DIPLOMA Hochschule, Bad Sooden- Allendorf, Germany
9Liem Institut for Psychosomatic Osteopathy, Hamburg, Germany
10Clinical- Based Human Research Department, Foundation COME Collaboration, 
Pescara, Italy
11College of Osteopathic Medicine, New York Institute of Technology, Old Westbury, 
New York, USA
12Escola Superior de Saúde Atlântica, Barcarena, Portugal
13Institute for Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy & Department of Psychology, 
Medical School Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
14Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University Medical 
Center Hamburg- Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany
15Institute of Interdisciplinary Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, Medical School 
Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
Acknowledgements The authors would like to acknowledge that a funding 
proposal has been submitted to a private foundation funding osteopathy- related 
research projects.
Contributors LB: conceptualisation, methodology, writing–original draft, 
investigation, project administration; ME, BM- O, FC and JEE: conceptualisation, 
methodology, writing–review and editing; JL, RS and TL: writing–review and editing; 
MS- M and TS: conceptualisation, methodology, resources, investigation, writing–
review and editing. All authors provided substantial contributions to the conception 
or design of the work, drafted the work or revised it critically for important 
intellectual content, approved the final version to be published and agreed to be 
accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the 
accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and 
resolved. LB is the guarantor.
Funding The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any 
funding agency in the public, commercial or not- for- profit sectors.
Competing interests None declared.
Patient and public involvement Patients and/or the public were not involved in 
the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research.
Patient consent for publication Not applicable.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has 
not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been 
peer- reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those 
of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and 
responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content 
includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability 
of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, 
terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error 
and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.
Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY- NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non- commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
11
Bohlen L, et al. BMJ Open 2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094747
Open access
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non- commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
ORCID iDs
Lucas Bohlen http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8267-7546
Jürgen Lorenz http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8561-6714
Francesco Cerritelli http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2963-9620
Meike Shedden- Mora http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2023-3824
REFERENCES
 1 Chen S, Chen M, Wu X, et al. Global, regional and national burden 
of low back pain 1990- 2019: A systematic analysis of the Global 
Burden of Disease study 2019. J Orthop Translat 2022;32:49–58. 
 2 Santomauro DF , Mantilla Herrera AM, Shadid J, et al. Global 
prevalence and burden of depressive and anxiety disorders in 204 
countries and territories in 2020 due to the COVID- 19 pandemic. 
The Lancet 2021;398:1700–12. 
 3 Vos T, Lim SS, Abbafati C, et al. Global burden of 369 diseases and 
injuries in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic 
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. The Lancet 
2020;396:1204–22. 
 4 Dieleman JL, Cao J, Chapin A, et al. US Health Care Spending by 
Payer and Health Condition, 1996- 2016. JAMA 2020;323:863. 
 5 Yang H, Hurwitz EL, Li J, et al. Bidirectional Comorbid Associations 
between Back Pain and Major Depression in US Adults. IJERPH 
2023;20:4217. 
 6 Amiri S, Behnezhad S, Azad E. Back pain and depressive 
symptoms: A systematic review and meta- analysis. Int J Psychiatry 
Med 2020;1–15:. 
 7 He C, Chen H, Guo L, et al. Prevalence and factors associated with 
comorbid depressive symptoms among people with low back pain 
in China: A cross- sectional study. Front Psychiatry 2022;13. 
 8 Wong JJ, Tricco AC, Côté P , et al. Association Between Depressive 
Symptoms or Depression and Health Outcomes for Low Back 
Pain: a Systematic Review and Meta- analysis. J Gen Intern Med 
2022;37:1233–46. 
 9 Cuijpers P , Noma H, Karyotaki E, et al. A network meta‐analysis 
of the effects of psychotherapies, pharmacotherapies and their 
combination in the treatment of adult depression. World Psychiatry 
2020;19:92–107. 
 10 George SZ, Fritz JM, Silfies SP , et al. Interventions for the 
Management of Acute and Chronic Low Back Pain: Revision 2021. 
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2021;51:CPG1–60. 
 11 Gianola S, Bargeri S, Del Castillo G, et al. Effectiveness of 
treatments for acute and subacute mechanical non- specific low 
back pain: a systematic review with network meta- analysis. Br J 
Sports Med 2022;56:41–50. 
 12 Cipriani A, Furukawa TA, Salanti G, et al. Comparative efficacy and 
acceptability of 21 antidepressant drugs for the acute treatment 
of adults with major depressive disorder: a systematic review and 
network meta- analysis. The Lancet 2018;391:1357–66. 
 13 Cuijpers P , Quero S, Noma H, et al. Psychotherapies for depression: 
a network meta‐analysis covering efficacy, acceptability and 
long‐term outcomes of all main treatment types. World Psychiatry 
2021;20:283–93. 
 14 Cuijpers P , Stringaris A, Wolpert M. Treatment outcomes for 
depression: challenges and opportunities. Lancet Psychiatry 
2020;7:925–7. 
 15 Mauck MC, Aylward AF , Barton CE, et al. Evidence- based 
interventions to treat chronic low back pain: treatment selection for 
a personalized medicine approach. Pain Rep 2022;7:e1019. 
 16 Foster NE, Anema JR, Cherkin D, et al. Prevention and treatment of 
low back pain: evidence, challenges, and promising directions. The 
Lancet 2018;391:2368–83. 
 17 Ormel J, Hollon SD, Kessler RC, et al. More treatment but no less 
depression: The treatment- prevalence paradox. Clin Psychol Rev 
2022;91:102111. 
 18 Heissel A, Heinen D, Brokmeier LL, et al. Exercise as medicine for 
depressive symptoms? A systematic review and meta- analysis with 
meta- regression. Br J Sports Med 2023;57:1049–57. 
 19 Ho EK- Y , Chen L, Simic M, et al. Psychological interventions for 
chronic, non- specific low back pain: systematic review with network 
meta- analysis. BMJ 2022;376:e067718. 
 20 Tyrovolas S, Moneta V, Giné Vázquez I, et al. Mental Disorders, 
Musculoskeletal Disorders and Income- Driven Patterns: Evidence 
from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. J Clin Med 
2020;9:2189. 
 21 Bohlen L, Shaw R, Cerritelli F , et al. Osteopathy and Mental Health: 
An Embodied, Predictive, and Interoceptive Framework. Front 
Psychol 2021;12:767005. 
 22 Bohlen L, Schwarze J, Richter J, et al. Effect of osteopathic 
techniques on human resting muscle tone in healthy subjects using 
myotonometry: a factorial randomized trial. Sci Rep 2022;12:16953. 
 23 Johnson JC, Degenhardt BF . Who Uses Osteopathic Manipulative 
Treatment? A Prospective, Observational Study Conducted by DO- 
Touch.NET. J Am Osteopath Assoc 2019;119:802–12. 
 24 Snow RJ, Seffinger MA, Hensel KL. American Osteopathic 
Association Guidelines for Osteopathic Manipulative Treatment 
(OMT) for Patients With Low Back Pain. J Am Osteopath Assoc 
2016;116:536–49. 
 25 Bagagiolo D, Rosa D, Borrelli F . Efficacy and safety of osteopathic 
manipulative treatment: an overview of systematic reviews. BMJ 
Open 2022;12:e053468. 
 26 Zipp CR, Semlitsch T, Tögel G, et al. An overview of systematic 
reviews on the efficacy and safety of osteopathic techniques. J 
Bodyw Mov Ther 2025;42:1186–97.
 27 Verhaeghe N, Schepers J, van Dun P , et al. Osteopathic care 
for spinal complaints: A systematic literature review. PLoS ONE 
2018;13:e0206284. 
 28 Dal Farra F , Risio RG, Vismara L, et al. Effectiveness of osteopathic 
interventions in chronic non- specific low back pain: A systematic 
review and meta- analysis. Complement Ther Med 2021;56:102616. 
 29 Franke H, Franke JD, Fryer G. Osteopathic manipulative treatment 
for nonspecific low back pain: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2014;15:286. 
 30 Licciardone JC, Brimhall AK, King LN. Osteopathic manipulative 
treatment for low back pain: a systematic review and meta- analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 
2005;6:43:1–12:. 
 31 Vismara L, Cimolin V, Menegoni F , et al. Osteopathic manipulative 
treatment in obese patients with chronic low back pain: a pilot 
study. Man Ther 2012;17:451–5. 
 32 Ajimsha MS, Daniel B, Chithra S. Effectiveness of myofascial 
release in the management of chronic low back pain in nursing 
professionals. J Bodyw Mov Ther 2014;18:273–81. 
 33 Licciardone JC, Minotti DE, Gatchel RJ, et al. Osteopathic manual 
treatment and ultrasound therapy for chronic low back pain: a 
randomized controlled trial. Ann Fam Med 2013;11:122–9. 
 34 Arguisuelas MD, Lisón JF , Sánchez- Zuriaga D, et al. Effects of 
Myofascial Release in Nonspecific Chronic Low Back Pain. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1986) 2017;42:627–34. 
 35 de Oliveira Meirelles F , de Oliveira Muniz Cunha JC, da Silva EB. 
Osteopathic manipulation treatment versus therapeutic exercises 
in patients with chronic nonspecific low back pain: A randomized, 
controlled and double- blind study. BMR 2019;33:367–77. 
 36 Castro- Sánchez AM, Lara- Palomo IC, Matarán- Peñarrocha GA, 
et al. Benefits of Craniosacral Therapy in Patients with Chronic Low 
Back Pain: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J Altern Complement 
Med 2016;22:650–7. 
 37 Villalta Santos L, Lisboa Córdoba L, Benite Palma Lopes J, 
et al. Active Visceral Manipulation Associated With Conventional 
Physiotherapy in People With Chronic Low Back Pain and Visceral 
Dysfunction: A Preliminary, Randomized, Controlled, Double- Blind 
Clinical Trial. J Chiropr Med 2019;18:79–89. 
 38 Nguyen C, Boutron I, Zegarra- Parodi R, et al. Effect of 
Osteopathic Manipulative Treatment vs Sham Treatment on 
Activity Limitations in Patients With Nonspecific Subacute and 
Chronic Low Back Pain: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Intern 
Med 2021;181:620–30. 
 39 Saracutu M, Rance J, Davies H, et al. The effects of osteopathic 
treatment on psychosocial factors in people with persistent pain: A 
systematic review. Int J Osteopath Med 2018;27:23–33. 
 40 Gordon TC, Hope- Bell J, Draper- Rodi J, et al. Effects of manual 
osteopathic interventions on psychometric and psychophysiological 
indicators of anxiety, depression and stress in adults: a systematic 
review and meta- analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ 
Open 2025;15:e095933. 
 41 Davis SE, Hendryx J, Menezes C, et al. Weekly Osteopathic 
Manipulative Treatment to Improve Measures of Sympathetic 
Tone in Women With Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: A Randomized, 
Controlled Pilot Study. J Am Osteopath Assoc 2020;120:310–21. 
 42 Espí-López GV, Inglés M, Soliva- Cazabán I, et al. Effect of the 
soft- tissue techniques in the quality of life in patients with Crohn’s 
disease. Medicine (Baltimore) 2018;97:e13811. 
 43 Attali T, Bouchoucha M, Benamouzig R. Treatment of refractory 
irritable bowel syndrome with visceral osteopathy: Short‐term 
and long‐term results of a randomized trial. J of Digest Diseases 
2013;14:654–61. 
12
Bohlen L, et al. BMJ Open 2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094747
Open access 
 44 Florance B- M, Frin G, Dainese R, et al. Osteopathy improves the 
severity of irritable bowel syndrome: a pilot randomized sham- 
controlled study. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;24:944–9. 
 45 D’Ippolito M, Tramontano M, Buzzi MG. Effects of Osteopathic 
Manipulative Therapy on Pain and Mood Disorders in Patients With 
High- Frequency Migraine. J Am Osteopath Assoc 2017;117:365–9. 
 46 Wiegand S, Bianchi W, Quinn TA, et al. Osteopathic manipulative 
treatment for self- reported fatigue, stress, and depression in 
first- year osteopathic medical students. J Am Osteopath Assoc 
2015;115:84–93. 
 47 Edwards DJ, Toutt C. An evaluation of osteopathic treatment 
on psychological outcomes with patients suffering from chronic 
pain: A prospective observational cohort study collected 
through a health and well- being academy. Health Psychol Open 
2018;5:2055102918774684. 
 48 Cholewicki J, Popovich Jr JM, Reeves NP , et al. The effects of 
osteopathic manipulative treatment on pain and disability in patients 
with chronic neck pain: A single‐blinded randomized controlled trial. 
PM&R 2022;14:1417–29. 
 49 Cordano C, Armezzani A, Veroni J, et al. Osteopathic Manipulative 
Therapy and Multiple Sclerosis: A Proof- of- Concept Study. J Am 
Osteopath Assoc 2018;118:531–6. 
 50 Miranda E, Giza J, Feketeova E, et al. Osteopathic Manipulative 
Treatment in Patients with Anxiety and Depression: A Pilot Study. 
The AAO Journal 2021;31:9–16. 
 51 Hope- Bell J, Draper- Rodi J, Edwards DJ. Applying an osteopathic 
intervention to improve mild to moderate mental health symptoms: 
a mixed- methods feasibility randomised trial. Chiropr Man Therap 
2024;32. 
 52 Licciardone JC. Preventing progression from chronic to widespread 
pain and its impact on health- related quality of life: a historical 
cohort study of osteopathic medical care. Journal of Osteopathic 
Medicine 2021;122:21–9. 
 53 Martí-Salvador M, Hidalgo- Moreno L, Doménech- Fernández 
J, et al. Osteopathic Manipulative Treatment Including Specific 
Diaphragm Techniques Improves Pain and Disability in Chronic 
Nonspecific Low Back Pain: A Randomized Trial. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil 2018;99:1720–9. 
 54 Licciardone JC, Gatchel RJ, Aryal S. Recovery From Chronic Low 
Back Pain After Osteopathic Manipulative Treatment: A Randomized 
Controlled Trial. J Am Osteopath Assoc 2016;116:144–55. 
 55 Di Lernia D, Serino S, Riva G. Pain in the body. Altered interoception 
in chronic pain conditions: A systematic review. Neurosci Biobehav 
Rev 2016;71:328–41. 
 56 Eggart M, Lange A, Binser MJ, et al. Major Depressive Disorder Is 
Associated with Impaired Interoceptive Accuracy: A Systematic 
Review. Brain Sci 2019;9:131. 
 57 Bonaz B, Lane RD, Oshinsky ML, et al. Diseases, Disorders, and 
Comorbidities of Interoception. Trends Neurosci 2021;44:39–51. 
 58 Khalsa SS, Adolphs R, Cameron OG, et al. Interoception and Mental 
Health: A Roadmap. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging 
2018;3:501–13. 
 59 Nord CL, Garfinkel SN. Interoceptive pathways to understand and 
treat mental health conditions. Trends Cogn Sci 2022;26:499–513. 
 60 Weng HY , Feldman JL, Leggio L, et al. Interventions and 
Manipulations of Interoception. Trends Neurosci 2021;44:52–62. 
 61 McGlone F , Wessberg J, Olausson H. Discriminative and affective 
touch: sensing and feeling. Neuron 2014;82:737–55. 
 62 Di Lernia D, Lacerenza M, Ainley V, et al. Altered Interoceptive 
Perception and the Effects of Interoceptive Analgesia in 
Musculoskeletal, Primary, and Neuropathic Chronic Pain 
Conditions. J Pers Med 2020;10:201. 
 63 Eggart M, Queri S, Müller- Oerlinghausen B. Are the antidepressive 
effects of massage therapy mediated by restoration of impaired 
interoceptive functioning? A novel hypothetical mechanism. Med 
Hypotheses 2019;128:28–32. 
 64 Field T. Massage therapy research review. Complement Ther Clin 
Pract 2016;24:19–31. 
 65 Moyer CA, Rounds J, Hannum JW. A meta- analysis of massage 
therapy research. Psychol Bull 2004;130:3–18. 
 66 Arnold MM, Müller- Oerlinghausen B, Hemrich N, et al. Effects of 
Psychoactive Massage in Outpatients with Depressive Disorders: 
A Randomized Controlled Mixed- Methods Study. Brain Sci 
2020;10:676. 
 67 Baumgart S- E, Baumbach- Kraft A, Lorenz J. Effect of Psycho- 
Regulatory Massage Therapy on Pain and Depression in Women 
with Chronic and/or Somatoform Back Pain: A Randomized 
Controlled Trial. Brain Sci 2020;10:721. 
 68 D’Alessandro G, Cerritelli F , Cortelli P . Sensitization and 
Interoception as Key Neurological Concepts in Osteopathy and 
Other Manual Medicines. Front Neurosci 2016;10:100. 
 69 Casals- Gutiérrez S, Abbey H. Interoception, mindfulness and touch: 
A meta- review of functional MRI studies. Int J Osteopath Med 
2020;35:22–33. 
 70 McGlone F , Uvnäs Moberg K, Norholt H, et al. Touch medicine: 
bridging the gap between recent insights from touch research and 
clinical medicine and its special significance for the treatment of 
affective disorders. Front Psychiatry 2024;15:1390673. 
 71 Cerritelli F , Chiacchiaretta P , Gambi F , et al. Osteopathy modulates 
brain- heart interaction in chronic pain patients: an ASL study. Sci 
Rep 2021;11:4556. 
 72 Cerritelli F , Chiacchiaretta P , Gambi F , et al. Effect of manual 
approaches with osteopathic modality on brain correlates of 
interoception: an fMRI study. Sci Rep 2020;10. 
 73 Manzotti A, Cerritelli F , Monzani E, et al. Dynamic touch induces 
autonomic changes in preterm infants as measured by changes in 
heart rate variability. Brain Res 2023;1799:148169. 
 74 McGlone F , Cerritelli F , Walker S, et al. The role of gentle touch 
in perinatal osteopathic manual therapy. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
2017;72:1–9. 
 75 Manzotti A, Cerritelli F , Esteves JE, et al. Dynamic touch reduces 
physiological arousal in preterm infants: A role for c- tactile 
afferents? Dev Cogn Neurosci 2019;39:100703. 
 76 Baroni F , Ruffini N, D’Alessandro G, et al. The role of touch in 
osteopathic practice: A narrative review and integrative hypothesis. 
Complement Ther Clin Pract 2021;42:101277. 
 77 Cerritelli F , Chiacchiaretta P , Gambi F , et al. Effect of Continuous 
Touch on Brain Functional Connectivity Is Modified by the 
Operator’s Tactile Attention. Front Hum Neurosci 2017;11:368. 
 78 Griffiths FS, McSweeney T, Edwards DJ. Immediate effects and 
associations between interoceptive accuracy and range of motion 
after a HVLA thrust on the thoracolumbar junction: A randomised 
controlled trial. J Bodyw Mov Ther 2019;23:818–24. 
 79 Cathcart E, McSweeney T, Johnston R, et al. Immediate 
biomechanical, systemic, and interoceptive effects of myofascial 
release on the thoracic spine: A randomised controlled trial. J 
Bodyw Mov Ther 2019;23:74–81. 
 80 Edwards DJ, Young H, Cutis A, et al. The Immediate Effect of 
Therapeutic Touch and Deep Touch Pressure on Range of Motion, 
Interoceptive Accuracy and Heart Rate Variability: A Randomized 
Controlled Trial With Moderation Analysis. Front Integr Neurosci 
2018;12:41. 
 81 Emmet DK, Davis G, Pierce- Talsma S, et al. Interoceptive bodily 
awareness in patients seeking pain relief with osteopathic 
manipulative treatment: an observational cohort pilot study. J 
Osteopath Med 2024;124:321–32. 
 82 Hechler T, Endres D, Thorwart A. Why Harmless Sensations 
Might Hurt in Individuals with Chronic Pain: About Heightened 
Prediction and Perception of Pain in the Mind. Front Psychol 
2016;7:1638. 
 83 Kube T, Rozenkrantz L, Rief W, et al. Understanding persistent 
physical symptoms: Conceptual integration of psychological 
expectation models and predictive processing accounts. Clin 
Psychol Rev 2020;76:101829. 
 84 Van den Bergh O, Witthöft M, Petersen S, et al. Symptoms and 
the body: Taking the inferential leap. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
2017;74:185–203. 
 85 Kube T, Schwarting R, Rozenkrantz L, et al. Distorted Cognitive 
Processes in Major Depression: A Predictive Processing 
Perspective. Biol Psychiatry 2020;87:388–98. 
 86 Paulus MP , Feinstein JS, Khalsa SS. An Active Inference Approach 
to Interoceptive Psychopathology. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 
2019;15:97–122. 
 87 Barrett LF , Quigley KS, Hamilton P . An active inference theory of 
allostasis and interoception in depression. Phil Trans R Soc B 
2016;371:20160011. 
 88 Esteves JE, Cerritelli F , Kim J, et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active 
Inference: A Theoretical Framework for Developing an Integrative 
Hypothesis in Osteopathy. Front Psychol 2022;13:1–19. 
 89 Schulz KF , Altman DG, Moher D, et al. CONSORT 2010 Statement: 
updated guidelines for reporting parallel group randomised trials. 
BMJ 2010;340:c332. 
 90 Chan A- W, Tetzlaff JM, Gotzsche PC, et al. SPIRIT 2013 explanation 
and elaboration: guidance for protocols of clinical trials. BMJ 
2013;346:e7586. 
 91 Barrey CY , Le Huec J- C, French Society for Spine Surgery. Chronic 
low back pain: Relevance of a new classification based on the injury 
pattern. Orthop Traumatol Surg Res 2019;105:339–46. 
 92 Amundsen PA, Evans DW, Rajendran D, et al. Inclusion and 
exclusion criteria used in non- specific low back pain trials: a review 
of randomised controlled trials published between 2006 and 2012. 
BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2018;19:113. 
13
Bohlen L, et al. BMJ Open 2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094747
Open access
 93 Smarr KL, Keefer AL. Measures of Depression and Depressive 
Symptoms. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 2020;72 Suppl 10:608–29. 
 94 Nduwimana I, Nindorera F , Sinzakaraye A, et al. Biopsychosocial 
factors associated with chronic low back pain- related activity 
limitations in Burundi. S Afr J Physiother 2022;78:1783. 
 95 Wang YP , Gorenstein C. Psychometric properties of the Beck 
Depression Inventory- II: a comprehensive review. Braz J Psychiatry 
2013;35:416–31. 
 96 Margraf J, Cwik JC, Pflug V, et al. Strukturierte klinische Interviews 
zur Erfassung psychischer Störungen über die Lebensspanne. 
Zeitschrift Für Klinische Psychologie Und Psychotherapie 
2017;46:176–86. 
 97 Suppiger A, In- Albon T, Herren C, et al. Reliabilität des 
Diagnostischen Interviews bei Psychischen Störungen 
(DIPS für DSM- IV- TR) unter klinischen Routinebedingungen. 
Verhaltenstherapie 2008;18:237–44. 
 98 In- Albon T, Suppiger A, Schlup B, et al. Validität des Diagnostischen 
Interviews bei psychischen Störungen (DIPS für DSM- IV- TR). 
Zeitschrift Für Klinische Psychologie Und Psychotherapie 
2008;37:33–42. 
 99 NVL. Nationale versorgungsleitlinie unipolare depression. 2022.
 100 NIH. Age.National institutes of health. 2022. Available: https://www. 
nih.gov/nih-style-guide/age
 101 Wagner S, Wollschläger D, Dreimüller N, et al. Effects of age on 
depressive symptomatology and response to antidepressant 
treatment in patients with major depressive disorder aged 18 to 65 
years. Compr Psychiatry 2020;99:152170. 
 102 Manogharan S, Kongsted A, Ferreira ML, et al. Do older 
adults with chronic low back pain differ from younger adults in 
regards to baseline characteristics and prognosis? Eur J Pain 
2017;21:866–73. 
 103 Zimmerman M, Holst CG, Clark HL, et al. The Psychiatric Inclusion 
and Exclusion Criteria in Placebo- Controlled Monotherapy Trials 
of Bipolar Depression: An Analysis of Studies of the Past 20 Years. 
CNS Drugs 2016;30:1209–18. 
 104 U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services. Dietary guidelines for americans. 2020.
 105 Hohenschurz- Schmidt D, Vase L, Scott W, et al. Recommendations 
for the development, implementation, and reporting of control 
interventions in efficacy and mechanistic trials of physical, 
psychological, and self- management therapies: the CoPPS 
Statement. BMJ 2023;381:e072108. 
 106 Hoffmann TC, Glasziou PP , Boutron I, et al. Better reporting of 
interventions: template for intervention description and replication 
(TIDieR) checklist and guide. BMJ 2014;348:g1687. 
 107 Tschacher W, Haken H, Kyselo M. Alliance: a common factor 
of psychotherapy modeled by structural theory. Front Psychol 
2015;6:1–11. 
 108 Hensel K, Will A, Giusti R, et al. Glossary of osteopathic 
terminology. 3rd edn. Chevy Chase: American Association of 
Colleges of Osteopathic Medicine, 2017.
 109 NHS. Osteopathy: how it’s performed. National Health Service; 
2022. Available: https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/osteopathy/what- 
happens/
 110 Kim J, Esteves JE, Cerritelli F , et al. An Active Inference Account 
of Touch and Verbal Communication in Therapy. Front Psychol 
2022;13:1–17. 
 111 Alvarez G, Zegarra- Parodi R, Esteves JE. Person- centered 
versus body- centered approaches in osteopathic care 
for chronic pain conditions. Ther Adv Musculoskelet Dis 
2021;13:1759720X211029417. 
 112 The Lancet. Ensuring care for people with depression. The Lancet 
2022;399:885. 
 113 The Lancet. Rethinking chronic pain. The Lancet 2021;397:2023. 
 114 WHO. International statistical classification of diseases and related 
health problems, 10th revision ICD- 10. 5th edn. 2016.
 115 Consorti G, Castagna C, Tramontano M, et al. Reconceptualizing 
Somatic Dysfunction in the Light of a Neuroaesthetic Enactive 
Paradigm. Healthcare (Basel) 2023;11:479. 
 116 Liem T, Dobler TK. Leitfaden Osteopathie: Parietale Techniken. 4th 
edn. München: Elsevier, 2017.
 117 Liem T, Dobler TK, Puylaert M. Leitfaden Viszerale Osteopathie. 3rd 
edn. Elsevier, 2020.
 118 Liem T. Kraniosakrale Osteopathie. 7th edn. Thieme, 2018.
 119 Liem T. Praxis der kraniosakralen osteopathie. 4th edn. Stuttgart, 
2020. Available: https://osteothek.thieme.de/10.1055/b-006-161640
 120 D’Alessandro G, Ruffini N, Iacopini A, et al. Five challenges for 
manual therapies trials with placebo controls: A proposal. Int J 
Osteopath Med 2022;46:55–9. 
 121 D’Alessandro G, Ruffini N, Iacopini A, et al. Overcoming placebo- 
related challenges in manual therapy trials: The ‘whats and hows’ 
and the ‘touch equality assumption’ proposals. Int J Osteopath Med 
2021;42:5–10. 
 122 D’Alessandro G, Ruffini N, Aquino A, et al. Differences between 
experimental and placebo arms in manual therapy trials: a 
methodological review. BMC Med Res Methodol 2022;22:219. 
 123 Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GK. Manual for the beck depression 
inventory- II. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation, 1996.
 124 Kühner C, Bürger C, Keller F , et al. Reliabilität und validität des 
revidierten Beck- Depressionsinventars (BDI- II). Befunde aus 
deutschsprachigen stichproben. Nervenarzt 2007;78:651–6. 
 125 Smarr KL, Keefer AL. Measures of depression and depressive 
symptoms: beck depression inventory- ii (bdi- ii), center for 
epidemiologic studies depression scale (CES- D). In: Geriatric 
Depression Scale (GDS), Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale 
(HADS), and Patient Health Questionna. Arthritis Care Res 
(Hoboken). 63. 2011: 454–66.
 126 Boonstra AM, Stewart RE, Köke AJA, et al. Cut- Off Points for Mild, 
Moderate, and Severe Pain on the Numeric Rating Scale for Pain in 
Patients with Chronic Musculoskeletal Pain: Variability and Influence 
of Sex and Catastrophizing. Front Psychol 2016;7:1466. 
 127 Hawker GA, Mian S, Kendzerska T, et al. Measures of adult pain: 
visual analog scale for pain (vas pain). In: Numeric Rating Scale 
for Pain (NRS Pain), McGill Pain Questionnaire (MPQ), Short- Form 
McGill Pain Questionnaire (SF- MPQ), Chronic Pain Grade Scale 
(CPGS). 63. 2011: 240–52.
 128 Chiarotto A, Maxwell LJ, Ostelo RW, et al. Measurement Properties 
of Visual Analogue Scale, Numeric Rating Scale, and Pain Severity 
Subscale of the Brief Pain Inventory in Patients With Low Back 
Pain: A Systematic Review. J Pain 2019;20:245–63. 
 129 Suzuki H, Aono S, Inoue S, et al. Clinically significant changes in 
pain along the Pain Intensity Numerical Rating Scale in patients with 
chronic low back pain. PLoS One 2020;15:e0229228. 
 130 Lauridsen HH, Hartvigsen J, Manniche C, et al. Responsiveness 
and minimal clinically important difference for pain and disability 
instruments in low back pain patients. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 
2006;7:82:1–16:. 
 131 Mannion AF , Junge A, Fairbank JCT, et al. Development of 
a German version of the Oswestry Disability Index. Part 1: 
cross- cultural adaptation, reliability, and validity. Eur Spine J 
2006;15:55–65. 
 132 Chiarotto A, Maxwell LJ, Terwee CB, et al. Roland- Morris Disability 
Questionnaire and Oswestry Disability Index: Which Has Better 
Measurement Properties for Measuring Physical Functioning 
in Nonspecific Low Back Pain? Systematic Review and Meta- 
Analysis. Phys Ther 2016;96:1620–37. 
 133 Ostelo RWJG, de Vet HCW. Clinically important outcomes in low 
back pain. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol 2005;19:593–607. 
 134 Schandry R. Heart Beat Perception and Emotional Experience. 
Psychophysiology 1981;18:483–8. 
 135 Garfinkel SN, Seth AK, Barrett AB, et al. Knowing your own heart: 
distinguishing interoceptive accuracy from interoceptive awareness. 
Biol Psychol 2015;104:65–74. 
 136 Young HA, Williams C, Pink AE, et al. Getting to the heart of the 
matter: Does aberrant interoceptive processing contribute towards 
emotional eating? PLoS ONE 2017;12:e0186312. 
 137 Schulz A, Back SN, Schaan VK, et al. On the construct validity 
of interoceptive accuracy based on heartbeat counting: 
Cardiovascular determinants of absolute and tilt- induced change 
scores. Biol Psychol 2021;164:108168. 
 138 Desmedt O, Luminet O, Corneille O. The heartbeat counting task 
largely involves non- interoceptive processes: Evidence from 
both the original and an adapted counting task. Biol Psychol 
2018;138:185–8. 
 139 Mehling WE, Acree M, Stewart A, et al. The Multidimensional 
Assessment of Interoceptive Awareness, Version 2 (MAIA- 2). PLoS 
ONE 2018;13:e0208034. 
 140 Todd J, Swami V, Aspell JE, et al. Are some interoceptive sensibility 
components more central than others? Using item pool visualisation 
to understand the psychometric representation of interoception. 
PLoS One 2022;17:e0277894. 
 141 Eggart M, Todd J, Valdés- Stauber J. Validation of the 
Multidimensional Assessment of Interoceptive Awareness (MAIA- 2) 
questionnaire in hospitalized patients with major depressive 
disorder. PLoS ONE 2021;16:e0253913. 
 142 Koreki A, Garfkinel SN, Mula M, et al. Trait and state interoceptive 
abnormalities are associated with dissociation and seizure 
frequency in patients with functional seizures. Epilepsia 
2020;61:1156–65. 
 143 Alexander LB, Luborsky L. The penn helping alliance scales. In: 
Greenberg LS, Pinsof W, eds. The psychotherapetuic process: a 
research handbook. New York: Guilford Press, 1986: 325–66.
14
Bohlen L, et al. BMJ Open 2025;15:e094747. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094747
Open access 
 144 Eich HS, Kriston L, Schramm E, et al. The German version of the 
helping alliance questionnaire: psychometric properties in patients 
with persistent depressive disorder. BMC Psychiatry 2018;18:107. 
 145 Liem T, Bohlen L, Jung A- M, et al. Does Osteopathic Heart- Focused 
Palpation Modify Heart Rate Variability in Stressed Participants 
with Musculoskeletal Pain? A Randomised Controlled Pilot Study. 
Healthcare (Basel) 2024;12:138. 
 146 Santiago RJ, Esteves JE, Baptista JS, et al. Results of a feasibility 
randomised controlled trial of osteopathy on neck- shoulder pain in 
computer users. Complement Ther Clin Pract 2022;46:101507. 
 147 de Steenwinkel M, Haagsma JA, van Berkel ECM, et al. Patient 
satisfaction, needs, and preferences concerning information 
dispensation at the emergency department: a cross- sectional 
observational study. Int J Emerg Med 2022;15:1–8. 
 148 Charles P , Giraudeau B, Dechartres A, et al. Reporting of sample 
size calculation in randomised controlled trials: review. BMJ 
2009;338:b1732. 
 149 Faul F , Erdfelder E, Lang A- G, et al. G*Power 3: a flexible statistical 
power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical 
sciences. Behav Res Methods 2007;39:175–91. 
 150 HHU. G*Power: statistical power analyses for mac and windows. 
Heinrich- Heine- Universität; 2015. Available: http://www.gpower. 
hhu.de/
 151 Haller H, Anheyer D, Cramer H, et al. Complementary therapies for 
clinical depression: an overview of systematic reviews. BMJ Open 
2019;9:e028527. 
 152 Bespalov A, Wicke K, Castagné V. Blinding and Randomization. 
Handb Exp Pharmacol 2020;257:81–100. 
 153 Wilkinson MD, Dumontier M, Aalbersberg IJJ, et al. The FAIR 
Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship. 
Sci Data 2016;3:1–9. 
 154 Kang H. The prevention and handling of the missing data. Korean J 
Anesthesiol 2013;64:402. 
 155 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Establishment and operation 
of clinical trial data monitoring committees: guidance for clinical 
trial sponsors. 2006. Available: https://www.fda.gov/regulatory- 
information/search-fda-guidance-documents/establishment-and- 
operation-clinical-trial-data-monitoring-committees
 156 Rubinstein SM, de Zoete A, van Middelkoop M, et al. Benefits and 
harms of spinal manipulative therapy for the treatment of chronic 
low back pain: systematic review and meta- analysis of randomised 
controlled trials. BMJ 2019;364:l689. 
 157 Carnes D, Mars TS, Mullinger B, et al. Adverse events and manual 
therapy: a systematic review. Man Ther 2010;15:355–63. 
 158 World Medical Association. World medical association declaration 
of helsinki: Ethical principles for medical research involving human 
subjects. JAMA 2013;310:2191–4. 
 159 Xu A, Baysari MT, Stocker SL, et al. Researchers’ views on, and 
experiences with, the requirement to obtain informed consent in 
research involving human participants: a qualitative study. BMC 
Med Ethics 2020;21:93. 
 160 Fernandez Lynch H. The right to withdraw from controlled 
human infection studies: Justifications and avoidance. Bioethics 
2020;34:833–48. 
 161 Kohlmayer F , Lautenschläger R, Prasser F . Pseudonymization for 
research data collection: is the juice worth the squeeze? BMC Med 
Inform Decis Mak 2019;19:178. 
 162 European Commission. General data protection regulation. 
2022. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-  
protection/reform/rules-business-and-organisations/dealing-  
citizens/do-we-always-have-delete-personal-data-if-person-  
asks_en
 163 Politou E, Alepis E, Patsakis C. Forgetting personal data and 
revoking consent under the GDPR: Challenges and proposed 
solutions. Journal of Cybersecurity 2018;4:1–20. 