Academic Editor: Nicola Smania
Received: 11 February 2025
Revised: 14 May 2025
Accepted: 21 May 2025
Published: 27 May 2025
Citation: Bonilla, D.A.; Stout, J.R.;
Gleeson, M.; Campbell, B.I.; Escalante,
G.; Rojas-Valverde, D.; Petro, J.L.;
Kreider, R.B.; Odriozola-Martínez, A.
The 4Rs Framework of Sports
Nutrition: An Update with
Recommendations to Evaluate
Allostatic Load in Athletes.Life 2025,
15, 867. https://doi.org/10.3390/
life15060867
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Review
The 4Rs Framework of Sports Nutrition: An Update with
Recommendations to Evaluate Allostatic Load in Athletes
Diego A. Bonilla 1,2,3, *
 , Jeffrey R. Stout 4
 , Michael Gleeson 5
 , Bill I. Campbell 6
 , Guillermo Escalante 7
 ,
Daniel Rojas-Valverde 8,9
 , Jorge L. Petro 1,10
 , Richard B. Kreider 11, *
 and Adrián Odriozola-Martínez 2
1 Research Division, Dynamical Business & Science Society—DBSS International SAS, Bogotá 110311, Colombia;
jorgelpetro@correo.unicordoba.edu.co
2 Hologenomiks Research Group, Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology,
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), 48940 Leioa, Spain; adrianodriozola@gmail.com
3 Grupo de Investigación NUTRAL, Facultad Ciencias de la Nutrición y los Alimentos, Universidad CES,
Medellín 050021, Colombia
4 Physiology of Work and Exercise Response (POWER) Laboratory, Institute of Exercise Physiology and
Rehabilitation Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA; jeffrey.stout@ucf.edu
5 School of Sport, Exercise and Health Sciences, Loughborough University, Loughborough LE11 3TU, UK;
m.gleeson@lboro.ac.uk
6 Performance & Physique Enhancement Laboratory, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, USA;
bcampbell@usf.edu
7 Department of Kinesiology, California State University San Bernardino (CSUSB),
San Bernardino, CA 92407, USA; gescalan@csusb.edu
8 Centro de Investigación y Diagnóstico en Salud y Deporte (CIDISAD), Escuela Ciencias del Movimiento
Humano y Calidad de Vida (CIEMHCAVI), Universidad Nacional, Heredia 86-3000, Costa Rica;
drojasv@una.cr
9 Clínica de Lesiones Deportivas (Rehab & Readapt), Escuela Ciencias del Movimiento Humano y Calidad de
Vida (CIEMHCAVI), Universidad Nacional, Heredia 86-3000, Costa Rica
10 Grupo de Investigación en Ciencias de la Actividad Física, el Deporte y la Salud (GICAFS), Universidad de
Córdoba, Montería 230002, Colombia
11 Exercise & Sport Nutrition Laboratory, Human Clinical Research Facility, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, USA
* Correspondence: dabonilla@dbss.pro (D.A.B.); rbkreider@tamu.edu (R.B.K.); Tel.: +57-320-3352050 (D.A.B.);
+1-979-458-1498 (R.B.K.)
Abstract: The 4Rs of sports nutrition were proposed in recent years as an evidence-based
framework to optimize post-exercise recovery within the context of allostasis. Under this
paradigm, it is important to consider that each R represents a factor with a tremendous in-
fluence on the allostatic response and improves individual components of the allostatic load
(AL), which will positively impact the exercise-induced adaptations and the athlete’s recov-
ery. The 4Rs correspond to the following. (i) Rehydration—This is necessary to guarantee
the post-exercise consumption of at least 150% of the body mass lost during the exercise
accompanied by sodium (if faster replacement is required). (ii) Refuel—Carbohydrate
intake (~1.2 g/kg body mass per hour for up to 4 h post-exercise) is essential not only in
restoring glycogen reserves but also in supporting the energy needs of the immune system
and facilitating tissue repair. Despite changes in substrate utilization, a ketogenic diet
generally has neutral or negative effects on athletic performance compared to carbohydrate-
rich diets. (iii) Repair—The ingestion of high-quality protein stimulates post-exercise net
muscle protein anabolism and might contribute to faster tissue growth and repair. The use
of certain supplements, such as creatine monohydrate, might help to enhance recovery,
while tart cherry, omega-3 fatty acids, and dietary nitrate (e.g., Beta vulgaris, Amaranthus
L.), as well as other herbal extracts containing flavonoid-rich polyphenols, deserve further
clinical research. (iv) Recuperate—Pre-sleep nutrition (casein- or protein-rich meal with
slow digestion rate) has a restorative effect, facilitating the recovery of the musculoskeletal,
endocrine, immune, and nervous systems. In this article, we update the 4Rs framework,
Life 2025, 15, 867 https://doi.org/10.3390/life15060867
Life 2025, 15, 867 2 of 31
delve deeper into the allostasis paradigm, and offer theoretical foundations and practi-
cal recommendations (the 4Rs app) for the assessment of AL in athletes. We cautiously
propose an AL index (ALindex) for physique competitors and elite athletes to evaluate the
cumulative physiological stress induced by exercise and, thereby, to adjust exercise and
nutrition interventions.
Keywords: allostasis; sports nutritional sciences; physiological adaptation; biomarkers;
cacostasis
1. Introduction to the 4Rs Framework of Sports Nutrition
To better understand the nutritional strategies that influence post-exercise recovery,
the 4Rs—Rehydrate, Refuel, Repair, and Rest—was proposed as an operational framework
for sports nutrition by Bonilla et al. (2020) [ 1]. These four Rs do not attempt to replace
existing techniques or construct a new, rigid paradigm in this regard, but rather seek
to introduce the strategic application of nutritional strategies that should be considered
during the recovery process in athletes (Figure 1). In practice, “Recuperate” might be
considered a broader term that includes not only passive recovery (e.g., sleep) but also
active strategies to address fatigue accumulation, injury recovery, or mental relaxation in
order to restore functionality [2]. Overall, the Rest/Recuperate component highlights the
importance of downtime to repair tissue and restore energy, including passive and active
strategies depending on the athlete’s situation.
Figure 1. The 4Rs framework of sports nutrition. Source: designed by the authors (D.A.B.).
Life 2025, 15, 867 3 of 31
This approach divides the nutrition intervention into four interrelated scenarios that
follow the post-exercise time course to optimize the exercise-induced adaptations and
recovery. Available clinical evidence and recommendations by professional organizations
support the structure of the 4Rs framework, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Clinical evidence and recommendations by professional organizations on the 4Rs.
4Rs Practical Recommendation Clinical Evidence * Professional
Organization
Rehydration
Fluid replacement is a fundamental
nutritional strategy that depends on
the athlete’s needs, the environment,
and the specific sports event.
Adequate rehydration involves
~1.5 L per kg of body mass lost
post-exercise, with electrolytes
(mainly sodium) and carbohydrates
(<6% w/v) to promote
faster recovery.
• López-Torres et al.
(2023) [3]
• Pérez-Castillo et al.
(2023) [4]
• Rowlands et al. (2022) [5]
• Zubac et al. (2019) [6]
• Holland et al. (2017) [7]
• IOC (2023) [8]
• GSSI (2023) [9]
• UEFA (2021) [10]
• DGE (2020) [11]
• SDA (2020) [12]
• ISSN (2018) [13]
• NATA (2017) [14]
• ACSM (2007) [15]
Refuel
Carbohydrate intake (~1.2 g/kg body
mass per hour for up to 4 h
post-exercise) is essential not only in
restoring glycogen reserves but also
in supporting the energy needs of the
immune system and facilitating
tissue repair. Specifically, 20 g of
creatine (5 g dose on four occasions
beginning on the same day of
fatiguing exercise) may promote
muscle glycogen resynthesis in the
first 24 h post-exercise. Despite
changes in substrate utilization, a
ketogenic diet generally has neutral
or negative effects on athletic
performance compared to
carbohydrate-rich diets.
• Cheng et al. (2025) [16]
• Lehman et al. (2024) [17]
• Ramos-Campo et al.
(2024) [18]
• Díaz-Lara et al.
(2024) [19]
• Koerich et al. (2023) [20]
• Craven et al. (2021) [21]
• Margolis et al. (2021) [22]
• Nielsen et al. (2020) [23]
• McCartney et al.
(2018) [24]
• Roberts et al. (2016) [25]
• ISSN (2024) [26]
• UEFA (2021) [10]
• DGE (2020) [27]
• DGE (2020) [28]
• ISSN (2018) [13]
• AND, DC, and ACSM
(2016) [29]
Repair
Post-exercise ingestion of
high-quality protein (0.3—0.5 g/kg
body mass) and creatine
monohydrate (0.1 g/kg body mass)
supports tissue growth and repair.
The potential of tart cherry, omega-3
fatty acids, dietary nitrate (e.g., Beta
vulgaris, Amaranthus L.), and other
herbal extracts containing
flavonoid-rich polyphenols deserves
further clinical research.
• Pearson et al. (2023) [30]
• Doma et al. (2022) [31]
• Jones et al. (2022) [32]
• Hill et al. (2021) [33]
• Jiaming and Hossein
(2021) [34]
• Carey et al. (2021) [35]
• Gao and Chilibeck
(2020) [36]
• Morton et al. (2018) [37]
• ISSN (2025) [38]
• DGE (2020) [39]
• ISSN (2017) [40]
• ISSN (2017) [41]
• AND, DC, and ACSM
(2016) [29]
Life 2025, 15, 867 4 of 31
Table 1. Cont.
4Rs Practical Recommendation Clinical Evidence * Professional
Organization
Rest/
Recuperate
Optimal sleeping time and quality
are necessary to benefit the allostatic
response after exercise. Alcohol
should be avoided due to its
inhibitory influence on several
aspects of recovery. Ideally, caffeine
should not be consumed for up to 4 h
before bed. Pre-sleep nutrition has a
restorative effect, facilitating the
recovery of the musculoskeletal,
endocrine, immune, and nervous
systems. Pre-sleep nutritional
strategies include whey, casein, or
protein-rich meals; >150 mg of
aqueous ashwagandha root extract;
cherries; kiwi fruit; fish oils (omega-3
PUFAs); and valerian.
• Gardiner et al.
(2024a) [42]
• Gardiner et al.
(2024b) [43]
• Gong et al. (2024) [44]
• Fatima et al. (2024) [45]
• Trommelen et al.
(2023) [46]
• Reis et al. (2021) [47]
• Dela Cruz and Kahan
(2021) [48]
• Cheah et al. (2021) [49]
• Gratwicke et al.
(2021) [50]
• Walsh et al. (2021) [51]
• Snijders et al. (2019) [52]
• Barnes (2014) [53]
• AASM (2021) [54]
• ISSN (2017) [55]
* Preference was given to meta-analytic evidence when available. ACSM: American College of Sports Medicine;
AND: Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics; DC: Dietitians of Canada; DGE: Deutschen Gesellschaft für
Ernährung—German Nutrition Society; GSSI: Gatorade Sports Science Institute; IOC: International Olympic
Committee; NATA: National Athletic Trainers’ Association; PUFAs: polyunsaturated fatty acids; SDA: Sports
Dietitians Australia; UEFA: Union of European Football Associations.
When the strategies outlined in the 4Rs framework are effectively implemented
through consistent nutritional adherence and compliance, exercise-induced adaptations
may be optimized. In fact, several research groups have recommended or used this ap-
proach for the metabolomic and proteomic profiling of athletes [ 56], as a holistic view
of nutrition and healing in injured athletes [ 57,58], as a working model that should be
prioritized to understand physiological requirements and nutritional recommendations
for equestrian riders [ 59], and during the promotion of health-related lifestyles among
university students [60].
In this article, we delve into the allostasis paradigm as the foundation of the 4Rs
framework and explore recommendations for the evaluation of allostatic load. We suggest
an allostatic load index (ALindex) for physique competitors and elite athletes to assess the
cumulative physiological stress induced by exercise.
2. Materials and Methods
This review incorporated elements of the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) [61]. It encom-
passes the identification, selection, evaluation, and synthesis of available evidence in a
narrative format.
2.1. Information Sources
The primary sources for the articles included the following online databases:
PubMed/MEDLINE, Web of Science, and Google Scholar. The comprehensive molec-
ular biomarker database MarkerDB v2.0 (available at https://markerdb.ca/, accessed on
3 March 2025) was searched for experimentally verified biological markers in humans [62].
Life 2025, 15, 867 5 of 31
2.2. Search Strategy
The search string included free terms such as “sports nutrition”, “allostasis”, “body
composition”, “allostatic load”, “allostatic overload”, and “physiological adaptation”. Each
term was combined with keywords such as long-term, chronic, acute, nutrition, exercise,
recovery, athletes, and biomarkers. The reference lists of the selected articles were also
manually searched for additional literature (snowballing).
2.3. Findings Presentation
The authors collaborated remotely and contributed to the development of this arti-
cle considering their standing and individual expertise in the field. Discrepancies were
identified and resolved through discussion between authors where necessary. All com-
munications and coordination throughout the process were completed electronically and
were led by the first author. This article is organized into sections including (i) allostasis
and adaptation; (ii) current approaches to biomarker monitoring in athletic populations;
(iii) how to measure the allostatic load in athletes; and (iv) applied practice. Finally, future
directions are presented to guide upcoming research in the field.
2.4. The 4Rs App
To ensure effective translation into practice, the “4Rs app” was developed within
the free software environment for statistical computing and graphics R v4.4.0 [ 63] and
the Shiny package v1.10.0 [ 64]. The development of the app had four phases: (i) con-
ceptual design, where the educational goals of the 4Rs in sports nutrition were defined
(including the allostatic load index and a scorecard for dietary supplements); (ii) UI/UX
prototyping, where a responsive interface using HTML, CSS, and Shiny widgets was
built; (iii) back-end integration, to connect interactive logic with nutrition algorithms
via R scripts and reactive modules; and (iv) testing and deployment, where we tested
the output, applied thematic styles (The 4Rs Framework branding), and deployed it via
https://www.shinyapps.io/ (accessed on 11 April 2025). The app was registered in Zenodo
(DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.15377939).
3. Allostasis and Adaptation
Stress is understood as the response to internal or external stimuli, referred to as
stressors, which induce disruptions that exceed the usual physiological thresholds [65]. In
simple terms, stress can be associated with a degree of perturbation within a biological
system after exposure to a given stressor—this results in different stress types according
to the type of perturbation, such as metabolic stress, psychological stress, mechanical
stress, etc. Complementarily, allostasis refers to a biological system’s ability to adapt
to daily challenges through predictive adjustments to maintain viability [ 66,67]. It is
worth noting that allostasis and homeostasis are complementary components of integrative
physiological regulation [ 68,69]. Allostasis is an extension of homeostatic parameters
from single stable states to variational and relationally stable states—to clarify any doubts
regarding the current conceptualization of homeostasis and allostasis, readers may refer to
the article “Conceptual Foundations of Physiological Regulation Incorporating the Free
Energy Principle and Self-Organized Criticality” by Bettinger and Friston (2023) [70].
Within the allostasis–interoception framework [71–73], and considering sports nutri-
tion as a working example, chronic stimuli such as energy restriction, exercise-induced
stress, or sleep disruption associated with pre-competition anxiety (external and inter-
nal stressors) can trigger systemic adaptations that recalibrate regulatory parameters to
prioritize resource allocation towards activities that are critical for immediate survival
(e.g., changes in substrate utilization, alterations in gene expression, exerkine regulations,
Life 2025, 15, 867 6 of 31
changes in mood and focus, etc.). These factors—individually or, more likely, collectively—
influence athletic performance by contributing to maladaptation.
As with any biological system, the human adaptation process needs two critical fac-
tors: energy and time. The energy factor has recently been defined as “allostasis and
stress-induced energy expenditure” by Bobba-Alves et al. (2022) [74]. In athletes, this con-
sequently influences the total daily energy expenditure, as has been discussed for injured
athletes [58,75]. This approach may also provide insights into individual responses during
nutrition and exercise interventions, potentially explaining phenomena at different organi-
zation levels, such as leptin pathway alterations, reductions in resting energy expenditure,
menstrual cycle irregularities, and increased susceptibility to lean mass loss—all hallmarks
of energy restriction-induced stress [76,77]. The time factor is connected to the restorative
period required to repair tissue and to correct interoceptive prediction mistakes, as well as
the many mechanisms that keep internal conditions within the new setpoint of adaptation.
For example, this includes recovery periods between exercise sessions and adequate sleep
for psycho- and physiological recuperation [1] (Figure 2). As a result, both energy and time
factors influence each individual/population’s allostatic load, which can be described as
the cost that a biological system must pay in order to reset its physiological parameters
during the adaptation process [78].
Figure 2. The time course of exercise-induced adaptation. Transient changes in metabolite sensing
and signaling during/after exercise drive the gene transcription of early genes; myogenic regula-
tors; genes of carbohydrate metabolism, lipid mobilization, transport and oxidation, mitochondrial
metabolism, and oxidative phosphorylation; and transcriptional regulators of gene expression and
mitochondrial biogenesis. Source: designed by the authors (D.A.B.). Refer to Bonilla et al. (2020) [ 1]
for further information.
It is worth noting that Chrousos (2009) introduced the term cacostatis (“bad state”,
from Ancient Greek κακóς [kakós], which means “bad”) to refer to this state of disharmony
and the cacostatic load as the cumulative pathophysiological burden of the organism [79].
Following this etymological conceptualization, the beneficial adaptation that leads to the
Life 2025, 15, 867 7 of 31
improved capacity of the human body might be referred to as hyperstasis (“higher better
state”) [80].
The allostatic load can increase dramatically if the system has superimposed on it
additional chronic loads (inactivity or overactivity) that exceed the capacity to cope (e.g.,
psychological disorders, cancer, under-nutrition, or drug-induced side effects [including
steroids]), in so-called allostatic overload [ 81]. Allostatic overload has been defined as
“long-term energy-dependent functional and/or structural dysregulation and breakdown
that arise due to chronic allostatic load, leading to accelerated aging, disease onset and
progression, and increased mortality risk” [74,82] or cacostasis [80]. In the context of this
work, physical exercise-induced stress relies on individual responses (prior knowledge
plus each R of our 4Rs operational framework) that follow an inverted U-shaped allostatic
response (Figure 3).
Figure 3. Performance-related response of an athlete to chronic physical exercise-induced stress
stimuli over time. The color gradient visually represents the transition from optimal adaptation
(green) to excessive stress (red). Source: designed by the authors (D.A.B.).
Thus, under the allostasis–interoception paradigm, we can consider syndromes such
as overtraining, burnout, or relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S) as cacostasis or
manifestations of allostatic overload in athletes. The difference between these syndromes
depends on the clinical variables that are used to monitor the athlete and the organic
system (physiological context) that is being evaluated. Overall, these clinical manifestations
appear when the athlete exceeds their capacity to cope with exposure to chronic stress
(e.g., nutrition and exercise-caused low energy availability or sleep disturbances). We
should remember that any biological adaptation process critically needs energy and time.
Understanding recovery after physical effort as a dynamic process involving con-
tinuous adjustments/resets of biological parameters underscores the significance of the
quality, magnitude, duration, timing, and novelty of the stressor, alongside the individual
pre-existing state information of the athlete (e.g., training history, current body composition,
genotype, etc.). Our group has emphasized that adopting this systemic (integrative and
multifactorial), evolutionary (biologically adaptive by nature), and adaptive (dynamic and
individualized) perspective, or “bio-logic approach” [2,83,84], would enhance our under-
Life 2025, 15, 867 8 of 31
standing of the flow of information through interactions between system components and
their regulatory aspects for a given phenotype and its allostatic load (Figure 4). Importantly,
nutrition is one of the many factors that might impact the allostatic load and, thereby, it
might influence musculoskeletal tissue overload and repair [58].
Figure 4. An integrative view of the multifactorial nature of the injury risk in athletes. (A) General
features of the allostasis–interoception process. While allostasis represents the adaptive process of
stability through change, interoception refers to encoding representations of the internal (physiologi-
cal) state of the body [85]. (B) Modulation of endogenous pain. Nociplastic pain conditions include
the combination of central and peripheral pain sensitization, hyper-responsiveness to painful and
non-painful sensory stimuli, and associated features (fatigue, sleep, and cognitive disturbances) [86].
(C) Detailed representation of the allostatic–interoceptive control (as a closed-loop system) of the
human body in response to any stimuli. The injury or pain etiology might be discussed in terms of
the role of the input signal (stimuli—distal physiology or external world), receptors (sensory surfaces,
biological receptors), transmitters (spinal cord, anatomy trains), decoders (central nervous system),
regulator elements (autonomic nervous system), and output signal (response, physiological effects).
This block diagram was taken from Sennesh et al. (2022) [71]. (D) Schematic illustration of the allody-
namic response to stress in sports injuries. AL: allostatic load; HPA: hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal
axis. Source: designed by the authors (D.A.B.). Refer to Bonilla et al. (2022) [2].
4. Current Approaches to Biomarker Monitoring in Athletic Populations
Biomarker profiling is applied to the monitoring of health, performance, and recov-
ery. Existing approaches to assessing physiological states, nutrition optimization, and
Life 2025, 15, 867 9 of 31
post-training/competition recovery all utilize blood biomarkers. Principal among these
are the biomarkers related to inflammatory cytokines, muscle enzymes, and metabolic
markers, which show a response in the athlete due to exercise and fatigue resulting from the
adaptation to it [87]. However, their usefulness as biomarkers is usually compromised by
several factors: individual variability, the need for the standardization of the measurement
methodologies, and the complexity of result interpretation in the context of multivariate
training environments [88,89].
Lee and colleagues (2017) [ 90] suggested a comprehensive approach to biomarker
analysis with categories that enable coaches and athletes to monitor performance, recovery,
and health in an individualized way. By using several validated biomarkers, the sensitivity
is increased, allowing for the early detection of training, recovery, or diet impacts. Long-
term biomarker data can help to prevent injuries and performance declines, with examples
of well-studied biomarkers suggested for the creation of a customized monitoring panel
(Figure 5).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Comprehensive approach to biomarker analysis. Reproduced from Lee et al. (2017) [90]—
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
Reliable biomarker technologies and individualized monitoring approaches are
needed to further enhance the accuracy of current tools for high-performance cohorts. We
recently proposed a human–machine collaboration method to identify potential biomarkers
of exercise stress-induced immunodepression linked to iron metabolism using network
topology analysis and bioinformatics [ 83]. In this regard, Figure 6 shows the response
pattern of the immune function to exercise-induced stress, although individual variation
(i.e., prior knowledge) should be considered, and it should be recognized that several
other factors (e.g., psychological stress, under-nutrition, poor sleep, and long-distance
travel) can also lower immunity in athletes [ 91]. Recently, Haller et al. (2023) described
recommendations for best practices in the use and interpretation of biomarkers to support
workload management in sport-specific contexts [92]. Hence, diagnosis and monitoring
encompass the screening of an athlete’s health while monitoring the load and recovery.
The authors suggested practical biomarkers with reference ranges, interpretations, and
correlations with the training load, as well as questionnaire scores that are categorized into
systems such as muscle, immune, metabolic, and inflammation.
Life 2025, 15, 867 10 of 31
Figure 6. Immune-related response of an athlete during a time course of chronic stress stimuli in
sports. Source: designed by the authors (D.A.B.). Refer to Bonilla et al. (2022) [83].
4.1. Clinical Assessment Tool Version 2 of the International Olympic Committee
As discussed earlier in this article and in previous works [1,58,83,84], relative energy
deficiency in sport (RED-S) may be considered a manifestation of allostatic overload or
cacostasis in athletes. The working group of the International Olympic Committee (IOC)
defines RED-S as a syndrome of impaired physiological and/or psychological functioning
experienced by female and male athletes, caused by exposure to problematic (prolonged
and/or severe) low energy availability [93]. This might be seen as a disequilibrium state
where the individual’s dietary energy intake is insufficient to support the energy expendi-
ture required for health, function, and daily living once the cost of exercise and sporting
activities is considered.
The IOC recently introduced the Clinical Assessment Tool Version 2 (CAT2) to evaluate
athletes and active individuals suspected of experiencing problematic low energy avail-
ability resulting in RED-S. The tool also provides guidance on determining appropriate
levels of sport participation [94]. It is intended for use by athlete health and performance
teams, under the guidance of a physician, for the clinical assessment and management
Life 2025, 15, 867 11 of 31
of athletes with RED-S. The CAT2 consists of a three-step operational framework: Step
1—RED-S screening using population-specific questionnaires assessing the presence of
RED-S indicators or clinical interviewing; Step 2—RED-S severity/risk assessment and
stratification and sports participation guidelines; and Step 3—RED-S clinical diagnosis and
treatment, which uses information collected in the previous steps. While the CAT2 tool
offers several primary and secondary indicators (used in Step 2) and proves practical for
use with elite athletes, the authors note that some potential indicators with subclinical or
clinical deviations are intentionally left vague in their quantification. This approach reflects
the need for further research to refine the parameters and establish more precise cut-offs.
Future updates to the tool are anticipated to address sport-specific populations, accounting
for the many confounding factors that must be considered when interpreting individual
athlete profiles [89].
Jeukendrup et al. (2024) introduced an Athlete Health and Readiness Check-
list (AHaRC) that compiles tools previously developed and validated by various ex-
pert/consensus statements to monitor and troubleshoot aspects of athlete health and
performance issues (Figure 7) [95]. Although our 4Rs framework of sports nutrition and
its foundations in the allostatic load in the sports context (Figure 3) were introduced in
2020 [1], we agree with Jeukendrup and colleagues that most practitioners (exercise and
nutrition professionals) and sports scientists largely ignore the concept of allostasis. As we
will discuss in more detail in the following sections, we propose that gaining a systemic
and comprehensive understanding of the nutritional and physical exercise-induced cumu-
lative physiological burden that athletes are experiencing—which is essential for diagnosis
and risk stratification—requires an evaluation of several components of allostatic load,
including cardiovascular, metabolic, immune, and neuroendocrine factors.
 
 
 
Figure 7. Athlete Health and Readiness Checklist (AHaRC), providing a multidimensional decision
tree to maintain athletes’ health and performance. AH: ad hoc; D: daily; M: monthly; OI: on indication;
W: weekly. Reproduced from Jeukendrup et al. (2024) [95]; refer to this for more details related to the
AHaRC tool—Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
Life 2025, 15, 867 12 of 31
4.2. The Reliance on Body Composition to Estimate Energy Availability
Energy availability (EA) refers to the energy remaining for metabolic functions after
subtracting the exercise energy expenditure (EEE) from energy intake (EI) [ 96]. It is cal-
culated as EA = (EI [kcal] − EEE [kcal])/FFM (kg), where FFM is fat-free mass [ 93]. To
support healthy physiological function in athletes, EA should be ≈45 kcal/kg FFM/day,
while levels below 30 kcal/kg FFM/day indicate low energy availability and should be
avoided [10,58,75,93,96]. In reality, this strict definition of LEA is somewhat impractical
in the field because it requires very accurate measures of the dietary EI, EEE, and body
composition. The EEE is mostly influenced by the actual training load, which may differ
from day to day. Accurate measurements of EI and FFM are also difficult to achieve in the
field, so the need for intervention is usually decided on the basis of identifying symptoms
and measurements of biomarkers (e.g., hematological parameters and selected plasma
hormones known to change with LEA).
In this context, changes in body composition are the outcome of physiological adapta-
tions to chronic intermittent stressors that unfortunately cannot be evaluated with a single
technique due to the drawbacks of all body composition methods. In addition, successful
exercise and nutrition intervention relies on the continuous and reliable assessment of body
composition. The four-compartment model represents the current gold-standard approach
and combines different techniques to measure/estimate the components of fat mass, total
body water, bone mineral content, and residual content. Unfortunately, this is limited to
research and diagnostic laboratories. In sports practice, a relatively accessible method is
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA). However, practitioners should be aware that
the FFM estimated with DXA should be corrected for the fat-free adipose tissue (FFAT) as
this can change the interpretation of the results during a dietary/exercise intervention [97]
or during sarcopenia diagnosis [98,99]. Practitioners and sports scientists are advised to
use the term FFM instead of lean body mass, as FFM aligns with chemically accurate
terminology. For a recent critical review on this topic, refer to Heymsfield et al. (2024) [100].
In agreement with the authors, adopting the correct terminology will help to minimize
confusion and enhance scientific rigor in body composition research.
If DXA is inaccessible, practitioners frequently use other in-field and more affordable
techniques, such as bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) and kinanthropometry. However,
these methods may present higher variability when the international recommendations of
the International Society for Electrical Bioimpedance (ISEBI) or the International Society for
the Advancement of Kinanthropometry (ISAK) are not followed. It should be noted that
there is a high prevalence of poor analyses based on non-specific-population equations;
therefore, when monitoring body composition, we strongly recommend that clinicians and
practitioners focus their analysis on the absolute values of these techniques, such as the
outcomes of the bioelectrical impedance vectorial analysis (BIVA; phase angle and Xc/R
graph) for BIA [101] or the sum of skinfolds and skinfold-corrected girths as adiposity and
muscularity indices, respectively, for kinanthropometry [102] (Table 2). Readers may refer
to the review article by Barakat et al. (2020) [ 103], which describes the advantages and
disadvantages of different techniques for the estimation of body composition, as well as to
Beausejour et al. (2024) for the assessment of skeletal muscle health [104].
Life 2025, 15, 867 13 of 31
Table 2. Recommendations to evaluate body composition.
Method Recommendations
Dual-Energy X-Ray
Absorptiometry (DXA)
• It is the gold-standard technique to measure bone content.
• Provides an estimation of fat mass (FM) and fat-free mass (FFM).
• Lean soft mass is estimated by subtracting bone minerals from FFM.
• Overall high reliability, although affected by nutrition/hydration status.
• FFM should be corrected for fat-free adipose tissue (FFAT).
• Certifications by the International Society for Clinical Densitometry.
Kinanthropometry
• It measures skinfolds, girths, breadths, and lengths in trunk and upper and
lower limbs.
• It represents a portable, fast, and more affordable method to track changes in
body composition.
• The use of non-specific estimation equations for FM or FFM should be avoided.
• Absolute data analysis is preferred: sum of skinfolds and skinfold-corrected girths.
• Reliability depends on the technician’s experience and adherence to the
ISAK standards.
• Certifications by the International Society for the Advancement of Kinanthropometry.
Bioelectrical
Impedance Analysis
(BIA)
• It measures resistance (R) and reactance (Xc) at different frequencies (generally
50 kHz) of alternating current. Impedance (Z) is a vector sum of R and Xc.
• Estimates body composition components (FM, FFM, total body water, etc.) by
integrating equations that use R, Xc, or Z as regressors.
• Bioelectrical impedance vectorial analysis is preferred for data analysis (phase angle
and the Xc/R graph).
• Certifications by the International Society for Electrical Bioimpedance.
Air Displacement
Plethysmography
• It measures volume and mass to estimate body density based on air displacement.
• Provides estimations of FM, body fat percentage, and FFM by integrating equations
that use body density as a regressor (e.g., Siri, Brozek).
• It does not provide regional data, and it is based on a two-compartment model that
assumes fixed densities for adipose and musculoskeletal tissue.
• Relatively rapid technique with high test–retest reliability and useful for several
populations, including special groups.
5. How to Measure the Allostatic Load in Athletes?
First of all, it is important to recognize that the allostatic load represents the cost
that a biological system (e.g., an individual organism, tissue, or cell) incurs to achieve a
new (allostatic) state of adaptation [ 1,74]. As we highlighted in our first article on the
4Rs framework of sports nutrition [ 1], to effectively structure a recovery process, it is
essential to prepare the body both physically and mentally to meet the demands of training
and competition, while ensuring that the adaptation processes necessary for progressive
improvement are not disrupted [105]. As a result, recovery strategies will largely depend
on factors such as the timing of the next session, the level of physiological stress, and the
importance of the upcoming event. These factors guide the approach to rehydration, energy
replenishment, and nutrient intake required for optimal tissue repair and recuperation.
Thus, the correct use of the 4Rs framework—Rehydration, Refuel, Repair, and Recuperate—
would reduce the components of the allostatic load and ultimately increase the effectiveness
of the intervention, allowing the athlete to reach their goal with less effort and in less
time [1].
To measure the cumulative physiological burden on the body due to chronic stress,
clinicians and researchers use the allostatic load index (AL index). This index typically
includes several biomarkers that show either sub-clinical or clinical deviations to assess the
overall strain on the main physiological systems: cardiovascular, metabolic, immune, and
Life 2025, 15, 867 14 of 31
neuroendocrine [74]. Generally, these biomarkers are equally weighted and summed to
calculate an index ranging from 0 to approximately 9–12. Figure 8 displays the frequency
of biomarker use in the allostatic load index in neighborhood research. Biomarkers were
extracted from 18 articles identified through a systematic review [106].
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Frequency of biomarker use in the allostatic load index. The biomarkers that are shaded in
a darker color include the initial ten variables, body mass index, and C-reactive protein. HgbA1C:
glycosylated hemoglobin; WBC: white blood cell count; Hgb: hemoglobin. Source: reproduced with
permission from Beese et al. (2022) [106].
Life 2025, 15, 867 15 of 31
Table 3 shows the original set used in clinical practice and a proposed updated version
of the biomarkers used to calculate the AL index, with the corresponding cut-off points
in chronic disease populations, based on available evidence [ 107–109]. Although non-
communicable diseases, such as diabetes, cancer, and heart disease, are beyond the scope of
this article, readers are encouraged to increase their awareness of their importance and use
“the healthy trinity” of physical activity, nutrition, and sleep as a shield for the prevention
and management of chronic diseases, as well as using the allostatic load index for clinical
monitoring. Please refer to Bonilla et al. (2024) [ 110] for the complete description of this
operational framework, which contributes to Sustainable Development Goal 3.
Table 3. Original and revised allostatic load indices for the general population.
The “Original 10” of ALindex Revised Version of ALindex Cut-Off Point System
DHEA-S Hair cortisol >150 pg/mg Neuroendocrine
Cortisol C-reactive protein * ≥0.3 mg/dL Inflammatory
Epinephrine Resting heart rate * ≥90 beats/min
Cardiovascular
Norepinephrine Systolic blood pressure ≥140 mmHg
Systolic blood pressure Diastolic blood pressure ≥90 mmHg
Diastolic blood pressure HDL cholesterol * <40 mg/dL (men);
<50 mg/dL (women)
HDL cholesterol Total cholesterol ≥240 mg/dL
Total cholesterol Serum albumin <3.8 g/dL
MetabolicHbA1c HbA1c * ≥6.4%
Waist-to-hip ratio Waist-to-height ratio * >0.5
A new proposal to evaluate allostatic load in populations with chronic diseases. All blood markers should be
assessed in a rested and fasted condition. * Recent meta-analytic evidence suggests that a five-item ALindex, based
on C-reactive protein, resting heart rate, HDL cholesterol, waist-to-height ratio, and HbA1c, can predict mortality
as effectively as, or better than, more complex biomarker sets [107]. DHEA-S: dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate;
HbA1c: glycosylated hemoglobin; HDL: high-density lipoprotein.
The selection and threshold determination of these biomarkers remain a prominent
focus in both basic and applied research on health and disease across different popula-
tions [108,109,111–116]. Conversely, although the foundational contributions by Sterling
and Eyer (1988) [67], McEwen and Stellar (1993) [117], and McEwen [78] emphasized that
allostasis involves the entire brain and body, rather than localized feedback mechanisms—
and highlighted exercise as an example of a stressor and physical condition as a modulator
of individual responses to stressors—significant work remains in the field of exercise and
sports sciences to develop a robust ALindex for athletes. In the 2000s, several researchers
contributed regarding the regulatory and protective role of physical exercise in the allostatic
load [118,119], while others suggested physiological mechanisms by which physical activity
may improve physical fitness through allostasis [120]. Rabey and Moloney (2022) recom-
mended allostasis as a possible explanatory model for the onset and maintenance of pain,
which can integrate the allostatic load into clinical reasoning to guide decision-making [121].
We also adopted an allostatic approach to explore the etiology of pain and common injuries
among fitness exercisers [ 2]. Interestingly, the association between allostatic load and
overuse musculoskeletal injury in the US Marine Corps was confirmed recently by Feigel
et al. (2024) [122]. Moreover, Forys and Tokuhama-Espinosa (2022) analyzed the relation
between neurotransmitters and allostatic load in an effort to understand the occurrence of
depression in elite athletes, suggesting that exercise-induced neurohormonal imbalances
might contribute to depressive symptoms [123]. In 2023, we also argued that the individual
effects of physical activity and certain adaptogens on depression-related outcomes could
be explained by reductions in allostatic load, providing a rationale for synergism [124].
Life 2025, 15, 867 16 of 31
It is essential to point out that current conceptualizations describe interoception as a
model and allostasis as control [71], both operating under the free energy principle pro-
posed by Dr. Karl Friston [125]. Under this principle, Inui (2023) argued that allostasis not
only requires the integration of interoceptive but also exteroceptive and proprioceptive
signals [126]. Allostasis can be seen as a mechanism with which the body adjusts its phys-
iological parameters within a range that is harmless (e.g., increasing oxygen delivery to
muscles during intense exercise, lowering heart rate during post-workout recovery, and
redirecting blood flow from the digestive system to active muscles during physical activity),
in response to changes anticipated from past experience, aimed at minimizing the future
surprise (i.e., free energy). In this context of mathematical analysis and dynamical systems
that follows Bayesian inference, allostasis is currently referred to as “variational and rela-
tional stability” by Bettinger and Friston (2023), which expands upon the traditional concept
of “stability through change” and highlights the inherent capacity of organic systems for
physiological resilience, or the ability to “return to stability”. These authors also describe
that allostatic health encompasses methods associated with psychoneuroimmunology [70].
Similarly, Tossici et al. (2024) suggest using allostatic load to monitor psycho-physical
condition in sports performance as a psychoneuroimmunology-inspired approach [127].
Very few studies have directly assessed biomarkers to include in the ALindex for the
athletic population. In a pilot study, we recently evaluated the relationship between several
molecular, physical, and psychometric biomarkers with the goal of contributing to the
development of a valid AL index for Colombian professional basketball players ( n = 12).
Interestingly, the levels of creatine kinase (CK) and the session rating of perceived exertion
(also known as Foster’s index) showed significant correlations with an arbitrary cumulative
score that reflected the exercise-induced cumulative physiological burden [128]. While we
did not evaluate hormonal markers, Milheiro et al. (2024) found a relationship between
saliva cortisol, insulin, and rating of perceived exertion responses in nine ultrarunners
(average time to completion of the ultramarathon = 24 h) [129], as part of a doctoral thesis
titled “Impact of allostatic biomarkers on health and performance”. Recently, Feigel et al.
(2025) found that an elevated allostatic load (using an eight-item ALindex) was significantly
associated with physical and psychological maladaptation in military personnel (n = 31,
14F) undergoing a 10-week military physical and tactical training course [130].
Based on the comprehensive panel and clinical evidence of well-studied biomarkers
in sports, Table 4 presents a proposal for the calculation of the AL index for physique
practitioners (whether they use performance and image-enhancing drugs [PIEDs] or
not) [131–136] and elite athletic populations [87,88,90,92,137–142]. To calculate the ALindex,
each biomarker is equally weighted and summed, resulting in an index ranging from 0 to
10. A value of 1 is assigned if the biomarker exceeds the cut-off point, while a value of 0
is assigned if it falls within the normal range. This clinical risk score has been utilized in
the allostatic load literature and refined with population- and sex-specific features derived
from available clinical evidence in exercise and sports sciences. It is important to note that
the ALindex is highly versatile, as the choice of scoring algorithm for biomarkers (i.e., high-
risk quartiles, two-tailed high-risk quartiles, high-risk deciles, two-tailed high-risk deciles,
Z-scores, system weighted, sex-specific cut-points, or clinical) does not significantly impact
the prediction of health-related outcomes. This remains valid provided that sex-specific
cut-offs are applied when appropriate, at least in the general population, as evidenced by
McLoughlin et al. (2020) [143].
In an athletic population, all blood markers should be assessed in a rested and fasted
condition. The required evaluation time varies depending on the biomarker, as each has
a different response and clearance rate following exercise. For example, (i) the resting
blood lactate concentration (b[La−]) should be assessed within 12–24 h post-exercise, with
Life 2025, 15, 867 17 of 31
higher values exceeding 1.5–4 mmol/L; (ii) the free testosterone-to-cortisol ratio (fT/C),
S100 calcium-binding protein B (S100B), and hepcidin require at least 24 h; and (iii) CK
levels peak between 48 and 72 h (considering inter-athlete variability, as elevated CK
typically ranges between 200 and 1000 U/L) [144]. Therefore, there is potential flexibility
to adapt biomarkers in a sport-specific manner or apply alternative cut-off points beyond
those proposed in this article (Table 4), provided that the clinical information is based on
high-quality scientific evidence, such as an umbrella review of systematic reviews and
meta-analyses or a Delphi-based international consensus.
Table 4. Proposed allostatic load indices for athletic populations.
Biomarker Cut-Off Point System MarkerDB Clinical
Evidence References
ALindex in
Physique
Athletes
fT/C (natural
athletes) * Reduced by +30% Neuroendocrine No ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [134,145]
HDL cholesterol <40 mg/dL (M);
<50 mg/dL (F) Cardiovascular Yes ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ [131,146–148]
Aspartate
transaminase >40 U/L Metabolic Yes ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ [131,135,146,
147]
Alanine
aminotransferase >40 U/L Metabolic Yes ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [131,135,147]
Cystatin C >1.0 mg/L Metabolic Yes ⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [149,150]
C-reactive protein >0.3 mg/dL Inflammatory Yes ⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [90]
Session RPE ** Increased Neuroendocrine,
Cardiovascular NA ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [136,151]
Cardiac troponin T >0.01 ng/mL Cardiovascular Yes ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [152,153]
Creatine kinase >200 U/L (M);
>170 U/L (F) Inflammatory Yes ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [132,138]
Blood pressure
instability ≥140 mmHg (SBP) Cardiovascular Yes ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [133,147,154,
155]
ALindex in
Elite
Athletes
fT/C *** Reduced by +30% Neuroendocrine No ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [156,157]
Heart rate variability Instability
(individual basis)
Neuroendocrine,
Cardiovascular Yes ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [158–160]
S100B >0.12 µg/L Neuroendocrine Yes ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [161–163]
Hepcidin Increased Inflammatory Yes ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [164,165]
Energy availability <30 kcal/kg
FFM/day Metabolic NA ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [166,167]
C-reactive protein >0.3 mg/dL Inflammatory Yes ⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [88,90]
Session RPE ** Increased Neuroendocrine,
Cardiovascular NA ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [168,169]
Resting b[La−] Increased Metabolic Yes ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [141,142,156]
Creatine kinase >200 U/L (M);
>170 U/L (F) Inflammatory Yes ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [138,144,156]
25-hydroxy vitamin D <20 ng/mL
(deficiency)
Neuroendocrine,
Metabolic Yes ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [170,171]
A new proposal to evaluate allostatic load in athletic populations. Practitioners should note that further research
is still needed to validate these sets of biomarkers in exercise and sports settings across different disciplines,
populations, sexes, and ages. MarkerDB v2.0 is a freely available electronic database that attempts to consolidate
information on all known clinical, and a selected set of pre-clinical, biomarkers into a single resource. NA: Not
applicable—refers to composite or derived biomarkers (e.g., session RPE and energy availability) that are not
included in MarkerDB v2.0, as they are calculated using several variables rather than being individual molecular
markers. Clinical evidence for each biomarker is categorized as follows: ⋆⋆⋆⋆⋆ for either umbrella reviews
of systematic reviews and meta-analyses or Delphi-based international consensus; ⋆⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 for systematic
reviews with meta-analyses; ⋆⋆⋆
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
★★★★☆ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 for systematic reviews. b[La−]: blood lactate concentration; F: female;
fT/C: free testosterone to cortisol ratio; HDL: high-density lipoprotein; M: male; MA: meta-analysis; RPE: rating
of perceived exertion; S100B: S100 calcium-binding protein B; SBP: systolic blood pressure; SR: systematic review.
* Hair cortisol might be used for PIED users (>150 pg/mg); ** session RPE = RPE x session duration (min), also
known as Foster’s index; *** at least in men, the testosterone–estradiol ratio is reduced by ~50% in overtrained
athletes compared with healthy athletes; therefore, when compared to fT/C, it has been suggested as a better
predictor of overtraining [172].
Life 2025, 15, 867 18 of 31
6. Applied Practice
To effectively apply this novel ALindex in athletes, several questions might arise: How
frequently should biomarkers be measured? How should borderline biomarker levels be
interpreted? How can nutrition or exercise training be adjusted based on AL index data?
Although further research is needed to answer these questions accurately, the following
section describes how a daily and weekly ALindex could guide immediate adjustments to
the training load or nutrition prescriptions, ultimately translating conceptual insights into
practical applications.
6.1. Training Feedback
Coaches and strength and conditioning staff should meet weekly to review ALindex
trends alongside performance metrics such as the shooting accuracy, sprint times, and jump
testing, among others. As the AL index is reduced and on-court indicators improve, the
training volume can gradually be increased to ensure continued progress without risking
overtraining or injury. If the AL index remains elevated or if performance data decline,
the team can adjust the training load (e.g., reducing plyometric work) or reinforce the
recovery strategies of the 4Rs, such as pre-sleep protein intake and hydration protocols.
In another hypothetical situation, if a subset of athletes shows consistently rising CRP
and CK, coupled with a higher session RPE, coaches could reduce the upcoming week’s
high-intensity interval training sessions or schedule an extra day of active recovery. This
adjustment could help to mitigate further strain on the athlete’s body and promote recovery.
Similarly, a drop in HRV readings below an individual’s baseline may indicate increasing
cumulative stress. In such cases, a brief taper (e.g., reducing the total training volume
by ~20%) could help to restore neuromuscular readiness before the next high-intensity
training session.
6.2. Adjusting Nutrition
Consider a collegiate basketball team collecting weekly AL index data throughout
their pre-season conditioning (e.g., pre-season training camp). If resources are available,
the ALindex could include biomarkers such as resting b[La −], HRV , CRP , CK, fT/C (or
testosterone–estradiol ratio), alongside self-reported fatigue levels (e.g., session RPE). Ath-
letes whose ALindex scores remain high for two consecutive weeks might be advised to
increase their carbohydrate intake, especially around key training sessions. Increasing
carbohydrate availability from 5–6 g/kg/day to 6–8 g/kg/day could enhance muscle glyco-
gen restoration and reduce metabolic stress, aiding in recovery and performance. Similarly,
in cases where high markers of muscle soreness or damage persist, the sports dietitian
could recommend more frequent protein feedings (e.g., 4–5 doses daily) or slightly higher
doses (e.g., 0.4 g/kg per meal) to support muscle repair. Adding 25–30 g of protein before
sleep might further enhance overnight recovery, helping the athlete to repair damaged
tissue and optimize muscle growth.
As previously demonstrated, biomarker monitoring can enhance positive adaptations
and reduce injuries caused by stressors during a competitive season [ 173]. However,
collecting between 60 and more than 92 biomarkers during pre-season and in-season weeks
presents a significant challenge for coaches and nutritional/medical staff. By applying
the ALindex to adjust training loads, nutrition, and recovery strategies based on real-time
physiological data, coaches, dietitians, and athletes can optimize performance and reduce
the risk of overtraining and injury while assessing fewer biomarkers. Notably, when
using the AL index to monitor athletes, there is flexibility to build a sport-specific index
of up to 10 biomarkers (or fewer) or use different cut-off points beyond those presented
in this article, primarily relying on clinical evidence. It is essential to consider the 4R
Life 2025, 15, 867 19 of 31
framework of sports nutrition to optimize post-exercise recovery and support the athlete’s
allodynamic response. These four factors can help guide nutrition and recovery strategies
while mitigating allostatic overload (Figure 9).
 
 
 
Figure 9. The 4Rs of sports nutrition and the allostatic load index in athletes. 25(OH)D: total serum
25-hydroxy vitamin D (i.e., the sum of D3 and D2); CHO: carbohydrates; CK: creatine kinase; CRP:
C-reactive protein; EA: energy availability; F: female; FFM: fat-free mass; fT/C: free testosterone to
cortisol ratio; HRV: heart rate variability; HAMP: hepcidin; b[La−]: blood lactate concentration; M:
male; PRO: protein; PUFA ω-3: polyunsaturated fatty acids omega-3; S100B: S100 calcium-binding
protein B; sRPE: session rating of perceived exertion. Source: designed by the authors (D.A.B.).
Life 2025, 15, 867 20 of 31
To ensure effective translation into practice, the 4Rs app was developed (available at
https://dbss.shinyapps.io/4RsApp/, accessed on 22 April 2025). This application would
help performance and health nutrition professionals in designing personalized recov-
ery and nutrition plans through a simple-to-use interface. It includes tools to calculate
a 4R recovery protocol and score the AL index using biomarkers with abnormal values
(see Tables 3 and 4) and provides evidence-based recommendations for the selection of a
dietary supplement by prioritizing quality and safety (Figure 10). Considering the inter-
individual variability among athletes and active individuals, the application includes
different sports and activities (e.g., powerlifting/weightlifting, bodybuilding, endurance,
sprints/team sports, among others), as well as exercise intensities and conditions (e.g., mod-
erate duration/low-to-moderate intensity, maximal intensity/competition, bulking, cutting,
injury, etc.). Furthermore, the 4Rs app contains educational content (e.g., videos, figures),
key references, and frequently asked questions about the allostatic load to enhance scien-
tific literacy among medical staff, nutritionists, coaches, and athletes. Health and sports
practitioners may consider the ALindex as a diagnostic tool for maladaptation, while the 4Rs
of sports nutrition provide an important pillar of individualized intervention for recovery
and resilience.
 
 
 
Figure 10. The 4Rs app. Available at https://dbss.shinyapps.io/4RsApp/ (accessed on 22 April
2025). Source: developed by D.A.B.
7. Limitations and Future Directions
High-level sports already assess a wide array of biomarkers in athletes, along with
movement and sleep data, psychological measures, and practice, training, and performance
analytics, to monitor them. This is done to evaluate training progress, support recovery,
optimize performance, and prevent overtraining or RED-S. The proposed ALindex offers a
Life 2025, 15, 867 21 of 31
way to harness and interpret all of these data for more effective athlete management. There
is no doubt that the proposed set of biomarkers requires further research to confirm their
validity and generate more accurate clinical recommendations for specific sports, sexes,
ages, and training phases. It needs to be noted that the available evidence indicates that nei-
ther the menstrual cycle [174–176] nor oral contraceptive use [177,178] significantly impacts
exercise adaptations or physical performance in women; however, individual monitoring
and sex-specific cut-offs may be warranted for athletes prioritizing elite performance.
The current information is primarily based on associations, underscoring the need
for more comprehensive studies that explore the longitudinal interactions between allo-
static overload (cacostasis) and sports performance. Additionally, as with other studies
in the field, there is a significant gap in terms of multilevel analyses, causal modeling,
and complexity-based approaches in the existing research [ 73]. Finally, more sensitive
laboratory methods are required to be included in sports practice to improve diagnosis and
reliability [179].
We encourage exercise scientists and sports nutrition researchers to contribute to the
development and validation of the AL index for athletes as a multisystemic clinical tool
to evaluate and monitor the adaptation process. This will help to refine and reduce the
large number of biomarkers (over 60) proposed in recent years (Figure 5) [ 90], as well
as to avoid oversimplification and inaccurate reliance on a few biomarkers in isolation,
which can lead to misdiagnosis. It is worth noting that, based on recent multi-cohort
meta-analytic findings in mid-to-late-life populations ( n = 67,126 participants aged 40
to 111 years, ~50% women) reported by McCrory et al. (2023) [ 107], a five-item ALindex
could also be developed using fewer biomarkers when resources are limited. Similarly,
Polick and colleagues (2024) [112] emphasized the value of a six-item ALindex using multi-
wave analysis as a predictor of morbidity and mortality, particularly in older adults,
and demonstrated that an individualized ALindex aligns with the shift towards precision
medicine. From bench (lab) to bedside, this is particularly important for PIEDs abuse in
recreational exercisers and amateur bodybuilders, which is increasingly recognized as a
serious public health concern [180–182]. Future research should focus on the versatility of
the ALindex, as the choice of scoring algorithm for biomarkers does not significantly affect
the prediction of health-related outcomes, as long as they use sex-specific cut-offs when
needed [143]. Personalized ranges based on an athlete’s history may provide a more robust
version that could enhance the performance of the ALindex. In this regard, Hecksteden et al.
(2017) demonstrated that developing individualized reference ranges using a Bayesian
approach enhances accuracy in athlete recovery monitoring, accounting for interindividual
variability [144].
In agreement with Mass et al. (2015) [183] and Pedlar et al. (2019) [88], key components
for biomarker suitability that should be considered by practitioners and researchers include
the following.
• Evidence: Is there sufficient research supporting the biomarker’s use in the target
sport population and sex? The main features of the population (e.g., age, sex, sport
setting, place of recruitment) should be described.
• Application: Does the biomarker provide actionable data, serving as a reliable in-
dicator for positive or negative outcomes? Are cut-off values presented for each
outcome variable (neuroendocrine, inflammatory, cardiovascular, and metabolic) used
in calculating the ALindex?
• Validity: Has the biomarker been validated, especially if it is a new technique, and
does it align with established “gold standard” methods?
• Variability: Is the biomarker’s analytical and biological variability acceptable, often
measured as the coefficient of variation?
Life 2025, 15, 867 22 of 31
• Collection and analysis: Is the biomarker collection and analysis procedure fast and
efficient, with minimal blood required?
• Sample treatment and transportation: Can the sample be analyzed on-site, or does it
require specific storage and transportation conditions?
• Diurnal variation: Are there factors, such as the time of day, exercise, sleep, and fasting
status, that influence the biomarker?
• Cost: Is the cost of obtaining biomarker data justified by its utility?
• Covariates: Are there known factors, such as environmental conditions, altitude, or
travel stress, that influence the biomarker’s reliability?
• Data analysis: Have the analyses been adjusted for potential sources of confounding?
Is the number of cases in the multivariate analysis at least 10 times the number of
independent variables? Present measures of associations (e.g., odds ratios including
95% confidence intervals for logistic regression, β for linear regression). The ALindex
should be calculated using the standardized method of risk quartiles and/or clinical
sex-specific cut-offs.
8. Conclusions
The 4Rs of sports nutrition (Rehydrate, Refuel, Repair, and Recuperate) represent
an evidence-based operational framework designed to enhance post-exercise recovery,
grounded in the allostasis paradigm. Under the allostasis–interoception paradigm, we
can consider syndromes such as overtraining, burnout, or RED-S as cacostasis or mani-
festations of allostatic overload in athletes. Despite its accuracy and robustness in clinical
settings for the assessment of morbidity and mortality, the allostatic load index (ALindex)
remains an underutilized tool that could effectively assess the exercise-induced cumulative
physiological burden in athletes. In this article, we cautiously propose an ALindex based
on 10 biomarkers tailored to physique competitors (with or without the use of PIEDs) and
elite athletes. To calculate the ALindex, each biomarker is equally weighted and summed,
resulting in an index ranging from 0 to 10 (a value of 1 is assigned if the biomarker exceeds
the cut-off point, while a value of 0 is assigned if it falls within the normal range). The
timing of blood draws is crucial for accurate readings—samples should be collected in a
rested and fasted state and not immediately after a high-intensity workout. Importantly,
practitioners should be cautious not to confuse system complexity with clinical difficulty or
impracticality. For instance, recent findings demonstrate that even a simplified, five-item
ALindex has been validated to effectively capture physiological “wear and tear” and predict
mortality in the general population [ 107]. Thus, practitioners can use the AL index as a
diagnostic tool for maladaptation, with the 4Rs framework then providing the essential
structure for customized recovery and resilience strategies.
We invite practitioners and researchers to adopt a systemic approach that uses the
available athlete data, emphasizing a predictive, integrative, and allostatic perspective.
This approach considers the dynamic and individualized adaptive responses—referred to
as “bio-logic” [2,83,84,110]—to more accurately capture the inherent complexity of human
physiological resilience, as conceptualized by Bettinger and Friston (2023) [70]. Thanks to
the versatility of the ALindex, several indices are expected to be developed and validated for
different exercise and sports populations. Personalized ranges based on an athlete’s history
may provide a more robust version that could enhance the performance of the ALindex. We
acknowledge that our proposal of the ALindex in athletic populations is limited to evidence
from its individual components, and further research is necessary to validate the full set of
biomarkers and ALindex during longitudinal or interventional studies. Thus, we encourage
exercise scientists and sports nutrition researchers to contribute to the construction and
Life 2025, 15, 867 23 of 31
validation of this multisystem assessment measure, which aims to monitor the adaptation
processes in athletes and physically active individuals.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization and software, D.A.B.; writing—original draft preparation,
D.A.B.; writing—review and editing, J.R.S., B.I.C., G.E., D.R.-V ., J.L.P ., M.G., R.B.K. and A.O.-M. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The APC was funded by ESNL at Texas A&M.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data supporting this review are from previously reported studies
and datasets, which have been cited. The CAT2 tool is available at https://stillmed.olympics.com/
media/Documents/Athletes/Medical-Scientific/Consensus-Statements/REDs/IOC-REDs-CAT-V2
.pdf (accessed on 20 August 2024). We encourage readers to explore the blogs and whitepapers of the
ALLOSTASIS—Decentralized Autonomous Organization (https://www.allostasis.io/, accessed on 28
November 2024) and VERSES, a cognitive computing company building next-generation intelligent
software systems (https://www.verses.ai/, accessed on 28 November 2024), as these initiatives offer
insights and scientific literacy regarding allostasis and the free energy principle.
Acknowledgments: The 4Rs of Sport Nutrition (https://dbss.shinyapps.io/4RsApp/, accessed
on 22 April 2025) and the Healthy Trinity (http://thehealthytrinity.pro/, accessed on 11 March
2025) are operational frameworks and literacy projects developed by the DBSS. The DeepSeek Chat
(DeepSeek-V3) was used to solve code problems.
Conflicts of Interest: D.A.B. serves as the scientific and managing director of KreaFood, an R&D&I
Project; has served as the science product manager for the MTX Corporation® in Europe; has acted
as a scientific consultant for MET-Rx® and Healthy Sports in Colombia; has conducted academic-
sponsored research on nutritional supplements; and receives honoraria for speaking about sports
nutrition at international conferences and private courses. R.B.K. has conducted industry-sponsored
research on dietary supplements; received financial support for presentations about dietary supple-
ments at industry-sponsored scientific conferences; and has served as an expert witness on cases
related to exercise, nutrition, and dietary supplementation. B.I.C. has received grants and contracts to
conduct research on dietary supplements; has served as a paid consultant for industry; has received
honoraria for speaking at conferences and writing lay articles about sports nutrition ingredients and
topics; and has served as an expert witness on cases involving dietary supplements. G.E. serves on the
Scientific Advisory Board and as the lead Physique and Bodybuilding Program subject matter expert
for the National Academy of Sports Medicine; he has also served as a paid scientific consultant for
various dietary supplement companies. J.R.S. has conducted industry-sponsored research on sports
nutrition over the past 25 years. Further, J.R.S. has also received financial support for presenting on
the science of various nutraceuticals, at industry-sponsored scientific conferences. M.G. has received
grants and contracts to conduct research on sport nutrition products and dietary supplements; has
served as a paid consultant for industry; and has received honoraria for speaking at conferences and
writing lay articles about sports nutrition ingredients and topics. Finally, R.B.K. serves as Chair of the
“Creatine for Health” scientific advisory board sponsored by Creapure® and Creavitalis®—Alzchem
Group AG, while D.A.B., B.I.C., and J.R.S. serve as members of this board. The other authors declare
no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Bonilla, D.A.; Perez-Idarraga, A.; Odriozola-Martinez, A.; Kreider, R.B. The 4R’s Framework of Nutritional Strategies for Post-
Exercise Recovery: A Review with Emphasis on New Generation of Carbohydrates. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health2020, 18, 103.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Bonilla, D.A.; Cardozo, L.A.; Velez-Gutierrez, J.M.; Arevalo-Rodriguez, A.; Vargas-Molina, S.; Stout, J.R.; Kreider, R.B.; Petro, J.L.
Exercise Selection and Common Injuries in Fitness Centers: A Systematic Integrative Review and Practical Recommendations.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health2022, 19, 12710. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Life 2025, 15, 867 24 of 31
3. Lopez-Torres, O.; Rodriguez-Longobardo, C.; Escribano-Tabernero, R.; Fernandez-Elias, V .E. Hydration, Hyperthermia, Glycogen,
and Recovery: Crucial Factors in Exercise Performance-A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Nutrients 2023, 15, 4442.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Perez-Castillo, I.M.; Williams, J.A.; Lopez-Chicharro, J.; Mihic, N.; Rueda, R.; Bouzamondo, H.; Horswill, C.A. Compositional
Aspects of Beverages Designed to Promote Hydration Before, During, and After Exercise: Concepts Revisited. Nutrients 2023,
16, 17. [CrossRef]
5. Rowlands, D.S.; Kopetschny, B.H.; Badenhorst, C.E. The Hydrating Effects of Hypertonic, Isotonic and Hypotonic Sports Drinks
and Waters on Central Hydration During Continuous Exercise: A Systematic Meta-Analysis and Perspective. Sports Med.2022,
52, 349–375. [CrossRef]
6. Zubac, D.; Paravlic, A.; Reale, R.; Jelaska, I.; Morrison, S.A.; Ivancev, V . Fluid balance and hydration status in combat sport
Olympic athletes: A systematic review with meta-analysis of controlled and uncontrolled studies. Eur. J. Nutr.2019, 58, 497–514.
[CrossRef]
7. Holland, J.J.; Skinner, T.L.; Irwin, C.G.; Leveritt, M.D.; Goulet, E.D.B. The Influence of Drinking Fluid on Endurance Cycling
Performance: A Meta-Analysis. Sports Med.2017, 47, 2269–2284. [CrossRef]
8. Racinais, S.; Hosokawa, Y.; Akama, T.; Bermon, S.; Bigard, X.; Casa, D.J.; Grundstein, A.; Jay, O.; Massey, A.; Migliorini, S.; et al.
IOC consensus statement on recommendations and regulations for sport events in the heat. Br. J. Sports Med.2023, 57, 8–25.
[CrossRef]
9. Baker, L.B. The Fluid Replacement Process: Principles of Beverage Formulation for Athletes. Available online: https://www.
gssiweb.org/sports-science-exchange/article/the-fluid-replacement-process-principles-of-beverage-formulation-for-athletes
(accessed on 31 January 2025).
10. Collins, J.; Maughan, R.J.; Gleeson, M.; Bilsborough, J.; Jeukendrup, A.; Morton, J.P .; Phillips, S.M.; Armstrong, L.; Burke,
L.M.; Close, G.L.; et al. UEFA expert group statement on nutrition in elite football. Current evidence to inform practical
recommendations and guide future research. Br. J. Sports Med.2021, 55, 416. [CrossRef]
11. Mosler, S.; Braun, H.; Carlsohn, A.; Großhauser, M.; König, D.; Lampen, A.; Nieß, A.; Oberritter, H.; Schäbethal, K.;Schek, A.; et al.
Position of the working group sports nutrition of the German Nutrition Society (DGE): Fluid replacement in sports. Dtsch. Z. Für
Sportmed. Ger. J. Sports Med.2020, 71, 178–184. [CrossRef]
12. McCubbin, A.J.; Allanson, B.A.; Caldwell Odgers, J.N.; Cort, M.M.; Costa, R.J.S.; Cox, G.R.; Crawshay, S.T.; Desbrow, B.; Freney,
E.G.; Gaskell, S.K.; et al. Sports Dietitians Australia Position Statement: Nutrition for Exercise in Hot Environments. Int. J. Sport.
Nutr. Exerc. Metab.2020, 30, 83–98. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Kerksick, C.M.; Wilborn, C.D.; Roberts, M.D.; Smith-Ryan, A.; Kleiner, S.M.; Jager, R.; Collins, R.; Cooke, M.; Davis, J.N.;
Galvan, E.; et al. ISSN exercise & sports nutrition review update: Research & recommendations. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr.2018,
15, 38. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. McDermott, B.P .; Anderson, S.A.; Armstrong, L.E.; Casa, D.J.; Cheuvront, S.N.; Cooper, L.; Kenney, W.L.; O’Connor, F.G.; Roberts,
W.O. National Athletic Trainers’ Association Position Statement: Fluid Replacement for the Physically Active. J. Athl. Train.2017,
52, 877–895. [CrossRef]
15. American College of Sports, M.; Sawka, M.N.; Burke, L.M.; Eichner, E.R.; Maughan, R.J.; Montain, S.J.; Stachenfeld, N.S. American
College of Sports Medicine position stand. Exercise and fluid replacement. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.2007, 39, 377–390. [CrossRef]
16. Cheng, G.; Zhang, Z.; Shi, Z.; Qiu, Y. An investigation into how the timing of nutritional supplements affects the recovery from
post-exercise fatigue: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Front. Nutr.2025, 12, 1567438. [CrossRef]
17. Lehmann, L.; Giacomoni, M.; Del Sordo, G.; Raymond, J.J.; Duche, P .; Margaritis, I. Energy and Macronutrient Intakes in Young
Athletes: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Int. J. Sports Med.2024, 45, 3–16. [CrossRef]
18. Ramos-Campo, D.J.; Clemente-Suarez, V .J.; Cupeiro, R.; Benitez-Munoz, J.A.; Andreu Caravaca, L.; Rubio-Arias, J.A. The ergogenic
effects of acute carbohydrate feeding on endurance performance: A systematic review, meta-analysis and meta-regression. Crit.
Rev. Food Sci. Nutr.2024, 64, 11196–11205. [CrossRef]
19. Diaz-Lara, J.; Reisman, E.; Botella, J.; Probert, B.; Burke, L.M.; Bishop, D.J.; Lee, M.J. Delaying post-exercise carbohydrate intake
impairs next-day exercise capacity but not muscle glycogen or molecular responses. Acta Physiol.2024, 240, e14215. [CrossRef]
20. Koerich, A.C.C.; Borszcz, F.K.; Thives Mello, A.; de Lucas, R.D.; Hansen, F. Effects of the ketogenic diet on performance and
body composition in athletes and trained adults: A systematic review and Bayesian multivariate multilevel meta-analysis and
meta-regression. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr.2023, 63, 11399–11424. [CrossRef]
21. Craven, J.; Desbrow, B.; Sabapathy, S.; Bellinger, P .; McCartney, D.; Irwin, C. The Effect of Consuming Carbohydrate With and
Without Protein on the Rate of Muscle Glycogen Re-synthesis During Short-Term Post-exercise Recovery: A Systematic Review
and Meta-analysis. Sports Med. Open2021, 7, 9. [CrossRef]
22. Margolis, L.M.; Allen, J.T.; Hatch-McChesney, A.; Pasiakos, S.M. Coingestion of Carbohydrate and Protein on Muscle Glycogen
Synthesis after Exercise: A Meta-analysis. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.2021, 53, 384–393. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Life 2025, 15, 867 25 of 31
23. Kloby Nielsen, L.L.; Tandrup Lambert, M.N.; Jeppesen, P .B. The Effect of Ingesting Carbohydrate and Proteins on Athletic
Performance: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. Nutrients 2020, 12, 1483. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
24. McCartney, D.; Desbrow, B.; Irwin, C. Post-exercise Ingestion of Carbohydrate, Protein and Water: A Systematic Review and
Meta-analysis for Effects on Subsequent Athletic Performance. Sports Med.2018, 48, 379–408. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Roberts, P .A.; Fox, J.; Peirce, N.; Jones, S.W.; Casey, A.; Greenhaff, P .L. Creatine ingestion augments dietary carbohydrate mediated
muscle glycogen supercompensation during the initial 24 h of recovery following prolonged exhaustive exercise in humans.
Amino Acids2016, 48, 1831–1842. [CrossRef]
26. Leaf, A.; Rothschild, J.A.; Sharpe, T.M.; Sims, S.T.; Macias, C.J.; Futch, G.G.; Roberts, M.D.; Stout, J.R.; Ormsbee, M.J.;
Aragon, A.A.; et al. International society of sports nutrition position stand: Ketogenic diets. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr. 2024,
21, 2368167. [CrossRef]
27. König, D.; Braun, H.; Carlsohn, A.; Großhauser, M.; Lampen, A.; Mosler, S.; Nieß, A.; Oberritter, H.; Schäbethal, K.;Schek, A.; et al.
Position of the working group sports nutrition of the German Nutrition Society (DGE): Carbohydrates in sports nutrition. Dtsch.
Z. Für Sportmed. Ger. J. Sports Med.2020, 71, 185–191. [CrossRef]
28. Braun, H.; Carlsohn, A.; Großhauser, M.; König, D.; Lampen, A.; Mosler, S.; Nieß, A.; Oberritter, H.; Schäbethal, K.;Schek, A.; et al.
Position of the working group sports nutrition of the German Nutrition Society (DGE): Energy needs in sports. Dtsch. Z. Für
Sportmed. Ger. J. Sports Med.2020, 71, 171–177. [CrossRef]
29. Thomas, D.T.; Erdman, K.A.; Burke, L.M. Position of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, Dietitians of Canada, and the
American College of Sports Medicine: Nutrition and Athletic Performance. J. Acad. Nutr. Diet.2016, 116, 501–528. [CrossRef]
30. Pearson, A.G.; Hind, K.; Macnaughton, L.S. The impact of dietary protein supplementation on recovery from resistance exercise-
induced muscle damage: A systematic review with meta-analysis. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr.2023, 77, 767–783. [CrossRef]
31. Doma, K.; Ramachandran, A.K.; Boullosa, D.; Connor, J. The Paradoxical Effect of Creatine Monohydrate on Muscle Damage
Markers: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Med.2022, 52, 1623–1645. [CrossRef]
32. Jones, L.; Bailey, S.J.; Rowland, S.N.; Alsharif, N.; Shannon, O.M.; Clifford, T. The Effect of Nitrate-Rich Beetroot Juice on Markers
of Exercise-Induced Muscle Damage: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Human Intervention Trials. J. Diet. Suppl.2022,
19, 749–771. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Hill, J.A.; Keane, K.M.; Quinlan, R.; Howatson, G. Tart Cherry Supplementation and Recovery From Strenuous Exercise:
A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Int. J. Sport. Nutr. Exerc. Metab.2021, 31, 154–167. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Jiaming, Y.; Rahimi, M.H. Creatine supplementation effect on recovery following exercise-induced muscle damage: A systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J. Food Biochem.2021, 45, e13916. [CrossRef]
35. Carey, C.C.; Lucey, A.; Doyle, L. Flavonoid Containing Polyphenol Consumption and Recovery from Exercise-Induced Muscle
Damage: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Med.2021, 51, 1293–1316. [CrossRef]
36. Gao, R.; Chilibeck, P .D. Effect of Tart Cherry Concentrate on Endurance Exercise Performance: A Meta-analysis.J. Am. Coll. Nutr.
2020, 39, 657–664. [CrossRef]
37. Morton, R.W.; Murphy, K.T.; McKellar, S.R.; Schoenfeld, B.J.; Henselmans, M.; Helms, E.; Aragon, A.A.; Devries, M.C.; Banfield, L.;
Krieger, J.W.; et al. A systematic review, meta-analysis and meta-regression of the effect of protein supplementation on resistance
training-induced gains in muscle mass and strength in healthy adults. Br. J. Sports Med.2018, 52, 376–384. [CrossRef]
38. Jager, R.; Heileson, J.L.; Abou Sawan, S.; Dickerson, B.L.; Leonard, M.; Kreider, R.B.; Kerksick, C.M.; Cornish, S.M.; Candow, D.G.;
Cordingley, D.M.; et al. International Society of Sports Nutrition Position Stand: Long-Chain Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty
Acids. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr.2025, 22, 2441775. [CrossRef]
39. König, D.; Carlsohn, A.; Braun, H.; Großhauser, M.; Lampen, A.; Mosler, S.; Nieß, A.; Schäbethal, K.; Schek, A.; Stehle, P .; et al.
Position of the working group sports nutrition of the German Nutrition Society (DGE): Protein intake in sports. Dtsch. Z. Für
Sportmed. Ger. J. Sports Med.2020, 71, 192–198. [CrossRef]
40. Jager, R.; Kerksick, C.M.; Campbell, B.I.; Cribb, P .J.; Wells, S.D.; Skwiat, T.M.; Purpura, M.; Ziegenfuss, T.N.; Ferrando, A.A.;
Arent, S.M.; et al. International Society of Sports Nutrition Position Stand: Protein and exercise. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr.2017,
14, 20. [CrossRef]
41. Kreider, R.B.; Kalman, D.S.; Antonio, J.; Ziegenfuss, T.N.; Wildman, R.; Collins, R.; Candow, D.G.; Kleiner, S.M.; Almada, A.L.;
Lopez, H.L. International Society of Sports Nutrition position stand: Safety and efficacy of creatine supplementation in exercise,
sport, and medicine. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr.2017, 14, 18. [CrossRef]
42. Gardiner, C.; Weakley, J.; Burke, L.M.; Roach, G.D.; Sargent, C.; Maniar, N.; Huynh, M.; Miller, D.J.; Townshend, A.; Halson,
S.L. The effect of alcohol on subsequent sleep in healthy adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep. Med. Rev.2024,
80, 102030. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Gardiner, C.L.; Weakley, J.; Burke, L.M.; Fernandez, F.; Johnston, R.D.; Leota, J.; Russell, S.; Munteanu, G.; Townshend, A.;
Halson, S.L. Dose and timing effects of caffeine on subsequent sleep: A randomised clinical crossover trial. Sleep 2024, 48, zsae230.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Life 2025, 15, 867 26 of 31
44. Gong, M.; Sun, M.; Sun, Y.; Jin, L.; Li, S. Effects of Acute Sleep Deprivation on Sporting Performance in Athletes: A Comprehensive
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Nat. Sci. Sleep2024, 16, 935–948. [CrossRef]
45. Fatima, K.; Malik, J.; Muskan, F.; Raza, G.; Waseem, A.; Shahid, H.; Jaffery, S.F.; Khan, U.; Zaheer, M.K.; Shaikh, Y.; et al. Safety
and efficacy of Withania somniferafor anxiety and insomnia: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum. Psychopharmacol.2024,
39, e2911. [CrossRef]
46. Trommelen, J.; van Lieshout, G.A.A.; Pabla, P .; Nyakayiru, J.; Hendriks, F.K.; Senden, J.M.; Goessens, J.P .B.; van Kranenburg,
J.M.X.; Gijsen, A.P .; Verdijk, L.B.; et al. Pre-sleep Protein Ingestion Increases Mitochondrial Protein Synthesis Rates During
Overnight Recovery from Endurance Exercise: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Sports Med.2023, 53, 1445–1455. [CrossRef]
47. Reis, C.E.G.; Loureiro, L.M.R.; Roschel, H.; da Costa, T.H.M. Effects of pre-sleep protein consumption on muscle-related
outcomes—A systematic review. J. Sci. Med. Sport.2021, 24, 177–182. [CrossRef]
48. Dela Cruz, J.; Kahan, D. Pre-Sleep Casein Supplementation, Metabolism, and Appetite: A Systematic Review. Nutrients 2021,
13, 1872. [CrossRef]
49. Cheah, K.L.; Norhayati, M.N.; Husniati Yaacob, L.; Abdul Rahman, R. Effect of Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) extract on
sleep: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS ONE2021, 16, e0257843. [CrossRef]
50. Gratwicke, M.; Miles, K.H.; Pyne, D.B.; Pumpa, K.L.; Clark, B. Nutritional Interventions to Improve Sleep in Team-Sport Athletes:
A Narrative Review. Nutrients 2021, 13, 1586. [CrossRef]
51. Walsh, N.P .; Halson, S.L.; Sargent, C.; Roach, G.D.; Nedelec, M.; Gupta, L.; Leeder, J.; Fullagar, H.H.; Coutts, A.J.; Edwards, B.J.;
et al. Sleep and the athlete: Narrative review and 2021 expert consensus recommendations. Br. J. Sports Med.2020, 55, 356–368.
[CrossRef]
52. Snijders, T.; Trommelen, J.; Kouw, I.W.K.; Holwerda, A.M.; Verdijk, L.B.; van Loon, L.J.C. The Impact of Pre-sleep Protein Ingestion
on the Skeletal Muscle Adaptive Response to Exercise in Humans: An Update. Front. Nutr.2019, 6, 17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Barnes, M.J. Alcohol: Impact on sports performance and recovery in male athletes. Sports Med.2014, 44, 909–919. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
54. Ramar, K.; Malhotra, R.K.; Carden, K.A.; Martin, J.L.; Abbasi-Feinberg, F.; Aurora, R.N.; Kapur, V .K.; Olson, E.J.; Rosen, C.L.;
Rowley, J.A.; et al. Sleep is essential to health: An American Academy of Sleep Medicine position statement. J. Clin. Sleep. Med.
2021, 17, 2115–2119. [CrossRef]
55. Kerksick, C.M.; Arent, S.; Schoenfeld, B.J.; Stout, J.R.; Campbell, B.; Wilborn, C.D.; Taylor, L.; Kalman, D.; Smith-Ryan, A.E.;
Kreider, R.B.; et al. International society of sports nutrition position stand: Nutrient timing. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr.2017, 14, 33.
[CrossRef]
56. Malsagova, K.A.; Kopylov, A.T.; Stepanov, A.A.; Kulikova, L.I.; Izotov, A.A.; Yurku, K.A.; Balakin, E.I.; Pustovoyt, V .I.; Kaysheva,
A.L. Metabolomic and Proteomic Profiling of Athletes Performing Physical Activity under Hypoxic Conditions. Sports 2024,
12, 72. [CrossRef]
57. Wu, W.; Zeng, J.; Liu, J. The influence of speed endurance training in different modes of sprint on muscle injury. Mol. Cell.
Biomech. 2025, 22, 283. [CrossRef]
58. Giraldo-Vallejo, J.E.; Cardona-Guzman, M.A.; Rodriguez-Alcivar, E.J.; Koci, J.; Petro, J.L.; Kreider, R.B.; Cannataro, R.; Bonilla, D.A.
Nutritional Strategies in the Rehabilitation of Musculoskeletal Injuries in Athletes: A Systematic Integrative Review. Nutrients
2023, 15, 819. [CrossRef]
59. Best, R.; Williams, J.M.; Pearce, J. The Physiological Requirements of and Nutritional Recommendations for Equestrian Riders.
Nutrients 2023, 15, 4977. [CrossRef]
60. Lonati, E.; Cazzaniga, E.; Adorni, R.; Zanatta, F.; Belingheri, M.; Colleoni, M.; Riva, M.A.; Steca, P .; Palestini, P . Health-Related
Lifestyles among University Students: Focusing on Eating Habits and Physical Activity. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health2024,
21, 626. [CrossRef]
61. Tricco, A.C.; Lillie, E.; Zarin, W.; O’Brien, K.K.; Colquhoun, H.; Levac, D.; Moher, D.; Peters, M.D.J.; Horsley, T.;Weeks, L.; et al.
PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR): Checklist and Explanation. Ann. Intern. Med. 2018, 169, 467–473.
[CrossRef]
62. Jackson, H.; Oler, E.; Torres-Calzada, C.; Kruger, R.; Hira, A.S.; Lopez-Hernandez, Y.; Pandit, D.; Wang, J.; Yang, K.;
Fatokun, O.; et al. MarkerDB 2.0: A comprehensive molecular biomarker database for 2025. Nucleic Acids Res. 2025, 53,
D1415–D1426. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing; R Foundation for Statistical Computing: Vienna, Aus-
tria, 2013.
64. Chang, W.; Cheng, J.; Allaire, J.J.; Sievert, C.; Schloerke, B.; Xie, Y.; Allen, J.; McPherson, J.; Dipert, A.; Borges, B. Shiny: Web
Application Framework for R, R Package version 1.10.0; Posit Software: Boston, MA, USA, 2025.
65. McEwen, B.S.; Karatsoreos, I.N. What Is Stress? In Stress Challenges and Immunity in Spac; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2020;
pp. 19–42. [CrossRef]
Life 2025, 15, 867 27 of 31
66. Abrams, D.B.; Turner, J.R.; Baumann, L.C.; Karel, A.; Collins, S.E.; Witkiewitz, K.; Fulmer, T.; Tanenbaum, M.L.; Commissariat,
P .; Kupperman, E.; et al. Allostasis, Allostatic Load. InEncyclopedia of Behavioral Medicine; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2013;
pp. 68–69. [CrossRef]
67. Sterling, P .; Eyer, J. Allostasis: A new paradigm to explain arousal pathology. InHandbook of Life Stress, Cognition and Health; John
Wiley & Sons: Oxford, UK, 1988; pp. 629–649.
68. Ramsay, D.S.; Woods, S.C. Clarifying the roles of homeostasis and allostasis in physiological regulation.Psychol. Rev.2014, 121,
225–247. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69. Goldstein, D.S. How does homeostasis happen? Integrative physiological, systems biological, and evolutionary perspectives. Am.
J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol.2019, 316, R301–R317. [CrossRef]
70. Bettinger, J.S.; Friston, K.J. Conceptual foundations of physiological regulation incorporating the free energy principle and
self-organized criticality. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.2023, 155, 105459. [CrossRef]
71. Sennesh, E.; Theriault, J.; Brooks, D.; van de Meent, J.W.; Barrett, L.F.; Quigley, K.S. Interoception as modeling, allostasis as control.
Biol. Psychol.2022, 167, 108242. [CrossRef]
72. Franco-O’Byrne, D.; Santamaria-Garcia, H.; Migeot, J.; Ibanez, A. Emerging Theories of Allostatic-Interoceptive Overload in
Neurodegeneration. In Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2024. [CrossRef]
73. Santamaria-Garcia, H.; Migeot, J.; Medel, V .; Hazelton, J.L.; Teckentrup, V .; Romero-Ortuno, R.; Piguet, O.; Lawor, B.; Northoff, G.;
Ibanez, A. Allostatic Interoceptive Overload Across Psychiatric and Neurological Conditions. Biol. Psychiatry2025, 97, 28–40.
[CrossRef]
74. Bobba-Alves, N.; Juster, R.P .; Picard, M. The energetic cost of allostasis and allostatic load.Psychoneuroendocrinology 2022, 146,
105951. [CrossRef]
75. Smith-Ryan, A.E.; Hirsch, K.R.; Saylor, H.E.; Gould, L.M.; Blue, M.N.M. Nutritional Considerations and Strategies to Facilitate
Injury Recovery and Rehabilitation. J. Athl. Train.2020, 55, 918–930. [CrossRef]
76. Shaffer, C.; Westlin, C.; Quigley, K.S.; Whitfield-Gabrieli, S.; Barrett, L.F. Allostasis, Action, and Affect in Depression: Insights
from the Theory of Constructed Emotion. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol.2022, 18, 553–580. [CrossRef]
77. Proschinger, S.; Freese, J. Neuroimmunological and neuroenergetic aspects in exercise-induced fatigue. Exerc. Immunol. Rev.2019,
25, 8–19.
78. McEwen, B.S. Stress, adaptation, and disease. Allostasis and allostatic load. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.1998, 840, 33–44. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
79. Chrousos, G.P . Stress and disorders of the stress system. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol.2009, 5, 374–381. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80. Agorastos, A.; Chrousos, G.P . The neuroendocrinology of stress: The stress-related continuum of chronic disease development.
Mol. Psychiatry2022, 27, 502–513. [CrossRef]
81. Ruini, C.; Offidani, E.; Vescovelli, F. Life Stressors, Allostatic Overload, and Their Impact on Posttraumatic Growth.J. Loss Trauma
2014, 20, 109–122. [CrossRef]
82. Bonanno, M.; Papa, D.; Cerasa, A.; Maggio, M.G.; Calabro, R.S. Psycho-Neuroendocrinology in the Rehabilitation Field: Focus on
the Complex Interplay between Stress and Pain. Medicina 2024, 60, 285. [CrossRef]
83. Bonilla, D.A.; Moreno, Y.; Petro, J.L.; Forero, D.A.; Vargas-Molina, S.; Odriozola-Martinez, A.; Orozco, C.A.; Stout, J.R.; Rawson,
E.S.; Kreider, R.B. A Bioinformatics-Assisted Review on Iron Metabolism and Immune System to Identify Potential Biomarkers of
Exercise Stress-Induced Immunosuppression. Biomedicines 2022, 10, 724. [CrossRef]
84. Bonilla, D.A.; Cione, E.; Angelini, F.; D’Antona, G.; Cannataro, R. Editorial: A systems approach to personalized exercise and
nutrition in health and disease. Front. Sports Act. Living2023, 5, 1190121. [CrossRef]
85. Corcoran, A.W.; Hohwy, J. Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy principle: Feeling our way forward. InThe Interoceptive
Mind: From Homeostasis to Awareness; Tsakiris, M., De Preester, H., Eds.; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2018; Volume 1.
86. Fitzcharles, M.A.; Cohen, S.P .; Clauw, D.J.; Littlejohn, G.; Usui, C.; Hauser, W. Nociplastic pain: Towards an understanding of
prevalent pain conditions. Lancet 2021, 397, 2098–2110. [CrossRef]
87. San-Millan, I. Blood Biomarkers in Sports Medicine and Performance and the Future of Metabolomics. Methods Mol. Biol.2019,
1978, 431–446. [CrossRef]
88. Pedlar, C.R.; Newell, J.; Lewis, N.A. Blood Biomarker Profiling and Monitoring for High-Performance Physiology and Nutrition:
Current Perspectives, Limitations and Recommendations. Sports Med.2019, 49, 185–198. [CrossRef]
89. Krumm, B.; Faiss, R. Factors Confounding the Athlete Biological Passport: A Systematic Narrative Review. Sports Med. Open2021,
7, 65. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
90. Lee, E.C.; Fragala, M.S.; Kavouras, S.A.; Queen, R.M.; Pryor, J.L.; Casa, D.J. Biomarkers in Sports and Exercise: Tracking Health,
Performance, and Recovery in Athletes. J. Strength. Cond. Res.2017, 31, 2920–2937. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91. Walsh, N.P . Recommendations to maintain immune health in athletes. Eur. J. Sport. Sci.2018, 18, 820–831. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Life 2025, 15, 867 28 of 31
92. Haller, N.; Behringer, M.; Reichel, T.; Wahl, P .; Simon, P .; Kruger, K.; Zimmer, P .; Stoggl, T. Blood-Based Biomarkers for Managing
Workload in Athletes: Considerations and Recommendations for Evidence-Based Use of Established Biomarkers. Sports Med.
2023, 53, 1315–1333. [CrossRef]
93. Mountjoy, M.; Sundgot-Borgen, J.; Burke, L.; Ackerman, K.E.; Blauwet, C.; Constantini, N.; Lebrun, C.; Lundy, B.; Melin, A.;
Meyer, N.; et al. International Olympic Committee (IOC) Consensus Statement on Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport (RED-S):
2018 Update. Int. J. Sport. Nutr. Exerc. Metab.2018, 28, 316–331. [CrossRef]
94. IOC. International olympic committee relative energy deficiency in sport clinical assessment tool 2 (IOC REDs CAT2). Br. J. Sports
Med. 2023, 57, 1068–1072. [CrossRef]
95. Jeukendrup, A.E.; Areta, J.L.; Van Genechten, L.; Langan-Evans, C.; Pedlar, C.R.; Rodas, G.; Sale, C.; Walsh, N.P . Does Relative
Energy Deficiency in Sport (REDs) Syndrome Exist? Sports Med.2024, 54, 2793–2816. [CrossRef]
96. Areta, J.L.; Taylor, H.L.; Koehler, K. Low energy availability: History, definition and evidence of its endocrine, metabolic and
physiological effects in prospective studies in females and males. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol.2021, 121, 1–21. [CrossRef]
97. Abe, T.; Dankel, S.J.; Loenneke, J.P . Body Fat Loss Automatically Reduces Lean Mass by Changing the Fat-Free Component of
Adipose Tissue. Obesity 2019, 27, 357–358. [CrossRef]
98. Loenneke, J.P .; Loprinzi, P .D.; Abe, T. The prevalence of sarcopenia before and after correction for DXA-derived fat-free adipose
tissue. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr.2016, 70, 1458–1460. [CrossRef]
99. Abe, T.; Loenneke, J.P .; Thiebaud, R.S.; Fujita, E.; Akamine, T. The impact of DXA-derived fat-free adipose tissue on the prevalence
of low muscle mass in older adults. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr.2019, 73, 757–762. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Heymsfield, S.B.; Brown, J.; Ramirez, S.; Prado, C.M.; Tinsley, G.M.; Gonzalez, M.C. Are Lean Body Mass and Fat-Free Mass the
Same or Different Body Components? A Critical Perspective. Adv. Nutr.2024, 15, 100335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Di Vincenzo, O.; Marra, M.; Scalfi, L. Bioelectrical impedance phase angle in sport: A systematic review. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr.
2019, 16, 49. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Bonilla, D.A.; De Leon, L.G.; Alexander-Cortez, P .; Odriozola-Martinez, A.; Herrera-Amante, C.A.; Vargas-Molina, S.; Petro, J.L.
Simple anthropometry-based calculations to monitor body composition in athletes: Scoping review and reference values. Nutr.
Health 2022, 28, 95–109. [CrossRef]
103. Barakat, C.; Pearson, J.; Escalante, G.; Campbell, B.; De Souza, E.O. Body Recomposition: Can Trained Individuals Build Muscle
and Lose Fat at the Same Time? Strength Cond. J.2020, 42, 7–21. [CrossRef]
104. Beausejour, J.P .; Knowles, K.S.; Wilson, A.T.; Mangum, L.C.; Hill, E.C.; Hanney, W.J.; Wells, A.J.; Fukuda, D.H.; Stout, J.; Stock,
M.S. Innovations in the Assessment of Skeletal Muscle Health: A Glimpse into the Future. Int. J. Sports Med.2024, 45, 659–671.
[CrossRef]
105. Jeukendrup, A.E. Periodized Nutrition for Athletes. Sports Med.2017, 47, 51–63. [CrossRef]
106. Beese, S.; Postma, J.; Graves, J.M. Allostatic Load Measurement: A Systematic Review of Reviews, Database Inventory, and
Considerations for Neighborhood Research. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health2022, 19, 17006. [CrossRef]
107. McCrory, C.; McLoughlin, S.; Layte, R.; NiCheallaigh, C.; O’Halloran, A.M.; Barros, H.; Berkman, L.F.; Bochud, M.; Crimmins,
E.M.; Farrell, M.T.; et al. Towards a consensus definition of allostatic load: A multi-cohort, multi-system, multi-biomarker
individual participant data (IPD) meta-analysis. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2023, 153, 106117. [CrossRef]
108. Schiller, D.; Yu, A.N.C.; Alia-Klein, N.; Becker, S.; Cromwell, H.C.; Dolcos, F.; Eslinger, P .J.; Frewen, P .; Kemp, A.H.; Pace-Schott,
E.F.; et al. The Human Affectome. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.2024, 158, 105450. [CrossRef]
109. Parker, H.W.; Abreu, A.M.; Sullivan, M.C.; Vadiveloo, M.K. Allostatic Load and Mortality: A Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis. Am. J. Prev. Med.2022, 63, 131–140. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
110. Bonilla, D.A.; Koˇ cí, J.; Petro, J.L.; Kreider, R.B. The Healthy Trinity to Face Non-communicable Diseases: Physical Activity,
Nutrition and Sleep. In Integrated Science for Sustainable Development Goal 3; Rezaei, N., Ed.; Integrated Science; Springer: Cham,
Switzerland, 2024; pp. 89–121. [CrossRef]
111. Li, G.; Tampubolon, G.; Maharani, A.; Tu, C. Sex differences in allostatic load trajectories among midlife and older adults:
Evidence from the China health and retirement longitudinal study. PLoS ONE2024, 19, e0315594. [CrossRef]
112. Polick, C.S.; Harris-Gersten, M.L.; Dennis, P .A.; Noonan, D.; Hastings, S.N.; Calhoun, P .S.; Rosemberg, M.A.; Stoddard, S.A.
Allostatic Load, Morbidity, and Mortality Among Older Adults: A Multi-Wave Analysis From the National Health and Aging
Trends Study.J. Appl. Gerontol.2024, 43, 1052–1059. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Mauss, D.; Jarczok, M.N. The streamlined allostatic load index is associated with perceived stress in life—Findings from the
MIDUS study. Stress 2021, 24, 404–412. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Mathew, A.; Doorenbos, A.Z.; Li, H.; Jang, M.K.; Park, C.G.; Bronas, U.G. Allostatic Load in Cancer: A Systematic Review and
Mini Meta-Analysis. Biol. Res. Nurs.2021, 23, 341–361. [CrossRef]
115. Christensen, D.S.; Zachariae, R.; Amidi, A.; Wu, L.M. Sleep and allostatic load: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep Med.
Rev. 2022, 64, 101650. [CrossRef]
116. Fava, G.A.; Sonino, N.; Lucente, M.; Guidi, J. Allostatic Load in Clinical Practice. Clin. Psychol. Sci.2022, 11, 345–356. [CrossRef]
Life 2025, 15, 867 29 of 31
117. McEwen, B.S.; Stellar, E. Stress and the individual. Mechanisms leading to disease. Arch. Intern. Med. 1993, 153, 2093–2101.
[CrossRef]
118. Schnorpfeil, P .; Noll, A.; Schulze, R.; Ehlert, U.; Frey, K.; Fischer, J.E. Allostatic load and work conditions.Soc. Sci. Med.2003, 57,
647–656. [CrossRef]
119. Tsatsoulis, A.; Fountoulakis, S. The protective role of exercise on stress system dysregulation and comorbidities. Ann. N. Y. Acad.
Sci. 2006, 1083, 196–213. [CrossRef]
120. Li, G.; He, H. Hormesis, allostatic buffering capacity and physiological mechanism of physical activity: A new theoretic
framework. Med. Hypotheses2009, 72, 527–532. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121. Rabey, M.; Moloney, N. “I Don’t Know Why I’ve Got this Pain!” Allostasis as a Possible Explanatory Model. Phys. Ther.2022, 102,
pzac017. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Feigel, E.D.; Bird, M.B.; Koltun, K.J.; Lovalekar, M.; Forse, J.N.; Gage, C.R.; Steele, E.J.; Kargl, C.K.; Martin, B.J.; Bannister, A.; et al.
Allostatic Load Is Associated with Overuse Musculoskeletal Injury during US Marine Corps Officer Candidates School. Med. Sci.
Sports Exerc.2024, 56, 2220–2229. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Forys, W.J.; Tokuhama-Espinosa, T. The Athlete’s Paradox: Adaptable Depression. Sports 2022, 10, 105. [CrossRef]
124. Sanchez, I.A.; Cuchimba, J.A.; Pineda, M.C.; Arguello, Y.P .; Koci, J.; Kreider, R.B.; Petro, J.L.; Bonilla, D.A. Adaptogens on
Depression-Related Outcomes: A Systematic Integrative Review and Rationale of Synergism with Physical Activity.Int. J. Environ.
Res. Public Health2023, 20, 5298. [CrossRef]
125. Friston, K. The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nat. Rev. Neurosci.2010, 11, 127–138. [CrossRef]
126. Inui, T. The Design Principle of Allostatic Mechanisms: The Free Energy Principle. Brain Nerve2023, 75, 1239–1243. [CrossRef]
127. Tossici, G.; Zurloni, V .; Nitri, A. Stress and sport performance: A PNEI multidisciplinary approach. Front. Psychol. 2024,
15, 1358771. [CrossRef]
128. Bonilla, D.A.; Agudelo-Martínez, A. Proceedings of the 5(th) Ibero-American Symposium on Sport and Physical Activity:
Nutrition & Training (SIDANE) and 1(st) International Conference on Nutrition Applied to Physical Activity and Sport.BMC
Proc. 2024, 18, 9. [CrossRef]
129. Milheiro, J.; Carvalho, D.D.; Pires, P .; Sousa, A.; Goethel, M.F.; Moreira, A.; Soares, J. Cortisol and insulin behaviors during an
ultramarathon event: Are they real markers of extreme exertion? J. Sports Med. Phys. Fit.2024, 64, 1250–1259. [CrossRef]
130. Feigel, E.D.; Koltun, K.J.; Lovalekar, M.; Kargl, C.K.; Bird, M.B.; Forse, J.N.; Patel, V .J.; Martin, B.J.; Nagle, E.F.; Friedl, K.E.; et al.
Association of allostatic load measured by allostatic load index on physical performance and psychological responses during
arduous military training. Physiol. Rep.2025, 13, e70273. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Tavares, A.S.R.; Vital, M.; Cunha, M.; Maia Matos, M.; Tonin, F.S. Impact of anabolic steroid consumption on biochemical and
hematological parameters in bodybuilders: A systematic review and evidence gap mapping. Perform. Enhanc. Health 2024,
12, 100280. [CrossRef]
132. Christou, G.A.; Christou, M.A.; Ziberna, L.; Christou, K.A. Indirect clinical markers for the detection of anabolic steroid abuse
beyond the conventional doping control in athletes. Eur. J. Sport. Sci.2019, 19, 1276–1286. [CrossRef]
133. Gheshlaghi, F.; Piri-Ardakani, M.R.; Masoumi, G.R.; Behjati, M.; Paydar, P . Cardiovascular manifestations of anabolic steroids in
association with demographic variables in body building athletes. J. Res. Med. Sci.2015, 20, 165–168.
134. Christou, M.A.; Christou, P .A.; Markozannes, G.; Tsatsoulis, A.; Mastorakos, G.; Tigas, S. Effects of Anabolic Androgenic Steroids
on the Reproductive System of Athletes and Recreational Users: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Med.2017, 47,
1869–1883. [CrossRef]
135. Petrovic, A.; Vukadin, S.; Sikora, R.; Bojanic, K.; Smolic, R.; Plavec, D.; Wu, G.Y.; Smolic, M. Anabolic androgenic steroid-induced
liver injury: An update. World J. Gastroenterol.2022, 28, 3071–3080. [CrossRef]
136. Petro, J.L.; Ferrari, G.; Cardozo, L.A.; Vargas-Molina, S.; Carbone, L.; Kreider, R.B.; Bonilla, D.A. Validity of Rating of Perceived
Exertion Scales in Relation to Movement Velocity and Exercise Intensity During Resistance-Exercise: A Systematic Review. Sports
Health 2024, 17, 621–628. [CrossRef]
137. Selmi, O.; Ouergui, I.; Levitt, D.E.; Marzouki, H.; Knechtle, B.; Nikolaidis, P .T.; Bouassida, A. Training, psychometric status,
biological markers and neuromuscular fatigue in soccer. Biol. Sport2022, 39, 319–327. [CrossRef]
138. Simmons, R.; Doma, K.; Sinclair, W.; Connor, J.; Leicht, A. Acute Effects of Training Loads on Muscle Damage Markers and
Performance in Semi-elite and Elite Athletes: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Sports Med.2021, 51, 2181–2207. [CrossRef]
139. Sapin, V .; Gaulmin, R.; Aubin, R.; Walrand, S.; Coste, A.; Abbot, M. Blood biomarkers of mild traumatic brain injury: State of art.
Neurochirurgie 2021, 67, 249–254. [CrossRef]
140. Gleeson, M. Biochemical and immunological markers of over-training. J. Sports Sci. Med.2002, 1, 31–41. [PubMed]
141. Hoff, J.; Storen, O.; Finstad, A.; Wang, E.; Helgerud, J. Increased Blood Lactate Level Deteriorates Running Economy in World
Class Endurance Athletes. J. Strength Cond. Res.2016, 30, 1373–1378. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Kano, R.; Sato, K. The Relationship between Training Cycle-Dependent Fluctuations in Resting Blood Lactate Levels and Exercise
Performance in College-Aged Rugby Players. J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol.2022, 7, 93. [CrossRef]
Life 2025, 15, 867 30 of 31
143. McLoughlin, S.; Kenny, R.A.; McCrory, C. Does the choice of Allostatic Load scoring algorithm matter for predicting age-related
health outcomes? Psychoneuroendocrinology 2020, 120, 104789. [CrossRef]
144. Hecksteden, A.; Pitsch, W.; Julian, R.; Pfeiffer, M.; Kellmann, M.; Ferrauti, A.; Meyer, T. A New Method to Individualize
Monitoring of Muscle Recovery in Athletes. Int. J. Sports Physiol. Perform.2017, 12, 1137–1142. [CrossRef]
145. Solanki, P .; Eu, B.; Smith, J.; Allan, C.; Lee, K. Physical, psychological and biochemical recovery from anabolic steroid-induced
hypogonadism: A scoping review. Endocr. Connect.2023, 12, e230358. [CrossRef]
146. Warrier, A.A.; Azua, E.N.; Kasson, L.B.; Allahabadi, S.; Khan, Z.A.; Mameri, E.S.; Swindell, H.W.; Tokish, J.M.; Chahla, J.
Performance-Enhancing Drugs in Healthy Athletes: An Umbrella Review of Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses. Sports Health
2024, 16, 695–705. [CrossRef]
147. Mingxing, L.; Yanfei, Y. Adverse Effects of Anabolic Androgenic Steroid Abuse in Athletes and Physically Active Individuals:
A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Subst. Use Misuse2025, 60, 873–887. [CrossRef]
148. Corona, G.; Rastrelli, G.; Marchiani, S.; Filippi, S.; Morelli, A.; Sarchielli, E.; Sforza, A.; Vignozzi, L.; Maggi, M. Consequences of
Anabolic-Androgenic Steroid Abuse in Males; Sexual and Reproductive Perspective. World J. Mens. Health2022, 40, 165–178.
[CrossRef]
149. Davani-Davari, D.; Karimzadeh, I.; Khalili, H. The potential effects of anabolic-androgenic steroids and growth hormone as
commonly used sport supplements on the kidney: A systematic review. BMC Nephrol.2019, 20, 198. [CrossRef]
150. Ashouri, R.; Lertkitcharoenpon, A.; Maidaa, M.; Brunner, B.; Velazquez, O.; Lipshultz, L.; Campbell, K. Creatinine and Cystatin
C: A Measure of Renal Function in Men With Testosterone-Induced Muscle Hypertrophy. Am. J. Mens. Health 2024, 18,
15579883241286654. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
151. Lea, J.W.D.; O’Driscoll, J.M.; Hulbert, S.; Scales, J.; Wiles, J.D. Convergent Validity of Ratings of Perceived Exertion During
Resistance Exercise in Healthy Participants: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Med. Open2022, 8, 2. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
152. Donaldson, J.A.; Wiles, J.D.; Coleman, D.A.; Papadakis, M.; Sharma, R.; O’Driscoll, J.M. Left Ventricular Function and Cardiac
Biomarker Release-The Influence of Exercise Intensity, Duration and Mode: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Med.
2019, 49, 1275–1289. [CrossRef]
153. Li, F.; Hopkins, W.G.; Wang, X.; Baker, J.S.; Nie, J.; Qiu, J.; Quach, B.; Wang, K.; Yi, L. Kinetics, Moderators and Reference Limits of
Exercise-Induced Elevation of Cardiac Troponin T in Athletes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Front. Physiol.2021,
12, 651851. [CrossRef]
154. Le, V .V .; Mitiku, T.; Sungar, G.; Myers, J.; Froelicher, V . The blood pressure response to dynamic exercise testing: A systematic
review. Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis.2008, 51, 135–160. [CrossRef]
155. Holmqvist, L.; Mortensen, L.; Kanckos, C.; Ljungman, C.; Mehlig, K.; Manhem, K. Exercise blood pressure and the risk of future
hypertension. J. Hum. Hypertens.2012, 26, 691–695. [CrossRef]
156. Greenham, G.; Buckley, J.D.; Garrett, J.; Eston, R.; Norton, K. Biomarkers of Physiological Responses to Periods of Intensified,
Non-Resistance-Based Exercise Training in Well-Trained Male Athletes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.Sports Med.
2018, 48, 2517–2548. [CrossRef]
157. Hayes, L.D.; Grace, F.M.; Baker, J.S.; Sculthorpe, N. Exercise-induced responses in salivary testosterone, cortisol, and their ratios
in men: A meta-analysis. Sports Med.2015, 45, 713–726. [CrossRef]
158. Bellenger, C.R.; Fuller, J.T.; Thomson, R.L.; Davison, K.; Robertson, E.Y.; Buckley, J.D. Monitoring Athletic Training Status Through
Autonomic Heart Rate Regulation: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Med.2016, 46, 1461–1486. [CrossRef]
159. Manser, P .; Thalmann, M.; Adcock, M.; Knols, R.H.; de Bruin, E.D. Can Reactivity of Heart Rate Variability Be a Potential
Biomarker and Monitoring Tool to Promote Healthy Aging? A Systematic Review With Meta-Analyses. Front. Physiol. 2021,
12, 686129. [CrossRef]
160. Manresa-Rocamora, A.; Sarabia, J.M.; Javaloyes, A.; Flatt, A.A.; Moya-Ramon, M. Heart Rate Variability-Guided Training for
Enhancing Cardiac-Vagal Modulation, Aerobic Fitness, and Endurance Performance: A Methodological Systematic Review with
Meta-Analysis. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health2021, 18, 10299. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
161. Schulte, S.; Podlog, L.W.; Hamson-Utley, J.J.; Strathmann, F.G.; Struder, H.K. A systematic review of the biomarker S100B:
Implications for sport-related concussion management. J. Athl. Train.2014, 49, 830–850. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
162. O’Connell, B.; Kelly, A.M.; Mockler, D.; Oresic, M.; Denvir, K.; Farrell, G.; Janigro, D.; Wilson, F. Use of Blood Biomarkers in the
Assessment of Sports-Related Concussion-A Systematic Review in the Context of Their Biological Significance. Clin. J. Sport Med.
2018, 28, 561–571. [CrossRef]
163. Oris, C.; Pereira, B.; Durif, J.; Simon-Pimmel, J.; Castellani, C.; Manzano, S.; Sapin, V .; Bouvier, D. The Biomarker S100B and Mild
Traumatic Brain Injury: A Meta-analysis. Pediatrics 2018, 141, e20180037. [CrossRef]
164. Liu, S.Y.; Ruan, L.; Wang, G.H.; Li, S.B.; You, K.; Chen, M.L.; Lv, Z.Q.; Pang, Y.; Pu, L.; Liu, X.Y.; et al. Effects of exercise on the
hepcidin inflammatory status and markers of iron metabolism: A meta-analysis. Sci. Sports2025, 40, 196–211. [CrossRef]
Life 2025, 15, 867 31 of 31
165. Fensham, N.C.; Govus, A.D.; Peeling, P .; Burke, L.M.; McKay, A.K.A. Factors Influencing the Hepcidin Response to Exercise:
An Individual Participant Data Meta-analysis. Sports Med.2023, 53, 1931–1949. [CrossRef]
166. Kuikman, M.A.; Coates, A.M.; Burr, J.F. Markers of Low Energy Availability in Overreached Athletes: A Systematic Review and
Meta-analysis. Sports Med.2022, 52, 2925–2941. [CrossRef]
167. Gallant, T.L.; Ong, L.F.; Wong, L.; Sparks, M.; Wilson, E.; Puglisi, J.L.; Gerriets, V .A. Low Energy Availability and Relative Energy
Deficiency in Sport: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Sports Med.2025, 55, 325–339. [CrossRef]
168. Inoue, A.; Dos Santos Bunn, P .; do Carmo, E.C.; Lattari, E.; da Silva, E.B. Internal Training Load Perceived by Athletes and
Planned by Coaches: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Med. Open2022, 8, 35. [CrossRef]
169. Pillitteri, G.; Petrigna, L.; Ficarra, S.; Giustino, V .; Thomas, E.; Rossi, A.; Clemente, F.M.; Paoli, A.; Petrucci, M.;Bellafiore, M.; et al.
Relationship between external and internal load indicators and injury using machine learning in professional soccer: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Res. Sports Med.2024, 32, 902–938. [CrossRef]
170. Jakobsen, M.M.; Nygaard, R.H.; Hojbjerg, J.A.; Larsen, J.B. The association between vitamin D status and overuse sport injuries:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Transl. Sports Med.2021, 4, 553–564. [CrossRef]
171. Harju, T.; Gray, B.; Mavroedi, A.; Farooq, A.; Reilly, J.J. Prevalence and novel risk factors for vitamin D insufficiency in elite
athletes: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur. J. Nutr.2022, 61, 3857–3871. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
172. Cadegiani, F.A.; Kater, C.E. Basal Hormones and Biochemical Markers as Predictors of Overtraining Syndrome in Male Athletes:
The EROS-BASAL Study. J. Athl. Train.2019, 54, 906–914. [CrossRef]
173. Huggins, R.A.; Fortunati, A.R.; Curtis, R.M.; Looney, D.P .; West, C.A.; Lee, E.C.; Fragala, M.S.; Hall, M.L.; Casa, D.J. Monitoring
Blood Biomarkers and Training Load Throughout a Collegiate Soccer Season.J. Strength Cond. Res.2019, 33, 3065–3077. [CrossRef]
174. Colenso-Semple, L.M.; D’Souza, A.C.; Elliott-Sale, K.J.; Phillips, S.M. Current evidence shows no influence of women’s menstrual
cycle phase on acute strength performance or adaptations to resistance exercise training. Front. Sports Act. Living2023, 5, 1054542.
[CrossRef]
175. Colenso-Semple, L.M.; McKendry, J.; Lim, C.; Atherton, P .J.; Wilkinson, D.J.; Smith, K.; Phillips, S.M. Menstrual cycle phase does
not influence muscle protein synthesis or whole-body myofibrillar proteolysis in response to resistance exercise. J. Physiol.2025,
603, 1109–1121. [CrossRef]
176. Niering, M.; Wolf-Belala, N.; Seifert, J.; Tovar, O.; Coldewey, J.; Kuranda, J.; Muehlbauer, T. The Influence of Menstrual Cycle
Phases on Maximal Strength Performance in Healthy Female Adults: A Systematic Review with Meta-Analysis. Sports 2024,
12, 31. [CrossRef]
177. Elliott-Sale, K.J.; McNulty, K.L.; Ansdell, P .; Goodall, S.; Hicks, K.M.; Thomas, K.; Swinton, P .A.; Dolan, E. The Effects of Oral
Contraceptives on Exercise Performance in Women: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Sports Med.2020, 50, 1785–1812.
[CrossRef]
178. Colenso-Semple, L.M.; McKendry, J.; Lim, C.; Atherton, P .J.; Wilkinson, D.J.; Smith, K.; Phillips, S.M. Oral contraceptive pill phase
does not influence muscle protein synthesis or myofibrillar proteolysis at rest or in response to resistance exercise. J. Appl. Physiol.
2025, 138, 810–815. [CrossRef]
179. Zhang, J.; Yu, H.; Shen, Y.; Yang, X.; Wang, Y. Rapid Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry Method for Determina-
tion of Total and Free Testosterone in Human Serum and Its Application to Monitoring Biomarker Response of Elite Athletes.
Molecules 2024, 29, 5007. [CrossRef]
180. Sagoe, D.; Torsheim, T.r.; Molde, H.; Andreassen, C.S.; Pallesen, S. Anabolic-Androgenic Steroid use in the Nordic Countries:
A Meta-Analysis and Meta-Regression Analysis. Nord. Stud. Alcohol Drugs2017, 32, 7–20. [CrossRef]
181. Bhasin, S.; Hatfield, D.L.; Hoffman, J.R.; Kraemer, W.J.; Labotz, M.; Phillips, S.M.; Ratamess, N.A. Anabolic-Androgenic Steroid
Use in Sports, Health, and Society. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.2021, 53, 1778–1794. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
182. Young, J. Doping with testosterone and androgenic/anabolic steroids: Impact on health, screening tools and medical care. Ann.
Endocrinol. 2023, 84, 401–405. [CrossRef]
183. Mauss, D.; Li, J.; Schmidt, B.; Angerer, P .; Jarczok, M.N. Measuring allostatic load in the workforce: A systematic review.Ind.
Health 2015, 53, 5–20. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.