THEORETICAL REVIEW
An active inference account of protective behaviours
during the COVID-19 pandemic
Hugo Bottemanne1,2,3 & Karl J. Friston 4
Accepted: 22 August 2021
# The Psychonomic Society, Inc. 2021
Abstract
Newly emerging infectious diseases, such as the coronavirus (COVID-19), create new challenges for public healthcare systems.
Before effective treatments, countering the spread of these infections depends on mitigating, protective behaviours such as social
distancing, respecting lockdown, wearing masks, frequent handwashing, travel restrictions, and vaccine acceptance. Previous
work has shown that the enacting protective behaviours depends on beliefs about individual vulnerability, threat severity, and
one’s ability to engage in such protective actions. However, little is known about the genesis of these beliefs in response to an
infectious disease epidemic, and the cognitive mechanisms that may link these beliefs to decision making. Active inference (AI)
is a recent approach to behavioural modelling that integrates embodied perception, action, belief updating, and decision making.
This approach provides a framework to understand the behaviour of agents in situations that require planning under uncertainty. It
assumes that the brain infers the hidden states that cause sensations, predicts the perceptual feedback produced by adaptive
actions, and chooses actions that minimize expected surprise in the future. In this paper, we present a computational account
describing how individuals update their beliefs about the risks and thereby commit to protective behaviours. We show how
perceived risks, beliefs about future states, sensory uncertainty, and outcomes under each policy can determine individual
protective behaviours. We suggest that these mechanisms are crucial to assess how individuals cope with uncertainty during a
pandemic, and we show the interest of these new perspectives for public health policies.
Keywords Active inference . Bayesian inference . Coronavirus . Protection motivation theory . Health belief model . Pandemic
Introduction
Emerging infectious diseases, such as COVID-19, create new
challenges for public healthcare systems. Without a treatment,
countering the spread of these diseases depends largely on pro-
tective behaviours on the part ofindividuals and groups, such as
social distancing, respecting quarantine, lockdown, wearing
masks, frequent handwashing, travel restrictions, and vaccine
acceptance (Steven et al., 2020; Mizumoto & Chowell, 2020;
Kretzschmar et al., 2020; Kissler et al., 2020; Friston et al.,
2020; Aleta et al., 2020). These individual and social measures
can reduce transmission rates, and subsequently alter mortality
rates and the number of active cases (Jefferson et al., 2009;
Hayward et al., 2020). Mathematical modelling and analysis of
individual behaviour at the population scale during previous ep-
idemics suggests that the degree to which protective behaviours
are enacted, especially social distancing, effectively predicts the
timing, and course of global disease trajectories (Brockmann &
Helbing,2013). Conversely, the inferred prevalence of the virus
and accompanying fear predicts behaviour on a population-level
( F a s te ta l . ,2015). This straightforward observation has a pro-
found implication; namely, that of a circular causality, in which
protective behaviours modulate transmission and spread of infec-
tion, while the prevalence of infection in turn induces protective
behaviours (Friston et al.,2020; Kassa & Ouhinou,2015;C h e r i f
et al., 2016).
Previous work suggests that committing to protective behav-
iours depends on perceived risks (i.e., beliefs about individual
* Hugo Bottemanne
hugo.bottemanne@gmail.com
1 Institut du Cerveau - Paris Brain Institute (ICM), UMR 7225/
UMR_S 1127, Sorbonne University/CNRS/INSERM, Paris, France
2 Department of Psychiatry, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Assistance
Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France
3 Sorbonne University, Department of Philosophy, SND Research
Unit, UMR 8011/CNRS, Paris, France
4 Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Neuroimaging, Institute of
Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13415-021-00947-0
/ Published online: 15 October 2021
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2021) 21:1117–1129
vulnerability and threat severity)a n do nt h ee s t i m a t e da v a i l a b i l i t y
and efficacy of protective actions (i.e., beliefs about the efficacy
of the response and about people ’s ability to engage in such
protective actions) (Webster et al., 2020; Williams et al., 2015;
Teasdale et al., 2014). These models include situations where
individuals believe protective behaviours are effective but are
not able to enact them (e.g., wanting a mask but not having
one, or wanting to social dista nce but being stuck in prison).
They assume that if a person believes that the infection can be
prevented, that infection can be avoided with protective behav-
iour, and that they have the means to perform those behaviours,
then this person is more likely to perform protective behaviours
(Xiao et al., 2016; Sesagiri Raamkumar et al., 2020;H ue ta l . ,
2017). During a pandemic, information from several sources,
such as media, government, and interpersonal relationships, can
increase awareness of the risks associated with the disease and
whether preventive measures should be adopted (Lin et al.,
2020). However, little is known about the genesis of these beliefs
in responses to an epidemic and about the cognitive mechanisms
that may link these beliefs to decision-making and action. In
order to develop sanitary strategies, it may be useful to gain better
understanding of the mechanisms that define the association be-
tween perceived risk and protective behaviour.
The active inference frameworkis a novel approach to behav-
ioural modelling that integrates embodied perception and action,
belief updating, and decision making (Friston et al., 2016;
Friston,2020). It addresses the problem of inferring (unobserved
or hidden) states of the world, learning the statistical structure of
the world, and acting in an appropriate manner based on a set of
preferred outcomes and probabilistic beliefs about an uncertain
and changing environment (Friston et al.,2016). Active inference
casts action, perception, and cognition as minimizing quantities
called variational and expected free-energy. The former mini-
mizes the divergence between predicted and observed sensory
outcomes and the latter minimizes the divergence between pre-
ferred and observed sensory outcomes of actions — based on a
model of how sensory data are generated under distinct plausible
behaviours (Friston et al.,2006). According to active inference,
the brain deploys a form of (variational or Bayesian) inference to
infer the unobserved causes of its sensory data, and to select
action sequences (policies) th at actively change the world to
bring about expected or preferred sensory outcomes (Friston
et al., 2006). In other words, action and perception work hand-
in-hand to minimise free-energy or to get the agent as close as
possible to its preferred sensations.
Active inference provides a formal framework to model
how agents update their probabilistic models of the world by
collecting sensory data that are generated by the consequences
of action. It thereby provides a mathematical description of the
cognitive and behavioural adaptation of a biological agent to
its environment (Friston, 2013; Ramstead et al., 2018;
Constant et al., 2018), and a framework for studying the be-
haviour of individuals and groups in situations that require
decision making under uncertainty (Friston et al., 2016).
This approach is thus valuable for understanding how beliefs
determine individual and collective behavior during an unex-
pected phenomenon such as a pandemic. In this paper, we
present a computational account from the AI principles de-
scribing how individuals update their beliefs about the risks
and thereby commit to protective behaviours. We show how
perceived risks, beliefs about future states, sensory uncertain-
ty, and outcomes under each policy can determine individual
protective behaviours. We suggest that these mechanisms are
crucial to assess how individuals cope with uncertainty during
a pandemic, and we describe the interest of these new perspec-
tives for public health policies.
Active inference in the brain?
In the cognitive neurosciences, active inference provides a
formal framework for understanding the choice behaviour of
individuals under uncertainty. This theory proposes that the
dynamics of the brain minimize variational and expected free-
energy (Friston et al., 2006). In information theory, free-
energy provides an upper bound on self-information (a formal
measure of surprise) where expected surprise is known as
entropy or uncertainty (see Technical terms for a detailed ex-
planation of terms). Cruciall y, minimizing free-energy is
equivalent to maximizing Bayesian model evidence, i.e., the
probability of sensory exchanges with the environment under
a model of how those sensations are caused (Friston, 2010).
Accordingly, the brain maintains an internal representation of
all the relevant statistical variables in the environment. This
representation rests on a probability distribution over hidden
states— and the observable consequences generated by those
variables; such (probabilistic) models are called generative
models because they represent the causal factors that generate
sensory data. Based on sensory observations, the brain can
update its representations, with an algorithmic process equiv-
alent to an approximate form of Bayesian inference about the
(hidden) state of its environment (Friston et al., 2017). This
inference corresponds to minimising free energy or
maximising the evidence for the generative model (see Fig.
1 for an example of a generative model in AI).
Active inference assumes that perception and action are
two major ways in which free-energy is minimized
(Ramstead et al., 2019). Heuristically, perception makes inter-
nal representations more like the data that the brain acquires.
Reciprocally, action makes the data closer to the preferred
distribution that is represented internally. Action (or policy
selection) involves inference premised on a generative model
that represents the expected sensory consequences of action,
where the sequence of actions that is selected is the one that
best reduces (expected) free-energy. This is sometimes re-
ferred to as planning as inference (Botvinick & Toussaint,
1118 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2021) 21:1117–1129
2012). This notion supposes that the brain is capable of predicting
the perceptual feedback that would be produced by adaptive ac-
tions. It infers the hidden states that cause sensations, and chooses
actions that minimize expected surprise in the future (Friston,
2010). For that purpose, the brain accumulates sensory evidence;
and perception corresponds to updating probabilistic beliefs or
representations about the current state of the world. In action,
rather than inferring the causes of sensory data, the brain infers
actions that are expected make sensory data accord with its pref-
erences about sensory input (i.e., avoid surprises expected in the
future). The value of each policy is then evaluated in terms of its
expected free-energy (i.e., surprise), such that the policy that leads
to the least expected free-energy is the one that is selected.
Behaviour therefore depends on beliefs about future states and
outcomes under each policy. Actions realize these predicted out-
comes, eliciting new evidence from the world (Friston et al.,
2010).
Free-energy minimization has been proposed as an explana-
tion for collective behaviours premised on shared cultural, social,
and trans-personal conventions (Ramstead et al.,2016;C o n s t a n t
et al., 2019). Crucially, these accounts explain collective
(multiagent or ensemble) behaviour in terms of individual actions
premised on a shared generative model. Recall that a generative
model specifies the manner in which typical sensory data are
caused, especially by action. To share a generative model means
to share such sets of expectations. In this way, social conformity
comes from individual inferences premised on a shared model
and from the enactment of those expectations via environment-
modifying actions (Ramstead et al.,2016; Constant et al.,2019).
This computational approach is thus able to describe the way in
which individual beliefs determine individual behavior, jointly
using knowledge from neuroscience and social psychology. But
it is also able to describe how individual beliefs determine collec-
tive behavior, and gradually fo rm collective beliefs. During a
pandemic, these perspectives thus offer the possibility of better
understanding the interaction between the information transmitted
within the population, the beliefs of individuals about the pan-
demic, the uncertainty caused by this unexpected phenomenon,
and the actions taken to protect themselves against the virus (aka,
the protective behaviours).
How to protect yourself during an outbreak?
Pandemics are massive generators of uncertainty. Infectious
diseases are generally perceived as less controllable than
chronic diseases, such as diabetes, cancer, or heart disease
(Kasperson et al., 1988). When facing an epidemic, individ-
uals appraise the characteristics of the threat itself, and their
ability to act against that threat (Nields, 2020). First, the threat
is generally assessed in terms of dangerousness. Second, the
predicted effectiveness of protective strategies and the per-
ceived vulnerability to infection each modulate the salience
of the threat. Proportional to threat salience, one of the central
emotional responses to a pandemic is fear (Person et al., 2004;
Chang et al., 2004;D e p o u xe ta l . ,2020; Leung et al., 2005). In
Fig. 1 Example of a generative model in AI (Active Inference). A
generative model is a probabilistic specification of how outcomes are
caused. Usually, the model is expressed in terms of a likelihood (the
probability of consequences give n causes) and priors over causes.
Examples of these probability distributions are provided in the green
boxes. Bayesian model inversion refers to the inverse mapping from
consequences to causes; i.e. estimating the hidden states that cause
outcomes. In approximate Bayesian inference, one specifies the form of
an approximate posterior distribution (blue box) with a specified
functional form— that is chosen to make model inversion tractable. Left
panel: these equations (in the green boxes) specify the generative model:
the likelihood is specified by a matrix A. The elements of A encode the
probability of each outcome for each hidden state. Cat means a
categorical probability distribution. The priors include probabilistic
transitions (in B matrices) among hidden states that can depend upon
actions, which are determined by policies (i.e., sequences of actions
denoted by π). The key aspect of this generative model is that policies
are more probable a priori if they minimize the expected free energy G,
which depends upon prior preferences about outcomes or costs (encoded
by C). Finally, the vector D specifies prior beliefs about the initial state.
This completes the specification of the model in terms of parameters that
constitute A, B, C, and D. Right panel: the accompanying generative
model shown as a Bayesian dependency graph: this Bayesian graph
depicts the conditional dependencies among hidden states and how they
cause outcomes. Open circles are random variables (hidden states and
policies), while filled circles denote observable outcomes. Squares
indicate fixed or known variables, such as the model parameters (See
Friston, Parr, De Vries (2017) for a detailed explanation of the variables
and mathematics).
1119Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2021) 21:1117–1129
the context of pandemic, people generate a number of beliefs
about the risk of infection given large amounts of available,
but ambiguous, evidence (Lau et al., 2006; Lau et al., 2007).
These evidence come from local sources that are communi-
cated through personal connections, and global sources that
depend on extrinsic factors like the media (Xiao et al., 2016;
Sesagiri Raamkumar et al., 2020; Funk et al., 2010).
According to these sources, people update beliefs about the
chances of being infected, the seriousness of the disease, the
efficacy and availability of protective actions, and their ability
to commit to such protective actions (Rogers, 1975; Lau et al.,
2003; de Zwart et al., 2009). Numerous studies have shown
that these beliefs are a major determinant of protective behav-
iours, such as social distancing, mask wearing, and
handwashing, or for the respect afforded to collective rules,
such as mandatory quarantine, lockdown, and travel restric-
tions (Fast et al., 2015; Kassa & Ouhinou, 2015; Cherif et al.,
2016; Webster et al., 2020; Teasdale et al., 2014).
The brain continuously mobilizes beliefs about the severity
of the illness, the probability of infection, the efficacy of the
behaviour to reduce the probability of infection, and finally,
the probability of infection if a new behaviour is adopted.
Individuals could reduce their fear by updating these beliefs.
This conception may be associated with previous models of
perceived risk that distinguish between an “automatic” emo-
tional reaction (a quick and automatic feeling about risk), and
a slower cognitive reaction (a more explicit, calculative ap-
praisal of risk) (Slovic et al., 2004; Dillard et al., 2018). The
first automatic type of response corresponds to belief updating
about the risk, i.e., increased estimated likelihood of risk;
whereas the second, deliberative response may be more asso-
ciated with explicit policies (beliefs about actions), i.e., ap-
praisal of coping strategies. These reactions (updating beliefs
vs. action-oriented decision making) could then be qualified
as adaptive (e.g., following group advice, seeking informa-
tion) or maladaptive behaviours (e.g., denial of risk, avoiding
new information).
Active inference offers an attractive framework for
integrating uncertainty, emotion, belief, and action
(Friston, 2010). Interestingly, most theories based on
active inference associate negative emotions, such as
fear, with inferences about increases in (expected) free-
energy over time, where expected free energy (i.e., sur-
prise) can be read as uncertainty (Hesp et al., 2020). In
this computational formulation of affective inference, a
hierarchical generative model is used in which negative
affective states are modelled as “states of self, ” i.e.,
higher-order states that are inferred on the basis of
lower-order beliefs (i.e., “I must be stressed because I
can't decide what to do next"). The expected free-energy
can then be read as a kind of internal estimate of “how
well I am doing ”—such that increases in expected free-
energy suggests poor performance, i.e., a failure to re-
solve uncertainty or realise preferred sensory states.
Crucially, an agent can evaluate the degree to which it
trusts the expected free-energy that it is generating.
Heuristically, if consistently higher-than-anticipated levels of
expected free-energy are generated under that model, then it is
not a particularly good model. Under this conception, negative
emotional states indicate that the agent ’sa t t e m p t st os e c u r e
preferred outcomes have been consistently thwarted. This en-
tails that the agent ’s
 predictive grip on its world is lacking.
Negative emotion is therefore a sign that the agent is losing its
predictive grip. This model of emotional valence — as hierar-
chical inference about irreducible expected free-energy (i.e.,
uncertainty)— provides an account of how emotional states
nuance posterior beliefs during Bayesian inference (Hesp
et al., 2020). This is usually cast in terms of emotional states
predicting the predictability or precision of lower level
representations.
A loss of certainty about states of affairs — and how
to respond — c o r r e s p o n d st oal o s so fp r e c i s i o ni nr e p r e -
sentations or probabilistic beliefs. Precision is an impor-
tant attribute of probabilistic beliefs and can be thought
of as the opposite of uncertainty (e.g., inverse variance).
In active inference, the precision of a belief has itself to
be inferred, where this inference corresponds to atten-
tion. In other words, affording a representation greater
precision corresponds to attentional selection.
Technically, the precision assigned to various sources
of evidence is a key quantity in Bayesian inference,
ensuring that more reliable sources of evidence contrib-
ute to belief updating.
Beliefs about coping responses are crucial for under-
standing the mechanisms involved in emotional re-
sponses to pandemics (Boer & Seydel, 1996). Beliefs
about threat depend on evaluating the state of the envi-
ronment and observing what happens to individuals,
whereas beliefs about coping are compelled by the per-
ceived response efficacy (the belief that the recommend-
ed behaviour will be protective) and one ’so w ns e l f -
efficacy (the ability to perform the recommended behav-
iour). Individuals evaluate w hether a protective action
will mitigate the threat (response efficacy), their level
of confidence in being able to carry that action out
(self-efficacy), and also the cost of this protective ac-
tion. Beliefs about coping responses encompass beliefs
about the threat, because if an individual is convinced
that they could protect themselves from risks, this re-
duces fear (and uncertainty) associated with the threat.
Active inference allows us to integrate beliefs about the
risk (threat appraisal), beli efs about action (coping ap-
praisal), and decision making. It suggests that the brain
could minimize free-energy (i.e., beliefs about high vul-
nerability and beliefs about hi gh severity) by fulfilling
1120 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2021) 21:1117–1129
its prediction about the availably of protective actions,
and predictions about the ability to engage in such pro-
tective actions.
Towards an active inference account
of protective behaviour
This model of active inference is consistent with previous
theories associating health beliefs and protective behaviours.
Traditionally, two competing theories of health-protective be-
haviour are proposed to explain the link between beliefs and
health actions: the health belief model (HBM) and the protec-
tion motivation theory (PMT) (Rogers, 1975; Janz & Becker,
1984). They are value-expectancy theories, based on the as-
sumptions that people want to avoid illness and believe that
behaviours will prevent illness. They describe the cognitive
processes that mediate behaviour in the face of a threat and
suppose that the motivation to protect oneself is the proximal
determinant of these behaviours (Maddux & Rogers, 1983).
These theories have been applied extensively in numerous
frameworks in medicine, nutrition, or cybersecurity, to predict
various health-related behaviours (Milne et al., 2000). The
health belief model (HBM) assumes that health behaviour
depends on the perceived threat, the perceived benefits of
health behaviour, and the perceived cost of health behaviour,
comprising economic, social, and psychological costs, such as
anxiety, shame, or discomfort (Rosenstock, 1974;B e c k e r
et al., 1977). Protection motivation theory (PMT) supports
HBM theory by incorporating several additional factors. It
refines these assumptions and includes beliefs about self-
efficacy as well as the conviction that one can successfully
execute the behaviour required to produce predicted outcomes
(Rogers, 1975;B a n d u r a ,1997).
PMT suggests that people ’s motivation to engage in pre-
cautionary actions is influenced by two major factors: threat
appraisal and coping appraisal (Rogers, 1983). Threat apprais-
al encompasses beliefs about vulnerability, a subjective esti-
mate of the chances of contracting a disease (how likely one is
to get the illness), and beliefs about the severity of a disease
(how serious the illness is). Coping appraisal involves beliefs
about the efficacy of the response, protective actions that are
available, and beliefs about self-efficacy; that is, one ’s ability
to effectively engage in such protective actions (Rogers,
1975). PMT thus includes the beliefs of individuals regarding
their ability to respond to the threat, and about the efficacy of
this response to that threat (Maddux & Rogers, 1983).
Explicitly, these beliefs cove r the self-vulnerability ( “my
chances of getting Covid-19 are high ”), the severity of the
pathogen (“pneumonia resulting from coronavirus is a serious
condition”), the perceived benefits ( “handwashing could re-
duce the risk of contracting COVID-19 ”), but also the cost
involved in carrying out that behaviour ( “social distancing
will make me sad ”).
These beliefs can be represented as a hierarchy like the one
we proposed in our model of active inference. In this hierar-
chy, each belief is embedded in a network of causal depen-
dencies: beliefs about the ability of individuals to protect
themselves influence beliefs about individual vulnerability
or about the dangerousness of a pathogen. If you believe that
potential infection will only have mild effects on you, then the
perceived efficacy of coping strategies is reduced (because
they reduce an already low risk). If you believe that coping
strategies are effective, then your perceived potential risk of
infection must be low. This dependence ensures that one ’s
motivation to remain healthy can influence coping appraisal,
predicted vulnerability, and perceived severity, but also per-
ceived benefits and predicted costs. In other words, the moti-
vation to realize protective actions may sensitize individuals
to threat signals, while a lack of motivation may desensitize
individuals to such signals. On the other hand, the conse-
quences of action could influence the strength of protective
motivations. If, after realizing action, perceived costs were
higher than perceived benefits, the perceived threat would be
expected to increase. In turn, the perceived threat could
strengthen motivation to enact protective behaviours, leading
to a self-reinforcing feedback loop.
These theories have been successfully applied to under-
st
and the evolution of behaviour during past outbreaks of se-
vere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS) (Jiang
et al., 2009; Tang & Wong, 2005; Tang & Wong, 2003),
influenza A virus subtype H1N1 (H1N1) (Cowling et al.,
2010;S h a r i f i r a de ta l . ,2014;d eZ w a r te ta l . , 2010), and
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS-CoV) (Alqahtani
et al., 2017;J a n ge ta l . ,2020). In the 2009 H1N1 outbreak, the
belief that the virus could be spread by indirect contact was
directly associated with a greater use of hygienic measures
and social distancing (Cowling et al., 2010). This belief in-
creased the perceived vulnerability of an individual, but also
indirectly increased the predicted response efficacy and self-
efficacy. During the early stages of the COVID-2019 pandem-
ic, a study conducted in South Korea showed that the enact-
ment of precautionary behaviours was strongly associated
with perceived risks, and with beliefs about the efficacy of
those behaviour (Lee & You, 2020). The majority of respon-
dents (51.3%) reported that their perceived risk of infection
was “neither high nor low”; 48.6% reported that they believed
that the severity of illness would be “high”; 19.9% reported
that they believed it would be “very high. ” In this sample,
41.5% were avoiding crowded places, 50% reported cancel-
ling social events, 63.2% reported always wearing a facial
mask, and 67.8% reported always practicing hand washing.
Interestingly, the average perceived severity score was higher
than perceived vulnerability. Another study that was conduct-
ed in Iran showed that both threat appraisal and coping
1121Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2021) 21:1117–1129
appraisal predicted protective behaviour (Barati et al., 2020).
These findings suggest that, whether for old epidemics or for
the current coronavirus crisis, a high perceived risk and a good
coping appraisal are strongly associated with social response.
Adaptive and maladaptive behaviours
as free-energy minimization
In our active inference model, optimal behaviour entails ac-
tions that resolve uncertainty and achieve preferred, unsurpris-
ing outcomes. These behaviours can be specified in terms of
policies that minimize the free-energy expected when pursu-
ing them (Friston et al., 2016; Friston et al., 2010). If the brain
seeks to minimize free-energy, it can select protective behav-
iours, which fulfil predictions about the threat and about cop-
ing responses. In short, the brain chooses policies that mini-
mize uncertainty about future outcomes, by minimizing the
free-energy expected following action. Crucially, expected
free-energy can be decomposed into epistemic and pragmatic
terms that can be alternatively expressed in terms of risk and
ambiguity.
Here, risk scores the difference between predicted and pre-
ferred outcomes, where preferred outcomes and those that are
least surprising a priori (e.g., avoiding infection). Ambiguity
reflects the uncertainty about observations, given their causes.
Therefore, choosing policies to minimise expected free-
energy maximizes preferred outcomes while, at the same time,
avoiding ambiguous situations, such as “being in the dark ”
(i.e., this has the effect of driving the agent to seek the most
salient or informative observations). These two aspects of ex-
pected free-energy can be regarded as uncertainty of a specific
and nonspecific sort that pertain to specific prior expectations
about preferences (i.e., risk) and a generic ability to infer states
of the world (i.e., ambiguity). Mathematically, risk corre-
sponds to the expected “cost” of a policy.
On this account, the outcomes of protective behaviours
confirm beliefs about the ability of coping to achieve preferred
outcomes and reduce uncertainty. Reduction of negative affect
(e.g., fear) via free-energy minimization will reinforce protec-
tive behaviour in the future (Friston et al., 2010). The realiza-
tion of protective behaviours thus forms a loop of belief-
confirmation and epistemic habits. This account could explain
why protracted experience of threat reduces perceived risk, in
the sense that fulfilment of predictions about coping strategies
reduces uncertainty about policies, independently of some
variation in the threat itself (Savadori et al., 1998).
Protection motivation arises when beliefs about response effi-
cacy and self-efficacy outweigh cost, and when protective
actions effectively fulfil predictions about severity and vulner-
ability. Dovetailing with this account, studies performed dur-
ing SARS epidemics show that the perceived response effica-
cy and self-efficacy were strongly associated with protection
behaviours (Jiang et al., 2009; Tang & Wong, 2005;T a n g&
Wong, 2003). During the COVID-19 pandemic, results from a
national cross-sectional onlin e survey of 1420 Australian
adults in March 2020 show that protection behaviours were
associated with a higher rating of perceived effectiveness of
behaviours and higher levels of perceived ability to adopt
social distancing strategies (Seale et al., 2020). This associa-
tion between precautionary behaviours, perceived severity
and perceived self-efficacy was found in a study that investi-
gates the impact of online information during the pandemic
(Farooq et al., 2020).
However, to minimize free-energy, the brain can adopt
other strategies, especially when there are no plausible coping
policies. These strategies encompass maladaptive behaviour,
such as avoidance, or maladaptive beliefs, such as denial or
wishful thinking (Conner & Norman, 2005;W i t t e&A l l e n ,
2000). In these cases, individuals entertain internal actions or
policies (e.g., attentional mechanisms) that control emotions
rather than limiting risks — which also minimizes free-energy,
albeit maladaptively if the resulting beliefs are not attuned to
the real risks present in the environment (Loewenstein et al.,
2001). In other words, by changing the confidence or preci-
sion afforded certain beliefs, the brain can effectively ignore
sources of evidence, leading to a decrease in the perceived
threat (e.g., ignoring cues that would otherwise suggests the
situation is dangerous). These maladaptive behaviours and
beliefs allow together individuals to avoid or reduce the threat,
and therefore maintain a low free-energy. High perceived risk
will elicit protective behaviour only when the individual has
sufficient confidence about coping efficacy. If there is high
uncertainty about these coping strategies, perceived risk may
produce a greater level of maladaptive responses.
In the early phase of the outbreak, the discrepancy between
predictions and sensed outcomes will largely increase free-
energy, producing uncertainty and fear (Liao et al., 2014;
Courtney et al., 2020). Faced with this uncertainty, the choices
of
policies are limited. The need to reduce uncertainty may
encourage individuals to ignore (i.e., reduce the precision of)
evidence of risk, resulting in some reassuring underestimation
of the severity of the epidemic (Dolinski et al., 2020). These
attenuated or biased beliefs can be understood as nuancing the
risk (and ambiguity) of the world. In effect, this kind of —
possibly some personal — denial is a Bayes-optimal response
to a world that cannot be predicted or explained. This phe-
nomenon could explain the discrepancy between sensory ev-
idence and people ’s cognitive representations of risk at the
beginning of COVID-19 epidemic (Savadori et al., 1998;
Loewenstein et al., 2001; Raude et al., 2020). In February
and the beginning of March, a large proportion of the
European public did not consider the novel coronavirus to
be a significant threat— sometimes attributed to an unwarrant-
ed exceptionalism (i.e., “This could not possibly happen to
us”)( B e t s c h ,2020). This collective denial has been difficult
1122 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2021) 21:1117–1129
to understand, given the accelerating death count in China,
Italy, and France (Balogun, 2020). During this period, many
Europeans developed maladaptive beliefs, such as “the virus
is like influenza,”“it only affects old people, ”or “it will never
come through the border. ”In the same way, while epidemiol-
ogists pointed out risks of infection ranging from 11% to 19%
during the 2009 H1N1 outbreak, the majority of people be-
lieved that they were unlikely to get infected and to infect
others (Xu & Peng, 2015), and felt that the pandemic did not
affect their daily habits (Lau et al., 2009).
This active inference principle may give some insights
about the production of conspiracy beliefs during COVID-
19 pandemic (such as denial of the existence of the virus or
denial of its dangerousness) and the ability to adopt preventive
and protective behaviours. In front of high uncertainty, indi-
viduals can accumulate information transmitted by peers, me-
dias, and social networks about the pandemic, but their action
will remain limited to these information channels. They will
not be able to go to Wuhan to investigate the site of the first
contaminations, question scientists to hear their conclusions,
or even find scientific evidence about this origin on their own:
carrying out actions (internet research, reading the press, con-
versation with peers) remains associated with a high degree of
uncertainty. Alternatively, conspiracy beliefs propose an ex-
planation of these ambiguous phenomenons for individual
and may participate to reduce this uncertainty. Studies showed
that conspiracy theorists are less likely to adopt normative
preventive behaviours when they perceive a significant risk
for themselves (Allington et al., 2020;E a r n s h a we ta l . ,2020;
Imhoff & Lamberty, 2020). This effect could be linked to the
lack of need for these subjects to reduce uncertainty by carry-
ing out actions: uncertainty is already sufficiently minimized
by conspiracy beliefs, and protective actions become useless.
Linked to this hypothesis, studies also suggest that individuals
who present conspiratorial beliefs are less likely to adhere to
vaccination (Morgan & Laland, 2012). This hypothesis ex-
plains why conspiracy beliefs not involving the dangerous-
ness of the virus (e.g., conspiracy beliefs about the origin of
the virus) restrain the observance of protective measures.
These conspiracy beliefs could minimize uncertainty, reduc-
ing the need for action. In the competition between generating
beliefs to better understand the world, and taking action to
acquire more precise information about the world, conspiracy
beliefs thus fulfill their role.
Limits and theoretical perspectives
The computational hypotheses that we have detailed deserve
to be compared with alternative theories concerning protective
behaviours. As we described earlier, the two most used theo-
ries in social psychology and public health are health belief
model (HBM) and protectio n motivation theory (PMT)
(Rogers, 1975; Janz & Becker, 1984). These models assume
that health behaviour depends on threat and coping appraisals,
encompassing beliefs about vulnerability, severity, efficacy of
the response, and self-efficacy (Cowling et al., 2010 ;
Sharifirad et al., 2014; de Zwart et al., 2010). In this paper,
we have shown how the principles of active inference may
enlighten the HBM and PMT mechanisms and bring new
ways of understanding experimental results in social
psychology.
Our theory thus links the perceived level of the threat to the
confidence (i.e., precision afforded) in the efficacy of coping
strategies. If the level of the threat is believed to be too high,
and the precision of expected outcomes from protective poli-
cies is believed to be too low, the threat itself could then
inhibit the protective action. This phenomenon is particularly
apparent in the context of screenings for serious diseases, such
as cancer or HIV (McCaskill, 2006). Screening tools then
provide information on the risk, but if the risk is confirmed,
the individual knows that the possibility of reducing risk is
low. In other words, there is a balance between reducing the
uncertainty of risk and the risk of increasing uncertainty.
Avoidance and denial are then a quick and effective way to
resolve uncertainty. By not performing the screening test, the
individual protects himself from the possibility of bad news.
The fear of death and physical pain — as a result of being
diagnosed with cancer or HIV — can lead to denial and hinder
screening behaviours.
Otherwise, unlike HBM and PMT models which assume
that attitudes (and actions) are determined by the conjunction
of evidence supporting behaviour and beliefs about the use-
fulness of those behaviours, our theory emphasizes the prima-
cy of action and uncertainty minimization. This account
agrees with studies suggesting that individuals first develop
attitudes and then find evidence to support those attitudes
(Dong 2008). In this setting, an individual wears a protective
mask if this action minimizes uncertainty, and beliefs about
the ability of the mask to protect against the virus (or the
usefulness of protection against the virus) are directly associ-
ated with this tendency to minimize uncertainty. This mecha-
nism coming from action to beliefs also may protect beliefs
that are incompatible with acquired sensory evidence and em-
phasizes the primacy of action over beliefs generation.
Moreover, extensions of active inference to social phenom-
ena may shed light onto individual reactions to the uncertainty
of the pandemic. Facing a pandemic, individuals coordinate
and cooperate with each other, supporting group decisions
based on shared goals. Beliefs about risks and protective ac-
tions are a crucial part of the shared expectations— to which an
individual or group implicitly appeals when they choose a
behavioural policy. Individuals acquire these expectations
through shared experiences in a social or epistemic communi-
ty; individual behaviour is mainly shaped by the social sub-
groups which embrace their social identities (Turner et al.,
1123Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2021) 21:1117–1129
1987). These shared expectations could explain social confor-
mity in protective behaviours, by generating automatic behav-
ioural responses in accordance with preferences, values, and
goals that are features of an epistemic community (Van
Assche et al., 2020). For the group, the relevance of protective
actions therefore may have been associated with beliefs about
generalised individuals vulnerability, and in return, the display
of protective actions in the group may sensitize individuals to
threat signals.
However, others theoretical frameworks in cognitive sci-
ences may offer some understandings of the emergence of
adaptive and maladaptive behaviours toward health threats
(Bavel et al., 2020; Bonell et al., 2020). For example, psycho-
logical theories focusing on individual psychological charac-
teristics are particularly interesting for explaining protective
behaviour in the population. Studies have shown that individ-
uals with reduced ability to think about the future are more
likely to engage in healthy behaviour when positive outcomes
are immediate, and negative outcomes are seen as only having
effects on the long term (Orbell et al., 2004). Alternatively,
individuals with a greater ability to think about and project
themselves into the future are more likely to undertake health
behaviours when immediate outcomes are negative, and long-
term outcomes are positive (Orbell et al., 2004). These results
can explain behaviours during the pandemic and are difficult
to reconcile with the principles of active inference.
Otherwise, studies have shown that compliance to protec-
tive behaviour result from people ’s capacity to obey the rules,
opportunity to break rules, and people ’s intrinsic motivations,
comprising moral support and social norms (Wolf et al., 2020;
Yamamoto et al., 2021). These individual psychological char-
acteristics are only partially taken into account in the princi-
ples of active inference. For example, individuals share group
membership with other agents during the pandemic: in this
setting, protective behaviour s may become a socially ap-
proved norm, and social conformity is an adaptive strategy
to cope with this kind of uncertain environmental situation
(Morgan & Laland, 2012;C r u w y se ta l . ,2020). This cognitive
mechanism includes the tendency towards increased appraisal
of information from socially relevant agents (e.g., people who
elicit epistemic trust) and to imitate these agents (Laland,
2018;D o n g ,2008). Moreover, some altruistic behaviour are
observed for individuals who have low personal risk (e.g.,
younger age, without preexis ting medical conditions) but
could still directly or indirectly transmit the virus to high-
risk people (Galang et al., 2021;W a l k e r ,2021). These indi-
viduals adopt (and maintain) nonpharmaceutical mitigation
strategies to protect others, primarily their loved ones, but
sometimes also society as a whole (Walker, 2021;P e t r o c c h i
et al., 2021). The principles of active inference do not
yet allow us to understand these altruistic behaviours facing
infectious agents, and these behaviours should be explored by
further studies.
Other lines of evidence also suggest that maladaptive be-
haviours can carry reward, such as intrinsic pleasure and so-
cial approval, which can contribute to maintain maladaptive
behaviour (Conner & Norman, 2005). This account is crucial
to understand the factors that determine whether people accept
or reject control or protection measures (Reicher & Stott,
2020). Indeed, some alternative beliefs (e.g., belief that the
virus is safe) or certain nonnormative behaviours (e.g., to de-
cline wearing a mask against the virus) can reinforce the self-
esteem of individuals. This rewarding effect has been associ-
ated with the individual and group self-esteem studied in psy-
chology. In this setting, generating maladaptive beliefs can
give the feeling of holding a truth, and thus increases the
feeling of being special (Cichocka et al., 2016;G o l e cd e
Zavala & Federico, 2018). This highlights a complicated in-
terplay between prior preferences (that determine risk) and the
need for clarity (that resolves ambiguity) when selecting a
course of action (Constant et al., 2018;R
a m s t e a de ta l . ,
2016;C o n s t a n te ta l . ,2019; Veissière et al., 2020).
Moreover, perceived risks and protective behaviours may
be linked with other cognitive biases, such as proportionality
bias and optimism bias (Bottemanne et al., 2020).
Proportionality bias designates the tendency to modify beliefs
and behaviours according to the importance of a phenomenon.
For example, the increasing severity of a phenomenon, such
as Sars-CoV2 infection, is generally associated to the number
of beliefs theories about this phenomenon. This bias implies
that major events must be explained by major causes and be
prevented by major measures. According to this principle, the
propensity to adopt protective behaviours may be directly as-
sociated with the perceived importance of the pandemic.
Optimism bias designates the tendency to update more beliefs
after positive information, rather than negative ones (Sharot,
2011; Sharot & Garrett, 2016). As we have seen, a large pro-
portion of individuals did not consider the novel coronavirus
to be a significant threat at the beginning of the pandemic
(Betsch, 2020), given the accelerating deaths count in China
and Europe (Balogun, 2020). This optimism bias has been
proposed to explain the discrepancy between sensory evi-
dence and people ’s cognitive representations of risk at the
beginning of COVID-19 epidemic (Savadori et al., 1998;
Loewenstein et al., 2001; Raude et al., 2020). However, we
have suggested that this cognitive bias may be associated with
uncertainty minimization: the limited choices of policies to
reduce uncertainty may encourage individuals to ignore (i.e.,
reduce the precision of) evi dence of risk, resulting in a
reassuring underestimation of the severity of the pandemic
(Dolinski et al., 2020). These optimistic biased beliefs can
be understood as shading the risk (and ambiguity) of the
world. Taken together, these alternative hypotheses are not
fully explain by the principles of active inference and deserve
to be considered as alternative cognitive theories for protective
behaviours during a pandemic.
1124 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2021) 21:1117–1129
From theory to guidelines for global health
policies
Despite its limits, active inference may furnish some perspec-
tives on developing guidelines for global health strategies. In
response to the COVID-19 pandemic, governments across the
world have adopted measures to slow the spread of the virus
such as lockdown and vaccine. The behavioural response of
individuals during epidemic is one of the major variables to
limit the spread and to predict the effects of societal or insti-
tutional responses to the epidemic (Friston et al., 2020;
Durham & Casman, 2012). Collective measures targeting
these behavioural responses are critical to decrease mortality
and reduce the overburdening of healthcare systems (Leung
et al., 2009). For example, vaccine hesitancy became a major
political and health issue, limiting or slowing the protection of
populations (Khubchandani & Macias, 2021).
As we have seen, individuals coordinate and cooperate
with each other, supporting group decisions based on shared
goals regarding the pandemic. Beliefs about risks and protec-
tive actions are a crucial part of these shared expectations;
individuals acquire these expectations through shared experi-
ence in an epistemic community (Turner et al., 1987). These
latter could explain social conformity in protection behaviour,
by generating behavioural responses in accordance with pref-
erences, values, and goals that are specific to the epistemic
community (Van Assche et al., 2020). The relevance of pro-
tective actions therefore may have been associated with be-
liefs about generalised individual vulnerability, and in return,
the display of protective actions in the group may sensitize
individuals to threat those signals.
Later, protective behaviour may be characterised by envi-
ronmental cues that denote specific actions to be accom-
plished, given that certain cues are perceived (Constant
et al., 2019). The idea here is that observing our peers in-
creases the likelihood that we will engage in the same behav-
iour. If this is correct, governments should promote the spread
of positive appraisals of public protective behaviour (e.g., the
obligation to wear a mask in public places) to produce “epi-
stemic pressure” leading to behavioural conformity (Betsch,
2020; Bavel et al., 2020). In line with this view, a study per-
formed during the spread of COVID-19 revealed that promot-
ing collectivism may be a way to increase engagement in
protection behaviours (Biddlestone et al., 2020).
Moreover, if action fulfils predictions based on perceptual
inference, and if the brain favours actions that minimize ex-
pected free-energy, then the prediction of the effectiveness of
the action — in relation to risk and ambiguity — is crucial.
Therefore, the major role of health policies and communica-
tion should be to increase the precision of various beliefs, i.e.,
resolve uncertainty about the expected outcomes associated
with protective behaviour. Namely, such beliefs have to un-
derwrite confidence about coping outcomes. Accordingly, a
meta-analysis showed that both threat and coping appraisals
were significantly associated with protective behaviour, but
this association was stronger for coping appraisal than threat
appraisal, and especially for self-efficacy (Milne et al., 2000).
Alternatively, self-efficacy and response efficacy were nega-
tively correlated with maladaptive behaviour which inhibits
protection motivation.
These active inference principles may also give some in-
sights about vaccine hesitancy. Vaccine acceptance and hesi-
tancy depend mainly on beliefs about the risk of the virus, and
beliefs about the vaccination including: safety, harmlessness,
efficacy of vaccination, but also confidence in the practitioner
providing it, in the pharmaceutical laboratory producing it,
and more generally in the health system (Xantus et al.,
2021). The content of these beliefs (e.g., the low risk of
contracting the disease, and the high risk associated with vac-
cination) contribute to a noncompliance of the government
recommendations. The fight against vaccine hesitation can
take several ways: first, by limiting the generation of maladap-
tive beliefs about the virus, which allow the individual to
directly reduce uncertainty without the necessity to take action
after; second, by limiting the generation of maladaptive beliefs
about the vaccines, which may constitute a brake on the initi-
ation of vaccination (action); finally, by amplifying the per-
ception that vaccination can effectively reduce the risk of con-
tamination, which increasing the capacity of vaccination (ac-
tion) to reduce uncertainty.
In this setting, governments may have to improve their
health message about protective measures and vaccination
(Finset et al., 2020;Y o u s u fe ta l . ,2020; Leung et al., 2020;
Piltch-Loeb et al., 2017).
During COVID-19 outbreak, a study
including 9,000 citizens in Italy dramatically shows that mass-
media communication plays a major role in updating these
beliefs about pandemic (Motta Zanin et al., 2020). It is crucial
for public-health policies to deliver mass health advice, not
only about risk, but especially about the effectiveness of pro-
tective behaviours. The balance between adaptive and mal-
adaptive response toward an infectious disease depends on
the balance between the threat appraisal and the expected risk.
Then, the predicted cost, both economic and cognitive, has to
be presented as low to facilitate these actions. Individual be-
haviours, such as handwashing, mask wearing, social distanc-
ing, and vaccination, must be framed as effective (when they
are found to be effective).
Conclusions
Cognitive and theoretical neuroscience may have something
useful to offer when fighting the COVID-19 outbreak.
Pandemics emerge from interactions between pathogens and
epistemic agents. Collective and individual protective mea-
sures especially require a fundamental shift in human beliefs
1125Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2021) 21:1117–1129
and behaviour. Although we are well aware of the biological
processes involved in the propagation of most pathogens, it is
difficult to model the cognitive and the behavioural processes
of individuals. Insights from the computational and social
neurosciences are then critical to enrich models of public
health intervention strategies.
Active inference offers a unifying framework to understand
how the individuals generate beliefs about risks and commit to
protective actions. It assumes that the brain minimizes expect-
ed free-energy, a proxy for uncertainty. For that, the brain
constantly makes inferences to predict the consequences of
action, and update its beliefs based on what the senses relay
back. With action, the brain actively samples the world to
ensure its predictions become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Protective behaviours, but also maladaptive behaviours, may
furnish a way to reduce this uncertainty. In this work, we
suggest that increasing the perceived efficacy of protective
behaviour, i.e., increasing the precision of beliefs about a con-
sequence of protective action, is a priority for our collective
fight against COVID-19.
This formulation acts as a bridge between theoretical
models of cognition and epidemiological models — and offers
a perspective on the importance of beliefs and believing mech-
anisms in mitigating pandemic. Mathematical formulations of
these cognitive mechanisms could improve the predictive va-
lidity of computational models used in epidemiology, if suit-
ably equipped with behavioural responses. Our brain pos-
sesses a set of prodigious adaptive systems to fight against
ecological threats; it is up to us to understand them, so that
we can improve our defences.
Technical terms
– Generative model: a probabilistic mapping from causes to
observed data. It is typically specified in terms of the
likelihood of getting some data given their causes (i.e.,
hidden states and parameters of a model) and priors over
the states and parameters.
– Bayesian model inversion: Bayesian model inversion re-
fers to the inverse mapping from consequences to causes,
i.e. estimating the hidden states that cause outcomes. In
approximate Bayesian inference, one specifies the form
of an approximate posterior distribution to make inver-
sion analytically tractable.
– Free energy: An information theory measure that bounds
(is greater than) the surprise on sampling some data, un-
der a generative model. Minimising free energy by
changing the approximate posterior provides a simple
and biologically plausible way of inverting a generative
model (a.k.a. belief updating).
– Prior: The probability distribution over the causes of data
that constitute beliefs about those causes prior to
observing the data.The probability distribution over the
causes of data that constitute beliefs about those causes
prior to observing the data.
– Posterior distribution: the probability distribution of
causes (i.e., hidden states and parameters), given some
data; that is, a probabilistic mapping from observed data
(consequences) to causes.
– Surprise: Surprise (a.k.a., surprisal or self information) is
the negative log probability of an outcome. An improba-
ble outcome is therefore surprising. The log probability of
an outcome is also known as Bayesian model evidence
(a.k.a., marginal likelihood).
– Precision: the inverse variance or dispersion of a random
variable. It quantifies the degree of certainty about the
variables (i.e., their predictability).
Acknowledgments The authors thank Maxwell Ramstead, Ryan Smith,
Casper Hesp, Fabien Vinckier, Julie Tang, and Lucie Joly for their in-
valuable help.
Funding This work was conducted under funding for the Wellcome
Centre for Human Neuroimaging (Ref: 088130/Z/09/Z).
Declarations
Conflict of interest The authors have nothing to disclose related to this
work.
References
Aleta, A., Martín-Corral, D., Pastore, Y., Piontti, A., Ajelli, M.,
Litvinova, M., Chinazzi, M., Dean, N. E., Halloran, M. E.,
Longini Jr., I. M., Merler, S., Pentland, A., Vespignani, A., Moro,
E., & Moreno, Y. (2020). Modelling the impact of testing, contact
tracing and household quarantine on second waves of COVID-19.
Nature Human Behaviour, 4 (9), 964–971.
Allington, D., Duffy, B., Wessely, S., Dhavan, N., & Rubin, J. (2020).
Health-protective behaviour, social media usage and conspiracy be-
lief during the COVID-19 public health emergency. Psychological
Medicine, 9,1 –7.
Alqahtani, A. S., Rashid, H., Basyouni, M. H., Alhawassi, T. M.,
BinDhim, N. F. (2017). Public response to MERS-CoV in the
Middle East: iPhone survey in six countries. J o u r n a lo fI n f e c t i o n
and Public Health, 10(5).
Balogun, J. A. (2020). Lessons from the USA Delayed Response to the
COVID-19 Pandemic. African Journal of Reproductive Health,
24(1).
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of Control .W . H .
Freeman.
Barati, M., Bashirian, S., & Jenabi, E. (2020). Factors Associated with
Preventive Behaviours of COVID-19 among Hospital Staff in Iran
in 2020: An Application of the Protection Motivation Theory. The
Journal of Hospital Infection, 0195-6701 (20), 30210–30213.
Bavel, J. J. V., Baicker, K., & Boggio, P. S. (2020). Using social and
behavioural science to support COVID-19 pandemic response.
Nature Human Behaviour, 4 (5).
1126 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2021) 21:1117–1129
Becker, M. H., Maiman, L. A., & Kirscht, J. P. (1977). The Health Belief
Model and prediction of dietary compliance: A field experiment.
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 18 (4), 348–366.
Betsch, C. (2020). How behavioural science data helps mitigate the
COVID-19 crisis. Nature Human Behaviour, 4 (5).
Bottemanne H, Morlaàs O, Schmidt L, & Fossati P. (2020). Coronavirus:
Predictive brain and terror management. Encephale, 46(3S), S107–
S113
Biddlestone, M., Green, R., & Douglas, K. M. (2020). Cultural orienta-
tion, power, belief in conspiracy theories, and intentions to reduce
t h es p r e a do fC O V I D - 1 9 .The British Journal of Social Psychology,
59(3).
Boer, H., & Seydel, E. R. (1996). Protection motivation theory. In M.
Connor & P. Norman (Eds.), Predicting Health Behavior . Open
University Press.
Bonell, C., Michie, S., & Reicher, S. (2020). Harnessing behavioural
science in public health campaigns to maintain “social distancing”
in response to the COVID-19 pandemic: key principles. Journal of
Epidemiology and Community Health, 74 (8).
Bottemanne, H., Morlaàs, O., Fossati, P., & Schmidt, L. (2020). Does the
Coronavirus Epidemic Take Advantage of Human Optimism Bias?
Frontiers in Psychology, 11 , 2001.
Botvinick, M., & Toussaint, M. (2012). Planning as inference. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 16(10), 485–488.
Brockmann, D., & Helbing, D. (2013). The hidden geometry of complex,
network-driven contagion phenomena. Science, 342,1 3 3 7–1342.
Chang, H. J., Huang, N., & Lee, C. H. (2004). The impact of the SARS
epidemic on the utilization of medical services: SARS and the fear
of SARS. American Journal of Public Health, 94 (4).
Cherif, A., Barley, K., & Hurtado, M. (2016). Homo-psychologicus:
Reactionary behavioural aspects of epidemics. Epidemics, 14,4 5 –
53.
Cichocka, A., & Marchlewska, M. (2016). Golec de Zavala A. Does self-
love or self-hate predict conspiracy beliefs? Narcissism, self-esteem,
and the endorsement of conspiracy theories. Social Psychological
and Personality Science, 7 (2), 157–166.
Conner, M., & Norman, P. (2005). Predicting Health Behaviour:
Research and Practice with Social Cognition Models (2nd ed.).
Open University Press.
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., & Veissiere, S. P. L. (2018). A varia-
tional approach to niche construction. Journal of the Royal Society
Interface, 15(141).
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J., Veissière, S. P., & Friston, K. J. (2019).
Regimes of expectations: an active inference model of social con-
formity and human decision making. Frontiers in Psychology, 10 ,
679.
Courtney, E. P., Goldenberg, J. L., & Boyd, P. (2020). The contagion of
mortality: A terror management health model for pandemics. The
British Journal of Social Psychology, 59 (3).
Cowling, B. J., Ng, D. M., & Ip, D. K. (2010). Community psychological
and behavioral responses through the first wave of the 2009 influ-
enza A(H1N1) pandemic in Hong Kong. The Journal of Infectious
Diseases, 202(6).
Cruwys, T., Stevens, M., & Greenaway, K. H. (2020). A social identity
perspective on COVID-19: Health risk is affected by shared group
membership. T h eB r i t i s hJ o u r n a lo fS o c i a lP s y c h o l o g y ,5 9(3).
de Zwart, O., Veldhuijzen, I. K., Elam, G., Aro, A. R., Abraham, T.,
Bishop, G. D., et al. (2009). Perceived threat, risk perception, and
efficacy beliefs related to SARS and other (emerging) infectious
di
seases: results of an international survey. International Journal
of Behavioral Medicine, 16 (1), 30–40.
de Zwart, O., Veldhuijzen, I. K., Richardus, J. H., & Brug, J. (2010).
Monitoring of risk perceptions and correlates of precautionary be-
haviour related to human avian influenza during 2006 - 2007 in the
Netherlands: results of seven consecutive surveys. BMC Infectious
Diseases, 10,1 1 4 .
Depoux, A., Martin, S., & Karafillakis, E. (2020). The pandemic of social
media panic travels faster than the COVID-19 outbreak. Journal of
Travel Medicine, 27(3).
Dillard, J. P., Yang, C., & Li, R. (2018). Self-regulation of emotional
responses to Zika: Spiral of fear. PLoS One, 13 (7).
Dolinski, D., Dolinska, B., & Zmaczynska-Witek, B. (2020). Unrealistic
optimism in the time of coronavirus pandemic: may it help to kill, if
so-whom: disease or the person? Journal of Clinical Medicine, 9(5).
Dong, W. (2008). Beyond SARS: ethnic community organization ’sr o l e
in public health – a Toronto experience. Promotion & Education,
15(4).
Durham, D. P., & Casman, E. A. (2012). Incorporating individual health-
protective decisions into disease transmission models: a mathemat-
ical framework. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 9 (68).
Earnshaw, V. A., Eaton, L. A., Kalichman, S. C., Brousseau, N. M., Hill,
E. C., & Fox, A. B. (2020). COVID-19 conspiracy beliefs, health
behaviors, and policy support. Translational Behavioral Medicine.
Farooq, A., Laato, S., & Islam, A. K. M. N. (2020). Impact of online
information on self-isolation intention during the COVID-19 pan-
demic: cross-sectional study. Journal of Medical Internet Research,
22(5).
Fast, S. M., González, M. C., Wilson, J. M., & Markuzon, N. (2015).
Modelling the propagation of social response during a disease out-
break. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 12 (104).
Finset, A., Bosworth, H., & Butow, P. (2020). Effective health commu-
nication - a key factor in fighting the COVID-19 pandemic. Patient
Education and Counseling, 103(5).
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory?
Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138.
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society
Interface, 10(86), 20130475.
Friston, K. J. (2020). A free energy principle for a particular physics.
Friston, K., Kilner, J., & Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle for
the brain. Journal of Physiology, Paris, 100 (1–3), 70–87.
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., Kilner, J., & Kiebel, S. J. (2010). Action and
behavior: a free-energy formulation.Biological Cybernetics, 102(3).
Friston, K. J., FitzGerald, T., & Rigoli, F. (2016). Active inference: a
process theory. Neural Computation, 29,1 –49.
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., & de Vries, B. (2017). The graphical brain: Belief
propagation and active inference. Nature Neuroscience, 1(4), 381–
414.
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., Zeidman, P., Razi, A., Flandin, G., Daunizeau, J.,
Hulme, O. J., Billig, A. J., Litvak, V., Price, C. J., Moran, R. J., &
Lambert, C. (2021). Second waves, social distancing, and the spread
of COVID-19 across the USA. Wellcome Open Research, 5 ,1 0 3 .
Funk, S., Salathe, M., & Jansen, V. A. A. (2010). Modelling the influence
of human behaviour on the spread of infectious diseases: a review.
J o u r n a lo ft h eR o y a lS o c i e t yI n t e r f a c e ,7(5
 0), 1247–1256.
Galang, C. M., Johnson, D., & Obhi, S. S. (2021). Exploring the
Relationship Between Empathy, Self-Construal Style, and Self-
Reported Social Distancing Tendencies During the COVID-19
Pandemic. Frontiers in Psychology, 12 , 588934.
Golec de Zavala, A., & Federico, C. M. (2018). Collective narcissism and
the growth of conspiracy thinking over the course of the 2016
United States presidential election: A longitudinal analysis.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 48 (7), 1011–1018.
Hayward, A. C., Beale, S., Johnson, A. M., Fragaszy, E. B., & Group
FW. (2020). Public activities preceding the onset of acute respiratory
infection syndromes in adults in England - implications for the use
of social distancing to control pandemic respiratory infections.
Wellcome Open Research, 5 (54).
Hesp, C., Smith, R., Parr, T., Allen, M., Friston, K. J., & Ramstead, M. J.
D. (2021). Deeply Felt Affect: The Emergence of Valence in Deep
Active Inference. Neural Computation, 33(2), 398–446.
Hu, Y., Wang, Y., Liang, H., & Chen, Y. (2017). Seasonal influenza
vaccine acceptance among pregnant women in Zhejiang Province,
1127Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2021) 21:1117–1129
China: evidence based on health belief model. International Journal
of Environmental Research and Public Health, 14 (12).
Imhoff, R., & Lamberty, P. (2020). A Bioweapon or a Hoax? The Link
Between Distinct Conspiracy Beliefs About the Coronavirus
Disease (COVID-19) Outbreak and Pandemic Behavior. Social
Psychological and Personality Science, 11 (8), 1110–1118.
Jang, W. M., Jang, D. H., & Lee, J. Y. (2020). Social distancing and
transmission-reducing practices during the 2019 Coronavirus dis-
ease and 2015 Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus out-
breaks in Korea. Journal of Korean Medical Science, 35 (23).
Janz, N. K., & Becker, M. H. (1984). The Health Belief Model: a decade
later. Health Education Quarterly, 11(1).
Jefferson, T., Del Mar, C., & Dooley, L. (2009). Physical interventions to
interrupt or reduce the spread of respiratory viruses: systematic re-
view. British Medical Journal, 339 ,b 3 6 7 5 .
Jiang, X., Elam, G., & Yuen, C. (2009). The perceived threat of SARS
and its impact on precautionary actions and adverse consequences: a
qualitative study among Chi nese communities in the United
Kingdom and the Netherlands. International Journal of
Behavioral Medicine, 16(1).
Kasperson, R. E., Renn, O., & Slovic, P. (1988). The social amplification
of risk: A conceptual framework. Risk Analysis, 8,1 7 7–187.
Kassa, S. M., & Ouhinou, A. (2015). The impact of self-protective mea-
sures in the optimal interventions for controlling infectious diseases
of human population. J o u r n a lo fM a t h e m a t i c a lB i o l o g y ,7 0(1–2).
Khubchandani, J., & Macias, Y. (2021). COVID-19 vaccination hesitan-
cy in Hispanics and African-Americans: A review and recommen-
dations for practice. Brain, Behavior, & Immunity – Health, 15 ,
100277.
Kissler, S. M., Tedijanto, C., & Goldstein, E. (2020). Projecting the trans-
mission dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 through the postpandemic peri-
od. Science, 5793.
Kretzschmar, M., Rozhnova, G., Boven, M. (2021). Isolation and contact
tracing can tip the scale to containment of COVID-19 in populations
with social distancing. Frontiers in Physics.
Laland, K. N. (2018). Darwin’s Unfinished Symphony: How Culture
Made the Human Mind . Princeton University Press.
Lau, J. T., Yang, X., Tsui, H., & Kim, J. H. (2003). Monitoring commu-
nity responses to the SARS epidemic in Hong Kong: from day 10 to
day 62. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 57 (11).
Lau, J. T., Tsui, H., Kim, J. H., & Griffiths, S. (2006). Perceptions about
status and modes of H5N1 transmission and associations with im-
mediate behavioral responses in the Hong Kong general population.
Preventive Medicine, 43(5).
Lau, J. T., Kim, J. H., Tsui, H., & Griffiths, S. (2007). Perceptions related
to human avian influenza and their associations with anticipated
psychological and behavioral responses at the onset of outbreak in
the Hong Kong Chinese general population. American Journal of
Infection Control, 35(1).
Lau, J. T. F., Griffiths, S., Choi, K. C., & Tsui, H. Y. (2009). Widespread
public misconception in the early phase of the H1N1 influenza ep-
idemic. The Journal of Infection, 59 ,1 2 2–127.
Lee, M., & You, M. Psychological and behavioral responses in South
Korea during the early stages of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-
19). International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health, 2020,1 7–2977.
Leung, G. M., Ho, L. M., & Chan, S. K. (2005). Longitudinal assessment
of community psychobehavioral responses during and after the 2003
outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome in Hong Kong.
Clinical Infectious Diseases, 40(12).
Leung, G. M., Quah, S., & Ho, L. M. (2009). Community psycho-behav-
ioural surveillance and related impact on outbreak control in Hong
Ko
ng and Singapore during the SARS epidemic. Hong Kong
Medical Journal, 9,3 0–34.
Leung, C. C., Lam, T. H., & Cheng, K. K. (2020). Mass masking in the
COVID-19 epidemic: people need guidance. Lancet, 395(10228).
Liao, Q., Cowling, B. J., & Lam, W. W. T. (2014). Anxiety, worry and
cognitive risk estimate in relation to protective behaviors during the
2009 influenza A/H1N1 pandemic in Hong Kong: ten cross-section-
al surveys. BMC Infectious Diseases, 14 (169).
Lin, Y., Hu, Z., Alias, H., & Wong, L. P. (2020). Impact of mass and
social media on psychobehavioural responses to COVID-19: A sur-
vey of medical university students in Fujian, China during the down-
ward trend of COVID-19. Journal of Medical Internet Research,
10(2196/19982).
Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., & Welch, N. (2001). Risk
as feelings. Psychological Bulletin, 127 ,2 6 7–286. https://doi.org/
10.1037/0033-2909.127.2.267
Maddux, J. E., & Rogers, R. W. (1983). Protection motivation and self-
efficacy: A revised theory of fear appeals and attitude change.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 19 (5), 469–479.
McCaskill, J. (2006). African-American women, self breast examination
and Health Belief Model: implications for practice. JOCEPS: The
J o u r n a lo fC h iE t aP h iS o r o r i t y ,5 2(1), 33–37.
Milne, S., Sheeran, P., & Orbell, S. (2000). Prediction and intervention in
health-related behavior: A meta-analytic review of Protection
Motivation Theory. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 30 (1),
106–143.
Mizumoto, K., Chowell, G. (2020). Estimating Risk for Death from
Coronavirus Disease, China, January –February 2020. Emerging
Infectious Diseases Journal.
Morgan, T. J. H., & Laland, K. N. (2012). The biological bases of con-
formity. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 6 (87).
Motta Zanin, G., Gentile, E., Parisi, A., & Spasiano, D. (2020). A
Preliminary Evaluation of the Public Risk Perception Related to
the COVID-19 Health Emergency in Italy. International Journal
of Environmental Research and Public Health, 27 ,1 7 ( 9 ) .
Nields, J. A. (2020). Alone together in our fear: perspectives from the
early days of lockdown due to COVID-19. The Journal of Nervous
and Mental Disease, 208 (6).
Orbell, S., Perugini, M., & Rakow, T. (2004). Individual differences in
sensitivity to health communications: consideration of future conse-
quences. Health Psychology, 23(4).
Person, B., Sy, F., & Holton, K. (2004). Fear and stigma: the epidemic
within the SARS outbreak. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 10(2).
Petrocchi, S., Bernardi, S., Malacrida, R., Traber, R., Gabutti, L., &
Grignoli, N. (2021). Affective empathy predicts self-isolation be-
haviour acceptance during coronavirus risk exposure. Scientific
Reports, 11(1), 10153.
Piltch-Loeb, R., Abramson, D. M., & Merdjanoff, A. A. (2017). Risk
salience of a novel virus: US population risk perception, knowledge,
and receptivity to public health interventions regarding the Zika
virus prior to local transmission. PLoS One, 12 (12).
Ramstead, M. J., Veissière, S. P., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2016). Cultural
Affordances: Scaffolding Local Worlds Through Shared
Intentionality and Regimes of Attention. Frontiers in Psychology,
7(1090).
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering
Schrödinger’s question: A free-energy formulation. Physics of Life
Reviews, 24,1 –16
 .
Ramstead, M. J., Kirchhoff, M. D., Friston, K. J. (2019). A tale of two
densities: active inference is enactive inference. Adaptive Behavior,
1059712319862774.
1128 Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2021) 21:1117–1129
Raude, J., Debin, M., Souty, C.. (2020). Are people excessively pessi-
mistic about the risk of coronavirus infection? PsyArxiv Preprint.
Reicher, S., & Stott, C. (2020). On order and disorder during the COVID-
19 pandemic. The British Journal of Social Psychology, 59 (3).
Rogers, R. W. (1975). A Protection Motivation Theory of Fear Appeals
and Attitude Change. The Journal of Psychology, 91 (1), 93–114.
Rogers, R. W. (1983). Cognitive and physiological processes in fear
appeals and attitude change: a revised theory of protection
motivation.G u i l f o r d .
Rosenstock, I. M. (1974). The health belief model and preventive health
behavior. Health Education, 2,3 5 4–386.
Savadori, L., Rumiati, R., & Bonini, N. (1998). Expertise and regional
differences in risk perception: the case of Italy. Swiss Journal of
Psychology, 57,1 0 1–113.
Seale, H., Heywood, A. E., & Leask, J. (2020). COVID-19 is rapidly
changing: Examining public perceptions and behaviors in response
to this evolving pandemic. PLoS One, 15 (6).
Sesagiri Raamkumar, A., Tan, S. G., & Wee, H. L. (2020). Use of health
belief model–based deep learning classifiers for COVID-19 social
media content to examine public perceptions of physical distancing:
model development and case study. JMIR Public Health and
Surveillance, 6(3).
Sharifirad, G., Yarmohammadi, P., Sharifabad, M. A., & Rahaei, Z.
(2014). Determination of preventive behaviors for pandemic influ-
enza A/H1N1 based on protection motivation theory among female
high school students in Isfahan, Iran. Journal of Education Health
Promotion, 3(7).
Sharot, T. (2011). The optimism bias. Current Biology: CB, 21 (23),
R941–R945.
Sharot, T., & Garrett, N. (2016). Forming Beliefs: Why Valence Matters.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20 (1), 25–33.
Slovic, P., Finucane, M. L., & Peters, E. (2004). Risk as analysis and risk
as feelings: some thoughts about affect, reason, risk, and rationality.
Risk Analysis, 24,3 1 1–322.
Steven, S., Yen Ting, L., & Chonggang, X. (2020). High Contagiousness
and Rapid Spread of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus 2. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 26(7).
Tang, C. S., & Wong, C. Y. (2003). An outbreak of the severe acute
respiratory syndrome: predictors of health behaviors and effect of
community prevention measures in Hong Kong, China. American
Journal of Public Health, 93 (11).
Tang, C. S., & Wong, C. Y. (2005). Psychosocial factors influencing the
practice of preventive behaviors against the severe acute respiratory
syndrome among older Chinese in Hong Kong. Journal of Aging
and Health, 17 (4).
Teasdale, E., Santer, M., & Geraghty, A. W. (2014). Public perceptions of
non-pharmaceutical interventions for reducing transmission of
respiratory infection: systematic review and synthesis of qualitative
studies. BMC Public Health, 14 (589).
Turner, J. C., Hogg, M. A., & Oakes, P. J. (1987). Rediscovering the
social group: A self categorization theory . Blackwell.
Van Assche, J., Politi, E., Van Dessel, P., & Phalet, K. (2020). To punish
or to assist? Divergent reactions to ingroup and outgroup members
disobeying social distancing. The British Journal of Social
Psychology, 59(3), 594–606.
Veissière, S. P., Constant, A., & Ramstead, M. J. (2020). Thinking
through other minds: A variational approach to cognition and cul-
ture. Th
e Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 43 ,e 9 0 .
Walker, K. K. (2021). Shining the Light on Altruism and Its Potential
Impact for Behavior Change Strategies Related to the COVID-19
Pandemic and Beyond. Health Communication, 11,1 –3.
Webster, R. K., Brooks, S. K., & Smith, L. E. (2020). How to improve
adherence with quarantine: rapid review of the evidence. Public
Health, 182,1 6 3–169.
Williams, L., Rasmussen, S., & Kleczkowski, A. (2015). Protection mo-
tivation theory and social distancing behaviour in response to a
simulated infectious disease epidemic. Psychology, Health &
Medicine, 20(7).
Witte, K., & Allen, M. (2000). A meta-analysis of fear appeals: implica-
tions for effective public health campaigns. Health Education &
Behavior, 27(5).
Wolf, L. J., Haddock, G., Manstead, A. S. R., & Maio, G. R. (2020). The
importance of (shared) human values for containing the COVID-19
psandemic. The British Journal of Social Psychology, 59 (3).
Xantus, G. Z., Burke, D., & Kanizsai, P. (2021). How to best handle
vaccine decliners: scientific facts and psychological approach.
Postgraduate Medical Journal.
Xiao, H., Peng, M., & Yan, H. (2016). An instrument based on protection
motivation theory to predict Chinese adolescents ’intention to en-
gage in protective behaviors against schistosomiasis. Glob Health
Res Policy, 1 (15).
Xu, J., & Peng, Z. (2015). People at risk of influenza pandemics: The
evolution of perception and behavior. PLoS One, 10 (12), 0144868.
Yamamoto, N., Jiang, B., & Wang, H. (2021). Quantifying compliance
with COVID-19 mitigation policies in the US: A mathematical
modeling study. Infectious Disease Modelling, 6,5 0 3–513.
Yousuf, H., Corbin, J., & Sweep, G. (2020). Association of a public
health campaign about Coronavirus Disease 2019 promoted by
news media and a social influencer with self-reported personal hy-
giene and physical distancing in the Netherlands. JAMA Network
Open, 3(7).
Publisher’sn o t e Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
1129Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci (2021) 21:1117–1129