fnins-15-647579 June 23, 2021 Time: 17:40 # 1
REVIEW
published: 29 June 2021
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.647579
Edited by:
Yoko Nagai,
Brighton and Sussex Medical School,
United Kingdom
Reviewed by:
Rishi R. Dhingra,
University of Melbourne, Australia
Georgios D. Mitsis,
McGill University, Canada
*Correspondence:
Asena Boyadzhieva
a51808039@unet.univie.ac.at
† These authors have contributed
equally to this work
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Autonomic Neuroscience,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Neuroscience
Received: 05 January 2021
Accepted: 27 May 2021
Published: 29 June 2021
Citation:
Boyadzhieva A and Kayhan E
(2021) Keeping the Breath in Mind:
Respiration, Neural Oscillations,
and the Free Energy Principle.
Front. Neurosci. 15:647579.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.647579
Keeping the Breath in Mind:
Respiration, Neural Oscillations, and
the Free Energy Principle
Asena Boyadzhieva1*† and Ezgi Kayhan2,3†
1 Department of Philosophy, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria,2 Department of Developmental Psychology, University
of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany,3 Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany
Scientiﬁc interest in the brain and body interactions has been surging in recent years.
One fundamental yet underexplored aspect of brain and body interactions is the link
between the respiratory and the nervous systems. In this article, we give an overview
of the emerging literature on how respiration modulates neural, cognitive and emotional
processes. Moreover, we present a perspective linking respiration to the free-energy
principle. We frame volitional modulation of the breath as an active inference mechanism
in which sensory evidence is recontextualized to alter interoceptive models. We further
propose that respiration-entrained gamma oscillations may reﬂect the propagation of
prediction errors from the sensory level up to cortical regions in order to alter higher level
predictions. Accordingly, controlled breathing emerges as an easily accessible tool for
emotional, cognitive, and physiological regulation.
Keywords: interoception, respiration-entrained neural oscillations, controlled breathing, free-energy principle,
self-regulation
INTRODUCTION
“The “I think” which Kant said must be able to accompany all my objects, is the “I breathe” which
actually does accompany them. Breath is the essence out of which philosophers have constructed the
entity known to them as consciousness” (James, 1912).
In Sanskrit “prana” means “breath.” At the same time it means “life.” The word “atman” is
similarly translated as both soul and air. This linguistic tie is a global one, present in many ancient
cultures: Ancient Greek has the concepts of “psyché” and “pneuma, ” in Hebrew there is “ruach” and
“néfesh, ” as well as the Latin “spiritus” and “anemos, ” the Chinese “ch’i, ” Japanese “ki” and Arabic
“ruh.” The reason is straightforward - breath brings us into life and carries us all the way through it.
Some cultures have recognized its importance thousands of years ago, adopting various breathing
exercises as a part of their spiritual practices. Interest in these practices has since spread from the
East to the West and from the spiritual to the scientiﬁc. While research on whether respiration
inﬂuences our cognitive, emotional and physiological functioning is on the rise, surprisingly little
is known about the underlying mechanisms of how respiration modulates these processes. In
this article, we review the state-of-the-art understanding of how respiration interacts with a wide
network of both central and peripheral systems, which work together to maintain homeostasis.
We provide a systematic overview of the emerging literature on how respiration modulates neural,
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 1 June 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647579
fnins-15-647579 June 23, 2021 Time: 17:40 # 2
Boyadzhieva and Kayhan Keeping the Breath in Mind
cognitive and emotional processes. Moreover, we present an
outlook for future work on formalizing volitional modulation of
breath as an active inference mechanism.
While increasing the awareness of an inner sensory modality
would be a step to modulating it, not every interoceptive signal
is an optimal candidate. The heartbeat, for instance, has been
well-studied for its aﬀective and cognitive interrelationships
(Garﬁnkel et al., 2016; Park and Blanke, 2019). Nevertheless,
unless excited, heart rhythm remains on the periphery of
experience for most of the people, and even more importantly,
cannot be directly modulated. The breath, however, is unique.
Despite being an interoceptive modality, it can be easily brought
into awareness, and its tempo can be controlled.
Consider the following example: Sam, a graduate student of
psychology, is attending a lecture on artiﬁcial intelligence. While
listening to the speaker, a question outside of their expertise
arises. While planning on how to formulate the question, Sam’s
heart starts racing. Sam is anxious. This realization alone does not
slow down the heartbeat. Sam decides to do what usually helps: to
focus on the breath and slow it down. Soon after, Sam may notice
that the heartbeat has normalized, and the tension has dissolved.
Slowing down the breathing rhythm triggered cardiovascular,
endocrine, autonomic and central brain systems, most notably
the activation of the parasympathetic system, thus, the elicitation
of physiological relaxation (Russo et al., 2017; Zaccaro et al.,
2018). Now, Sam feels calmer to ask the question.
Linking the volitional and the autonomic, controlled
breathing becomes an anchor in the present, which provides
organisms with new evidence to update their beliefs on
interoceptive states. This is a powerful position to be in
within the free-energy framework. Through active inference,
that is, changing the breathing rhythm, respiration can alter
interoceptive predictions, and the felt experience thereof. As
respiration-related sensory evidence is recontextualized, the
body’s predictions are altered: in the case of slowing down
the breathing rhythm, they become aligned with a relaxed
state, rather than other, possibly conﬂicting, and interoceptive
states (i.e., an increased heartbeat and an anxious state). This
formulation, therefore, accounts for the eﬃcacy of a slow
breathing rhythm to achieve a calm emotional and physiological
state (Philippot et al., 2002; Ma et al., 2017). At the same time, it
acknowledges its bidirectionality, explaining how an accelerated
breathing rhythm can also upregulate the system in a way that
results in an aroused state (Nardi et al., 2009).
In this article, we will give an overview of the theoretical and
empirical ﬁndings on how respiration aﬀects neural, cognitive
and emotional processes. Moreover, we will present an outlook
for future work on how controlled breathing can be used
as an active inference mechanism to modulate interoceptive
predictions. Controlled breathing is proposed to be a dynamic
regulatory mechanism, which is used as a means to update
top-down interoceptive predictions by weighting bottom-up
sensory evidence. It should be noted that here by learning to
control the breath, we put emphasis on learning to actively
modulate the breathing rhythm. Hence, controlled breathing
is used as an umbrella term for any kind of volitional
change of breathing pattern, which includes not only slowing
down of the breath but also rapid breathing, as well as
alterations between the two. That is, changes in rate, depth and
duration of breathing can be used to both downregulate and
upregulate the system eliciting distinct cognitive, aﬀective, and
physiological changes.
BREATHING FREE (ENERGY)
Predictive Processing and Interoceptive
Models
Predictive processing has become an inﬂuential framework in
understanding brain-body interactions (Seth and Friston, 2016;
Barrett, 2017). According to this framework, the nervous system
predicts how changes in the environment or in the body will
aﬀect the organism by creating the so-called generative models
based on which the predictions emerge (Friston, 2010). These
models don’t come as a given but they are acquired through
a unique history of experience (Seth and Friston, 2016). The
predictions issued by the nervous system are compared to the
available sensory information (Friston, 2010). Whenever there
is a mismatch between what is predicted and what is observed,
this elicits a prediction error (PE), which propagates back to
cortical regions (Friston, 2010). The organism then tries to
reduce prediction errors either by active inference, that is,
by changing its sensory states through action to update its
predictions, or by changing its internal dynamics with respect to
environmental conditions, conceptualized as perceptual inference
(Friston, 2010). This error minimization process, central to the
free-energy principle, suggests that organisms continuously try
to minimize the free energy arising from discrepancies between
the predicted and the observed states to eventually increase the
accuracy of their internal models (Friston, 2010). In the case of
interoceptive priors, the more predictable a prediction is, the
less need there is to check in with the sensations felt right now
(Barrett and Simmons, 2015). The reason for this is plain. If you
experience your heartbeat in a predictable manner often enough,
there is no need to update the priors associated with it. However,
even persistent predictions, such as the interoceptive ones, are
malleable (Adams et al., 2013).
Allostasis, the process of adaptively altering physiological
parameters of the body with respect to environmental changes
(Sterling, 1988), is the main objective of predictive processing
within the nervous system (Sterling, 2014). Allostasis achieves
homeostasis, which maintains physiological parameters within a
relatively constant range, by ensuring that the organism adapts
to a precarious environment (Sterling, 2014). The management
of these parameters requires constant handling of immense
amounts of information, which the nervous system achieves
by employing a clever strategy: instead of processing all of the
information, it only registers the discrepancies from what was
expected (Friston, 2010). Thus, the brain-centered predictive
regulation of allostasis coordinates changes in bodily systems to
assure that the organism is prepared to meet the body’s basic
needs, such as food, warmth and cooling, before they are at stake,
to keep the system in equilibrium (Sterling, 2014; Kleckner et al.,
2017).
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 2 June 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647579
fnins-15-647579 June 23, 2021 Time: 17:40 # 3
Boyadzhieva and Kayhan Keeping the Breath in Mind
Consider the example of Sam again. Instead of dwelling
on the symptoms of anxiety, Sam redirects their attention to
the breath. By slowing it down, Sam is taking an action to
meet another internal generative model: that of being relaxed.
Through active inference, mediated by controlled respiratory
signals, the breath induces an almost immediate change in
interoceptive priors and internal states thereof. In other words,
controlled breathing emerges as a rapid and easily accessible PE
minimization strategy engaging both attention and action to alter
interoceptive predictions.
Attention and Prediction Updating
Attention is a way of amplifying what is relevant and salient,
leaving the rest in the background (Feldman and Friston,
2010). Usually, the regulation of breath happens without paying
attention to it and the physiological and emotional changes that
come with it follow automatically. However, attention can be
used as a tool to deliberately control the breath. In predictive
processing terms, attention weights PEs by increasing the
precision of the sensations being attended to Smout et al. (2019).
What this means is that bottom-up information, happening
now, is prioritized over top-down predictions based on previous
experience. Consequently, attention opens the possibility to
re-evaluate sensations by amplifying their importance, which
contributes to the updating of associated priors.
There are factors to consider when talking about attention
in the context of controlled breathing. Redirecting the attention
to the sensations of the breath can be seen as a form of
interoceptive attention, which could be aﬀected by how one
focuses on the breath. For instance, attention can be paid
to the nostrils, the rising and falling of the chest, or more
subtle inner changes. Alternatively, in cases where biofeedback
is used, the attention may be directed outward (Wang et al.,
2010). Therefore, deﬁning and measuring attention to the breath
poses a serious experimental diﬃculty, which should be carefully
considered in experimental designs. A good starting point would
be to clarify whether the mechanisms underlying attention,
as deﬁned by the free-energy principle, can be generalized
for both internal and external attention (Clark, 2017). Given
that these converge in the anterior insular cortex (AIC), it is
likely that both internal and external attention work together
to attune the body’s internal state to the external environment
(Farb et al., 2013a).
Farb et al. (2013a) operationalized an interoceptive attention
task, during which participants were asked to monitor their
breath without intentionally changing its rhythm. This internal
attention task was contrasted to two external attention tasks.
In the ﬁrst external attention task, the participants were
asked to “keep their minds blank” while reading sequentially
presented words, that is, to suppress any cognitive or emotional
response to the words. In the second task, participants
pressed a button whenever they recognized a previously
presented word. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), Farb et al. (2013a) found that interoceptive and
exteroceptive attention tasks recruited diﬀerent neural networks.
Whereas external attention recruited frontoparietal “executive”
attention network, interoceptive attention recruited primary
interoceptive and somatosensory regions, as well as the
posterior cingulate and hippocampus (Farb et al., 2013a).
Despite engaging diﬀerent attentional networks, internal and
external states meet in the AIC, where internal signals may
be integrated in a broader exteroceptive context (Craig,
2009; Singer et al., 2009; Farb et al., 2013a). Empirical
evidence about the integration of interoceptive and exteroceptive
information, however, remains scarce (Allen et al., 2019; Allen,
2020).
Expectation of a stimulus also inﬂuences the way attention
contributes to changing predictions. It has been shown that
precision increases the most when stimuli are predicted to
occur, leading to postsynaptic gain of the PE neurons that
communicate with neurons already “primed” to the stimuli
(Kok et al., 2012). Perceptual inference takes advantage of
this synergistic relationship between attention and prediction,
which, in the context of breathing, can be related to the
process of simply observing the breath. It is not clear, however,
whether this is enough to minimize PEs. According to the
free energy principle, to completely diminish PE, action needs
to be taken (Friston, 2010). While one might argue that
deliberately choosing to pay attention to something, such as
the breath, is an act in its own right, the argument remains
open to debate (Clark, 2017). In either case, controlled breathing
can be seen as an easily accessible active inference strategy
engaging both attention and action to alter interoceptive
generative models.
BREATHING IN: BRAIN-BODY
INTERACTIONS
Changes in the breathing rhythm are commonly associated with
changes in peripheral signals mediated through the vagus nerve
(Russo et al., 2017). This, however, is an incomplete view on
the system-wide changes that breathing elicits. The following
section reviews the state of the art demonstrating how respiration
modulates sensorimotor, emotional and cognitive processes.
Breathing in Sensation and Motion
Respiration is ﬁrst and foremost a movement a rhythmic
oscillation. The connection between respiration and movement
is readily utilized in the martial arts, where the force of punches
is maximized by synchronizing them with expirations. The tactic
is justiﬁed: peak force, eye and ﬁnger-movements have all been
correlated with the respiratory cycle (Rassler and Raabe, 2003; Li
and Laskin, 2006; Li and Rymer, 2011).
A recent study by Park et al. (2020) demonstrated that
breathing is coupled to voluntary action control. By measuring
cortical readiness potential, Park et al. (2020) reported that
breathing phases were temporally aligned with voluntary actions,
where actions were initiated more often during the expiration
period. However, it should be noted that the data presented
by Park et al. (2020) is low-pass ﬁltered in respect to the
mean cycle presented. Thus, it is likely that the observed
cortical readiness potential was not coupled with the periods
of inspiration (I) and expiration (E) per se , but with the
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 3 June 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647579
fnins-15-647579 June 23, 2021 Time: 17:40 # 4
Boyadzhieva and Kayhan Keeping the Breath in Mind
transitions between them. A closer look at the data of
Park et al. (2020) shows that it is the transition from the
expiration to inspiration (i.e., late phase of expiration) during
which participants initiate voluntary actions more frequently.
Readiness potential amplitudes were also smaller during the
expiration phase as compared to inspiration. This interpretation
of the results is further supported by a recent study of
Dhingra et al. (2020) showing that the transitions between
inspiration and post-inspiration are especially relevant for
synaptic engagement: the I-PI transition exclusively engages a
brainstem-wide respiratory network.
Emerging evidence further shows that the phase and depth
of respiration modulate oscillatory activity in the sensorimotor
cortex (Kluger and Gross, 2020). For example, in a study
by Kluger and Gross (2020), magnetoencephalography (MEG)
was used to study the interplay of breathing, brain activity
and muscle activity. By measuring corticomuscular coherence
in the beta band, Kluger and Gross (2020) showed that the
rhythm of the breath, maintained by respiratory muscles, is in
bi-directional interaction with brain oscillations. Importantly,
the observed neural signature was dependent on whether
breathing was voluntary or automatic a ﬁnding explained by
the distinct neural recruitment required to meet the diﬀerent
demands on muscle control. Overall, their study supports the
idea that controlled breathing plays a special role in mediating
respiration-entrained brain synchrony enhancing motor activity
(Mckay et al., 2003) and synchrony in the motor cortex
(Herrero et al., 2018).
Processing of sensory signals can also be dramatically
inﬂuenced by the breath (Brown and Gerbarg, 2005; Arch
and Craske, 2006; Ma et al., 2017). Perhaps the most striking
example has to do with pain perception, where numerous
studies have shown that respiration modulates the ways in
which noxious stimuli are felt or appraised (Iwabe et al.,
2014; Larsen et al., 2019; Jafari et al., 2020; Wells et al.,
2020). The attenuation of pain associated with slow deep
breathing, especially with a low inspiration-expiration ratio,
occurs independently from cardiovascular changes (Jafari et al.,
2020). The endogenous opioid system, which is also activated
by a slow-breathing rhythm, does not seem to be involved
in the process of pain attenuation suggesting that slow deep
breathing reduces pain through an independent pathway (Wells
et al., 2020). While the exact mechanisms underlying how
the breath modulates mobility, emotional processing, cognitive
functioning, and sensory perception, are yet to be delineated, and
mounting evidence suggests that large-scale synchronizations of
neural rhythms are pivotal players (for review Varga and Heck,
2017).
Breathing in Emotions
Controlled breathing can be used as an anchor into the present,
which can help in the process of emotion recognition and
regulation. The prime example of how breathing aﬀects emotion
is the physiological and psychological relaxation that occurs
when the breathing rhythm is slowed down to 0.1 Hz or 6
breaths per minute, a technique know as slow-paced breathing
(Brown and Gerbarg, 2005). This type of breathing is associated
with respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), a cardiorespiratory
synchronization in which the interval between consecutive
heartbeats decreases during inspiration and increases during
expiration (Eckberg et al., 1985). Slow breathing also increases
the variation in time intervals between heartbeats, or HRV
- an indicator of a healthy systemic balance and ability to
respond to physiological functioning (Shaﬀer et al., 2014).
Conversely, HRV is known to be reduced by a fast breathing
rhythm (Song and Lehrer, 2003). On one hand, this eﬀect is
highly relevant for stress-related disorders, such as anxiety and
depression, in which HRV is known to be reduced (Gorman
and Sloan, 2000). On the other hand, it shows how deeply
intertwined the rhythms of the body are (Mather and Thayer,
2018). Importantly, cardiorespiratory coupling is considered to
be bidirectional: cardiac signals also modulate breathing rate
(Dick et al., 2014).
While breathing rapidly is often associated with fear or high
arousal, it may also serve an important role in stimulating
brain areas responsible for information processing in the brain,
which aids responding faster to stimuli in the environment
(Zelano et al., 2016). Whether this is adaptive or maladaptive,
depends solely on the context. For instance, it has been
shown that cyclic hyperventilation followed by breath retention
activates the sympathetic nervous system and attenuates aberrant
immune responses - a response appropriate for times in which
an alert state is desired (Kox et al., 2014). However, in
susceptible populations, panic attacks have been shown to be
induced by hyperventilation (Clark, 1993). Moreover, breathing
techniques which integrate aspects of both rapid and slow
breathing have been shown to be eﬀective in the treatment
of stress, anxiety and depression (Brown and Gerbarg, 2005).
Preliminary evidence suggests that these changes are associated
with changes in emotion-related brain regions, like the amygdala,
the AIC, ACC, and the prefrontal cortex (PFC) (Novaes et al.,
2020). Overall, aﬀective responses seem to be highly related
to the breathing rhythm, a change which has been shown to
be suﬃcient to induce both positive and negative emotions
(Philippot et al., 2002). What these coupled variations in
breathing pace and physiological responses show is that the
breath can work as both an up and a down regulator of arousal.
Learning to control the breath means learning to control the
eﬀects it elicits.
Breathing in Cognition
The ups and downs of the breath are not only reﬂected in
emotion they shape our cognitive functioning as well. And
the two work hand in hand. For instance, nasal breathing
phase has been shown to aﬀect both emotional judgments and
memory recall, with people being able to identify emotional
faces quicker and remember an object better when presented
at inhalation than exhalation (Zelano et al., 2016). In this
study, intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG) recordings
from epileptic patients showed how breathing is entrained
with slow cortical rhythms in the olfactory cortex, which in
turn modulate higher frequency rhythms in the amygdala and
hippocampus - regions closely related to aﬀective and cognitive
functioning (Zelano et al., 2016). To test whether breathing
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 4 June 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647579
fnins-15-647579 June 23, 2021 Time: 17:40 # 5
Boyadzhieva and Kayhan Keeping the Breath in Mind
phase is indeed related to emotion and memory, Zelano et al.
(2016) recruited an independent group of healthy participants
to test whether their recognition of emotional faces was aﬀected
by breathing phase. Results showed that the recognition of
emotional faces was dependent on the respiratory phase in
which the stimuli were presented. More speciﬁcally, fearful
faces presented at the transitions between respiratory phases
were recognized faster as participants inhaled as compared
to faces presented during exhalation. This eﬀect diminished
when shifting from nasal to mouth breathing (Zelano et al.,
2016). A detailed inspection of the iEEG data suggests that,
in many participants, the mean spectral power increases occur
as participants inhale. Similarly, the ﬁndings of Ito et al.
(2014) show that increases in delta/gamma power are most
reliably detected at the transition from inspiration to post-
inspiration (I-PI).
While studies linking respiration to memory in humans are
scarce (Huijbers et al., 2014; Arshamian et al., 2018), research
done in rodents support of the role of respiratory-entrained
hippocampal oscillations (Y anovsky et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2017)
and their pivotal involvement in memory consolidation and
memory retrieval (Kay et al., 2009; Kay, 2014). The need to
further investigate how exactly the respiratory phase is linked to
memory encoding and retrieval in humans remains an important
line of future research.
A further link between respiration and cognition is established
in a small region in the brainstem responsible for synthesizing
norepinephrine (NE), the locus coeruleus (LC) (Melnychuk et al.,
2018). LC, being a major player in attention and behavioral
ﬂexibility (Aston-Jones et al., 1999), is an organic link between
respiration and attention (Herrero et al., 2018; Melnychuk
et al., 2018). As demonstrated by Melnychuk et al. (2018) pupil
dilation, a reliable indicator of LC activity (Murphy et al.,
2014), has been shown to increase with inhalation and decrease
during expiration. Further, Melnychuk et al. (2018) framed
the respiratory-LC-attentional system as a dynamical system
in which breath-focused practices can be used to inﬂuence
its stability. In such a coupled dynamical system, changing
one aspect of it inevitably changes the others. Therefore, by
controlling the breath, one can also modulate the LC-entrained
attentional system and responses relevant for the regulation
of arousal, attention and stress (Berridge and Waterhouse,
2003; Y ackle et al., 2017). Moreover, LC-NE activity under
arousal promotes not only selective attention but also memory
exemplifying the close connection between diﬀerent cognitive
faculties (Mather et al., 2016).
AN EMBODIED NEUROARCHITECTURE
Since breathing is simultaneously an interoceptive signal and a
movement within volitional control, it comes as no surprise that
both the interoceptive and the proprioceptive brain networks
get activated by diaphragmatic movements through sensory
medullary pathways (Heck et al., 2017). Respiratory-entrained
neural circuitry, however, extends beyond areas responsible for
breathing regulation. This section provides a concise overview of
the relevant neuroanatomy, focusing on the circuitry recruited by
gamma-band frequency neural oscillations.
Breathing in Rhythm: Neural Oscillations
Life is governed by rhythm. Brain, being a component of it, is
no diﬀerent. Brain functions are governed by oscillatory activity
(Buzsaki, 2006). Spontaneous neural activity reﬂects how the
brain integrates neural information on multiple spatial and
temporal scales (Engel et al., 1999; Buzsaki, 2006). Emerging
evidence shows that neural oscillations entrain to respiration and
that respiration constitutes a fundamental neural rhythm, which
is deeply intertwined with cognitive and aﬀective functions like
memory, attention and sensory processing (Zelano et al., 2016;
Heck et al., 2017; Varga and Heck, 2017; Herrero et al., 2018; Tort
et al., 2018; Maric et al., 2020).
Earlier studies revealed that the global signal recorded through
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), which measures
changes in blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD), and is aﬀected
by breathing (Birn et al., 2006, 2008a,b). Correcting for breathing
signals, for example, signiﬁcantly improved the detection of the
task-related activation (Birn et al., 2006). Later studies, however,
recognized the breath as a fundamental rhythm of brain function
(Heck et al., 2017). A growing body of literature shows that
respiration speciﬁcally modulates high frequency oscillations
such as gamma activity (40–150 Hz), which are known to govern
attention, memory, decision making, problem solving, language
processing, and sensory perception (Heck et al., 2017; Kluger
and Gross, 2020). In an iEEG study, Herrero et al. (2018)
operationalized a breathing awareness task, where participants
were asked to count their breaths. In another task, they were
instructed to modulate their respiratory rhythm by increasing
its pace (Herrero et al., 2018). While gamma band oscillatory
activity was shown to correlate with respiratory phase in both
the awareness and the modulation of breath, the brain circuits
recruited during these tasks did not overlap completely (Herrero
et al., 2018). During volitional upregulation of the breathing
rhythm, iEEG-breath coherence increases in a frontotemporal-
insular network, while during breath counting, activity increased
in the ACC, AIC, premotor cortex, and the hippocampus
(Herrero et al., 2018). The presence of breathing-entrained
gamma band waves across regions in the whole brain suggests
that breathing can act as an organizing hierarchical principle
for neuronal oscillations (Herrero et al., 2018). Recent studies
on respiratory-brain circuitry support this idea (Ito et al., 2014;
Biskamp et al., 2017; Heck et al., 2017; Herrero et al., 2018; Tort
et al., 2018; Maric et al., 2020).
The entrainment of both slow and fast neural oscillations
has been shown to enable neuronal coherence (e.g., Fries, 2005;
Lakatos et al., 2005). Breathing has been suggested to exert
its system-wide eﬀects in an analogous manner: the slower
respiratory rhythm is coupled to faster cortical rhythms which
facilitate long distance brain synchronization (Sanchez-Vives
and McCormick, 2000; Biskamp et al., 2017; Herrero et al.,
2018; Tort et al., 2018; Noble and Hochman, 2019). Both
direct and indirect pathways are likely to mediate the process,
modulating cortical activity in distinct ways. The rate, phase
and type of breathing are all factors which should be considered
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 5 June 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647579
fnins-15-647579 June 23, 2021 Time: 17:40 # 6
Boyadzhieva and Kayhan Keeping the Breath in Mind
when discussing the mechanisms underlying respiratory-cortical
interactions (for review Maric et al., 2020). Whereas it has
been mostly shown that broadband gamma activity couples
with respiratory cycle in mice and in humans during normal
to fast breathing (Ito et al., 2014; Y anovsky et al., 2014;
Zelano et al., 2016; Herrero et al., 2018), others have reported
modulation of cortical phase activity in the alpha range across
widespread brain areas during slow-paced breathing (Hsu et al.,
2020). Overall cross-frequency dynamics involved in controlled
breathing, and the factors which inﬂuence them, are yet to
be delineated. It is nonetheless plausible that the interplay of
slow and fast cortical rhythms may be reﬂecting the relay
of bottom-up sensory information and top-down predictions.
The reorganization of cortical phase activity may involve an
increase in gamma-band coherence and a decrease in alpha-
band coherence during the diﬀerent phases of inspiration. In
other words, a hierarchy of neural rhythms may be orchestrating
brain-body interactions through an active inference mechanism
which mediates information between primary aﬀerent pathways
and higher cortical regions (Corcoran et al., 2018). Further,
while the work by Tort et al. (2018) disassociates theta and
respiration-modulated oscillations, there is evidence that theta
and respiration-entrained rhythms are coupled (e.g., Hammer
et al., 2020). Interestingly, it seems that they are coupled not
through the phase of respiration, but through the rate of
breathing (Hammer et al., 2020). Either way, it is likely that
respiratory information from pulmonary and nasal pathways is
propagated up to cortical areas responsible for the integration
of interoceptive and exteroceptive signals (AIC, ACC), and
vice versa: top-down predictions issued by cortical regions
then regulate physiological responses. The connection between
primary sensory regions and the cortex further engages areas
associated with emotion (central nucleus of the amygdala,
CeA), memory (hippocampus, HC), arousal, and attention (LC).
Consequently, modulating the breath means modulating this
circuitry, and the physiological responses associated with it.
Conceptualized this way, controlled breathing can be framed
as an active inference mechanism to regulate a wide array of
allostatic processes that together ensure the adaptivity of an
organism in a precarious environment.
In this review we choose to focus on respiration-entrained
gamma-band neural activity due to their multifaceted roles
in mediating physiological, aﬀective cognitive processes (Engel
et al., 1999; Heck et al., 2017) and them being likely markers of
PE propagation (van Pelt et al., 2016; Boroujeni et al., 2020). It
should be noted that this narrowing down is a simpliﬁcation of
the complex rhythmic interactions taking place in a wide network
of brain areas, the most relevant of which will be discussed in the
next section of this article.
A Wide Interoceptive Network
According to the current understanding of how the free-energy
principle is related to neural oscillations, ascending PEs are
conveyed at a faster frequency (e.g., gamma), while descending
predictions propagate by lower frequencies (e.g., alpha/beta) (van
Pelt et al., 2016; Alamia and VanRullen, 2019). If attention is
paid to a sensory signal, in our case the breath, the information
it carries in the form of a PE is deemed precise and important.
Hence, the weighted PE could propagate to upper levels in the
hierarchy, increasing its impact on the updating of high-level
predictions (Alamia and VanRullen, 2019). In terms of neural
oscillations, this would be reﬂected by the predominance of
feedforward signals, more speciﬁcally, gamma-band oscillations
propagating from sensory to cortical brain regions. Breathing
entrains gamma-band neural oscillatory activity across the
brain, which are in turn associated with cognitive and aﬀective
functioning (Herrmann et al., 2010; Herrero et al., 2018).
The presence of gamma-band neural oscillations in the AIC
is especially interesting in the context of relating the breath to
a system-wide regulatory mechanism. For one, this region has
been shown to be central in interoceptive attention. In a study
by Wang et al. (2019), interoceptive attention was engaged via a
breath detection task in which participants were asked to indicate
whether a presented breathing curve is delayed or not relative to
their own breathing. In another task that engaged exteroceptive
attention, participants indicated whether a visual stimulus ﬂashed
on the breathing curve. They found that activations in the AIC are
critical for interoceptive attention and that they are indicative of
individual diﬀerences in interoceptive accuracy.
Other studies using breathing tasks to recruit interoceptive
attention showed that although interoceptive and exteroceptive
attention arise from anatomically distinct regions, they meet
in AIC (Farb et al., 2013b,a; Wang et al., 2019; Weng et al.,
2020). These ﬁndings support already existing interoceptive
inference models, which identify the AIC as a region critical for
the processing of both interoceptive and exteroceptive signals
(Seth et al., 2012; Allen et al., 2019; Allen, 2020). Through
its connections to a wider network in brain regions, such
as other viscero-motor areas (VMAs), the anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC), subgenual cortex (SGC), and orbitofrontal cortex
(OCC), the insular cortex can propagate predictions that at the
lowest levels serve as homeostatic setpoints, maintained through
descending projections to subcortical, brainstem and spinal cord
regions. At higher levels, these moderate aﬀective and cognitive
states by processing ascending PEs via viscerosensory innervation
(Seth and Friston, 2016).
The dynamic coordination of brain activity and physiology
orchestrated by interoceptive predictions all works in favor of
allostasis (Barrett and Simmons, 2015). Given that respiratory
related signaling is a thread linking these pathways, it is
plausible that controlled breathing can be used to modulate the
processes of physiological, emotional, and cognitive attunement
needed to meet ever-changing environmental requirements.
More speciﬁcally, deliberate modulation of respiration can be
used to minimize prediction errors on various levels maximizing
the accuracy of interoceptive models, which would result
in system-wide changes in the physiological, aﬀective, and
cognitive domains.
Respiration-Speciﬁc Circuitry
While an exhaustive overview of respiratory neural circuitry is
beyond the scope of the article (for a review Mironov, 2009; Maric
et al., 2020), here, we will point out the key players involved in
respiratory-entrained cognitive and emotional processes.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 6 June 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647579
fnins-15-647579 June 23, 2021 Time: 17:40 # 7
Boyadzhieva and Kayhan Keeping the Breath in Mind
These processes, however, cannot be disentangled from
the main function of breathing: gas exchange. The lungs,
cardiovascular and neural systems work together to supply
oxygen (O 2) to all cells of the body and dispel carbon dioxide
(CO2). The variations in CO 2 levels are a potent driver for
breathing. Certain neurons in the brainstem, most notably the
retrotrapezoid nucleus neurons and serotonergic nuclei, are
sensitive to the partial pressure of CO 2 (pCO2) reﬂecting the
amount of CO 2 dissolved in the blood (Guyenet and Bayliss,
2015). The direct activation of these chemoreceptors is a part of
the medullary brainstem circuits involved in the motor control
of respiration (Guyenet and Bayliss, 2015). The ﬂuctuations in
arterial CO2 are also reﬂected in the global neuronal rhythmicity
measured by the fMRI (Wise et al., 2004) and the MEG (Driver
et al., 2016). It has been shown that the natural variations in
arterial CO2 occurring during breathing aﬀect neural oscillations
in multiple frequency bands (Driver et al., 2016). These ﬁndings
suggest that breath-related rhythms have widespread eﬀects
on brain activity, the implications of which are yet to be
fully understood. A good starting point, however, would be
to examine the neuroanatomical connections which link the
chemosensing neurons in the brainstem to the rest of the
central nervous system.
It has been widely accepted that three parts of the medulla
oblongata - the pre-Bötzinger cellular complex (preBötzC), the
post-inspiratory complex (PiCo, and the parafacial respiratory
group are coupled to orchestrate the timing of inspiration, post-
inspiration pause, and expiration, respectively (Maric et al.,
2020). Recent work, however, sheds light on the lack of
evidence for this triple-oscillatory hypothesis, and the role
of the PiCo speciﬁcally (Toor et al., 2019; Dhingra et al.,
2021). Nonetheless, it is known that the preBötzC sends
autonomous action potentials which serve as neural pacemakers
(Smith et al., 1991; Del Negro et al., 2018). What makes
medulla oblongata especially intriguing is its association with
the locus coeruleus noradrenergic (LC/NE) system. The LC/NE
system provides the cortex, hippocampus and amygdala with
noradrenaline (NE) – a neurotransmitter associated with the
modulation of wakefulness, as well as processing of salient
sensory information through cognitive operations (Berridge and
Waterhouse, 2003). In a recent study, Y ackle et al. (2017)
identiﬁed a cluster of pre-Bötzinger neurons which project
to the LC. They propose that these neurons may facilitate a
connection between the respiratory center and higher brain
regions. Functionally, this may explain how fast breathing in
humans leads to an increased state of alertness and arousal
(Magalhães et al., 2018). It is worthwhile noting that there are
alternative neural circuits which contribute to the voluntary
modulation of breathing. Motor cortical pathways involved
in volitional respiratory control have long been suggested
to bypass the respiratory center and instead act directly on
phrenic nerves controlling the diaphragm and consequently
respiration (Corﬁeld et al., 1998). More recent anatomical
studies reveal a dense reciprocal connectivity between the PAG
and the pontomedullary respiratory network in rats (Trevizan-
Baú et al., 2021). It is interesting to note that Trevizan-Baú
et al. (2021) identify the subparabrachial nucleus as being most
densely connected to the PAG, and not the preBötzC, which
goes against the idea that corticospinal pathways mediate the
volitional control of breathing and instead shows that cortical
regions have direct descending pathways connecting them to
respiratory control areas. What is also relevant is that the insula
provides an equally dense network of descending inputs to
the investigated respiratory nuclei (Trevizan-Baú et al., 2021).
These ﬁndings show that it is not only the breath which aﬀects
the cortex, but that the cortex also communicates with the
respiratory network – the ﬂow of ascending and descending
information has an anatomical substrate. The connection to
the PAG is further supported by animal and human studies
which link the area to the integration of threat perception with
breathing control mechanisms (for review Faull et al., 2015).
The nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS), the lateral parabrachial
nucleus, and the hypothalamus are in direct communication
with the PAG, facilitating processes involved in the control of
respiration (Huang et al., 2000; Hayward et al., 2003; Horiuchi
et al., 2009). The NTS, speciﬁcally, is proposed to act as an
important center for cardiorespiratory regulation (Huang et al.,
2000; Green et al., 2007). Interestingly, areas implicated in
aﬀective evaluation, like the PFC and the amygdala, have been
identiﬁed to provide input to the PAG (Holstege, 2014). Such
studies neuroanatomically support the hypothesis that breathing
patterns regulating emotional and allostatic processes may be
orchestrated by a respiratory network.
In humans, fMRI studies have indicated which brain regions
are aﬀected by the ﬂuctuations of the respiratory rhythm (e.g.,
Evans et al., 2002; Birn et al., 2008a; Pattinson et al., 2009; Faull
et al., 2015). For example, Pattinson et al. (2009) demonstrated
that opioid analgesia is related to respiratory neurocircuits.
The authors showed that the urge to breathe activates the
secondary somatosensory cortex, the frontal operculum and the
bilateral insula. An opioid, remifentanil, reduced the awareness
of respiration and led to a decrease in BOLD response in the
PAG, the cerebellum, ACC, and the dorsolateral PFC. Holding
the breath was associated with activations in the brainstem, and
more concretely the medulla oblongata. Overall, both brainstem
and higher cortical regions seem to be crucial players in
facilitating the awareness of breathing necessary for its volitional
modulation. Although future neuroanatomical studies should
identify the exact circuitry that governs the interactions between
respiration, neural oscillations and the free energy principle,
evidence suggests that the network of brain regions modulated
by respiration aﬀect a wide range of processes such as attention,
emotion, and memory through bidirectional processing of
bottom-up and top-down signals.
In addition to the medullary brainstem circuits outlined
above, the respiratory rhythm aﬀects neural activity through
the oscillatory entrainment of a large network of brain regions,
in which nasal breathing is suggested to play an important
role (e.g., Zelano et al., 2016; Herrero et al., 2018). Breathing
through the nose seems to be key when discussing how
controlled breathing aﬀects motility, emotions, cognition and
sensory processing (Zelano et al., 2016; Ma et al., 2017; Wells
et al., 2020). A respiration-speciﬁc neural mechanism, which
relays sensory information through the olfactory bulb (OB)
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 7 June 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647579
fnins-15-647579 June 23, 2021 Time: 17:40 # 8
Boyadzhieva and Kayhan Keeping the Breath in Mind
may explain why. Nasal breathing activates olfactory sensory
neurons (OSN) in the nasal cavity, which project to the OB
(Cunningham et al., 1999). In rodents, OB has been shown
to be linked to respiratory-entrained low-frequency oscillations
in the barrel cortex (Fontanini and Bower, 2005; Buonviso
et al., 2006; Ito et al., 2014). Olfactory and whisker-related
information is expected to be synchronized with respiration:
sniﬃng is rhythmically coupled with nasal, head and whisking
movements, facilitating active sensing (Verhagen et al., 2007;
Corcoran et al., 2018). Here, active sensing expresses the idea that
the environment is explored with a purposeful motor strategy
to extract relevant sensory information. The synchronized
whisking-related activity can support the ﬂow of bottom-up
sensory information and top-down predictions. Hence, OB-
mediated oscillations related to olfaction can be framed as an
active inference strategy to reduce uncertainty and support
adaptive action (Corcoran et al., 2018). However, the presence of
respiratory-entrained neural oscillations in other brain regions
not directly related to olfaction remain puzzling (Y ackle et al.,
2017; Zhong et al., 2017; Herrero et al., 2018; Tort et al.,
2018). As shown by Zelano et al. (2016), nasal, but not mouth,
breathing entrain electrical activity in the human olfactory cortex,
as well as in limbic brain areas, such as the amygdala and
the hippocampus. It is, therefore, likely that the long-range
synchrony of neural oscillations in the gamma-band and the
cognitive functioning related to it is mediated through slow
respiratory-entrained oscillations through OSNs and the OB. In
Figure 1, we illustrate the key regions involved in the interaction
between breathing, gamma-band oscillations and prediction
error propagation.
BREATHING OUT: AN INTEGRATION OF
THE STATE OF THE ART AND ITS
SIGNIFICANCE
The crux of the signiﬁcance of controlled respiration is that
breathing always happens in the present moment - it grounds
the organism in the current sensory experience. In the context
of the free-energy principle, this is signiﬁcant because it
implies that the breath can be used to recontextualize bottom-
up respiratory-related sensory information, which could alter
FIGURE 1 | Respiratory-entrained propagation of prediction errors. Nasal breathing stimulates olfactory sensory neurons in the olfactory bulb, which synchronizes
respiratory rate and neural oscillations in the olfactory bulb and piriform cortex. A large-scale entrainment of downstream targets like the entorhinal cortex,
hippocampus, the amygdala, insula, orbitofrontal cortex, and anterior cingulate cortex is suggested to co-occur. During controlled respiration prediction errors, or
bottom-up sensory information, are propagated to visceromotor corical regions (mostly via the insula) where they can update generative models. The blue arrows
represent direct anatomical projections from the olfactory bulb; the dashed arrows indicate long-distance respiratory-entrainment, where the red lines show the relay
of prediction errors in the form of gamma-band oscillations. For simpliﬁcation, the descending propagation of predictions from cortical regions to physiological
regulatory centers is omitted from the schema. Amy, Amygdala; ACC, anterior cingulate cortex; EC, entorhinal cortex; HC, hippocampus; OFC, orbitofrontal cortex;
OB, olfactory bulb; OSNs, olfactory sensory neurons.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 8 June 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647579
fnins-15-647579 June 23, 2021 Time: 17:40 # 9
Boyadzhieva and Kayhan Keeping the Breath in Mind
top-down predictions. For instance, slowing the breathing
rhythm triggers a number of physiological, cognitive and
aﬀective responses, corresponding to a generative model
of an overall relaxed state. Conversely, a rapid breathing
rhythm elicits an aroused state. Conscious control of the
breath can therefore be used as a fast-acting tool to modify
interoceptive priors.
The overarching purpose of this respiration-based regulatory
mechanism is to enable adaptation to a changing environment.
To recapitulate with an example: in an anxiety-provoking
situation, one can choose to attend to the breath and slow it
down, and by doing so alter an anxious internal state to a relaxed
one, without having changed environmental circumstances. If
the same external states demand diﬀerent optimal reactions
in diﬀerent situations, through this mechanism, the organism
can react ﬂexibly. In predictive processing terms, uncertainty is
minimized by putting more weight on bottom-up respiratory
signals and modulating predictive interoceptive models through
controlled breathing. Thousands of years of breathing practices
are thus grounded in an integration of contemporary ﬁndings
in the ﬁelds of respiratory neurophysiology, psychology,
and neuroscience.
Open Questions and Implications
From the insights discussed in this article, controlled breathing
emerges as an active inference strategy for minimizing
interoceptive prediction errors. However, controlled breathing
is a concept which would beneﬁt from improved granularity,
as it remains to be clariﬁed what types of breathing are best
suited for which situation, how long-lasting their eﬀects are and
if the eﬀects are prolonged by practice. In this paper, we refer
to the changes that occur as soon as the breath is brought into
conscious awareness and modulated. The time scale on which
these changes occur may vary from individual to individual
and context to context. Future research should elucidate
which factors inﬂuence this process. While the eﬀects of slow
breathing (from 4–10 breaths per min) on the cardiovascular and
autonomic nervous system have been well documented (Russo
et al., 2017), a multitude of fast-paced breathing techniques
remain to be systematically studied (Saoji et al., 2019). The same
holds for the role of nasal breathing, and its variations in terms
of nostril constriction, in opposition to mouth breathing, as the
neurocircuitry engaged by them does not overlap completely
(Maric et al., 2020).
Perhaps more importantly, however, the question of how
controlled breathing would act as an active inference mechanism
to alter interoceptive predictions should be further clariﬁed and
formalized. Animal models utilizing viral tracing techniques
are crucial to disentangle the underlying neurocircuitry. Once
established, the connectivity can be causally analyzed using
optogenetics to selectively target and manipulate neuronal
networks. In human neuroimaging studies, a combination of
EEG, fMRI, and respiratory measurements can be used to
investigate how the breath entrains cortical regions and whether
the OB-AIC-Frontal cortex circuitry should be the focus of
future investigation.
Another standing question is the signiﬁcance of perceptual
inference within the discussed processes. This issue is tightly
connected to the role of attention within the free-energy
principle. While heightened weighting of sensory evidence
mediated by attention attenuates predictions and increases
the precision of perceptual inference (Kok et al., 2012), it is
unclear whether attention per se is enough to elicit a change in
the interoceptive models. Put diﬀerently, it should be further
discussed whether paying attention to a certain feature of the
external or internal environment can be considered an “action”
by itself, transcending the function of precision weighting
(Clark, 2017).
Underlying this proposal is the motivation to contribute
to the physiological and the psychological well-being of both
clinical and normative populations. Maintaining a state of inner
balance within an ever-changing environment is a process
which requires receptivity and ﬂexibility. In the vast majority
of time, attuning to the internal and external environment does
not require conscious awareness. In fact, high interoceptive
awareness is associated with anxiety in both healthy subjects
and in clinical populations (Zoellner and Craske, 1999; Critchley
et al., 2004; Eley et al., 2004). However, given the promising
results of interoceptive training on the reduction of anxiety
(Garﬁnkel et al., 2017; Sugawara et al., 2020), it is likely that
this not an issue of an increased interoceptive sensitivity per
se. On a psychological level, the training may be eﬀective
because it teaches a diﬀerent mode of relating to these
signals, which on a computational level can be framed as a
strategic weighting of sensory evidence. This is in line with
the already well-established importance of interoceptive signal
processing in emotional stability and mental health (Barrett
et al., 2016; Critchley and Garﬁnkel, 2017; Murphy et al.,
2017; Khalsa et al., 2018). Therefore, controlled breathing
has the potential to be established as an easily accessible
and eﬀective tool, which shapes emotional, cognitive, and
physiological processes.
Conclusion
This article integrates respiration, neural oscillations and the free-
energy principle into a uniﬁed regulatory network of interaction
between physiological, aﬀective, and cognitive processes. Much
like an inhale gives rise to an exhale, the conceptual framework
can give rise to research. For this research to be exhaustive
and to do justice to the complexity of the interactions taking
place, it requires experts from diﬀerent ﬁelds to combine their
skills and share their knowledge. Computational models and
empirical studies ought to establish how respiration entrains
the central nervous system and how this is tied to the
homeostatic balance of the whole organism. Based on the
interactions outlined here, we believe that investigating how
gamma oscillations, via the OB, entrain processes in the insula
is a promising direction to go into, which would help to
understand how neuronal oscillations at diﬀerent temporal scales
ﬁt within the free-energy principle. This would be the starting
point for establishing scientiﬁcally sound strategies to modulate
maladaptive interoceptive models, as those associated with
anxiety, alexithymia, ADHD, depression and eating disorders
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 9 June 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647579
fnins-15-647579 June 23, 2021 Time: 17:40 # 10
Boyadzhieva and Kayhan Keeping the Breath in Mind
(Seth and Friston, 2016). An interdisciplinary approach would be
vital in deepening the understanding of how the brain, body and
the environment interact.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
AB and EK contributed to the conceptualization, writing, and
revision of the manuscript. AB conceived the original idea. EK
closely supervised the project. Both authors contributed to the
article and approved the submitted version.
FUNDING
AB was supported by Open access funding provided by
University of Vienna. EK was supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) (project number: 402789467).
REFERENCES
Adams, R. A., Shipp, S., and Friston, K. J. (2013). Predictions not commands:
active inference in the motor system. Brain Struct. Funct. 218, 611–643. doi:
10.1007/s00429-012-0475-5
Alamia, A., and VanRullen, R. (2019). Alpha oscillations and traveling waves:
signatures of predictive coding? PLoS Biol. 17:e3000487. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pbio.3000487
Allen, M. (2020). Unravelling the neurobiology of interoceptive inference. Trends
Cogn. Sci. 24, 265–266. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2020.02.002
Allen, M., Levy, A., Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2019). In the body’s eye: the
computational anatomy of interoceptive inference. bioRxiv [preprint] doi: 10.
1101/603928
Arch, J. J., and Craske, M. G. (2006). Mechanisms of mindfulness: emotion
regulation following a focused breathing induction. Behav. Res. Ther. 44,
1849–1858. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2005.12.007
Arshamian, A., Iravani, B., Majid, A., and Lundström, J. N. (2018). Respiration
modulates olfactory memory consolidation in humans. J. Neurosci. 38, 10286–
10294. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3360-17.2018
Aston-Jones, G., Rajkowski, J., and Cohen, J. (1999). Role of locus coeruleus in
attention and behavioral ﬂexibility.Biol. Psychiatry46, 1309–1320. doi: 10.1016/
S0006-3223(99)00140-7
Barrett, L. F. (2017). The theory of constructed emotion: an active inference
account of interoception and categorization. Soc. Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 12,
1–23. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsx060
Barrett, L. F., and Simmons, W. K. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in the brain.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 16, 419–429. doi: 10.1038/nrn3950
Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., and Hamilton, P. (2016). An active inference theory
of allostasis and interoception in depression. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B
Biol. Sci. 371:20160011. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0011
Berridge, C. W., and Waterhouse, B. D. (2003). The locus coeruleus–noradrenergic
system: modulation of behavioral state and state-dependent cognitive processes.
Brain Res. Rev. 42, 33–84. doi: 10.1016/S0165-0173(03)00143-7
Birn, R. M., Diamond, J. B., Smith, M. A., and Bandettini, P. A. (2006).
Separating respiratory-variation-related ﬂuctuations from neuronal-activity-
related ﬂuctuations in fMRI. Neuroimage 31, 1536–1548. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2006.02.048
Birn, R. M., Murphy, K., and Bandettini, P. A. (2008a). The eﬀect of respiration
variations on independent component analysis results of resting state functional
connectivity. Hum. Brain Mapp. 29, 740–750. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20577
Birn, R. M., Smith, M. A., Jones, T. B., and Bandettini, P. A. (2008b).
The respiration response function: the temporal dynamics of fMRI signal
ﬂuctuations related to changes in respiration. Neuroimage 40, 644–654. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.11.059
Biskamp, J., Bartos, M., and Sauer, J. F. (2017). Organization of prefrontal network
activity by respiration-related oscillations. Sci. Rep. 7:45508. doi: 10.1038/
srep45508
Boroujeni, K. B., Oemisch, M., Hassani, S. A., and Womelsdorf, T. (2020). Fast
spiking interneuron activity in primate striatum tracks learning of attention
cues. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 18049–18058. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
2001348117
Boyadzhieva, A., and Kayhan, E. (2020). Keeping the breath in mind: respiration,
neural oscillations and the free energy principle. PsyArXiv [preprint] doi: 10.
31234/osf.io/8fm2r
Brown, R. P., and Gerbarg, P. L. (2005). Sudarshan Kriya yogic breathing in the
treatment of stress, anxiety, and depression: part I-neurophysiologic model.
J. Altern. Complement. Med. (New York, N.Y.) 11, 189–201. doi: 10.1089/acm.
2005.11.189
Buonviso, N., Amat, C., and Litaudon, P. (2006). Respiratory modulation of
olfactory neurons in the rodent brain. Chem. Sens. 31, 145–154. doi: 10.1093/
chemse/bjj010
Buzsaki, G. (2006). Rhythms of the Brain. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2017). Predictions, precision, and agentive attention. Conscious. Cogn.
56, 115–119. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2017.06.013
Clark, D. M. (1993). Cognitive mediation of panic attacks induced by biological
challenge tests. Adv. Behav. Res. Ther. 15, 75–84. doi: 10.1016/0146-6402(93)
90004-L
Corcoran, A. W., Pezzulo, G., and Hohwy, J. (2018). Commentary: respiration-
entrained brain rhythms are global but often overlooked. Front. Syst. Neurosci.
12:25. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2018.00025
Corﬁeld, D. R., Murphy, K., and Guz, A. (1998). Does the motor cortical control
of the diaphragm ‘bypass’ the brain stem respiratory centres in man? Respir.
Physiol. 114, 109–117. doi: 10.1016/S0034-5687(98)00083-8
Craig, A. D. (2009). How do you feel–now? The anterior insula and human
awareness. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 59–70. doi: 10.1038/nrn2555
Critchley, H. D., and Garﬁnkel, S. N. (2017). Interoception and emotion. Curr.
Opin. Psychol. 17, 7–14. doi: 10.1016/j.copsyc.2017.04
Critchley, H. D., Wiens, S., Rotshtein, P., Öhman, A., and Dolan, R. J. (2004).
Neural systems supporting interoceptive awareness. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 189–195.
doi: 10.1038/nn1176
Cunningham, A. M., Manis, P. B., Reed, R. R., and Ronnett, G. V. (1999). Olfactory
receptor neurons exist as distinct subclasses of immature and mature cells
in primary culture. Neuroscience 93, 1301–1312. doi: 10.1016/S0306-4522(99)
00193-1
Del Negro, C. A., Funk, G. D., and Feldman, J. L. (2018). Breathing matters. Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 19, 351–367. doi: 10.1038/s41583-018-0003-6
Dhingra, R. R., Dick, T. E., Furuya, W. I., Galán, R. F., and Dutschmann, M.
(2020). Volumetric mapping of the functional neuroanatomy of the respiratory
network in the perfused brainstem preparation of rats. J. Physiol. 598, 2061–
2079. doi: 10.1113/JP279605
Dhingra, R. R., Furuya, W. I., Dick, T. E., and Dutschmann, M. (2021). Response
to: the post-inspiratory complex (PiCo), what is the evidence? J. Physiol. 599,
361–362. doi: 10.1113/JP280958
Dick, T. E., Hsieh, Y. H., Dhingra, R. R., Baekey, D. M., Galán, R. F., Wehrwein,
E., et al. (2014). Cardiorespiratory coupling: common rhythms in cardiac,
sympathetic, and respiratory activities. Prog. Brain Res. 209, 191–205. doi: 10.
1016/B978-0-444-63274-6.00010-2
Driver, I. D., Whittaker, J. R., Bright, M. G., Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., and
Murphy, K. (2016). Arterial CO2 ﬂuctuations modulate neuronal rhythmicity:
implications for MEG and fMRI studies of resting-state networks. J. Neurosci.
36, 8541–8550. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4263-15.2016
Eckberg, D. L., Nerhed, C. H., and Wallin, B. G. (1985). Respiratory modulation of
muscle sympathetic and vagal cardiac outﬂow in man. J. Physiol. 365, 181–196.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1985.sp015766
Eley, T. C., Stirling, L., Ehlers, A., Gregory, A. M., and Clark, D. M.
(2004). Heart-beat perception, panic/somatic symptoms and anxiety sensitivity
in children. Behav. Res. Ther. 42, 439–448. doi: 10.1016/S0005-7967(03)
00152-9
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 10 June 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647579
fnins-15-647579 June 23, 2021 Time: 17:40 # 11
Boyadzhieva and Kayhan Keeping the Breath in Mind
Engel, A. K., Fries, P., König, P., Brecht, M., and Singer, W. (1999). Temporal
binding, binocular rivalry, and consciousness. Conscious. Cogn. 8, 128–151.
doi: 10.1006/ccog.1999.0389
Evans, K. C., Banzett, R. B., Adams, L., Mckay, L., Frackowiak, R. S., and Corﬁeld,
D. R. (2002). BOLD fMRI identiﬁes limbic, paralimbic, and cerebellar activation
during air hunger. J. Neurophysiol. 88, 1500–1511. doi: 10.1152/jn.2002.88.3.
1500
Farb, N. A., Segal, Z. V., and Anderson, A. K. (2013a). Attentional modulation of
primary interoceptive and exteroceptive cortices. Cereb. Cortex 23, 114–126.
Farb, N. A., Segal, Z. V., and Anderson, A. K. (2013b). Mindfulness meditation
training alters cortical representations of interoceptive attention. Soc. Cogn.
Aﬀect. Neurosci. 8, 15–26. doi: 10.1093/scan/nss066
Faull, O. K., Jenkinson, M., Clare, S., and Pattinson, K. T. (2015). Functional
subdivision of the human periaqueductal grey in respiratory control using 7
tesla fMRI. Neuroimage 113, 356–364. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.02.026
Feldman, H., and Friston, K. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy.Front.
Hum. Neurosci. 4:215. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215
Fontanini, A., and Bower, J. M. (2005). Variable coupling between olfactory system
activity and respiration in Ketamine/Xylazine anesthetized rats.J. Neurophysiol.
93, 3573–3581. doi: 10.1152/jn.01320.2004
Fries, P. (2005). A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: neuronal communication
through neuronal coherence. Trends Cogn. Sci. 9, 474–480. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.
2005.08.011
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Garﬁnkel, S. N., Manassei, M. F., Hamilton-Fletcher, G., In den Bosch, Y., Critchley,
H. D., and Engels, M. (2016). Interoceptive dimensions across cardiac and
respiratory axes. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 371:20160014. doi: 10.1098/
rstb.2016.0014
Garﬁnkel, S. N., Mclanachan, A., and Critchley, H. D. (2017). Interoceptive
training for anxiety management in autism: aligning dimension of interoceptive
experience. Psychosom. Med. 79:A100.
Gorman, J. M., and Sloan, R. P. (2000). Heart rate variability in depressive and
anxiety disorders. Am. Heart J. 140, S77–S83. doi: 10.1067/mhj.2000.109981
Green, A. L., Wang, S., Purvis, S., Owen, S. L., Bain, P. G., Stein, J. F., et al. (2007).
Identifying cardiorespiratory neurocircuitry involved in central command
during exercise in humans. J. Physiol. 578(Pt 2), 605–612. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.
2006.122549
Guyenet, P. G., and Bayliss, D. A. (2015). Neural control of breathing and CO2
homeostasis. Neuron 87, 946–961. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.08.001
Hammer, M., Schwale, C., Brankaˇck, J., Draguhn, A., and Tort, A. B. (2020). Theta-
gamma coupling depends on breathing rate. bioRxiv [preprint] doi: 10.1101/
2020.10.22.349936
Hayward, L. F., Swartz, C. L., and Davenport, P. W. (2003). Respiratory response
to activation or disinhibition of the dorsal periaqueductal gray in rats. J. Appl.
Physiol. 94, 913–922. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00740.2002
Heck, D. H., McAfee, S. S., Liu, Y., Babajani-Feremi, A., Rezaie, R., Freeman,
W. J., et al. (2017). Breathing as a fundamental rhythm of brain function.Front.
Neural Circ. 10:115. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2016.00115
Herrero, J. L., Khuvis, S., Yeagle, E., Cerf, M., and Mehta, A. D. (2018). Breathing
above the brain stem: volitional control and attentional modulation in humans.
J. Neurophysiol. 119, 145–159. doi: 10.1152/jn.00551.2017
Herrmann, C. S., Fründ, I., and Lenz, D. (2010). Human gamma-band
activity: a review on cognitive and behavioral correlates and network
models. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 34, 981–992. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.
09.001
Holstege, G. (2014). The periaqueductal gray controls brainstem emotional motor
systems including respiration. Prog. Brain Res. 209, 379–405. doi: 10.1016/
B978-0-444-63274-6.00020-5
Horiuchi, J., McDowall, L. M., and Dampney, R. A. (2009). Vasomotor and
respiratory responses evoked from the dorsolateral periaqueductal grey are
mediated by the dorsomedial hypothalamus. J. Physiol. 587, 5149–5162. doi:
10.1113/jphysiol.2009.179739
Hsu, S. M., Tseng, C. H., Hsieh, C. H., and Hsieh, C. W. (2020). Slow-
paced inspiration regularizes alpha phase dynamics in the human brain.
J. Neurophysiol. 123, 289–299. doi: 10.1152/jn.00624.2019
Huang, Z. G., Subramanian, S. H., Balnave, R. J., Turman, A. B., and Chow,
C. M. (2000). Roles of periaqueductal gray and nucleus tractus solitarius in
cardiorespiratory function in the rat brainstem. Respir. Physiol. 120, 185–195.
doi: 10.1016/S0034-5687(00)00107-9
Huijbers, W., Pennartz, C. M., Beldzik, E., Domagalik, A., Vinck, M., Hofman,
W. F., et al. (2014). Respiration phase-locks to fast stimulus presentations:
implications for the interpretation of posterior midline “deactivations”. Hum.
Brain Mapp. 35, 4932–4943. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22523
Ito, J., Roy, S., Liu, Y., Cao, Y., Fletcher, M., Lu, L., et al. (2014). Whisker barrel
cortex delta oscillations and gamma power in the awake mouse are linked to
respiration. Nat. Commun. 5:3572. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4572
Iwabe, T., Ozaki, I., and Hashizume, A. (2014). The respiratory cycle modulates
brain potentials, sympathetic activity, and subjective pain sensation induced
by noxious stimulation. Neurosci. Res. 84, 47–59. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2014.03.
003
Jafari, H., Gholamrezaei, A., Franssen, M., Van Oudenhove, L., Aziz, Q., Van den
Bergh, O., et al. (2020). Can slow deep breathing reduce pain? An experimental
study exploring mechanisms. J. Pain 21, 1018–1030. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2019.
12.010
James, W. (1912). Essays in Radical Empiricism. New York, NY: Longma Green &
Co.
Kay, L. M. (2014). Circuit oscillations in odor perception and memory. Prog. Brain
Res. 208, 223–251. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63350-7.00009-7
Kay, L. M., Beshel, J., Brea, J., Martin, C., Rojas-Líbano, D., and Kopell, N.
(2009). Olfactory oscillations: the what, how and what for. Trends Neurosci. 32,
207–214. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2008.11.008
Khalsa, S. S., Adolphs, R., Cameron, O. G., Critchley, H. D., Davenport, P. W.,
Feinstein, J. S., et al. (2018). Interoception and mental health: a roadmap. Biol.
Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging 3, 501–513.
Kleckner, I. R., Zhang, J., Touroutoglou, A., Chanes, L., Xia, C., Simmons, W. K.,
et al. (2017). Evidence for a large-scale brain system supporting allostasis and
interoception in humans. Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 1–14. doi: 10.1038/s41562-017-
0069
Kluger, D. S., and Gross, J. (2020). Depth and phase of respiration modulate
cortico-muscular communication. NeuroImage 222:117272.
Kok, P., Rahnev, D., Jehee, J. F., Lau, H. C., and De Lange, F. P. (2012). Attention
reverses the eﬀect of prediction in silencing sensory signals. Cereb. Cortex 22,
2197–2206. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr310
Kox, M., van Eijk, L. T., Zwaag, J., van den Wildenberg, J., Sweep, F. C., van der
Hoeven, J. G., et al. (2014). Voluntary activation of the sympathetic nervous
system and attenuation of the innate immune response in humans. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 7379–7384. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1322174111
Lakatos, P., Shah, A. S., Knuth, K. H., Ulbert, I., Karmos, G., and Schroeder,
C. E. (2005). An oscillatory hierarchy controlling neuronal excitability and
stimulus processing in the auditory cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 94, 1904–1911.
doi: 10.1152/jn.00263.2005
Larsen, K. L., Brilla, L. R., McLaughlin, W. L., and Li, Y. (2019). Eﬀect of deep
slow breathing on pain-related variables in osteoarthritis. Pain Res. Manag.
2019:5487050. doi: 10.1155/2019/5487050
Li, S., and Laskin, J. J. (2006). Inﬂuences of ventilation on maximal isometric force
of the ﬁnger ﬂexors. Muscle Nerve 34, 651–655. doi: 10.1002/Mus.20592
Li, S., and Rymer, W. Z. (2011). Voluntary breathing inﬂuences corticospinal
excitability of nonrespiratory ﬁnger muscles. J. Neurophysiol. 105, 512–521.
doi: 10.1152/jn.00946.2010
Liu, Y., McAfee, S. S., and Heck, D. H. (2017). Hippocampal sharp-wave ripples in
awake mice are entrained by respiration. Sci. Rep. 7:8950. doi: 10.1038/s41598-
017-09511-8
Ma, X., Yue, Z. Q., Gong, Z. Q., Zhang, H., Duan, N. Y., Shi, Y. T., et al. (2017).
The eﬀect of diaphragmatic breathing on attention, negative aﬀect and stress in
healthy adults. Front. Psychol. 8:874. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00874
Magalhães, K. S., Spiller, P. F., da Silva, M. P., Kuntze, L. B., Paton, J. F.,
Machado, B. H., et al. (2018). Locus Coeruleus as a vigilance centre for active
inspiration and expiration in rats. Sci. Rep. 8:15654. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-
34047-w
Maric, V., Ramanathan, D., and Mishra, J. (2020). Respiratory regulation &
interactions with neuro-cognitive circuitry. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 112, 95–
106. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.02.001
Mather, M., and Thayer, J. F. (2018). How heart rate variability aﬀects emotion
regulation brain networks. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 19, 98–104. doi: 10.1016/j.
cobeha.2017.12.017
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 11 June 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647579
fnins-15-647579 June 23, 2021 Time: 17:40 # 12
Boyadzhieva and Kayhan Keeping the Breath in Mind
Mather, M., Clewett, D., Sakaki, M., and Harley, C. W. (2016). Norepinephrine
ignites local hotspots of neuronal excitation: how arousal ampliﬁes selectivity
in perception and memory. Behav. Brain Sci. 39:e200. doi: 10.1017/
S0140525X15000667
Mckay, L. C., Evans, K. C., Frackowiak, R. S., and Corﬁeld, D. R. (2003). Neural
correlates of voluntary breathing in humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 95, 1170–1178.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00641.2002
Melnychuk, M. C., Dockree, P. M., O’Connell, R. G., Murphy, P. R., Balsters, J. H.,
and Robertson, I. H. (2018). Coupling of respiration and attention via the locus
coeruleus: eﬀects of meditation and pranayama. Psychophysiology 55:e13091.
doi: 10.1111/psyp.13091
Mironov, S. (2009). Respiratory circuits: function, mechanisms, topology, and
pathology. Neuroscientist 15, 194–208. doi: 10.1177/1073858408329510
Murphy, J., Brewer, R., Catmur, C., and Bird, G. (2017). Interoception and
psychopathology: a developmental neuroscience perspective. Dev. Cogn.
Neurosci. 23, 45–56. doi: 10.1016/j.dcn.2016.12.006
Murphy, P. R., O’connell, R. G., O’sullivan, M., Robertson, I. H., and Balsters, J. H.
(2014). Pupil diameter covaries with BOLD activity in human locus coeruleus.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 35, 4140–4154. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22466
Nardi, A. E., Freire, R. C., and Zin, W. A. (2009). Panic disorder and control of
breathing. Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol. 167, 133–143. doi: 10.1016/j.resp.2008.07.
011
Noble, D. J., and Hochman, S. (2019). Hypothesis: pulmonary aﬀerent activity
patterns during slow, deep breathing contribute to the neural induction
of physiological relaxation. Front. Physiol. 10:1176. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.
01176
Novaes, M. M., Palhano-Fontes, F., Onias, H., Andrade, K. C., Lobão-Soares, B.,
Arruda-Sanchez, T., et al. (2020). Eﬀects of yoga respiratory practice (Bhastrika
pranayama) on anxiety, aﬀect, and brain functional connectivity and activity: a
randomized controlled trial. Front. Psychiatry 11:467. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.
00467
Park, H. D., and Blanke, O. (2019). Heartbeat-evoked cortical responses:
underlying mechanisms, functional roles, and methodological considerations.
Neuroimage 197, 502–511. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.04.081
Park, H. D., Barnoud, C., Trang, H., Kannape, O. A., Schaller, K., and Blanke, O.
(2020). Breathing is coupled with voluntary action and the cortical readiness
potential. Nat. Commun. 11:289. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-13967-9
Pattinson, K. T., Governo, R. J., MacIntosh, B. J., Russell, E. C., Corﬁeld, D.
R., Tracey, I., et al. (2009). Opioids depress cortical centers responsible for
the volitional control of respiration. J. Neurosci. 29, 8177–8186. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.1375-09.2009
Philippot, P., Chapelle, G., and Blairy, S. (2002). Respiratory feedback in
the generation of emotion. Cogn. Emot. 16, 605–627. doi: 10.1080/
02699930143000392
Rassler, B., and Raabe, J. (2003). Co-ordination of breathing with rhythmic head
and eye movements and with passive turnings of the body. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol.
90, 125–130. doi: 10.1007/s00421-003-0876-5
Russo, M. A., Santarelli, D. M., and O’Rourke, D. (2017). The physiological
eﬀects of slow breathing in the healthy human. Breathe (Sheﬃeld, England) 13,
298–309. doi: 10.1183/20734735.009817
Sanchez-Vives, M. V., and McCormick, D. A. (2000). Cellular and network
mechanisms of rhythmic recurrent activity in neocortex. Nat. Neurosci. 3,
1027–1034. doi: 10.1038/79848
Saoji, A. A., Raghavendra, B. R., and Manjunath, N. K. (2019). Eﬀects of yogic
breath regulation: a narrative review of scientiﬁc evidence. J. Ayurveda Integr.
Med. 10, 50–58. doi: 10.1016/j.jaim.2017.07.008
Seth, A. K., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the
emotional brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 371:20160007. doi: 10.1098/
rstb.2016.0007
Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2012). An interoceptive predictive
coding model of conscious presence. Front. Psychol. 2:395. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2011.00395
Shaﬀer, F., McCraty, R., and Zerr, C. L. (2014). A healthy heart is not a metronome:
an integrative review of the heart’s anatomy and heart rate variability. Front.
Psychol. 5:1040. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01040
Singer, T., Critchley, H. D., and Preuschoﬀ, K. (2009). A common role of insula in
feelings, empathy and uncertainty. Trends Cogn. Sci. 13, 334–340.
Smith, J. C., Ellenberger, H. H., Ballanyi, K., Richter, D. W., and Feldman,
J. L. (1991). Pre-Botzinger complex: a brainstem region that may generate
respiratory rhythm in mammals. Science 254, 726–729. doi: 10.1126/science.
1683005
Smout, C. A., Tang, M. F., Garrido, M. I., and Mattingley, J. B. (2019). Attention
promotes the neural encoding of prediction errors. PLoS Biol. 17:e2006812.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000368
Song, H. S., and Lehrer, P. M. (2003). The eﬀects of speciﬁc respiratory rates on
heart rate and heart rate variability. Appl. Psychophysiol. Biofeedback 28, 13–23.
doi: 10.1023/A:1022312815649
Sterling, P. (1988). “Allostasis: a new paradigm to explain arousal pathology, ” in
Handbook of Life Stress, Cognition and Health , eds S. Fisher and J. Reason
(New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons), 629–649.
Sterling, P. (2014). Homeostasis vs allostasis: implications for brain function and
mental disorders. JAMA psychiatry71, 1192–1193. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.
2014.1043
Sugawara, A., Terasawa, Y., Katsunuma, R., and Sekiguchi, A. (2020). Eﬀects of
interoceptive training on decision making, anxiety, and somatic symptoms.
BioPsychoSoc. Med. 14:7. doi: 10.1186/s13030-020-00179-7
Toor, R. U. A. S., Sun, Q. J., Kumar, N. N., Le, S., Hildreth, C. M., Phillips,
J. K., et al. (2019). Neurons in the intermediate reticular nucleus coordinate
postinspiratory activity, swallowing, and respiratory-sympathetic coupling in
the rat. J. Neurosci. 39, 9757–9766. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0502-19.2019
Tort, A. B. L., Brankack, J., and Draguhn, A. (2018). Respiration-entrained brain
rhythms are global but often overlooked. Trends Neurosci. 41, 186–197. doi:
10.1016/j.tins.2018.01.007
Trevizan-Baú, P., Furuya, W. I., Mazzone, S. B., Stani ´c, D., Dhingra, R. R., and
Dutschmann, M. (2021). Reciprocal connectivity of the periaqueductal gray
with the ponto-medullary respiratory network in rat. Brain Res. 1757:147255.
doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2020.147255
van Pelt, S., Heil, L., Kwisthout, J., Ondobaka, S., van Rooij, I., and Bekkering,
H. (2016). Beta-and gamma-band activity reﬂect predictive coding in the
processing of causal events. Soc. Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 11, 973–980. doi: 10.
1093/scan/nsw017
Varga, S., and Heck, D. H. (2017). Rhythms of the body, rhythms of the brain:
respiration, neural oscillations, and embodied cognition. Conscious. Cogn. 56,
77–90. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2017.09.008
Verhagen, J. V., Wesson, D. W., Netoﬀ, T. I, White, J. A., and Wachowiak, M.
(2007). Sniﬃng controls an adaptive ﬁlter of sensory input to the olfactory bulb.
Nat. Neurosci. 10, 631–639. doi: 10.1038/nn1892
Wang, S. Z., Li, S., Xu, X. Y., Lin, G. P., Shao, L., Zhao, Y., et al. (2010). Eﬀect of slow
abdominal breathing combined with biofeedback on blood pressure and heart
rate variability in prehypertension. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 16, 1039–1045.
doi: 10.1089/acm.2009.0577
Wang, X., Wu, Q., Egan, L., Gu, X., Liu, P., Gu, H., et al. (2019). Anterior
insular cortex plays a critical role in interoceptive attention. ELife 8:e42265.
doi: 10.7554/eLife.42265
Wells, R. E., Collier, J., Posey, G., Morgan, F., Auman, T., Strittameter, B., et al.
(2020). Attention to breath sensations does not engage endogenous opioids to
reduce pain. Pain 161, 1884–1893. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001865
Weng, H. Y., Lewis-Peacock, J. A., Hecht, F. M., Uncapher, M. R., Ziegler, D. A.,
Farb, N. A., et al. (2020). Focus on the breath: brain decoding reveals internal
states of attention during meditation. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 14:336. doi: 10.
3389/fnhum.2020.00336
Wise, R. G., Ide, K., Poulin, M. J., and Tracey, I. (2004). Resting ﬂuctuations in
arterial carbon dioxide induce signiﬁcant low frequency variations in BOLD
signal. Neuroimage 21, 1652–1664. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.11.025
Y ackle, K., Schwarz, L. A., Kam, K., Sorokin, J. M., Huguenard, J. R., Feldman, J. L.,
et al. (2017). Breathing control center neurons that promote arousal in mice.
Science 355, 1411–1415. doi: 10.1126/science.aai7984
Y anovsky, Y., Ciatipis, M., Draguhn, A., Tort, A. B., and Branka ˇck, J. (2014).
Slow oscillations in the mouse hippocampus entrained by nasal respiration.
J. Neurosci. 34, 5949–5964. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5287-13.2014
Zaccaro, A., Piarulli, A., Laurino, M., Garbella, E., Menicucci, D., Neri, B.,
et al. (2018). How breath-control can change your life: a systematic review
on psycho-physiological correlates of slow breathing. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
12:353. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00353
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 12 June 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647579
fnins-15-647579 June 23, 2021 Time: 17:40 # 13
Boyadzhieva and Kayhan Keeping the Breath in Mind
Zelano, C., Jiang, H., Zhou, G., Arora, N., Schuele, S., Rosenow, J., et al. (2016).
Nasal respiration entrains human limbic oscillations and modulates cognitive
function. J. Neurosci. 36, 12448–12467. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2586-16.
2016
Zhong, W., Ciatipis, M., Wolfenstetter, T., Jessberger, J., Müller, C., Ponsel, S., et al.
(2017). Selective entrainment of gamma subbands by diﬀerent slow network
oscillations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, 4519–4524. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1617249114
Zoellner, L. A., and Craske, M. G. (1999). Interoceptive accuracy and panic.Behav.
Res. Ther. 37, 1141–1158. doi: 10.1016/S0005-7967(98)00202-2
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Boyadzhieva and Kayhan. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 13 June 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647579