1 
 
Introduction 
In the context of experiencing a moment, there exists an underlying awareness that attributes 
the unfolding experience to a distinct entity often referred to as the "self." This self-related perspective 
manifests as a subjective sense that sensory information in the moment pertains to "me," or is 
essentially owned or experienced by "me." This intrinsic quality of subjective perspective, often referred 
to as "first-personal givenness" (Henriksen et al., 2019), constitutes what Gallagher (2000) termed 
"minimal selfhood." Formally defined, the minimal self is the immediate, pre-reflective awareness or 
sense of being the subject of a given experience.  
There is growing acceptance that one’s sense of minimal selfhood can vary or even be 
extinguished (i.e., disrupted), particularly due to the use of psychedelic drugs or mindfulness meditation 
practice (Hafner et al., 2022; Lang & Viertbauer, 2022). Instances of minimal self disruption in the 
context of psychedelics is commonly referred to as psychedelic ego-dissolution, and minimal self 
disruption in the context of meditation is commonly referred to as non-dual awareness (Josipovic & 
Miskovic, 2020; Letheby & Gerrans, 2017). Finally, disruption of minimal selfhood seems to be a core 
feature of minimal phenomenal experience (MPE; Metzinger, 2024). The purpose of this paper is to 
explain states in which one is conscious of content or experiences qualia, yet with no phenomenological 
reference to a self. Thus, the purposes of this paper are more immediately relevant to MPE without 
absorption.  
Variations in animal selfhood can therefore be considered an important marker and mechanism 
of these alterations in consciousness. However, it has been difficult to identify the physical systems 
driving these variations for two reasons. First, common experimental conditions used to identify the 
neural activity involved in minimal selfhood may not actually be targeting this construct (Girn & 
Christoff, 2018). Second, the mechanisms currently hypothesised to disrupt minimal selfhood may not 
accurately represent the core neural systems responsible for it (Millière, 2017). 
This paper aims to address both issues by proposing a novel theoretical approach which 
integrates knowledge about psychedelic ego-dissolution and meditative non-dual awareness. First, the 
two main challenges which characterise minimal self research will be discussed, along with an argument 
for considering psychedelic ego-dissolution and meditative non-dual awareness as valid instances of 
minimal self disruptions. Following that, the proposed solution is introduced: theoretical work on the 
causal basis of the minimal self should be guided by observations of context-independent changes in 
neural activity related to minimal selfhood. An example of this approach and its utility will be presented 
by analysing commonalities between neurocomputational models of psychedelic ego-dissolution and 
meditative non-dual awareness. To provide context for this analysis, it will be prefaced with an 
explanation about the predictive processing framework of computational modelling. Then, examples of 
hypotheses which can be derived from this analysis are presented. Following, we describe how these 
hypotheses might guide simulations of selfless experience in a new computational model of selfhood 
(Reichle & Boag, 2024). Finally, implications and future directions for this research are discussed. 
2 
 
The First Challenge: Finding Genuine Cases of Minimal Self 
Disruption 
In recent years, cognitive scientists have expressed the utility of studying the disruption of 
minimal selfhood as a way to increase understanding of its physical basis (Hafner et al., 2022; Lebedev et 
al., 2015). However, considering minimal selfhood cannot be defined by any reflective self-aspect, this 
goal requires utilising cases which clearly involve the disruption of pre-reflective selfhood (Gallagher, 
2000). Girn and Christoff (2018) note that fulfilling this requirement has been difficult, because 
experimental manipulations of selfhood usually make use of reflective processes. For instance, Nour and 
Carhart-Harris (2017) emphasise that most neuroscientific evidence related to selfhood mainly concern 
reflective self-attribution rather than feelings of pre-reflective selfhood. This is because neuroimaging 
has usually been conducted in light of subjects’ levels of introspection, autobiographical memory, and 
general mental or physical features of oneself (Nour & Carhart-Harris, 2017). The authors suggest that 
this evidence more directly addresses the self as “an object of attribution” (p. 177), but are not well 
suited to provide information specific to the neural bases of the minimal self-experience, or experience 
of phenomenal subjectivity.  
Millière (2017) corroborates this point, stating that in attempt to pinpoint the brain processes 
related to the minimal self, it is important to direct neuroscientific investigation towards “self-
specifying” processes which underlie the pre-reflective relation of a phenomenal object to a subject, 
instead of “self-related processes” which underlie tasks in which one consciously processes information 
about one’s self. This distinction was originally conceived by Ruby and Legrand (2009). Millière (2017) 
points out that the latter “does not tell us anything important about the neural correlates of the self, 
since these processes are also involved in inferential processing and memory recall in general (including 
other-related information)” (p. 10). To effectively establish the physical basis of the minimal self, it is 
important then to focus data collection on the modulation of experiential subjectivity. One way this may 
be achieved is by tracking the neural correlates of psychedelic ego-dissolution and non-dual awareness, 
an approach which will be justified in the following section.  
Psychedelic Ego-dissolution and Meditative Non-Dual Awareness as Genuine Cases of 
Minimal Self Modulation 
This section aims to substantiate the idea that some forms of psychedelic ego-dissolution and 
non-dual awareness represent extreme modulations (i.e., disruptions) specific to minimal selfhood. The 
central requirement that each case must meet to be considered as a minimal self disruption is that it 
represents a conscious experience lacking any form of subjectivity. In the case of psychedelic ego-
dissolution, existing evidence positions it as a suitable representation of a minimal self disruption 
(Lebedev et al., 2015; Letheby, 2020; Millière, 2017). For qualitative reports on selfless states under 
psychedelics, notable references include Lutkajtis (2021), Marguilho et al. (2023), Mollaahmetoglu et al. 
(2021), Pollan (2019) and Turton et al. (2014). 
3 
 
 Letheby (2020, p. 17) states that sefless states under psychedelics represent a notable 
departure from the sense of being a conscious entity—an “inherent point of reference". This felt ego-
dissolution is fundamentally characterised by the absence of any readily identifiable entity or 
perspective through which one is conscious of the objects in one’s phenomenal field (Millière, 2017). 
Moreover, this departure is significant enough that it becomes unsuitable to confidently attribute the 
feature of first-personal givenness to these experiences. In other words, this type of psychedelic ego-
dissolution is fundamentally characterised by a conscious state which lacks any sense of subjectivity. 
Taken together, these reports suggest that this type of psychedelic ego-dissolution is best understood as 
a disruption of minimal selfhood.  
Specific links between non-dual awareness in the context of meditation and disruption to 
minimal selfhood are less clear. Although this idea is expressed relatively directly in Buddhist texts 
(Chadha, 2017; MacKenzie, 2009; Mills, 1977), these ideas have not been taken at face value in modern 
cognitive science (Millière et al., 2018). Accordingly, the second aim of this section is to examine these 
texts in light of the phenomenological description of minimal selfhood, which is relevant to its scientific 
operationalisation. The second aim of this section is to argue that non-dual awareness is a valid case of a 
minimal self disruption: it is a state in which conscious experience lacks any sense of subjectivity. 
Psychedelic Ego-Dissolution. It is important to preface that all not psychedelic-induced 
alterations in self-experience are necessarily alterations in minimal selfhood (Millière, 2020). Millière 
(2020) highlights a complex range of possible alterations to minimal self associated with psychedelics, 
from mild disruption of surface or narrative aspects of self experience through to disruption of minimal 
self (i.e., total ego-dissolution). The following evidence presented is therefore specific to ego-dissolution 
marked by alterations in the pre-reflective selfhood, defining any mention of psychedelic ego-
dissolution henceforth.  
Meditative Non-Dual Awareness. During the mid-twentieth century, there was a surge of 
integration of Buddhist philosophies with Western cognitive science by the works of authors such as 
Kabat-Zinn (1981) and Rhys Davids (1914). This approach to psychology and consciousness contained 
ideas about the nature of the self that were not easily reconciled with the scientific understanding of 
that time (Chadha, 2017). The Buddha taught, as transcribed in the Dhammapada canon (Mills, 1977), 
that there are three markers of existence which apply to every living being: impermanence (anicca), 
suffering (dukkha), and not-self (anattā). Each of these serve as a doctrine guiding meditation practice 
towards understanding these markers through direct experience. Not-self, or anattā, is considered by 
Buddhist scholars as the Buddha’s most profound insight (Mills, 1977). Anattā is the realisation that 
“self” is an illusion constructed by the mind (Mills, 1977). This is the generation of the sense that there is 
an “experiencer” to experience, an “observer” to observe, or an individual entity which interacts with 
the world. The “self” here emerges through self-referent interpretation of what the Buddha called the 
five aggregates (khandas) of experience: form (the physical world), feeling (as in our simplest responses 
to an experience; like, dislike, or indifference), perception (recognition of sensory objects), volitions 
(intentions), and consciousness (cognizance or any kind of mental activity) (Mills, 1977). 
4 
 
Self-referent interpretation normally occurs as each of these aggregates naturally arise in one’s 
experience (MacKenzie, 2009). Specifically, one will subconsciously interpret any of the aggregates or 
their combination (1) as possessing the aggregates, (2) as the individual existing within the aggregate, or 
(3) as the aggregate existing within the individual. This self-referential processing is what Buddhist texts 
term “I-making” (ahaṃkāra) because it is in such identification with the aggregates that a sense of “self” 
or “I” emerges (MacKenzie, 2010; Mills, 1977). In other words, a sense of “I” originates from a 
subconscious identification of experience as occurring in reference to an entity, as opposed to just 
occurring impersonally. Realising anattā is therefore described as a state in which one has abandoned 
the perspective that an experience is happening to or around them, i.e. no sense of minimal self 
(Chadha, 2017).  
According to the Dhammapada, with enough mindfulness, it is possible to observe the process 
of “I-making” and stop it (Mills, 1977). No-self is described canonically and by practitioners as resulting 
from the observation of the five aggregates in constant interaction, with no detection of a “self” existing 
at that moment (Chadha, 2017). The moment is simply observed as an impersonal interaction between 
form, feeling, perception, volitions, and consciousness. Even volitions, understood in Western 
psychology as a core part of selfhood, are felt as just arising and passing phenomena with no personal 
meaning to them (Chadha, 2017). Each one arises, interacts with another, and then passes in constant 
flux, with no “self”-like entity or agent to be detected. The process of “I-making” can be realised and 
stopped, and thus the subjectivity of an experience can be extinguished. The Buddhist doctrine on 
anattā is thus: where “I” cannot exist without conscious experience (“I-making” depends on the 
dynamics of the five experiential aggregates), conscious experience can exist without “I” (Mills, 1977).  
More recent empirical studies describe reports of non-dual awareness, typically characterised 
by feelings such as feeling “absorbed” or “melting” into all things, lacking any form of subject-object 
distinction (Hanley et al., 2018). On a Western scientific view, the mindfulness teachings which promote 
the extinguishing or lessening of minimal selfhood have been described by Dahl et al. (2015) as 
“deconstructive”, geared towards shifting the meditator into an experiential mode with no sense of 
subject/object distinction or duality, and therefore no subjective perspective by which experiences are 
phenomenally given. This mode of non-dual awareness clearly describes a conscious experience lacking 
any form of phenomenal subjectivity. Considering this, a defining characteristic of the non-dual 
awareness state is the disruption of minimal selfhood.  
The Neural Correlates of Minimal Self Disruptions Inform Processes Involved in 
Minimal Selfhood 
In light of the discussion so far, psychedelic ego-dissolution and non-dual awareness may both 
be considered states in which the minimal self is disrupted. Observing the brain activity of individuals 
reportedly undergoing these states with comparison to controls can help to pinpoint neural systems 
implicated in the minimal self. This is the approach of neuropsychiatric research, which seeks to define 
correlations between mental functions and neural activity. These correlations provide more guidance to 
5 
 
theories or hypotheses which attempt to causally attribute a mental function to certain brain regions or 
patterns of interactions between neurons.  
For instance, increased global connectivity in frontal, parietal and inferior temporal cortices with 
ego-dissolution under the psychedelic lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) may inspire the hypothesis that 
changes in global connectivity are responsible for variations of minimal selfhood in some capacity 
(Tagliazucchi et al., 2016). In turn, this may lead to the development of a theoretical model or 
hypothesis which attributes the neural basis of minimal self to a certain state of connectivity across 
these cortical areas. This example illustrates that neural correlates of psychedelic ego-dissolution and 
meditative non-dual awareness shape theories which specify the physical processes responsible for 
causing variation of minimal selfhood. This approach has been used in studies such as Deane (2020) and 
Carhart-Harris and Friston (2019) for psychedelic ego-dissolution, and Dorjee (2016), Josipovic (2021), 
Laukkonen & Slagter (2021), Paoletti et al. (2022) and Meling (2021) for non-dual awareness. However, 
the next section argues that these theoretical understandings may be refined by examining them in light 
of each other.  
The Second Challenge: Disentangling Core Mechanisms underlying 
Minimal Self Modulations from its Enabling Conditions 
So far, it has been argued that neural correlates of psychedelic ego-dissolution and meditative 
non-dual awareness provide unique insights into the neural systems responsible for minimal selfhood. 
However, Millière (2017) notes that even when provided with psychedelic ego-dissolution correlates, it 
is difficult to distinguish which patterns of brain activity represent the neural changes which are 
minimally sufficient for loss of minimal selfhood. Chalmers (2000) seminally differentiated between the 
“core mechanism” and “enabling conditions” of consciousness. He noted that the total difference in 
neuronal activity held between subjects in a particular state of consciousness and those who are not 
cannot be considered to represent a minimally sufficient marker of that state. That is, functional 
differences in neural activity related to variations in subjective experience represents both the activity 
directly responsible for the variation and activity which enables the former. 
The difference between enabling conditions and core mechanisms can be clarified using the 
analogy of sugar's solubility, inspired by Howhy (2007). Suppose one’s aim was to understand the 
physical changes which are minimally sufficient for sugar to dissolve. Enabling conditions, like water in 
this analogy, create a conducive environment for the dissolution to occur. The core mechanism is the 
breakdown in the sugars molecular structure, which occurs when it is exposed to materials which 
disrupt its polar bonds (solvents) such as water. This core mechanism is the genuine property 
responsible for the phenomenon and can manifest across diverse contexts (e.g., ethanol instead of 
water). External contexts, while influential, do not constitute the fundamental property but enable its 
manifestation.  
6 
 
In the same way, the neural correlates of a state of consciousness encompass information about 
the changes in the environment (i.e., neural prerequisites) which are conducive to a core mechanism, 
and the core mechanism itself. When observing ego-dissolution under psychedelics, the two types of 
information are entangled. This is why Millière (2017) states that “it is impossible to know which of the 
functional differences between [non ego-dissolution and ego-dissolution] subjects, if any, directly 
underlie the loss of the sense of self—that is which of them, if any, is minimally sufficient for having a 
sense of self”. Thereby, it becomes unwarranted to use the neural correlates of psychedelic ego-
dissolution to theoretically infer the minimally sufficient mechanism responsible for providing one with 
a sense of self. Logically, the same applies with meditative non-dual awareness, for which data would be 
characterised by the same problem. The question which then arises is: how can the neural correlates of 
these states be used to make causal inferences which address the neural markers that are minimally 
sufficient for minimal selfhood?  
The Potential Solution: Identifying Context-Independent 
Mechanisms  
Here, we would like to propose the idea that an enabling condition may be disentangled from a 
core mechanism by focusing on the parts of the neural differences which represent a change in minimal 
selfhood across independent contexts. Specifically, we suggest that the core neural basis for the sense 
of minimal selfhood can be pinpointed by examining consistent changes in neural models associated 
with the loss of subjectivity across the two contexts in which this loss occurs—psychedelic ego-
dissolution and non-dual awareness. This section aims to justify this proposal.  
Recalling the sugar analogy, the phenomenon of sugar dissolution is caused by certain changes 
in its molecular configuration, not a specific solvent conducive to it. The core mechanism becomes clear 
when observing the change across contexts; the breakdown of polar bonds across different solvents 
indicates that the dissolution phenomenon is contingent on a specific change in its chemical structure. 
Changes in system dynamics associated with the dissolution of sugar across independent contexts are 
more likely to represent the physical properties which sustain it (e.g., the molecular configuration) than 
context specific variables (e.g., the solvent).  
In the same vein, changes in system dynamics associated with the dissolution of self across 
contexts may provide insight into the physical properties which sustain it. Psychedelic ego dissolution 
and non-dual awareness are relevant examples of how loss of minimal selfhood can occur in different 
contexts. The neural changes that occur during the transitions from normal consciousness to both states 
may therefore more likely signify an underlying core mechanism for the loss of phenomenal subjectivity. 
This approach may provide a solution for the problem posed by Millière (2017), regarding the difficulty 
in differentiating core and enabling processes given psychedelic ego-dissolution correlates. Namely, the 
answer could be: core mechanisms are represented by functional differences which are not context-
dependent.  
7 
 
This approach can be conceived as an integrative element to the neuropsychological approach; 
data (e.g., from neuroimaging) or representations (e.g., computational models) of physical processes 
involved in both psychedelic ego-dissolution and meditative non-dual awareness are purposefully 
integrated. Shared processes are considered to represent mechanisms which are less likely to be context 
dependent. This approach allows the elaboration of models which more likely represent the neural 
systems which are necessarily sufficient for the experience of minimal selfhood. Consequently, the 
hypotheses derived from these models could guide experimental methods that are more likely to test 
core mechanisms rather than enabling conditions. The rest of this paper aims to serve as a “proof of 
concept” by applying this analysis to demonstrate its feasibility, and utility in providing testable 
hypotheses. 
It is worth pre-emptively noting that the validity of this approach is contingent on the global 
neural states afforded by psychedelic and meditative induced minimal self disruption being sufficiently 
different to be considered as independent contexts. Put crudely, whether the “neuronal environment” 
they promote is different. The fact that one case involves chemically induced alterations (which require 
no effort), whereas the other relies solely on volitional modulation of attention (and thus requires 
effort), indicates that these global states are likely to be sufficiently dissimilar. In any case, future 
research should aim to critically establish this assumption. Assuming they are for the purposes of the 
present paper, the following section aims to identify similarities in neurocomputational models which 
represent ego-dissolution and non-dual awareness.  
Proof of Concept: Identification of Commonalities across Minimal 
Self Disruptions 
This section firstly explains, in a high level, the predictive processing framework. In this 
framework, neural activity is represented by computational and statistical principles (namely the Free 
Energy Principle; Friston, 2010). Then, theories which apply this framework to understand psychedelic 
ego dissolution and non-dual awareness are described. From comparing these theories, a commonality 
between them can be evidenced: hierarchical flattening. Finally, three broad hypotheses are presented 
which are based on an inverse relationship between minimal selfhood and hierarchical flattening.  
The Brain as a Predictive Processor  
Computational models attempt to explain how one's psychological experience is the result of 
how a system (the brain) processes the world (sensory data) to provide an output (the content of one’s 
consciousness, i.e. reportable cognitive, perceptual, affective, or behavioural experiences) (Mathis et al, 
1994). Specifically, algorithms can be used to model how the contents of one’s conscious experience 
result from the operations of particular neural systems. The current predominant computational 
framework used to model how the brain produces conscious content is hierarchical predictive 
processing (Carhart-Harris & Friston, 2019). The computational representations of ego-dissolution and 
meditative non-dual awareness used for the integrative analysis were formulated according to this 
8 
 
framework. Therefore, to provide sufficient context for the analysis, the section aims to firstly explain 
the predictive processing framework. 
Predictive processing is the hypothesis that what one consciously experiences is not a result of 
the passive reception of sensory data (Seth & Howhy, 2021). Rather, the brain has an internal 
representation of the world and at each moment samples the sensory data which matches this 
representation (Friston et al., 2013). Conscious experience is thus constrained by how the world is 
expected to be. These expectations are formally termed “prior beliefs” in this framework, 
commensurate with the Bayesian statistical parameter of “prior hypotheses” or simply “priors” (Friston, 
2010). If one comes across sensory information that does not match a prior of how the world is, this 
results in prediction error. Proponents of the predictive processing hypothesis argue that the resolution 
of prediction error is an important principle which governs how neurons interact (Free Energy Principle; 
Friston, 2010). To resolve errors, either the brain will update its prior, or modify the perception of 
information to match the prior belief (Friston, 2010). 
Following evidence that neural systems encode sensory information hierarchically, every level of 
a neural system must engage in these behaviours to successfully resolve error at a system level (Friston, 
2013). The hierarchy works such that the highest level of the system constrains the lower, and thus the 
overarching prior imposed on the system is the one held by the highest level. For instance, consider the 
hierarchical neural system responsible for visual perception (Herzog and Clarke, 2014). Networks encode 
different kinds of information, which increase in complexity or abstraction with their positioning in the 
hierarchy. Each network or level functions as a predictive model with prior beliefs. Importantly, the 
highest prior belief has a constraining influence on all lower priors (Friston, 2013).   
 Crucially, precision weight parameters within these models influence the recursive dynamic of 
error resolution between lower levels (Friston 2013). Specifically, the greater the precision weighting of 
the highest prior, the more that the sensory input the brain receives will be reflected consciously in a 
way that confirms the model’s prior belief. On the other hand, high precision weighting for the error 
indicates that the prior should be updated to reflect a novel understanding of the world. In turn, what is 
represented consciously may vary (Friston, 2013; Seth & Howhy, 2021). Decreases in the former and 
increases in the latter precision weight parameters prevent the corresponding model’s prior beliefs from 
defining the contents of one’s consciousness (Friston, 2013).  
Relaxed Beliefs Under Psychedelics: The Effects of Psychedelics on Predictive Processing. The 
Relaxed Beliefs Under Psychedelics model (REBUS; Carhart-Harris & Friston, 2019) is a model which 
attempts to account for a wide range of the psychological effects induced by the use of classical 
psychedelics, including losses of selfhood, based on the understanding of the brain as a predictive 
processor. The model accounts for ego-dissolution mainly by considering four reliable empirical findings. 
First, psychological effects of psychedelics are related to the activation effect of their active compounds 
on the serotonin receptor subtype 5-HT2AR (Vargas et al., 2023). Second, neural systems which encode 
the full spectrum of self-representations (i.e., provide the various forms of self-consciousness) find the 
highest level of their functional hierarchy in the Default Mode Network (DMN), which is distributed 
9 
 
across the parietal, temporal, and frontal cortices (Carhart-Harris & Friston, 2010; Fingelkurts et al., 
2012). Third, the DMN presents a concentrated expression of 5-HT2ARs (Beliveau et al., 2017). Fourth, 
loss of self-consciousness shows positive correlations with the functional disintegration of the DMN 
(Lebedev et al., 2015). Together, this evidence suggests that psychedelics activate 5-HT2ARs in the DMN, 
for which the connectivity is implicated in encoding representations of oneself as an embodied agent in 
the world.  
The model also depends on evidence framed within a predictive processing understanding of 
the brain. Namely, that activation of 5-HT2ARs increases the neuronal excitability (i.e., sensitivity to 
ascending input) of deep pyramidal neurons, which are thought to encode priors (Carhart-Harris, 2018). 
This in turn decreases the brain's oscillatory activity in the alpha and beta bands associated with top-
down inhibition of sensory processing in lower-level networks, and hence represent the top-down 
constraining effect of priors (Carhart Harris & Friston, 2019). Moreover, psychedelics have shown to 
dramatically decrease the power of alpha and beta frequency bands, which constitute a major node of 
the DMN (Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2013).  
Considering this evidence, the authors of REBUS suggest that psychedelics can be thought to 
increase the sensitivity of priors to prediction errors via 5-HT2AR activation induced excitability (i.e., 
decrease the precision weighting of the priors) in the DMN, consequently reducing their top-down 
constraining influence via decreased alpha and beta oscillatory power. In short, psychedelics effectively 
decrease the precision weighting of self-related priors encoded by the DMN and consequently disable 
their top-down influence. This, in turn, decreases contents related to selfhood in one’s consciousness. 
Extinguishment of minimal selfhood corresponds to total ego-dissolution, in which one’s 
conscious experience does not include being an embodied agent in any capacity (Letheby & Gerrans, 
2017). In REBUS, this translates to complete disintegration of the hierarchical structure of self-related 
models. Indeed, REBUS states that ego-dissolution occurs as a result of hierarchical ‘flattening’. The 
extreme decrease in precision weighting of DMN-located high-level predictions of a self afforded by 
psychedelics leads to a cascade effect of prior revision at every remaining level of the model (Carhart-
Harris & Friston, 2019). The hierarchy ‘flattens’ because information processed by the lower level no 
longer functions to conform to a higher-level self prediction. Consequently, the self-prediction cannot be 
fulfilled at any level of the system and thus cannot be consciously represented in any form. Hence, one 
loses all sense of “for-me-ness”; in that moment, there is no self to refer to within a conscious 
experience. 
The DMN is reliably associated with self-related processes. However, the disruption of minimal 
selfhood during the use of high-dose psychedelics is also associated with changes in the functional 
connectivity within the DMN. As such, in assuming minimal selfhood is strictly self-specific, the empirical 
evidence for the connection between the DMN and ego-dissolution as outlined in this particular 
subsection should not be discredited by assuming that the DMN can only serve towards self-related 
processing. In other words, given current evidence, it is not reasonable to rule out the possibility that 
whilst the DMN is indeed pivotal for self-related processes, it may also be implicated in self-specific 
10 
 
processing. As such, the proposed computational analysis that follows relies on the auxiliary assumption 
that there is a connection between the DMN and self-specificity. 
Many to (N)one: The Effects of Mindfulness on Predictive Processing. The Many to (N)one 
(MN) model (Laukkonen & Slagter, 2021) attempts to explain the psychological effects of mindfulness 
meditation practice on the brain’s predictive processes. Unexpected sensory stimuli are typically 
encoded by superficial pyramidal neurons, signifying their involvement in propagating prediction errors 
within the framework of predictive processing. Heightened attention directed toward unexpected 
sensory stimuli leads to an increase in synaptic gain among these neurons within the neural system 
responsible for processing the associated sensory modality (Feldman & Friston, 2010). Increases in these 
neurons’ synaptic gain are considered to be mathematically equivalent to increases in precision-
weighting of prediction error (Friston, 2023). 
Classically, Buddhism considers the perception of duality (subject-object distinction) as a learned 
interpretation of reality, which occurs as a reaction to dependent arising (Chadha, 2017; Mills, 1977). 
Dependent arising is the notion of creating relation from learned concepts, exemplified as "if this exists, 
that exists; if this ceases to exist, that also ceases to exist" (Chadha, 2017). As one learns that there is a 
concept of “you”, separate to oneself, then necessarily there is a concept of “me” (Mills, 1977). Thus, for 
Buddhism, it could be said that the division between the observer and the observed, the distinction 
which enables identification of a subject, is encoded as a prior belief learned from previous experience. 
Laukkonen and Slagter (2021) implicitly assume this prior to be high level and present in the processing 
of most, if not all, modes of perception.  
The MN model posits that mindfulness meditation entails the intentional directing of attention 
towards sensory information as it arises or what it is now, not abstracted as what it means within a 
higher-level representation of the world. In other words, sensory information is attended to before it is 
attuned to correspond to a prior; attention is placed on non-predicted information, i.e., what is 
represented by the prediction error. As discussed, attention increases the precision-weighing of this 
information, encouraging parameter revision in the priors held by the model which would otherwise 
attune it. With attention directed to unexpected or novel information at many levels of perception, the 
precision weight of the errors which propagate upward increase, and the system tends towards prior 
revision (Laukkonen et al., 2021). Thus, sensory input is less attuned according to higher level priors, and 
consequently what is predicted by the system becomes less of a function of these priors. In other words, 
the predictive hierarchy flattens, resulting in a mode of conscious experience in which any abstraction 
ceases, including the prescription of relation between any experiential object, including towards a 
subject (Laukkonen et al., 2021). This results in a state of consciousness in which an input may be 
received without the processing of it as an object to be perceived by a subject, yielding an absence of 
phenomenological duality.  
Hierarchical Flattening as a Common Mechanism 
11 
 
Through analysis of the REBUS and MN models of minimal self disruption, a common 
mechanism can be identified: hierarchical flattening. The hierarchical dynamic of information processing 
ceases within the contexts of psychedelic ego-dissolution and meditative states of non-dual awareness. 
In normal conditions, sensory information is propagated upward across levels through recursive error 
resolution guided by a higher-level prior. However, in states of ego-dissolution or non-dual awareness, 
higher level priors no longer guide the resolution of unexpected information. Instead, unpredicted 
information propagates more easily through the entire neural system without top-down constraint. 
Classic psychedelics disable this top-down constraint through its neuropharmacological effects on neural 
networks which encode high-level priors, while meditation disables it through attentional modulations 
of error propagation. These two independent conditions activate distinct neural precursors which both 
enable hierarchical flattening of predictive processing. Crucially then, the flattening can be conceived as 
the mechanism which is context-independent, i.e., more likely to be a core mechanism rather than an 
enabling condition.  
In general, conscious experiences which violate prior beliefs would follow from these changes. 
REBUS and MN both consider that the minimal self relies on priors which specify the self in a 
phenomenological field of awareness. Therefore, failure to match these beliefs would result in the 
conscious experience of no self. Importantly, neither model states that psychedelic or meditative 
conditions selectively target neural systems that encode minimal selfhood. Rather, they specify the 
enabling conditions for radical extinguishment of prior beliefs in general. Both models represent 
minimal self to rely on self-specifying priors which are active during most, if not all, modes of 
perception. As such, sensory information will always be represented consciously in the context of 
someone having it. Failure to impose such priors on any mode of sensory perception would result in that 
information being represented consciously with no subjectivity.  
Predictions from the Hierarchical Disintegration Approach  
In summary, this analysis attempted to highlight a core mechanism of minimal selfhood. To 
formalise the analysis and point toward concrete future directions, we suggest three testable 
hypotheses that assess the relationship between minimal selfhood and hierarchical neural dynamics. 
First, minimal self is dependent on the hierarchical nature of sensory processing. Second, minimal 
selfhood is encoded as a high-level prior (as opposed to any other parameter in the predictive 
framework). Third, minimal selfhood is positively related to top-down inhibition.  
The first hypothesis about the physical nature of minimal self is that the generation of minimal 
selfhood during any experience is dependent on the very hierarchical nature of neuronal systems (given 
the underlying assumption that these systems function predictively). Flattening of the normal predictive 
hierarchy removes its defining characteristic, that the levels above influence the function of levels 
below. Both the REBUS and MN models state that disintegration of a functional predictive hierarchy in 
perceptual processes underlies disruption minimal selfhood. Evidence against this hypothesis, for 
example, may be that the strength of one’s subjectivity in perceiving a sensory stimulus is not associated 
with disintegration of the hierarchical dynamic in its corresponding brain regions. 
12 
 
The second hypothesis is that minimal self is encoded as a high-level prior. This is quite explicit 
in the REBUS model as the authors equate a stable experience of subjectivity to a “top-heavy system 
which biases high-level priors” (p. 333), and state that the ego is represented by a high-level model. It is 
important here to emphasise that a high-level model necessarily constrains the entire system. In the MN 
model, the experience of minimal self fades in one’s consciousness as the high-level models are 
“dropped”. This means that the more a high-level model constrains the system, the more likely one is to 
predict a subject to the experience. In other words, reduced high-level constraints should hypothetically 
lead to decreased prediction of a self. Therefore, the models imply that experiencing subjectivity in 
relation to a sensory input is due to its processing by a top-heavy system. Direct evidence against this 
hypothesis could include reports lacking “for-me-ness” towards the experience of an input, whilst the 
uppermost level of its corresponding perceptual system exhibits stronger afferent processing relative to 
its generation of efferent signals.   
The final hypothesis is that the subjectivity felt towards a given sensory input should be 
inversely related to its attunement. This follows logically from the previous hypotheses about the 
hierarchical dynamics underlying the minimal self. Specifically, if minimal self involves heavy weighting 
of high-level priors, then it should necessarily be related to processes which attempt to match lower 
level information to the highest prior. Reports of minimal self disruptions should therefore be positively 
related to markers of sensory attunement in systems which process the given input.  To evaluate this 
hypothesis for example, studies may manipulate sensory attunement through paradigms such as the 
force-matching task (McNoughton et al., 2022) and collect reports on the subjectivity or “for-me-ness” 
felt during that experience.   
Towards a Computational Simulation of Non-Self 
This section will give an account of how the hypotheses discussed in the preceding sections 
might be formally implemented by extending an existing computational model of narrative selfhood 
(Reichle & Boag, 2024a). Our approach in doing this will be to first provide a brief overview of the model 
and its current theoretical scope, and to then discuss how the model’s theoretical assumptions might be 
augmented or adjusted to accommodate what is currently known about disruptions to minimal self. 
The model of self, which is called the “model of the reconstructed self” or MRS (Reichle & Boag, 
2024a, 2024b; Williams et al., 2024), is an extension of a more basic model of human memory called 
MINERVA 2 (Hintzman, 1984, 1986, 1987, 1988).  Because the former model extends the latter, the two 
models share five core theoretical assumptions: (1) our experiences are represented by configurations 
of features that correspond to perceptual and semantic primitives (e.g., colours, textures, affective 
tones, simple logical relationships like “before,” etc.); (2) these features can represent both focal 
information (i.e., whatever is being attended) and information about the cognitive and/or 
environmental context (e.g., current mood state), and can also be self-referential in nature (e.g., an 
experience of regret); (3) any features that are active in primary memory are consciously experienced as 
such and thus give rise to corresponding qualia; (4) any configuration of active features in primary 
memory can be encoded into secondary memory as a discrete memory trace; and (5) information can be 
13 
 
retrieved from secondary memory by probing with whatever features are active in primary memory; this 
probing cause individual memory traces to “resonate” to the degree that their contents are similar to 
the contents of the probe, thereby generating an composite “echo” that has some degree of familiarity 
(i.e., a signal that is used for recognition) and content (i.e., a pattern of features that is used for recall).  
These assumptions collectively allow both MINERVA 2 and MRS to simulate a large number of 
phenomena related to human memory, including recognition and recall, judgments of familiarity and 
frequency, and the learning of concepts from specific instances.  And although both models are 
implemented at Marrs’ (1982) algorithm-representation (cognitive) level, MINERVA 2 has also been 
implemented within the framework of a simple neural network (Reichle et al., 2022) and is therefore (to 
at least some degree) biologically plausible (see also Kelly et al., 2017).   
The MRS then extends MINERVA 2 by adding the assumptions that: (1) the capacity of primary 
memory is limited to a certain number of features per time unit; and (2) previously experienced features 
in primary memory tend to be displaced by the features of more recent experiences so that, across time, 
progressive weaker associations “link” more temporally distant experiences (e.g., the memory for event 
1 will be most strongly associated with the memory for event 2 and more weakly associated with each 
successive event).  These two additional assumptions allow the MRS to explain how the order of event 
sequences can be reconstructed from an otherwise unstructured collection of memory traces and 
thereby allow the model to simulate many of the benchmark phenomena related to serial-order 
memory (e.g., human performance recalling lists of items using forwards vs. free recall; Drewnowski & 
Murdock, 1980).  And because the MRS inherits the basic capabilities of MINERVA 2, it can also explain 
how schema or scripts are learned across experiences of similar sequences (i.e., scripts; Schank & 
Abelson, 1977).  Finally, because information is represented in a contextually rich manner and is 
retrieved in a content-addressable manner, the MRS can simulate important findings related to 
dissociations of memory and disorders of self-identity (e.g., dissociative identity disorder; Boag, 2024), 
including the formation of two or more “streams” of awareness or “identities” within a single 
(simulated) individual. 
As implemented, the MRS has two assumptions that might be directly related to modulations of 
minimal self.  The first of these is the fact that, as the model is conceptualized, the cycle of encoding 
information into and retrieving information from secondary memory is a dynamic one: During normal 
periods of wakefulness, new perceptual input is combined with information in primary memory to 
retrieve old information from secondary memory, with this retrieved information (which is now active in 
primary memory) then being encoded into secondary memory and combined with new perceptual input 
to retrieve additional information.  By this account, any process that disrupts this dynamic encoding-
retrieval cycle (e.g., meditation) would result in a fixed configuration of features in primary memory 
that, from the first-person perspective, might be experienced as a static or timeless state.  This state 
would be consistent with the hierarchical flattening discussed earlier due to the fact that any perceptual 
input would not be subject to the conceptual interpretation that normally occurs when it is subject to 
the encoding-retrieval cycle.  Saying this another way, the perceptual input would not be subjected to 
top-down interpretation but would instead be experienced in a more veridical manner. Saying this a 
third way, the perceptual input would not be interpreted with respect to a “prior” based on past 
14 
 
experience. By any of these interpretations, the halting of the encoding-retrieval process would be 
predicted to modulate self-referential phenomenology by preventing the construction of (a) the 
narrative self that dominates self-identity (McAdams, 1998; McAdams & McLean, 2013), and (b) the 
minimal self, given its dependence on hierarchical processing of sensory input.   
The second assumption of the MRS that might be directly related to modulations of minimal self 
is the nature of the features that represent whatever is experienced—whether or not they are self-
referential in nature. Returning to the example described in the preceding paragraph, although the 
cessation of the encoding-retrieval cycle should produce a static-state experience, the contents of that 
experience might vary depending upon what is in the focus of attention.  For example, the experience 
might be of raw perceptual input, such as the object of focus during meditation (e.g., a bell).  
Alternatively, the experience might be focused inwards, on either the self or the self’s experience of 
something in the immediate present (e.g., one’s reaction to the sound of a bell).  The relative “mixture” 
of perceptual versus self-referential features would of course also be predicted to modulate self-
identity; a static experience that is rich in self-referential features correspond to a state in which 
minimal self is present and an experience completely devoid of such features perhaps correspond to a 
state in which the minimal self is extinguished.  
At present, although the preceding ideas are interesting (at least to us!), they remain 
speculative in that, although the simulations required to evaluate the ideas are certainly possible, the 
challenge will be to rigorously evaluate the model by linking any simulation results to objective 
measures of behaviours or neuroscientific markers that can in turn be correlated to subjective mental 
states. If this project is funded, we will aim to do exactly that. Firstly, we aim to explore connections 
between context-independent physiological markers and minimal selfhood. Then, we can link these 
connections to simulation results of the MRS.  
We are currently preparing strategies to identify context-independent mechanisms of minimal 
selfhood. The principal strategy is through current development and validation of a psychometric tool 
designed to capture these modulations in sensed “for-me-ness" towards a qualitative element of 
experience (e.g., a sensory input) (Bunting & Polito, in prep). A few psychometric measurement tools 
already exist which aim to identify whether and to what extent a selfless state has been achieved, e.g., 
the Ego-Dissolution Inventory (Nour et al., 2016) or the Minimal Phenomenal Experience Questionnaire 
(Gamma & Metzinger, 2021). However, our scale differs by not focusing on probing about a selfless 
state, but rather if the attention towards a qualitative object of experience is self-specifying. Saying this 
another way, the scale attempts to quantify the extent to which qualia is given in a first-personal way, as 
opposed to an impersonal way. This is done by asking the participant whether a given stimulus (e.g., a 
specific physical sensation) felt as if it belonged to them, as opposed to occurring “for no-one". These 
types of questions, in principle, tap into a very basic type of self-specifying process: the identification of 
an experiencer in one’s “invisible” phenomenological field of awareness, before the stages of attributing 
the experiencer to an object (a body or an identity). Measuring this sensed ownership over qualia is also 
different from measuring agency because it does not require the subject to perform or attend to motor 
or mental action – features which are usually not present during deeper stages of meditation.   
15 
 
Therefore, this new tool is built with strategies to maximize specificity for minimal selfhood, 
rather than tap into bodily, agentic or narrative self-consciousness. Additionally, we have carefully 
constructed items to be sensitive to minimal self modulations across four contexts: meditation, 
psychedelic use, spontaneous peak experiences, and mind-body practices (e.g., yoga asana or ice baths). 
Applicability of the same scale across contexts enables analysis of context-independency.  
If the scale achieves the expected specificity and sensitivity, it will serve to empirically validate 
the framework we are currently presenting. This new standardized measure of minimal self variation 
could be used in two ways: first, in studies testing the current version of the framework that posits the 
hierarchical disintegration hypotheses related to perceptual and memory networks and second, in 
studies that use the framework as a guide to develop new hypotheses. In the first case, the focus would 
be on investigating whether physiological markers of hierarchical disintegration are present in minimal 
self variations across the four contexts. Importantly, this kind of study allows for (a) empirical evaluation 
of the MRS as a candidate computational model for explaining minimal phenomenal experience without 
absorption, and (b) empirical guidance towards new mechanistic models of minimal selfhood. In the 
second case, the goal would be to explore novel physiological markers linked to minimal selfhood that 
are consistent across these contexts, thereby generating new hypotheses about the core neural 
mechanisms of minimal selfhood (cf. enabling mechanisms). This research program is called “The Core 
Self Program.”   
Conclusion 
This review aimed to explore the potential derived from unifying insights into minimal self 
disruptions across various contexts. The goal was to develop a theoretical approach that emphasises the 
core mechanism underlying the sense of self, rather than its enabling conditions. This enables the 
formulation of hypotheses which more likely address necessarily sufficient neural systems responsible 
for the minimal self. Using neurocomputational models, the review demonstrated that psychedelic ego-
dissolution and meditative non-dual awareness both involve a disruption in hierarchical neural 
dynamics. This convergence point between models led to the formulation of hypotheses which attribute 
the minimal self to the hierarchical nature of neural networks. The theories broadly suggest that certain 
configurations of hierarchical predictive processing are responsible for the felt sense of subjectivity in an 
experience. These hypotheses do not define the minimal self as a high-level prior; rather, the analysis of 
this section suggests that its neuroscientific basis lies within neural properties which encode high-level 
priors. Crucially, since these results describe a context-independent process, they also lend a basis for 
interpreting the core computational mechanisms which allow for minimal phenomenal experience 
without absorption, which is not (by nature) defined by a specific state such as those induced by 
meditation or psychedelics. 
It is important to emphasise that the establishment of a commonality between theories of both 
cases happened to be through predictive processing models. That is to say that just because these 
models allow a comparative analysis, this does not mean that it should be the only neuroscientific 
framework by which the physical basis of minimal self is investigated. Rather, the analysis demonstrates 
16 
 
that unifying both cases under one framework is sensible, given the affected structure (minimal self) is 
arguably the same. However, using the predictive processing framework is advantageous because it 
explains subjective senses which apply throughout all modes of perception (e.g., visual, tactile, 
interoceptive). Minimal selfhood is present during all modes of perception, and therefore any 
mechanistic account for it must be amodal. More importantly, it provides specific, testable predictions 
towards uncovering the neural processes sufficient for sustaining the minimal self. Besides what this 
represents for the theory’s strength (its falsifiability, potential for refinement, or interdisciplinary 
application), it provides a solid starting point for mapping a hard-to-grasp concept to the human brain 
(Zahavi, 2015).  
Future studies should aim to formalise possible hypotheses derived from this analysis by 
specifying the exact neural markers associated with hierarchical disintegration, heavy precision 
weighting of high-level priors, sensory attunement, and the encoding-retrieval cycle specified by the 
MRS. Stronger tests of these hypotheses may involve the comparison of psychedelics and meditation 
groups, together, with control subjects that do not experience modulation of minimal selfhood. 
Computational simulations of the hierarchical disintegration hypotheses of selfhood loss can be done by 
adjusting parameters supporting the encoding-retrieval loop in the MRS. 
Importantly, further critical analysis is required to determine the feasibility of the proposed 
theoretical approach. Assuming the approach is logical, future research should seek to unify mechanistic 
representations of psychedelic ego-dissolution and meditative non-dual awareness under the same 
neuroscientific framework to provide additional predictions on the core neural system underlying the 
minimal self. 
References 
Beliveau, V., Ganz, M., Feng, L., Ozenne, B., Højgaard, L., Fisher, P. M., Svarer, C., Greve, D. N., & 
Knudsen, G. M. (2017). A High-Resolution In Vivo Atlas of the Human Brain’s Serotonin 
System. The Journal of Neuroscience, 37(1), 120–128. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2830-16.2016 
Beuter, A. (2017). The use of neurocomputational models as alternatives to animal models in 
the development of electrical brain stimulation treatments. Alternatives to Laboratory 
Animals: ATLA, 45(2), 91–99. https://doi.org/10.1177/026119291704500203 
Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2018). Serotonin, psychedelics and psychiatry. World Psychiatry, 17(3), 
358–359. https://doi.org/10.1002/wps.20555 
Carhart-Harris, R. L., & Friston, K. J. (2010). The default-mode, ego-functions and free-energy: A 
neurobiological account of Freudian ideas. Brain, 133(4), 1265–1283. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awq010 
Carhart-Harris, R. L., & Friston, K. J. (2019). REBUS and the Anarchic Brain: Toward a Unified 
Model of the Brain Action of Psychedelics. Pharmacological Reviews, 71(3), 316–344. 
https://doi.org/10.1124/pr.118.017160 
Chadha, M. (2017). No Self and the Phenomenology of Agency. Phenomenology and the 
Cognitive Sciences, 16(2), 187–205. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-016-9455-1 
17 
 
Chalmers, D. J. (2000). ‘‘What is a neural correlate of consciousness?,’’ in Neural Correlates of 
Consciousness, ed. T. Metzinger (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 17–39. 
Dahl, C. J., Lutz, A., & Davidson, R. J. (2015). Reconstructing and deconstructing the self: 
Cognitive mechanisms in meditation practice. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(9), 515–523. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2015.07.001 
Doblin, R., Christiansen, M., Jerome, L., & Burge, B. (2019). The Past and Future of Psychedelic 
Science: An Introduction to This Issue. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 51, 93–97. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02791072.2019.1606472 
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. (2010). Attention, Uncertainty, and Free-Energy. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 4. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215 
Fingelkurts, A. A., Fingelkurts, A. A., Bagnato, S., Boccagni, C., & Galardi, G. (2012). DMN 
Operational Synchrony Relates to Self-Consciousness: Evidence from Patients in Vegetative 
and Minimally Conscious States. The Open Neuroimaging Journal, 6, 55–68. 
https://doi.org/10.2174/1874440001206010055 
Friston, K. (2022). Computational psychiatry: From synapses to sentience. Molecular Psychiatry, 
28, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-022-01743-z 
Gamma, A., & Metzinger, T. (2021). The Minimal Phenomenal Experience questionnaire (MPE-
92M): Towards a phenomenological profile of "pure awareness" experiences in 
meditators. PloS one, 16(7), e0253694. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0253694. 
Gallagher, I. (2000). Philosophical conceptions of the self: Implications for cognitive science. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4(1), 14–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1364-6613(99)01417-5 
Hafner, V., Hommel, B., Kayhan, E., Lee, D., Paulus, M., & Verschoor, S. (2022). Editorial: The 
Mechanisms Underlying the Human Minimal Self. Frontiers in Psychology, 13. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.961480 
Henriksen, M. G., Parnas, J., & Zahavi, D. (2019). Thought insertion and disturbed for-me-ness 
(minimal selfhood) in schizophrenia. Consciousness and Cognition, 74, 102770. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2019.102770 
Hohwy, J. (2006). The Sense of self in the phenomenology of agency and perception. Psyche, 13. 
Josipovic, Z., & Miskovic, V. (2020). Nondual Awareness and Minimal Phenomenal Experience. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 2087. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02087 
Krägeloh, C., & Krägeloh, C. (2019). Phenomenological Research Fails to Capture the Experience 
of Nondual Awareness. Mindfulness, 10. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12671-018-0995-z 
Lang, S., & Viertbauer, K. (2022). Editorial: Self-Consciousness Explained—Mapping the Field. 
Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 13(2), 257–276. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164-
022-00641-1 
Lebedev, A. V., Lövdén, M., Rosenthal, G., Feilding, A., Nutt, D. J., & Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2015). 
Finding the self by losing the self: Neural correlates of ego-dissolution under psilocybin. 
Human Brain Mapping, 36(8), 3137–3153. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22833 
Letheby, C. (2020). Being for no-one: Psychedelic experience and minimal subjectivity. 
Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(I), 1–26. https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.I.47 
Letheby, C., & Gerrans, P. (2017). Self unbound: Ego dissolution in psychedelic experience. 
Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2017(1), nix016. https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/nix016 
18 
 
Lutkajtis, A. (2021). Four individuals’ experiences during and following a psilocybin truffle 
retreat in the Netherlands. Journal of Psychedelic Studies, 5(1), 22–32. 
https://doi.org/10.1556/2054.2021.00162 
Mathis, D., & Mozer, M. C. (1994). On the Computational Utility of Consciousness. Advances in 
Neural Information Processing Systems, 7. 
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/1994/hash/6aab1270668d8cac7cef2566a1c5f569-
Abstract.html 
Millière, R. (2017). Looking for the Self: Phenomenology, Neurophysiology and Philosophical 
Significance of Drug-induced Ego Dissolution. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 11. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2017.00245 
Milliere, R. (2020). The varieties of selflessness. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(I), Article I. 
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.I.48 
Millière, R., Carhart-Harris, R. L., Roseman, L., Trautwein, F.-M., & Berkovich-Ohana, A. (2018). 
Psychedelics, Meditation, and Self-Consciousness. Frontiers in Psychology, 9. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01475 
Mills, L.-K. (1977). Dhammapada. Mahamakut Press. 
Mollaahmetoglu, O. M., Keeler, J., Ashbullby, K. J., Ketzitzidou-Argyri, E., Grabski, M., & Morgan, 
C. J. A. (2021). “This Is Something That Changed My Life”: A Qualitative Study of Patients’ 
Experiences in a Clinical Trial of Ketamine Treatment for Alcohol Use Disorders. Frontiers in 
Psychiatry, 12. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyt.2021.695335 
Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., Carhart-Harris, R. L., Moran, R. J., Brookes, M. J., Williams, T. M., 
Errtizoe, D., Sessa, B., Papadopoulos, A., Bolstridge, M., Singh, K. D., Feilding, A., Friston, K. 
J., & Nutt, D. J. (2013). Broadband cortical desynchronization underlies the human 
psychedelic state. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for 
Neuroscience, 33(38), 15171–15183. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2063-13.2013 
Nour, M. M., Evans, L., Nutt, D., & Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2016). Ego-Dissolution and Psychedelics: 
Validation of the Ego-Dissolution Inventory (EDI). Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00269  
Nour, M. M., & Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2017). Psychedelics and the science of self-experience. The 
British Journal of Psychiatry: The Journal of Mental Science, 210(3), 177–179. 
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.116.194738 
Pollan, M. (2019). How to change your mind the new science of psychedelics. Penguin Books. 
Reggia, J. A. (2013). The rise of machine consciousness: Studying consciousness with 
computational models. Neural Networks, 44, 112–131. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2013.03.011 
Reggia, J. A., Katz, G., & Huang, D.-W. (2016). What are the computational correlates of 
consciousness? Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures, 17, 101–113. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bica.2016.07.009 
Reichle, E. D. & Boag, S.  (2024).  Towards a reconstructive theory of self.  Manuscript 
submitted for review. 
Reichle, E. D. & Boag, S.  (2024, August).  An instance-based memory model of the 
reconstructed self.  Paper presented at the Personality and its Disorders Conference, 
Sydney, Australia. 
19 
 
Williams, E., Boag, S., & Reichle, E. D. (2024, August).  Simulations to explore dissociative 
identity disorder.  Paperpresented at the Personality and its Disorders Conference, 
Sydney, Australia. 
Stoliker, D., Egan, G. F., & Razi, A. (2022). Reduced Precision Underwrites Ego Dissolution and 
Therapeutic Outcomes Under Psychedelics. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 16. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnins.2022.827400 
Turton, S., Nutt, D. J., & Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2014). A qualitative report on the subjective 
experience of intravenous psilocybin administered in an FMRI environment. Current Drug 
Abuse Reviews, 7(2), 117–127. https://doi.org/10.2174/1874473708666150107120930 