HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 30 June 2022
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.867328
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Edited by:
Gesine Dreisbach,
University of Regensburg, Germany
Reviewed by:
Giovanni Pezzulo,
National Research Council (CNR), Italy
Alexandre Zénon,
UMR5287 Institut de Neurosciences
Cognitives et Intégratives d’Aquitaine
(INCIA), France
*Correspondence:
Martin V. Butz
martin.butz@uni-tuebingen.de
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Cognition,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 01 February 2022
Accepted: 13 April 2022
Published: 30 June 2022
Citation:
Butz MV (2022) Resourceful
Event-Predictive Inference: The Nature
of Cognitive Effort.
Front. Psychol. 13:867328.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.867328
Resourceful Event-Predictive
Inference: The Nature of Cognitive
Effort
Martin V. Butz1,2*
1 Neuro-Cognitive Modeling Group, Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Tubingen, Germany,
2 Department of Psychology, Faculty of Science, University of Tübingen, Tubingen, Germany
Pursuing a precise, focused train of thought requires cogni tive effort. Even more effort is
necessary when more alternatives need to be considered or wh en the imagined situation
becomes more complex. Cognitive resources available to us l imit the cognitive effort we
can spend. In line with previous work, an information-theor etic, Bayesian brain approach
to cognitive effort is pursued: to solve tasks in our environ ment, our brain needs to
invest information, that is, negative entropy, to impose st ructure, or focus, away from
a uniform structure or other task-incompatible, latent str uctures. To get a more complete
formalization of cognitive effort, a resourceful event-pr edictive inference model (REPI) is
introduced, which offers computational and algorithmic ex planations about the latent
structure of our generative models, the active inference dy namics that unfold within, and
the cognitive effort required to steer the dynamics—to, for e xample, purposefully process
sensory signals, decide on responses, and invoke their exec ution. REPI suggests that we
invest cognitive resources to infer preparatory priors, ac tivate responses, and anticipate
action consequences. Due to our limited resources, though, the inference dynamics
are prone to task-irrelevant distractions. For example, th e task-irrelevant side of the
imperative stimulus causes the Simon effect and, due to simi lar reasons, we fail to
optimally switch between tasks. An actual model implementa tion simulates such task
interactions and offers ﬁrst estimates of the involved cogn itive effort. The approach may
be further studied and promises to offer deeper explanation s about why we get quickly
exhausted from multitasking, how we are inﬂuenced by irrele vant stimulus modalities,
why we exhibit magnitude interference, and, during social i nteractions, why we often fail
to take the perspective of others into account.
Keywords: grounded cognition, cognitive resources, cognitive effort, predictive coding, active inference, event-
predictive cognition
1. INTRODUCTION
Our cognitive abilities are limited. We are forgetful in so m any ways, lazy, and often stuck with sub-
optimal task solutions. Dual- or even multi-tasking is often extremely eﬀortful and error-prone,
unless one of the tasks can be done fully automatically. Why ca n’t we do it? The answer is that
our “cognitive resources” are limited, restricting the “co gnitive eﬀort” we can spend on the current
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
tasks at hand. Some of us may be satisﬁed with such an answer.
Clearly though, neither “cognitive” nor “resources” nor “e ﬀort”
are really well-deﬁned. This article attempts to scrutinize what
“cognitive resources” and “cognitive eﬀort” are.
Recent insights from cognitive science imply that our minds’
thoughts—and thus our minds’ mental content—while being
awake, do not only cover the present itself, but also the past
and future to varying extents (
Buckner and Carroll, 2007; Butz
et al., 2019, 2021; Stawarczyk et al., 2021 ). Meanwhile, these
thoughts are structured in the form of event-predictive enco dings
(Rao and Ballard, 1999; Hommel et al., 2001; Zacks and Tversky ,
2001; Zacks et al., 2007; Frings et al., 2020 ), giving rise to event-
predictive cognition (EPCog, cf. Franklin et al., 2020; Zacks, 2020;
Baldwin and Kosie, 2021; Butz et al., 2021; Kuperberg, 2021 ).
EPCog essentially suggests that we hold thoughts about even ts,
event progressions, and characteristics of the scenes withi n which
these events unfold. When considering a particular event, we
tend to temporally bind event-characterizing encodings of t he
entities, the interaction dynamics, and typical starting an d ending
conditions into an event-predictive attractor.
Meanwhile, we actively explore these events and progressions
thereof by means of active inference (ActInf, cf.
Friston, 2009;
Friston et al., 2018 ), which formalizes (i) short-term state- and
event-inference (inferring what is going on), (ii) goal-di rected
planning, reasoning, and behavioral control (inferring wha t
to do), as well as (iii) longer-term, retrospective behavior al
optimization and model learning (inferring useful memory
structures). Derived from the free energy principle (
Friston,
2009), ActInf, as a process theory, essentially formalizes the
brain’s eﬀort to minimize the conjoint eﬀort of brain and body t o
survive, that is, to maintain an inner, bodily-grounded bala nce,
akin to a highly complex autopoietic system ( Maturana and
Varela, 1980; Butz, 2008; Friston et al., 2015b, 2018 ). In typical
psychological paradigms, this eﬀort may be closely related to a
simple cost-beneﬁt analysis to ﬁnd solutions to particular ta sks
with minimum eﬀort (
Wang et al., 2021 ).
Given EPCog encodings, ActInf formalizes how these
predictive encodings are dynamically activated and bound
together. Current activation densities essentially encod e the
considered events and event progressions within partially deﬁ ned
scenes (
Butz, 2016; Schrodt et al., 2017; Gumbsch et al., 2021a;
Stegemann-Philipps and Butz, 2021; Achimova et al., 2022 ). As
a result, ActInf oﬀers a quantitative formalism to model the
goal-oriented direction of attention, the dynamic mainten ance
of active working memory content, dynamic reasoning and
decision making, and a purposeful selection, activation, and
control of behavior (
Gumbsch et al., 2021a,b ). Conjoint with
event-predictive cognition, ActInf ﬂexibly binds component s
into Event-Gestalten, integrates them into scenes, project s them
into potential futures, and controls their dynamic interact ions in
a goal-directed, homeostasis-oriented manner.
In accordance with these theories, cognitive eﬀort may be
formalized by means of a Resourceful Event-Predictive Infer ence
(REPI) model. REPI is closely related to previous approaches
that have equated cognitive eﬀort with the information neede d
to change prior into posterior densities, given some source
of information (
Ortega and Braun, 2013; Genewein et al.,
2015; Zenon et al., 2019 ). Beyond these previous approaches,
though, REPI integrates event-predictive encoding structur es
into the formalism and oﬀers an actual implementation of
the inference dynamics. We thus can simulate several basic
ﬁndings—such as the Simon eﬀect and task switching costs—
and oﬀer suggestions for imminent model expansions. Moreover,
we can measure the cognitive, task-oriented eﬀort explicitly
while the dynamics unfold. Dynamic processing in REPI is also
similar to previous dynamic processing models, which did not
explicitly relate the simualted processing dynamics to cogniti ve
eﬀort. For example,
Steyvers et al. (2019) simulate dynamic
task and response side densities. The model yields the basic
task switching eﬀect. Moreover, it can simulate training eﬀect s
by increasing an adaption rate. Apart from the relation to
cognitive eﬀort, we simulate cognitive processing dynamics i n
the full processing pipeline, including stimulus and stimulus -bias
estimation densities.
The remainder of this work details how this cognitive eﬀort
may be well-approximated by a mixture of computational-
algorithmic processes, which control our thoughts. Thereby,
the nature of the structures co-determines the resources
needed to execute a particular task: the more compressed and
readily available particular task-relevant structures are, the less
cognitive resources will be required. In this paper, ﬁrst more
detailed background is provided on related work and on the
main motivation for proposing REPI. Next, REPI is detailed
on a computational level (
Marr, 1982 ) and an algorithmic
implementation is introduced. The system implementation
generates behavioral results that yield the SIMON eﬀect and ta sk
switching behavior. Other well-known psychological phenomen a
may be explained with REPI, including the STROOP , SNARC,
and crossmodal interaction eﬀects as well as cognitive limita tions
in social interactions. A ﬁnal discussion concludes the wor k.
2. INFORMATION AS EFFORT
The perspective that our mind and body somewhat invest
information to survive dates rather far back. From the very
general perspective of thermodynamics and quantum mechanics ,
Schroedinger (1944) already proposed that life itself may be
characterized as the active intake of negative entropy, thus
counteracting disintegration. Only over the last decade, h owever,
several researchers have started formalizing how exactly o ur
brains may invest information as a resource to elicit self-
motivated, goal-directed decisions and behavior (
Ortega and
Braun, 2013; Genewein et al., 2015; Zenon et al., 2019 ).
2.1. Computational Information Processing
Effort
The perspective that planning, reasoning, decision making,
and control requires information processing resources can b e
partially motivated by, but it can also partially explain, the
concept of bounded rationality (
Bratman, 1987; Friston et al.,
2013; Lieder and Griﬃths, 2020 ). Bounded rationality essentially
emphasizes that limited cognitive capacities prevent us from
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
thinking problems fully through, deeming our decisions sub-
optimal (
Simon, 1955 ). To save resources, we employ heuristics
and often act habitually rather than in a deliberate, goal-di rected
manner, which leads to typical errors in our reasoning and
decision making (
Kahneman, 2003; Gigerenzer and Gaissmaier,
2011). Thus, sub-optimal behavior is caused by our limited
information processing resources, which struggle to process
more complex tasks optimally due to their higher demand of
information processing resources.
Ortega and Braun (2013) proposed a free energy-based
formalization of bounded rational decision making that is
directly derived from thermodynamics. Decision making
requires to steer distributions away from a prior distributi on
toward a decision-peaked distribution. Changing the distri bution
requires information processing resources (e.g., to solve a task),
while its investment is rectiﬁed by the corresponding expecte d
utility gain (e.g., actually solving the task).
Genewein et al.
(2015) enhanced this model by enabling it to selectively recruit
(provided) hierarchical encodings to further minimize cogn itive
eﬀort. For example, the group of food items or dangerous
animals is recruited, subsuming the entities that match wit h a
respective interaction class, leading to a more eﬃcient deci sion
making process.
Focusing only on the cost of cognition—implicitly assuming
that the eﬀort will be worth the while and thus maximum
available eﬀort will be spent—(
Zenon et al., 2019 ) formalize an
optimization model that consists of three summands: the mutu al
information I between (i) the expected and actually perceived
state of the environment, (ii) the expected prior (preparatory)
response and actual posterior response, given the actually
perceived state, and (iii) the assumed context T dependent
stimulus-response mapping vs. the actual posterior response.
The formalism thus assumes independency between stimulus
processing eﬀort, task-dependent response eﬀort, and context-
dependent response eﬀort. The authors then illustratively addre ss
inferences in the Strop task and also discuss the consequenc es in
task switching and multitasking, which we will follow up upon
below.
REPI enhances the model of
Zenon et al. (2019) and Genewein
et al. (2015) in that it assumes an inner, event-predictive,
generative model, which contains distributed predictive en coding
densities. In line with Ortega and Braun (2013) and Zenon et al.
(2019), REPI equates cognitive eﬀort with the focused activation
of current mental content away from both residual, previous t ask
priors and latent, habitual priors. The mental content, howev er,
is made more explicit and the active inference dynamics as wel l
as the involved eﬀort is simulated as a process model.
2.2. Neuro-Physiological Basis
While this paper does not address the question how cognitive
eﬀort is actually spent in the brain from a neuro-physiological
perspective, it may generally be assumed that evolution has
designed our brains to generate ﬂexible and highly adaptive
behavior—including socially-interactive behavior—in a v ery
resource-eﬀective manner. Accordingly, neuro-physiologic al
evidence is accumulating that synchronized and coordinate d
neural ﬁring is indeed eﬀortful. It appears that processing
resources are dominantly determined by the eﬀort to generate
and transmit signals via biochemical dynamics and neural spi kes
(
Laughlin, 2001; Sengupta et al., 2010 ). Accordingly, energy is
required for the maintenance of a wakeful state, in which neu rons
communicate with each other across cortical and sub-cortic al
areas by selective, rhythmic synchronization and coordina tion
(Engel et al., 2001; Bastos et al., 2015; Fries, 2015; Daume et al.,
2017; Misselhorn et al., 2019 ).
These and related insights are in agreement with the
perspective that cognitive eﬀort is needed to counter uncertai nty,
which, in neuro-physiological terms, is closely related to
focusing the mind by means of precise, coordinated neural and
biochemical activities (
Daume et al., 2017; Misselhorn et al.,
2019). Most recent research has even linked such resource
constraints to predictive coding theory, showing that resou rce-
eﬃcient encodings are predictive and develop in recurrent ne ural
networks naturally, when the goal is to solve a particular tas ks
resource-eﬃciently ( Ali et al., 2021 ).
In sum, it may be said that the current’s mind focus
with its neuro-physiological activities essentially constit utes
current mental content, Thereby, the maintenance of a stron ger
processing focus and dynamic refocusing is eﬀortful. In order to
make the mental content more explicit on a computational and
algorithmic level, though, the active inference principle co njoint
with event-predictive cognition oﬀer suggestions.
3. INFERENCE AND INFORMATION
PROCESSING
To maximize adaptivity and ﬂexibility, computational resour ces
need to be directed toward those considerations that are, or m ay
soon or suddenly become, behaviorally relevant (
Butz et al., 2003;
Butz, 2008; Butz and Pezzulo, 2008; Pezzulo et al., 2008 ). Various
research strands have put forward that planning and reasoning
may be viewed as inference processes, essentially subsuming
model-free and model-based reinforcement learning, visual
perception, and even social cognition (
Rao and Ballard, 1999;
Botvinick et al., 2009; Friston, 2009; Botvinick and Toussa int,
2012; Baker et al., 2017 ).
The involved perception, planning, and motor control
mechanisms can be formalized by means of the active inference
(ActInf) principle. Additionally, though, inference require s
information processing resources, which is again intrinsic ally
linked to ActInf.
3.1. Active Inference
ActInf essentially highlights that our brain predicts the fu ture
given its past experiences, even including its genetically-g athered
experiences (
Hohwy, 2013; Friston et al., 2015a; Clark, 2016 ).
Importantly, though, our brain does not predict the future—or
generate models of our environment—for its own sake. Rather,
it does so for optimizing the generation of (highly adaptive)
behavior, which is elicited to maintain and foster both inte rnal
homeostasis and model consistency (
Friston et al., 2015b ). As a
result, the developing predictive encodings, which constitut e our
individual latent beliefs about the world, serve a self-motivated
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
purpose. Together, our individual ActInf processes, which unf old
within our individual predictive encoding structures, gene rate
our individual current state of mind.
In relation to behavioral psychology, ActInf oﬀers a
formalization of the ideomotor principle: initial evolution ary-
determined, reactive behavior becomes associated with its eﬀects.
Later, behavior is elicited by the desire to generate the ass ociated
eﬀects again under diﬀerent but related circumstances, leadi ng to
further learning ( Hoﬀmann, 1993, 2003; Stock and Stock, 2004;
Butz and Kutter, 2017 ). ActInf thus formalizes how internal
generative structures inevitably reﬂect the (hidden) outs ide
reality—or at least those components of reality that tend to a ﬀect
the well-being and mere existence of the living being in ques tion
(Friston, 2009; Butz and Kutter, 2017 ).
The ActInf formalization subsumes three distinct, highly
interactive inference processes:
1. Fast, prospective ActInf, which infers behavior from
projections into the future, aiming at minimizing expected
free energy, which quantiﬁes both expected uncertainty as
well as homeostasis.
2. Fast, retrospective inference to adapt current model activ ities
to the gathered (attended-to) sensory information and the
hidden causes, which (as the brain’s generative model believes)
seem to explain away the sensory information (including, for
example, the behavior of others, physical objects, etc.).
3. Much slower, longer-term, consolidating inference, whic h
reﬁnes, modiﬁes, and extends the brain’s generative model
itself, that is, its internal predictive encoding structure s.
Due to the free energy formalization, the process will focus
learning on those experienced aspects, episodes, events, and
components thereof that appear relevant to decrease (future)
free energy.
In the REPI model, we focus on simulating the ﬁrst two processes ,
providing presumably learned predictive encoding structures as
the available generative model.
Since the reminder of this work focuses on the inference
of behavior and involved eﬀort, a formalization of prospective
ActInf will be useful. To do so, it is necessary to specify the t o-
be-minimized free energy (
Friston et al., 2015b, 2018; Gumbsch
et al., 2021a ). Given a particular policy π, which generates actions
a in the light of the current belief state bt and system needs
nt considering a particular, possibly adaptive, temporal horizon
τ = { t, t + 1, t + 2, ..., t + T} with depth T, the anticipated free
energy when pursuing policy πcan be written as:
ˆFE(π, τ, bt, nt) = KL
[
Q
(
oτ |bt, π
)
||P
(
oτ |bt, nt
) ]
  
predicted divergence from desired states
+ EQ(bτ|bt,π)
[
H
[
P
(
oτ |bτ
)] ]
  
predicted uncertainty
, (1)
where prior densities are denoted by P while expected posterior
densities are denoted by Q. The KL divergence is calculated
as the expected divergence of posterior observation densitie s,
when following policy π starting from belief state bt, from
the prior desired observation densities P
(
oτ | bt, nt
)
over the
temporal horizon τ. Meanwhile, predicted uncertainty quantiﬁes
the entropy H over expected future observations dependent on
expected policy-dependent future belief states E Q(bτ|bt,π), when
following policy πstarting from belief state bt.
Driven by the purpose to minimize free energy, and thus to
maintain internal structure, Equation (1) essentially quan tiﬁes a
payoﬀ, which may be equated with the decrease in free energy
compared to the possible development of free energy given
inactivity.
3.2. Information Processing Cost
Meanwhile, though, invoking activities and focus will come a t
a cost, which has been equated with the change from a prior to
a posterior distribution in terms of KL divergences (
Ortega and
Braun, 2013; Genewein et al., 2015; Zenon et al., 2019 ):
C(P, Q) = KL
[
Q(x|e)||P(x)
]
, (2)
which quantiﬁes the investment cost of changing a prior
probability density over some representational generally
continuous space x ∈ R into a posterior distribution over this
space given a source of evidence e.
When furthermore assuming a density E over these
evidences—be they sensory information about body or
environment or also internal model expectations or motor
activity—a more accurate cost estimate takes the weighted
mean over the possible evidences, yielding a form of mutual
information:
C(P, Q, E) =
∑
e∈ E
p(e)KL
[
Q(x|e)||P(x)
]
= IQ(E, P). (3)
According to this equation, the cognitive eﬀort to direct beh avior
and thoughts toward desired states and away from expected
observational uncertainty (cf. Equation 1) can be equated
with the mutual information I Q between the state-informative
evidence density E, which we here assume to be discrete for
simplicity reasons, and state estimation prior P(x), given the
conditional model Q, which maps evidence onto posterior
state estimations.
The system then ideally ﬁnds the optimal behavioral policy π∗
that minimizes anticipated cognitive costs, that is, informa tion
investment costs, and anticipated free energy. When the gain
in free energy minimization is larger than the cognitive cost s,
the eﬀort is worth its while. Eﬀort costs and utility gains thus
need to be well-balanced. Accordingly, a weighting factor h as
been introduced as a Lagrangian multiplier that factors the
optimization cost into the expected utility gain (
Ortega and
Braun, 2013 ), allowing an adaption in how much cognitive
investment is currently worth the while. This factor may
essentially be related to the current cognitive resources a vailable
to an agent, which is related to inner homeostasis and thus
intrinsically part of Equation 1. In the future, the ﬁxed hori zon
in Equation 1 may thus be subsumed by a dynamic horizon
that may optimally take planning costs and available resources
into account (cf.
Gumbsch et al. 2021a for a similar proposal).
For now, a simplifying alternative to balancing the two aspect s
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
lies in focusing on solving one particular task and assuming
that maximal available cognitive eﬀort is spent on solving it a t
any current point in time. In this way, cognitive costs domina te
behavioral and cognitive processing and decision making: th e
larger the needed density changes to process a task, the slowe r
the behavioral decision making.
To summarize: there is compelling evidence that our brain is
developing generative predictive model(s) by means of ActInf .
Concurrently, the developing models enable ActInf to focus
our computational resources on anticipated needs. Combined
with information processing cost considerations, ActInf th us
controls how computational resources are invested, conside ring
the future in the light of the present, the current needs, and
our so-far gained behavioral and model-predictive knowledg e.
It continuously adapts the currently active internal models
in the light of the accumulating evidence, develops these
models further over time, and determines current attention al
dynamics, reasoning, decision making, and behavioral cont rol by
attempting to minimize expected free energy (Equation 1).
The biggest criticism on ActInf and the information cost
formalization from the cognitive science side lies in the te stability
and falsiﬁability of the involved formalism. This is particu larly
the case because the involved generative model is not speciﬁe d.
Indeed, ActInf may play out not only during ontogenetic
development and the hear-and-now, but even on evolutionary
time-scales, creating particularly well-suited bodily proper ties
(such as our hands), developmental pathways (such as our
brains’ modular structure), and consequent inductive lear ning
biases (
Pfeifer and Bongard, 2006; Butz and Kutter, 2017 )—
all inﬂuencing generative model development. We thus now
scrutinize likely properties of the developing generative mod el.
4. EVENT -PREDICTIVE STRUCTURES
EPCog emphasizes that event-predictive encodings are
particularly prominent in our brain, as suggested from variou s
disciplinary and interdisciplinary perspectives (
Butz et al., 2021 ).
Coming from the developmental psychology side, for example,
Dare Baldwin and Jessica Kosie emphasize that events are
inferred from our sensorimotor experiences:
“Events–the experiences we think we are having and recall
having had—are constructed; they are not what actually occurs.
What occurs is ongoing dynamic, multidimensional, sensory ﬂow,
which is somehow transformed via psychological processes into
structured, describable, memorable units of experience.” (p.79,
Baldwin and Kosie, 2021 )
In relation to ActInf, we appear to learn to construct progressi vely
more abstract event-predictive structures in a self-motiva ted
manner. Over time, we even learn to express some of these
structures via language. From an evolutionary, cognitive e ﬀort-
oriented perspective, it may be said that over the course of
our lifetime our brain attempts to minimize its cognitive eﬀor t
to life a “successful” life (ultimately from an evolutionar y
perspective
Darwin 1859; Dawkins 1976 ). To succeed in our
challenging social and cultural cooperative and competitive
world, it appears that evolution has given our brains the
tendency, or inductive learning bias, to compress our experie nces
into abstract, conceptual, symbolizable structures (
Deacon, 1997;
Butz and Kutter, 2017 ).
In behavioral psychological research, event-ﬁles have been
characterized as behavioral units that commonly encode
actions with their consequences, allowing the triggering o f
actions by their anticipated eﬀects (
Hommel et al., 2001 ). In
more observation-oriented event segmentation studies, st rong
commonalities have been identiﬁed in segmenting movies int o
event units at various levels of granularity ( Zacks and Tversky,
2001; Zacks et al., 2007 ). Meanwhile, memory research has shown
that events are memorized as units of experience, while event
boundaries characterize predictably unpredictable decision s, for
example, of what a person is going to do next after having ﬁnishe d
a particular (sub-)task (
Baldwin and Kosie, 2021; Kuperberg,
2021). On the language level, events constitute a critical struct ural
component not only in research on grammar and semantics,
but also in studies on metaphors and analogies (
Lakoﬀ and
Johnson, 1980; Gentner and Markman, 1998; Pietroski, 2000;
Gehrke and McNally, 2019; Ünal et al., 2021
). Encompassing
cognitive theories have also used the event concept extensive ly,
such as the theory of conceptual spaces and the geometry of
meaning (
Gärdenfors, 2000, 2014 ).
Recent more explicit theories on EPCog have proposed that
events consist of multiple, event-characterizing component s
(Butz, 2016; Butz et al., 2021 ):
• actions as well as other forces, which dynamically inﬂuence the
event dynamics;
• entities involved in the event including their roles (e.g., agent,
recipient, tool) and other critical properties (e.g., agentiv eness,
material properties);
• spatiotemporal relations and dynamics between the involved
entities while the event unfolds;
• when agents are involved, intentions that trigger
particular behavior.
These components need to be ﬂexibly bound into current
events, which are then characterized and constituted by thei r
components and their interactions. The required binding proce ss
appears to be biochemically eﬀortful, as it requires the select ive
synchronization of various brain areas, eﬀectively binding the
involved components and spatiotemporal dynamics into event
structures (
Engel et al., 2001; Buckner and Carroll, 2007; Fries,
2015; Daume et al., 2017; Misselhorn et al., 2019; Frings et al .,
2020; Stawarczyk et al., 2021 ).
Events can be closely related to scripts in traditional cogni tive
science. Moreover, research on schema structures is closely
related. In these cases, though, mostly linear, well-ordere d,
and often fully symbolic structures were assumed. Events
seem to be more ﬂexible than this, as recently highlighted
from various research perspectives (
Elman and McRae, 2019;
Baldwin and Kosie, 2021; Butz et al., 2021; Kuperberg, 2021;
McRae et al., 2021
). That is, the dynamic construction and
activation of events can unfold in highly varying manners.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
On the one hand, it is stimulated bottom-up by the outside
environment while inferring the currently activated inter nal
generative model. On the other hand, it is controlled top-
down, driven by current and anticipated, task-oriented, bod ily,
motivational, and emotional needs. The dynamic and selecti ve
activations, driven by the ActInf principle, essentially cor respond
to the dynamic consideration of the following conceptual
questions: Which behaviorally relevant entities are presen t and
which events dynamically unfold in the outside environment ?
Which behavioral and other counterfactual alternatives sh ould
be considered? Which dynamical interaction consequences m ay
be relevant?
To be able to encode more complex event and event
progressions, scene embeddings oﬀer additional support. The
ActInf of critical scene-characterizing properties, in whic h
currently considered events are embedded, may constitute a
hallmark of our imagination. We all know this rather well whe n
reading a ﬁction book. If the book is good and we are in the
right mind set, our imagination creates (abstract) scenes a nd
ﬁlls-in unmentioned aspects with most plausible components—
augmenting the stories with deeper gist, background, intent ions,
and emotions. There is evidence that network activity dynam ics
unfold within a default network, which appears to both maintain
an actual event-speciﬁc thought and coordinate switching
dynamics between thoughts (
Buckner and Carroll, 2007; Buckner
et al., 2008; Stawarczyk et al., 2021 ). The REPI model, which
we introduced in the following section, essentially mimics such
dynamics on an admittedly still rather simple level.
5. RESOURCEFUL EVENT -PREDICTIVE
INFERENCE
REPI integrates formalizations of cognitive eﬀort and ActInf
with the EPCog perspective. That is, REPI assumes that event-
predictive ActInf strives to continuously maintain and infe r
the currently deemed relevant event-predictive encodings a bout,
and interactions with, the outside environment. Moreover,
ActInf controls anticipatory and reﬂective event dynamics a s
well as switches between events while accounting for the
involved cognitive eﬀort. Meanwhile, ActInf will tend to maint ain
multiple, possibly competitive, event hypotheses in parallel, f or
example, when facing a complex problem with a yet unknown
problem solution or when pursuing task switching.
REPI equates cognitive eﬀort with the eﬀort to dynamically
activate precise event-predictive encodings via active
inference, including retrospective, prospective, alternati ve,
and counterfactual encodings. The eﬀort essentially lies in
adapting internal activities and choosing behavioral activ ities
for the minimization of both task-respective divergence and
observational uncertainty. Meanwhile, theories of event-
predictive cognition suggest that the involved activities a re
constituted by interactive, event predictive codes, which pr edict
not only the unfolding stimulus dynamics but also each
others’ dynamics.
Because the adaptation processes fundamentally depend on
the current availability of (event-) predictive encodings, a
particular task will be solved the easier the more task-concre te
encoding are available. Vice versa, the more unusual a partic ular
task is, that is, the more incompatible required task response s
are to the so-far learned predictive encodings, the harder it
will be to inhibit the learned encodings and to activate curre nt
task-relevant components.
5.1. Preparation and Processing
Information Effort
Considering the eﬀort of focusing densities in relation to EPC og,
it will be eﬀortful to selectively activate precise event-predic tions,
or foci, away from previous foci as well as from uncertainty and
general lethargy. That is, cognitive resources are needed b oth
to activate new foci, to deactivate previous ones, and to invo ke
structure away from uncertainty, that is, away from a unifor m
distribution (maximal entropy).
Because the ease of activating particular densities will depen d
on the (i.e., learned) predictive encoding structures avail able, the
more unusual a particular event is, the more eﬀortful it will be to
encode it. Similarly, the more unusual, unexpected, or count er-
intuitive the binding of individual event components is, the more
eﬀortful the binding will be. Meanwhile, inhibiting competing
events as well as considering multiple alternative events wil l be
eﬀortful. Even more eﬀortful will be the successive activatio n or
parallel maintenance of mutually inhibitory encodings, suc h as
when a stimulus needs to be mapped ﬁrst onto the right response
side and then onto the left response side, due to a task switch.
Since considered events may be integrated into scenes, the
complexity of and the prior knowledge about a considered scene
will also play crucial roles. First, the ActInf of particular sc ene
aspects and un-mentioned but event-relevant components for
the production of coherent mental content will be eﬀortful. Th e
more common and well-known an encoded scene, the fewer
cognitive resources will be needed to activate its compressed
scene-characteristic event structures. The activation of scene-
unusual, or even scene-contradictory, attributes will be r esource-
demanding, because their activation will be inhibited by th e
scene code. When alternative scenes need to be considered, th eir
compatibility or logical temporal progression will inﬂuence th e
eﬀort to maintain them in parallel.
For example, the entities and interactions necessary to prepar e
a cup of tea can be eﬀectively encoded because we know all
involved entities and interactions well. Its encoding is eve n less
demanding, once we have developed an even more integrative
event-predictive schema, which predicts the involved sub-ev ents,
entities and conditional event progressions a priori, for exa mple,
when considering “preparing a cup of tea” (
Kuperberg, 2021 ).
Similarly, much less cognitive eﬀort is necessary when succe eding
in processing a multitude of stimuli in an integrative, Gesta lt-
oriented manner—as is the case when, for example, recognizing a
human ﬁgure walking in a point-light motion display ( Johansson,
1973; Pavlova, 2012; Sadeghi et al., 2021 ).
In sum, the preparation and processing of actual events and
event progressions within scenes can be assumed to be the more
resource demanding:
1. the more individual entities are involved,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
2. the more distinct their current spatial relations and dyna mics
are,
3. the more distinct their properties are,
4. the less typical or well-known the respective components and
interactions are,
5. the more distinct (non-)agentive roles are involved, and
6. the fewer precise prior event-predictive encodings are
available for activating the content.
The activation of a particular event will also depend on previou s
content activations: the more the current event diﬀers from
the previous one, the more eﬀortful the switch. Moreover, the
fewer this particular event switch has been experienced in the
past, the more resource-demanding it will be, because it is
less expectable.
5.2. Cognitive Effort When Processing
(Successive) Tasks
When facing a concrete task, various components of cognitive
eﬀort are involved. During task preparation, suitable event-
predictive task-speciﬁc priors away from previous posteriors,
latent habitual priors, and uniform entropy need to be
activated. These include priors on the expected, relevant
sensory stimulus information, the expected mappings—or,
more generally speaking, computations—needed to transform
the stimulus into an appropriate response, as well as priors
over potential responses. When processing a task-informative
stimulus these priors will be adapted further. For example,
in a priming task the prime may bias response tendencies.
Similarly, when the stimulus informs about likely upcoming
actual imperative stimuli or the upcoming task, stimulus prior s,
stimulus-response mapping priors, and response priors will be
focused further.
When processing the task-imperative stimulus then, super-
threshold activities need to be reached while inhibiting
incompatible priors in perception, in competing task sets, and in
the action choices. This principle is closely related to dynam ic
neural ﬁeld theory (
Schoener, 2020 ), where sub-threshold
activities in an activation ﬁeld correspond to preparatory, bu t
also latent and residual, priors. When preparation is maximally
eﬀective, expected and fully prepared stimuli will be processed
fastest and with least eﬀort, and they will yield smallest res ponse
errors. Meanwhile, when a response is overly prepared, it may
be executed prematurely, or incorrectly when the imperative
stimulus does not conform to the expected stimulus. This has
been, for example, studied in detail in go-nogo tasks.
In the following section, concrete examples of such encoding s
are provided and REPI is implemented as a dynamic processing
model. Model simulations yield the Simon Eﬀect and Task
Switching costs. More detailed model evaluations are needed
to further verify or falsify the ability of the architecture to
model more intricate task switching observations. We end
with a discussion that sketches-out the potential of REPI to
model other psychological experiments and typical observable
behavioral eﬀects.
6. MODELING PSYCHOLOGICAL
OBSERVATIONS
The combination of EPCog with ActInf makes rather
direct predictions about task-speciﬁc cognitive eﬀort and
consequent behavioral phenomena. In particular, it has
immediate implications for all behavioral paradigms where
multiple, including latent, stimulus-response options need
to be considered and selectively activated. According to th e
theoretical considerations, each task setup will lead to th e
activation of a particular, event-predictive state of mind. A ctInf
will attempt to focus the available cognitive resources on the
task at hand, while prior, latent activities (such as habitua l
stimulus-response mappings) will maintain a base-level activ ity
of general knowledge and behavioral response structures.
In relation to expected free energy (Equation 1), the
preparation to solve a particular task may be equated with
desired future observations P
(
oτ | bt, nt
)
, which essentially
quantiﬁes the focus on the current task set. Observations he re
can also include motor responses and their consequences, thus
triggering response-eﬀect compatibilities (
Elsner and Hommel,
2001; Kunde, 2003 ). Moreover, they can include the pre-
activation of particular, internal stimulus-response mapping s as
well as the inhibition of inappropriate ones. The higher the
uncertainty in this future-concerning observation density , the
more diﬃcult it will be to trigger a task-appropriate action.
Meanwhile, the second summand in Equation (1) will
maintain a general alertness, aiming at decreasing general
uncertainty about the environment. This component may thus
lead to the generation of task-irrelevant, epistemic actions,
but also to the prior activation of latent stimulus-response
mappings, which have proven to be useful to decrease
uncertainty—such as reacting to a particular stimulus with a n
orientation reﬂex.
6.1. REPI Model Implementation
In order to explain the mentioned psychological behavioral
phenomena not only qualitatively but quantitatively, we now
introduce an actual algorithmic implementation of the REPI
model. In this implementation, we focus on modeling standard
tasks that elicit the Simon eﬀect as well as task switching
costs. Figure 1 shows a sketch of the task-oriented REPI model
implementation, where sensory information ﬂows into the
model from the left, task-informative information from the top,
response tendencies are sent toward the right, while anticipat ed
response consequences are sent back to the left.
In all these tasks, we assume a dynamic perceptual space O,
where at a point in time t prior densities are given by P(Ot) and
posteriors by Q(Ot). Similarly, we denote the relevant task space
by /Psi1, with priors P(/Psi1t) and posteriors Q(/Psi1t). As an additional
latent observational bias space, we model B. Moreover, we model
response side dynamics in S and the actual response dynamics
in R.
During a trial, these densities are dynamically adapted towa rd
particular target values. In each iterative update step, all de nsities
are adapted from priors to posteriors, which constitute the priors
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
FIGURE 1 |The concrete REPI model implementation is able to mimic Simo n and task switching effects. It consists of ﬁve main dynamics p rocessing modules (slim
rectangles), which simulate inferences of observation den sities O, observation bias densities B, task set densities /Psi1, response side densities S, and actual response
densities R. The wide rectangles in the center correspond to task-speci ﬁc mappings from stimuli to task-respective response sides. Form- and color-response
matrices map the stimulus densities onto left/right respons es mixing the output relative to the form and color task activ ity values of the task density, while the latent
response matrix adds the stimulus bias density inﬂuence weig hted by the latent task activity. A response threshold deter mines when the response is actually triggered.
Activities are only passed into the response density R upon stimulus onset. To improve comprehensibility, a parti cular task switching scenario is shown exemplarily,
where the two tasks correspond to a form and a color task and th e stimuli include black and white stars and circles, which ma p to either a left or right response,
dependent on the task.
in the next time step. The update is computed as follows:
Q(Xt) ∝ P(Xt) + αǫtG(Xt), (4)
where αdenotes a rate factor, ǫt the currently available cognitive
resources per time step (e.g., per second), X ∈ { O, B, /Psi1, S, R}
denotes the density that is adapted, and G(Xt) denotes the current
targeted density, that is, the ideal goal state REPI strives f or via
active inference. In the simulations below we set the simula tion
speed to 10 ms per iteration and thus α = 0.01, while we set the
resource strength to ǫ= 6.
When focusing on one particular task, the task density P(/Psi1)
will strive to adapt toward a fully focused density, which wou ld,
for example, correspond to ( /Psi1|ψt = 1) = [1, 0, ... , 0] in the case
of a discrete one-hot encoding when focusing on the ﬁrst task .
While preparing for a particular task, or a set of tasks, the task
densities will adapt to the average mixture of each possible tas k.
Finally, to model a latent readiness to process stimuli habit ually,
a general latent readiness may be modeled with an oﬀset facto r
λ, such that, for example, a maximal readiness for processing tw o
equally probable tasks would correspond to:
G(/Psi1|ψt ∈ { 1, 2}) =
[
(1 − λ)/2, (1 − λ)/2, 0, ... , 0, λ
]
, (5)
where we assume additional dormant tasks in the middle with
zero activity.
The observational density, which focuses on processing
the imperative stimulus, will generate task-particular, top-
down, goal-directed stimulus expectation densities G(Ot|P(/Psi1t))
dependent on the current task density Q(/Psi1) during the stimulus
preparatory phase. Once the stimulus is presented, though,
processing will switch to bottom-up evidence accumulation
by setting G(Ot|ot) to, for example, a one-hot encoding of
the discrete stimulus signal. While information fusion opti ons
may be included here, at the moment the implementation sets
G(Ot) either to the top-down or the bottom-up observational
goal, dependent on the current stimulus availability. Meanwh ile,
potential stimulus biases may be processed within the bias
space B, where no stimulus side bias corresponds to G(Bt) =
[0.5, 0.5]. The response side density is continuously updated
task- and observation-estimate dependently. That is, G(St) is
set to P(S|Q(Ot), Q(/Psi1t)), where the respective task sets are
implemented by means of task-respective mapping matrices,
which map individual objects to task-corresponding response
sides. Finally, once a stimulus has been perceived, the actua l
response density is adapted away from a uniform response
density toward the current processing side density, that is, G(Rt)
is set to Q(St). The actual response is then triggered once a
particular response threshold θr, which we typically set to 0.9,
is reached.
Assuming, as speciﬁed above, that the full focus will lie
on solving tasks during an experiment appropriately, the costs
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
FIGURE 2 |In the Simon effect, the response dynamics are inﬂuenced by the side of the stimul us, besides the actual stimulus identity. The dynamics clea rly show
how REPI gets ready for the task once the ﬁxation cross is shown (vertical solid bars). Once the imperative stimulus is show n (vertical dotted bars), response inference
is activated and evidence for either response side accumula tes. The response is triggered when a particular response th reshold (set to 0.9) is reached (vertical
dashed bars).
for solving a particular trial may then be quantiﬁed by the
dynamically unfolding mutual information between current
response tendencies and desired response tendencies given th e
beliefs in the current task and the current stimulus situati on,
that is:
C(task) = C
(
P(St), P(/Psi1t), P(Ot)
)
=
∑
ψ∈ /Psi1t,o∈ Ot
p(ψ)p(o)KL
(
Q(St|ψ, o)||P(St)
)
=
∑
ψ∈ /Psi1t,o∈ Ot
p(ψ)p(o)KL
(
G(St)||P(St)
)
= I(P(/Psi1t, Ot); P(St)). (6)
In the future, several advancements in this cost computation
and the distribution of cognitive resources are imaginable . These
include (i) the computation and integration of costs based on
mutual information in the other spaces, including the task
and observational spaces, (ii) the adaptive, non-uniform, ac tive-
inference-driven distribution of computational resources over
the considered density spaces, that is, adapting ǫt in Equation (4).
6.2. Modeling of the Simon Effect
The Simon eﬀect characterizes the eﬀect that participants
respond to a stimulus faster with their ipsilateral than with
their contralateral eﬀector even when the position of the
stimulus presentation is irrelevant for the actual task (
Erlhagen
and Schöner, 2002; Cho and Proctor, 2010 ). From the event-
predictive ActInf perspective, paradigms that study the Simon
eﬀect essentially study the presence of latent, spatial stimul us-
response mappings and their latent activity strength relative to
the task-speciﬁc activities, participants attempt to focus on. The
latent response mapping corresponds to an ipsilateral response
to lateral stimuli, such as by an overt eye saccade, by a cover t
direction of attention, or by an actual manual interaction— where
in the last case handedness plays an additional important role .
For example, we respond to a visual stimulus by looking at it,
by touching it (e.g., a power switch), avoiding it (e.g., an in sect),
or actively pursuing interactions with it (e.g., when washing
our hands or grasping a mug). As a result, ipsilateral, stimulus -
response mappings, which are predictive by nature, are latently
active in our minds, facilitating many everyday interaction s. In a
particular experiment that elicits the Simon eﬀect, though, th ese
latent mappings get in the way and are hard to fully inhibit.
To model the dynamics and estimate the relative eﬀort to
solve individual trials, we ran REPI on a simulation of a typica l
Simon eﬀect-eliciting task. We assumed that the task was to
respond to the form of an object, ignoring its color as well as it s
location on the screen. Objects were simulated to be presente d
either centrally to the right or to the left of the center. The trial
started with the presentation of a ﬁxation cross, followed by the
imperative stimulus 500 ms afterwards. The inter trial inter val
was set to 100 ms.
In our REPI implementation, we used the general setup shown
in Figure 1 focusing on the form task and leaving the latent
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
activity active between a value of 0.1 and 0.2, dependent on if the
ﬁxation cross or the imperative stimulus are shown or not yet,
respectively. Task cue and stimulus goal signals are set to 0. 9 and
0.97, respectively assuming a latent task activity of 0.1 and a slim
chance to perceive one of the other objects with a probability o f
0.03, respectively1.
Figure 2 shows the unfolding dynamics of the simulation
over the ﬁrst ten trials. Moreover, the dynamics of the costs,
which focuses on solving the task quickly and correctly, are
plotted. Figure 3 shows the simulated reaction times as well
as the resource investment determined over the time from the
imperative stimulus until the response was triggered. The res ults
clearly show the Simon eﬀect: a stimulus that appears on the righ t
or left is responded to faster with the compatible response side ,
while a stimulus in the center does not exhibit this inﬂuence .
Moreover, response repetition beneﬁts are visible, when the
response side needs to be switched. The cost measurement C
(cf. Equation 1) conﬁrms that faster responses go hand-in-ha nd
with smaller cognitive eﬀort. Future work may also model the
STROOP eﬀect with similar principles. Here, an open question is
whether modiﬁcations of the task priors will be enough to model
the dominance of the word reading response in all its detail.
6.3. Modeling Task Switching
The task switching literature is full of additional insight s
on how quickly event-predictive encodings can be selectively
engaged, disengaged, and inhibited. When comparing blocks
with single and multiple tasks, parallel task processing costs
as well as switching costs are assessed. These are needed to
pre-activate the task-speciﬁc stimulus encodings and stimul us-
response mappings as well as to switch between the distinct,
task-speciﬁc encodings and mappings.
In contrast, mixed task blocks reveal the ﬂexibility of the
cognitive processes involved when switching between tasks
(
Kiesel et al., 2010; Koch et al., 2018; Frings et al., 2020 ). Task
switching costs—that is, worse performance (typically measu red
in response times and response errors) when performing a
diﬀerent task in a subsequent trial vs. the same task—reveal t hat
it is diﬃcult to fully erase the task set that was relevant in t he
previous trial from memory. The robustness of this ﬁnding is
stunning: it can be found in blocks with predictable task swit ches,
cued switches, intermittent instructions, and even when ta sk
selection is mostly voluntary (
Kiesel et al., 2010 ).
6.3.1. Model Results
To model the dynamics and estimate the relative eﬀort to solve
individual trials, we adapted the simulation and evaluated RE PI
in a typical task-switching experiment. We simulated mixed ta sk
blocks, where ﬁrst a cue informed about the task of the trial. After
a cue-stimulus interval (set to 100 ms if not stated diﬀerently
below) the imperative stimulus appeared. After the reaction wa s
executed by REPI, the response to cue interval, which we also se t
to 100 ms in the reported results, commenced. We leave the othe r
1The Simon eﬀect model implementation is available online as an interact ive
shiny app: https://cognitivemodeling.shinyapps.io/shinysimone ﬀectsimulation/. It
allows explorations of critical model parameters, random trial order dyna mics, and
resulting, condition-dependent reaction time values.
settings identical to the Simon eﬀect simulation, except for t hat
all stimuli were simulated to be presented centrally yieldin g no
latent response bias. A task switch occurred with a 50% chance 2.
Figure 4 shows the unfolding dynamics of the simulation for
the ﬁrst 10 trials. In contrast to the Simon task, we can now
observe only indirect stimulus bias density dynamics, which s tem
from the response side activities. Moreover, we can observe ho w
task switches delay decision making, as do response side switc hes.
Figure 5 shows simulated reaction times as well as the
resource investment (cf. Equation 6). The results reveal th e
typical Task Switching eﬀect as well as its decline when the
response to the other task is compatible vs. when it is not.
They also show that the task switching costs clearly decline
with a longer cue-stimulus interval (
Monsell, 2003; Altmann and
Gray, 2008; Kiesel et al., 2010 ). Moreover, response repetition
beneﬁts are observed, which are particularly strong when the
same object is presented. In comparison to the costs reported
in the Simon eﬀect simulation, it may come as a surprise that
the costs for individual trials area actually slightly smal ler on
average. This may be the case because the costs currently only
focus on the mutual information residing in the response side
space. When the stimulus activities are directly set to the cu rrent
value instead of dynamically adapted, the switching costs to n ot
reverse when in the previous trial the other response side had
to be chosen. This eﬀect should be studied in further detail.
When the stimulus is assumed to be processed instantly, in
which case REPI acts very similar to the one in
Steyvers et al.
(2019), intricate interactions of the current trial situation wit h
the previous response side disappear. Future research should
further elaborate on the validity of these additional inter actions.
The put-forward REPI model would expect these inﬂuences,
although their inﬂuences may not be as pronounced as the ones
in the presented results. In fact, an instant perceptual process ing
essentially corresponds to very large update steps (i.e., larg e
values of ǫt for the perceptual updates only; cf. Equation 4). Thus,
REPI essentially subsumes the model in
Steyvers et al. (2019),
but, additionally, puts forward the relation to active infere nce,
to event-predictive cognition, as well as to the involvement o f
cognitive eﬀort and cognitive resources.
6.3.2. Task Switching and Multitasking Literature
Relations
The typical task switch results are thus explained by REPI with
its implementation of the event-predictive ActInf perspective .
Each task requires the activation of a particular task set, wh ich
will be encoded by corresponding event-predictive encodings,
that is, the prior activation of particular stimulus-response
mappings. A response is then selected based on a suﬃcient
activity threshold, which mimics accumulator or drift mode ls
(
Ratcliﬀ, 1978; Lewandowski, 2007 ) and is also related to dynamic
neural ﬁeld approaches ( Schoener, 2020 ). Longer reaction times
thus are generated when response alternatives still have larg er
2The task switching model implementation is available online as an int eractive
shiny app: https://cognitivemodeling.shinyapps.io/shinytasks witchingsimulation/,
which allows further explorations of additional eﬀects of the model parameters and
the simulation setup.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
FIGURE 3 |In the Simon effect, the reaction times clearly depend on the stimulus bias, fav oring ipsilateral responses. Besides the mean reaction tim es, the values
report standard error, the number of condition-respective trials, and mean cognitive effort costs C (task) integrated over the time from the stimulus onset unti l
the response.
FIGURE 4 |In the task switchingsimulation, the response dynamics are indirectly inﬂuenced by the previous task as well as by the previous response. Once a
response is executed, response side and action densities ar e set back to uniform.
prior activities from previous trials. Moreover, the activity of the
same response in the previous trial yields response delays in the
case of a task switch, because a now incorrect stimulus-respo nse
mapping is still co-activated.
Meanwhile, an independent congruency eﬀect can be
observed, which yields faster responses when the stimuli
aﬀord the same response in the case of either current task.
Interestingly, the latter is much less dependent on preparatio n
time. Both eﬀects can be explained by the failure to fully
suppress previous task activities, thus aﬀecting response time.
If it was possible to remove or normalize over the eﬀects of
the particular pairs of tasks, response time activities may be
understood in even better manners. Generally, though, REPI
simulates how competing task structures may elicit congruen t or
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
FIGURE 5 |Results of task switchingsimulations averaged over twenty experiments for the full R EPI model with all dynamics simulating a cue-stimulus inter val of
100 ms (top row). When this interval is enhanced to 500 ms (middle row), the task switching effect decreases, as is well-known from results in the task-switching
literature. When the stimulus density is set directly to the actual stimulus value, the predicted response distributio ns undergo fewer dynamical interactions (bottom
row). The basic REPI simulation without further parameter optim ization yields reaction times that depend on whether a task s witch occurred (cf. “either” column in the
left block). Additionally, a strong previous response side beneﬁt is generated, yielding faster responses for the same r esponse side. Moreover, the compatibility of the
response to the other task in a trial plays an important role ( center vs. right block of reaction times). When the stimulus is assumed to be processed instantly (bottom
row), the expected reversal of the task-switching effect in the c ase of the other previous response side disappears. Besides the mean reaction times, the numbers
report standard error, the number of condition-respective trials, and mean cognitive effort costs C (task) integrated over the time from the stimulus onset unti l
the response.
incongruent stimulus-response mappings, causing the observa ble
congruency eﬀects.
In task-switching research, two-stage processing models hav e
been developed, where the task selection and the actual respon se
selection are analyzed separately (cf. Kiesel et al., 2010 ). Task
selection corresponds to the eﬀort to focus on one particular
task while inhibiting all latent, incompatible mappings; that is,
the adaption of prior task-set activities. This corresponds to the
precision of the prior activation of desired observations, th at is,
sensory-to-motor mappings, in Equation (1), as well as additio nal
latent activities (cf. Figure 4). Response selection then depends
on the actual trial-speciﬁc stimulus as well as on the prior
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
task set activities and competing activations. That is, respo nse
selection depends on both, the certainty which task should
actually be performed and the certainty which response needs t o
be issued.
Moreover, given the imperative stimulus, the anticipation of
the action consequences may include posterior self-evaluat ion
attempts to maximize task-conform behavior (minimizing the
KL divergence in Equation 1) while minimizing surprising
consequences (minimizing expected entropy in Equation 1).
These components are not included, yet, except after the actua l
response has been made. As a potential result, an imperative
stimulus that is compatible with the other task but would requ ire
the opposite response in the other task will be particularly
eﬀortful to process, because the residual previous task activi ty
leads to the prediction of an incorrect behavior, which needs to
be avoided. Overall, larger uncertainties on both, althoug h highly
interactive, processing stages will thus yield response delay s and
larger errors.
Meanwhile, the refractory period to a full disengagement
from the previous task will vary dependent on the complexity
of the switch between tasks. Accordingly, preparation is fast er
the easier the switch. On the one hand side, switch training m ay
facilitate switching between the involved, task-set chara cterizing
predictive encodings. On the other hand, overlaps between the
required perceptual stimulus processes and the relevant stimu lus-
response mappings will determine switching demands. If there i s
no overlap, switching will be rather easy. The higher the over lap,
though, and the stronger the need to inhibit previously activa ted
stimulus-response mappings, the higher the cognitive eﬀort will
be. When the task sets mutually inhibit each other, the switc h of
the task sets will be particularly eﬀortful. This is the case be cause
an even stronger change in the precision encoding is needed
when the tasks overlap but demand incompatible responses.
Task switching results have even shown that asymmetric task s
yield larger switch costs for switches to the easier task com pared
to switches to the harder task, suggesting that disengaging
from inhibitions is more eﬀortful than engaging into previous ly
inhibited tasks (
Kiesel et al., 2010 ). Further implementations of
REPI may explore according eﬀects.
7. FURTHER MODELING POTENTIAL
In the previous section we have successfully modeled the
Simon eﬀect and task switching behavior, the results of which
generally conform to the literature and have correctly reve aled
larger task eﬀort when an irrelevant stimulus bias interfere s,
when a task switch had to be processed, when the response
side needed to be changed, and when the other task requires
an incompatible response. We furthermore have discussed
additional open questions and modeling challenges. Here, se veral
other paradigms and behavioral psychological phenomena are
addressed and discussed, which may be modeled with REPI
in the near future, revealing possible further potential as we ll
as potential limitations of the put-forward event-predictive
inference approach.
7.1. Theory of Magnitude
The theory of magnitude (ATOM) (
Walsh, 2003 ) suggests that
space, time, and quantity are encoded by a common magnitude
system. From the event-predictive inference perspective, the
common encoding of magnitudes makes a lot of sense: in the
real world, magnitudes are closely related across modalities .
For example, a louder crashing noise is created by a stronger
force or by a larger object or by taking a longer fall onto
the ground. Similarly, numerously more objects will send mo re
visual signals, will be heavier in sum, will take longer to swi pe
away, and will be more eﬀortful to create, compared to fewer
objects of the same type. Thus, over development, it seems high ly
likely that predictive encodings form that cross-correlate various
magnitudes with each other, setting the stage for the discov ery
of ATOM.
One closely related, particularly well-studied paradigm
addresses the SNARC eﬀect: spatial-numerical associations of
response codes. In this case, numbers have been shown to be
spatially-distributed on a magnitude axis, leading from left to
right in societies with left-to-right scripts, presumably be cause
the reading and writing direction guides from the past into
the future, determining a latent temporal axis in our minds.
Given a particular task set then, particular sets of numbers wi ll
be pre-activated in our minds, leading to the SNARC eﬀect:
even if the number magnitude does not matter for the response
itself (e.g., deciding between even and odd), smaller/larg er
numbers are responded to faster with a left/right response (
Wood
et al., 2008 ). This fact, however, depends on the numbers that
are currently mentally active in working memory as well as
their spatial grounding. Accordingly, a working memory-bas ed
account of the SNARC eﬀect has been proposed (
Abrahamse
et al., 2016 ), which highlights the importance of currently active
mappings between space and numbers. For example, imagining
numbers on a clock face grounds the numbers seven to 11 left
of the numbers one to ﬁve, while this grounding is reversed
when imagining the number on a ruler (
Baechtold et al.,
1998).
From the event-predictive inference perspective, these prior
spatial-numerical activations correspond to current predict ive
encoding activities, which temporarily and latently associa te
numbers with space. As a result, and in close correlation with
the Simon eﬀect, investigations concerning the SNARC eﬀect,
and various related eﬀects concerning number processing (
van
Dijck and Fias, 2011; Lohmann et al., 2018; Cipora et al.,
2020
), essentially investigate the strength of latent and tempor ary
associations between space and numbers as well as the activati on
of particular spatial axes, dependent on the task at hand. Furth er,
much more detailed, modeling eﬀorts by means of REPI may
shed further light on the concrete encodings involved and th eir
processing dynamics in the respective ATOM-related paradigms
and particular experimental setups.
7.2. Crossmodal Concruencies
As a ﬁnal example for behavioral psychological
experiments, results from studies on crossmodal congruency
may be explained in a similar manner. Related to
the SNARC eﬀect and the theory of magnitude, in
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
crossmodal congruency paradigms typically irrelevant
distractor stimuli in a somewhat irrelevant modality
systematically interfere with stimulus processing in the
response-relevant modality.
One prominent approach was originally motivated by single
cell recording results in monkeys. Individual neurons were
shown to encode peripersonal spaces, responding to stimuli
touching or appearing close by a particular part of the hand
or face (
Fogassi et al., 1996; Maravita et al., 2003 ). From an
event-predictive inference perspective, again this comes as n o
surprise. As discussed above, cross-modal associations occ ur very
frequently in our world. Thus, latent predictive encodings c an be
expected to develop that associate these respective stimuli c ross-
modally as well as across respective frames of reference. In f act,
the rubber hand illusion ( Botvinick and Cohen, 1998 ) as well
as the disappearing hand trick ( Newport and Gilpin, 2011 ) fall
in the same category, in which case the brain attempts to infer
a consistent explanation for the multisensory or sensorimot or
signals the participants focus on, leading to an adaption of
internal body state estimations (
Ehrenfeld and Butz, 2013; Butz
et al., 2014 ). During a typical crossmodal congruency task, on the
other hand, irrelevant stimuli close to response-relevant t actile
stimuli will interfere with according responses ( Spence et al.,
2004), indicating that visual stimuli are mapped onto tactile
perceptions a priori, because the two modalities typically oﬀer
compatible signals in the real world.
Interestingly, the more recently investigated anticipator y
cross-modal congruency eﬀect (
Brozzoli et al., 2010; Belardinelli
et al., 2018; Lohmann et al., 2019 ) shows that peripersonal
space around the hand is projected onto a planned grasp even
before the actual action execution commences. These result s
essentially indicate that event-predictive inference anti cipates
action results, pre-activating particular goal constellatio ns and
according multisensory mappings. Interestingly, as would be
expected from the event-predictive ActInf perspective, when
uncertainty is high while approaching the object, the focus sh ould
lie on controlling the actual arm movement, thus temporarily not
yielding a signiﬁcant anticipatory crossmodal-congruency eﬀect
(
Lohmann et al., 2019 ). A ﬁrst variational implementation of the
eﬀect can be found elsewhere ( Weigert et al., 2021 ).
Earlier studies on simpler action-eﬀect compatibilites also
fall into the same category: the eﬀect of an action and the
latent or temporarily activated compatibility with the action
code itself, can lead to anticipatory cross-modal interacti ons
(
Elsner and Hommel, 2001; Kunde, 2003 ). On the dynamic event
encoding level, studies on rotations have shown yet again re lated
predictive encoding interactions: the processing of a rotati ng
tactile stimulus on the palm, for example, interferes with the
active rotation of a visual stimulus in a dual task paradigm
(
Lohmann et al., 2017 ). Earlier, visual perception was shown
to be biased by the rotating tactile stimulus ( Butz et al., 2010 ),
indicating shared temporal dynamic encodings across modali ties.
We believe that REPI may indeed be used to model all of these
eﬀects—although open questions include the stimulus design
choices, the actual involved predictive encodings, as well a s the
exact means to process the anticipated horizon and its eﬀect on
actual stimulus processing dynamics.
7.3. Social Interactions With Other Agents
In our social realities, we experience scenes, and events wit hin,
often with a multitude of entities and other agents involved .
These other agents have their own minds. Thus, to foster eﬀect ive
and adaptive interactions between these agents, it is beneﬁc ial to
know something about the others’ minds, that is, to develop a
theory of mind (ToM) (
Frith and Frith, 2005 ). When engaging in
social interactions, then, ActInf may consider the ToM of oth ers,
including their perception of one’s own mind and particularly
one’s own personality. Accordingly, building up scenes with a
multitude of interaction-critical agents becomes eﬀortful and can
be strenuous. The more diverse agents (colleagues, friends, co-
workers, team-members etc.) one is willing and able to consid er,
the more eﬀort will be needed. Their parallel activation withou t
between-agent interference (in one’s mind), is per se strenuous
because it is impossible to maintain too many distinct predictiv e
densities simultaneously—particularly seeing that each set of
events about another agent contains recursive agent events.
This recursiveness with respect to social interactions enab les
us to pursue rational social reasoning, as formulated in the
rational speech act model (
Frank and Goodman, 2012; Goodman
and Frank, 2016 ). On the other hand, it also requires much more
computational resources, as others need to be co-processed in
one’s own mind. Accordingly, a rather large corpus of studies
suggests that our brains, particularly when acting under tim e
pressure, have a very hard time to consider the perspective
of others, failing to avoid, for example, undesired ambiguous
situations during conversations (
Ferreira and Dell, 2000; Ferreira,
2008). Due to the highly resource-demanding challenge to
maintain the perspective of an interaction partner besides
ones own perspective, we often sidestep this perspective taking
problem by simply assuming that others have the same state
of knowledge as we do. Nonetheless, when retrospectively
interpreting ones own utterance and the observed actual
behavioral response of the current conversation partner(s), w e
are able to inversely infer aspects of their motivations, int entions,
and state of knowledge (
Baker et al., 2017; Liu and Spelke, 2017;
Achimova et al., 2022 ), enabling us to learn about others.
In sum, social interactions will require additional cognit ive
resources because eﬀective and adaptive social interactions with
particular others will need to activate our ToM about the other .
Moreover, the more complex that social interaction and the more
unusual the other(s); the more eﬀortful the ActInf-based con trol
of these interactions will be. It remains an open challenge to s hed
further light on the involved processes and resource demands by
means of socially-extended REPI-like models.
8. CONCLUSIONS
This paper has put forward that cognitive eﬀort unfolds in
our brain on multiple levels of abstraction, within scenes,
and event-respectively. During wakefulness, our state of min d
essentially elaborates on the accumulating evidence about
the outside environment, binding and integrating them into
currently active, behavioral-relevant, generative models about—
and possible interactions with—the environment. Meanwhile, w e
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
selectively probe the future to minimize anticipated uncerta inty
and deviations from expected internal homeostasis. Moreover ,
we consolidate our accumulated, event-oriented experience s
into our episodic memory and, over time, into procedural and
associative memory structures. All these aspects are eﬀortfu l,
because they require the selective, precise, coordinated ac tivation
of event-predictive encodings, the co-activation of altern atives,
and selective consolidations.
The proposal is generally compatible with The Binding and
Retrieval in Action Control (BRAC) proposal (
Frings et al.,
2020), which oﬀers explanations for task switching and related
tasks. BRAC suggests two main cognitive processes: stimulus -
response-eﬀect combinations are bound into event ﬁles for
task preparation and execution. Meanwhile, related event ﬁles
are retrieved from previous trials. Viewed from the introduc ed
resourceful event-precictive inference perspective REPI, eve nt
ﬁles are constituted by sets of predictive encodings (
Butz,
2016), which predict sensory perceptions, sensory-to-motor
mappings, actual motor responses, and consequences thereof.
Retrieval from previous trials corresponds to residual as well
as latent, habitual predictive encoding activities. Beyond BRAC,
though, the proposed ActInf-induced eﬀort perspective oﬀers a
computational formalism how binding and retrieval are elici ted.
Moreover, it suggests that cognitive eﬀort can be equated with
changes in the event-predictive densities that focus our min ds
onto particular tasks while inhibiting previous activities a s well
as latent, habitual activities.
The put-forward resourceful event-predictive inference mod el
REPI also oﬀers a computational explanation why particularly
multitasking and task-switching is cognitively eﬀortful an d
strenuous. This is the case because the maintenance of
multiple event schemata, that is, the maintenance of a more
complex, multi-task-speciﬁc, predictive encoding density is
more eﬀortful. This is particularly the case, when multiple,
independent alternatives need to be maintained and, even mor e
so, when the alternatives need to activate mutually inhibito ry
predictive encodings. On top of that, it is not only the
maintenance of complex densities, but also the fast switchin g
between task-respective response mapping alternatives—be the y
explanations, counterfactual reasoning considerations, o r simple
task mappings. Such switches require the temporary stronger,
selective activation of task-speciﬁc densities, while inhi biting
those from the other concurrent tasks, whereby ActInf pushes
toward accomplishing the switches back-and forth between th em.
The REPI implementations of tasks that elicit the Simon eﬀect
as well as of task switching experiments underline the potenti al
of the theoretical perspective and ask for further research eﬀo rts.
REPI has essentially shown how computational resources may
be distributed by means of ActInf within the developing, late nt
event-predictive structures. However, for now the eﬀort was
distributed equally over all modules, that is, ǫt in Equation (4)
was constant and had the same value in all modules. Additiona lly,
neither sequential expectation eﬀects nor fatigue have been
modeled, yet. Equation (4) allows for such adaptations and
could certainly be modiﬁed further by modeling task-orient ed
focus following the general active inference principle. A rela ted
challenge lies in identifying and in learning the actual eve nt-
predictive structures that are maximally useful to improve tas k
performance. Moreover, the neural mechanisms that enable
the selective activation and maintenance of multiple present,
past, future, and social considerations should be scrutinize d
further. As a ﬁnal result, the put-forward event-predictive A ctInf-
induced perspective on cognitive eﬀort may not only be able to
explain and algorithmically model a multitude of results fro m
psychological studies, but may also oﬀer design and training
suggestions to facilitate our interactions with our increas ingly
complex, diverse, social, digitalized world.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are includ ed
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author conﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work an d
has approved it for publication.
FUNDING
This research was supported by the German Research
Foundation (DFG) within Priority-Program SPP 2134-project
Development of the agentive self (BU 1335/11-1, EL 253/8-1),
the research training group 1808 on Ambiguity-Production
and Perception, the research unit 2718 on Modal and Amodal
Cognition: Functions and Interactions (BU 1335/12-1), and the
Machine Learning Cluster of Excellence, funded by the Deutsch e
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation)
under Germany’s Excellence Strategy - EXC number 2064/1 -
Project number 390727645. Finally, additional support came
from the Open Access Publishing Fund of the University
of Tübingen.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am highly grateful to my collaborators Asya Achimova, Nadi ne
Koch, and Johannes Lohmann for providing concrete feedback
and suggestions to earlier drafts of this paper.
REFERENCES
Abrahamse, E., van Dijck, J.-P., and Fias, W. (2016). How does wo rking
memory enable number-induced spatial biases? Front. Psychol . 7, 977.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00977
Achimova, A., Scontras, G., Stegemann-Philipps, C., Lohmann, J., a nd Butz, M.
V. (2022). Learning about others: modeling social inference thro ugh ambiguity
resolution. Cognition 218, 104862. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2021.104862
Ali, A., Ahmad, N., de Groot, E., van Gerven, M. A. J., and Kietzman n,
T. C. (2021). Predictive coding is a consequence of energy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
eﬃciency in recurrent neural networks. bioRxiv. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.39
76481
Altmann, E. M., and Gray, W. D. (2008). An integrated model of cogni tive control
in task switching. Psychol. Rev. 115, 602–639. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.115.3.602
Baechtold, D., Baumüller, M., and Brugger, P. (1998). Stimulus-respo nse
compatibility in representational space. Neuropsychologia 36, 731–735.
doi: 10.1016/S0028-3932(98)00002-5
Baker, C. L., Jara-Ettinger, J., Saxe, R., and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2017). Rational
quantitative attribution of beliefs, desires and percepts in huma n mentalizing.
Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 0064. doi: 10.1038/s41562-017-0064
Baldwin, D. A., and Kosie, J. E. (2021). How does the mind render st reaming
experience as events? Top. Cogn. Sci . 13, 79–105. doi: 10.1111/tops.12502
Bastos, A., Vezoli, J., Bosman, C., Schoﬀelen, J.-M., Oostenve ld, R.,
Dowdall, J., et al. (2015). Visual areas exert feedforward and feedb ack
inﬂuences through distinct frequency channels. Neuron 85, 390–401.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.018
Belardinelli, A., Lohmann, J., Farn?, A., and Butz, M. V. (2018). Me ntal space maps
into the future. Cognition 176, 65–73. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2018.03.007
Botvinick, M., and Cohen, J. (1998). Rubber hands ‘feel’ touch that eyes see. Nature
391, 756. doi: 10.1038/35784
Botvinick, M., Niv, Y., and Barto, A. C. (2009). Hierarchically or ganized behavior
and its neural foundations: a reinforcement learning perspective. Cognition 113,
262–280. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2008.08.011
Botvinick, M., and Toussaint, M. (2012). Planning as inferenc e. Trends Cogn. Sci .
16, 485–488. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2012.08.006
Bratman, M. (1987). Intention, Plans and Pratical Reasoning . Harvard: Harvard
University Press.
Brozzoli, C., Cardinali, L., Pavani, F., and Farnè, A. (2010). Act ion-
speciﬁc remapping of peripersonal space. Neuropsychologia 48, 796–802.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.10.009
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., and Schacter, D. L. (200 8). The brain’s default
network. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci . 1124, 1–38. doi: 10.1196/annals.1440.011
Buckner, R. L., and Carroll, D. C. (2007). Self-projection and the bra in. Trends
Cogn. Sci. 11, 49–57. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2006.11.004
Butz, M. V. (2008). How and why the brain lays the foundations for a conscious
self. Construct. Foundat. 4, 1–42. Available online at: http://constructivist.info/
4/1/001
Butz, M. V. (2016). Towards a uniﬁed sub-symbolic computational t heory of
cognition. Front. Psychol. 7, 925. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00925
Butz, M. V., Achimova, A., Bilkey, D., and Knott, A. (2021). Eve nt-predictive
cognition: a root for conceptual human thought. Top Cogn. Sci . 13, 10–24.
doi: 10.1111/tops.12522
Butz, M. V., Bilkey, D., Humaidan, D., Knott, A., and Otte, S. (20 19). Learning,
planning, and control in a monolithic neural event inference archit ecture.
Neural Netw. 117, 135–144. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2019.05.001
Butz, M. V., and Kutter, E. F. (2017). How the Mind Comes Into Being: Introducing
Cognitive Science from a Functional and Computational Persp ective. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Butz, M. V., Kutter, E. F., and Lorenz, C. (2014). Rubber hand i llusion aﬀects joint
angle perception. PLoS ONE 9, e92854. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092854
Butz, M. V., and Pezzulo, G. (2008). “Beneﬁts of anticipations in cognitive agents, ”
in The Challenge of Anticipation: A Unifying Framework for the Anal ysis
andDesign of Artiﬁcial Cognitive Systems, LNAI 5225 , eds G. Pezzulo, M. V.
Butz, C. Castelfranchi, and R. Falcone (Berlin: Springer Verlag), 45– 62.
Butz, M. V., Sigaud, O., and Gérard, P., (eds) (2003). Anticipatory Behavior in
Adaptive Learning Systems: Foundations, Theories, and Syste ms (LNAI 2684) .
Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Butz, M. V., Thomaschke, R., Linhardt, M. J., and Herbort, O. (201 0).
Remapping motion across modalities: tactile rotations inﬂuence visu al
motion judgments. Exp. Brain Res . 207, 1–11. doi: 10.1007/s00221-010-2
420-2
Cho, D. T., and Proctor, R. W. (2010). The object-based simon eﬀ ect: grasping
aﬀordance or relative location of the graspable part? J. Exp. Psychol . 36,
853–861. doi: 10.1037/a0019328
Cipora, K., He, Y., and Nuerk, H.-C. (2020). The spatial-numerical ass ociation of
response codes eﬀect and math skills: why related? Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci . 1477,
5–19. doi: 10.1111/nyas.14355
Clark, A. (2016). Surﬁng Uncertainty: Prediction, Action and the Embodied Mind .
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Darwin, C. (1859). The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection . London:
Penguin Books.
Daume, J., Gruber, T., Engel, A. K., and Friese, U. (2017). Phase-a mplitude
coupling and long-range phase synchronization reveal frontotemporal
interactions during visual working memory. J. Neurosci . 37, 313–322.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2130-16.2016
Dawkins, R. (1976). The Selﬁsh Gene . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Deacon, T. W. (1997). The Symbolic Species: The Co-Evolution of Language and the
Brain. W. W. Norton and Company (New York, NY).
Ehrenfeld, S., and Butz, M. V. (2013). The modular modality frame model:
Continuous body state estimation and plausibility-weighted in formation
fusion. Biol. Cybern. 107, 61–82. doi: 10.1007/s00422-012-0526-2
Elman, J. L., and McRae, K. (2019). A model of event knowledge. Psychol. Rev. 126,
252–291. doi: 10.1037/rev0000133
Elsner, B., and Hommel, B. (2001). Eﬀect anticipation and action co ntrol. J. Exp.
Psychol. 27, 229–240. doi: 10.1037/0096-1523.27.1.229
Engel, A. K., Fries, P., and Singer, W. (2001). Dynamic prediction s: Oscillations
and synchrony in top-down processing. Nat. Rev. Neurosci . 2, 704–716.
doi: 10.1038/35094565
Erlhagen, W., and Schöner, G. (2002). Dynamic ﬁeld theory of movemen t
preparation. Psychol. Rev. 109, 545–572. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.109.3.545
Ferreira, V. S. (2008). Ambiguity, accessibility, and a division of labor
for communicative success. Psychol. Learn. Motivat . 49, 209–246.
doi: 10.1016/S0079-7421(08)00006-6
Ferreira, V. S., and Dell, G. S. (2000). Eﬀect of ambiguity and lexica l
availability on syntactic and lexical production. Cogn. Psychol . 40, 296–340.
doi: 10.1006/cogp.1999.0730
Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Luppino, G., Matelli, M., and Rizzolatti, G.
(1996). Coding of peripersonal space in inferior premotor cortex (area f4). J.
Neurophysiol. 76, 141–157. doi: 10.1152/jn.1996.76.1.141
Frank, M. C., and Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting pragmatic reason ing in
language games. Science 336, 998–998. doi: 10.1126/science.1218633
Franklin, N. T., Norman, K. A., Ranganath, C., Zacks, J. M., and Ge rshman, S. J.
(2020). Structured event memory: a neuro-symbolic model of event cogn ition.
Psychol. Rev. 127, 327–361. doi: 10.1037/rev0000177
Fries, P. (2015). Rhythms for cognition: communication through c oherence.
Neuron 88, 220–235. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.09.034
Frings, C., Hommel, B., Koch, I., Rothermund, K., Dignath, D., Giese n, C., et al.
(2020). Binding and retrieval in action control (BRAC). Trends Cogn. Sci . 24,
375–387. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2020.02.004
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the b rain? Trends
Cogn. Sci. 13, 293–301. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., and P ezzulo, G.
(2018). Active inference: a process theory. Neural Comput . 29, 1–49.
doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00912
Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., FitzGerald, T ., and Pezzulo, G.
(2015b). Active inference and epistemic value. Cogn. Neurosci . 6, 187–214.
doi: 10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053
Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P., Fitzgerald, T., Moutoussis, M. , Behrens, T., and
Dolan, R. J. (2013). The anatomy of choice: active inference and agency. Front.
Hum. Neurosci. 7, 598. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00598
Friston, K., Levin, M., Sengupta, B., and Pezzulo, G. (2015a). K nowing one’s place:
a free-energy approach to pattern regulation. J. R. Soc. Interface 12, 20141383.
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.1383
Frith, C., and Frith, U. (2005). Theory of mind. Curr. Biol . 15, R644–645.
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2005.08.041
Gärdenfors, P. (2000). Conceptual Spaces: The Geometry of Thought . Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press,. doi: 10.7551/mitpress/2076.001.0001
Gärdenfors, P. (2014). The Geometry of Meaning: Semantics Based on Conceptual
Spaces. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gehrke, B., and McNally, L. (2019). Idioms and the syntax/semanti cs
interface of descriptive content vs. reference. Linguistics 57, 769–814.
doi: 10.1515/ling-2019-0016
Genewein, T., Leibfried, F., Grau-Moya, J., and Braun, D. A. (20 15).
Bounded rationality, abstraction, and hierarchical decision- making:
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 16 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
an information-theoretic optimality principle. Front. Rob. AI 2, 27.
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2015.00027
Gentner, D., and Markman, A. B. (1998). Structure mapping in analogy a nd
similarity. Am. Psychol. 52, 45–56. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.52.1.45
Gigerenzer, G., and Gaissmaier, W. (2011). Heuristic decision ma king.
Annu. Rev. Psychol . 62, 451–482. doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych-120709-1
45346
Goodman, N. D., and Frank, M. C. (2016). Pragmatic language
interpretation as probabilistic inference. Trends Cogn. Sci . 20, 818–829.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2016.08.005
Gumbsch, C., Adam, M., Elsner, B., and Butz, M. V. (2021a). Emerge nt goal-
anticipatory gaze in infants via event-predictive learning and in ference. Cogn.
Sci. 45, e13016. doi: 10.1111/cogs.13016
Gumbsch, C., Butz, M. V., and Martius, G. (2021b). “Sparsely chan ging latent
states for prediction and planning in partially observable domains, ” i n 35th
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021). Available
online at: https://openreview.net/forum?id=-VjKyYX-PI9
Hoﬀmann, J. (1993). Vorhersage und Erkenntnis: Die Funktion von Antizipationen
in der menschlichen Verhaltenssteuerung und Wahrnehmung . [ Anticipation
and cognition: The function of anticipations in human behavi oral control and
perception.]. Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Hoﬀmann, J. (2003). “Anticipatory behavioral control, ” in Anticipatory Behavior in
Adaptive Learning Systems: Foundations, Theories, and Syste ms, eds M. V. Butz,
O. Sigaud, and P. Gerard (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, Berlin), 44–65.
Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Hommel, B., Müsseler, J., Aschersleben, G., and Prinz, W. (2001). Th e theory of
event coding (TEC): a framework for perception and action planning. Behav.
Brain Sci. 24, 849–878. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X01000103
Johansson, G. (1973). Visual perception of biological motion an d a model for its
analysis. Percept. Psychophys. 14, 201–211. doi: 10.3758/BF03212378
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and choice: mapping b ounded
rationality. Am. Psychol. 58, 697–720. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.58.9.697
Kiesel, A., Steinhauser, M., Wendt, M., Falkenstein, M., Jost , K., Philipp, A., et al.
(2010). Control and interference in task switching-a review. Psychol. Bull. 136,
849–874. doi: 10.1037/a0019842
Koch, I., Poljac, E., Müller, H., and Kiesel, A. (2018). Cognitive structure, ﬂexibility,
and plasticity in human multitasking–an integrative review of dual- task and
task-switching research. Psychol. Bull. 144, 557–583. doi: 10.1037/bul0000144
Kunde, W. (2003). Temporal response-eﬀect compatibility. Psychol. Res . 67,
153–159. doi: 10.1007/s00426-002-0114-5
Kuperberg, G. R. (2021). Tea with milk? A hierarchical generative framework
of sequential event comprehension. Top. Cogn. Sci . 13, 256–298.
doi: 10.1111/tops.12518
Lakoﬀ, G., and Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By, volume 1980 . Chicago,
IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Laughlin, S. B. (2001). Energy as a constraint on the coding and
processing of sensory information. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol . 11, 475–480.
doi: 10.1016/S0959-4388(00)00237-3
Lewandowski, A. (2007). Learning to anticipate a temporarily hidden moving
object. Technical Report TR-2007-08, Österreichisches Forschungsin stitut für
Artiﬁical Intelligence, Wien.
Lieder, F., and Griﬃths, T. L. (2020). Resource-rational analy sis: understanding
human cognition as the optimal use of limited computational resource s. Behav.
Brain Sci. 43, e1. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X1900061X
Liu, S., and Spelke, E. S. (2017). Six-month-old infants expect ag ents
to minimize the cost of their actions. Cognition 160, 35–42.
doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2016.12.007
Lohmann, J., Belardinelli, A., and Butz, M. V. (2019). Hands ahead in mind
and motion: Active inference in peripersonal hand space. Vision 3, 15.
doi: 10.3390/vision3020015
Lohmann, J., Rolke, B., and Butz, M. V. (2017). In touch with ment al rotation:
Interactions between mental and tactile rotations and motor respon ses. Exp.
Brain Res. 235, 1063–1079. doi: 10.1007/s00221-016-4861-8
Lohmann, J., Schroeder, P. A., Nuerk, H.-C., Plewnia, C., and Butz , M. V.
(2018). How deep is your snarc? interactions between numerical ma gnitude,
response hands, and reachability in peripersonal space. Front. Psychol . 9, 622.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00622
Maravita, A., Spence, C., and Driver, J. (2003). Multisensory int egration and
the body schema: close to hand and within reach. Curr. Biol . 13, 531–539.
doi: 10.1016/S0960-9822(03)00449-4
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human
Representation and Processing of Visual Information . Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Maturana, H., and Varela, F. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of
the Living. Boston, MA: Reidel.
McRae, K., Brown, K. S., and Elman, J. L. (2021). Prediction-base d learning
and processing of event knowledge. Top. Cogn. Sci . 13, 206–223.
doi: 10.1111/tops.12482
Misselhorn, J., Friese, U., and Engel, A. K. (2019). Frontal and parie tal alpha
oscillations reﬂect attentional modulation of cross-modal matchin g. Sci. Rep .
9, 5030. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-41636-w
Monsell, S. (2003). Task switching. Trends Cogn. Sci . 7, 134–140.
doi: 10.1016/S1364-6613(03)00028-7
Newport, R., and Gilpin, H. R. (2011). Multisensory disintegration
and the disappearing hand trick. Curr. Biol . 21, R804–805.
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.08.044
Ortega, P. A., and Braun, D. A. (2013). Thermodynamics as a theory of decision-
making with information-processing costs. Proc. R. Soc. Math. Phys. Eng. Sci .
469, 20120683. doi: 10.1098/rspa.2012.0683
Pavlova, M. A. (2012). Biological motion processing as a hallmark of so cial
cognition. Cereb. Cortex 22, 981–995. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr156
Pezzulo, G., Butz, M. V., and Castelfranchi, C. (2008). “The ant icipatory approach:
deﬁnitions and taxonomies, ” in The Challenge of Anticipation: A Unifying
Framework for the Analysis andDesign of Artiﬁcial Cognitive S ystems, LNAI
5225, eds G. Pezzulo, M. V. Butz, C. Castelfranchi, and R. Falcone (Verla g;
Berlin: Springer), 23–43.
Pfeifer, R., and Bongard, J. C. (2006). How the Body Shapes the Way We Think: A
New View of Intelligence . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pietroski, P. M. (2000). Causing Actions. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rao, R. P., and Ballard, D. H. (1999). Predictive coding in the visu al cortex:
a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-ﬁeld eﬀects. Nat.
Neurosci. 2, 79–87. doi: 10.1038/4580
Ratcliﬀ, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychol. Rev . 85, 59–108.
doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.85.2.59
Sadeghi, M., Schrodt, F., Otte, S., and Butz, M. V. (2021). Ges talt perception of
biological motion: a generative artiﬁcial neural network model. IEEE Int. Conf.
Dev. Learn. 2021, 1–7. doi: 10.1109/ICDL49984.2021.9515633
Schoener, G. (2020). The dynamics of neural populations capture the laws of the
mind. Top Cogn. Sci . 12, 1257–1271. doi: 10.1111/tops.12453
Schrodt, F., Kneissler, J., Ehrenfeld, S., and Butz, M. V. (2017) . Mario becomes
cognitive. Top. Cogn. Sci . 9, 343–373. doi: 10.1111/tops.12252
Schroedinger, E. (1944). What is Life ? Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Sengupta, B., Stemmler, M., Laughlin, S. B., and Niven, J. E. (2010 ).
Action potential energy eﬃciency varies among neuron types in
vertebrates and invertebrates. PLoS Comput. Biol . 6, e1000840.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000840
Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice. Q. J. Econ . 69, 99–118.
doi: 10.2307/1884852
Spence, C., Pavani, F., Maravita, A., and Holmes, N. (2004). Multis ensory
contributions to the 3-d representation of visuotactile periperson al space in
humans: evidence from the crossmodal congruency task. J. Physiol. Paris 98,
171–189. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2004.03.008
Stawarczyk, D., Bezdek, M. A., and Zacks, J. M. (2021). Event representations and
predictive processing: the role of the midline default network core. Top. Cogn.
Sci. 13, 164–186. doi: 10.1111/tops.12450
Stegemann-Philipps, C., and Butz, M. V. (2021). Learn it ﬁrst: Grou nding
language in compositional event-predictive encodings. IEEE Int.
Conf. Dev. Learn . 2021, 1–6. doi: 10.1109/ICDL49984.2021.95
15621
Steyvers, M., Hawkins, G. E., Karayanidis, F., and Brown, S. D. (2019). A
large-scale analysis of task switching practice eﬀects across the lifespan.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A . 116, 17735–17740. doi: 10.1073/pnas.19067
88116
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 17 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328
Butz Resourceful Event-Predictive Inference
Stock, A., and Stock, C. (2004). A short history of ideo-motor ac tion. Psychol. Res.
68, 176–188. doi: 10.1007/s00426-003-0154-5
Ünal, E., Ji, Y., and Papafragou, A. (2021). From event representatio n to linguistic
meaning. Top. Cogn. Sci . 13, 224–242. doi: 10.1111/tops.12475
van Dijck, J.-P., and Fias, W. (2011). A working memory account
for spatial-numerical associations. Cognition 119, 114–119.
doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2010.12.013
Walsh, V. (2003). A theory of magnitude: common cortical metrics of ti me, space
and quantity. Trends Cogn. Sci . 7, 483–488. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2003.09.002
Wang, X., Janiszewski, C., Zheng, Y., Laran, J., and Jang, W. E. (2021).
Deriving mental energy from task completion. Front. Psychol . 12, 3479.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.717414
Weigert, P., Lohmann, J., and Butz, M. V. (2021). “Modeling the a nticipatory
remapping of spatial body representations: a free energy approach, ” in
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science S ociety, 43,
1374–1380.
Wood, G., Willmes, K., Nuerk, H.-C., and Fischer, M. H. (2008). On th e cognitive
link between space and number: a meta-analysis of the SNARC eﬀect. Psychol.
Sci. 50, 489–525.
Zacks, J. M. (2020). Event perception and memory. Annu. Rev. Psychol. . 71,
165–191. doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych-010419-051101
Zacks, J. M., Speer, N. K., Swallow, K. M., Braver, T. S., and Reyno lds, J. R.
(2007). Event perception: a mind-brain perspective. Psychol. Bull. 133, 273–293.
doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.133.2.273
Zacks, J. M., and Tversky, B. (2001). Event structure in percepti on and
conception. Psychol. Bull . 127, 3–21. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.127.
1.3
Zénon, A., Solopchuk, O., and Pezzulo, G. (2019). An
information-theoretic perspective on the costs of cognition.
Neuropsychologia 123, 5–18. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.
09.013
Conﬂict of Interest: The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be c onstrued as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note:All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizat ions, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may b e evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not gua ranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Butz. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use , distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the orig inal author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original public ation in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these t erms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 18 June 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 867328