  
 
Abstract—The main purpose of this study was to investigate 
the relationship between adverse events and infrastructure 
development investments by estimating the number of adverse 
events in an active war theater based on the allocation of 
infrastructure development projects utilizing a fuzzy inference 
systems (FIS) approach. The considered model input variables 
included the total number of economic improvement projects 
and their associated budgets at different time periods in 
Afghanistan between 2002 and 2009. The output variables were 
the estimated numbers of people killed, wounded, and hijacked 
in different sectors of Afghanistan in 2010. Six different 
prediction models were developed and tested with an 
independent datasets. The prediction accuracy of each FIS 
model was evaluated and compared based on the mean absolute 
errors (MAE). It was concluded that the FIS is a useful 
modeling approach that can be applied under scenario-based 
conditions to support decision makers in analyzing historical 
economic data on how allocation of regional infrastructure 
development funds can best help reducing the onset of adverse 
events in an active war theater.  
 
Index Terms —Adverse events , fuzzy inference system , 
human social cultural behavior (HSCB) modeling , 
infrastructure development. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
To protect civilians, today’s military engages in irregular 
warfare where the civilian population is present [1]. The 
Department of Defense (DoD) describes irregular warfare as 
“a violent struggle among state and n on-state actors for 
legitimacy and influence over the relevant population(s)” [2].  
To address the challenges of irregular warfare, the Human 
Social Culture Behavior (HSCB) modeling program was 
initiated [3]. The main objective of HSCB program was to 
guide military in understanding different cultures while 
operating in overseas countries [4], and to improve 
organizing and controlling the human terrain during 
nonconventional warfare and other missions [5].   
Nowadays, there is a need for HSCB models in military 
operations to understand the behavior and structure of 
organizational units at a macro level (economies, politics, 
 
Manuscript received July 15, 2014; revised December 20, 2014 . This 
study was supported in part by Grant No. [1052339] , Complex Systems 
Engineering for Rapid Computational Socio-Cultural Network Analysis, 
from the Office of Naval Research. The authors acknowledge the helpful 
guidance of ONR program management, and the contributions of the 
technical team. 
E. Cakit is with the Department of Industrial Engineering, Aksaray 
University, 68100, Aksaray, Turkey (e-mail: ermancakit@aksaray.edu.tr).  
W. Karwowski is with the Department of Industrial Engineering and 
Management Systems, University of Central Florida, Florida, FL 
32816-2450 USA (e-mail: wkar@ucf.edu). 
socio-cultural regions) and a micro level (social networks, 
tribes, military units) [6]. For instance, infrastructure 
development has been started during ongoing adverse events 
in Afghanistan [7].  Thus, HSCB models are attracting much 
attention with regard to current and future operational 
requirements.  
Because an HSCB model can be defined as a complex 
system, computational modeling and simulation techniques 
are needed to deal with this complexity. While researchers in 
social science are contributing to HSCB modeling efforts by 
considering observations of human social behavior and 
communication [8], the program also needs the capability to 
represent variety of complex, ill-defined, and imprecise 
socio-economic-cultural concepts. Such a challenge can be 
met by application of fuzzy inference systems (FIS) 
modeling approach. To our best knowledge, there is currently 
no study that applies any soft-computing technique to 
investigate the relationship between adverse events and 
economic development projects in an active war theater.  
This study investigates the application of 
Takagi-Sugeno-Kang (TSK) and the Mamdani fuzzy 
inference system (FIS) models to examine the relationship 
between adverse events and infrastructure development 
projects in Afghanistan, where the accuracy of the 
predictions is directly beneficial from an economic and 
humanistic point of view. 
 
II. BACKGROUND 
There are various challenges associated with problems 
related to representing social science data. Researchers have 
emphasized some of these difficulties. Numrich and Tolk [9] 
summarized these difficulties as lack of common vocabulary, 
variations in modeling approaches, and data acquisition. 
Similarly, Schmorrow et al. [10] highlighted the challenge of 
leveraging Modeling and Simulation (M&S) for HSCB. The 
difficulties were summarized as the usage of M&S tools 
within different complexity levels. To apply various 
methodologies in the domain of HSCB, such difficulties must 
be understood and specific modeling requirements must be 
met. 
Studies in this area emerge from data-driven, statistical 
approaches where the modeler empirically derives the HSCB 
model from patterns identified in the data [11]. For example, 
terrorist attacks are not random in space and time, and as a 
result there are patterns that exist. It is possible to discover 
representative patterns in adverse activity or behavior over 
time and space by analyzing geospatial intelligence on 
various reported incidents, as stated by the Director of 
Assessing the Relationship between Economic Factors and 
Adverse Events in an Active War Theater Using Fuzzy 
Inference System Approach 
Erman Cakit, Member, IACSIT and Waldemar Karwowski 
International Journal of Machine Learning and Computing, Vol. 5, No. 3, June 2015
252DOI: 10.7763/IJMLC.2015.V5.516
  
National Intelligence, Open Source Center (OCS) [12] . The 
OSC study of terrorism in Afghanistan highlighted the 
following types of analysis: mapping incident density, 
identifying the dominant ethnic group where incidents 
occurred, mapping incidents by district, mapping incidents 
by province, identifying the mean center of incidents over 
time, calculating the standard deviation (spatial pattern/trend) 
of overall incidents, mapping total incidents by month, and 
computing the mean center of incidents by month [13].  
Similarly, there are a lot of challenges with HSCB 
modeling, particularly with regard to handling complexity, 
uncertainty, etc. Prediction is a particularly difficult task. The 
use of soft computing techniques with HSCB can mitigate 
these challenges. Fuzzy inference systems can be used for 
solving complex, ill-defined, and nonlinear problems 
including security and safety issues [14]-[16].   To 
demonstrate this, we're going to use FIS to analyze a certain 
characteristic we know aligns with stability and lack of 
violence (infrastructure & economic spending) and see if we 
can use it to do a really difficult but useful modeling task:  
predict adverse events.  
 
III. METHODOLOGY 
A. Dataset 
Two different kinds of Afghanistan datasets provided by 
the HSCB program management were utilized in this 
research, including adverse events and fourteen infrastructure 
development projects which took place between 2002 and 
2010 (see Fig. 1). The adverse event dataset, which includes 
information regarding the date of event, incident type, 
number of people killed, wounded, and hijacked, province, 
city, district, description of the event, and simple event 
summary. The infrastructure aid dataset, which includes 
information regarding the province, city, district, project 
types, and allocated budget information for different sectors 
[17]. 
 
Fig. 1. Input and output data. 
The total number of economic improvement projects and 
the total budget of those projects have been used to estimate 
the occurrence of adverse events. We considered a total of 3 
outputs reflecting the adverse events in terms of the number 
of people killed, wounded, and hijacked. The data was 
grouped for generating rules and validation as follows: years 
between 2002 and 2009 (totally 38400 records for rule 
generation purpose), and year 2010 (totally 4800 records for 
validation). 
B. Fuzzy Inference System 
A fuzzy system consists of five functional blocks including 
fuzzification, database, rulebase, inference operations, and 
defuzzification (see Fig. 2). Moreover, input and output 
variables can be included. 
A fuzzification interface transforms real numbers of input 
into fuzzy sets with linguistic values such as low, medium, 
and high. A database which determines the membership 
functions is applied in the fuzzy rules. A rule base has a 
number of fuzzy if-then rules that include all possible fuzzy 
relationships between inputs and outputs. 
The inference engine helps to achieve inference operations 
on the rules. A defuzzification unit is used for converting 
fuzzy results into crisp values. There are two popular types of 
fuzzy inference systems including Mamdani and 
Takagi-Sugeno-Kang (TSK)  models that have been widely 
used for solving problems in several applications such as 
decision analysis, expert systems, prediction, data 
classification, image processing, optimization, control and 
system identification [19], [20]. 
 
Fig. 2. Fuzzy inference system (Adapted from [18]). 
 
Mamdani’s FIS was proposed by Mamdani and Assilian 
(1975) and the TSK models were introduced by Takagi and 
Sugeno (1985). Since output values have to be fuzzy in 
Mamdani type, and crisp in TSK type; the main difference 
between these two types of models is in generating the crisp 
value. Mamdani type FIS applies defuzzification techniques, 
however the TSK type FIS applies a weighted average and 
weighted sum methods while calculating the crisp output.   
C. Mamdani Fuzzy Model 
The Mamdani fuzzy model proposed by Mamdani and 
Assilian [21] was one of the first developed fuzzy set theory 
based control systems. The output membership functions of 
Mamdani model are fuzzy sets. After the aggregation process, 
defuzzification is necessary for each output variable to 
convert a fuzzy set to a crisp value.  
A defuzzifier transforms the fuzzy results obtained from 
inference operations into a crisp output. There are several 
defuzzification methods such as centroid of area (COA), 
center of gravity, mean of the maximums, and smallest of the 
maximums. The most common defuzzifization method is the 
COA (Equation (1)).  
    
()
()
AY
COA
AY
y ydy
y
y dy


 

                           (1) 
where 
COAy  is the crisp value for the z output and 
()A y  is 
the summation of output membership function [22]. 
The Mamdani fuzzy model is the most popular fuzzy 
International Journal of Machine Learning and Computing, Vol. 5, No. 3, June 2015
253
  
methodology which has been applied widely for several 
problems. Some of the advantages of Mamdani model are its 
suitability and intuitive for expert opinion, and that it is 
widely accepted.  
D. Takagi-Sugeno-Kang (TSK) Fuzzy Model 
The Takagi-Sugeno-Kang (TSK) fuzzy model was 
introduced by Takagi and Sugeno [23] in order to establish a 
systematic approach to construct fuzzy rules from a given 
input-output dataset [22]. There are similarities to the 
Mamdani method in several ways. For instance, the first two 
sections of the fuzzy inference systems (input fuzzification 
and applying the fuzzy operator) are completely same. The 
main difference is in the last part. The output membership 
functions can be a linear or constant for TSK model. A 
common rule in a Sugeno fuzzy model can be defined as 
following: 
If x is A and y is B then 
z px qy r  
. 
where A and B are fuzzy sets and z is a non-fuzzy function. 
For a zero-order Sugeno model, the output level z is a 
constant (p=q=0). Many different resources are available in 
the literature for further explanations of FIS [15], [18], [19]. 
 
Fig. 3. Proposed fuzzy inference system flow diagram. 
E. Study Steps 
This study was conducted based on the following sequence 
of main steps as shown in Fig. 3: 
Step 1. Identifying the type of fuzzy system (Mamdani or 
TSK type fuzzy system) 
Step 2. Define the input and output variables 
Step 3. Define the ranges for input and output values 
Step 4. Determination of the membership functions 
Step 5. Generate set of linguistic rules 
Step 6. Assign rule weights.  
Step 7. Aggregate all rules 
Step 8. Defuzzify the aggregate output 
Step 9. Validate the system. 
 
Step 1. Identifying the type of fuzzy system: Both types of 
fuzzy inference system (Mamdani and TSK type) were 
considered and compared to each other at the end of the 
study.  
Step 2.  Defining input and output values: Input values 
were considered as total number of economic improvement 
projects and allocated budgets values at different time 
periods whereas output values were three types of adverse 
events: number of people killed, wounded, and hijacked (Fig. 
4). 
 
Fig. 4. General framework of FIS models used in this study. 
 
TABLE I: INPUT VALUES AND THEIR PARAMETERS FOR BOTH FIS 
Input field Range Linguistic 
terms 
Parameters 
Total number 
of aid projects 
 
[0 – 2111] 
 
Low 
Medium 
High 
[0  0  12] 
[8  46  84] 
[70  2111  2111] 
 
 
 
 
Total budget 
value ($) 
 
 
 
 
[0– 
1,362,515,958] 
 
Low 
 
 
Medium 
 
 
 
High 
[0  0  20,000,000] 
 
[15,000,000  
40,000,000  
65,000,000] 
 
[50,000,000  
1,362,515,958 
1,362,515,958] 
 
 
TABLE II: OUTPUT VALUES AND THEIR PARAMETERS FOR MAMDANI TYPE 
FIS 
Output field Range Linguistic 
terms Parameters 
 
Number of 
people killed 
 
 
[0 103] 
 
Very Low 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Very High 
[0  0  1] 
[0.4  1.2  2] 
[1.5  4  6.5] 
[5  20  35] 
[30  103  103] 
 
Number of 
people 
wounded 
 
 
[0 261] 
 
Very Low 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Very High 
[0  0  1] 
[0.5  1.25  2] 
[1.5  4.5  7.5] 
[6  28  51] 
[40  261  261] 
 
Number of 
people 
hijacked 
 
 
[0 156] 
Very Low 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Very High 
[0  0  1] 
[0.2  0.9  1.6] 
[1.2  2.2  3.2] 
[3  12.5  22] 
[15  156  156] 
International Journal of Machine Learning and Computing, Vol. 5, No. 3, June 2015
254
  
Step 3.  Defining the ranges for input and output values: 
Minimum and maximum values of inputs and output fields 
were determined for setting relevant membership functions 
and parameters. The ranges, linguistic terms, and parameters 
for each input and output value were illustrated in Table I, II 
and III.  
TABLE III: OUTPUT VALUES AND THEIR PARAMETERS FOR TSK TYPE FIS 
 
Output 
 
Range 
 
Linguisti
c terms 
 
Parameters 
 
Killed 
 
Wounded 
 
Hijacked 
 
 
 
Killed 
Wounded 
Hijacked 
 
 
 
[0 103] 
[0 261] 
[0 156] 
Lowest [0] [0] [0] 
Very 
Low [1] [1] [1] 
Low [2] [2] [2] 
Low 
Medium [3] [3] [3] 
Medium [5] [10] [5] 
High [20] [30] [10] 
Very 
High [40] [50] [20] 
Highest [103] [261] [156] 
 
Fig. 5. Membership functions of total number of projects. 
 
 
Fig. 6. Membership functions of total project budget ($). 
Step 4. Determination of the membership functions:  For 
this study, due to its computational efficiency and ease to use, 
the triangular membership function was used for both input 
and output values. Triangular membership function for each 
independent and dependent variable is illustrated in Fig . 5 
through 9.  
Step 5. Generating set of linguistic rules:  Total number of 
rules for each prediction methods was determined based on 
the number of input values and related membership functions. 
Training data was considered for generating IF-THEN rules. 
Step 6. Assigning rule weights: The rule weights were 
calculated based on the number of rule frequency extracted 
from the training dataset and assigned to the rules. For 
instance the rule weight for rule i was calculated as 8038 
(frequency of rule i) / 38400 (total number of rules or total 
records in training data) = 0.209323 (the rule weight). 
Step 7 . Aggregate all rules: The output of each rule was 
combined to determine one fuzzy output value. For this study, 
this process is done by using the fuzzy “OR”.  
 
Fig. 7. Membership functions of number of people killed. 
 
 
Fig. 8. Membership functions of number of people wounded. 
 
Step 8. Defuzzify the aggregate output: For Mamdani type 
FIS, there are several defuzzification approaches such as 
Centroid of area (COA), Bisector of area (BOA), Mean of 
maximum (MOM), Smallest of maximum (SOM), and 
Largest of maximum (LOM). In this paper, we chose bisector 
of area (BOA) approach, since the lowest MAE values were 
obtained among other approaches. For the Sugeno type FIS, 
there are two approaches called weighted sum and weighted 
average. For this study, the weighted average approach was 
applied based on the lowest MAE values.  
Step 9. Validating the system: The system was validated 
using testing data for year 2010. The model performance was 
evaluated based on the mean absolute error (MAE) value. 
International Journal of Machine Learning and Computing, Vol. 5, No. 3, June 2015
255
  
 
Fig. 9. Membership functions of number of people hijacked. 
F. Performance Metrics 
Performance metrics were used for calculating the error 
(difference between actual and predicted values) in the model. 
There are several performance metrics including MSE (Mean 
Square Error), RMSE (Root Mean Square Error), MAE 
(Mean Absolute Error), and MAPE (Mean Absolute 
Percentage Error).  In this study, the model accuracy was 
evaluated based on the mean absolute error (MAE) between 
the predicted and actual values. The following equation was 
used for this calculation: 
1
1MAE ( )
N
iii APN  
                     (2) 
where Pi and Ai were predicted and actual values, 
respectively; N: total number of records. 
 
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The performance values for incident types (number of 
people killed, wounded, and hijacked) for Mamdani and TSK 
models are given in Fig. 10. While the MAE values of 
number of killed, wounded, and hijacked output for Mamdani 
model were found as 0.6608, 1.0098, and 0.1981, 
respectively, these values were found in TSK model as 
0.7907, 1.1875, and 0.2494. The results showed that better 
prediction results were obtained for number of people 
hijacked than other dependent variables. Both Mamdani and 
TSK models were useful for estimating the number of 
adverse events based on the number of economic 
improvement projects and project budgets. However, 
Mamdani models had better predictive accuracy than TSK 
models as demonstrated by experimental results. 
In summary, these techniques were considered to examine 
the relationship between adverse events and infrastructure 
development in an active war theater. These models may be 
considered as general models that used Afghanistan data fo r 
validation and verification. The model has applicability for 
another country looking to build infrastructure while terrorist 
and military activities are present. 
Selecting the right fuzzy membership function and 
extracting of fuzzy rules are crucial and complicated for 
constructing fuzzy inference systems. Due to its 
computational efficiency and ease to use, the triangular 
membership function was selected to define fuzzy variables. 
It must be noted that this selection may not be the optimum 
one, and different membership functions should be tried in 
further studies.  
 
Fig. 10. Mean absolute values (MAE) of predicted values for 2010. 
 
The fuzzy inference rules were generated from training 
data and each rule was weighted based on its frequency 
among training records. Similarly, this approach may not be 
the optimum one and other approaches can be considered 
such as optimization-based methods (simulated annealing 
algorithm, genetic algorithm, etc.) for further analysis.   
 
V. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, the Takagi-Sugeno-Kang (TSK) type and the 
Mamdani type fuzzy inference systems (FIS) were applied to 
the problem of adverse events prediction based on the 
economic improvement projects and allocated infrastructure 
development budgets at different time periods in active war 
theater. As demonstrated by experimental results, when the 
model accuracy was calculated based on the mean absolute 
error (MAE), the Mamdani models had better predictive 
accuracy than the TSK models. It can be concluded that the 
FIS is a useful modeling technique for predicting the number 
of adverse events based on economic data.  Such a modeling 
approach should be further investigated for scenario-based 
prediction to support decision makers in analyzing historical 
economic data on how regional funds allocation can best help 
reduce or minimize the onset of adverse events in active war 
theater. Since one of the main goals of this research effort 
was to assess the relationship between adverse events and 
economic infrastructure developments, in the future more 
input data should be used to test data patterns of such adverse 
events, with sensitivity analysis to study the plausible 
cause-and-effect relationships. Finally, geographic 
information systems should be implemented to improve the 
expected model resolution and prediction quality.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was supported in part by Grant No. [1052339], 
Complex Systems Engineering for Rapid Computational 
Socio-Cultural Network Analysis, from the Office of Naval 
Research. The authors acknowledge the helpful guidance of 
ONR program management, and the contributions of the 
technical team. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Clancy and C. Crossett, “Measuring effectiveness in irregular 
warfare,” Parameters, vol. 37, no. 2, 2007.  
[2] JOC, Irregular Warfare (IW) Joint Operating Concept (JOC), 2007. 
International Journal of Machine Learning and Computing, Vol. 5, No. 3, June 2015
256
  
[3] Y. Bhattacharjee,  “Cross-cultural research. Pentagon asks academics 
for help in understanding its enemies,” Science, vol. 316, no. 5824, pp. 
534-535, 2007. 
[4] M. D. Drapeauand and B. K. Mignone, “Culture, conflict, and climate?” 
Science, vol. 316, no. 5831, pp. 1564-1564, 2007. 
[5] HSCB Modeling Program. (2009). Available: 
http://www.dtic.mil/biosys/docs/HSCB-news-spring-2009.pdf 
[6] J. Stanton, “Evolutionary cognitive neuroscience: dual use discipline 
for understanding & managing complexity and altering warfar e,” in 
Proc. International Studies Association Conference, Portugal, 2007. 
[7] C. J. Coyne and A. Pellillo, “Economic reconstruction amidst conflict: 
Insights from Afghanistan and Iraq,” Defence and Peace 
Economics, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 627-643, 2011. 
[8] D. Schmorrow and D. Nicholson, Advances in Cross-Cultural 
Decision Making, Boca Raton: CRC Press, ch. 38, pp. 374-384, 2011. 
[9] S. K. Numrich and A. Tolk, “Challenges for human, social, cultural, 
and behavioral modeling,” SCS M&S Magazine, vol. 1, no. 1, 2010. 
[10] D. Schmorrow, G. L. Klein, R. Foster, J. Boiney, S. Biggerstaff, P. R. 
Garvey, M. Koehler, and B. Costa, “Applied use of socio-cultural 
behavior modeling and simulation: an emerging challenge for C2,” 
Office of The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Science And 
Technology) Rosslyn Va, 2009. 
[11] G. L. Zacharias, J. MacMillan, and S. B. VanHemel, Behavioral 
Modeling and Simulation : From Individuals to Societies , National 
Academies Press, 2008. 
[12] Federation of American Scientists. (2009). A GEOINT analysis of 
terrorism in Afghanistan, Secrecy News. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.fas.org/blog/secrecy/2009/05/05 
[13] Open Source Center (OSC). (April 30, 2009).  Afghanistan-Geospatial 
analysis reveal patterns in terrorist incidents 2004 –2008. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.fas.org/irp/dni/osc/afghan-geospat.pdf 
[14] L. A. Zadeh, “Fu zzy logic, neural networks and soft computin g,” 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 77-84, 1994. 
[15] D. Nauck, F. Klawonn, and R. Kruse,  Foundations of Neuro-Fuzzy 
Systems, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY, USA, 1997. 
[16] U. Inyaem, P. Meesad, C. Haruechaiyasak, and D. Tran, “Te rrorism 
event classification using fuzzy inference syst ems,” International 
Journal of Computer Science and Information Security , vol. 7, no. 3 , 
2010. 
[17] E. Çakıt, “In vestigating the relationship between adverse events and 
infrastructure development in an actıve war theater using soft 
computing techniques,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Industrial Eng. and 
Management Systems, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida, 
2013. 
[18] S. N. Sivanandam, S. Sumathi, and S. N. Deepa,  Introduction to Fuzzy 
Logic Using MATLAB, Springer, 2008 
[19] H. J. Zimmermann, Fuzzy Set Theory – and Its Applications, 3rd edition, 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996. 
[20] A. Haji and M. Assadi, “Fuzzy expert systems and challenge of new 
product pricing,” Computers & Industrial Engineering, vol. 56, no. 2, 
pp. 616-630, 2009. 
[21] E. H. Mamdani and S. Assilian, “An experiment in linguistic synthesis 
with a fuzzy logic controller,”  International Journal of Man-Machine 
Studies, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1-13, 1975. 
[22] J. S. R. Jang, C. T. Sun, and E. Mizutani, Neuro-Fuzzy and Soft 
Computing: A Computational Approach to Learning and Machine 
Intelligence, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1997. 
[23] T. Takagi and M. Sugeno, “Fuzzy identification of systems and its 
applications to modeling and control,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, 
Man and Cybernetics, vol. 1, pp. 116-132, 1985.  
 
 
 
 
Erman Cakit received his PhD  degree in industrial 
engineering from the University of Central Florida , 
Orlando, USA, in 2013. He is currently working as an 
assistant professor at the Department of Industrial 
Engineering, Aksaray University, Turkey. His 
research interests include applications of human 
factors / ergono mics, cross cultural decision making, 
human social c ulture behavior (HSCB) modeling 
using soft computing, applied statistics, and 
geographic ınforma tion systems. He is a member of IACSIT , SCIEI  and 
IEEE Computational Intelligence Society. 
 
 
 
 
 
Waldemar Karwowski is a professor and the 
chairman of the Department of Industrial Engineering 
and Management Systems . He is also an  executive 
director of Institute for Advanced Systems 
Engineering, University of Central Florida, Orlando, 
USA. He holds an M.S.  (1978) in production 
engineering and management from the Technical 
University of Wroclaw, Poland, and a Ph.D. (1982) in 
industrial engineering from Texas Tech University. He 
was awarded D.Sc. degree in management science by the State Institute for 
Organization and Management in Industry, Poland (2004). He is the past 
president of the International Ergonomics Association (2000-2003), and the 
past president of the Human Factors and Ergonomi cs Society (2007). He  
served on the Committee on Hum an Factors/Human Systems Integration, 
National Research Council, the National Academies, USA (2007-2011). He 
is the author or coauthor of over 380 scientific publications which focus on 
occupational ergonomics,  human systems integration, human -computer 
interaction, neuro -fuzzy modeling, nonlinear  dynamics of human 
performance, and neuroergonomics. He is a member of IEEE/Systems, Man 
& Cybernetics Society  and a fellow member of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society. 
 
 
 
 
Author’s formal 
photo 
 
Author’s formal 
photo 
International Journal of Machine Learning and Computing, Vol. 5, No. 3, June 2015
257