Citation: Carl, M. An Active Inference
Agent for Modeling Human
Translation Processes. Entropy 2024,
26, 616. https://doi.org/10.3390/
e26080616
Academic Editors: Thomas Parr,
Giovanni Pezzulo, Rosalyn Moran,
Maxwell Ramstead, Axel Constant
and Anjali Bhat
Received: 7 April 2024
Revised: 12 July 2024
Accepted: 15 July 2024
Published: 23 July 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
entropy
Article
An Active Inference Agent for Modeling Human
Translation Processes
Michael Carl
Department of Modern and Classical Language Studies, Kent State University, Kent, OH 44240, USA;
mcarl6@kent.edu
Abstract: This paper develops an outline for a hierarchically embedded architecture of an artificial
agent that models human translation processes based on principles of active inference (AIF) and
predictive processing (PP). AIF and PP posit that the mind constructs a model of the environment
which guides behavior by continually generating and integrating predictions and sensory input. The
proposed model of the translation agent consists of three processing strata: a sensorimotor layer, a
cognitive layer, and a phenomenal layer. Each layer consists of a network of states and transitions that
interact on different time scales. Following the AIF framework, states are conditioned on observations
which may originate from the environment and/or the embedded processing layer, while transitions
between states are conditioned on actions that implement plans to optimize goal-oriented behavior.
The AIF agent aims at simulating the variation in translational behavior under various conditions
and to facilitate investigating the underlying mental mechanisms. It provides a novel framework for
generating and testing new hypotheses of the translating mind.
Keywords: active inference; predictive processing; translation process research; translation agent
1. Introduction
Translation has many definitions. It has been defined as the “process of creating
target-language content that corresponds to the source content according to agreed-upon
specifications” ([1], p. 7), or/and it “has to be an accurate reproduction of the source text in
a target language” ([2], p. 94). It has been defined as a process and a product [3] requiring
the integration of linguistic, cognitive, and cultural knowledge. Despite the variety of
definitions, it is uncontroversial that human translators demonstrate remarkable proficiency
in navigating this process, but understanding the underlying mental mechanisms remains
a challenging endeavor. Numerous models have been proposed [4–14], as frameworks for
elucidating processes in translation, but they are often purely pedagogical or are otherwise
unsuited approaches for empirical assessment or verification. However, in recent years,
models based on active inference (AIF, [15,16]) and predictive processing (PP , [17–19]) have
emerged as promising frameworks for modeling and simulating complex mental processes
that may also be suited for modeling human translation processes [ 20]. These theories
propose that the mind constructs a model of the environment, continually generating and
integrating predictions and sensory input to guide behavior. Leveraging these theoretical
foundations, this paper elaborates on a novel architecture for an artificial agent aimed
at modeling human translation processes. The architecture comprises three embedded
processing strata—a sensorimotor, a cognitive, and a phenomenal layer—where each layer
represents a different aspect of the translating mind. Each layer consists of a structure of
states and transitions that are conditioned on observations of the environment and/or the
other processing layers, while transitions between the states are conditioned on actions
that follow plans to minimize expected free energy [ 15,16] and optimize goal-oriented
behavior. The proposed AIF agent aims at simulating translation behavior and opens new
possibilities for investigating the underlying mental mechanisms governing this complex
mental task.
Entropy 2024, 26, 616. https://doi.org/10.3390/e26080616 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 2 of 34
This paper thus contributes to the growing body of research that elicits our understand-
ing of human translation processes. It proposes a novel way of approaching translation
research through the simulation of the temporal structure in which humans produce
translations. In order to appreciate the current situation of Cognitive Translation and Inter-
pretation Studies (CTIS) and how the proposed AIF agent may enrich the CTIS research
landscape, Section 2 provides a brief historical review of 40 years of empirical translation
research, outlining how this field of enquiry has increasingly endorsed embodied and
enactive approaches in the past years. The multitude of theoretical and methodological
approaches has led to several sub-denominations in the field, all of which can, however, be
subsumed under the CTIS label.
In Section 3, I suggest that three distinct mechanisms of primed anticipation are
essential in human translation processes: perceptual/semantic priming unfolds on the
sensorimotor layer, conceptual/associative priming processes unwind on the cognitive
layer, and affective priming on the phenomenal layer. The pausing structure in translation
production, I argue, is tightly related to the priming strength (or the lack thereof), where
stronger priming effects will likely result in more immediate translation production and
thus shorter inter-keystroke pauses.
In Section 4, I discuss two different approaches for conceptualizing keystroke pauses, a
much-discussed topic in empirical translation research [21–23]. I illustrate the relationship
between the Task Segment Framework (TSF, [22]) and the HOF taxonomy [23] by means
of a translation progression graph. While Section 4 provides evidence for hierarchically
embedded pausing structures in translation production from a conceptual view, Sections 5
and 6 aim lay out an architecture for the artificial AIF translation agent suited to simulate the
pausing structure in human translation production. Section 6 maps the pause structure, as
observed in the translation process data discussed in Section 4, on the suggested embedded
hierarchical architecture.
Sections 7 and 8 provide additional empirical support for the suggested AIF archi-
tecture. These sections discuss the variation in typing behavior, pauses and Tasks, as
observed in recorded behavioral data from 54 Spanish and Arabic translators. It discusses
the recorded process data in light of the TSF and HOF states and the proposed AIF architec-
ture. While Section 7 is concerned with keystroke pauses, Section 8 assesses properties of
the translator’s typing bursts (Tasks). This paper ends with a discussion in Section 9 which
provides a wider outlook on some topics currently discussed within the CTIS literature
and elaborates novel views on human translation processes that emerge from different
interaction possibilities between the three processing layers of the AIF agent and its imple-
mentation as embedded Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs, Heins,
2022 [24]).
2. A Brief Review of CTIS
Cognitive Translation and Interpretation Studies (CTIS) is a field of study within
translation studies that has a relatively short history. CTIS has emerged in recent years as
a research discipline that encompasses several research traditions, aiming to understand
cognitive processes of translators, including human–computer interaction, emotions, or
workplace ergonomics. The first attempts to study translation as a cognitive activity
date back to the 1960s and 1970s. This early research was targeted to investigate spoken
translation and interpretation [ 5]. By the mid-1980s, translation process research (TPR)
started investigating the mental processes of written translation, Machine Translation post-
editing, and translation revision, using think aloud protocols (TAP). In the mid-1990s, with
the wide-spread availability of Personal Computers and the development of Translog [25], it
became possible to record the translators’ keystrokes, introducing a new era of quantitative
investigation. The TRAP (translation process) project was the first endeavor in this regard:
“[R]esearchers from different language departments at the Copenhagen Business School
(CBS) launched a translation project with the aim of promoting research into the transla-
tion process . . . [as] it was felt that our understanding of the mental processes could be
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 3 of 34
improved if the traditional qualitative approaches could be supplemented by quantitative
data.” ([26], p. 7)
Keylogging technology, and from 2005 also eyetracking [27], provided the empirical
basis for TPR to investigate and model the workings of the translators’ minds. TPR thus
set out to investigate how translators translate, how they create meaning, how they arrive
at translation choices, how translation competence develops, how cultural and linguistic
factors impact the translated text, etc. (see, e.g., [28]), with the ambition to assess “by what
observable and presumed mental processes do translators arrive at their translations?” ([29],
p. 21). By around 2009, the first attempts were made to collect translation process data [30]
in a centralized repository that was to become the CRITT TPR-DB (Translation Process
Research Database, [ 31]) of the Center for Research and Innovation in Translation and
Translation Technology (CRITT).
Based on recorded keylogging, and in many cases also eyetracking data, TPR has
investigated several theoretical frameworks to explain behavioral observations: Hvelplund,
2011 [32] draws on working memory and the central executive system [ 33] to explain
translation processes, while Sjørup, 2013 [ 34] assesses the cognitive effort in metaphor
translation referring to the work of [35]. Other researchers investigate predictions of sys-
temic functional and cognitive grammar for understanding and explaining translation
processes [36,37]). Numerous researchers develop measures of cross-lingual complexity
on a lexical or syntactic level [ 38–40], while Alves and Vale, 2009 [ 41] develop an em-
pirical interpretation of translation units (TUs, see below) to ground Relevance Theory
(RT, [10,42]) in empirical behavioral data. Schaeffer and Carl, 2013/2015 [ 14] suggest a
Monitor Model that builds on the findings of Tirkkonen-Condit, 2005 [43], which “hypothe-
sized literal translation automaton and its monitoring mechanism”, as well as aspects of
bilingualism [44,45]. Further work [46] joins the Monitor Model with insights from RT and
AIF [20].
However, as Risku, 2012 [ 28] (p. 675) points out, earlier TPR researchers “refer to
and expand” the classical computational model of cognition, in which the “mind is seen
essentially as a problem-solving mechanism for information-processing” ([47], p. 3). Subse-
quently, several post-cognitivist approaches have emerged, subsumed within CTIS, that
account for the embodied, embedded, extended, enacted, and affective (4EA) nature of
translation [2,48–51].
In 2010, Muñoz [ 48] called for an alternative denomination within empirical CTIS
which he labeled cognitive translatology. In his foundational paper, Muñoz elaborates upon
ten suggestions for a functionalist, cognitive translatology program with the “urgent need
to establish experimental paradigms to foster the interplay between theory and research”
(p. 169). He seems to endorse “a change of focus to study the dynamics of the interaction
among mind, body, and the environment” and a view of cognition that holds that “what is
going on inside the head, is not adequate to describe the workings of the mind” (p. 171).
Muñoz [48] posits that translators “enter into deeper mental processing strategies, namely,
problem-solving and decision-taking, only when direct, proceduralized formulations do not
seem successful” (p. 177). Cognitive processes, he says, “happen in real-time environments
and cognitive agents adapt and react to environmental challenges” (p. 171). Cognitive
translatology, therefore, “should focus on the interaction between translators and their
environment” (p. 178).
Other translation scholars follow similar approaches. Risku, 2014 [ 52] for instance,
makes out a methodological shift in the theoretical orientation and proposes conducting
research at the workplace to complement TPR with “qualitative, ethnographic research in
order to be able to account for the situated, embedded and extended aspects of cognition”
(p. 331). She attributes thereby “a central role in human cognition to the body and to
physical and social interaction rather than to the notion of mental representation” ([ 49],
p. 481). Similarly, Ehrensberger-Dow, 2017, 2021 [ 53,54] investigates how workspace
“ergonomics can provide insights into the physical, cognitive, and organizational factors
that impinge on translation” (2017: p. 332), while O’Brien, 2017 [ 55] and many other
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 4 of 34
researchers are interested in Machine Translation post-editing and the efficiency of post-
editing processes.
Another line of research focuses on emotional intelligence in translation. For Hubscher-
Davidson, 2017 [56] emotional intelligence not only plays an important role in job satisfac-
tion but also makes translators more skilled in dealing with emotion-laden and difficult
issues in their work. Hubscher-Davidson, 2017 [56] (p. 2) defines “emotionality as a set of
responses that are observable or perceivable to us or to others around us and take place
when a person reacts emotionally to stimuli”. She sees “three distinctive areas where
emotions influence translators: emotional material contained in source texts, their own
emotions, and the emotions of source and target readers”. For Hubscher-Davidson and
Lehr, 2021 [57] “affective profiles of translators can sometimes be more important than
their language skills in terms of shaping translations” (p. 18). Consequently, “Translators
who are aware of their own dispositions and emotional processing styles will be in a better
position to make effective decisions at work” ([57], p. 19). This view is shared, for instance,
by Rojo, 2017 [58], who maintains that emotional intelligence and intuition are essential in
translation performance.
This embodied/affective position is further developed, for instance, by Robinson,
2023 [2]. Drawing on Peirce (1992) [ 59], Robinson distinguishes between three kinds of
“interpretants”: the “emotional”, the “energetic”, and the “logical” interpretants. He argues
that feelings are qualia, and qualia are emotional interpretants. Emotional interpretants
are activated first, followed by energetic and cognitive interpretants: “we move from
feeling-as-First to effort-as-Second to thought-as Third” (p. 31). In this view, we first “feel
the word” (ibid.), then we expend effort to “put the word into some kind of experiential
context” (i.e., the energetic interpretant), and then we “construct the word’s meaning
out of the clash of the emotional and energetic interpretants”. For him, every word and
every phrase are “constantly being enactively and iteratively generated by human interpretive
consciousness cycling through emotional and energetic interpretants up to the verbalizations of
logical interpretants” (p. 38, original emphasis). Emotions, he says, have thereby a social
status; they are “performative responses to other people, embodied addresses signaling
not only what I’m thinking about what you just did/said but how my thinking and feeling
aligns with and/or deviates from yours/ours” (p. 63). Emotions are internal to an agent,
but they also surface though body language, mimetic, and nonverbal communication.
Affect, he says, “is the glue that makes the world we cocreate with our environments
cohere” (p. 86). This is what Robinson calls the somatic exchange: affect is not trapped in
the individual body. Rather, he maintains, it is the “extensibility of feeling” that makes the
extended/embedded/enactive mind possible. I will come back to this discussion in the
Conclusion (Section 9).
This focus of translation (and interpretation) studies on phenomenology, i.e., “as they
are lived”, has been taken up and criticized by Halverson. Halverson (2020) [60] makes out
three approaches within CTIS: a computational, a connectionist, and a cognitive approach.
She rejects the computational (and connectionist) approach(es) in which cognition is un-
derstood as “computational procedures that operate on representational structures in the
mind” (p. 38). Rather, Halverson [60] seems to sympathize with the cognitive translatology
view in which thinking is performed “by the brain in interaction with the body and the
environment” (p. 38). However, Halverson complains that in much research output within
the cognitive translatology tradition “the linguistic nature of the task is not in focus at all”
(p. 41). She regrets that meaning and communication are in most cases the predominant
object of enquiry and requests that “all cognitive translational research programmes must
build on a clearly articulated commitment to a view of language and language processing
in translation” (p. 38). The current discussion, she says, “has been to emphasize the need
for a phenomenological take on translation”. However, she sees no contradiction in calling
for a linguistically oriented cognitive translatology while at the same time wishing to
situate these processes within a broader, more encompassing world. “[I]t is not impossible”
she says, “to model translational cognition in a computational manner and also include
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 5 of 34
both situational parameters and personality-related ones” (p. 41), but “language must be
central to our fundamental ontology in all cognitive approaches to translation” (p. 38):
“The question is not whether to do so, but how” (p. 49).
This paper develops a perspective on the human translating mind to accomplish
precisely this. It explores predictive processing as a possible theory to model enacted
and embodied translation processes, with a clear commitment to the linguistic nature
of translation while also accounting for the affective nature of human translators. Pre-
dictive processing (PP , also known as active inference or predictive coding, Clark [ 19])
provides a complementary but related view on the mind. While, according to Clark, 4EA
cognition emphasizes how cognition emerges from interactions between the body and the
environment within a social context, PP focuses on how the brain generates and updates
predictions based on sensory inputs. PP thereby acknowledges the importance of the
body, the environment, and the (social) context in shaping predictions and perception [19].
Clark, 2023 [19] provides an abundance of evidence that shows how expectations shape our
perceptions, our interactions with the environment, and what we take to be true. Similarly,
Seth, 2021 [18] maintains that consciousness emerges from the dynamic interaction between
the brain, body, and environment.
While PP aligns with embodied and enactive aspects of 4E cognition, it has not
been applied within CTIS under this perspective. However, expectations, or anticipatory
cognition, have been shown to influence the translator’s decisions and processing strategies
on various levels of translation processing: on a sensorimotor level, on a cognitive level, and
an affective/phenomenal level of processing [2,28,32]. In this paper, I attempt to integrate
those different ideas within a hierarchically embedded architecture of the translating mind.
3. Modeling Prediction and Priming in Translation
The modeling of predictions in translation can be addressed on a subjective and on
an objective level. It is not clear which level is meant when Schaeffer et al., 2020 [ 61]
(p. 3939) announce the “predictive turn in translation studies”, in which machine learning
approaches could be used for modeling human translation processes and for predicting
“when and why a translator is having trouble carrying out the [translation] task” (ibid.,
p. 3940).
There are two fundamentally different types of models that could predict this “trouble”:
An objective model elicits and predicts, from an external observer’s (or experimenter’s) point
of view, the behavioral correlates of the translator’s trouble. The objective model assumes
that an experimenter conducts experiments with one (or more) experimental subjects and
evaluates the probability distributions of observed actions or behavioral choices. The
resulting model would then allow the experimenter to make informed predictions for
similar translation situations. “This is the likelihood of observed behavior given parameters
and stimuli—i.e., the likelihood distribution in the objective model” ([16], p. 174).
The subjective model, in contrast, would simulate the translators’ ongoing translation
processes and (re)produce the causes and effects of the translation trouble, which then
result in and can be observed as specific patterns of behavioral data. The “subjective model
is assumed to be used by the experimental subject [itself . . . It] depends on parameters
whose value we do not know” ([16], p. 175). However, in PP and AIF, the “general goal is
to recover the parameters of the generative model that a subject’s brain uses to produce
behavior— the subjective model” ([16], p. 173).
Fortunately, we can use the objective model to determine how the subjective model
produces behavior: we “can invert our objective model on the basis of the behavior we
observe to draw inferences about the parameters of the subjective generative model” ([16],
p. 173). Based on these assumptions, I outline in Section 4 the components of an objective
translation model and map this in Sections 5 and 6 on a subjective model that is bound to
simulate the observed variations of the translation process.
To date, empirical CTIS has been interested in obtaining objective models of the
translation process that describe configurations of parameters indicating how one group of
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 6 of 34
translators compares to another group, or how a different environmental setup impacts
translation. Among other things, the focus of interest has been on exploring in what
consists translators’ expertise [12,62–64], assessing performance variation with different
types of texts [65], workspace ergonomics (e.g., [53]), the impact of translation directionality,
i.e., L1/L2 translation [ 66,67], processes of subtitling [ 68] or spoken translation [ 69,70],
emotional factors [2,58], as well as productivity gains in Machine Translation (MT) post-
editing (e.g., [71,72]) and computer-assisted translation (CAT, [55,73]). The aim has been to
assess those vital parameters that have an impact on translation effort (e.g., as measured by
gaze metrics or keystroke pauses, see below), translation quality, and productivity.
Expectations and anticipatory processing in translation have been studied under
various labels and conditions. Several studies have investigated implicit memory (priming)
and explicit expectations in translation. Implicit memory is a mental mechanism that can
explain how past experiences influence behavior without the individual being aware of it. It
refers to the observation that the retention of information or past experiences can influence
behavior, thoughts, or feelings without conscious awareness of the memory. According to
Lucas et al., 2019 [74], implicit memory includes cognitive and motor skill learning, habit
learning, conditioning, and priming.
Perceptual priming studies stipulate that the physical characteristics of a priming
stimulus largely determine the response. Bilingualism studies often investigate how a
source language stimulus, a word, sentence, or structure can facilitate effects on successive
target language production [75–77]. In translation studies, cross-lingual priming effects
have been reported on a word and sentence level [78–80]. “Shining through” [81,82] can
be seen as an effect of perceptual priming. “Shining through” in corpus-based translation
studies is a phenomenon where source text (ST) features become apparent in the translated
text, of which a translator may, or may not, be consciously aware. I will discuss competing
views on this phenomenon in the Conclusion, Section 9.
Priming effects arise quickly, within milliseconds to seconds or even longer after
exposure to a priming stimulus (e.g., a passage of the ST), and depend on various factors,
including the strength of the ST-TT association (e.g., how closely the two languages are
related or the ambiguity of the translation equivalence), prior experience of the translator,
the translator’s emotional state, fatigue, etc. Priming impacts the integration of sensory
perception and motor actions, highlighting the intricate connections between perception, ac-
tion, and cognition. This mechanism thus influences sensorimotor processing, the dynamic
interplay between sensory input, motor output, and cognition in translation.
Another priming effect in translation may be triggered by a translation brief. A trans-
lation brief specifies the intended audience and purpose of the translation in the target
language. Translation briefs are shown to translators prior to their work and are meant
to bias (or prime) translators. A translation brief will activate particular associations that
answer to a specific translation expectation. For Nord, 2006 [83] (p. 142), the act of trans-
lation depends on the “conclusions the translator draws from the brief . . . it is no longer
the source-text [alone] that guides the translator’s decisions but the overall communicative
purpose the target text is supposed to achieve in the target culture”. Also, Sturm, 2017 [84]
(p. 16) mentions that “Translation briefs and technical guidelines offer indications both
about author intentions and the background of the target audience”. Several authors
stress the importance of translation briefs, in particular for MT post-editing, as they have a
significant impact on the translation process and product as well [85,86].
However, in contrast to perceptual priming, the translation brief activates associations
on a cognitive level. A translation brief can be seen as a type of associative (or conceptual)
priming, to the extent the brief specifies terminological preferences or style guidelines,
provides background information about the target audience or the intended use of the
translated text. This information influences the translator’s interpretation of the ST and
directs their decisions with respect to textual constraints, production conditions (e.g., con-
ditions of delivery), and expected translation quality to be achieved in the translation task.
A proper interpretation of the translation brief primes, that is, it makes related concepts
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 7 of 34
more easily accessible in memory which influences various cognitive processes such as
decision making or problem solving in translation. Thus, Nitzke et al., 2019 [87] highlight
the importance of properly understanding the translation brief, and how it is interpreted
should be taught during translation education.
In addition, a layer of affect priming may influence emotional responses and the
translator’s mood states. Hubscher-Davidson, 2017 [ 58], for instance, maintains that affect
influences judgments in translation. Certain emotions may evoke corresponding emotional
experiences that modulate the intensity of emotional responses [2,88].
We thus have three layers of expectation or anticipatory processes in translation: one
on a fast sensorimotor level that integrates perception–action loops and perceptual/motor
priming, another slightly slower cognitive layer that integrates associative priming of a
translation brief with decision making and problem solving, and an affective layer “that
makes the world we cocreate with our environments cohere”.
In the next section, I analyze each of these layers of expectation and anticipation. I
show how each layer operates on a different timeline with distinctive pause structures that
can be retrieved in the translation process.
4. Pause Analysis and the Task Segment Framework
Human translation production (as other kinds of writing) emerges in terms of typing
bursts, that is, sequences of fast keystrokes, that are preceded by a (longer) keystroke
pause. Following Muñoz and Apfelthaler [22], in this paper, I refer to the pause between
any two successive keystrokes (i.e., successive key-down) as the Inter-Keystroke Interval
(IKI), which Dhakal et al., 2018 [ 89] define as “the difference in timestamps between
two keypress events”. The duration of an IKI preceding a typing burst has often been
assumed to relate to the amount of mental effort required to engage in the successive stretch
of typing [21,90]. Whereas smooth typing (i.e., sequences of fast successive keystrokes)
indicates unchallenged text (or translation) production, long(er) IKIs fragment the typing
flow into segments, indicating translation problems, hurdles, or difficulties.
This assumption is analogous to the eye–mind hypothesis. The eye–mind hypothe-
sis [91] stipulates that the “eyes are where the mind is”, i.e., whatever the eyes fixate on is
being processed by the mind. In a similar manner, the pausing-typing assumption suggests
that mental processing during a typing break relates (somehow) to the successive typing
activities that follow the typing break. Thus, longer IKIs signal higher cognitive effort.
4.1. The Task Segment Framework (TSF)
Several approaches have been proposed to define an IKI threshold, suited to distin-
guish challenged from unchallenged translation—for a recent overview, see [22,23]. Some
authors suggest multiple thresholds that are believed to separate different mental pro-
cesses [90,92], but it has been controversial what exactly these mental processes are [93].
More often, a single IKI threshold has been assumed to separate two different mental
processes: an unproblematic or “default” translation process [45,94] and a challenged or
“bumpy” translation mode [95].
However, Dragsted, 2005 [64] reports that translators work at different paces and with
different typing speeds. She thus suggests using different pause thresholds for different
subjects since “comparing all subjects on the basis of the same pause unit value would
amount to comparing the motion of a turtle and a leopard as if they both belonged to the
same species of animals” ([64], p. 53). Consequently, she proposes a keystroke-pausing
threshold (and thus a segmentation method) that depends on the translators’ average
production speed, which would reveal certain grammatical structures. She thus calculates
the duration of an IKI that segments the keystroke data into sequences of typing bursts in
relative times with respect to the individual typing speed.
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 8 of 34
Muñoz and Apfelthaler, 2022 [ 22] take up this idea by introducing a Task Segment
Framework (TSF) that incorporates multiple, translator-relative pause thresholds. They
make a distinction between four types of IKI thresholds: Delays, Respites, Task Segment
Pauses, and Superpauses (see Table 1). The most basic units of text production, they say, are
motor programs of 3–4 keystrokes. Motor programs are automatized, embodied routines of
fast typing patterns where each IKI is below 200 ms. While motor programs are quick and
relatively effortless, Muñoz and Apfelthaler [22] point out that “Motor programs are taken
to operate only after typists have settled on the text stretch they want to enter” (p. 10).
Table 1. Types of pauses in the TS Framework and some of their properties.
Type of Pause Properties
Delay
• IKI threshold: IKI ≥ 200 ms
• Separation between successive motor programs (3–4 keypresses)
• Motor programs are automatized typing routine (IKI < 200 ms)
Respite (RSP)
• IKI threshold: RSP = 2 ∗ median(within − word IKI )
• Separation between Tasks (sequences of motor programs)
• RSPs are non-intentional typing halts
• RSPs are part of fluent typing
Task Segment
Pause (TSP)
• IKI threshold: TSP = 3 ∗ median(between − word IKI )
• Separation between Task Segments (sequences of Tasks)
• TSPs are intentional typing halts
• TSPs disrupt the typing flow
Superpause
• IKI threshold: Superpause >> TSP
• Superpauses separate Flow states
• Superpauses indicate first-pass readings or states of Orientation
Tasks may consist of keystroke sequences inserting new text, changing or deleting
existing text, searching for information, etc. (see Section 8 for detailed analysis). Successive
Tasks are separated by short breaks which Muñoz and Apfelthaler [22] refer to as Respites
(henceforth RSPs). RSPs are accidental, involuntary short stops which do not interrupt the
typing flow. On the next level of processing, one or more successive Tasks cluster into Task
Segments. Task Segments, in contrast to Tasks, are interrupted by Task Segment Pauses
(henceforth TSPs) which, according to Muñoz and Apfelthaler, are voluntary, intentional
breaks indicating that a translator may need to allocate new resources or address some
kind of translation hurdle. TSPs thus interrupt stretches of fluent typing. Drawing on
(Strömqvist, 1999 [96]), Muñoz and Apfelthaler [22] define the TSP as 3 * median between-
word IKI and RSPs as 2 * median within-word IKI (see Table 1).
Figure 1 shows a sequence of 24 s of translation process data. An illustration of
how the different pauses and typing segments interact is shown in Figure 2. Figures 1
and 2 visualize the process of translating the English phrase “ the breakdown of traditional
norms and customs and warranted a revised understanding of ” into Spanish, “una rotura con las
normas y costumbres tradicionales, y garantiz ó una revisión de cómo”. The example is taken
from the CRITT TPR-DB, Study BML12, translator P06, translating Segment 4 of Test 5
(see also Section 7). It shows the coordination of gaze movements on the source and
target text and the typing activities when producing the Spanish translation. The figures
illustrate how the translator deals with typing errors in the production of Spanish “ las
normas” in Task Segment 1 and then moving the translation of the pre-nominal English
adjective “traditional” behind Spanish “las normas” in Task Segment 2 (TS 2). The Flow state
(see Section 4.2) is followed by a stretch of Hesitation in which the translator apparently
scrutinizes cross-linguistic constraints or possibilities, which then leads to inserting “ y
costumbres” (EN: “and customs” ) before “ tradicionales” to finally arrive at “ las normas y
costumbres tradicionales”. As noted by one reviewer, the figure also shows that “ garantizó
una revisión de como” may not be the best translation of “ warranted a revised understanding
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 9 of 34
of”. The figures illustrate the coordination of gazing, pausing and typing behavior, and
the realization of different Tasks, Task Segments, and HOF states, as observed in this
particular stretch of translation.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER R EVIEW 9 of 34 
 
 
4.2) is followed by a stretch of Hesitation in which the translator apparently scrutinizes 
cross-linguistic constraints or possibilities, which then leads to inserting “ y costumbres” 
(EN: “and customs”) before “ tradicionales”  to finally arrive at “ las normas y costumbres tradi-
cionales”. As noted by one reviewer, the figure also shows that “ garantizó una revisión de 
como” may not be the best translation of “ warranted a revised understanding of”. The figures 
illustrate the coordination of gazing, pausing and typing behavior, and the realization of 
different Tasks, Task Segments, and HOF states, as observed in this particular stretch of 
translation.   
 
Figure 1. The progression graph shows about 24 seconds (94,000 –118,000 ms) of a translation ses-
sion, visualizing eye movements on the ST (in blue) and eye movements on the TT (in green) as well 
as keystrokes, insertions (in black) , and deletions (in red). The English ST ( left Y-axis) and Spanish 
TT (right Y-axis) are aligned on the word (or phrase) level in the order of the ST (left), from bottom 
to top. While the English (ST) side shows each individual word in a separate row, the Spanish (TT) 
side illustrates the phrasal translation alignment. Thus, the two Spanish words “las normas” are  
here translation s of/aligned with English “norms” , while the three English words “understanding 
of how” are aligned with the two Spanish words “de como”, which are repeated for every ST word 
in the right Y-axis. The progression graph also visualizes vario us translation units (TUs) separated 
by red vertical dashed lines. In the terminology we adopt here from Muñoz and Apfelthaler [22], a 
TU consists of a typing pause (a Task Segment Pause, TSP) followed by a Task Segment (TS). Task 
Segments are marked as gr ay bars on top of the graph (the first two TS s are numbered 1 and 2) , 
while the preceding TSP is the white stretch between the successive TSs. The graph also visualizes 
coherent sequences of fixations (fixation units, FUs) on the ST and on the TT, indicate d as blue and 
green striped boxes in the upper part of the figure. While the sequence of FUs indicate s how the 
translator’s eyes switch back and forth between the source and the target windows in the translation 
editor, TUs elicit the translator ’s alternation between pausing and typing. The graph provides an 
example of how a translator coordinates eye and hand movements in the production of a translation. 
Note, however, that Muñoz and Apfelthaler do not consider gaze data in their TSF.  
Figure 1. The progression graph shows about 24 seconds (94,000–118,000 ms) of a translation session,
visualizing eye movements on the ST (in blue) and eye movements on the TT (in green) as well as
keystrokes, insertions (in black), and deletions (in red). The English ST (left Y-axis) and Spanish TT
(right Y-axis) are aligned on the word (or phrase) level in the order of the ST (left), from bottom to
top. While the English (ST) side shows each individual word in a separate row, the Spanish (TT)
side illustrates the phrasal translation alignment. Thus, the two Spanish words “las normas” are
here translations of/aligned with English “norms”, while the three English words “understanding
of how” are aligned with the two Spanish words “de como”, which are repeated for every ST word
in the right Y-axis. The progression graph also visualizes various translation units (TUs) separated
by red vertical dashed lines. In the terminology we adopt here from Muñoz and Apfelthaler [22], a
TU consists of a typing pause (a Task Segment Pause, TSP) followed by a Task Segment (TS). Task
Segments are marked as gray bars on top of the graph (the first two TSs are numbered 1 and 2),
while the preceding TSP is the white stretch between the successive TSs. The graph also visualizes
coherent sequences of fixations (fixation units, FUs) on the ST and on the TT, indicated as blue and
green striped boxes in the upper part of the figure. While the sequence of FUs indicates how the
translator’s eyes switch back and forth between the source and the target windows in the translation
editor, TUs elicit the translator’s alternation between pausing and typing. The graph provides an
example of how a translator coordinates eye and hand movements in the production of a translation.
Note, however, that Muñoz and Apfelthaler do not consider gaze data in their TSF.
With their TSF, Muñoz and Apfelthaler, 2022 [22] suggest a hierarchical, embedded
translation architecture in which two translator-specific pause thresholds, RSPs and TSPs,
depend on the translator’s average typing speed and intentionality. Previous research [21]
shows that successive keystrokes are quicker within words (within-word IKIs) than between
words (between-word IKIs). Muñoz and Apfelthaler [22] report that IKIs “are also longer at
syllable boundaries, and shorter within highly frequent bigrams” (p. 11). That is, average
IKIs within words are likely to be shorter than average IKIs between words.
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 10 of 34
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER R EVIEW 10 of 34 
 
 
 
Figure 2. This figure shows a sequence of six phenomenal translation states (Orientation, Flow, Hes-
itation, Flow, Orientation, Flow), painted on top of the plot of behavioral data from the progression 
graph shown in Figure 1. Each of the phenomenal states is related to a typical behavioral pattern: A 
state of Orientation is characterized by forward reading gaze movements on the ST, while Flow and 
Hesitation states break down into one or more Task Segment(s), separated by a Task Segment Pause 
(TSP). A Task Segment may, in turn, consist of one or more Tasks which are separated by Respites 
(RSPs). This figure shows the embedded nature of translation processes into phenomenal states, 
Task Segments, and Tasks. It illustrates, among other things, the different shapes of Pauses, Tasks , 
and Task Segments in the Flow and Hesitation states.  
With their TSF, Muñoz and Apfelthaler , 2022  [22] suggest a hierarchical, embedded 
translation architecture in which two translator -specific pause thresholds, RSPs and TSPs, 
depend on the translator’s average typing speed and intentionality. Previous research [21] 
shows that successive keystrokes are quicker within words (within -word IKIs) than be-
tween words (between-word IKIs). Muñoz and Apfelthaler [22] report that IKIs “are also 
longer at syllable boundaries, and shorter within highly frequent bigrams” ( p. 11). That 
is, average IKIs within words are likely to be shorter than average IKIs between words.  
4.2. The HOF Taxonomy 
While Muñoz and Apfelthaler’s TSF considers only sequences of keystrokes (and 
their IKIs) for fragmenting the process data into Tasks and Task Segments, a complemen-
tary approach for segmenting behavioral translation data has been suggested by Carl et 
al., 2024 [23] that also assesses gaze data. As we will see, these segmentation approaches 
unfold on different timelines and account for different levels of mental processes com-
pared to those suggested by Muñoz and Apfelthaler.  
Drawing on the translators’ gaze-hand coordination , as visualiz ed in translation pro-
gression graphs (see Figures 1 and 2), Carl et al. [23] develop a novel annotation taxonomy 
that specifies three basic phenomenal translation states. As Albarracin , 2024 [97] point out, 
phenomenology is “the descriptive study of the dynamics, structure, and contents of the 
first-person, conscious experience” . Accordingly, Carl et al.’s HOF taxonomy suggests 
three basic experiential translation states:  
• A state of Orientation is characterized by a long(er) stretch of ST reading, which we 
take to correspond to [22] Muñoz and Apfelthaler’s Superpause. In a state of Orien-
tation, a translator follows a goal -oriented plan that allows him/her to become aware 
of possible translation difficulties and to adjust their translation expectations based 
on the empirically gathered evidence. This may resul t in more precise priors in 
Figure 2. This figure shows a sequence of six phenomenal translation states (Orientation, Flow,
Hesitation, Flow, Orientation, Flow), painted on top of the plot of behavioral data from the progression
graph shown in Figure 1. Each of the phenomenal states is related to a typical behavioral pattern: A
state of Orientation is characterized by forward reading gaze movements on the ST, while Flow and
Hesitation states break down into one or more Task Segment(s), separated by a Task Segment Pause
(TSP). A Task Segment may, in turn, consist of one or more Tasks which are separated by Respites
(RSPs). This figure shows the embedded nature of translation processes into phenomenal states, Task
Segments, and Tasks. It illustrates, among other things, the different shapes of Pauses, Tasks, and
Task Segments in the Flow and Hesitation states.
4.2. The HOF Taxonomy
While Muñoz and Apfelthaler’s TSF considers only sequences of keystrokes (and their
IKIs) for fragmenting the process data into Tasks and Task Segments, a complementary
approach for segmenting behavioral translation data has been suggested by Carl et al.,
2024 [23] that also assesses gaze data. As we will see, these segmentation approaches
unfold on different timelines and account for different levels of mental processes compared
to those suggested by Muñoz and Apfelthaler.
Drawing on the translators’ gaze-hand coordination, as visualized in translation
progression graphs (see Figures 1 and 2), Carl et al. [ 23] develop a novel annotation
taxonomy that specifies three basic phenomenal translation states. As Albarracin, 2024 [97]
point out, phenomenology is “the descriptive study of the dynamics, structure, and contents
of the first-person, conscious experience”. Accordingly, Carl et al.’s HOF taxonomy suggests
three basic experiential translation states:
• A state of Orientation is characterized by a long(er) stretch of ST reading, which we take
to correspond to [22] Muñoz and Apfelthaler’s Superpause. In a state of Orientation,
a translator follows a goal-oriented plan that allows him/her to become aware of
possible translation difficulties and to adjust their translation expectations based on
the empirically gathered evidence. This may result in more precise priors in successive
translation production and higher translation accuracy. The two Orientation states in
Figure 2 show short sequences of reading ahead in the ST, which, apparently, were
sufficient input for the translator to proceed translation production with a Flow state.
• In a Flow state, a translator engages in largely undisturbed fluent translation. A
Flow state may consist of several Task Segments interrupted by TSPs that do not
exhibit surprise or hesitation. In a Flow state, translation production unfolds with
relatively short keystroke pauses and with minimal reading-ahead—thus different
from Orientation. A Flow state may be characterized as a type of mindset in which
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 11 of 34
concentration, immersion, and a loss of self-awareness are predominant [98]. Figure 2
depicts three Flow states. The first Flow state consists of two Task Segments, separated
by a TSP that contains an extended fixation on an ST word currently being translated.
Task Segment 1 consists of six Tasks, while the Task Segment (TS 2) is composed of
two Tasks.
• A state of Hesitation is triggered in a moment of surprise. It amounts to challenged
translation [94] or Pym’s (2017) [95] “bump” mode, which may arise from unforeseen
observations that do not match the translator’s expectations. Overcoming a Hesitation
may require the adjustment of internal beliefs and/or the modification of translations
already generated. A state of Hesitation is, thus, characterized by behavioral patterns
that exhibit re-starts, re-reading, or revisions and modifications. The state of Hesitation
in Figure 2 shows repeated reading of the same sequence of TT word(s) and a short
deletion Task, before the translator comes back to a Flow state.
5. Predictive Processing in Translation
While the previous section gives a view from an experimenter’s/observer’s perspec-
tive on the translation process, I now draw on predictive processing (PP) to develop a
subjective perspective of the translation process from the agent’s point of view. PP main-
tains that the mind is (as opposed to has) a model of the world (or environment) which
mainly predicts observations and only analyzes them when necessary. Conventional mod-
els of the mind “perceive the brain as a relatively passive organ taking inputs from the
world and then ‘processing’ them in a predominantly feedforward (outer to inner) fashion”
([19], p. 7). Contrary to this view, PP maintains that “the bulk of what the brain does is
learn and maintain a kind of model of body and world—a model that can then be used,
moment by moment, to try and predict the sensory signal”. (ibid.: 8) These predictions
help structure everything we encounter (see, hear, feel) and create a sense of continuity. We
can learn to predict the world, Clark says, “we can learn to do better, until our predictions
succeed” (ibid. p. 27). In order to learn or adapt the model when a stimulus does not
exactly coincide with a prediction, the agent needs to decide whether the stimulus or the
prediction is more trustworthy. In order to do so, the brain constantly estimates a trade-off
between these two factors, where the right precision of their balance is of crucial importance.
Clark equals this precision with attention. On the one hand, excessive focus on sensory
detail may lead to misinterpretations or exaggerations, detracting attentional resources
from other tasks or activities. This can have detrimental effects on cognitive functioning.
On the other hand, overemphasis on prediction may lead to rigid behavioral patterns and
failure to update the internal model that needs to account for changing circumstances. In
a similar fashion, consciousness arises, Clark says, from the brain’s predictive processing
mechanisms, generating internal models of the world and updating them based on sensory
input. In this view, consciousness (conscious experience) can be understood as a form
of “controlled hallucination” [ 18]: the brain generates a predictive model of the world
and experiences it as a conscious perception, a principle that has also been referred to as
“self-evidencing” [17].
In the realm of translation, this perspective suggests that translator’s expertise hinges
on the aptness of the translator’s source and the target models. Central to their expertise is
the translator’s ability for optimizing and contextualizing the precision function, which
reconciles predictions, as, for instance, derived from the translation brief or translation
norms, with sensory input from the translation environment, i.e., the source text (ST) itself
(see Section 9 for a discussion). Translation expertise is thus contingent upon the translator’s
capacity to navigate between the explicit guidelines and expectations of a customer (or the
target audience) and the demands of the ST. By effectively synthesizing these components,
translators can fine-tune their mental model(s), balancing function and loyalty [99] to the
translation by navigating between fidelity to the original ST, the expectations of the target
language addressees, and the cultural context.
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 12 of 34
A PP view on translation would thus underscore the dynamic interplay between
predictive processing mechanisms and sensory feedback inherent in the translation process.
According to this approach, translators must continuously refine their predictive models
based on contextual cues and situational constraints, while also leveraging their perceptual
acuity to discern subtle nuances and connotations embedded within the ST. The discussion
around Figure 2 suggests that this process concurrently unfolds on three distinct layers of
mental description: (1) on the sensorimotor layer, sequences of motor programs integrate
into Tasks, (2) on the cognitive layer, Task Segments are planned, processed, and coor-
dinated, and (3) on the phenomenal layer, the agent processes experiential qualities and
affective states, integrating sensory perceptions with emotional responses to form a cohe-
sive subjective experience. Analogous to the IKI thresholds in Table 1, Table 2 summarizes
some properties of these three processing layers.
Table 2. Three types of embedded processing layers of translation agent.
Type of Layer Properties
Sensorimotor
• Integration of sensory (textual) input and motor action (typing, Motor Programs)
• Short non-intentional breaks, facilitating fluent translation production
• Monitoring and adjustment through feedback loops
• Continuous interactions with the environment
Cognitive
• Higher-order processes: reasoning, problem solving, memory, abstract thought
• Executive functions: attention, decision making, cognitive control, and planning
• Metacognition: reflection and evaluation, monitoring, inference, interpretation
Phenomenal
• Subjective experiences, (self-) awareness, affect, emotions and feelings
• Experience of agency and volition
• Time perception, temporal order of events
• Sense of autonomy and responsibility for actions
• Self-reflection on desires, intentions, and beliefs
6. An Embedded Translation Architecture
In this section, I develop an outline for a subject-based view on the translation process
in the form of a translation agent that consists of three layers as discussed in Table 2. The
most basic, sensorimotor layer integrates perceptual and motor processes, as shown in
Figure 3. On the one hand, sensory input (ST reading) activates lexical representations
and primes translation correspondences which are successively typed out ([14,76,77], see
also Section 9). On the other hand, motor actions, i.e., TT typing, generate modifications
of the translation environment which lead to modified sensory inputs that are monitored
and that may change successive predictions, or adjust ongoing translation production.
This feedback loop leads to a continuous refinement of the translator’s model in which
predictions are tuned to the context and motor action (typing) is adapted according to the
perceptual feedback. As depicted in Task Segment 1 in Figure 2, loops of perception and
action in translation may be tightly coupled, indicating skilled integration of predictions
and guidance of motor actions.
The activation of lexical translation equivalents may be unconscious, although they
can give rise to conscious experiences that are accessible to introspection. For instance,
in Task 3 of Task Segment 1 (in Figure 2), a typo seems to have occurred. An attempt to
rectify it (deletion of “o”) takes place while the translator is still looking at the ST window
(fixations in blue). The eyes then switch to the TT window (fixations in green), and in the
successive Tasks 4, 5, and 6, several follow-up typos (insertion and deletion of “ot” and “r”)
are produced and addressed. The translator seems to have noticed the first typo in Task 3
without visual feedback, probably due to the sensing of an incorrect execution of a motor
program. Successively, the translator switches visual attention to the TT and monitors the
typing activity, which indicates the tight integration of sensorimotor processes.
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 13 of 34
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER R EVIEW 13 of 34 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The internal processing structure of a Task Segment on the sensorimotor layer. The Task 
Segment consists of two successive sensorimotor states S1 and S2 (green in black circles). The sen-
sorimotor states S are inferring environmental configurations based on sensory input (blue arrows), 
which are conditioned on the probabilit y distributions of the A matrices. Transitions between these 
states (black arrows) are conditioned on probability distributions specified in a transition matrix B 
(orange boxes) and the execution of a corresponding translation Task (indicated by orange arrows), 
while the vector D encodes priors on these hidden states. The dotted lines indicate the indefinite 
length of a Task Segment. A Markov Blanket (black double-dashed line) separates the agent’s inter-
nal sensorimotor processing layer from outside external states ( 𝜗, see Kirchhoff et al.,  2018 [100]). 
Loops of perception (blue) and action (orange) are presented here as successive events; however, 
they can also occur concurrently, as , for instance, in Task Segment s 1 and 2 in Figures 1 and 2. The 
sensorimotor layer exhibits a continuous flow of information between epistemic affordances (read-
ing) and pragmatic affordances (typing), showcasing the translator’s dynamic interaction with the 
environment. AIF conceptualizes predictive processing and anticipatory processing by minimizing 
the expected free energy of possible future sequences of action that might be generated. An operator, 
G, computes the expected free energy [15,16] for each possible translation continuation within a 
planning horizon (i.e. , n steps ahead) and selects the most relevant path (i.e., the next transition in 
B) given preferred observations C and habits E (see [24]). 
The activation of lexical translation equivalents may be unconscious, although they 
can give rise to conscious experiences that are accessible to introspection. For instance, in 
Task 3 of Task Segment 1 (in Figure 2) , a typo seems to have occurred. An attempt to 
rectify it (deletion of “o”) takes place while the translator is still looking at the ST window 
(fixations in blue). The eyes then switch to the TT window (fixations in green) , and in the 
successive Tasks 4, 5 , and 6 , several follow -up typos (insertion and deletion of “ot” and 
“r”) are produced and addressed. The translator seems to have noticed the first typo in 
Task 3 without visual feedbac k, probably due to the sensing of an incorrect execution of a 
motor program. Successive ly, the translator  switches visual attention to the TT and mon-
itors the typing activity , which indicates the tight integration of sensorimotor processes.  
Another pattern of sensorimotor integration can be observed in Task Segment 2. 
Here, the eyes read a few words ahead in the ST while the hands still type out a stretch of 
legacy TT. Also this Task shows a tight integration of perception –action loops , which al-
lows for seamless translation production: while the translator takes in a new piece of ST , 
the hands still type out a piece of TT from the previous chunk. Jakobsen , 2005 [101] reports 
that such patterns of “peak performance” can be observed over stretch es of more than 100 
keystrokes for experienced translators.  
The a nticipation of optimal production processes is modeled within AIF through 
minimizing chances of suboptimal state transitions . These state transitions , from S i to Si+1 
Figure 3. The internal processing structure of a Task Segment on the sensorimotor layer. The
Task Segment consists of two successive sensorimotor states S1 and S2 (green in black circles). The
sensorimotor states S are inferring environmental configurations based on sensory input (blue arrows),
which are conditioned on the probability distributions of the A matrices. Transitions between these
states (black arrows) are conditioned on probability distributions specified in a transition matrix
B (orange boxes) and the execution of a corresponding translation Task (indicated by orange arrows),
while the vector D encodes priors on these hidden states. The dotted lines indicate the indefinite
length of a Task Segment. A Markov Blanket (black double-dashed line) separates the agent’s
internal sensorimotor processing layer from outside external states (ϑ, see Kirchhoff et al., 2018 [100]).
Loops of perception (blue) and action (orange) are presented here as successive events; however,
they can also occur concurrently, as, for instance, in Task Segments 1 and 2 in Figures 1 and 2.
The sensorimotor layer exhibits a continuous flow of information between epistemic affordances
(reading) and pragmatic affordances (typing), showcasing the translator’s dynamic interaction
with the environment. AIF conceptualizes predictive processing and anticipatory processing by
minimizing the expected free energy of possible future sequences of action that might be generated.
An operator, G, computes the expected free energy [15,16] for each possible translation continuation
within a planning horizon (i.e., n steps ahead) and selects the most relevant path (i.e., the next
transition in B) given preferred observations C and habits E (see [24]).
Another pattern of sensorimotor integration can be observed in Task Segment 2. Here,
the eyes read a few words ahead in the ST while the hands still type out a stretch of legacy
TT. Also this Task shows a tight integration of perception–action loops, which allows for
seamless translation production: while the translator takes in a new piece of ST, the hands
still type out a piece of TT from the previous chunk. Jakobsen, 2005 [101] reports that such
patterns of “peak performance” can be observed over stretches of more than 100 keystrokes
for experienced translators.
The anticipation of optimal production processes is modeled within AIF through
minimizing chances of suboptimal state transitions. These state transitions, from S i to
Si+1 in Figure 3, are specified in matrix B. The operator G in Figure 3 takes as input a
definition of preferred behavior (as specified by vector C) and a definition of habits (e.g.,
long context planner/head starter/online revision, specified by E). Given these constraints
and the current configuration of the translation model, the G operator aims at producing
an optimal path though the state space by adapting the transition probabilities in B. At
the sensorimotor level, this may result in the realization of different Task trajectories, as
exemplified in Figures 1 and 2.
Figure 4 depicts the hierarchical architecture of a translation agent with three em-
bedded processing layers. Figure 4 shows three interconnected internal processing layers,
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 14 of 34
an external state that consists of the translation environment, the source and target texts,
and a Markov Blanket that separates the external and the internal states (Kirchhoff et al.,
2018 [100]). The three internal layers have similar structures as discussed in the context of
the sensorimotor layer. Each layer specifies a sequence of internal states and transitions
between them. Each layer also implements an AIF mechanism capable of computing an
optimized path through the state space, given layer-specific preferences and habits.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER R EVIEW 14 of 34 
 
 
in Figures 3, are specified in matrix B. The operator G in Figure 3 takes as input a defini-
tion of preferred behavior ( as specified by vector C) and a definition of habits (e.g., long 
context planner /head starter /online revision, specified by E). Given these constraints and 
the current configuration of the translation model, the G operator aims at producing an 
optimal path though the state space by adapting the transition probabilities  in B. At the 
sensorimotor level, this may result in the realization of different Task  trajectories, as ex-
emplified in Figures 1 and 2.  
Figure 4 depicts the hierarchical architecture of a translation agent with three embed-
ded processing layers. Figure 4 shows three interconnected internal processing layers, an 
external state that consist s of the translation environment, the source and target texts, and 
a Markov Blanket that separates the external and the internal states ( Kirchhoff et al., 2018 
[100]). The three internal layers have similar structures as discussed in the context of the 
sensorimotor layer. Each layer specifies a sequence of i nternal states and transitions be-
tween them. Each layer also implements an AIF mechanism capable of computing an op-
timized path through the state space, given layer -specific preferences and habits.  
 
Figure 4. This figure depicts the interaction between the three internal layers of the translation agent 
and the external states in the environment ( 𝜗). It shows a possible instantiation of two successive 
phenomenal states, Orientation (O, big yellow box) followed by Flow state ( F, big blue box). Three 
internal processing strata unfold concurrently on different timelines, on sensorimotor, cognitive, 
and phenomenal layer s. Each layer consists of a sequence of states (green circles with black lines) 
and transitions be tween them (B matrices in orange boxes). Transitions between successive states 
are conditioned on actions, indicated by orange downwards arrows. Actions condition resources in 
the downstream lower layers. The dotted downward orange arrow indicates action(s) by which the 
phenomenal layer may also directly impact sensorimotor processes. In one possible instantiation of 
the architecture, each state infers the status of the translation environment based on sensory input 
(blue solid arrows), conditioned on the current internal state(s), as specified by the blue A matrices 
[102]. Alternatively, each processing layer may (also) obtain feedback information from the embed-
ded layer(s), as indicated by the blue dotted upwards arrows. As suggested in the AIF/PP literature, 
the trade-off between the internal predictions and the sensory input may be balanced by a precision 
value. 
Figure 4. This figure depicts the interaction between the three internal layers of the translation agent
and the external states in the environment (ϑ). It shows a possible instantiation of two successive
phenomenal states, Orientation (O, big yellow box) followed by Flow state (F, big blue box). Three
internal processing strata unfold concurrently on different timelines, on sensorimotor, cognitive, and
phenomenal layers. Each layer consists of a sequence of states (green circles with black lines) and
transitions between them (B matrices in orange boxes). Transitions between successive states are
conditioned on actions, indicated by orange downwards arrows. Actions condition resources in the
downstream lower layers. The dotted downward orange arrow indicates action(s) by which the
phenomenal layer may also directly impact sensorimotor processes. In one possible instantiation
of the architecture, each state infers the status of the translation environment based on sensory
input (blue solid arrows), conditioned on the current internal state(s), as specified by the blue
A matrices [102]. Alternatively, each processing layer may (also) obtain feedback information from
the embedded layer(s), as indicated by the blue dotted upwards arrows. As suggested in the AIF/PP
literature, the trade-off between the internal predictions and the sensory input may be balanced by a
precision value.
The cognitive layer involves higher-order processes including memory, reasoning,
problem solving, or the generation of complex thoughts The states P on the cognitive
layer in Figure 4 activate the respective executive functions such as planning, decision
making, problem solving, cognitive control, self-regulation, etc. These functions may also
imply metacognition, including the need for monitoring, or the regulation of cognitive
processes. These cognitive states may play a crucial role in goal-directed behavior by
selecting/activating appropriate subsections of the translator’s model that are attended to
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 15 of 34
on the sensorimotor layer. The cognitive and the sensorimotor layers may thus dynamically
interact in support of adaptive behavior and cognition – see Section 9 for a discussion.
The orange arrows in Figure 4 that emanate from the B1 matrices may activate or
control resources on the sensorimotor layer, while the blue dashed lines provide feedback
from the sensorimotor layer to the cognitive layer. In this architecture, the sensorimotor
layer interacts with the environment, while the cognitive layer builds upon this foundation
to support more complex processes and behaviors.
The third, phenomenal layer encompasses subjective conscious experiences. PP and
4EA theories emphasize the close connection between sensorimotor and phenomenal pro-
cesses to play a foundational role in shaping conscious experience. On the one hand,
sensorimotor and cognitive processes can influence conscious awareness and emotional
states. These connections are indicated as blue dotted arrows in Figure 4. That is, sen-
sorimotor attention (i.e., sensorimotor precision) may influence how sensory stimuli are
experienced and interpreted, while cognitive processes such as conceptualization, memory
or thought may structure conscious experiences and phenomenal awareness. On the other
hand, phenomenal experience can also influence cognitive and sensorimotor processing, as
indicated in orange arrows in Figure 4. For instance, emotional states can impact memory
and decision making, biasing cognitive and/or sensorimotor processing toward emotion-
ally salient stimuli (indicated by the orange dotted lines). Phenomenal states can influence
action selection, bias perceptual processing, or alter the interpretation and integration of
sensory information so as to align with subjective experiences. They can contribute to the
integration and coupling of sensory and motor processes, creating a dynamic feedback
loop between perception and action.
7. Pausing Structure across Languages and Translators
In this and the next section, I illustrate properties of the pausing and keystroke data
structure that the proposed translation agent might be expected to produce. I extract a
subset of 54 English-to-Spanish and English-to-Arabic translation sessions from the CRITT
TPR-DB, compute RSPs and TSPs, and provide summary information of properties of Tasks
and Task Segments. The data show interesting similarities and differences across translators
and languages in the realization of RSPs, TSPs, Tasks, Task Segments, and HOF states.
In this section, I illustrate the IKI structure of the logging data and illustrate cross-
lingual and cross-personal differences. In the next Section 8, I discuss the properties of the
state spaces on the three layers of the embedded architecture.
7.1. The Empirical Data
The CRITT Translation Process Research Database (CRITT TPR-DB, [31]) is a publicly
available repository of translation process data that are freely available under a Creative
Commons License (CC BY-NC-SA). It is hosted at sourceforge.net with extensive documen-
tation on the CRITT webpage (https://sites.google.com/site/centretranslationinnovation/
home, accessed 12 July 2024). The TPR-DB contains currently more than 5000 translation
sessions: more than 600 h of text production with recorded keystroke logging, mostly
written translation sessions but also authoring and spoken translation (sight translation,
reading aloud, etc.). Many studies also have gaze data.
In this study, I investigate keystroke data of from-scratch translation sessions from the
MultiLing sub-corpus. The MultiLing corpus (https://sites.google.com/site/centretran
slationinnovation/tpr-db/public-studies#h.p_iVVuCQOHJx2O, accessed 12 July 2024)
consists of six short English source texts (STs), each between 110 and 160 words. The six STs
have 847 words in total and are translated into several languages under different translation
conditions. Table 3 compares the IKIs of from-scratch translation sessions from the six
MultiLing texts into five languages (English to Arabic, Spanish, Danish, Hindi, German).
Table 3 shows the TPR-DB study names with their target language, the number of total
keystrokes in each study, the total duration in hours, the number of sessions and different
translators, as well as the mean and median lag of time between successive keystrokes
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 16 of 34
(IKIs) in ms. It shows that Danish translators (KTHJ08) are (on average) the fastest typists in
our dataset: a total of 24 Danish translators needed a total of 7.7 h to produce 69 translations
with 72.383 keystrokes (383 ms per keystroke on average). Hindi translators (NJ12), in
contrast, were the slowest in this dataset; they needed, on average, 1223 ms per keystroke,
more than 3 times longer.
Table 3. The properties of the empirical keystroke data for from-scratch translation from English into
5 different languages. The “Study” (e.g., AR20) is the internal name in the CRITT TPR-DB and has no
further meaning in this paper.
Study Name AR20 BML12 KTHJ08 NJ12 SG12
Target Lang. ar es da hi de
Keystrokes 37,171 73,619 72,383 43,137 58,883
Duration (h) 8.72 10.10 7.70 14.67 12.46
Sessions 40 60 69 38 47
Translators 22 32 24 20 24
Mean IKI 844 493 382 1223 761
Median IKI 265 156 160 374 156
Figure 5 shows the distribution of the IKIs of these five languages from Table 3. All
language pairs show a somewhat similar IKI distribution, with one peak and a very long
tail, heavily skewed towards the right. Two language pairs, English-to-Spanish (es) and
English-to-Danish (da), have peaks (Modus) around 140 ms, while English-to-Arabic (ar)
and English-to-Hindi (hi) have a much flatter distribution with one IKI peak around 160 ms.
The mean and median IKIs are shown in Table 3 and marked in Figure 5 in solid lines and
dotted lines, respectively.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER R EVIEW 16 of 34 
 
 
In this study , I investigate keystroke data of from -scratch translation sessions from  
the MultiLing sub -corpus. The MultiLing corpus  (https://sites.google.com/site/centr e-
translationinnovation/tpr -db/public-studies#h.p_iVVuCQOHJx2O , accessed 1 2 July 2024) 
consists of six short English source texts (STs), each between 110 and 160 words. The six 
STs have 847 words in total and are translated into several languages under different 
translation conditions. Table 3 compares the IKIs of from-scratch translation  sessions from 
the six MultiLing texts into five languages (English to Arabic, Spanish, Danish, Hindi, 
German). Table 3 shows the TPR -DB study names with their target language, the number 
of total keystrokes in each study, the total duration in hours, the number o f sessions and 
different translators, as well as the mean and median lag of time between successive key-
strokes (IKIs) in ms. It shows that Danish translators (KTHJ08) are (on average) the fastest 
typists in our dataset: a total of 24 Danish translators  needed a total of 7.7 h to produce 69 
translations with 72.383 keystrokes (38 3 ms per keystroke on average). Hindi translators 
(NJ12), in contrast, were the slowest in this dataset; they needed , on average, 1223 ms per 
keystroke, more than 3 times longer.  
Table 3. The properties of the empirical keystroke data for from -scratch translation from English 
into 5 different languages. The “Study” (e.g., AR20) is the internal name in the CRITT TPR -DB and 
has no further meaning in this paper.  
Study Name  AR20 BML12 KTHJ08 NJ12 SG12 
Target Lang.  ar es da hi de 
Keystrokes 37,171 73,619 72,383 43,137 58,883 
Duration (h) 8.72 10.10  7.70 14.67  12.46  
Sessions  40 60 69 38 47 
Translators  22 32 24 20 24 
Mean IKI  844 493 382 1223  761 
Median IKI  265 156 160 374 156 
Figure 5 shows the distribution of the IKIs of these five languages from Table 3. All 
language pairs show a somewhat similar IKI distribution, with one peak and a very long 
tail, heavily skewed towards the right. Two language pairs, English -to-Spanish (es) and 
English -to-Danish (da) , have peaks (Modus) around 14 0 ms, while English -to-Arabic (ar) 
and English -to-Hindi (hi) have a much flatter distribution with one IKI peak around 16 0 
ms. The mean and median IKIs are shown in Table 3 and marked in Figure 5 in solid lines 
and dotted lines , respectively. 
 
Figure 5. Density of IKIs for five languages . 
Given that the Spanish and Arabic datasets show quite different IKI distributions, I 
only look at those two target languages in the reminder of this paper. The English -to-
Arabic translations were collected from 22 experienced PhD students at Kent State Uni-
versity. The English -to-Spanish data were collected in 2012 from translation students and 
Figure 5. Density of IKIs for five languages.
Given that the Spanish and Arabic datasets show quite different IKI distributions, I
only look at those two target languages in the reminder of this paper. The English-to-Arabic
translations were collected from 22 experienced PhD students at Kent State University.
The English-to-Spanish data were collected in 2012 from translation students and have
been used since then in numerous studies ([ 40,103,104], and others). We only use the
from-scratch translation data in this study.
7.2. Word Boundaries, RSPs, and TSPs
Every recorded keystroke in the CRITT TPR-DB is assigned a key-down timestamp [89],
where an IKI is the lag of time between two successive key-down events. Additional
information is computed for each keystroke, such as the index of the segment in which
a keystroke was produced, the TL word that it produced, the corresponding translation
equivalent in the ST, etc. This information is, however, not used in this study.
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 17 of 34
For the sake of computing RSPs and TSPs, a word-boundary keystroke is defined to be
any of the following keystrokes (blank spaces are mapped on the underscore “_”):
‘ “’_.!?:=@$%&*()[]{}
A keystroke is considered within-word if it is not a word-boundary keystroke and
neither preceded nor followed by a word-boundary keystroke. A word initial keystroke is
the first keystroke of a word (i.e., not a word-boundary keystroke), and a segment initial
keystroke is the first non-word-boundary keystroke of a new segment. Note that a first-
segment keystroke is usually also a word initial keystroke.
A within-word pause (WP) is an IKI preceding a within-word keystroke. The IKI
preceding a word initial keystroke is defined to be the between-word pause (BP), and the IKI
preceding a segment initial keystroke is the between-segment pause (SP).
As translators have different typing skills and typing styles, Muñoz and Apfelthaler [22]
expect different WPs and BPs for every translator. In addition, it has often been as-
sumed [21,22] that WPs are shorter than BPs and BPs are shorter than SPs. Following
the discussion in Table 1, values for RSPs and TSPs are computed for each translator i
separately, based on their median WPi and the median BPi. Thus, as previously discussed,
Muñoz and Apfelthaler define RSPi and TSPi as follows:
RSPi = 2 ∗ median(WPi)
TSPi = 3 ∗ median(BPi)
Table 4 shows several values (min, max, mean, median) for RSPs and TSPs for the
22 Arabic (ar) and the 32 Spanish (es) translators. The Table shows that the values for the
Arabic translators are much higher (almost twice) than for their Spanish colleagues.
Table 4. RSP and TSP values for 22 Arabic and 32 Spanish translators.
ar Min Max Mean Median
RSP 312 1032 563 546
TSP 795 2388 1288 1077
es
RSP 220 470 301 281
TSP 423 1686 697 609
The minimum RSP duration is 220 ms for Spanish translator P11 in our data, which is
just above the assumed value for a Delay (200 ms, see Table 1). The maximumRSP duration
is 1032 ms (for translator P18 in the Arabic data). The minimum TSP duration is 423 ms and
the maximum is 2388 ms, which is, by coincidence, achieved by the same two translators.
7.3. Relating RSPs and TSPs
Figure 6 shows the distribution ofRSPs on the left and TSPs on the right for 32 Spanish
and 22 Arabic translators. It shows that Arabic translations have much larger variability,
i.e., a flatter distribution, than Spanish. As Muñoz and Apfelthaler assumed, the durations
of RSPs are—for every translator—shorter than those of TSPs.
Figure 7 shows that RSPs tend to correlate with TSPs. This correlation is significant
for Spanish (Spearman τ: 0.68, p < 0.0001), while it is not significant for Arabic (Spearman
τ: 0.40, p: 0.065).
As plotted in Figure 8, there is a strong correlation between the number of Tasks within
a Task Segment and the number of keystrokes produced in that Task Segment (τ: 0.74 and
τ: 0.73, p: 0.000 for Arabic and Spanish, respectively). While, on average, Arabic and
Spanish translators engage in 2.2 Tasks per Task Segment, Arabic translators show, also
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 18 of 34
here, a larger variation (min 1.2 and max 3.9, median 2.1) than Spanish translators (min 2.1
and max 3.4, median 1.94).
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER R EVIEW 18 of 34 
 
 
variability, i.e., a flatter distribution, than Spanish. As Muñoz and Apfelthaler assumed, 
the durations of RSPs are—for every translator —shorter than those of TSPs.  
 
Figure 6. Distribution of RSPs (left) and TSPs (right) for Spanish (BML12) and Arabic (AR20) trans-
lators. 
Figure 7 shows that RSPs tend to correlate with TSPs. This correlation is significant 
for Spanish (Spearman τ:  0.68, p < 0.0001), while it is not significant for Arabic ( Spearman 
τ: 0.40 p: 0.065).  
 
Figure 7. Correlation of RSPs and TSPs.  
As plotted in Figure 8, there is a strong correlation between the number of Tasks 
within a Task Segment and the number of keystrokes produced in that Task Segment ( τ: 
0.74 and τ: 0.73, p: 0.000 for Arabic and Spanish , respectively). While, on average, Arabic 
and Spanish translators engage in 2.2 Tasks per Task Segment, Arabic translators show, 
also here, a larger variation (min 1.2 and max 3.9, median 2.1) than Spanish translators 
(min 2.1 and max 3.4, median 1.94).  
Figure 6. Distribution ofRSPs (left) and TSPs (right) for Spanish (BML12) and Arabic (AR20) translators.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER R EVIEW 18 of 34 
 
 
variability, i.e., a flatter distribution, than Spanish. As Muñoz and Apfelthaler assumed, 
the durations of RSPs are—for every translator —shorter than those of TSPs.  
 
Figure 6. Distribution of RSPs (left) and TSPs (right) for Spanish (BML12) and Arabic (AR20) trans-
lators. 
Figure 7 shows that RSPs tend to correlate with TSPs. This correlation is significant 
for Spanish (Spearman τ:  0.68, p < 0.0001), while it is not significant for Arabic ( Spearman 
τ: 0.40 p: 0.065).  
 
Figure 7. Correlation of RSPs and TSPs.  
As plotted in Figure 8, there is a strong correlation between the number of Tasks 
within a Task Segment and the number of keystrokes produced in that Task Segment ( τ: 
0.74 and τ: 0.73, p: 0.000 for Arabic and Spanish , respectively). While, on average, Arabic 
and Spanish translators engage in 2.2 Tasks per Task Segment, Arabic translators show, 
also here, a larger variation (min 1.2 and max 3.9, median 2.1) than Spanish translators 
(min 2.1 and max 3.4, median 1.94).  
Figure 7. Correlation of RSPs and TSPs.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER R EVIEW 19 of 34 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Correlation of total number of keystrokes per Task Segment and number of Tasks.  
Spanish translators also produce , on average , more keystrokes per Task Segment 
than Arabic translators do. A Spanish Task Segment contains between 8 and 18 keystrokes 
(mean 11.2) , while an Arabic Task Segment has between 5 and 16 keystrokes (mean 9.4). 
However, while the mean number of Tasks is almost identical for Arabic and Spanish  Task 
Segments, (i.e., 2.2), a Spanish Task has between 3.9 and 7.4 keystrokes (mean 5.3) , while 
an Arabic Task has between 2.7 and 6.0 keystrokes (mean 4.3) , per translator .  
7.4. Personal Pausing Profiles  
As Figures 7 and 8 indicate, the keystroke distributions seem to discriminate not only 
between the two language pairs, but also between every individual translator. A two-
sample Kolmogorov Smirnov Test (KS2) shows that in 78% of the cases , different transla-
tions from the same translator were indeed (correctly) recognized as samples from the 
same population (i.e., the same translator), while in 96% of the cases translations from  
different translators were correctly recognized as samples from different popula tions (i.e., 
different translators). It is thus interesting to note not only that there seem to be differences 
between languages but also that each translator seems to have their personal pausing 
structure. However, at this stage more research is required to determine what exactly 
these different personal pausing structures  represent. 
We also observe a slight negative effect of Task Segment length on the number of 
keystrokes produced per Task: as the number of Tasks per Task Segment increases, so 
decreases the number of keystrokes per Task. This effect is significant for Spanish (τ:  −0.52, 
p: 0.002) but not for Arabic (τ:  −0.18, p: 0.41), which may have to do with the larger varia-
bility in the data and the smaller number of observations for our Arabic data set .  
8. Task Structure across Processing Layers  
As discussed in the context of Figure 2, each Task Segment is a sequence of Tasks 
where a Task is separated by an RSP. Following our architecture in Figure 4, sequences of 
Tasks are realized on the sensorimotor layer, while the planning and execution of Task 
Segments pertain to the cognitive layer. Inspired by Muñoz and Apfelthaler’s Task typol-
ogy, in this section I first assess a taxonomy of Tasks and Task Segments  and then look at 
their relation to the HOF states .  
8.1. Types of Tasks and Task Segments  
Muñoz and Apfelthaler distinguish between several types of Tasks that involve dif-
ferent types of keystrokes . They suggest the following types of Tasks (subtasks): ADD 
(adding new text), CHANGE (changing the text), SEARCH (searching for information), 
HCI (human –computer interaction). However, thi s list seems to be open to further exten-
sion and/or more fine -grained differentiation . In this study I adopt the following three 
Figure 8. Correlation of total number of keystrokes per Task Segment and number of Tasks.
Spanish translators also produce, on average, more keystrokes per Task Segment than
Arabic translators do. A Spanish Task Segment contains between 8 and 18 keystrokes (mean
11.2), while an Arabic Task Segment has between 5 and 16 keystrokes (mean 9.4). However,
while the mean number of Tasks is almost identical for Arabic and Spanish Task Segments,
(i.e., 2.2), a Spanish Task has between 3.9 and 7.4 keystrokes (mean 5.3), while an Arabic
Task has between 2.7 and 6.0 keystrokes (mean 4.3), per translator.
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 19 of 34
7.4. Personal Pausing Profiles
As Figures 7 and 8 indicate, the keystroke distributions seem to discriminate not
only between the two language pairs, but also between every individual translator. A
two-sample Kolmogorov Smirnov Test (KS2) shows that in 78% of the cases, different
translations from the same translator were indeed (correctly) recognized as samples from
the same population (i.e., the same translator), while in 96% of the cases translations from
different translators were correctly recognized as samples from different populations (i.e.,
different translators). It is thus interesting to note not only that there seem to be differences
between languages but also that each translator seems to have their personal pausing
structure. However, at this stage more research is required to determine what exactly these
different personal pausing structures represent.
We also observe a slight negative effect of Task Segment length on the number of
keystrokes produced per Task: as the number of Tasks per Task Segment increases, so
decreases the number of keystrokes per Task. This effect is significant for Spanish (τ: −0.52,
p: 0.002) but not for Arabic ( τ: −0.18, p: 0.41), which may have to do with the larger
variability in the data and the smaller number of observations for our Arabic data set.
8. Task Structure across Processing Layers
As discussed in the context of Figure 2, each Task Segment is a sequence of Tasks where
a Task is separated by an RSP. Following our architecture in Figure 4, sequences of Tasks
are realized on the sensorimotor layer, while the planning and execution of Task Segments
pertain to the cognitive layer. Inspired by Muñoz and Apfelthaler’s Task typology, in this
section I first assess a taxonomy of Tasks and Task Segments and then look at their relation
to the HOF states.
8.1. Types of Tasks and Task Segments
Muñoz and Apfelthaler distinguish between several types of Tasks that involve dif-
ferent types of keystrokes. They suggest the following types of Tasks (subtasks): ADD
(adding new text), CHANGE (changing the text), SEARCH (searching for information), HCI
(human–computer interaction). However, this list seems to be open to further extension
and/or more fine-grained differentiation. In this study I adopt the following three Task
types: an insertion Task, A, has only insertion keystrokes (corresponds to Muñoz and
Apfelthaler’s ADD), a deletion Task, D, has only deletions (not considered by Muñoz and
Apfelthaler), and a change Task,C, has insertions and deletions (corresponds to [22] Muñoz
and Apfelthaler’s CHANGE). I omit the SEARCH Task since the setup of our translation
sessions did not allow for external research.
Figure 9 shows the average duration and number of keystrokes of the three types of
Tasks for the Spanish and Arabic translations. The figure shows that there are systematic
differences between the Spanish and the Arabic Tasks: on average, all types of TasksA, D,
and C have more keystrokes for Spanish as compared to Arabic translation, but the average
duration is longer for Arabic than for Spanish. This observation corroborates findings from
the previous section, which showed that Spanish translators produce their translations
more quickly than Arabic ones.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER R EVIEW 20 of 34 
 
 
Task types: an insertion Task, A, has only insertion keystrokes (corresponds to Muñoz 
and Apfelthaler’s ADD), a deletion Task, D, has only deletions (not considered by Muñoz 
and Apfelthaler), and a change Task, C, has insertions and deletions (corresponds to [22] 
Muñoz and Apfelthaler’s CHANGE). I omit the SEARCH Task since the setup of our 
translation sessions did not allow for external research.  
Figure 9 shows the average duration and number of keystrokes of the three types of 
Tasks for the Spanish and Arabic translations. The figure shows that there are systematic 
differences between the Spanish and the Arabic Tasks: on average , all types of Tasks A, 
D, and C have more keystrokes for Spanish as compared to Arabic  translation , but the 
average duration is longer for Arabic than for Spanish. This observation corroborates find-
ings from the previous section , which showed that Spanish translators produc e their 
translations more quickly than Arabic ones.  
 
Figure 9. The number of keystrokes ( left) and durations (right) for the three types of Arabic and 
Spanish Tasks , A, C, D. Our data show more keystrokes and shorter timespans for the Spanish 
Tasks. 
Task Segments consist of sequences of Tasks. As each Task has a label —in the current 
setting, A, D, or C—I take the concatenation of Task labels that are realized within one 
Task Segment to label (i.e., characterize) the Task Segment. There are altogether  10,356 
Task Segments in the joint Arabic and Spanish translation data with 892 different Task 
Segment labels. The mean and median duration s of a Task Segment are 6777 ms and 5781 
ms, and the median, mean, and maximum number s of Tasks are 11, 14, and 61 per Task 
Segment, respectively.  
More than 93% of these Task Segment labels —that is, 833 different labels —occur less 
than 10 times ( that is, each Task Segment label covers < 0.1% of the data). Together , they 
account for 13.8% of the data,  or 1426 Task Segments. For the 20 most frequent types of 
Task Segment s the mean and median duration s are 3479 s and 318 3 s, respectively, and 
the number of Tasks is, on average, 3.0. Thus, just as the pause structure (Figure 5) , the 
distribution of the Task Segment labels  also has a very long tail. Table 5 gives a summary 
of the 11 most frequent Task Segment labels which make up 75% and 71% percent of Span-
ish and Arabic data , respectively.  
Table 5. The 11 most frequent types of Task Segments (TS label) and their percentages for the Spanish 
and Arabic translation data. The column “Total” shows the total number of Task Segments, and %es 
and %ar indicate the proportion of the TS label in the two languages. DurTS provides the average 
duration of the Task Segment. The Table shows the average IKI and the average number of keystrokes 
per Task (KeyT). 
TS Label Total %es %ar DurTS IKI KeyT 
A 3870  37.95  36.46  921 173 5.33 
AA 1398  13.94  12.81  2167  211 5.13 
D 753 7.71 6.59 504 121 4.16 
AAA 543 5.49 4.86 2740  190 4.81 
AAAA 263 2.72 2.25 4365  233 4.67 
DA 194 2.15 1.44 1593  196 4.07 
Figure 9. The number of keystrokes (left) and durations (right) for the three types of Arabic and
Spanish Tasks, A, C, D. Our data show more keystrokes and shorter timespans for the Spanish Tasks.
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 20 of 34
Task Segments consist of sequences of Tasks. As each Task has a label—in the current
setting, A, D, or C—I take the concatenation of Task labels that are realized within one
Task Segment to label (i.e., characterize) the Task Segment. There are altogether 10,356 Task
Segments in the joint Arabic and Spanish translation data with 892 different Task Segment
labels. The mean and median durations of a Task Segment are 6777 ms and 5781 ms,
and the median, mean, and maximum numbers of Tasks are 11, 14, and 61 per Task
Segment, respectively.
More than 93% of these Task Segment labels—that is, 833 different labels—occur less
than 10 times (that is, each Task Segment label covers < 0.1% of the data). Together, they
account for 13.8% of the data, or 1426 Task Segments. For the 20 most frequent types of
Task Segments the mean and median durations are 3479 s and 3183 s, respectively, and
the number of Tasks is, on average, 3.0. Thus, just as the pause structure (Figure 5), the
distribution of the Task Segment labels also has a very long tail. Table 5 gives a summary of
the 11 most frequent Task Segment labels which make up 75% and 71% percent of Spanish
and Arabic data, respectively.
Table 5. The 11 most frequent types of Task Segments (TS label) and their percentages for the Spanish
and Arabic translation data. The column “Total” shows the total number of Task Segments, and %es
and %ar indicate the proportion of the TS label in the two languages. DurTS provides the average
duration of the Task Segment. The Table shows the average IKI and the average number of keystrokes
per Task (KeyT).
TS Label Total %es %ar DurTS IKI KeyT
A 3870 37.95 36.46 921 173 5.33
AA 1398 13.94 12.81 2167 211 5.13
D 753 7.71 6.59 504 121 4.16
AAA 543 5.49 4.86 2740 190 4.81
AAAA 263 2.72 2.25 4365 233 4.67
DA 194 2.15 1.44 1593 196 4.07
AD 164 1.35 1.96 1607 226 3.56
C 164 1.27 2.08 641 152 4.23
DD 116 1.42 0.64 1183 122 4.84
AAAAA 107 1.06 0.99 5300 230 4.61
CC 84 0.62 1.11 1181 160 3.70
Table 5 provides a summary for the most frequent Task Segment labels (composed of
Task labels A,D,C). It shows the total number of occurrences per Task Segment label, the
percentage of Spanish and Arabic data, as well as the duration (in ms) of the Task Segment
(DurTS), the average IKI, and average number of keystrokes per Task (KeyT, the average
keystrokes per TS, would hence be the product of number of Tasks * KeyT).
There is a very strong correlation between the proportion of the Spanish (%es) and
the Arabic (%ar) Task Segment labels (r = 0.998), which may indicate that these labels are
language- and translator-independent. Thus, the most frequent Task Segment, 38% and
36% of the Spanish and Arabic data, respectively, consists of a single ADD TaskA. Table 5
indicates that there are, on average, 5.33 keystrokes for this Task with an average IKI of
173 ms. However, given the discussion in the previous section, there may be interaction
effects between the average duration, the two languages and the individual translators, a
relation that should be investigated in more detail in future research.
As previously mentioned, the average number of keystrokes per Task decreases as the
length of Task Segment increases. While there are, on average, 5.33 keystrokes per Task for
a TS with a single A Task, there are 5.13 keystrokes per Task if the Task Segment consists of
two A Tasks (AA), 4.81 keystrokes if the Task Segment has threeA Tasks (AAA), 4.67 for
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 21 of 34
four Tasks, etc. On the other hand, the IKIs tend to increase as the Task Segments become
longer, which suggests that typing slows down or becomes more interrupted as the Task
Segment is composed of more Tasks.
Olalla-Soler, 2023 [105] assumes that Task Segments that consist only of a few ADD
Tasks constitute default translations [45]. He observes that 67.8% of his Task Segments were
default translations which contained 69.5% of the words. The observations in our data
show that slightly more than 60% of the Task Segments are A-only, and they cover around
44% of all the keystrokes.
It is also interesting to note that IKI profiles—that is, the keystroke pausing structure,
as shown, e.g., in Section 7, Figures 7 and 8—seem to be typical for specific languages
and translators. Our preliminary analysis of Task Segment labels, in contrast, suggest that
the frequency and order of Task types that are realized within a Task Segment seem to be
language- and translator-independent.
8.2. HOF States, Tasks, and Task Segments
In Sections 4 and 6 it was assumed that each layer in the agent’s hierarchical archi-
tecture operates on a different time scale and thus with different pausing structure and
duration. The sensorimotor layer organizes sequences of Tasks, while the cognitive layer
organizes sequences of Task Segments. As discussed in Section 4, on the phenomenal layer,
the architecture specifies three broad experiential translation states.
In previous work [23], we have manually annotated data from eight Spanish and six
Arabic translation sessions with HOF state labels. The annotation process is described in
detail in [23,106]; here, I analyze the annotations in light of the architecture in Figure 4,
without giving further justifications or explanations of the HOF taxonomy.
Table 6 provides an overview of the annotated states in the eight Spanish and six
Arabic translation sessions. Despite the different absolute numbers of states in the two
languages (a total of 606 and 292 state annotations, respectively), it is interesting to note
that the percentages of H, O, and F states are almost identical in the two languages, as
indicated in the % columns in Table 6.
Table 6. The number of HOF translation states in the manually annotated Spanish and Arabic data
and respective percentages. There are approximately half the number of states for Arabic for 25% less
annotated data, but the ratio of the three states seems to be quite similar for the two language pairs.
O %O F %F H %H Total
es 183 30.20 284 46.86 139 22.94 606
ar 93 31.85 132 45.21 67 22.95 292
Table 7 shows the transition matrix between two successive HOF states, in percentage,
for Arabic and Spanish data on the left and right, respectively. The rows indicate the
state at time i (from where the transition starts), while the columns indicate the transition
probability into the next state at timei + 1. As can be seen, the most likely pattern, according
to this table, is a loop over the Orientation (O) and Flow (F) states (marked in bold). Only
in 16% and 14% of the cases for Arabic (ar) and Spanish (es), respectively, is an Orientation
state followed by a Hesitation. Here, too, the transition patterns in both transition matrices
for Arabic and Spanish are quite similar, with the only exception, perhaps, that Arabic
translators transition more often from a Hesitation to a successive Orientation (21%), while
this is much less likely for Spanish translators (9% of the cases). However, in both cases,
perhaps not surprisingly, the highest chances are that a translator will try to arrive at a
Flow state (F).
Table 8 shows the distribution of A, D, and C Tasks in the Hesitation (H) and Flow (F)
states for the two languages. According to this table, as can be expected, the Flow states are
clearly dominated by A Tasks (>80%), while they are more equally distributed (54% and
53%) as compared to the sum of deletions and changes during Hesitation.
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 22 of 34
Table 7. Transition matrix between successive HOF states for Arabic (left) and Spanish (right).
ar es
To O F H O F H
From
O - 0.84 0.16 - 0.86 0.14
F 0.60 - 0.40 0.60 - 0.40
H 0.21 0.79 - 0.09 0.91 -
Table 8. The proportions of Tasks in Flow and Hesitation states for the Spanish and Arabic data.
There is clearly a higher proportion ofA Tasks in Flow states (84% and 81%) and moreD Tasks during
Hesitation. (Columns add up to 100%.)
ar es
H F H F
A 0.54 0.84 0.53 0.81
D 0.34 0.08 0.41 0.08
C 0.12 0.08 0.06 0.11
Table 9 shows the six most frequent Task Segment labels for F and H states in the
two languages. These 2*six types of TSs for the different HOF states account for roughly
75% of the data. As for the correlation reported in Table 5, this table also shows a very
strong correlation between the Task Segment labels for the Arabic and Spanish Flow states
and—slightly less—for the Arabic and Spanish Hesitation states. Thus, the correlation
coefficient for the first 20 TS labels in Arabic and Spanish Flow states amounts to r = 0.993,
while it is still r = 0.968 for the Arabic and Spanish Hesitation states (not all labels shown
in Table 9). The correlation between Flow and Hesitation states is still strong but lower,
r = 0.76.
Table 9. The six most frequent Task Segment labels of Flow and Hesitation states in Arabic and
Spanish. Note the identical ranking of Task Segment labels in the Flow state (F-ar and F-es).
F-ar F-es H-ar H-es
A A A A
AA AA D D
AAA AAA AA C
AAAA AAAA C AA
C C DD DA
D D DA CA
This seems to indicate, as before, that Tasks and Task Segments realized in HOF states
across different languages seem to depend on the Task itself, rather than on the language
or (presumably) the translator.
8.3. Time Structure of HOF States
While the frequency and distribution of Task and Task Segment labels do not seem
to depend on the target language, in this subsection, I assess whether there are significant
differences in the translation processes that underly the realization of HOF states in Arabic
and Spanish. Tables 10 and 11 provide values for the duration as well as the number of
keystrokes, Tasks, and Task Segments of Flow and Hesitation, respectively. The tables
indicate the mean, minimum, and maximum values of these variables.
As Table 10 shows, the duration of Arabic Flow states is approximately twice as long
as the Spanish ones (Dur/F). There are more keystrokes per Arabic Flow state (Key/F),
more Task Segments (TS/F) and Tasks (T/F) in the Arabic data, and the variation of these
parameters is higher for the Arabic as compared with the Spanish data. However, the
number of keystrokes per Task (Key/T) and the number of keystrokes per Task Segment
(Key/TS) seem to be lower for Arabic than for Spanish. As in the previous discussion,
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 23 of 34
this indicates that Arabic translators are slower, and their production proceeds with more
disruption as compared to the Spanish translators.
Table 10. Summary information of Flow states for Arabic and Spanish data. Mean, minimum,
and maximum values per translation session: average duration (Dur/F), keystrokes (Key/F), Task
Segments (TS/F), and Tasks (T/F) per Flow state, keystrokes per Task Segment (Key/TS), and
keystrokes per Task (Key/T).
ar Dur/F Key/F TS/F Key/TS T/F Key/T
mean 12320 36.58 3.04 12.50 7.17 5.04
min 8314 23.48 1.48 10.67 5.22 4.10
max 21930 63.33 5.60 15.88 10.40 6.09
es
mean 6389 29.42 2.10 14.85 5.44 5.47
min 3585 19.52 1.30 10.76 4.00 4.69
max 9484 40.97 3.81 20.04 7.80 6.70
Table 11. Summary information of Hesitation states for Arabic and Spanish data. Same columns as in
Table 10.
ar Dur/H Key/H TS/H Key/TS T/H Key/T
mean 14,155 17.68 2.76 6.78 4.54 3.99
min 9703 11.15 2.14 3.82 3.62 2.51
max 17,597 24.14 3.38 11.27 6.26 6.26
es
mean 7329 3.19 1.95 1.55 2.23 1.34
min 4199 1.71 1.53 1.07 1.55 1.02
max 13,122 7.64 2.59 2.95 3.32 2.30
A slightly different pattern can be observed for Hesitations, as shown in Table 11. As
for Flow states, the duration of Hesitations is also longer for Arabic than for Spanish, and
there are more keystrokes and Task Segments in Arabic than in Spanish Hesitations. How-
ever, the number of keystrokes per Hesitation (Key/H) in the Arabic data is approximately
½ as compared to Flow states (17.68 vs. 36.58), while for the Spanish data this ratio ap-
proaches 1/9 (3.19 vs. 29.24). This large difference may indicate a less clear discrimination
between states of Hesitation and Flow in the Arabic data, an observation that might merit
more investigation in future research.
The potentially blurred boundary between H and F states in the Arabic data is also
corroborated by the fact that Spanish translators spend approximately 18% of their time in
Flow states inTSPs, while the TSP time in Hesitations is 3 times higher, 54%. That is, Spanish
translators spend approximately 54% of their Hesitations time in (presumably) reflection
or visual search (i.e., no keystrokes produced) and accordingly 46% in the completion of
Task Segments (i.e., typing/modification). Arabic translators, in contrast, spend 26% of
their time in the Flow state in pausing (i.e., TSPs), while this is the case only for 45% during
Hesitation. The boundary between reflection and typing in Flow and Hesitation seems to
be less pronounced in the Arabic data.
Finally, the slower (or more meticulous) pace of Arabic translators is also obvious
in the duration of Orientation states. As shown in Table 12, the durations of Orienta-
tion states observed in the Arabic data amounts to approximately twice that of their
Spanish colleagues.
Thus, while the temporal structures of Tasks, Task Segments, and HOF states show
clear differences between languages and (potentially) translators, this does not seem to be
the case for the aggregate Task and Task Segment labels. However, more in-depth research
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 24 of 34
is required to corroborate these results and to develop more fine-grained classification
taxonomies that may elicit the hidden relations in more detail.
Table 12. Duration of Orientation states, Arabic and Spanish translations.
Mean Min Max
ar 10,300 5851 15,169
es 4838 3007 8050
9. Discussion and Conclusions
This paper presents a hierarchically embedded model of human translation processes
that aligns with the principles of active inference (AIF) and predictive processing (PP).
The central idea of PP/AIF is that the mind constructs a model of the environment to
guide and evaluate behavior. PP and AIF posit that the brain is a prediction machine
(Friston et al., 2017 [15], Seth, 2021 [18], Clark, 2023 [19]) that continually generates and
updates predictions about incoming sensory information. The incoming information is
offset against prior knowledge (or expectations) so as to minimize prediction error. PP
thereby acknowledges the role of the body and the environment in generating and testing
predictions. That is, PP endorses that cognition emerges from the interaction between the
organism and its environment.
This paper suggests a formal model that allows us to specify and implement these
assumed translation processes from a subjective perspective, in the form of a transla-
tion agent.
9.1. The Subjective View
More than 30 years ago, Neubert and Shreve, 1992 [7] proposed a multi-layer model of
human translation processes which, they suggest, consists of (1) unconscious mental opera-
tions that “invoke pre-existent internalized courses-of-action” (ibid. 52) and (2) translation
strategies and procedures that, according to them, constitute “generalizations about typical
courses-of-action”, assisted by “information recall, storage, and integration procedures,
and monitored by pattern-matching and planning procedures” (ibid.). They maintain
the following:
“We must understand how the mental processes act upon and influence one another as
they are applied. It is clear that these procedures are not part of a simple sequential process;
they are not activated in a fixed order. Their temporal and sequential relationships are
more complex. The entire convoluted process resembles a network more than a chain”
(p. 50)
The suggested PP/AIF agent advances this project in a formalized manner. The model
of the proposed translation agent is described in Figure 4. It consists of three embedded
layers: a sensorimotor layer, a cognitive layer, and a phenomenal layer. Each of the phe-
nomenal HOF states in Figure 4 is associated with embedded cognitive and sensorimotor
processes with characteristic properties of the current phenomenal translation state. The
cognitive layer simulates cognitive functions, which include memory, attention, and de-
cision making. The sensorimotor layer simulates the integration of sensory modalities
(reading) and motor actions (typing). As discussed below, different modes of integration of
these three layers allow us to simulate the coordination of perception, action, cognition,
and phenomenal experience in translation.
The hierarchical architecture and its three embedded processing layers in Figure 4
are depicted as Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs, [24]). Within
their introduction to POMDP , Heins (2022, https://github.com/infer-actively/pymd
p/blob/master/docs/notebooks/active_inference_from_scratch.ipynb, accessed on 12
July 2024) operationalizes the interaction between the organism and its environment in the
following way:
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 25 of 34
1. Sample an observation from the current state of the environment;
2. Perform inference over hidden states through free-energy minimization;
3. Calculate the expected free energy of actions G;
4. Sample action from the posterior over actions;
5. Use the sampled action to perturb the generative process and go back to step 1.
In the translation context, this cycle suggests that a translator comes into a translation
situation with some prior knowledge of the translation assignment and a set of preferences
and expectations that lead to a course of action. Translators may update their internal
models based on their observations (perceptions) and/or they may adapt their (preferred)
course of action according to the requirements/constraints of the translation environment,
which includes the source and target texts.
Each layer in Figure 4 consists of a network of states (in circles) and transitions be-
tween them (B matrices). Transitions between successive states are conditioned on actions
(orange arrows). The states and transitions of the embedded layers may be initialized
by higher states. Da Costa and Sandved-Smith, 2024 [102] suggest that higher states can
infer the status of lower (embedded) states by assessing changes in the environment via
sensory input, as indicated through blue solid lines and conditioned by theA matrices. This
leads to the conclusion that what an agent perceives is (partly) due to how it acts on the
environment and hence through “action that gives an organism a grip on its environmental
affordances” ([107], p. 52). Alternatively, the “simulation theory of conscious experience”
(ibid. 47 ff) suggests an architecture in which internal feedback loops inform the higher
layers about the embedded layer’s internal states. These feedback loops are indicated in
dashed blue lines in Figure 4. They transfer information from the lower level, indepen-
dent from configurations of the environment, and are thus prone to produce “inferred
fantasies” [107] or “controlled hallucinations” [ 18] or, in a slightly more positive view,
simulate “metacognition” [102]. It may also be possible that both types of top-down and
bottom-up connections concurrently exist and complement each other, depending on the
concrete implementation and the value of a precision parameter.
The agent proposed in this paper aims at simulating observed variation in translation
behavior, as, for instance, outlined in Sections 7 and 8. It has the potential to shed new
light on the mechanisms underlying human translation performance. It might allow us to
generate novel hypotheses and explanations with respect to various questions in CTIS and
to empirically test and validate them as a computational simulation of the AIF agent.
For instance, the PP view may suggest that translation expertise, a topic of constant
interest among CTIS researchers [108], depends on how well a translator has acquired a
model of the ST with its translation possibilities into the target language [ 109,110] and
how skillful a translator can optimize and contextualize the precision function to balance
the attention between their own predictions and the sensory input from the translation
environment. The PP agent may be suited to simulate performance variation in L1/L2
translation (directionality), taking into account characteristics of the language pair as, e.g.,
discussed in Sections 7 and 8. It might be suited to simulate and assess the impact of
working memory or emotional and cognitive ergonomic factors such as MT post-editing,
CAT usage, etc. Some of these issues are discussed as follows.
9.2. Shared Representations and Lexical Co-Activation
One long-standing topic under discussion within CTIS aims at explaining the obser-
vation that some translations seem to be easier and faster to produce than others. Ease of
translation is related to the automatization of translation patterns, a phenomenon that has
been reported for a long time by many translation scholars. Two competing hypotheses
have recently been suggested to explain this phenomenon. The first hypothesis (hypothesis
1) explains fluent/automatized translation production through cross-lingual structural
similarities of the source and target that lead to subconscious priming of “shared repre-
sentations” [14,80,111]. The activation of shared representations makes it successively
easier for the translator to enter a state of fluent translation production. This hypothesis
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 26 of 34
rests on the assumption of shared cross-lingual syntactic similarities and a mechanism of
semantic/conceptual priming at the level of abstract syntactic structures and grammatical
patterns that facilitate translation production.
The second hypothesis (hypothesis 2) suggests that specific translation patterns are
learned and automatized through repeated practice. These patterns consist of “easily
accessible routinized knowledge” ([45], p. 190) that can (but must not) consist of cross-
lingual syntactic similarities. This hypothesis relies more on the sensory and perceptual
features of the stimuli rather than their cross-lingual semantic or syntactic similarities.
With the three-layer architecture of the proposed translation agent, the underlying
assumed processes of these two hypotheses may be conceptualized quite differently. The
first hypothesis draws on resources that are most likely located at the cognitive layer,
whereas the second hypothesis relies more heavily on automatized sensorimotor processes
and perceptual priming. These hypotheses may boil down to different ways of coordinating
and integrating the sensorimotor and the cognitive layers and to conceptualize the choices
made within those layers, which may be implemented and verified in the agent. However,
while these hypotheses predict different modes of priming, AIF goes even a step further
by positing that an agent can actively, consciously or non-consciously, choose the priming
input - for instance a piece of the ST - which reduces its surprise (i.e., the free energy). That
is, AIF stipulates that an agent (e.g., a translator) will select a visual stimulus which allows
her to proceed most effectively in subsequent (translational) action, and she will engage in
action that reduce surprise of the successive observation, a perception-action loop referred
to as self-evidencing (see below).
A related question concerns the origin of “shining through” effects ([ 81,82], see
Section 3), in which the grammatical structure of a source sentence may leave traces in
the translated TT. The first hypothesis that explains this observation is similar to the first
one in the previous paragraphs, assuming that “shared representations” prime translation
production so that the translator will be biased to produce translations that are structurally
similar to the ST, if the TT allows for such structures. The second hypothesis suggests
that word-for-word translation (i.e., serial lexical co-activation) facilitates the translation
process, without necessary recourse to cross-lingual structural similarities [112]. In both
cases, a shining through effect will be visible in the translation, but in the second case, the
similarity of syntactic structures is merely a side effect of word-for-word translation, rather
than a (compulsory) starting point of translation.
Here, too, the assumed processes may be implemented differently in the proposed
agent’s architecture, putting the burden on the cognitive layer (first hypothesis) or on
the sensorimotor layer (second hypothesis). Differences might result, for instance, from
assumptions about the prediction horizon on the sensorimotor layer and its access to
entrenched sequences of, e.g., n-gram translation patterns, or from assumptions about the
prediction horizon on the cognitive layer that facilitate/monitor the compliance of the
translation outcome with respect to the structural requirements and the anticipation of
conceptual language constraints.
The artificial translation agent, constrained to comply with basic properties of the
translation process, as, e.g., described in Sections 7 and 8, might shed new light on this
sensorimotor/cognitive controversy.
9.3. Hesitation and Default Translations
Not unlike the three-layer architecture of the proposed translation agent, Robinson
(2023) [2] conceptualizes human translation to evolve on three levels of energetic, logical,
and emotional interpretants (see Section 2). He explains the origins of the “logical interpre-
tant” to emerge as a result of a clash between the emotional and the energetic interpretants.
Conventionally, he says, theories assumed that natural language processing is “handled”
entirely by logical interpretants, which is, in our architecture, a constitutive ingredient of
the cognitive layer. The cognitive layer is, among other things, the location of conceptual
planning, rational thought, and analytic thinking. For Robinson, however, cognition and
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 27 of 34
the logical interpretant emerge in a process of “feeling-becoming-thinking”: “Whatever
conscious awareness we have of semantic meaning is constantly being fed affectively, cona-
tively, and becoming-cognitively to the logical interpretant by the emotional and energetic
interpretants”. According to this view, processes on the cognitive layer would emerge
when the coordination breaks down between the phenomenal and the sensorimotor layer,
in an ”affective-becoming-cognitive trajectory”.
This view has the advantage of rejecting—from the beginning—the existence of the
“hard problem” of consciousness, as formulated by Chalmers (1996) [113]. Chalmers’s “hard
problem” asks why humans have subjective experience (or phenomenal consciousness)
at all, why physical processes are accompanied by an experiential aspect, when human
behavior can be explained in mechanistic terms. It can be imagined (by some) that Zombies
(that is, philosophical creatures that lack any kind of consciousness) are as successful as
humans are. Under this assumption, Chalmers asked why we have feelings and emotions
when they are not necessary to complete a task. However, Robinson’s notion of “feeling-
becoming-thinking” alleviates this “hard problem” altogether, since his approach starts
from first-person experience. Robinson takes “feeling-as-First”, rather than as a difficult-to-
explain addition to an assumed functional human machine, the understanding of which
constitutes Chalmers’s so-called “easy problem(s)”.
Similarly, Seth (2021, p. 23) [18] formulates the “real problem of consciousness” that
aims at explaining why—rather than establishing that—a neural, or, as in our case, a
behavioral, pattern “maps to a particular kind of conscious experience”. Seth’s real problem
of consciousness acknowledges the existence of phenomenal experiences and predicts that
“the hard-problem intuition that consciousness can never be understood in physical terms
will fade away, eventually vanishing in a puff of metaphysical smoke” (p. 28), since, as
he posits at the end of his book “the entirety of human experience and mental life arises
because of, and not in spite of, our nature as self-sustaining biological organisms that care
about their own persistence.” (p. 266)
The effect of phenomenal experiences, Seth says, is a “massive reduction of uncer-
tainty” (p. 53), as we can have at any one point in time only one conscious experience
out of a vast possibility. However, conscious experience is more than just a reduction in
uncertainty. Every conscious experience, Seth says, “is both informative and unified at the
level of phenomenology”. (p. 54) Consequently, it can be assumed that a coherent interac-
tion with the environment becomes difficult if experience disintegrates with sensorimotor
processes. In such a coordination clash between the phenomenal layer (the emotional
interpretant) and sensorimotor processes (the energetic interpretant), Robinson suggests
that the logical interpretant (i.e., the cognitive layer) may then interfere to re-integrate
sensorimotor contingencies with the phenomenal layer.
If this is correct, Robinson’s view provides a complementary interpretation of our HOF
taxonomy: as discussed in Section 4, a state of Hesitation is triggered in a moment of sur-
prise or unanticipated observation and may lead to a temporary disruption/disintegration
of the sensorimotor/phenomenologically integrated Flow states. In Robinson’s terminol-
ogy, Hesitation states thus likely instantiate the “feeling-becoming-thinking” trajectory in
which predominantly logical interpretants are “called upon to build an analytical bridge
from source text to target language” (p. 38). An example of such an “analytical bridge”
is provided in Section 4 when discussing the state of Hesitation in the translation of “tra-
ditional” and the syntactic shift it triggered. This is also corroborated in the HOF state
transition Table 7 which shows that states of Hesitation are most frequently followed by a
Flow state.
This view suggests that interventions of processes on the cognitive layer are triggered
by a phenomenal disintegration as an effect of the “affective-becoming-cognitive trajec-
tory”, rather than the other way around, in which Flow states would only be possible
following a phase of cognitive/reflective intervention. However, whatever their order,
there seems to exist an increasing agreement that Hesitation/extended reflection constitutes
the exception rather than the “default”—at least for more experienced translators. PP and
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 28 of 34
AIF may provide support for a deeper understanding of these intricate processes and
their interactions.
Robinson also stipulates that the “affective-becoming-cognitive trajectory” would
“explain conventionalization in all human social interaction, not just in language, [ . . .]
conventionalization in linguistic usage and then, more narrowly, in translation” (p. 114), as
discussed in the next subsection.
9.4. Translation Norms and the Extended Mind
Another related controversy touches the notion of “translation norms”. Drawing
on Hermans, 2013 [114], Robinson, 2023, [2] (p. 94) defines translation norms as “shared
expectations binding translators and their clients together”. Translation norms clarify
“how one should translate: the best way to translate; the ideal” (ibid.) They determine
“performance instructions” as well as “behavioural routines” that specify the type and
extent of equivalence manifested by actual translations [13].
However, how these norms are established and what levels of mental processes they
entertain is controversial. Chesterman, 1993 [115], for instance, defines translation norms
as rational laws, clearly locating them on a cognitive layer. He says, “norms originate in
rational, norm-directed strategies which are observed to be used by professionals. These
laws are empirical, spatio-temporally falsifiable, probabilistic, predictive and explanatory”.
This view has been contested by Robinson, 2023 [2] and others. Halverson and Kotze,
2022 [116], for instance, maintain that language use (and translation) is “convention- and
entrenchment-driven” due to frequency effects. Through experience, translators have
internalized much about which linguistic choices are considered appropriate in particular
contexts and which are favored. In line with hypothesis 2 above, this view would hence des-
ignate the sensorimotor layer as the location of translation and translation norms. However,
Halverson and Kotze underscore that “conventionalized norms also have a fully embodied
and affective nature” (p. 71), which suggests that norms emerge as integrated processes on
the sensorimotor and phenomenal layers. In addition, Halverson and Kotze also maintain
that there is an “interwoven relationship between cognitive representations and social
experience” (p. 73), which alludes to the cognitive layer. They conceptualize translation
norms to emerge on two poles of a continuum, as “patterns of bottom-up conventionaliza-
tion . . . and norms as socially constructed and legitimized collective agreements” (p. 68).
Norms thus evolve, according to them, in a circular fashion, in terms of individual-internal
and cumulative-collective versions that (presumably) approximate over time. Translation
norms seem to transcend the translator’s physical boundaries and stretch into the social
environment; the internal models become interwoven with collective agreements and social
experience, touching all three processing layers of the translating agent. A translator then
adjusts, over time, with collective agreements and intersubjective expectations, in line with
a “conception of the agent as a model of its environment” ([107], p. 4807).
In the PP/AIF context, this process is known as “self-evidencing”: self-evidencing
is a mechanism by which an agent gathers and samples sensory inputs that are already
predicted and thus explained by the agent’s internal model. Self-evidencing, Kirchhoff and
Kiverstein, 2021 [107] (p. 4808) say, is a process that contributes to maintaining the organi-
zation of the agent over time. It is “responsible for producing the boundary separating the
agent from its surroundings”. However, according to Kirchhoff and Kiverstein, 2021 [107],
this boundary is not fixed once and forever; the boundary of the mind “will coincide over
time with the boundaries of the self-evidencing individual agent” (p. 4804). According to
them, the agent–environment boundary marks the “causal-constitutive cut” which may
change over time, as it specifies whether something is a component of a system (such as
the mind) or merely an event (a cause) that leads to another event (the effect).
Translation norms are thus constitutive of the translation process, rather than merely
causal. They are constitutive of the translating mind, as they form prior beliefs that substan-
tially reduce the translator’s prediction errors and they are—at least partially—outside the
translator’s body. Translation norms, in this view, are examples of a “liberal view” of the
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 29 of 34
extended mind hypothesis, which stipulates that cognition is “socially extensive, in a way
that goes beyond the typical examples (involving notebooks and various technologies)”
(Gallagher 2013, p. 1 [117]). The ‘classical’ Extended Mind Hypothesis, proposed by Andy
Clark and David Chalmers, suggests that the mind is not confined to the brain or the
body but extends into the environment through the use of external tools and technologies.
Gallagher, 2013 [117] extends this classical notion, maintaining that the “socially extended
mind is in some cases constituted not only in social interactions with others, but also in
ways that involve institutional structures, norms, and practices.” (p. 1) Thinking, he says,
cannot be reduced to purely “in the head” processes. Cognition is distributed: “There is a
distribution across a number of participants—including the experts” (p. 4).
A similar view can also be found in Toury, 2012 [ 13] (p. 64), who maintains that
translation norms are negotiated “through a (largely unconscious) socialization and in-
tersubjective alignment process in the course of which members of a community reach
(mostly non-verbalized) agreements on appropriate behavior in particular contexts, based
on general shared values”. In the same line of thought, Robinson, 2023 [2] highlights that
translation is fundamentally “interactional in its very nature, involving—as any kind of
interaction does—environmental feedback” (p. 284). We “turn repeated events into patterns
that we take to be reality. Those patterns are norms” (2023, 94ff). It thus seems that, due
to translation norms, translators can make sense of their observations in the translation
job, as they would otherwise remain in a state of high prediction errors. Norms maximize
evidence of the translator’s (expected) observations and—by adjusting their mental models
accordingly—help them better predict their future (translational) action, thus reducing
risks of surprise or hesitation, to better maintain a state of flow.
Robinson (2023) further explains that norms “are ‘counterfactual’ orientations to action
guided by shared regulatory social affect” (p. 101). Norms help us deal with the fear of
failure for future action. According to Robinson, affective and emotional factors play
a crucial role in norm formation. Much of our understanding (not only in translation)
is related to “sensory-motor contingencies that afford us the ability to understand other
people’s feelings and feeling-saturated thoughts”. He maintains that the formation of norms
“may exist, be learnt and operate without ever being verbalized”. For Robinson, norms
“rely on intuition or unconscious habit”, they are a “habit-as-instinct”. Similar to Halverson
and Kotze’s “patterns of bottom-up conventionalization”, also Robinson explains that “we
don’t so much register norms as create them, by way of making sense of events” (p. 110).
He continues that “the counterfactual fear of social disapproval motivates the construction
of norms and conformity to those newly constructed norms” (p. 110, original empathizes).
Norms regulate “emotional response to events that have abnormal causes” (p. 103). Norms
are thus instantiations of socially legitimized patterns that are vital for the self-evidencing
agent [17], as they ensure the translator’s “systemic integration on average and over time”
and to keep free energy (i.e., the amount of surprise and unexpected observations) to a
minimum in the long run [118].
Kirchhoff and Kiverstein, 2021 [107] explain that “the mind is nested and multiscale
sometimes extending beyond the individual agent to incorporate items located in the
environment”. For them, “external resources form a part of an agent’s mind when they are
poised to play a part in the processes of active inference that keep surprise to a minimum
over time (i.e., that minimise free energy)” (p. 4807). The notion of a Markov Blanket (see
Figure 4) is well suited to account for this nested conception of the mind. It implies that
the mind has no unique, permanently fixed boundary: although the mind has only one
boundary at any one point in time, “the Markov blanket concept can be put to work to
delineate a boundary for the mind that changes over time to sometimes include elements
external to the individual’s body” (ibid.). Extended minds incorporate tools, devices,
routines and, as this discussion shows, also social practices and norms that “find their
home in the surrounding environment”.
Intersubjective alignment processes and shared values across social groups may thus
(temporally) extend the boundaries of the translator’s mind, as do translation aides and
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 30 of 34
CAT tools [119]. The three layers of the proposed architecture and their predictions may
then expand into that environment, taking as priors the anticipated expectations of external
agents, customers, or the translation audience, by following or creating translation norms
and producing “content according to agreed-upon specifications”.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study used several datasets of translation process data
that were collected between 2008 and 2020, in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The
most recent Arabic data collection was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Kent State
University (approved 31 August 2020).
Data Availability Statement: The data used in this article are freely available and can be downloaded
from the CRITT website. The CRITT provides free server access through registration via: https:
//sites.google.com/site/centretranslationinnovation/tpr-db/getting-started (accessed 12 July
2024). Upon logging into the CRITT server as summer_gst, a Python notebook is available under
shared/IKI_analysis.ipynb that contains the Python code and data used in Sections 7 and 8 of this study.
Acknowledgments: I would like to thank Moritz Schaeffer and two anonymous reviewers for their
detailed comments on an earlier version of this paper, which have led to substantial revisions and
ameliorations. I would also like to thank Masaru Yamada, Yuxiang Wei, and Takanori Mizowaki for
their continuous discussions on related topics, as well as my students in a course, fall 2023, in which
parts of the suggested framework were discussed in detail. Without their ideas and input, this paper
would not have developed in the way presented here. All errors are mine.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Melby, A.K. Future of Machine Translation: Musings on Weaver’s Memo ; Routledge Handbook of Translation and Technology;
O’Hagan, M., Ed.; Routledge: London, UK, 2018; Chapter 25.
2. Robinson, D. Questions for Translation Studies; Benjamins Translation Library: Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Philadelphia, PA,
USA, 2023; p. 162.
3. Emery, P .G. Translation, Equivalence and Fidelity. Babel 2004, 50, 143–167. [CrossRef]
4. Catford, J.C. A Linguistic Theory of Translation; Oxford Press: Oxford, UK, 1965.
5. Seleskovitch, D. Langage, Langues et Mémoire, Introduction de Jean Monnet; Minard Lettres Modernes: Paris, France, 1975.
6. Nida, E. A Framework for the Analysis and Evaluation of Theories of Translation. In Translation Application and Research; Brislin,
R.W., Ed.; Gardner Press: New York, NY, USA, 1975.
7. Neubert, A.; Shreve, G.M. Translation as Text; Kent State University Press: Kent, OH, USA, 1992.
8. Kiraly, D. Pathways to Translation: From Process to Pedagogy; Kent State University Press: Kent, OH, USA, 1995.
9. Gile, D. Basic Concepts and Models for Interpreter and Translator Training; Benjamins: Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Philadelphia,
PA, USA, 1995.
10. Gutt, E. Translation and Relevance. In Cognition and Context; Blackwell Publishing: Oxford, UK; St Jerome Publishing: Manchester,
UK, 2000.
11. Setton, R. Models of the interpreting process. In Avances en la Investigación Sobre la Interpretación; Collados Aís, A., Sabio Pinilla,
J.A., Eds.; Editorial Comares: Granada, Spain, 2003; pp. 29–91.
12. PACTE. Building a Translation Competence Model. In Triangulating Translation; Alves, F., Ed.; John Benjamins: Amsterdam, The
Nertherland, 2003; pp. 43–66.
13. Toury, G.Descriptive Translation Studies—And Beyond, Revised ed.; Benjamins: Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Philadelphia, PA,
USA, 2012.
14. Schaeffer, M.; Carl, M. Shared representations and the translation process: A recursive model. Transl. Interpret. Stud. J. Am. Transl.
Interpret. Stud. Assoc. 2013, 8, 169–190. [CrossRef]
15. Friston, K.; FitzGerald, T.; Rigoli, F.; Schwartenbeck, P .; Pezzulo, G. Active Inference: A Process Theory.Neural Comput. 2017, 29,
1–49. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Parr, T.; Pezzulo, G.; Friston, K.J. Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior; The MIT Press: Cambridge,
MA, USA, 2022. [CrossRef]
17. Hohwy, J. The Self-Evidencing Brain. Noûs 2016, 50, 259–285. [CrossRef]
18. Seth, A. Being You: A New Science of Consciousness; Faber and Faber: London, UK, 2021.
19. Clark, A. The Experience Machine: How Our Minds Predict and Shape Reality; Pantheon Books: New York, NY, USA, 2023.
20. Carl, M. Models of the Translation Process and the Free Energy Principle. Entropy 2023, 25, 928. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21. Kumpulainen, M. On the operationalisation of ‘pauses’ in translation process research. Int. J. Transl. Interpret. Res. 2015, 7, 47–58.
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 31 of 34
22. Muñoz Mart ín, R.; Apfelthaler, M. A Task Segment Framework to study keylogged translation processes.Transl. Interpret. 2022,
14, 8–31. [CrossRef]
23. Carl, M.; Wei, Y.; Lu, S.; Zou, L.; Mizowaki, T.; Yamada, M. Hesitation, Orientation, and Flow: A taxonomy for deep temporal
translation architectures. Ampersand 2024, 12, 100164. [CrossRef]
24. Heins, C.; Millidge, B.; Demekas, D.; Klein, B.; Friston, K.; Couzin, I.D.; Tschantz, A. pymdp: A python library for active inference
in discrete state spaces. J. Open Source Softw. 2022, 7, 4098. [CrossRef]
25. Jakobsen, A.L.; Schou, L. Translog Documentation, Version 1.0. InProbing the Process in Translation: Methods and Results; Hansen,
G., Ed.; Samfundslitteratur: Copenhagen, Denmark, 1999; pp. 1–36.
26. Hansen, G. Introduction. In Probing the Process in Translation: Methods and Results ; CSL 24; Samfundslitteratur: Copenhagen,
Denmark, 1999.
27. Hvelplund, K.T. Eye Tracking in Translation Process Research; Schwieter, J.W., Ferreira, A., Eds.; Willey Handbook: Hoboken, NJ,
USA, 2017. [CrossRef]
28. Risku, H. Cognitive approaches to translation. In The Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics; Chapelle, C., Ed.; Blackwell: London, UK,
2012; pp. 675–684.
29. Jakobsen, A.L. Translation Process Research. In The Handbook of Translation and Cognition; Schwieter, J.W., Ferreira, A., Eds.; Wiley:
Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2017; pp. 19–49. [CrossRef]
30. Carl, M.; Jakobsen, A.L. Towards Statistical Modelling of Translators’ Activity.Int. J. Speech Technol. 2009, 12, 125–138. [CrossRef]
31. Carl, M.; Schaeffer, M.; Bangalore, S. The CRITT Translation Process Research Database. InNew Directions in Empirical Translation
Process Research; Carl, M., Bangalore, S., Schaeffer, M., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2016; pp. 13–54.
32. Hvelplund, K.T. Allocation of Cognitive Resources in Translation: An Eye-Tracking and Key-Logging Study. Ph.D. Thesis,
Copenhagen Business School, Copenhagen, Demark, 2011.
33. Baddeley, A. Working Memory, Thought, and Action; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2007. [CrossRef]
34. Sjørup, A.C. Cognitive Effort in Metaphor Translation: An Eye-Tracking and Key-Logging Study. Ph.D. Thesis, Copenhagen
Business School, Copenhagen, Demark, 2013.
35. Lakoff, G.; Johnson, M. Metaphors We Live By; University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL, USA, 1980.
36. Serbina, T. A Construction Grammar Approach to the Analysis of Translation Shifts. A Corpus-Based Study. Ph.D. Thesis, RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 2015.
37. Heilmann, A. Profiling Effects of Syntactic Complexity in Translation: A Multi-Method Approach. Ph.D. Thesis, RWTH Aachen
University, Aachen, Germany, 2020. [CrossRef]
38. Zou, L.; Carl, M.; Mirzapour, M.; Jacquenet, H.; Vieira, L.N. AI-Based Syntactic Complexity Metrics and Sight Interpreting
Performance. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Human Computer Interaction, Kent, OH, USA, 20–22
December 2021; pp. 534–547.
39. Vanroy, B. Syntactic Difficulties in Translation. Ph.D. Thesis, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2021.
40. Schaeffer, M.; Dragsted, B.; Hvelplund, K.T.; Balling, L.W.; Carl, M. Word Translation Entropy: Evidence of Early Target Language
Activation during Reading for Translation. In New Directions in Empirical Translation Process Research; Carl, M., Bangalore, S.,
Schaeffer, M., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2016; pp. 183–210. ISBN 978-3-319-20357-7.
41. Alves, F.; Vale, D. Probing the Unit of Translation in Time: Aspects of the Design and Development of a Web Application for
Storing, Annotating, and Querying Translation Process Data. Across Lang. Cult. 2009, 10, 251–273. [CrossRef]
42. Sperber, D.; Wilson, D. Relevance: Communication and Cognition; Blackwell: Oxford, UK, 1995.
43. Tirkkonen-Condit, S. The monitor model revisited: Evidence from process research. Meta 2005, 50, 405–414. [CrossRef]
44. Halverson, S. The Cognitive Basis of Translation Universals. Target2003, 15, 197–241. [CrossRef]
45. Halverson, S. ‘Default Translation’: A construct for Cognitive Translation and Interpreting Studies. Transl. Cogn. Behav. 2019, 2,
187–210. [CrossRef]
46. Carl, M.; Schaeffer, M. Outline for a Relevance Theoretical Model of Machine Translation Post-editing. InResearching Cognitive
Processes of Translation; Li, D., Lai, V ., Lei, C., He, Y., Eds.; Springer: Singapore, 2019; pp. 49–67.
47. Rojo López, A.M.; Muñoz Mart ín, R. Translation process research. In The Routledge Handbook of Translation and Methodology ;
Routledge: London, UK, 2022.
48. Muñoz Martín, R. On Paradigms and Cognitive Translatology. In Translation and Cognition; Shreve, G.M., Angelone, E., Eds.; John
Benjamins: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2010; pp. 169–187.
49. Risku, H.; Rogl, R. Translation and Situated, Embodied, Distributed, Embedded and Extended Cognition. In The Routledge
Handbook of Translation and Cognition; Routledge: London, UK, 2020; pp. 478–499.
50. Ivancic, B.; Zepter, A.L. Embodiment in Translation Studies: Different Perspectives. inTRAlinea Special Issue: Embodied
Translating—Mit dem Körper Übersetzen. 2022. Available online: https://www.intralinea.org/specials/article/2607 (accessed
on 12 July 2024).
51. Han, J. The Role of Emotion in the Translation Process from the Perspective of Embodied Cognition.Psychology 2023, 14, 1395–1412.
[CrossRef]
52. Risku, H. Translation process research as interaction research: From mental to socio-cognitive processes. MonTI Spec. Issue
Minding Transl. 2014, 1, 331–352. [CrossRef]
53. Ehrensberger-Dow, M. Ergonomics and translation workplaces. Handb. Transl. Stud. 2021, 5, 67–72.
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 32 of 34
54. Ehrensberger-Dow, M. An ergonomic perspective of translation. In The Handbook of Translation and Cognition; Schwieter, J.W.,
Ferreira, A., Eds.; Wiley-Blackwell: London, UK, 2017; pp. 332–349.
55. O’Brien, S. Machine translation and cognition. In The Handbook of Translation and Cognition; Schwieter, J.W., Ferreira, A., Eds.;
Wiley Blackwell: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2017; pp. 313–331.
56. Hubscher-Davidson, S. Translation and Emotion—A Psychological Perspective. InRoutledge Advances in Translation and Interpreting
Studies; Taylor & Francis Group: Abingdon, UK, 2017; ISBN 978-1138855335.
57. Hubscher-Davidson, S.; Lehr, C. Improving the Emotional Intelligence of Translators: A Roadmap for an Experimental Training.
Intervention; Palgrave Studies in Translating and Interpreting; Springer Nature: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2021.
58. Rojo, A. The Role of Emotions. InThe Handbook of Translation and Cognition; Schwieter, J.W., Ferreira, A., Eds.; Blackwell Handbooks
in Linguistics; Blackwell’s: London, UK, 2017.
59. Peirce, C.S. The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings; Peirce Edition Project, Ed.; Indiana University Press: Bloomington,
IN, USA, 1992.
60. Halverson, S.L. Translation, linguistic commitment, and cognition. In The Routledge Handbook of Translation and Cognition ;
Routledge: London, UK, 2020; pp. 37–51.
61. Schaeffer, M.; Nitzke, J.; Hansen-Schirra, S. Predictive Turn in Translation Studies: Review and Prospects. InThe Handbook of the
Changing World Language Map; Brunn, S.D., Kehrein, R., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2020; pp. 3939–3961.
62. Shreve, G.M. The strange attractions of translation: Performance, expertise, and complexity. In Translation in Transition: Human
and Machine Intelligence; Lacruz, I., Ed.; American Translators Association Scholarly Monograph Series, XX; John Benjamins:
Amsterdam, The Nertherlands, 2023.
63. Englund Dimitrova, B. Expertise and Explicitation in the Translation Process; Benjamins Translation Library: Amsterdam, The Nerther-
lands, 2005; p. 64.
64. Dragsted, B. Segmentation in translation. Differences across levels of expertise and difficulty. Target2005, 17, 49–70. [CrossRef]
65. Sun, S. Measuring translation difficulty: Theoretical and methodological considerations. Across Lang. Cult. 2015, 16, 29–54.
[CrossRef]
66. Ferreira, A.; Schwieter, J.W. (Eds.) Directionality in Translation; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2017.
67. Feng, J. Allocation of Attentional Resources in E-C and C-E Translation: A Key-Logging and Eye-Tracking Study of Directionality.
Ph.D. Thesis, Beijing Foreign Studies University, Beijing, China, 2017.
68. Karakanta, A.; Orrego-Carmona, D. Subtitling in transition: The case of TED Talks. In Translation in Transition: Human and Machine
Intelligence; Lacruz, I., Ed.; American Translators Association Scholarly Monograph Series, XX; John Benjamins: Amsterdam,
The Nertherland, 2023.
69. Chmiel, A.; Janikowski, P .; Cie´ slewicz, A. The eye or the ear?: Source language interference in sight translation and simultaneous
interpreting. Interpreting 2020, 22, 187–210. [CrossRef]
70. Mees, I.M.; Dragsted, B.; Hansen, I.G.; Jakobsen, A.L. Sound effects in translation. Target2013, 25, 140–154. [CrossRef]
71. Mirela Machine Translation Post-Editing: What You Need to Know. 2024. Available online: https://poeditor.com/blog/machin
e-translation-post-editing/ (accessed on 12 July 2024).
72. Nitzke, J.; Hansen-Schirra, S. A Short Guide to Post-Editing ; Translation and Multilingual Natural Language Processing 16;
Language Science Press: Berlin, Germany, 2021. Available online: https://langsci-press.org/catalog/book/319 (accessed on 12
July 2024).
73. Dragsted, B. Computer-aided translation as a distributed cognitive task. Pragmat. Cogn. 2006, 14, 443–464. [CrossRef]
74. Lucas, H.D.; Creery, J.D.; Hu, X.; Paller, K.A. Grappling With Implicit Social Bias: A Perspective From Memory Research.
Neuroscience 2019, 406, 684–697. [CrossRef] [PubMed] [PubMed Central]
75. De Groot, A.M.B. The cognitive study of translation and interpretation: Three approaches. In Cognitive processes in translation and
interpretation; Sage Publications: Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, 1997; pp. 25–56.
76. Tokowicz, N.; Kroll, J.F. Number of Meanings and Concreteness: Consequences of Ambiguity within and Across Languages.
Lang. Cogn. Process. 2007, 22, 727–779. [CrossRef]
77. Hartsuiker, R.J.; Pickering, M.J. Language integration in bilingual sentence production.Acta Psychol. 2008, 128, 479–489. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
78. Robinson, D. Priming Translation: Cognitive, Affective, and Social Factors; Routledge: London, UK, 2023; ISBN 9780367681159.
79. Maier, R.M.; Pickering, M.J.; Hartsuiker, R.J. Does translation involve structural priming? Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 2017, 70, 1575–1589.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
80. Neveu, A.; Lacruz, I. Early processes in reading for translation: A micro-scale study in the CRITT TPR-DB. In Translation in
Transition: Human and Machine Intelligence; Lacruz, I., Ed.; American Translators Association Scholarly Monograph Series, XX;
John Benjamins: Amsterdam, The Nertherlands, 2023.
81. Hansen-Schirra, S. Between normalization and shining-through: Specific properties of English-German translations and their
influence on the target language. Hambg. Stud. Multiling. 2011, 12, 133–162.
82. Teich, E. Cross-Linguistic Variation in System and Text: A Methodology for the Investigation of Translations and Comparable Texts; Walter
de Gruyter: Berlin, Germany, 2003.
83. Nord, C. Translating as a purposeful activity: A prospective approach. Teflin J. 2006, 17, 131–143. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 33 of 34
84. Sturm, A. Metaminds: Using metarepresentation to model minds in translation. In Empirical Modelling of Translation and
Interpreting; Language Science Press: Berlin, Germany, 2017; pp. 419–435. [CrossRef]
85. Hu, K.; Cadwell, P . A comparative study of post-editing guidelines. Balt. J. Mod. Comput. 2016, 4, 346–353.
86. Massardo, I.; van der Meer, J.; O’Brien, S.; Hollowood, F.; Aranberri, N.; Drescher, K. Taus mt Post-Editing Guidelines; TAUS
Signature Editions: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2017.
87. Nitzke, J.; Hansen-Schirra, S.; Canfora, C. Risk management and post-editing competence. J. Spec. Transl. 2019, 31, 239–259.
88. Yeung, C.W.M.; Wyer, R.S. Affect, Appraisal, and Consumer Judgment. J. Consum. Res. 2004, 31, 412–424. [CrossRef]
89. Dhakal, V .; Feit, A.M.; Kristensson, P .O.; Oulasvirta, A. Observations on typing from 136 million keystrokes. In Proceedings of the
2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’18), Montreal, QC, Canada, 21–26 April 2018; pp. 1–12.
90. Lacruz, I.; Shreve, G.M. Pauses and cognitive effort in post-editing. InPost-Editing of Machine Translation: Processes and Applications;
Scholars Publishing: Cambridge UK, 2014; pp. 246–272.
91. Just, M.A.; Carpenter, P .A. A theory of reading: From eye fixations to comprehension.Psychol. Rev. 1980, 87, 329–354. [CrossRef]
92. Couto-Vale, D. What does a translator do when not writing? In Empirical Modelling of Translation and Interpreting; Hansen-Schirra,
S., Czulo, O., Hofmann, S., Eds.; Language Science Press: Berlin, Germany, 2017; Volume 10, pp. 209–237.
93. Heilmann, A.; Neumann, S. Dynamic pause assessment of keystroke logged data for the detection of complexity in translation
and monolingual text production. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Linguistic Complexity
(CL4LC), Osaka, Japan, 11–17 December 2016; pp. 98–103.
94. Carl, M.; Dragsted, B. Inside the Monitor Model: Processes of Default and Challenged Translation Production. InCrossroads between
Contrastive Linguistics, Translation Studies and Machine Translation; Translation: Computation, Corpora, Cognition; Language
Science Press: Berlin, Germany, 2012; Volume 2.
95. Pym, A. A Typology of Translation Solutions for Spanish-English. Translation and Interpretation, Translation. Research Gate.
2017. Available online: https://www.academia.edu/34961391/ (accessed on 12 July 2024).
96. Strömqvist, S. Production rate profiles. In The Process of Writing: A Progress Report; Stromqvist, S., Ahlsen, E., Eds.; University of
Göteborg, Department of Linguistics: Gothenburg, Sweden, 1999; pp. 53–70.
97. Albarracin, M.; Pitliya, R.J.; St. Clere Smithe, T.; Friedman, D.A.; Friston, K.; Ramstead, M.J.D. Shared Protentions in Multi-Agent
Active Inference. Entropy 2024, 26, 303. [CrossRef]
98. Csikszentmihalyi, M. Flow and the Foundations of Positive Psychology: The Collected Works of Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi ; Springer:
Dordrecht, Germany, 2014.
99. Nord, C. Function plus loyalty. In Translating as a Purposeful Activity; Routledge: London, UK, 2018.
100. Kirchhoff, M.; Parr, T.; Palacios, E.; Friston, K.; Kiverstein, J. The Markov blankets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free
energy principle. J. R. Soc. Interface 2018, 15, 152017079220170792. [CrossRef]
101. Jakobsen, A.L. Instances of Peak Performance in Translation. Leb. Sprachen 2005, 50, 111–116. [CrossRef]
102. Da Costa, L.; Sandved-Smith, L. Towards a Bayesian Mechanics of Metacognitive Particles: A Commentary on “Path Integrals,
Particular Kinds, and Strange Things” by Friston, Da Costa, Sakthivadivel, Heins, Pavliotis, Ramstead, and Parr, Physics of Life
Reviews. 2024; pp. 11–13. Available online: https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/physics-of-life-reviews/vol/48/suppl/C
(accessed on 12 July 2024).
103. Mesa-Lao, B. Gaze Behaviour on Source Texts: An Exploratory Study Comparing Translation and Post-Editing, Post-Editing of Machine
Translation: Processes and Applications; Cambridge Scholars Publishing: Cambridge, UK, 2014.
104. Gilbert, D.; Toledo-Báez, C.; Carl, M.; Espino, H. Impact of word alignment on word translation entropy and other metrics: A
comparison of translation process research findings derived from different word alignment methods. In Translation in Transition:
Human and Machine Intelligence; American Translators Association Scholarly Monograph Series, XX; John Benjamins: Amsterdam,
The Nertherlands, 2023. [CrossRef]
105. Olalla-Soler, C. Literal vs. Default Translation. Challenging the Constructs with Middle Egyptian Translation as an Extreme
Case in Point. Sendebar. Revista de Traducción e Interpretación, Universidad de Granada. 2023; pp. 65–92. Available online:
https://revistaseug.ugr.es/index.php/sendebar (accessed on 12 July 2024).
106. Carl, M.; Lu, S.; Al-Ramadan, A. Using Machine Learning to Validate a Novel Taxonomy of Phenomenal Translation States. In
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the European Association for Machine Translation, Sheffield, UK, 24–27 June 2024.
Available online: https://eamt2024.github.io/proceedings/vol1.pdf (accessed on 12 July 2024).
107. Kirchhoff, M.D.; Kiverstein, J. Extended Consciousness and Predictive Processing: A Third-Wave View; Routledge: London, UK, 2019.
[CrossRef]
108. Ferreira, A.; Schwieter, J.; Gile, D.The Position of Psycholinguistic and Cognitive Science in Translation and Interpreting: An Introduction;
Benjamins Translation Library; Benjamins: Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2015. [CrossRef]
109. Pym, A. Redefining translation competence in an electronic age. In defence of a minimalist approach. Meta 2003, 48, 481–497.
[CrossRef]
110. Pym, A. Translation Skill-Sets in a Machine-Translation Age. Meta 2013, 58, 487–503. [CrossRef]
111. Hartsuiker, R.J.; Pickering, M.J.; Veltkamp, E. Is syntax separate or shared between languages? Cross-linguistic syntactic priming
in Spanish-English bilinguals. Psychol. Sci. 2004, 15, 409–414. [CrossRef]
112. Jacob, G.; Schaeffer, M.J.; Oster, K.; Hansen-Schirra, S. The psycholinguistics of shining-through effects in translation: Cross-
linguistic structural priming or serial lexical co-activation? Appl. Psycholinguist. 2024, 1–25. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2024, 26, 616 34 of 34
113. Chalmers, D. The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1996.
114. Hermans, T. What is (not) Translation? In The Routledge Handbook of Translation Studies; Carmen, M., Bartrina, F., Eds.; Routledge:
London, UK; New York, NY, USA, 2013; pp. 75–87.
115. Chesterman, A. From ‘Is’ to ‘Ought’: Laws, Norms and Strategies in Translation Studies. Target1993, 5, 1–20. [CrossRef]
116. Halverson, S.L.; Kotze, H. Sociocognitive Constructs in Translation and Interpreting Studies (TIS): Do We Really Need Concepts
Like Norms and Risk When We Have a Comprehensive Usage-Based Theory of Language? InContesting Epistemologies in Cognitive
Translation and Interpreting Studies; Halverson, S.L., Garc ía, Á.M., Eds.; Routledge: London, UK; New York, NY, USA, 2022;
pp. 51–79.
117. Gallagher, S. The socially extended mind. Cogn. Syst. Res. 2013, 25, 4–12. [CrossRef]
118. Kirchhoff, M.D.; Kiverstein, J. How to determine the boundaries of the mind: A Markov blanket proposal. Synthese 2021, 198,
4791–4810. [CrossRef]
119. Balashov, Y. The Translator’s Extended Mind. Minds Mach. 2020, 30, 349–383. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.