Citation: Cerritelli, F.; Esteves, J.E.
An Enactive–Ecological Model to
Guide Patient-Centered Osteopathic
Care. Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
healthcare10061092
Academic Editors: Saleh A. Naser
and Robbert Gobbens
Received: 3 April 2022
Accepted: 10 June 2022
Published: 12 June 2022
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
healthcare
Communication
An Enactive–Ecological Model to Guide Patient-Centered
Osteopathic Care
Francesco Cerritelli 1, * and Jorge E. Esteves 1,2
1 Clinical-Based Human Research Department, Foundation COME Collaboration, 66100 Pescara, Italy;
osteojorge@gmail.com
2 Malta ICOM Educational, GZR 1071 Gzira, Malta
* Correspondence: fcerritelli@comecollaboration.org
Abstract: Osteopaths commonly face complexity and clinical uncertainty in their daily professional
practice as primary contact practitioners. In order to effectively deal with complex clinical presen-
tations, osteopaths need to possess well-developed clinical reasoning to understand the individual
patient’s lived experience of pain and other symptoms and how their problem impacts their per-
sonhood and ability to engage with their world. We have recently proposed (En)active inference
as an integrative framework for osteopathic care. The enactivist and active inference frameworks
underpin our integrative hypothesis. Here, we present a clinically based interpretation of our in-
tegrative hypothesis by considering the ecological niche in which osteopathic care occurs. Active
inference enables patients and practitioners to disambiguate each other’s mental states. The patients’
mental states are unobservable and must be inferred based on perceptual cues such as posture, body
language, gaze direction and response to touch and hands-on care. A robust therapeutic alliance
centred on cooperative communication and shared narratives and the appropriate and effective use of
touch and hands-on care enable patients to contextualize their lived experiences. Touch and hands-on
care enhance the therapeutic alliance, mental state alignment, and biobehavioural synchrony between
patient and practitioner. Therefore, the osteopath–patient dyad provides mental state alignment and
opportunities for ecological niche construction. Arguably, this can produce therapeutic experiences
which reduce the prominence given to high-level prediction errors—and consequently, the top-down
attentional focus on bottom-up sensory prediction errors, thus minimizing free energy. This com-
mentary paper primarily aims to enable osteopaths to critically consider the value of this proposed
framework in appreciating the complexities of delivering person-centred care.
Keywords: touch; pain; free energy principle; patient-practitioner dyad; active inference; ecological
niche; enactivism
1. Introduction
Current evidence from musculoskeletal care, neuroscience, pain and cognitive science,
and philosophy provides opportunities for developing and implementing robust models
of osteopathic person-centred care [1]. In recent years, enactivism, predictive processing,
and the Free Energy Principle (FEP) have emerged as promising frameworks for the under-
standing of cognition, pain, and mental health (e.g., [2–7]). We have recently argued that
the osteopathic-underpinning conceptual framework aligns with an enactive and ecological
take on life and mind [8]. Speciﬁcally, we have argued that the concepts of unity of body and
mind, its adaptive and self-regulatory mechanisms and the person’s dynamical engagement
with their world as agents can be interpreted and researched under the theoretical frame-
works of enactivism, predictive processing, the FEP , and active inference [8–10]. Indeed,
Bruineberg and colleagues [10] have argued that the FEP and the enactivist and ecological
approaches to life and mind provide a robust framework for fully understanding the whole
organism–environment system and their dynamical interactions. Moreover, Cormack and
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare10061092 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/healthcare
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092 2 of 12
co-workers (2022) have recently proposed that an enactive–biopsychosocial approach to
patient care enabled practitioners to appreciate the complexities and wholeness of human
experience that are intrinsically embedded and embodied in an environment [11]. We argue
that the enactive approach to cognition, predictive processing, FEP , and active inference
provides the tools for developing a robust osteopathic person-centred care model [8,12,13].
This commentary paper builds upon our ongoing research and recently published work
to provide a synopsis of critical concepts from the literature on enactivism, predictive
processing, FEP , and active inference and a framework that can inform clinical reasoning
in osteopathy. Despite the growing support for the use of these theoretical frameworks in
clinical practice [6–8,11] we are acutely aware of the debate around the putative incompati-
bilities between enactivism and the FEP (e.g., DiPaolo et al., 2022 [14]) and the failure of
predictive processing as a uniﬁed theory of cognition [ 15]. Although we agree that one
should avoid applying these frameworks to clinical practice in an uncritical manner, there
is growing empirical evidence that, for example, predictive processing and active inference
have neurobiological correlations that are relevant to practitioners (e.g., Horing and Buchel,
2022 [16]). Active inference is also aligned with enactivist theories, which emphasize the
self-organization of behaviour and autopoietic interactions with the environment required
to enable living organisms to stay within appropriate bounds [17]. Moreover, an enactive–
ecological approach addresses the limitations and misapplications of the biopsychosocial
model, thus providing a “big picture” framework which enables practitioners to better
understand their patients’ complex and changing experiences [11]. We start with a brief
introduction to enactivism, predictive processing and active inference to provide a robust
framework for our take-home messages to osteopaths. This commentary paper primarily
aims to enable osteopaths to critically consider the value of this proposed framework in
appreciating the complexities of delivering person-centred care. We are aware that our
putative framework is mainly theoretical, thus requiring signiﬁcant empirical work to
develop further and validate an enactive–ecological model of osteopathic care.
Enactivism is a position in cognitive science that departs from the traditional represen-
tationalist views to consider that cognition arises from the dynamic interactions between
an embodied organism and its world [17]. Instead of focusing on the mind, the body or
a particular system, the enactive approach postulates that the whole individual and their
dynamic interactions in their environment enact their lived experiences. Through this lens,
cognition is an embodied and embedded activity that is extended in the environment [17].
Therefore, the relationship between physiological and lived experiences includes the per-
son’s relationships with their environments [2]. Consequently, enactivism departs from
the mind–body relationship to stress the mereological co-dependence between the mind,
body, and world, i.e., the physiological, experiential, and environmental/sociocultural
dimensions are all part of one person–world system [ 2]. Autopoiesis, autonomy, and
sense-making are the three central concepts deﬁning enactivism [18]. Crucially, all living
includes some form of cognition or sense-making.
Sense-making, an organism’s evaluative interaction with its environment, is one of
its critical concepts [ 2]. Sense-making activity discloses the world as a ﬁeld of relevant
affordances [2]. Affordances are opportunities for action provided to the organism by its
environment, e.g., hitting a ball with a bat, opening a door, or lifting a box [19,20]. As such,
altered sense-making discloses an altered ﬁeld of relevant affordances [2]. We argue that
sense-making is particularly relevant to osteopathy and health care. A recent interpretation
of pain supports our argument. Pain is conceptualized as a sense-making process that
occurs through a lived body that is dynamically coupled with the world we interact with
and shape [6].
Interestingly, in his early work, J. M. Littlejohn proposed an osteopathic model of
care grounded on four fundamental tenets: adaptation, function, environment, and immu-
nity [21]. In particular, he emphasized the body’s functional adaptation to its surrounding
environment [22]. Although some of these early concepts were lost in favour of causality-
based models of osteopathic care, we would argue that enactivism, FEP , predictive process-
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092 3 of 12
ing, and active inference provide opportunities to reinterpret Littlejohn’s early ideas in a
critical and evidence-informed way.
Predictive coding stems from the pioneering work of Hermann von Helmholtz [23]
and is predicated on the assumption that a complex system such as the brain has a genera-
tive or internal model for inferring the causes of incoming sensations. From this perspective,
the brain is a Bayesian device constantly making predictions about the causes of sensory
evidence, and these predictions cascade in a top-down fashion through the brain’s per-
ceptual hierarchy [20,24]. The bottom-up sensory signals which are conveyed to the brain
tend to maintain these top-down predictions linked to their causes [20,24]. The incoming
sensory signals function as ‘prediction errors’, registering the difference between what the
brain’s predictions are and what it receives at every level of processing. By modulating top-
down predictions and consequently suppressing bottom-up prediction errors, the brain’s
perceptual inferences maintain their grip on their causes in the world. Through this lens,
perception is viewed as an ongoing process of prediction error minimisation [20]. Over the
last few years, predictive coding has been incorporated into predictive processing, which
has become a signiﬁcant theory in cognitive science, neuroscience, and philosophy [ 25].
Predictive processing extends the scope of predictive coding to include the consequences
of action. Therefore, Bayesian belief updating is not strictly based on perceptual inference
but also considers active inference’s crucial role.
Predictive processing views the brain as a hierarchical, multilevel prediction machine,
and therefore what we feel, see, and hear is the brain’s best guess of the causes of its sensa-
tions [20,26]. Crucially, the embodied brain is a generative model of the body in the world
that is utilized to generate predictions of the sensory outcomes of the organism’s actions
in the world. Therefore, the embodied brain anticipates the distal causes of interoceptive,
exteroceptive, and proprioceptive signals to minimize prediction errors [ 26,27]. These
causes may involve, for example, motor or autonomic action or interoceptive sensations.
Perception is a proactive process; the brain does not passively react to the world. Instead, it
develops hypotheses and proactively tests them against sensory evidence [9]. Prediction
error minimization occurs by either perceptual or active inference. Perceptual inference
requires updating the generative model in response to prediction errors. In contrast, active
inference requires the agent to act on their world to generate predicted or anticipated
sensations [28].
Sense-making, autopoiesis, and adaptivity have been considered key concepts for
enactivists for interpreting how biological systems access their environments. Although
we endorse this position, it is also crucial to understand the life–mind continuity under the
FEP [29]. The FEP provides a formal analysis for autopoiesis and active inference properties.
Yet the FEP is enacted by all systems with a Markov blanket [ 29]. Given stable bound-
ary conditions, dynamical systems spontaneously self-organize to maximize evidence for
their enacted world model by minimizing their expected variational free energy [30]. To
minimize free energy or prediction errors, organisms must possess a generative model
for inferring how exteroceptive, interoceptive, and proprioceptive sensations are gener-
ated [3,20]. This generative model enables biological systems to narrow the gap between
predicted and incoming sensory signals by altering their sensory states via action or altering
predictions via perception [3,20,30].
Predictive coding and active inference can all be understood through the lens of FEP
as stemming from what it means to exist and be alive [ 20]. Autonomy is necessary for
describing living systems’ behaviours under the umbrella of Bayesian inference and free en-
ergy minimization [5,31]. Although the FEP endorses the hypothesis of the Bayesian brain,
anticipating and changing the consequences of actions and reducing bound entropy pro-
duction requires acting on the world; this differentiates the FEP from the predictive coding
framework [32]. Active inference illustrates the fundamental tendency of biological systems
to comply by generating, revising, and preserving inferences about the environment whilst
maintaining a distinction between themselves and their environment [5]. The biological
system is simply an actively maintained boundary—a Markov blanket—that through ac-
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092 4 of 12
tive inference differentiates the internal states from the external environment [ 30,33,34].
Because Markov blankets ease the internal–external state exchange, they imply action–
perception cycles as the biological system engages with the environment based on the
available affordances it has been given [34]. The concept of Markov blankets has been used
to illustrate the critical precondition for any adaptive system to have some separation and
autonomy from the environment [32]. However, Bruineberg and colleagues (2022) have
recently pointed out some inaccuracies in the literature regarding the use of the term [35].
The authors propose a distinction between ‘Pearl Blankets’—the original epistemic use
of Markov blankets as a tool for Bayesian inference, and ‘Friston Blankets’ to refer to the
metaphysical construct in the FEP framework to demarcate the physical boundary between
an agent and its environment [35].Although this is an important debate in the literature,
it is beyond the purpose of this paper, and we will therefore maintain the use of Markov
blankets to illustrate our arguments.
Crucially, active inference goes beyond the concept of the embodied brain, reducing the
uncertainty surrounding its sensory evidence via perceptual inference to consider the role of
an embodied agent actively and selectively sampling the world or generative model [36]. To
this end, active inference puts the action into perception considering planning as inference,
i.e., inferring what one would do next to resolve uncertainty regarding their lived world [37].
The human being is a complex, dynamic, open, system, and any change to one component
of one’s personhood can have an impact on their physical and mental health and well-
being. Thus, a critical understanding of the FEP and active inference is fundamental to our
clinical reasoning framework in osteopathy. The organism, its body, the embodied brain,
and the world constitute the generative model and will determine the probabilities of the
kind of actions one can engage in [ 31]. This can be interpreted through the conceptual
notion of an Umwelt, in which an organism’s world is itself a constituting and constraining
feature of its embodiment [31]. Active inference provides a formal theoretical framework
for understanding the constitutive coupling of the brain–body–environment [ 10,31,38].
Within this context, it is possible to argue that the generative model might be regarded as
a model that comprises the entire embodied organism, where the latter considers all the
living elements within and outside the human being [ 38]. Therefore, as a consequence,
active inference might be considered as shaping the organism’s (or agent’s) conscious and
lived experience [38]. This perspective is consistent with embodied–enactive approaches
and enables the dialectic between what an organism is (embodiment) and what it does
(enactment). As a result, it can be argued that active inference is enactive inference [ 39].
(En)active inference portrays how complex dynamical systems develop adaptive agency
independently [40]. Crucially, people do not simply try to make sense of their sensations;
they actively create their own sensoria [ 37]. Therefore, (En)active inference provides a
framework for comprehending health and illness and, potentially, providing person-centred
osteopathic care.
2. A Critical Evaluation of Osteopathic Models and How They Fit into This
Putative Framework
Enactivism, predictive processing, and active inference have implications for clini-
cal practice. In support of this thesis, Owens and colleagues proposed that bottom-up
interoceptive prediction errors may be a source of anxiety and may drive responses in
the autonomic, metacognitive, motor homeostatic, and allostatic systems [41]. Similarly,
Barrett and colleagues [42] argued that depression is the outcome of a brain insensitive to
prediction errors coupled with inefﬁcient energy regulation associated with intense suf-
fering and difﬁculties in participating in vigorous mental or physical activity. Treatments
aimed at re-categorizing prior beliefs provide a vital therapeutic intervention. On this
point, cognitive behavioural therapy enables individuals to develop new concepts that as
predictive signals alter the gain in prediction errors via the salience network. Over time,
this process may modify inputs, ultimately becoming the ‘empirical priors’ that agranular
limbic cortices use to initiate subsequent predictions [42]. From an enactivist perspective,
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092 5 of 12
De Haan proposed that mental health conditions such as depression should be viewed
as disorders of sense-making [ 43]. From this perspective, the therapeutic encounter en-
ables the recognition of rigid and inappropriate patterns of interaction and the practice of
alternative strategies for engaging with the world [8,43].
Apart from depression and anxiety, predictive processing and active inference are very
relevant to patients with, for example, persistent pain and kinesiophobia; protective mecha-
nisms may be associated with movements initiated to reduce prediction errors and conﬁrm
existing predictions (Figure 1). To this end, the purpose of an intervention would be to
cause positive surprise and a high prediction error that will violate existing predictions and
update the brain’s internal model (see Bohlen et al. [12], on this point). This can be achieved
using hands-on care, cognitive reassurance, appropriate language, and graded exposure
to movement and interoceptive sensations. We argue that these strategies can update the
brain’s internal model whilst reducing activity in regions including the amygdala (critical
concerning signal uncertainty) and achieving allostatic regulation (Figure 2). On this point,
we have recently proposed that from an active inference standpoint, the essence of touch in
osteopathy is the provision of sensory data to be (re)interpreted by a patient [44]. Practi-
tioners should weaken their patients’ pre-existing generative models through ﬂattening
sensory states, changing the sense of agency, and facilitating the redeployment of attention.
Therefore, a new robust generative model can be installed through inner communication
complemented with hands-on care as the sensory evidence for this new narrative [44].
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092 5 of 12 
 
 
may modify inputs, ultimately becoming the ‘empirical priors’ that agranular limbic cor-
tices use to initiate subsequent predictions [42]. From an enactivist perspective, De Haan 
proposed that mental health conditions such as depression should be viewed as disorders 
of sense-making [43]. From this perspective, the therapeutic encounter enables the recog-
nition of rigid and inappropri ate patterns of interaction and the practice of alternative 
strategies for engaging with the world [8,43]. 
Apart from depression and anxiety, predictive processing and active inference are 
very relevant to patients with, for example, persistent pain and kinesiophobia; protective 
mechanisms may be associated with movements initiated to reduce prediction errors and 
confirm existing predictions (Figure 1). To this end, the purpose of an intervention would 
be to cause positive surprise and a high prediction error that will violate existing predic-
tions and update the brain’s internal model (see Bohlen et al. [12], on this point). This can 
be achieved using hands-on care, cognitiv e reassurance, approp riate language, and 
graded exposure to movement and interoceptive sensations. We argue that these strate-
gies can update the brain’s internal model whilst reducing activity in regions including 
the amygdala (critical concerning signal uncert ainty) and achieving allostatic regulation 
(Figure 2). On this point, we have recently proposed that from an active inference stand-
point, the essence of touch in osteopathy is the provision of sensory data to be (re)inter-
preted by a patient [44]. Practitioners should  weaken their patients’ pre-existing genera-
tive models through flattening sensory states, changing the sense of agency, and facilitat-
ing the redeployment of attention. Therefore,  a new robust generative model can be in-
stalled through inner communication compleme nted with hands-on care as the sensory 
evidence for this new narrative [44]. 
 
Figure 1. The expectation of pain (prior) is confirmed by the movement (confirmation of prior) 
through the active inference. 
Figure 1. The expectation of pain (prior) is conﬁrmed by the movement (conﬁrmation of prior)
through the active inference.
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092 6 of 12
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092 6 of 12 
 
 
 
Figure 2. The expectation of pain (prior) is violated by feeling no pain during the movement, gen-
erating high prediction error and a new prior. This is argued to be the cycle established after a man-
ual osteopathic treatment. 
Here, we propose a model for clinical reasoning in osteopathy that fuses the profes-
sion’s conceptual basis with the enactivist, predictive processing, FEP, and active infer-
ence frameworks and evidence from the fields of interoception, allostatic regulation, and 
affective touch. Arguably, in osteopathy, the concepts of body-mind unity, adaptation, 
and self-regulation are aligned with the principles of sense-making and autopoiesis cen-
tral to enactivism [1]. Osteopathy should move further and over the concept of a therapy 
centred to the body, which is informed by, arguably, models of care, including the bio-
medical. Indeed, human behaviour and function are complex, individual, and difficult to 
predict. Therefore, osteopaths should evaluate their patients within an inconstant ecolog-
ical system [45]. Ultimately, health and disease should be interpreted within the person’s 
environment, which includes life and the way in which the person interacts with the ex-
ternal world [45,46]. 
The model enables practitioners to effectively evaluate their patients within a biopsy-
chosocial(existential) framework whilst considering how their embodied brains construct 
their internal models of disease, health, an d well-being. The model also enables practi-
tioners to implement treatment strategies underpinned by effective language and affective 
touch and integrated with cognitive reassurance; graded exposure to movement, exercise, 
and interoceptive sensations; and mindfulness-based strategies. From a clinical stand-
point, chronic pain treatment is an excellent example of the ecological–enactive and active 
inference paradigms: underpinni ng embodied action is pain, which reflects the body’s 
and the world’s uncertainty [47,48]. This ultimately alters interactions between organisms 
Figure 2. The expectation of pain (prior) is violated by feeling no pain during the movement,
generating high prediction error and a new prior. This is argued to be the cycle established after a
manual osteopathic treatment.
Here, we propose a model for clinical reasoning in osteopathy that fuses the profes-
sion’s conceptual basis with the enactivist, predictive processing, FEP , and active inference
frameworks and evidence from the ﬁelds of interoception, allostatic regulation, and af-
fective touch. Arguably, in osteopathy, the concepts of body-mind unity, adaptation, and
self-regulation are aligned with the principles of sense-making and autopoiesis central to en-
activism [1]. Osteopathy should move further and over the concept of a therapy centred to
the body, which is informed by, arguably, models of care, including the biomedical. Indeed,
human behaviour and function are complex, individual, and difﬁcult to predict. Therefore,
osteopaths should evaluate their patients within an inconstant ecological system [45]. Ulti-
mately, health and disease should be interpreted within the person’s environment, which
includes life and the way in which the person interacts with the external world [45,46].
The model enables practitioners to effectively evaluate their patients within a biopsy-
chosocial(existential) framework whilst considering how their embodied brains construct
their internal models of disease, health, and well-being. The model also enables practi-
tioners to implement treatment strategies underpinned by effective language and affective
touch and integrated with cognitive reassurance; graded exposure to movement, exercise,
and interoceptive sensations; and mindfulness-based strategies. From a clinical standpoint,
chronic pain treatment is an excellent example of the ecological–enactive and active in-
ference paradigms: underpinning embodied action is pain, which reﬂects the body’s and
the world’s uncertainty [47,48]. This ultimately alters interactions between organisms or
agents and their environments either temporarily, such as in acute pain, or permanently in
cases of chronic pain [49]. In subjects with chronic pain, other physical symptomatology,
and associated kinesiophobia, an osteopathic intervention would cause a positive surprise
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092 7 of 12
and a high precision-weighted prediction error that will violate existing predictions (for
example, fear of movement in lumbar ﬂexion) (Figure 2). This can be achieved through
incoming interoceptive, exteroceptive, or proprioceptive sensory sensations or by reframing
existing beliefs and expectations based on new information. Arguably, through repeated
steps of perceptual inference across the hierarchy, the therapeutic intervention updates the
brain’s internal generative model. This process is illustrated in Equation (1). It is essential
to highlight that the purpose of Equations (1) and (2) adapted from Hohwy (2020) [25] is
simply to illustrate the process of perceptual inference rather than for empirical purposes.
New prediction (“I can bend forwards with less pain”) = Old prediction (“lumbar ﬂexion increases my pain”) +
Osteopathic treatment (learning rate × Prediction error from interoceptive, exteroceptive and proprioceptive inputs) (1)
On occasion, patients may refer to sensations of ‘good pain’. In this context, high-
precision weighted predictions will indicate that the source of the noxious stimulation is
the osteopath; forecasts of pain can, therefore, be achieved without engaging low-level
motor reﬂexive responses. This will likely lead to allostatic changes in the form of updated
beliefs about the “safety” and tolerance of nociceptive signals arising from applying an
osteopathic technique (see Von Mohr and Fotopoulou [50], on this point). This process is
illustrated in Equation (2).
New prediction (“The treatment was uncomfortable, but I feel much better”) = Old prediction (“movement and touch are painful”) +
Osteopathic treatment delivered by a trusted practitioner − “I’m in safe hands”(learning rate × Prediction error
from interoceptive, exteroceptive and proprioceptive inputs and sense of safety)
(2)
We propose that osteopathic care be viewed as an interactive ritual that enables
sensations to be reinterpreted, attention redirected, and distracting stimuli attenuated and
ignored. Therefore, osteopaths must recognise patterns of interaction in their patients
that show inﬂexibility and inappropriateness; this will enable osteopaths to implement
therapeutic strategies that can help individuals interact with the environment, considering
their patients’ symptoms and personalities [50]. Therefore, the practice of osteopathy might
be conceived as participatory sense-making [43].
3. A Clinical Case Example
Consider the following scenario: a 48-year-old female with chronic neck, upper tho-
racic back, and epigastric pain; headaches; and sporadic abdominal discomfort. Aside from
that, she has a history of gastro-oesophageal reﬂux disease, anxiety-related problems, and
a ﬁbromatous uterus that was discovered accidentally. After seeing a variety of health
care professionals, including a cardiologist, gynaecologist, gastroenterologist, neurologists,
physiotherapists, and osteopaths, she decided to discontinue treatment due to the slight
improvement in her symptoms. Although she has received assurances from her doctors
that everything is ﬁne, she is concerned that she may have breast cancer or a heart condition.
She has been told that degenerative changes in her cervical spine cause her neck pain and
that there is nothing wrong with her heart or breasts. Following the clinical evaluation, the
osteopath arrives at the conclusion that the patient suffers from chronic non-speciﬁc neck
pain with likely central and peripheral nociplastic changes and maladaptive cognitions.
On examination, the clinician ﬁnds areas of protective muscle spasm in the neck and upper
back regions with associated allodynia and signs of fear of movement in her cervical spine.
In their examination, the clinician also ﬁnds evidence of a temporomandibular disorder
and generalised sensitivity to the palpation of her abdomen. Particularly relevant to this
scenario is the concept of cognitive immunisation [51]. Patients with persistent physical
symptoms like the one portrayed here are likely to develop dysfunctional expectations
about health and disease and become progressively immune to reassurance through cog-
nitive reappraisal [52]. From a predictive processing perspective, the process of cognitive
immunisation against disconﬁrmatory evidence and reassurance corresponds to too much
precision afforded to prior predictions [52]. Strong priors override benign bodily signals,
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092 8 of 12
making a person believe something serious is wrong with their body [ 52]. Therefore,
we argue that the purpose of a therapeutic intervention is to cause a positive surprise
and a high prediction error that will violate existing predictions and update the brain’s
generative model.
This scenario exempliﬁes the complexity that many osteopaths and other health care
practitioners must deal with in their daily clinical practice. The patient claims that she is
constantly conscious of her neck and chest pain. When we are in good health, the interac-
tion with the world generates sensorial pleasures through our embodied organisms, and
we do not have to think about them very much when we are sick [53]. As part of ﬁltering
and making sense of sensory input, the body is used by our brain to collect information
and give a meaning to it, making a contribution to our personhood and identity. As a result,
one could argue that brains are embodied, communicating with their environment via an
‘invisible’ body. Even when one’s body appears to be in good health and well-being, the
body typically ‘reappears’ when one is in pain or suffering from some form of dysfunc-
tion [54]. In this way, pain impacts the foundation that underpins one’s selfhood [53]. When
presenting a case of long-lasting pain and other physical symptomatology, it is critical to
note that the body, in addition to becoming ‘visible’, evolves into the focus of attention [55].
When an individual pays only partial attention to their body, it impairs their ability to
engage in environmental interaction, including with other people, in other words, their
sense of agency. Diseases develop into an agency loss, and the individual’s inability to
carry out goal-oriented behaviour in a predictable manner represents the start of their
transformation into a patient (or patientization) [45].
Considering the above-mentioned clinical case experiencing persistent physical symp-
toms, we could argue that the symptoms are not simply attributes of sensations but are
symptoms in and of themselves. Crucially, through the lens of active inference, patients
do not simply interpret their bodily sensations, they actively create their own sensoria [9].
Their explanations for what she is experiencing are the best explanations available at the
time. They result from meticulously constructed narratives spanning years of participation
with her own body and health care professionals. One’s pledge to the narrative that they
suffer from persistent pain and other physical symptoms is not based on the content of
their prior beliefs but rather on their commitment to the narrative. In contrast, their in-
ability to divert their attention away from the sensory evidence necessitates this type of
explanation [3]. The ability to ignore, attend away from, or selectively attenuate different
sources of sensory evidence is impaired in chronic pain sufferers. Chronic pain sufferers
lack precision in the context of selective attention, and therefore they cannot attenuate or
amplify sensations [3,9,56].
4. Final Remarks
Appropriate verbal and non-verbal communication, principally touch-based strate-
gies, lay the groundwork for developing trust, compliance, cooperation, and prosocial
communication [44,57]. A robust therapeutic alliance centred on cooperative communica-
tion and shared narratives and the appropriate and effective use of touch and hands-on
care enable patients to contextualize their lived experiences. Hands-on care is crucial
because it effectively communicates one’s cognitions and perceptions, provides context
and precision, establishes an interpersonal connection, and infers another’s mental states,
facilitating biobehavioural synchronization [58,59]. Active inference enables patients and
practitioners to disambiguate the mental state of each other [60]. Touch and hands-on care
enhance the therapeutic alliance, mental state alignment, and biobehavioural synchrony
between patient and practitioner. Therefore, the osteopath–patient dyad provides mental
state alignment and opportunities for ecological niche construction. The osteopath aims
to modify their patient’s symptoms and promote allostatic regulation during the process
of care. We argue that this elicits bidirectional reactions evoked by hands-on experience
and reinforced by communicating effectively [ 61,62]. Developing synchrony between
brains [57] and allostatic co-regulation [59,63,64] and thus consolidating interpersonal rela-
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092 9 of 12
tionships are arguably possible with osteopathic care characterized by a strong therapeutic
alliance [65]. Establishing biobehavioural synchrony is crucial since the intertwined Markov
blankets, with reciprocally forecasting sensory experiences produced by the osteopath and
patient, lay the foundation for a mutual narrative and epistemic trust, both required for the
dissolution of solid beliefs and priors.
Osteopathy is a form of care centred on the person, and as such, osteopaths need
to take their modus operandi away from a reliance on etiological models to critically ap-
praising the importance of appropriate forms of communication, the education of patients
and affective and cognitive reassurance to deliver psychologically informed osteopathic
care [8]. The psychologically informed approach to osteopathic care is bidirectional from
the perspective of (En)active inference: (1) when providing novel sensory signals, manual
therapy interventions inﬂuence the Bayesian inferences from lower to higher levels of
the neuronal hierarchy; (2) when updating the generative models, touch associated with
appropriate communication, adequate education of the patient, and reassurance modulate
top-down predictive processes [44]. As a result of the clinician’s narrative, sensory signals
generated by manual therapy interventions will be rapidly interpreted at the lower levels,
and possibly self-evidently, regarding the generative models being revised, leading to the
‘ﬂattening of sensory data’ [8]. The active inference cycle can be modulated by psycho-
logically informed osteopathic care, allowing for revised sense-making due to the patient
attending to proprioceptive, interoceptive, and exteroceptive signals, simultaneously modi-
fying the active inference cycle. Because of this, it is critical to both attenuate some forms of
attention that are orchestrated by the patient’s higher levels of their hierarchical generative
models and increase other forms of attention.
Drawing upon the enactivism and active inference framework, we can improve exist-
ing models of osteopathic care by evoking the mechanisms that underpin dyadic exchanges,
niche construction, the therapeutic alliance, and the outcomes of person-centred osteopa-
thy. Living organisms must ensure that they only visit their characteristic or expected
states to minimize the surprise of their sensory observations, thus maintaining an opti-
mal entropy [32]. Suppose a patient is experiencing chronic pain associated with various
psychosocial factors. As an ecological niche, the dyad between the osteopath and the
patient gives the two individuals with relevant affordances to promote adaptations and the
patient’s ability to regain their agency to undergo their activities of daily living, thus en-
hancing their health and well-being. Osteopaths should assist their patients in developing
a repertoire of attentional deployment that is signiﬁcantly greater than what is required to
reinterpret their interoceptive signals and enable them to regain their capacity to disregard
and reassess irrelevant signals to return to a more natural state of being able to render
things invisible when necessary. This should enable patients to regain control of their
bodies and explore alternative responses to relevant signals emanating from within them.
Clinical staff should use comforting, positive communication to help patients make mean-
ingful interpretations of sensory signals and, as a result, revise their generative models.
Therefore, psychologically informed osteopathic care can produce experiences similar to
mindfulness meditation that reduce the prominence given to high-level prediction errors
and, consequently, the top-down attentional focus on bottom-up sensory prediction errors,
thus minimizing free energy.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, F.C. and J.E.E.; resources, F.C. and J.E.E.; writing—original
draft preparation, F.C. and J.E.E.; writing—review and editing, F.C. and J.E.E. All authors have read
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092 10 of 12
References
1. Esteves, J.E.; Zegarra-Parodi, R.; van Dun, P .; Cerritelli, F.; Vaucher, P . Models and Theoretical Frameworks for Osteopathic
Care–A Critical View and Call for Updates and Research. Int. J. Osteopath. Med.2020, 35, 1–4. [CrossRef]
2. De Haan, S. Currently Available Models in Psychiatry. InEnactive Psychiatry; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2020;
pp. 16–45, ISBN 9781108426060.
3. Edwards, M.J.; Adams, R.A.; Brown, H.; Parees, I.; Friston, K.J. A Bayesian Account of “Hysteria”.Brain 2012, 135, 3495–3512.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Hechler, T.; Endres, D.; Thorwart, A. Why Harmless Sensations Might Hurt in Individuals with Chronic Pain: About Heightened
Prediction and Perception of Pain in the Mind. Front. Psychol.2016, 7, 1638. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Kiverstein, J.; Kirchhoff, M.D.; Thacker, M. An Embodied Predictive Processing Theory of Pain Experience. Rev. Phil. Psych.
2022, 1–26. [CrossRef]
6. Stilwell, P .; Harman, K. An Enactive Approach to Pain: Beyond the Biopsychosocial Model.Phenom. Cogn. Sci.2019, 18, 637–665.
[CrossRef]
7. Tabor, A.; Burr, C. Bayesian Learning Models of Pain: A Call to Action. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci.2019, 26, 54–61. [CrossRef]
8. Esteves, J.E.; Cerritelli, F.; Kim, J.; Friston, K.J. Osteopathic Care as (En)Active Inference: A Theoretical Framework for Developing
an Integrative Hypothesis in Osteopathy. Front. Psychol.2022, 13, 812926. [CrossRef]
9. Friston, K. The Free-Energy Principle: A Rough Guide to the Brain? Trends Cogn. Sci.2009, 13, 293–301. [CrossRef]
10. Bruineberg, J.; Kiverstein, J.; Rietveld, E. The Anticipating Brain Is Not a Scientist: The Free-Energy Principle from an Ecological-
Enactive Perspective. Synthese 2018, 195, 2417–2444. [CrossRef]
11. Cormack, B.; Stilwell, P .; Coninx, S.; Gibson, J. The Biopsychosocial Model Is Lost in Translation: From Misrepresentation to an
Enactive Modernization. Physiother. Theory Pract.2022, 1–16. [CrossRef]
12. Bohlen, L.; Shaw, R.; Cerritelli, F.; Esteves, J.E. Osteopathy and Mental Health: An Embodied, Predictive, and Interoceptive
Framework. Front. Psychol.2021, 12, 767005. [CrossRef]
13. Zegarra-Parodi, R.; Esteves, J.E.; Lunghi, C.; Baroni, F.; Draper-Rodi, J.; Cerritelli, F. The Legacy and Implications of the Body-
Mind-Spirit Osteopathic Tenet: A Discussion Paper Evaluating Its Clinical Relevance in Contemporary Osteopathic Care. Int. J.
Osteopath. Med.2021, 41, 57–65. [CrossRef]
14. Di Paolo, E.; Thompson, E.; Beer, R. Laying down a Forking Path: Tensions between Enaction and the Free Energy Principle.
Philos. Mind Sci.2022, 3, 1–39. [CrossRef]
15. Litwin, P .; Miłkowski, M. Uniﬁcation by Fiat: Arrested Development of Predictive Processing. Cogn. Sci. 2020, 44, e12867.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Horing, B.; Büchel, C. The Human Insula Processes Both Modality-Independent and Pain-Selective Learning Signals. PLoS Biol.
2022, 20, e3001540. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Arandia, I.R.; Di Paolo, E.A. Placebo From an Enactive Perspective. Front. Psychol.2021, 12, 660118. [CrossRef]
18. De Jaegher, H.; Di Paolo, E. Participatory Sense-Making: An Enactive Approach to Social Cognition. Phenom. Cogn. Sci.2007,
6, 485–507. [CrossRef]
19. Tschacher, W.; Giersch, A.; Friston, K. Embodiment and Schizophrenia: A Review of Implications and Applications.Schizophr.
Bull. 2017, 43, 745–753. [CrossRef]
20. Seth, A. Being You: A New Science of Consciousness; Penguin: New York, NY, USA, 2021; ISBN 1524742872.
21. Gevitz, N. The DO’s: Osteopathic Medicine in America, 1st ed.; The Johns Hopkins University Press: Baltimore, MD, USA, 1982.
22. Littlejohn, J.M. Principles of Osteopathy; Self-published: Kirksville, MO, USA, 1905.
23. Von Helmholtz, H. Handbuch Der Physiologischen Optik; Voss: Leipzig, Germany, 1867.
24. Smith, R.; Badcock, P .; Friston, K.J. Recent Advances in the Application of Predictive Coding and Active Inference Models within
Clinical Neuroscience. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci.2021, 75, 3–13. [CrossRef]
25. Hohwy, J. New Directions in Predictive Processing. Mind Lang.2020, 35, 209–223. [CrossRef]
26. Clark, A. Whatever next? Predictive Brains, Situated Agents, and the Future of Cognitive Science. Behav. Brain Sci. 2013,
36, 181–204. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Clark, A. Embodied Prediction. Open MIND2015, 7, 1–21. [CrossRef]
28. Venter, E. Toward an Embodied, Embedded Predictive Processing Account.Front. Psychol.2021, 12, 543076. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Wiese, W.; Friston, K.J. The Neural Correlates of Consciousness under the Free Energy Principle: From Computational Correlates
to Computational Explanation. Philos. Mind Sci.2021, 2. [CrossRef]
30. Friston, K.; Schwartenbeck, P .; FitzGerald, T.; Moutoussis, M.; Behrens, T.; Dolan, R.J. The Anatomy of Choice: Active Inference
and Agency. Front. Hum. Neurosci.2013, 7, 598. [CrossRef]
31. Allen, M.; Friston, K.J. From Cognitivism to Autopoiesis: Towards a Computational Framework for the Embodied Mind. Synthese
2018, 195, 2459–2482. [CrossRef]
32. Friston, K.J.; Fortier, M.; Friedman, D.A. Of Woodlice and Men: A Bayesian Account of Cognition, Life and Consciousness. An
Interview with Karl Friston. ALIUS Bull.2018, 2, 17–43.
33. Hohwy, J. The Self-Evidencing Brain. Noûs 2016, 50, 259–285. [CrossRef]
34. Kiverstein, J. Free Energy and the Self: An Ecological–Enactive Interpretation. Topoi 2020, 39, 559–574. [CrossRef]
35. Bruineberg, J.; Dolega, K.; Dewhurst, J.; Baltieri, M. The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets.Behav. Brain Sci.2021, 1–63. [CrossRef]
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092 11 of 12
36. Ramstead, M.J.D.; Constant, A.; Badcock, P .B.; Friston, K.J. Variational Ecology and the Physics of Sentient Systems.Phys. Life Rev.
2019, 31, 188–205. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Parr, T.; Pezzulo, G.; Friston, K.J. Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior; The MIT Press: Cambridge,
MA, USA, 2022; ISBN 9780262045353.
38. Kirchhoff, M.D.; Kiverstein, J. Extended Consciousness and Predictive Processing: A Third Wave View; Routledge, Taylor & Francis
Group: New York, NY, USA, 2019; ISBN 978-1-315-15042-0.
39. Ramstead, M.J.D.; Friston, K.J.; Hipólito, I. Is the Free-Energy Principle a Formal Theory of Semantics? From Variational Density
Dynamics to Neural and Phenotypic Representations. Entropy 2020, 22, 889. [CrossRef]
40. Ramstead, M.J.; Kirchhoff, M.D.; Friston, K.J. A Tale of Two Densities: Active Inference Is Enactive Inference. Adapt. Behav.2020,
28, 225–239. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41. Owens, A.P .; Allen, M.; Ondobaka, S.; Friston, K.J. Interoceptive Inference: From Computational Neuroscience to Clinic.Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev.2018, 90, 174–183. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Barrett, L.F. The Theory of Constructed Emotion: An Active Inference Account of Interoception and Categorization. Soc. Cogn
Affect. Neurosci.2017, 12, 1–23. [CrossRef]
43. De Haan, S. An Enactive Approach to Psychiatry. Philos. Psychiatry Psychol.2020, 27, 3–25. [CrossRef]
44. Kim, J.; Esteves, J.E.; Cerritelli, F.; Friston, K.J. An Active Inference Account of Touch and Verbal Communication in Therapy.
Front. Psychol.2022, 13, 17. [CrossRef]
45. Tyreman, S. An Anthropo-Ecological Narrative. In Textbook of Osteopathic Medicine; Mayer, J., Standen, C., Eds.; Elsevier: Munich,
Germany, 2018.
46. Hoover, H. A Hopeful Road Ahead for Osteopathy. J. Am. Osteopath. Assoc.1963, 62, 608–616.
47. Tabor, A.; Keogh, E.; Eccleston, C. Embodied Pain—Negotiating the Boundaries of Possible Action. P AIN2017, 158, 1007–1011.
[CrossRef]
48. Miyahara, K. Enactive Pain and Its Sociocultural Embeddedness. Phenom. Cogn. Sci.2021, 20, 871–886. [CrossRef]
49. Coninx, S.; Stilwell, P . Pain and the Field of Affordances: An Enactive Approach to Acute and Chronic Pain.Synthese 2021, 199,
7835–7863. [CrossRef]
50. Von Mohr, M.; Fotopoulou, A. Of Interoception: Active and Social Inference of Pain and Pleasure On. In The Interoceptive MIND:
From Homeostasis to Awareness; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2018.
51. Rief, W.; Glombiewski, J.A.; Gollwitzer, M.; Schubö, A.; Schwarting, R.; Thorwart, A. Expectancies as Core Features of Mental
Disorders. Curr. Opin. Psychiatry2015, 28, 378–385. [CrossRef]
52. Kube, T.; Rozenkrantz, L.; Rief, W.; Barsky, A. Understanding Persistent Physical Symptoms: Conceptual Integration of
Psychological Expectation Models and Predictive Processing Accounts. Clin. Psychol. Rev.2020, 76, 101829. [CrossRef]
53. Arika, N. The Interoceptive Turn is Maturing as a Rich Science of Selfhood. 2019. Available online: https://aeon.co/essays/the-
interoceptive-turn-is-maturing-as-a-rich-science-of-selfhood (accessed on 23 April 2022).
54. Leder, D. The Absent Body; University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL, USA, 1990; ISBN 9780226469997.
55. Van den Bergh, O.; Witthöft, M.; Petersen, S.; Brown, R.J. Symptoms and the Body: Taking the Inferential Leap. Neurosci. Biobehav.
Rev. 2017, 74, 185–203. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Pareés, I.; Brown, H.; Nuruki, A.; Adams, R.A.; Davare, M.; Bhatia, K.P .; Friston, K.; Edwards, M.J. Loss of Sensory Attenuation in
Patients with Functional (Psychogenic) Movement Disorders. Brain 2014, 137, 2916–2921. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57. Morrison, I.; Löken, L.S.; Olausson, H. The Skin as a Social Organ. Exp. Brain Res.2010, 204, 305–314. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Hertenstein, M.J.; Keltner, D.; App, B.; Bulleit, B.A.; Jaskolka, A.R. Touch Communicates Distinct Emotions. Emotion 2006,
6, 528–533. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59. McParlin, Z.; Cerritelli, F.; Friston, K.J.; Esteves, J.E. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference: The Role of Therapeutic Touch and
Synchrony. Front. Psychol.2022, 13, 783694. [CrossRef]
60. Vasil, J.; Badcock, P .B.; Constant, A.; Friston, K.; Ramstead, M.J.D. A World Unto Itself: Human Communication as Active
Inference. Front. Psychol.2020, 11, 417. [CrossRef]
61. Ackerley, R.; Backlund Wasling, H.; Liljencrantz, J.; Olausson, H.; Johnson, R.D.; Wessberg, J. Human C-Tactile Afferents Are
Tuned to the Temperature of a Skin-Stroking Caress.J. Neurosci.2014, 34, 2879–2883. [CrossRef]
62. Song, Y.; Su, Q.; Yang, Q.; Zhao, R.; Yin, G.; Qin, W.; Iannetti, G.D.; Yu, C.; Liang, M. Feedforward and Feedback Pathways of
Nociceptive and Tactile Processing in Human Somatosensory System: A Study of Dynamic Causal Modeling of FMRI Data.
NeuroImage 2021, 234, 117957. [CrossRef]
63. Atzil-Slonim, D.; Tschacher, W. Dynamic Dyadic Processes in Psychotherapy: Introduction to a Special Section.Psychother. Res.
2020, 30, 555–557. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1092 12 of 12
64. Nguyen, T.; Abney, D.H.; Salamander, D.; Bertenthal, B.I.; Hoehl, S. Proximity and Touch Are Associated with Neural but Not
Physiological Synchrony in Naturalistic Mother-Infant Interactions. NeuroImage 2021, 244, 118599. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Shamay-Tsoory, S.G.; Saporta, N.; Marton-Alper, I.Z.; Gvirts, H.Z. Herding Brains: A Core Neural Mechanism for Social
Alignment. Trends Cogn. Sci.2019, 23, 174–186. [CrossRef] [PubMed]