fpsyg-10-02267 October 3, 2019 Time: 18:1 # 1
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 04 October 2019
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02267
Edited by:
Christoph Mathys,
International School for Advanced
Studies (SISSA), Italy
Reviewed by:
Karl Friston,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Gerd Thomas Waldhauser,
Ruhr University Bochum, Germany
*Correspondence:
D. Eric Chamberlin
Eric@ChamberlinNeuroscience.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Psychoanalysis
and Neuropsychoanalysis,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 10 July 2019
Accepted: 23 September 2019
Published: 04 October 2019
Citation:
Chamberlin DE (2019) The
Predictive Processing Model
of EMDR. Front. Psychol. 10:2267.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02267
The Predictive Processing Model of
EMDR
D. Eric Chamberlin*
Chamberlin Applied Neuroscience, Glastonbury, CT, United States
Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing Therapy (EMDR) is an effective
treatment for Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). The Adaptive Information
Processing Model (AIP) guides the development and practice of EMDR. The AIP
postulates inadequately processed memory as the foundation of PTSD pathology.
Predictive Processing postulates that the primary function of the brain is prediction that
serves to anticipate the next moment of experience in order to resist the dissipative
force of entropy thus facilitating continued survival. Memory is the primary substrate of
prediction, and is optimized by an ongoing process of precision weighted prediction
error minimization that reﬁnes prediction by updating the memories on which it is
based. The Predictive Processing model of EMDR postulates that EMDR facilitates the
predictive processing of traumatic memory by overcoming the bias against exploration
and evidence accumulation. The EMDR protocol brings the traumatic memory into
an active state of re-experiencing. Defensive responding and/or low sensory precision
preclude evidence accumulation to test the predictions of the traumatic memory in
the present. Sets of therapist guided eye movements repeatedly challenge the bias
against evidence accumulation and compel sensory sampling of the benign present.
Eye movements reset the theta rhythm organizing the ﬂow of information through the
brain, facilitating the deployment of both overt and covert attention, and the mnemonic
search for associations. Sampling of sensation does not support the predictions of the
traumatic memory resulting in prediction error that the brain then attempts to minimize.
The net result is a restoration of the integrity of the rhythmic deployment of attention,
a recalibration of sensory precision, and the updating (reconsolidation) of the traumatic
memory. Thus one prediction of the model is a decrease in Attention Bias Variability, a
core dysfunction in PTSD, following successful treatment with EMDR.
Keywords: psychological trauma (PTSD), Free Energy Principle, predictive processing, EMDR, memory
reconsolidation, physiological mechanism
INTRODUCTION
The Adaptive Information Processing Model (AIP) guides the development and practice of Eye
Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing Therapy (EMDR) used in the treatment of Post-
traumatic Stress Disorder. The AIP hypothesizes that “dysfunctionally stored memory” serves as
the foundation of post-traumatic psychopathology (Shapiro, 2001). Furthermore “there is a system
inherent in all of us that is physiologically geared to process information to a state of mental
health. . . by means of this system, negative emotions are relieved, and learning takes place, is
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 October 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2267
fpsyg-10-02267 October 3, 2019 Time: 18:1 # 2
Chamberlin Predictive Processing Model of EMDR
appropriately integrated, and is available for future use” (Shapiro,
2018). EMDR is posited to exert its therapeutic eﬀects through
targeted information processing of “dysfunctionally stored
memory” (Solomon and Shapiro, 2008; Shapiro and Laliotis,
2011; Shapiro, 2018).
The clinical eﬀectiveness of EMDR has been well-established
(Rodenburg et al., 2009; Bisson et al., 2013; Jeﬀries and Davis,
2013; Watts et al., 2013). However the proposed neurobiological
mechanisms of EMDR have yet to oﬀer a model capable
of catalyzing robust targeted biological research (Bergmann,
2010). To wit, in a recent review Landin-Romero et al. (2018)
concluded, “the current understanding of the mechanisms of
action underlying EMDR is similar to the parable of the Blind
Men and the Elephant in that there is no agreed deﬁnition of
what the candidate mechanisms are (i.e., eye movements, bilateral
stimulation, dual attention, etc.) and how these mechanisms can
be measured or demonstrated.” The goal of this paper is to
try to remedy this situation through application of Predictive
Processing to EMDR.
THE FREE ENERGY PRINCIPLE –
FOUNDATION OF PREDICTIVE
PROCESSING
Predictive Processing is a corollary of the Free Energy Principle
as developed by Friston et al. (2006) and Friston (2009). The
Free Energy Principle has its roots in statistical physics as an
information isomorph of the second law of thermodynamics
(Clark, 2013c). Living requires energy and information to
maintain organization and resist the dispersive forces of entropy.
For humans this requires statistical processing that minimizes
uncertainty about the world, despite not having direct access
to the world. As postulated by the Free Energy Principle, this
is accomplished through a generative model that is constantly
updated to reﬂect current conditions (Friston et al., 2006). The
existence and updating of a generative model is where the
Predictive Processing story begins.
PREDICTIVE PROCESSING
The activity of “boot strapping” increasingly complex models
of the world based on probabilistic inference is known as
Predictive Processing (Clark, 2013c). From the perspective
of Predictive Processing the main function of the brain is
to predict its own immediate experience, i.e., the patterns
of ﬁring neurons that will occur next. To achieve this
goal there is a relentless focus on reducing the errors of
its predictions so as to “get it right” in the future. This
process is known as Prediction Error Minimization and utilizes
sensation as feedback on the accuracy of its predictions. The
excitement surrounding Predictive Processing in contemporary
neuroscience stems from the promise of being able to explain
a wide range of cognitive activities including perception,
attention, learning, and action with a single conceptually simple
mechanism grounded in physiologically plausible computation
(Friston, 2009; Hohwy, 2013). Recently this paradigm has been
applied to Psychotherapy (Holmes and Nolte, 2019).
THE PREDICTIVE PROCESSING MODEL
OF EMDR
The Predictive Processing Model of EMDR focuses on the role
of memory as the principle substrate for predictions that guide
behavior (Bar, 2009; Buckner, 2010). To minimize uncertainty,
resist entropy, and ensure survival the brain is constantly
making predictions, and then using sensation as feedback to
test its predictions (Clark, 2013c). When there is a mismatch
between what is predicted and what is currently sensed, the
brain registers a “prediction error” (Hohwy, 2013). In response
the brain may update the memory through the process of
Memory Reconsolidation (Pedreira et al., 2004; Dudai, 2006,
2009). The goal of updating the memory is to minimize the (long-
term average of) prediction error thus reducing uncertainty
and resulting in more successful behavior in the future. The
dysfunctionally stored memories postulated by the AIP make
for poor predictions and result in the suboptimal behavior
characteristic of PTSD. Thus The Predictive Processing Model
of EMDR attempts to explain the biological basis of “the system
inherent in all of us that is physiologically geared to process
information to a state of mental health” postulated by the AIP
and activated by EMDR.
Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing Therapy
is an ideal lens through which to view this model as it is “a
comprehensive psychotherapy compatible with all theoretical
orientations, ” and has well-delineated clinical interventions
(Shapiro and Laliotis, 2011; Shapiro, 2018). In addition the
inclusion of the therapeutic element of eye movements aﬀords the
opportunity to appreciate the powerful role that eye movements
play in network and mnemonic function (Johansson and
Johansson, 2014; Vernet et al., 2014).
PERCEPTION AS INFERENCE
Predictive Processing has its roots in the work of German
physician and physicist Herman von Helmholtz (Friston et al.,
2006). Helmholtz recognized that incoming sensory data are
ambiguous (Helmholtz, 1867). For a given sensation there are
multiple potential causes in the world. For example, an orange
scent could be caused by orange soda, air freshener, or an
actual orange. And contrary to common sense, we do not have
direct access to the world. Consider vision. Light does not
enter the brain. The inside of the skull is dark. Instead the
retina converts photons of light into the ﬁring of neurons. In
fact every sensory receptor, from vision, to touch, to smell,
has the same type of output. This is true for the interoceptive
senses such as proprioception, hunger, and thirst as well. In
our experience of the world, all the brain has to work with are
patterns of ﬁring neurons. As Immanuel Kant suggested, all we
can know is the “phenomenon, ” that is the eﬀect of the world
upon us, i.e., patterns of ﬁring neurons. We can never know
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 October 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2267
fpsyg-10-02267 October 3, 2019 Time: 18:1 # 3
Chamberlin Predictive Processing Model of EMDR
“the thing in itself ” that is, the actual causes in the world of the
eﬀects we experience (Kant, 1781). With this observation Kant
anticipated the Markov Blanket, a concept central to Predictive
Processing. The Markov blanket is essentially the boundary
between a system, and everything else that is not that system,
expressed in mathematical terms (Yuﬁk and Friston, 2016). Given
the ambiguity of sensory data and the impossibility of knowing
“the thing in itself ” Helmholtz concluded that perception is an
act of unconscious inference. We cannot know directly what lies
on the other side of the Markov blanket (i.e., sensory boundary)
that is constituted by our sensory epithelia. When we perceive,
the brain is making a guess about the state of the world. This
process is automatic, rapid, and unconscious (Tenenbaum et al.,
2011). As a result we are unaware that a sophisticated process has
occurred. We are only aware of the product, what the brain has
calculated is the most likely cause, the best guess. However we do
not experience this as a probability or a guess, but rather as a fact
(Dehaene and Changeux, 2011; Hohwy, 2013) “I see an orange.”
Helmholtz’ hypothesis of perception as inference has
signiﬁcant implications for brain function. If perception is an act
of inference, the brain must have information that is used as the
basis for inference. That is, it must have a model of the world,
a priori, before it encounters the world. Dreaming during Rapid
Eye Movement (REM) sleep illustrates the ability of the brain
to generate perceptual hypotheses in the absence of any sensory
data, an a priori model (Hobson et al., 2014). In the parlance
of predictive processing this is called a prior probability or
“prior” based on Bayes Theorem (Geisler and Diehl, 2003). Prior
probability is the likelihood of a proposition before considering
empirical data from the senses. But where does such a prior
probability or model come from?
HARDWIRED MODELS
The models present at birth appear to be hardwired (Ullman
et al., 2012). As suggested by Kant, in order for humans to
be able to make sense of the world we assume that experience
unfolds in extended space, over time, with causes and eﬀects
(Kant, 1781). In other words the hardwired model we begin
life with contains notions of space, time and causality. Friston
has suggested that hardwired models are a function of the
type of organism, including its particular sensory receptors
and expected environment. Biological systems have a model
implicit in their structure, and sample the world so as to fulﬁll
their expectations (Friston et al., 2006). Fish “expect” to be
surrounded by water from which they extract oxygen. Humans
“expect” to be surrounded by air. Such “proto-concepts” form the
scaﬀolding upon which patterns of ﬁring neurons resulting from
experience give rise to more sophisticated models of the world
(Ullman, 2019).
EVOLUTION OF MODELS
Following birth humans “boot strap” increasingly complex
models of the world based on experience. Prior probabilities
present at birth are modiﬁed by experience into posterior
probabilities. For example, starting with no knowledge of
language, infants learn language. Research is beginning
to deconstruct this process through the lens of predictive
processing. One of the ﬁrst tasks of an infant learning language
is to parse a stream of syllables into discrete words. Based on
patterns of ﬁring neurons from the cochlea, the infant identiﬁes
some combinations of sounds as occurring more frequently
together than others. Given 2 min of exposure, 8 month old
infants can separate the syllables Pre-tty-ba-by into the separate
words of pretty, and baby (Saﬀran et al., 1996). The syllables
pre-tty occur more frequently together in natural speech than
the syllables found in the middle of the stream, tty-ba. Similarly
the syllables ba-by occur more frequently together than tty-ba.
The infant’s best guess based on statistical computations about
the patterns of ﬁring neurons that it experiences is that “pretty”
is a discrete word, and that “baby” is a discrete word. A prior
probability that speech sounds that occur in particular patterns
have signiﬁcance, becomes a posterior probability that “pretty”
and “baby” are such patterns. This empirically informed “best
guess” then becomes incorporated into the infant’s memory and
model of language.
PREDICTIVE PROCESSING IMPLIES A
PROACTIVE BRAIN
It is important to underscore that from the contemporary
perspective the brain is not simply the passive recipient of
sensation that is then used to build a model of the world.
To the contrary, the brain is proactive (Raichle, 2010). This is
captured in Gregory’s conception of perceptions as hypotheses
(Gregory, 1980). From the perspective of predictive processing
the brain has a model of the world before it encounters the
world. It uses its model to try to predict what it will experience
next in its patterns of ﬁring neurons. Action is taken to sample
sensation in a manner that tests the hypothesis (Clark, 2013a).
To the extent that the prediction about the state of the world is
supported by the sampled sensory data, further processing of the
sensation is suppressed as it does not contain useful information
(Blakemore et al., 2000). If the prediction is not supported,
the resulting prediction error will drive further processing of
the sensation. In pursuing the brain’s intransigent survival
imperative of minimizing prediction error the brain has two main
approaches; namely, action and perception (Friston, 2009). With
action it can sample the world diﬀerently until sampled sensation
matches prediction, or it can revise its model. That is, it can
update its “prior” to a reality calibrated posterior belief.
PERCEPTUAL INFERENCE-CYCLES OF
SEARCHING THE WORLD AND
SEARCHING MEMORY
Incoming sensation acts as a retrieval cue for memory (Tulving
and Schacter, 1990). For example searching the world with the
eyes imports coarse global properties of an object in the form
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 October 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2267
fpsyg-10-02267 October 3, 2019 Time: 18:1 # 4
Chamberlin Predictive Processing Model of EMDR
of patterns of ﬁring neurons. Such patterns are believed to
trigger an internal hippocampal mediated search that attempts
to answer the question “what is this like?” (Bar and Neta, 2008).
From this perspective, object recognition is a matching task.
An analogy representing the closest familiar representation in
memory is selected by the prefrontal cortex from a matrix of
possibilities with diﬀering probabilities (Hakonen et al., 2017).
Low probability analogies are suppressed (Depue, 2012). The
selected analogy is itself connected to a web of associations.
Taken together these activated memory networks correspond
to the brain’s “best guess” about current reality and what to
expect next (Bar, 2009). The brain then tests its prediction by
searching the world with saccadic eye movements (Friston et al.,
2012). Speciﬁcally Friston asserts “ . . .saccadic eye movements
are optimal experiments, in which data are gathered to test
hypotheses or beliefs . . .” (Friston, 2012). The data from these
eye movements will either support or refute the prediction. If
the visual search results do not support the prediction, the brain
may attempt to search memory for a new “best guess.” This
in turn engenders a new visual search to test the new “best
guess.” Searching the world alternates with searching memory
in a constant ongoing ﬂux of processing (Richter et al., 2015).
This cycle of sampling, matching from memory, prediction, and
further sampling continues throughout life as the brain attempts
to navigate the endless uncertainty of incoming sensation by
minimizing the errors of its predictions (Clark, 2016).
EYE MOVEMENTS AND HIPPOCAMPUS
FORM AN INTEGRATED SEARCH
SYSTEM
Perceptual inference as described reﬂects a process that requires
tight coordination between the oculomotor system that controls
the movement of the eyes, and the hippocampal search
of memory. Converging evidence leads to the conclusion
that these two systems are functionally and anatomically
coupled (Shen et al., 2016). The nature of this relationship
is further illuminated by consideration of the functions of
the hippocampus.
THE HIPPOCAMPUS NAVIGATES
INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL SPACE
The role of the hippocampus in memory function was ﬁrst
described in Scoville and Milner (1957). Subsequently, it was
found to play an important role in spatial navigation (O’Keefe
and Dostrovsky, 1971). More recently, these two apparently
distinct functions have been reconciled through identiﬁcation
of a common underlying mechanism (Buzsaki and Moser,
2013). A leading theory of hippocampal function posits that the
hippocampus acts to index the locations in the cortex of the
disparate elements of memory which when co-activated confer
the experience of remembering (Teyler and Rudy, 2007). In other
words the hippocampus knows where in the cortex to ﬁnd the
smell, the sound, the visual image, etc. of an experience allowing
reconstruction of an episodic memory (Schacter and Addis,
2007). See Figure 1. In eﬀect the hippocampus maps the physical
space inside the brain that gives rise to memories (Bellmund
et al., 2018). Similarly the hippocampus maps the disparate
landmarks in the physical space outside the brain as it performs
its role in navigation in the world. It has been argued that the
computational properties of the hippocampus are particularly
well-suited to execute this type navigation which is essentially the
same whether one is searching the world or searching memory
(Buzsaki and Moser, 2013).
THETA RHYTHM KEEPS INFORMATION
FLOW ORGANIZED
Consider a walk in the park. Crude visual input triggers a
hippocampal mediated memory search and retrieval of the best
guess regarding current location. Based on the best guess of
current location, the brain predicts the next landmark it will
FIGURE 1 |fMRI derived image of successful episodic memory recall showing hippocampal (blue) mediated “retrieval assembly” of cortical regions containing the
sensory and motor elements of the memory. Adapted from Geib et al. (2017) and adapted with permission.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 October 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2267
fpsyg-10-02267 October 3, 2019 Time: 18:1 # 5
Chamberlin Predictive Processing Model of EMDR
encounter using memory (Eichenbaum, 2017). It then tests its
prediction by sampling the world with saccadic eye movements
(Friston et al., 2012; Parr and Friston, 2017; Stefanics et al., 2018;
Smout et al., 2019). In order to execute these cycles the brain must
be able to maintain the distinction between new information
coming in (encoding) and information already stored in the brain
(retrieval). In other words, it must not confuse the monument
that is currently seen, with the concession stand that it predicts
it will see next based on memory. Recent research suggests that
the hippocampal theta rhythm is crucial in organizing the ﬂow
of information through the neural circuits responsible for the
encoding and retrieval of episodic memory (Hasselmo and Stern,
2014; Siegle and Wilson, 2014).
THETA RHYTHM CORRELATES WITH
MEMORY PERFORMANCE
The theta rhythm has been conceived of as “the navigation
rhythm through both physical and mnemonic space, facilitating
the formation of maps and episodic/semantic memories”
(Buzsaki, 2005). More generally theta rhythms promote
coordination across distributed brain areas during diﬀerent types
of information processing (Colgin, 2013). Such coordination of
disparate regions including the hippocampus and the prefrontal
cortex is critical in being able to retrieve episodic memories
(Preston and Eichenbaum, 2013; Geib et al., 2017). Recently,
theta rhythm synchronization of hippocampal and prefrontal
regions by external stimulation has been shown to transiently
restore working memory function in older adults (Reinhart
and Nguyen, 2019). The implication is that loss of theta
synchronization plays an important role in the deterioration of
working memory with age. Given that attention and working
memory are the most severely compromised neurocognitive
functions in PTSD (Scott et al., 2015), the possibility arises
that enhanced theta synchronization might improve memory
function in PTSD as well.
EYE MOVEMENTS RE-SET THETA
RHYTHMS
The ability to import sensory information is highly dependent on
the motor rhythms used to acquire that information (Schroeder
et al., 2010). While the eyes are moving during a saccade, visual
input to the brain is suppressed (Bremmer et al., 2009). We
don’t perceive this because the brain continues to generate its
prediction of the world and ﬁlls in the gap. If suppression
did not occur, our vision would be like a rapidly panning
video camera blurring the image every time the eyes moved.
In addition such “sensory attenuation” is necessary to keep
incoming sensation separated from brain generated prediction
(Brown et al., 2013). When the eyes stop moving there is a period
of ﬁxation during which data is acquired (Rajkai et al., 2008).
It is primarily during ﬁxation that sensation is taken in to the
visual system (Wurtz, 2008; Crevecoeur and Kording, 2017). As
previously discussed, organizing the incoming and outgoing ﬂow
of information through the hippocampus is essential. It appears
that saccadic eye movements play a critical role in this regard
by resetting the theta rhythm and thus synchronizing the ﬂow
of incoming information through disparate regions including the
hippocampus and prefrontal cortex in processing experience and
memory (Jutras et al., 2013; Meister and Buﬀalo, 2016).
SUMMARY OF PERCEPTUAL
INFERENCE
Lacking direct experience of the world perception is an act of
inference that utilizes raw sensory data to search memory to
ﬁnd the statistically most likely “best guess” about current reality.
The best guess is then tested with saccadic eye movements that
sample the world obtaining new data that either support or
refute the best guess prediction about the state of the world.
The cycling of incoming sensation and outgoing prediction based
on memory is perpetual while awake. As part of an integrated
search system saccadic eye movements reset the theta rhythm
synchronizing the ﬂow of incoming and outgoing information
from the hippocampus through other participating structures
including the prefrontal cortex. Thus disparate regions are
coordinated optimizing the processing of current experience.
CROSS REFERENCING SENSORY DATA
REDUCES UNCERTAINTY
The challenge of perceptual inference about the state of the
world becomes more tractable when data from multiple senses
is combined into the computations. For example smell oﬀers
probabilities of an orange soda, air freshener, or an actual orange.
Vision suggests an orange colored ball, or an orange. Touch
suggests a tomato, an apple, or an orange. When the statistical
probabilities suggested by each sense are integrated, the most
likely single cause of these sensations is an orange. In other words
cross-referencing by the senses rapidly reduces the possibilities to
the most likely cause.
MEMORY FOR PREDICTION
The clinical relevance of Predictive Processing to psychological
trauma and its resolution becomes apparent recognizing that
memory is the principle substrate of prediction (Bar, 2009;
Buckner, 2010). In fact it can be argued that the raison
d’etre of memory at all levels in the brain is to facilitate
Predictive Processing (Sterling, 2012). The AIP model postulates
“dysfunctionally stored memories” as the foundation of post-
traumatic psychopathology. If the core function of the brain is
prediction based on memory, it is easy to imagine grossly sub-
optimal behavior resulting from such compromised memories.
For example when a truck backﬁres in suburbia, it may trigger a
veteran’s dysfunctionally stored memory so he predicts incoming
mortar ﬁre and dives to the ground. The subsequent absence
of destruction from an incoming mortar represents a massive
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 October 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2267
fpsyg-10-02267 October 3, 2019 Time: 18:1 # 6
Chamberlin Predictive Processing Model of EMDR
failure of prediction. If the Predictive Processing account is
correct, then the brain would be expected to try to minimize its
prediction error to improve future prediction and behavior. The
Network Balance Model of Trauma and Resolution postulates
that imbalance of the Salience, Default Mode and Central
Executive Networks compromises the coordinated interaction of
brain regions required to execute this processing (Chamberlin,
2019). However once balance is restored, memory will be
processed. But how does memory process? The AIP postulates
“there is a system inherent in all of us that is physiologically
geared to process information to a state of mental health . . .by
means of this system, negative emotions are relieved, and learning
takes place, is appropriately integrated, and is available for future
use.” The Predictive Processing Model of EMDR argues that
this “inherent system” is, broadly speaking, Predictive Processing
itself. In a sense, it is just what the brain does.
MISMATCH NEGATIVITY REFLECTS
PREDICTION ERROR
Mismatch Negativity is a well-established research paradigm that
reﬂects deviation from the brain’s expectations (Naatanen et al.,
2007). When sensation does not match what is expected, the
EEG brainwave recorded over the corresponding sensory cortex
will show a negative deﬂection. For example if the 10th note of
the song “Mary had a little lamb” is played incorrectly, people
familiar with the song will manifest a negative wave in the EEG
over the auditory cortex. The brain is surprised. In the parlance
of Predictive Processing the brain registers a prediction error. If
the song is played incorrectly in the same way multiple times,
the magnitude of the measured prediction error will diminish
as the brain updates its model and expectations (Baldeweg,
2007; Garrido et al., 2009). In neuro-energetic modeling the
magnitude of mismatch negativity has been shown to correlate
to the magnitude of prediction error and reﬂects an increase
in energy available to drive synaptic adaptation (Strelnikov,
2007). In eﬀect the brain learns to predict a diﬀerent pattern of
ﬁring neurons (sound) under certain circumstances, e.g., when
the song is played by a 5 year-old novice. Prediction error
has been minimized. Similar eﬀects have been demonstrated in
the visual realm using facial expressions that are unexpected,
thus supporting the Predictive Processing paradigm and its
postulated updating of models (Stefanics et al., 2018). In the
tactile realm, unexpected changes in the intensity of a stimulus
result in the updating of somatic models, an eﬀect mediated
by the anterior insula (Allen et al., 2015). This has signiﬁcant
implications for the awareness of somatic sensation in trauma,
and its processing in EMDR Therapy utilizing bilateral tactile
stimuli. It is important to note that mismatch negativity and
related violation responses later in peri-stimulus time (e.g.,
the P 300) are not limited to sensation, but has also been
demonstrated on the conceptual levels of grammar and semantic
meaning (Naatanen et al., 2007; Batterink and Neville, 2013).
Thus Mismatch Negativity appears to reﬂect the occurrence
of prediction error in the brain on multiple levels and in
multiple regions.
MEMORY RECONSOLIDATION
Following retrieval a memory must undergo a process involving
protein synthesis called Memory Reconsolidation in order to
return to storage (Nader et al., 2000). This creates an opportunity
to alter the memory in several ways. For example pharmacologic
interventions may disrupt protein synthesis so the memory
cannot return to storage (Przybyslawski et al., 1999; Debiec
and Ledoux, 2004; Kindt et al., 2014). Eﬀectively the memory
is erased. While promising as a clinical intervention there are
many constraints that need to be navigated for the approach to
be useful. These constraints are currently the subject of active
research (Visser et al., 2018). Another way memory may be
altered is physiologically through memory updating or learning.
Not only are the causes of sensation uncertain, but the future
is inherently uncertain because self and world are constantly
changing. This requires that memories be capable of being
updated when conditions change in order to optimize predictions
(Dudai, 2009; Lee, 2009; Kroes and Fernandez, 2012).
MEMORY RECONSOLIDATION
CONSTRAINED BY BOUNDARY
CONDITIONS
The process of updating memory is achieved through Memory
Reconsolidation and requires that certain conditions be satisﬁed
(Monﬁls et al., 2009). The ﬁrst so-called “boundary condition”
to be described was a “mismatch between what is expected and
what actually occurs” (Pedreira et al., 2004). After a memory
is retrieved, if there is a mismatch, i.e., a prediction error, the
memory may enter an active state during which new information
can be incorporated into the memory. Under these conditions the
memory will be updated. However if there is a signiﬁcant delay
in receiving the information that contradicts the expectation, the
result will be “extinction, ” that is the creation of a new competing
memory instead of updating the original memory (Diaz-Mataix
et al., 2013). In addition if the new information/experience is
too dissimilar to the retrieved memory, a new memory will be
created and the retrieved memory will be left intact (Forcato et al.,
2009). Thus identifying and controlling boundary conditions are
critical if the Memory Updating process is to be harnessed in a
therapeutic fashion (Schiller et al., 2010; Kroes et al., 2016; Walker
and Stickgold, 2016; Elsey and Kindt, 2017; Treanor et al., 2017).
PREDICTION ERROR WINDOW OF
MEMORY RECONSOLIDATION
Several points are worth highlighting regarding memory
updating following experience. Memory updating can and
does occur spontaneously and without conscious awareness
throughout life. And when it occurs, the changes span the
range from “intracellular gene inductions to brain-wide systems
level reorganization of memory representations” (Stickgold and
Walker, 2007). This is consistent with the theoretical formulation
of Predictive Processing based on statistical physics that asserts
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 October 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2267
fpsyg-10-02267 October 3, 2019 Time: 18:1 # 7
Chamberlin Predictive Processing Model of EMDR
that all quantities that can change in a system will change,
in order to minimize prediction error (Friston et al., 2006;
Strelnikov, 2010). Furthermore the magnitude of the prediction
error appears to be critical in regulating memory updating
when attempting a therapeutic intervention. If the prediction
error is small, the memory will be not be updated given lack
of signiﬁcant new information. In contrast, if the prediction
error is too large, the brain appears to treat it as a new
experience and creates a new memory. The original memory
is not updated. Only if the prediction error is “moderate”
does updating of the memory with new information via
reconsolidation occur (Finnie and Nader, 2012; Sevenster et al.,
2014; Beckers and Kindt, 2017). In The Predictive Processing
Model of EMDR this optimal level of moderate prediction
error is referred to as the Prediction Error Window and
is a crucial factor in harnessing the therapeutic potential of
Memory Reconsolidation.
PROCESSING TRAUMATIC
EXPERIENCE-NETWORK BALANCE
It has been postulated that balance of the three principle large-
scale networks is an essential pre-requisite for the processing
of traumatic experience to an optimal state (Chamberlin, 2019).
Such balance may occur spontaneously or through eﬀective
trauma therapies such as EMDR. Elements of the EMDR
protocol are thought to activate speciﬁc individual networks. For
example questions during the assessment phase are posited to
activate the default mode and salience networks bringing the
individual into a state of active re-experiencing. Subsequently
therapist guided Dual Attention and Eye Movements are
posited to have a crucial role in activating the central
executive network thus restoring network balance. This allows
the individual to begin taking in new information from
the external world and orienting to the present. In essence
these interventions set the stage for the “inherent system”
postulated by the AIP to then spontaneously process the
“dysfunctionally stored memory.” The Predictive Processing
Model of EMDR suggests how the “inherent system” may
actually function.
PROCESSING TRAUMATIC
EXPERIENCE-PREDICTION ERROR
MINIMIZATION
Having been brought into a state of active re-experiencing
during EMDR, the brain predicts what will come next as
the remembered trauma unfolds. For example an individual
involved in a car accident predicts the sight of broken glass,
the smell of burning plastic, and the pressure of an airbag on
the chest. The Predictive Processing Model of EMDR postulates
the following sequence of events: saccadic eye movements
guided by the therapist compel multi-modal sampling of current
sensation thus testing the individual’s predictions of what
comes next. Sensory sampling of the therapist’s oﬃce does
not support the predicted car accident mayhem. There is no
broken glass, smell of burning plastic or airbag pressure. The
result is multi-modal prediction error. This prediction error
registers in the brain as Mismatch Negativity in multiple
regions. Energy is mobilized for synaptic adaptation. Memory
reconsolidation is initiated. Subsequent sampling is invoked to
generate new predictions as the individual attains progressively
greater orientation to the benign present. All the while saccadic
eye movement mediated theta rhythm synchronization keeps
the inﬂow of sensation and outﬂow of mnemonic predictions
organized for optimal processing. Disparate brain regions are
synchronized, and working memory capacity is restored. The
net result, the overarching goal of the brain, is prediction
error minimization. Ultimately prediction error minimization
is driven by the thermodynamics of free energy minimization
(Friston, 2010; Sengupta et al., 2013). “There was a car accident
but it’s not happening now. It’s over and I’m sitting in
an oﬃce.”
RE-ENTRANT PROCESSING
The preceding example of prediction error minimization occurs
over time with repeated sets of subjective reports followed
by sets of eye movements. Presumably this involves cycles
of re-entrant processing as information gets passed through
thalamo-cortical as well as cortico-cortico loops as the processes
of disambiguation, diﬀerentiation, sensory integration, and
mnemonic integration occur (Edelman and Gally, 2013; Preston
and Eichenbaum, 2013; Ohkawa et al., 2015; Richter et al., 2015;
Hakonen et al., 2017; Kitamura et al., 2017; Yokose et al., 2017;
Chao et al., 2018). The result is an updated memory and model of
the world that makes better predictions.
PRECISION WEIGHTING OF
PREDICTION ERROR
Implicit in the preceding discussion of prediction error
minimization is the predictive processing mechanism of
precision weighting of prediction error. As noted by Helmholtz
incoming sensation is ambiguous. In addition the sensory signal
itself it is often imprecise and unreliable. Potentially this sets
the stage for an unreliable signal to drive prediction error
minimization and memory updating thus compromising the
future utility of the brain’s generative model of the world. The
predictive processing response to this challenge, postulated to
reﬂect brain function, is to oﬀer a prediction regarding the
reliability of the sensory signal. This prediction of reliability is
called “precision weighting” and reﬂects the degree of conﬁdence
or precision in the sensory signal (Friston, 2009). It is an
estimate of uncertainty that reﬂects the trustworthiness of
the sensation and is posited to be implemented biologically
through changes in synaptic gain modulated by “top down”
cortical predictions. Signals deemed unreliable and imprecise
carry less weight or inﬂuence, and are not able to drive
learning. In a sense the downward ﬂowing prediction or
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 October 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2267
fpsyg-10-02267 October 3, 2019 Time: 18:1 # 8
Chamberlin Predictive Processing Model of EMDR
belief prevails as the interpretation of the current state of the
world, and the prediction error based on unreliable sensation
is ignored. We then experience what we expect, rather than
what sensation might suggest. In contrast, signals deemed
reliable have more “weight” with increased synaptic gain, and
are able drive memory updating. Thus precision weighting
of prediction error can be conceived of as a mechanism
for modulating the inﬂuence of prediction errors on belief
updating (Clark, 2013b). In other words, precision weighting
helps us to implicitly ask and answer the following questions:
“How much do I trust current sensation? Which sensory
channels are the most reliable? And “do I need to update
my beliefs?”
PRECISION GIVES RISE TO ATTENTION
Precision weighting also oﬀers a way of understanding sensory
attention at a neuronal level. Formally this has been expressed
as “attention is the process of optimizing the synaptic gain
to represent the precision of sensory information during
hierarchical inference” (Feldman and Friston, 2010). This
proposition has received strong empirical support in a study
of spatial attention and response speed (Vossel et al., 2014).
From this perspective attention is an emergent property of
the process of estimating the reliability of sensation. As the
brain estimates the uncertainty associated with diﬀerent channels
of sensation, giving more weight to some channels through
synaptic gain, and less weight to others, the byproduct is
what we call “paying attention” (Hohwy, 2013). For example,
a sailor proceeding through a dense fog may predict that
sound is more reliable than vision, and as a result pays more
attention to sound, and relies less on vision than he would on
a clear day. Given that the deployment of attention is a crucial
factor in the pathology of PTSD, precision weighting may play
an important role.
ATTENTION COMPROMISED IN PTSD
A recent meta-analysis found that attention and working
memory were among the most severely compromised
neurocognitive functions in PTSD (Scott et al., 2015).
Early investigators characterized the abnormalities in
attention seen in PTSD as a bias toward threatening stimuli
(Fani et al., 2012). While this is frequently demonstrated in
clinical populations, there is also a high incidence of bias away
from threat, i.e., ignoring threat (Bar-Haim et al., 2010; Sipos
et al., 2014). This observation led to the recognition that the
abnormalities in attention seen in PTSD are characterized by an
increase in Attention Bias Variability (ABV). PTSD suﬀerers are
biased toward the extremes of attention, i.e., excessive attention
towards threat at times, and excessive attention away from threat
at other times (contributing to reckless behavior) (Iacoviello
et al., 2014; Naim et al., 2015). In PTSD the control and
deployment of attention appears compromised, thus raising the
question of how this might be inﬂuenced by precision weighting.
PRECISION IN PSYCHOLOGICAL
TRAUMA
Recent empirical work has explored the potential eﬀects of threat
on precision weighting in humans (Cornwell et al., 2017). The
authors found that under threat of unpredictable aversive shock,
there was an increased auditory mismatch response to deviant
stimuli best explained by increased post-synaptic gain in primary
auditory cortex, with precision weighting biased toward feed
forward propagation of prediction errors. This was consistent
with a state of anxious hypervigilance and attentional bias to
threats in the environment.
Considering the potential role of precision weighting in
psychological trauma, Wilkinson et al. (2017) suggested that
the survival imperative resulting from experience of a life-
threatening event might result in an unusually strong prior
probability that will be selected, even when the incoming
sensation is a relatively poor ﬁt. The position seems to be, “I
must act to ensure survival, evidence be damned.” Recently, this
concept has been explored empirically.
Using an agent-based model computer simulation of PTSD
(Linson et al., 2019) varied the precision weighting of a prior
cued by a stressor and found a perturbation in the balance
between exploration and exploitation. Speciﬁcally, when the prior
was aﬀorded low precision the agent engaged in exploration
and evidence accumulation, essentially testing the hypothesis
“I’m in danger.” However, when the prior was aﬀorded high
precision the agent exploited its knowledge of how to avoid
danger and took defensive action, without actually assessing
if it was in danger. This was accompanied by physiological
responses characteristic of PTSD coded into the model. The
authors interpreted these ﬁndings by suggesting that a prior belief
that carries a high probability of injury or death is aﬀorded
high precision via natural selection given that the potential
catastrophic consequences outweigh the beneﬁts of exploration
and evidence accumulation. (A familiar example of this might
be herd behavior when a group of animals run from a predator.
While only a subset actually saw the predator, their running
triggers in the others the prior of a predator and they take
defensive action and start running, without actually trying to see
if there is a predator or not. “Better safe than sorry.”).
This suggests that altered precision may result in a state biased
against evidence accumulation, consistent with impairments in
safety learning characteristic of PTSD (Jovanovic et al., 2012;
Sijbrandij et al., 2013). What has been called “safety blindness”
(Chamberlin, 2019). And further, that EMDR may act in part by
overcoming this bias thus facilitating the acquisition of evidence
that does not support traumatic experience in the present.
Analysis of the role of eye movements in attention can help
illustrate how this might work.
ATTENTION, PRECISION, AND EYE
MOVEMENTS
What we see depends on where we look. And where we look
depends on a guess, a prediction, about where we can ﬁnd
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 October 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2267
fpsyg-10-02267 October 3, 2019 Time: 18:1 # 9
Chamberlin Predictive Processing Model of EMDR
what we are looking for. And what we actually ﬁnd there, in
turn informs where we look next (Parr and Friston, 2017).
Thus the motor element of attention, where we look, and the
perceptual element, what we see, are mutually informative and
interdependent (Mirza et al., 2016). The perceptual and motor
elements are part of the perpetual circular processing of the
Perception-Action Cycle (Fuster and Bressler, 2015). Elucidating
the precise anatomy and physiology of this cycle of visual foraging
has been a major challenge for cognitive neuroscience.
The ﬁrst element involves the motor system and the overt
orienting of attention with saccadic eye movements. The second
element involves perception and the covert orientation of
attention without eye movement. This is the aspect of attention
most directly related to precision as previously discussed. This
entails orienting to sensation that oﬀers the best evidence in
support of the current belief that is being tested (Friston et al.,
2012; Mirza et al., 2018). These motor and sensory aspects
of attention are tightly coupled sharing a largely overlapping
neuroanatomy (Corbetta et al., 1998; Nobre et al., 2000; de
Haan et al., 2008). Sharing essentially the same anatomy yet
performing dissociable motor and sensory functions (Juan et al.,
2008) presents a dilemma that has thus far has deﬁed satisfying
explanation. By incorporating neural oscillations the Rhythmic
Theory of Attention suggests how this dilemma might be resolved
(Fiebelkorn and Kastner, 2019a).
Based on empiric data in humans and monkeys Fiebelkorn
and Kaster found rhythmic epochs of enhanced sensory
sensitivity alternating with saccadic eye movements during
speciﬁc phases of theta rhythm. The “sampling state” was
characterized by enhanced sensory processing and suppression
of attentional shifts, both covert and overt. The “shifting state”
was characterized by an attenuation of sensory processing, and
was sometimes associated with a covet shift, and sometimes
an overt shift in attention. The authors interpreted this to be
a state of disengagement that creates an opportunity to shift,
either overtly or covertly. These theta “clocked” states were
associated with a rhythmic reweighting of network connections
to either support motor or sensory activity (Fiebelkorn and
Kastner, 2019b). The Rhythmic Theory of Attention posits
that the theta rhythm organizes environmental sampling by
periodically reweighting functional connections to motor or
sensory regions resulting in states that promote either sampling
or shifting. Thus the deployment of both overt (saccadic)
and covert (precision mediated) attention are tightly coupled,
intimately associated with eye movement, and organized by the
theta rhythm (“clocking”).
EMDR MAY RESTORE ATTENTION
Taken together these considerations suggest that the therapeutic
target of EMDR in PTSD may be in overcoming the bias against
exploration and evidence accumulation. Challenging this bias
repeatedly with sets of therapist guided eye movements may
restore the integrity of the rhythmic deployment of attention
(overt and covert) leading to evidence accumulation of a non-
traumatic present, recalibration of sensory precision, and the
updating of memory. The net result of treatment with EMDR
may be relearning how to deploy attention and weigh the
sensory evidence we receive from inside and outside the body
in support of our narrative about what is happening now. If so,
this hypothesis predicts a reduction in ABV and aberrant theta
activity following successful treatment with EMDR (Dunkley
et al., 2015). Such a reduction would be consistent with recent
work utilizing attention control training that resulted in a
decrease in PTSD symptoms, ABV (Badura-Brack et al., 2015)
and aberrant theta activity (McDermott et al., 2016).
Having described the core elements of the Predictive
Processing Model of EMDR it is now possible to posit how
some common clinical phenomena from the practice of EMDR
might be explained.
EYES MOVE TO REMEMBER
Previous discussion of the tight coupling between the oculomotor
system and hippocampus elucidated how eye movements
can drive search of memory to identify an analogy that
matches current sensation thus forming the brain’s best
guess. Another manifestation of this integrated oculomotor–
hippocampal system is the search of memory that results from
eye movements without regard to sensation.
During conversation individuals will periodically look away
from the person they are talking to toward regions of the
visual ﬁeld that do not contain any useful information. This so
called “Looking at nothing” phenomenon has spawned research
that suggests it has an important role in cognition. Also called
“non-visual eye movements” or “non-visual gaze paths” the core
hypothesis of this research is that saccadic eye movements play
a role in non-visual cognitive tasks (Ehrlichman et al., 2007).
One ﬁnding is that rates of non-visual eye movements increase
in tasks requiring search of long term memory and episodic
recall (Micic et al., 2010). Going beyond simple association
early research found that performance of episodic recall is
enhanced with saccadic eye movements (Christman et al., 2003).
Subsequent research has established the facilitation of retrieval
from memory by eye movements consistent with the concept of
embodied cognition (Bochynska and Laeng, 2015; Scholz et al.,
2016). The idea is that the speciﬁc gaze path traced during
the encoding of an experience may enhance recall when it is
physically re-enacted during retrieval. Alternatively restriction of
eye movement has been shown to impair memory performance
(Johansson et al., 2012; Laeng et al., 2014). And ﬁnally memory
processing during REM sleep is characterized by the elaboration
of wide ranging associations while the eyes are closed. These
ﬁndings suggest that saccadic eye movements have an important
role in search and retrieval from memory that is independent
of visual input. (The classic Analytic geometry of lying down
and staring at the ceiling to facilitate free association appears
to support this idea). Indeed it has been suggested that “there
is an inherent link, functionally and anatomically between
the brain’s oculomotor system and its hippocampal system”
(Liu et al., 2016). And further that the physiological coupling
between these systems may be obligatory (Andrillon et al., 2015).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 October 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2267
fpsyg-10-02267 October 3, 2019 Time: 18:1 # 10
Chamberlin Predictive Processing Model of EMDR
Taken together these ﬁndings suggest the possibility that the
operation of the occulomotor–hippocampal system, like many
systems in the brain, is bi-directional, and that eye movements
may be used deliberately to drive memory search (Christman
et al., 2003, 2006; Parker et al., 2008; Brunye et al., 2009;
Parker and Dagnall, 2010). While EMDR therapy appears to
have incorporated and capitalized on this phenomenon, the
explanation oﬀered has been “increased inter-hemispheric brain
activity” rather than the bi-directional oculomotor–hippocampal
hypothesis advanced above.
CLEARING THE CHANNELS OF
TRAUMATIC MEMORY
From the preceding discussion it appears that eye movements
sometimes occur in the service of vision, e.g., searching the
world and sampling reality to test a prediction. In addition
eye movements may also occur in the service of memory, e.g.,
searching memory for associations. Recalling the example of
a walk in the park, these distinct roles spontaneously shift
rapidly and ﬂexibly throughout waking life. An interesting
manifestation of this shifting can be seen during successive
sets of eye movements during EMDR. Assessment questions
bring the traumatic memory online often engendering a rising
level of arousal. Initial sets of eye movements typically result
in a rapid “desensitization” with decreasing arousal (Elofsson
et al., 2008; Schubert et al., 2011). This appears to result from
central executive network activation and amygdala deactivation
(de Voogd et al., 2018). The second is increased sampling
of current sensation testing the predictions of the traumatic
memory (Mirza et al., 2018). This reﬂects the use of eye
movements in the service of vision. When current sensation
does not support the predictions of trauma, arousal decreases.
However subsequent sets of eye movements are often associated
with an increased level of arousal (Sack et al., 2008). Per the
Predictive Processing Model this occurs as a result of eye
movements in the service of memory. (Seeking uncertainty
leads to opportunities to reduce uncertainty). Speciﬁcally, eye
movements drive the search for associations often ﬁnding a new
traumatic memory fragment with its corresponding prediction.
Returning to the car accident example, the prediction of broken
glass is tested by using eye movements and is not supported.
Prediction error is minimized and arousal decreases. The next
set of eye movements drives memory search and ﬁnds the
associated fragment of active bleeding from lacerations. This
is accompanied by fear and increased arousal. The next set
of eye movements then prompts searching the world to test
this prediction. The prediction of bleeding is not supported
resulting in a fall in arousal. Clinically one result of these
cycles of searching the world and then searching memory
is an undulating level of arousal with an overall downward
trend. The predictions of the traumatic memory, and all its
associations are progressively found, tested and not supported.
In the words of Friston, “the only hypothesis that can endure
over successive saccades is the one that correctly predicts the
salient features that are sampled” (Friston, 2012). This leads
to an inevitable best guess of current reality: “no trauma
happening now.”
ATTENTION AMPLIFIES PREDICTION
ERROR
During processing of traumatic experience with EMDR residual
symptoms may persist despite signiﬁcant attenuation. The
therapist may then direct the client’s attention to one of the
residual symptoms. For example after learning that there is still
an abnormal sensation in the abdomen, the therapist may instruct
the client to “Go with that” before initiating another set of eye
movements. Clinical experience suggests that this intervention is
eﬀective in facilitating complete processing of the memory. But
how does this work?
Recent research has demonstrated that directing attention to
a prediction error ampliﬁes the error signal thus enhancing the
neural encoding of the error (Smout et al., 2019). This suggests
that the therapist’s directing attention to a residual symptom may
amplify the prediction error prompting the brain to minimize
the error. That is, the prediction error has been ampliﬁed to the
“moderate range” where it is in the Prediction Error Window
that triggers memory reconsolidation. This appears to result in
a complete resolution of the symptom.
LINKING TO ADAPTIVE NETWORKS
Another important clinical phenomenon related to eye
movement driven elaboration of associations is the linking
of the traumatic experience to “adaptive networks” of memory
as postulated by the AIP. Network research suggests that
elaboration of associations (mental exploration) is the default
mode of the brain (Buckner et al., 2008). When the “load” of
cognitive and perceptual processing demand is low, the brain
searches memory widely (Baror and Bar, 2016). In contrast
when the demands are high, the brain utilizes immediate
“obvious” information from memory without signiﬁcant search.
For example if there is a gun in your face, your thoughts and
associations will probably be very narrowly focused on escape
from danger, e.g., door, window. You are unlikely to be reﬂecting
on how guns helped promote survival on the western frontier, or
the implications for society of being able to make guns digitally
from 3-D printers. The Predictive Processing Model of EMDR
postulates that as the prediction error of traumatic memory
gets reduced, demand decreases and eye movements drive
elaboration of associations progressively more distant from those
of the core memory (Christman et al., 2006; Parker et al., 2008,
2009; El Khoury-Malhame et al., 2011). Initially associations
will be local, i.e., closely related to, or part of the trauma. From
the preceding car accident example, associations might be to
bleeding from lacerations, or the ambulance ride to the ER. As
demand and arousal decreases associations are broader, and
more “global.” For example, “recovering from this car accident
was like when I rebounded from the skiing accident. I’m pretty
resilient.” This results in a state where there is co-activation
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 October 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2267
fpsyg-10-02267 October 3, 2019 Time: 18:1 # 11
Chamberlin Predictive Processing Model of EMDR
of two previously unrelated memories simultaneously. Such
synchronous co-activation has been shown to result in formation
of a qualitatively new memory that links the previously
independent memories (Ohkawa et al., 2015; Yokose et al., 2017).
One result is that activation of one memory, e.g., car accident,
now triggers activation of the newly linked memories of ski
accident and resilience. Per the AIP , the traumatic memory has
been linked to an adaptive network.
MODEL PREDICTIONS
The Predictive Processing Model of EMDR contains multiple
predictions that can be empirically tested. For example the
model predicts that the processing of traumatic memory with
saccadic eye movements in the benign present will result in an
increase in prediction error. If so, the increase in prediction
error should be reﬂected by an increase in mismatch negativity.
It is also postulated that processing entails serial predictions
as associated memory fragments are recalled and tested. If
so, the increase in mismatch negativity would be expected to
undulate and potentially be synchronized with the undulation of
arousal that has been measured. That is an increase in arousal
as a new prediction arises, followed by increased mismatch
negativity as it is tested and not supported. Over the entire
session mismatch negativity (and arousal) would be expected
to drop as the memory is updated and the benign present
becomes predicted.
The model also suggests that EMDR may act to restore the
integrity of the rhythmic deployment of attention including
the re-calibration of precision weighting. If so, this would be
expected to result in a decrease in aberrant theta dynamics,
and a decrease in ABV in patients who experience signiﬁcant
improvement in symptoms.
CONCLUSION
The Predictive Processing Model of EMDR builds on The
Network Balance Model of Trauma and Resolution utilizing
the foundation of the Free Energy Principle to explain how
traumatic memories are resolved using EMDR as an example.
With the progressive restoration of large-scale network balance,
the physiological conditions necessary for the optimal processing
of memory are re-established. Next, driven by an excess of
Free Energy the brain resumes prediction error minimization
of the traumatic memory. Saccadic eye movements facilitate
this Predictive Processing resulting in memory updating with
reconsolidation and integration into widespread mnemonic
networks. EMDR therapy was be used to illustrate how
speciﬁc clinical interventions may facilitate the processing of
“dysfunctionally stored memory” and the resolution of trauma.
DATA AVIALABILITY STATEMENT
No new data sets were generated for this review of previously
published studies.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author conﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work and
has approved it for publication.
FUNDING
Research and publication funded by the author. There are no
outside sources of funding.
REFERENCES
Allen, M., Fardo, F., Dietz, M. J., Hillebrandt, H., Friston, K., Rees, G.,
et al. (2015). Anterior insula coordinates hierarchical processing of tactile
mismatch responses. Neuroimage 127, 34–43. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.
11.030
Andrillon, T., Nir, Y., Cirelli, C., Tononi, G., and Fried, I. (2015). Single-neuron
activity and eye movements during human REM sleep and awake vision. Nat.
Commun. 6:7884. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8884
Badura-Brack, A. S., Naim, R., Ryan, T. J., Levy, O., Abend, R., Khanna, M. M.,
et al. (2015). Eﬀect of attention training on attention bias variability and PTSD
symptoms: randomized controlled trials in Israeli and U.S. combat veterans.
Am. J. Psychiatry 172, 1233–1241. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2015.14121578
Baldeweg, T. (2007). ERP repetition eﬀects and mismatch negativity generation.
J. Psychophysiol. 21, 204–213. doi: 10.1027/0269-8803.21.34.204
Bar, M. (2009). The proactive brain: memory for predictions. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 364, 1235–1243. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0310
Bar, M., and Neta, M. (2008). The proactive brain: using rudimentary information
to make predictive judgements. J. Consum. Behav. 7, 313–330.
Bar-Haim, Y., Holoshitz, Y., Eldar, S., Frenkel, T. I., Muller, D., Charney, D. S., et al.
(2010). Life-threatening danger and suppression of attention bias to threat.Am.
J. Psychiatry 167, 694–698. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2009.09070956
Baror, S., and Bar, M. (2016). Associative activation and its relation to exploration
and exploitation in the brain. Psychol. Sci. 27, 776–789. doi: 10.1177/
0956797616634487
Batterink, L., and Neville, H. J. (2013). The human brain processes syntax in
the absence of conscious awareness. J. Neurosci. 33, 8528–8533. doi: 10.1523/
jneurosci.0618-13.2013
Beckers, T., and Kindt, M. (2017). Memory reconsolidation interference as an
emerging treatment for emotional disorders: strengths, limitations, challenges,
and opportunities. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 13, 99–121. doi: 10.1146/annurev-
clinpsy-032816-045209
Bellmund, J. L. S., Gärdenfors, P., Moser, E. I., and Doeller, C. F. (2018). Navigating
cognition: spatial codes for human thinking.Science 362:eaat6766. doi: 10.1126/
science.aat6766
Bergmann, U. (2010). EMDR’s neurobiological mechanisms of action: a survey of
20 years of searching. J. EMDR Pract. Res. 4, 22–42. doi: 10.1891/1933-3196.4.
1.22
Bisson, J. I., Roberts, N. P., Andrew, M., Cooper, R., and Lewis, C. (2013).
Psychological therapies for chronic post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in
adults. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 12:Cd003388. doi: 10.1002/14651858.
CD003388.pub4
Blakemore, S. J., Wolpert, D., and Frith, C. (2000). Why can’t you tickle yourself?
Neuroreport 11, R11–R16.
Bochynska, A., and Laeng, B. (2015). Tracking down the path of memory:
eye scanpaths facilitate retrieval of visuospatial information. Cogn. Process
16(Suppl. 1), 159–163. doi: 10.1007/s10339-015-0690-0
Bremmer, F., Kubischik, M., Hoﬀmann, K. P., and Krekelberg, B. (2009). Neural
dynamics of saccadic suppression. J. Neurosci. 29, 12374–12383. doi: 10.1523/
jneurosci.2908-09.2009
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 October 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2267
fpsyg-10-02267 October 3, 2019 Time: 18:1 # 12
Chamberlin Predictive Processing Model of EMDR
Brown, H., Adams, R. A., Parees, I., Edwards, M., and Friston, K. (2013).
Active inference, sensory attenuation and illusions. Cogn. Process 14, 411–427.
doi: 10.1007/s10339-013-0571-3
Brunye, T. T., Mahoney, C. R., Augustyn, J. S., and Taylor, H. A. (2009). Horizontal
saccadic eye movements enhance the retrieval of landmark shape and location
information. Brain Cogn. 70, 279–288. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2009.03.003
Buckner, R. L. (2010). The role of the hippocampus in prediction and imagination.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 61, 27–48. doi: 10.1146/annurev.psych.60.110707.163508
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., and Schacter, D. L. (2008). The brain’s default
network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.
1124, 1–38. doi: 10.1196/annals.1440.011
Buzsaki, G. (2005). Theta rhythm of navigation: link between path integration
and landmark navigation, episodic and semantic memory. Hippocampus 15,
827–840. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20113
Buzsaki, G., and Moser, E. I. (2013). Memory, navigation and theta rhythm in the
hippocampal-entorhinal system. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 130–138. doi: 10.1038/nn.
3304
Chamberlin, D. E. (2019). The network balance model of trauma and resolution—
level I: large-scale neural networks. J. EMDR Pract. Res. 13, 124–142.
doi: 10.1891/1933-3196.13.2.124
Chao, Z. C., Takaura, K., Wang, L., Fujii, N., and Dehaene, S. (2018). Large-scale
cortical networks for hierarchical prediction and prediction error in the primate
brain. Neuron 100, 1252.e3–1266.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.10.004
Christman, S. D., Garvey, K. J., Propper, R. E., and Phaneuf, K. A. (2003). Bilateral
eye movements enhance the retrieval of episodic memories. Neuropsychology
17, 221–229. doi: 10.1037/0894-4105.17.2.221
Christman, S. D., Propper, R. E., and Brown, T. J. (2006). Increased
interhemispheric interaction is associated with earlier oﬀset of childhood
amnesia. Neuropsychology 20, 336–345. doi: 10.1037/0894-4105.20.3.336
Clark, A. (2013a). Expecting the world: perception, prediction, and the origins of
human knowledge. J. Philos. 110, 469–496. doi: 10.5840/jphil2013110913
Clark, A. (2013b). The many faces of precision (Replies to commentaries on
“Whatever next? Neural prediction, situated agents, and the future of cognitive
science”).Front. Psychol. 4:270. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00270
Clark, A. (2013c). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the
future of cognitive science. Behav. Brain Sci. 36, 181–204. doi: 10.1017/
S0140525X12000477
Clark, A. (2016). Surﬁng Uncertainty : Prediction, Action, and The Embodied Mind.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Colgin, L. L. (2013). Mechanisms and functions of theta rhythms. Annu. Rev.
Neurosci. 36, 295–312. doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-062012-170330
Corbetta, M., Akbudak, E., Conturo, T. E., Snyder, A. Z., Ollinger, J. M., Drury,
H. A., et al. (1998). A common network of functional areas for attention and
eye movements. Neuron 21, 761–773. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80593-0
Cornwell, B. R., Garrido, M. I., Overstreet, C., Pine, D. S., and Grillon,
C. (2017). The unpredictive brain under threat: a neurocomputational
account of anxious hypervigilance. Biol. Psychiatry 82, 447–454.doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2017.06.031
Crevecoeur, F., and Kording, K. P. (2017). Saccadic suppression as a perceptual
consequence of eﬃcient sensorimotor estimation. eLife 6:e25073. doi: 10.7554/
eLife.25073
de Haan, B., Morgan, P. S., and Rorden, C. (2008). Covert orienting of attention and
overt eye movements activate identical brain regions. Brain Res. 1204, 102–111.
doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.01.105
de Voogd, L. D., Kanen, J. W., Neville, D. A., Roelofs, K., Fernandez, G., and
Hermans, E. J. (2018). Eye-movement intervention enhances extinction via
amygdala deactivation. J. Neurosci. 38, 8694–8706. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.0703-
18.2018
Debiec, J., and Ledoux, J. E. (2004). Disruption of reconsolidation but not
consolidation of auditory fear conditioning by noradrenergic blockade in the
amygdala. Neuroscience 129, 267–272. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.08.018
Dehaene, S., and Changeux, J. P. (2011). Experimental and theoretical approaches
to conscious processing. Neuron 70, 200–227. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.03.
018
Depue, B. E. (2012). A neuroanatomical model of prefrontal inhibitory modulation
of memory retrieval. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 36, 1382–1399. doi: 10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2012.02.012
Diaz-Mataix, L., Ruiz Martinez, R. C., Schafe, G. E., LeDoux, J. E., and Doyere,
V. (2013). Detection of a temporal error triggers reconsolidation of amygdala-
dependent memories. Curr. Biol. 23, 467–472. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.01.053
Dudai, Y. (2006). Reconsolidation: the advantage of being refocused. Curr. Opin
Neurobiol. 16, 174–178. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2006.03.010
Dudai, Y. (2009). Predicting not to predict too much: how the cellular machinery
of memory anticipates the uncertain future. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol.
Sci. 364, 1255–1262. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0320
Dunkley, B. T., Sedge, P. A., Doesburg, S. M., Grodecki, R. J., Jetly, R., Shek,
P. N., et al. (2015). Theta, mental ﬂexibility, and post-traumatic stress disorder:
connecting in the parietal cortex. PLoS One 10:e0123541. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0123541
Edelman, G. M., and Gally, J. A. (2013). Reentry: a key mechanism for integration
of brain function. Front. Integr. Neurosci. 7:63. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2013.00063
Ehrlichman, H., Micic, D., Sousa, A., and Zhu, J. (2007). Looking for answers: eye
movements in non-visual cognitive tasks. Brain Cogn. 64, 7–20. doi: 10.1016/j.
bandc.2006.10.001
Eichenbaum, H. (2017). The role of the hippocampus in navigation is memory.
J. Neurophysiol. 117, 1785–1796. doi: 10.1152/jn.00005.2017
El Khoury-Malhame, M., Lanteaume, L., Beetz, E. M., Roques, J., Reynaud,
E., Samuelian, J. C., et al. (2011). Attentional bias in post-traumatic stress
disorder diminishes after symptom amelioration.Behav. Res. Ther.49, 796–801.
doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2011.08.006
Elofsson, U. O., von Scheele, B., Theorell, T., and Sondergaard, H. P. (2008).
Physiological correlates of eye movement desensitization and reprocessing.
J. Anxiety Disord. 22, 622–634. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2007.05.012
Elsey, J. W. B., and Kindt, M. (2017). Breaking boundaries: optimizing
reconsolidation-based interventions for strong and old memories. Learn. Mem.
24, 472–479. doi: 10.1101/lm.044156.116
Fani, N., Tone, E. B., Phifer, J., Norrholm, S. D., Bradley, B., Ressler, K. J.,
et al. (2012). Attention bias toward threat is associated with exaggerated
fear expression and impaired extinction in PTSD. Psychol. Med. 42, 533–543.
doi: 10.1017/s0033291711001565
Feldman, H., and Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 4:215. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215
Fiebelkorn, I. C., and Kastner, S. (2019a). A rhythmic theory of attention. Trends
Cogn. Sci. 23, 87–101. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2018.11.009
Fiebelkorn, I. C., and Kastner, S. (2019b). Functional specialization in the attention
network. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 71, 1–29. doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych-010418-
103429
Finnie, P. S., and Nader, K. (2012). The role of metaplasticity mechanisms in
regulating memory destabilization and reconsolidation. Neurosci. Biobehav.
Rev. 36, 1667–1707. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.03.008
Forcato, C., Argibay, P. F., Pedreira, M. E., and Maldonado, H. (2009). Human
reconsolidation does not always occur when a memory is retrieved: the
relevance of the reminder structure. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 91, 50–57.
doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2008.09.011
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain? Trends
Cogn. Sci. 13, 293–301. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. (2012). Embodied inference and spatial cognition. Cogn. Process
13(Suppl. 1), S171–S177. doi: 10.1007/s10339-012-0519-z
Friston, K., Adams, R. A., Perrinet, L., and Breakspear, M. (2012). Perceptions as
hypotheses: saccades as experiments. Front. Psychol. 3:151. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2012.00151
Friston, K., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle for the brain.
J. Physiol. Paris 100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001
Fuster, J. M., and Bressler, S. L. (2015). Past makes future: role of pFC in prediction.
J. Cogn. Neurosci. 27, 639–654. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_00746
Garrido, M. I., Kilner, J. M., Kiebel, S. J., Stephan, K. E., Baldeweg, T.,
and Friston, K. J. (2009). Repetition suppression and plasticity in the
human brain. Neuroimage 48, 269–279. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.
06.034
Geib, B. R., Stanley, M. L., Dennis, N. A., Woldorﬀ, M. G., and Cabeza, R.
(2017). From hippocampus to whole-brain: the role of integrative processing
in episodic memory retrieval. Hum. Brain Mapp. 38, 2242–2259. doi: 10.1002/
hbm.23518
Geisler, W. S., and Diehl, R. L. (2003). A Bayesian approach to the evolution
of perceptual and cognitive systems. Cogn. Sci. 27, 379–402. doi: 10.1207/
s15516709cog2703_3
Gregory, R. L. (1980). Perceptions as hypotheses.Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol.
Sci. 290, 181–197.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 October 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2267
fpsyg-10-02267 October 3, 2019 Time: 18:1 # 13
Chamberlin Predictive Processing Model of EMDR
Hakonen, M., May, P. J. C., Jaaskelainen, I. P., Jokinen, E., Sams, M., and Tiitinen,
H. (2017). Predictive processing increases intelligibility of acoustically distorted
speech: behavioral and neural correlates. Brain Behav. 7:e00789. doi: 10.1002/
brb3.789
Hasselmo, M. E., and Stern, C. E. (2014). Theta rhythm and the encoding and
retrieval of space and time. Neuroimage 85(Pt 2), 656–666. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2013.06.022
Helmholtz, H. (1867). Handbuch der Physiologishen Optik. Leipzig: Leopold Voss.
Hobson, J. A., Hong, C. C., and Friston, K. J. (2014). Virtual reality and
consciousness inference in dreaming.Front. Psychol. 5:1133. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2014.01133
Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Holmes, J., and Nolte, T. (2019). “Surprise” and the bayesian brain: implications for
psychotherapy theory and practice. Front. Psychol. 10:592. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2019.00592
Iacoviello, B. M., Wu, G., Abend, R., Murrough, J. W., Feder, A., Fruchter, E.,
et al. (2014). Attention bias variability and symptoms of posttraumatic stress
disorder. J. Trauma Stress 27, 232–239. doi: 10.1002/jts.21899
Jeﬀries, F. W., and Davis, P. (2013). What is the role of eye movements in eye
movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) for post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD)? a review. Behav. Cogn. Psychother. 41, 290–300. doi: 10.1017/
s1352465812000793
Johansson, R., Holsanova, J., Johansson, M., Dewhurst, R., and Holmqvist, K.
(2012). Eye movements play an active role when visuospatial information is
recalled from memory. J. Vis. 12, 1256–1256. doi: 10.1167/12.9.1256
Johansson, R., and Johansson, M. (2014). Look here, eye movements play a
functional role in memory retrieval. Psychol. Sci. 25, 236–242. doi: 10.1177/
0956797613498260
Jovanovic, T., Kazama, A., Bachevalier, J., and Davis, M. (2012). Impaired safety
signal learning may be a biomarker of PTSD. Neuropharmacology 62, 695–704.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.02.023
Juan, C. H., Muggleton, N. G., Tzeng, O. J. L., Hung, D. L., Cowey, A., and Walsh,
V. (2008). Segregation of visual selection and saccades in human frontal eye
ﬁelds. Cereb. Cortex 18, 2410–2415. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhn001
Jutras, M. J., Fries, P., and Buﬀalo, E. A. (2013). Oscillatory activity in the monkey
hippocampus during visual exploration and memory formation. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 13144–13149. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1302351110
Kant, I. (1781). Kritik der Reinen VERNUNFT (Critique of Pure Reason). Hamburg:
Felix Meiner.
Kindt, M., Soeter, M., and Sevenster, D. (2014). Disrupting reconsolidation of fear
memory in humans by a noradrenergic beta-blocker. J. Vis. Exp. 94:e52151.
doi: 10.3791/52151
Kitamura, T., Ogawa, S. K., Roy, D. S., Okuyama, T., Morrissey, M. D., Smith,
L. M., et al. (2017). Engrams and circuits crucial for systems consolidation of
a memory. Science 356, 73–78. doi: 10.1126/science.aam6808
Kroes, M. C., and Fernandez, G. (2012). Dynamic neural systems enable adaptive,
ﬂexible memories. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 36, 1646–1666. doi: 10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2012.02.014
Kroes, M. C., Schiller, D., LeDoux, J. E., and Phelps, E. A. (2016). Translational
approaches targeting reconsolidation. Curr. Top. Behav. Neurosci. 28, 197–230.
doi: 10.1007/7854_2015_5008
Laeng, B., Bloem, I. M., D’Ascenzo, S., and Tommasi, L. (2014). Scrutinizing
visual images: the role of gaze in mental imagery and memory. Cognition 131,
263–283. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2014.01.003
Landin-Romero, R., Moreno-Alcazar, A., Pagani, M., and Amann, B. L. (2018).
How does eye movement desensitization and reprocessing therapy work? a
systematic review on suggested mechanisms of action. Front. Psychol. 9:1395.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01395
Lee, J. L. (2009). Reconsolidation: maintaining memory relevance.Trends Neurosci.
32, 413–420. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2009.05.002
Linson, A., Parr, T., and Friston, K. (2019). Active inference, stressors and
psychological trauma: a neuroetholigical model of (mal)adaptive explore-
exploit dynamics in ecological context. bioRxiv doi: 10.1101/695445
Liu, Z. X., Shen, K., Olsen, R. K., and Ryan, J. D. (2016). Visual sampling predicts
hippocampal activity. J. Neurosci. 37, 599–609. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.2610-16.
2016
McDermott, T. J., Badura-Brack, A. S., Becker, K. M., Ryan, T. J., Bar-Haim, Y.,
Pine, D. S., et al. (2016). Attention training improves aberrant neural dynamics
during working memory processing in veterans with PTSD.Cogn. Aﬀect. Behav.
Neurosci. 16, 1140–1149. doi: 10.3758/s13415-016-0459-7
Meister, M. L., and Buﬀalo, E. A. (2016). Getting directions from the hippocampus:
the neural connection between looking and memory. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem.
134 (Pt A), 135–144. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2015.12.004
Micic, D., Ehrlichman, H., and Chen, R. (2010). Why do we move our eyes while
trying to remember? The relationship between non-visual gaze patterns and
memory. Brain Cogn. 74, 210–224. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2010.07.014
Mirza, M. B., Adams, R. A., Mathys, C., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Human visual
exploration reduces uncertainty about the sensed world.PLoS One 13:e0190429.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0190429
Mirza, M. B., Adams, R. A., Mathys, C. D., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Scene
construction, visual foraging, and active inference. Front. Comput. Neurosci.
10:56. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2016.00056
Monﬁls, M.-H., Cowansage, K. K., Klann, E., and LeDoux, J. E. (2009). Extinction-
reconsolidation boundaries: key to persistent attenuation of fear memories.
Science 324, 951–955. doi: 10.1126/science.1167975
Naatanen, R., Paavilainen, P., Rinne, T., and Alho, K. (2007). The mismatch
negativity (MMN) in basic research of central auditory processing: a review.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 118, 2544–2590. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2007.04.026
Nader, K., Schafe, G. E., and Le Doux, J. E. (2000). Fear memories require
protein synthesis in the amygdala for reconsolidation after retrieval.Nature 406,
722–726. doi: 10.1038/35021052
Naim, R., Abend, R., Wald, I., Eldar, S., Levi, O., Fruchter, E., et al. (2015). Threat-
related attention bias variability and posttraumatic stress.Am. J. Psychiatry172,
1242–1250. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2015.14121579
Nobre, A. C., Gitelman, D. R., Dias, E. C., and Mesulam, M. M. (2000). Covert
visual spatial orienting and saccades: overlapping neural systems. Neuroimage
11, 210–216. doi: 10.1006/nimg.2000.0539
Ohkawa, N., Saitoh, Y., Suzuki, A., Tsujimura, S., Murayama, E., Kosugi, S.,
et al. (2015). Artiﬁcial association of pre-stored information to generate a
qualitatively new memory. Cell Rep. 11, 261–269. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.
03.017
O’Keefe, J., and Dostrovsky, J. (1971). The hippocampus as a spatial map.
Preliminary evidence from unit activity in the freely-moving rat. Brain Res. 34,
171–175. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(71)90358-1
Parker, A., Buckley, S., and Dagnall, N. (2009). Reduced misinformation eﬀects
following saccadic bilateral eye movements. Brain Cogn. 69, 89–97. doi: 10.
1016/j.bandc.2008.05.009
Parker, A., and Dagnall, N. (2010). Eﬀects of handedness and saccadic bilateral eye
movements on components of autobiographical recollection. Brain Cogn. 73,
93–101. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2010.03.005
Parker, A., Relph, S., and Dagnall, N. (2008). Eﬀects of bilateral eye movements on
the retrieval of item, associative, and contextual information. Neuropsychology
22, 136–145. doi: 10.1037/0894-4105.22.1.136
Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2017). The active construction of the visual world.
Neuropsychologia 104, 92–101. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2017.08.003
Pedreira, M. E., Perez-Cuesta, L. M., and Maldonado, H. (2004). Mismatch between
what is expected and what actually occurs triggers memory reconsolidation or
extinction. Learn. Mem. 11, 579–585. doi: 10.1101/lm.76904
Preston, A. R., and Eichenbaum, H. (2013). Interplay of hippocampus and
prefrontal cortex in memory. Curr. Biol. 23, R764–R773. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.
2013.05.041
Przybyslawski, J., Roullet, P., and Sara, S. J. (1999). Attenuation of emotional
and nonemotional memories after their reactivation: role of beta adrenergic
receptors. J. Neurosci. 19, 6623–6628. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.19-15-06623.1999
Raichle, M. E. (2010). Two views of brain function. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 180–190.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2010.01.008
Rajkai, C., Lakatos, P., Chen, C. M., Pincze, Z., Karmos, G., and Schroeder, C. E.
(2008). Transient cortical excitation at the onset of visual ﬁxation.Cereb. Cortex
18, 200–209. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhm046
Reinhart, R. M. G., and Nguyen, J. A. (2019). Working memory revived in older
adults by synchronizing rhythmic brain circuits. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 820–827.
doi: 10.1038/s41593-019-0371-x
Richter, F. R., Chanales, A. J. H., and Kuhl, B. A. (2015). Predicting the integration
of overlapping memories by decoding mnemonic processing states during
learning. Neuroimage 124(Pt A), 323–335. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.
08.051
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 October 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2267
fpsyg-10-02267 October 3, 2019 Time: 18:1 # 14
Chamberlin Predictive Processing Model of EMDR
Rodenburg, R., Benjamin, A., de Roos, C., Meijer, A. M., and Stams, G. J. (2009).
Eﬃcacy of EMDR in children: a meta-analysis. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 29, 599–606.
doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2009.06.008
Sack, M., Lempa, W., Steinmetz, A., Lamprecht, F., and Hofmann, A.
(2008). Alterations in autonomic tone during trauma exposure using
eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR)–results of
a preliminary investigation. J. Anxiety Disord. 22, 1264–1271. doi:
10.1016/j.janxdis.2008.01.007
Saﬀran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., and Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical learning by
8-month-old infants. Science 274, 1926–1928. doi: 10.1126/science.274.5294.
1926
Schacter, D. L., and Addis, D. R. (2007). The cognitive neuroscience of constructive
memory: remembering the past and imagining the future. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 362, 773–786. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2007.2087
Schiller, D., Monﬁls, M. H., Raio, C. M., Johnson, D. C., Ledoux, J. E., and Phelps,
E. A. (2010). Preventing the return of fear in humans using reconsolidation
update mechanisms. Nature 463, 49–53. doi: 10.1038/nature08637
Scholz, A., Mehlhorn, K., and Krems, J. F. (2016). Listen up, eye movements play a
role in verbal memory retrieval. Psychol. Res. 80, 149–158. doi: 10.1007/s00426-
014-0639-4
Schroeder, C. E., Wilson, D. A., Radman, T., Scharfman, H., and Lakatos, P. (2010).
Dynamics of active sensing and perceptual selection. Curr. Opin Neurobiol. 20,
172–176. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2010.02.010
Schubert, S. J., Lee, C. W., and Drummond, P. D. (2011). The eﬃcacy
and psychophysiological correlates of dual-attention tasks in eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR). J. Anxiety Disord. 25, 1–11.
doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2010.06.024
Scott, J. C., Matt, G. E., Wrocklage, K. M., Crnich, C., Jordan, J., Southwick,
S. M., et al. (2015). A quantitative meta-analysis of neurocognitive functioning
in posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychol. Bull. 141, 105–140. doi: 10.1037/
a0038039
Scoville, W. B., and Milner, B. (1957). Loss of recent memory after bilateral
hippocampal lesions. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 20, 11–21. doi: 10.1136/
jnnp.20.1.11
Sengupta, B., Stemmler, M. B., and Friston, K. J. (2013). Information and eﬃciency
in the nervous system-a synthesis.PLoS Comput. Biol.9:e1003157. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pcbi.1003157
Sevenster, D., Beckers, T., and Kindt, M. (2014). Prediction error demarcates the
transition from retrieval, to reconsolidation, to new learning. Learn. Mem. 21,
580–584. doi: 10.1101/lm.035493.114
Shapiro, F. (2001). Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR): Basic
Principles, Protocols, and Procedures, 2nd Edn. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Shapiro, F. (2018). Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EDMR)
Therapy : Basic Principles, Protocols, and Procedures , 3rd Edn. New York, NY:
The Guilford Press.
Shapiro, F., and Laliotis, D. (2011). EMDR and the adaptive information processing
model: integrative treatment and case conceptualization. Clin. Soc. Work J. 39,
191–200. doi: 10.1007/s10615-010-0300-7
Shen, K., Bezgin, G., Selvam, R., McIntosh, A. R., and Ryan, J. D. (2016).
An anatomical interface between memory and oculomotor systems. J. Cogn.
Neurosci. 28, 1772–1783. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01007
Siegle, J. H., and Wilson, M. A. (2014). Enhancement of encoding and retrieval
functions through theta phase-speciﬁc manipulation of hippocampus. eLife
3:e03061. doi: 10.7554/eLife.03061
Sijbrandij, M., Engelhard, I. M., Lommen, M. J., Leer, A., and Baas, J. M.
(2013). Impaired fear inhibition learning predicts the persistence of symptoms
of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). J. Psychiatr. Res. 47, 1991–1997.
doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.09.008
Sipos, M. L., Bar-Haim, Y., Abend, R., Adler, A. B., and Bliese, P. D. (2014).
Postdeployment threat-related attention bias interacts with combat exposure
to account for PTSD and anxiety symptoms in soldiers. Depress. Anxiety 31,
124–129. doi: 10.1002/da.22157
Smout, C. A., Tang, M. F., Garrido, M. I., and Mattingley, J. B. (2019). Attention
promotes the neural encoding of prediction errors. PLoS Biol. 17:e2006812.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2006812
Solomon, R., and Shapiro, F. (2008). EMDR and the adaptive information
processing model. J. EMDR Pract. Res. 2, 315–325.
Stefanics, G., Heinzle, J., Horvath, A. A., and Stephan, K. E. (2018).
Visual mismatch and predictive coding: a computational single-trial
ERP study. J. Neurosci. 38, 4020–4030. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.3365-17.
2018
Sterling, P. (2012). Allostasis: a model of predictive regulation. Physiol. Behav. 106,
5–15. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2011.06.004
Stickgold, R., and Walker, M. P. (2007). Sleep-dependent memory consolidation
and reconsolidation. Sleep Med. 8, 331–343. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2007.03.011
Strelnikov, K. (2007). Can mismatch negativity be linked to synaptic processes?
A glutamatergic approach to deviance detection. Brain Cogn. 65, 244–251.
doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2007.04.002
Strelnikov, K. (2010). Neuroimaging and neuroenergetics: brain activations as
information-driven reorganization of energy ﬂows. Brain Cogn. 72, 449–456.
doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2009.12.008
Tenenbaum, J. B., Kemp, C., Griﬃths, T. L., and Goodman, N. D. (2011). How
to grow a mind: statistics, structure, and abstraction. Science 331, 1279–1285.
doi: 10.1126/science.1192788
Teyler, T. J., and Rudy, J. W. (2007). The hippocampal indexing theory and episodic
memory: updating the index. Hippocampus 17, 1158–1169. doi: 10.1002/hipo.
20350
Treanor, M., Brown, L. A., Rissman, J., and Craske, M. G. (2017). Can memories
of traumatic experiences or addiction be erased or modiﬁed? A critical review
of research on the disruption of memory reconsolidation and its applications.
Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 12, 290–305. doi: 10.1177/1745691616664725
Tulving, E., and Schacter, D. L. (1990). Priming and human memory systems.
Science 247, 301–306. doi: 10.1126/science.2296719
Ullman, S. (2019). Using neuroscience to develop artiﬁcial intelligence. Science
363:692. doi: 10.1126/science.aau6595
Ullman, S., Harari, D., and Dorfman, N. (2012). From simple innate biases
to complex visual concepts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 18215–18220.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1207690109
Vernet, M., Quentin, R., Chanes, L., Mitsumasu, A., and Valero-Cabre, A. (2014).
Frontal eye ﬁeld, where art thou? Anatomy, function, and non-invasive
manipulation of frontal regions involved in eye movements and associated
cognitive operations. Front. Integr. Neurosci. 8:66. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2014.
00066
Visser, R. M., Lau-Zhu, A., Henson, R. N., and Holmes, E. A. (2018). Multiple
memory systems, multiple time points: how science can inform treatment to
control the expression of unwanted emotional memories. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 373:20170209. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2017.0209
Vossel, S., Mathys, C., Daunizeau, J., Bauer, M., Driver, J., Friston, K. J., et al. (2014).
Spatial attention, precision, and Bayesian inference: a study of saccadic response
speed. Cereb. Cortex 24, 1436–1450. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs418
Walker, M. P., and Stickgold, R. (2016). Understanding the boundary conditions of
memory reconsolidation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, E3991–E3992.
Watts, B. V., Schnurr, P. P., Mayo, L., Young-Xu, Y., Weeks, W. B., and Friedman,
M. J. (2013). Meta-analysis of the eﬃcacy of treatments for posttraumatic stress
disorder. J. Clin. Psychiatry 74, e541–e550. doi: 10.4088/JCP.12r08225
Wilkinson, S., Dodgson, G., and Meares, K. (2017). Predictive processing and the
varieties of psychological trauma. Front. Psychol. 8:1840. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2017.01840
Wurtz, R. H. (2008). Neuronal mechanisms of visual stability. Vision Res. 48,
2070–2089. doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2008.03.021
Yokose, J., Okubo-Suzuki, R., Nomoto, M., Ohkawa, N., Nishizono, H., Suzuki,
A., et al. (2017). Overlapping memory trace indispensable for linking, but
not recalling, individual memories. Science 355, 398–403. doi: 10.1126/science.
aal2690
Yuﬁk, Y. M., and Friston, K. (2016). Life and understanding: the origins of
“Understanding” in self-organizing nervous systems. Front. Syst. Neurosci.
10:98. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2016.00098
Conﬂict of Interest: The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Chamberlin. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 October 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2267