fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 1
TYPE Hypothesis and Theory
PUBLISHED 04 January 2023
DOI 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Filippo Cieri,
Cleveland Clinic, United States
REVIEWED BY
Igor Douven,
Université Paris-Sorbonne, France
Nithin George,
Indian Institute of Technology
Gandhinagar, India
*CORRESPONDENCE
D. Eric Chamberlin
Eric@ChamberlinNeuroscience.com
SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to
Cognitive Neuroscience,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience
RECEIVED 28 May 2022
ACCEPTED 12 December 2022
PUBLISHED 04 January 2023
CITATION
Chamberlin DE (2023) The Active
Inference Model of Coherence
Therapy.
Front. Hum. Neurosci.16:955558.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
COPYRIGHT
© 2023 Chamberlin. This is an
open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which
does not comply with these terms.
The Active Inference Model of
Coherence Therapy
D. Eric Chamberlin*
Chamberlin Applied Neuroscience, Glastonbury, CT, United States
Coherence Therapy is an empirically derived experiential psychotherapy
based on Psychological Constructivism. Symptoms are viewed as necessary
output from an implicit model of the world. The therapist curates experiences
and directs attention toward discovering the model. Rendered explicit, the
model is juxtaposed with contradictory knowledge driving memory re-
consolidation with resolution of the symptom. The Bayesian Brain views
perception and action as inferential processes. Prior beliefs are combined
in a generative model to explain the hidden causes of sensations through a
process of Active Inference. Prior beliefs that are poor ﬁts to the real world
are suboptimal. Suboptimal priors with optimal inference produce Bayes
Optimal Pathology with behavioral symptoms. The Active Inference Model
of Coherence Therapy posits that Coherence Therapy is a dyadic act of
therapist guided Active Inference that renders the (probable) hidden causes of
a client’s behavior conscious. The therapist’s sustained attention on the goal
of inference helps to overcome memory control bias against retrieval of the
affectively charged suboptimal prior. Serial experiences cue memory retrieval
and re-instantiation of the physiological/affective state that necessitates
production of the symptom in a particular context. As this process continues
there is a break in modularity with assimilation into broader networks of
experience. Typically, the symptom produced by optimal inference with
the suboptimal prior is experienced as unnecessary/inappropriate when
taken out of the particular context. The implicit construct has been re-
represented and rendered consciously accessible, by a more complex but
more accurate model in which the symptom is necessary in some contexts
but not others. There is an experience of agency and control in symptom
creation, accompanied by the spontaneous production of context appropriate
behavior. The capacity for inference has been restored. The Active Inference
Model of Coherence Therapy provides a framework for Coherence Therapy
as a computational process which can serve as the basis for new therapeutic
interventions and experimental designs integrating biological, cognitive,
behavioral, and environmental factors.
KEYWORDS
Coherence Therapy, memory control and access, Bayesian Brain, Free Energy
Principle and Active Inference (FEP-AI) framework, post-freudian psychology,
psychotherapy, memory representation, conscious access
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 01 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 2
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
Introduction to the Active
Inference Model of Coherence
Therapy (AIMCT)
Freud’s Project for a Scientiﬁc Psychology attempted to
ground Psychology in the Natural Sciences (Freud, 1895).
Steeped in physiology and Thermodynamics, Freud came to
view living things as dynamic energy systems. He envisioned
Psychology as explainable through the physiology of the
brain (Cieri and Esposito, 2019). Ultimately Freud was
forced to abandon the Project due to the technical and
conceptual limitations of the time. This included what he
considered “the heart of the riddle, ” the physiology of the
phenomenon of repression. In doing so he appears to have
reluctantly adopted a Functionalist perspective that the mind
can be studied independently of the brain (Johnson-Laird,
1983). Having abandoned pursuit of a deep connection to
neurophysiology, Freud developed the meta-psychology that
informs Psychoanalysis.
Recent developments have reanimated Freud’s vision of
understanding Psychology as the physiology of the brain
(Eliasmith, 2003). The identiﬁcation of resting state networks
has facilitated a preliminary mapping from the psychological
concepts of Psychoanalysis to the activity of the Default network
(Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2010). This is part of a larger body
of work known as Neuro-psychoanalysis (Solms and Turnbull,
2011; Johnson and Flores Mosri, 2016). Extending beyond
Psychoanalysis, network function has been used to model the
pathophysiology of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD),
and to its resolution with Eye Movement Desensitization
and Reprocessing (EMDR) (Lanius et al., 2015; Chamberlin,
2019a). Viewed from this perspective the distance between the
psychological and the physiological appears to diminish in what
has been called Dual Aspect Monism. Brieﬂy, “the mind and
brain are emergent aspects of the same neuronal dynamics”
(Hobson et al., 2021).
Another recently developed tool is the Free Energy
Principle, and its realization in the Bayesian Brain (Friston
and Stephan, 2007; Friston, 2009; Holmes and Nolte, 2019).
The Free Energy Principle as developed by Friston et al. is an
information theoretic isomorph of Statistical Thermodynamics
that begins from consideration of “ﬁrst principles.” That is,
what a living thing must do to continue living (Clark, 2013). In
order to exist a living thing must resist the dissipative forces of
entropy by minimizing surprising, catastrophic exchanges with
the environment e.g., being a ﬁsh out of water. To accomplish
this the agent must reduce its Free Energy, which is essentially
the error of its predictions (Hohwy, 2013). In other words,
to stay alive an agent must have a model of the world that
is capable of generating predictions about sensory data, and
must minimize the error of those predictions (Friston and
Stephan, 2007). The Free Energy Principle through prediction
error minimization oﬀers the possibility of explaining disparate
psychological functions like perception, attention, and action
with a conceptually simple mechanism that is physiologically
plausible and empirically veriﬁable (Friston, 2010). The non-
negotiable requirements of thermodynamics regarding energy
and information apply at all levels of consideration e.g., from
molecular to psychological (Strelnikov, 2014). This creates
a common language or currency between disciplines that
facilitates a deeper connection than simple associations between
mind and brain (Clark, 2016). Thus the Free Energy Principle
has been used to provide putative links from Psychoanalysis
to neurophysiology (Hopkins, 2012, 2016; Johnson and Flores
Mosri, 2016). Post-Freudian therapeutic approaches have also
beneﬁted from the explanatory power of the Free Energy
Principle. For example, the Predictive Processing Model of
EMDR suggests how the epistemic aﬀordance of eye movements
can be used to drive free energy minimization and belief
updating in PTSD (Chamberlin, 2019b).
The Active Inference Model of Coherence Therapy attempts
to leverage the explanatory power of the Free Energy
Principle by oﬀering critical analysis of an empirically validated
post-Freudian psychotherapy through the lens of Bayes
Optimal Pathology (Schwartenbeck et al., 2015). Application
of Bayes Optimal Pathology presents two key questions for
computational neuropsychology (Parr et al., 2018). The ﬁrst
question is “what are the prior beliefs that would have to be
held to make this behavior optimal?” Next, having identiﬁed
the (putative) suboptimal priors, the question becomes “what
are the biological substrates of these priors”? Or, what happens
in the brain? These questions will be addressed sequentially in
what can overall be considered an exercise in Psychodynamic
Neuroscience. In essence, using the Free Energy Principle as a
bridge between mind and brain (Cieri and Esposito, 2019).
Introduction to Coherence
Therapy
Coherence Therapy (CT) is empirically derived experiential
psychotherapy developed by Bruce Ecker, Laurel Hulley and
Robin Ticic (Ecker et al., 2012). Based on Psychological
Constructivism, the emphasis of Coherence Therapy is on
the individual’s subjective experience of reality resulting from
models built to understand the world, and to support successful
action in it. To wit: “Perhaps most central to the constructivist
vision is the contention that we do not passively perceive the
world as it actually is, but rather shape and form what we know
and experience through active, constructive mental processes”
(Toomey and Ecker, 2007). And further, “ . . .the function of
forming “knowings” is to optimize the person’s adaptation in
the experiential world, not to accurately discern the true nature
of things.” With these assumptions Coherence Therapy is ﬁrmly
embedded in the Constructivist tradition.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 02 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 3
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
Coherence Therapy distinguishes itself from other
psychotherapies with several additional assumptions. The
ﬁrst is that a client’s presenting symptom is assumed to be
a logical, “coherent” product of the “implicit knowing” or
construction of reality held by the person in the present (Ecker
et al., 2012). Speciﬁcally, there is an implicit “emotional truth”
that makes it necessary to have or produce the symptom
(Ecker and Hulley, 1996). From this perspective, despite being
undesirable, the symptom is not a “dysfunction” of the brain.
Per Ecker et.al. “ . . . a client’s seemingly irrational, out-of-
control presenting symptom is actually a sensible, cogent,
orderly expression of the person’s existing constructions of self
and world, not a “disorder” or pathology” (Toomey and Ecker,
2007). The problem lies with the implicit model. The central
task of the therapist is to facilitate an experience of the implicit
“emotional truth” becoming explicit.
Following symptom identiﬁcation, Discovery is the phase
of Coherence Therapy which attempts to curate experiences
that render the emotion and implicit model of the world
that necessitates symptom production, explicit (Ecker et al.,
2012). Examples of experiences include symptom deprivation,
sentence completion, role play, imaginal interaction techniques
etc (Ecker, 2016). The Principle of Immediate Accessibility
asserts that the implicit model can be known rapidly (from one
to several sessions depending on the underlying complexity of
the material) (Ecker and Hulley, 1996; Ecker, 2018a). This stands
in contrast to conventional wisdom in psychotherapy about
the diﬃculty of reliably accessing unconscious material swiftly,
and is based on Ecker’s research developing the experiential
techniques that facilitate this process. It appears that the
assumed coherence or logical necessity of the symptom given
the implicit model facilitates eﬃcient elucidation of the model
(Ecker et al., 2012).
An important element of the retrieval of the implicit model
or schema in the Discovery process is the sustained application
of attention to the task by both parties, driven by the therapist
(Ecker and Hulley, 1996). From the perspective of the client,
the symptom is problematic and the idea that the symptom
“makes sense” at some level is deeply counter-intuitive. Thus, the
success of the Discovery process is contingent on the therapist’s
commitment to the assumption of coherence to overcome the
intuitive bias of the client and sustain focus on Discovery
(Ecker et al., 2012). An additional challenge is that the implicit
model is typically formed early in life in a situation with
emotional urgency, often leading to repression or exclusion
from consciousness of the emotionally charged memory (Ecker,
2015).
Following Discovery, the implicit model has been rendered
explicit and the Integration phase ensues. Integration is
intended to facilitate incorporation of the now explicit model
into everyday awareness in preparation for the ﬁnal phase of
Juxtaposition (Ecker et al., 2012). In Juxtaposition the client
is ushered into an experience of simultaneous awareness
of the symptom necessitating model, and personally held
contradictory living knowledge. This juxtaposition results in
eﬀortless cessation of the symptom going forward, having
presumably driven prediction error mediated memory
reconsolidation (Ecker et al., 2012). Typically, after having been
rendered explicit the symptom is understood as being necessary
in some contexts, e.g., past personal experience, but not in
the present context (Ecker and Hulley, 1996). The result is an
experience of agency in symptom production, and spontaneous
context appropriate behavior thereafter.
Discovery as the essential activity of
Coherence Therapy
Thus far Ecker et al. have focused on the role of the
Juxtaposition phase and presumed memory re-consolidation
as being the core active element of this eﬀective therapy
(Ecker, 2018a). In contrast, this review will focus on the
Discovery phase and its role in the therapeutic process. The
reason for this is that in practice, successful Discovery of the
precise symptom necessitating schema results in immediate and
enduring cessation of the symptom in more than half of clients
sampled (Ecker, 2018b; Ecker and Bridges, 2020). In these cases,
it appears that when the symptom necessitating schema is ﬁrst
apprehended clearly in consciousness, the client is immediately
confronted with contradictory knowledge that often leaves
them bemused e.g., “When I think about it, that’s ridiculous”
(needing to produce the symptom in the current context)
(Ecker et al., 2012). Thus it appears that the Discovery phase is
the only necessary and (often) suﬃcient phase of the process.
While Integration and Juxtaposition likely ensure consistent,
comprehensive resolution, something crucial appears to be
happening in Discovery.
The Bayesian Brain
The Bayesian Brain views perception and action as
inferential processes (Doya et al., 2006; Parr et al., 2018).
Recognizing that the brain does not have direct access to
the world it must infer the hidden causes of the sensations
it experiences. For example, light does not enter the brain,
the inside of the skull is dark. Upon striking the retina, the
energy of light is transformed into the ﬁring of neurons.
From the resulting patterns of neuronal ﬁring the brain must
infer, or guess, the hidden cause in the world eliciting that
pattern (Hohwy, 2013). The process of inference is presumed
to be accomplished by physiologically plausible computations
employing Bayesian logic. The prior probability (the “prior”) is
the probability of a cause before consideration of the particular
sensory data. The likelihood is the conditional probability of
the sensory data given the cause. Precision reﬂects conﬁdence
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 03 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 4
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
in prior beliefs and in sensory data, varying how much weight
should be given to each in computations. Taken together the
“prior” and the “likelihood” constitute a “generative model”
i.e.,. a model of how the sensation is generated by a hidden
cause in the world. This constitutes the brain’s “best guess” (as
a probability) regarding the current state of the world.
The Active Inference of embodied,
embedded agents
Recognizing that inference occurs in an embodied agent,
who is embedded in a particular environment in the world,
it becomes apparent that it is an active process. In order to
more accurately infer the causes of the sensations it experiences,
the agent must act on the world and run experiments to
test hypotheses about the hidden causes (Friston K. et al.,
2012). For example, “what happens if I look over there, or
push on this?” (Parr and Friston, 2017). The sensory results
of such experiments provide data that is then used to revise
current hypotheses and suggest new experiments. The best
experiments resolve the most uncertainty, that is, provide the
most information (Friston et al., 2016; Clark, 2018). For example
looking toward the source of a sound is likely to provide
more information about its cause than looking away from
it. As this process of hypothesis generation, testing, revision,
etc., proceeds, inferences about the current state of the world
become more accurate. Formally, model evidence increases.
This suggests that humans perceiving and acting in the world
behave essentially as scientists. That is, from the perspective
of Active Inference they employ the core elements of the
Scientiﬁc Method as they learn about the world. This assertion is
supported by a rich body of empiric work in childhood cognitive
development (Gopnik and Wellman, 2012).
Bayes Optimal Pathology
Human behavior is not always adaptive. How is this
understood from a Bayesian perspective? The results of the
Complete Class Theorem suggest that for any behavior, there is
a prior belief that makes that behavior “Bayes Optimal” (Wald,
1947). This includes non-adaptive or pathological behavior.
In other words, the inferential process itself may be intact
i.e., ”Bayes Optimal.” However, starting with a suboptimal
prior, the behavior resulting from intact inference may be
“pathological” (Schwartenbeck et al., 2015). By analogy, despite
sound logic, if one starts with questionable assumptions the
conclusion may be inappropriate. The result is Bayes Optimal
Pathology. This suggests that a pathological behavior “makes
sense” if we know the suboptimal prior belief it is based upon.
It has been suggested that the identiﬁcation of the suboptimal
priors underlying pathological behavior is a promising clinical
approach (Parr et al., 2018). If so, the question becomes “what
are the prior beliefs that would need to be held to make a
behavior Bayes Optimal”?
Consilience of Coherence Therapy and
Bayes Optimal Pathology
Coherence Therapy assumes that behavior, including
pathology is always “coherent, ” that is “makes sense” and
is logically consistent if one identiﬁes the underlying
“emotional truth” or schema on which it is based. In fact,
the underlying schema necessitates the behavior, including
symptom production. This is analogous to the notion of
Bayes Optimal Pathology where a suboptimal prior belief
(=“emotional truth”) with intact Bayesian inference, gives rise
to pathological behavior (a symptom). There is not necessarily
“dysfunction” in the physiology of the brain (Parr et al., 2018).
As suggested previously the question becomes “what are the
prior beliefs that would need to be held to make the behavior
Bayes Optimal?” The analogous question in Coherence Therapy
is, “In what way does your (undesirable) behavior/symptom
make sense?” The process of Discovery is essentially to curate
experiences that lead to identiﬁcation of the suboptimal prior
in this particular client. This can be thought of as an act of
meta-Bayesian inference in which the therapist is making
inferences about the subject’s inferential process (Daunizeau
et al., 2010).
Discovery effects a representational
redescription
The Discovery Phase of Coherence Therapy begins with
a symptom that the subject has identiﬁed as problematic
or undesirable. The shared initial goal as framed by the
therapist is to identify the hidden cause of the client’s behavior,
characterized as an implicit “emotional truth” or schema that
necessitates symptom production. “The therapeutic target of
change is a given symptom’s underlying emotional learning
which is a schema, or mental model, that was learned long ago
in an emotionally intense experience and has been controlling
behavior and or state of mind from outside of awareness”
(Ecker and Bridges, 2020). Of note is that the schema is not
conscious despite its signiﬁcant, problematic inﬂuence. Ecker
et al. characterize ﬁnding this schema as “retrieval” of the
schema. The Active Inference Model of Coherence Therapy
(AIMCT) diverges signiﬁcantly from this perspective viewing
identiﬁcation of the “symptom necessitating schema” as being
the product of coordinated Active Inference that while often
retrieving a relevant memory, always acts to re-represent the
target schema at a higher hierarchical level. This process
takes time as the back and forth exchanges of therapist and
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 04 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 5
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
client establish the features of the representation. This new
representation is consciously accessible and is available for
verbal expression and diﬀerent types of cognitive processing.
This includes action (policy) selection. In addition, it is
embedded in context and manifests agency. In other words,
the essence of the Discovery phase of Coherence Therapy
is knowledge construction through Active Inference. In the
context of the Bayesian Brain applied to psychotherapy this type
of knowledge construction has been called Structure Learning.
It refers to “learning the repertoire or narratives that constitute
our prior beliefsñor hypothesesñabout how our world works,
and how these might be inﬂuenced therapeutically” (Holmes
and Nolte, 2019). Empiric simulations suggest that “structure
learning can be seen as an emergent property of active inference
(and learning) under generative models with “spare capacity”;
where spare or uncommitted capacity is used to expand the
repertoire of representations” (Smith et al., 2020).
Convergence of Coherence Therapy
and Psychoanalysis
Focusing on the notion of “representation” Hopkins
synthesized the deep convergence of Freudian Metapsychology
and the Bayesian Brain (Hopkins, 2012). Freud viewed
symptoms as occurring in the setting of failures of First
Person Authority (agency) due to emotionally conﬂicting
representations held by the patient (Freud et al., 1961). The
challenge of acting while holding conﬂicting representations
was managed by suppression of one representation according
to Freud. As in the Bayesian Brain, there can only be one best
(highest probability) representation at a time. For example, in
the binocular rivalry face-house image, the brain chooses the
most likely representation at that moment and sees a face or
a house, but not both. One representation is utilized while the
other is suppressed (for the moment) (Hohwy, 2013). From
Freud’s observations, however, the suppressed representation
may exert eﬀects on behavior that manifested as symptoms,
without awareness of the role of the suppressed representation
(This is consistent with continued evidence of the suppressed
representation at lower cortical levels in binocular rivalry
(Zhang et al., 2011)]. Utilizing observations of behavior and
free association, the psychoanalyst infers regarding the “hidden
cause” (suppressed representation) of the symptom delivering
a verbal interpretation to the client that attempts to make this
suppressed representation explicit and consciously accessible so
that the conﬂict, and therefore the symptom can be resolved.
Although not its stated intent, the Discovery phase of CT
often elicits suppressed memories as it “retrieves” the symptom
necessitating schema, that is usually grounded in an emotionally
intense childhood experience (Ecker, 2018a). Once explicit,
the conﬂict and symptom are resolved with the emergence of
agency, or what Freud called First Person Authority.
The challenge of never represented
“inchoate forces”
In addition to representations that were suppressed and
therefore unavailable to consciousness, Freud also identiﬁed
“inchoate forces” that had never been represented and yet
had causal (behavioral) eﬃcacy (Levine, 2012). Never having
been consciously represented these implicit inﬂuences pose
a signiﬁcant problem for Psychoanalysis. The challenge of
representing these inﬂuences verbally so that they can be
thought, and processed further, has been called “the work
of Psychic Figurability” (Botella and Botella, 2004). Because
of the amorphous nature of these unconscious inﬂuences a
signiﬁcant concern with this work lies in ensuring that the
jointly rendered explicit representation is the product of the
client’s, and not the analyst’s mind, as much as possible (Levine,
2012). A further technical challenge is the required level of
therapist activity which deviates signiﬁcantly from the core
Psychoanalytic practice of observation.
The AIMCT argues that Coherence Therapy addresses the
challenge not only of rendering suppressed representations
explicit, but also making those that have never been represented,
explicit. It achieves this through coordinated active inference
that utilizes therapist observation to make inferences that are
utilized not as interpretations, but to design experiments that
engender visceral experience and prediction error constrained
disambiguation of hypotheses regarding the hidden causes
of the client’s behavior. In the process a representational
redescription is eﬀected. Because therapist inference is only
used to design disambiguating experiments, therapist bias and
“contamination” are (hopefully) minimized. “To do Coherence
Therapy is to say and do nothing designed to directly counteract,
overcome or prevent the symptom, and to do no interpreting”
(Ecker, 2016). “Better narrative, clever reframes, positive beliefs
and other “counteractive” interventions are precluded” (Ecker
et al., 2012). This helps to operationalize the constructivist
assumption of “the client as the expert on their life, ” with the
therapist coming from a “not knowing” but actively curious
position (Anderson, 1992). Requiring therapist inferences to
be utilized only through experimental design helps to create
a “ﬁrewall” that attempts to keep therapist models separate
from the client’s (evolving) model. It likely contributes to
the striking claim that “any competent (Coherence) Therapist
should discover the same set of constructs” (Ecker and Hulley,
1996).
Divergence of Coherence Therapy
from Psychoanalysis
Like Psychoanalysis, Coherence Therapy makes extensive
use of observation. However, unlike Psychoanalysis it is an
intrinsically active therapy that uses experiments to create
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 05 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 6
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
experiences and disambiguate competing hypotheses (Ecker,
2016). From the AIMCT perspective it is an iterative process
where the therapist inverts his evolving generative model
of the client’s (hidden) generative model to specify the
subject’s likely suboptimal priors which are then subject
to experimentation. This strategy is consistent with the
suggestion that identiﬁcation of possible suboptimal priors
for experimentation is a starting point for phenotyping in
Computational Psychiatry (Schwartenbeck and Friston, 2016).
The core divergence of these two therapies is captured in the
rough analogy: Psychoanalysis is to Perceptual Inference as CT
is to Active Inference. That is, passive observation is replaced
by active exploration and experimentation. While Perceptual
Inference operates on latent states that cannot be controlled,
active inference operates on states that can be controlled
e.g., actively guiding another’s experience to gain a (mutual)
understanding of why someone does something (Frith, 2012).
Understanding how such representations may become explicit
requires a deeper look at the representational redescription
Model.
Representational redescription begins
with implicit representations
The model of representational redescription was developed
to explain observations of cognitive development in children
as they acquire language and solve problems (Karmiloﬀ-Smith,
1979). As children learn they appear to pass through several
stereotyped phases beginning with implicit representations that
reﬂect knowledge of a procedure. That is, they are able to
produce a particular output in response to particular external
stimuli. However, while their behavior suggests that they
know “what to do” in a given situation, they are unable to
describe what they are doing, or why. At this level of implicit
representation, “it is knowledge in the system, but it is not yet
knowledge to the system” (Clark and Karmiloﬀ-Smith, 1993). As
a result, the knowledge that is embedded in the procedure is not
available to other processors or the system as a whole. In that
sense the implicit knowledge is “modular” (Karmiloﬀ-Smith,
1994).
Implicit representations are serially
re-described and rendered explicit
The representational redescription model posits a
progressive “explicitization” of the initial implicit procedural
representation (Karmiloﬀ-Smith, 1986). Based on empiric
observations, the essential point is that the implicit
representation is not rendered explicit as a result of simple
“reading” by a conscious or semantic processor. Explicitization
is thought to be a constructive process that takes time and often
requires some type of “scaﬀolding” or “cognitive processing
prop” to be eﬀected. Successive iterations generate increasingly
more likely representations as hypotheses are tested and
revised (Gopnik and Wellman, 2012). An analogy is drawn
to scientiﬁc discovery with the accretion of knowledge and
progressive re-description resulting in a ﬂexible knowledge
structure that can be utilized in diﬀerent ways. Recent work on
the optimization of knowledge construction sheds light on the
products of this process suggesting that the most useful schemas
are composed of a balance between generalized semantic and
detailed episodic memories (van Kesteren and Meeter, 2020).
The AIMCT posits the Discovery Phase of Coherence Therapy
is a process of progressive representational redescription that
yields a relatively optimized schema with a balance of semantic
generalization and episodic detail that typically renders the
presenting symptom unnecessary, or inappropriate in the
current context.
Learning to be conscious
The concept of representational redescription has been
incorporated into recent work that sheds light on the dynamics
of the process of redescription. The Self-Organizing Meta-
representational Account of consciousness (SOMA) suggests
that consciousness is something the brain learns to do
(Cleeremans et al., 2020). Driven by the need to manage
the consequences of its actions on the world in order to
ensure survival, the brain develops a model of itself. Starting
with neuronal activity which is intrinsically non-conscious, the
brain learns how to execute an action in response to certain
stimuli without awareness of what it is doing. For example,
a young child may have a sensation of fear and complain of
a (non-existent) stomach ache. This results in staying home
from school and avoiding a feared experience. There is not
necessarily any awareness of this “procedure” or why it is
executed, it just works. The uncomfortable sensation of fear
goes away. According to SOMA this type of procedure may
operate automatically without awareness, indeﬁnitely as long
as it is adaptive. However, if the consequences of the behavior
become suﬃciently problematic e.g., sensing irritability from
an inconvenienced parent, the procedure may no longer be
adaptive. Then the brain is doing something in its exchanges
with the world that has unexpected, undesirable consequences.
In other words, the brain’s activity is resulting in excessive
uncertainty, and in preferred states not being realized. The brain
may attempt to reduce uncertainty, and gain increased control
by creating a model to explain the causes of the unexpected
consequences. It does this by creating a representation of its own
activity. The “procedure” with its initial sensation of fear, the act
of verbalizing “stomach ache, ” and the eﬀects become objects
for representation. “I feel fear, say I have a stomach ache, miss
school, the fear goes away, and mom is irritated.” The brain
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 06 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 7
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
has made its activity an object for itself to be represented. It
is creating “a theory about itself ” and in so doing there is the
emergence of phenomenal consciousness, agency, and control
(Cleeremans et al., 2020).
The emergence of a self with agency
In the process of representing the brain’s activity to itself,
the notion of a “self ” necessarily emerges. To have a sensation,
requires that there is an experiencer of the sensation, that is, a
“self ” that is having an experience (Fleming, 2020). And if an
action is taken, there needs to be an agent taking that action.
Thus the act of representation results in conscious awareness of
a self with agency. Because this self can take action or not, there
is the possibility of control.
The process of re-representing lower hierarchical levels
can continue as needed to reduce uncertainty and increase
control. For example, the child who has represented the original
procedure may say “I was scared and said I had a stomach
ache, missed a lot of school and mom got irritated” as an
early representation. This may evolve into a higher level
representation that is both more detailed, and more general e.g.,
“I was scared because I had a math test on those days, and I had
failed one early in the year. When I’m scared, I avoid things.”
And then a higher level “I was scared and avoided math tests
because I really want to be an engineer, like my mother. So in
order to do that I have to try to stop avoiding.” Of note is that
one can easily imagine how this iterative re-representation could
be facilitated by attentive, interested others who help “connect
the dots” of self-experience e.g., parents, teachers etc.
There are several important things to note about this
process. Learning to be conscious through representational
redescription takes time and involves processing diﬀerent
types of information (perceptual, episodic memory, general
knowledge etc.). This implies that the modularity of the
initial implicit knowledge as noted by KarmiloﬀñSmith has
been broken, consistent with the Global Neuronal Workspace
Hypothesis. Per Dehaene et al. “For the GNW, consciousness
serves a function: it evolved to break the modularity of non-
conscious processing and broadcast information to a brain-wide
network that makes information globally available for report
(motor or verbal) and post-perceptual cognitive processing
like working memory or decision making (Panagiotaropoulos
et al., 2020). Also of note is that there is a progression toward
models of increasing temporal depth driven by the need to
reduce uncertainty and to realize preferred states. With the
initial procedure there is no representation of consequences or
future states e.g., mom getting irritated over time. As the re-
representation process continues with additional iterations and
elaboration of hierarchical levels, the expected consequences
of actions are represented over progressively greater intervals
of time. These inferences about the future e.g., what happens
if I do this, or if I do that, are the province of Expected
Free Energy.
Models of the future-expected free
energy
In the Bayesian Brain the process of belief updating is driven
by the imperative to minimize the discrepancy between the
prior belief or model and the observed data in order to survive
(Hohwy, 2013). Too great a discrepancy or divergence between
the belief and observation may be incompatible with life e.g., a
ﬁsh that “expects” to be in water observing that it is not. This
divergence or surprise cannot be computed directly, however,
variational free energy or prediction error can be computed and
serves as a bound on surprise i.e., Free energy is always greater
than surprise (surprise or surprizal is used here as a formal
construct of information theory, not in its colloquial sense.).
Therefore, in active Inference the drive is to minimize surprise
by minimizing (average) Free Energy (Friston, 2009). In the
moment this can be accomplished by updating the model to
bring it in to accord with the observations, or by taking action
and sampling the world to obtain diﬀerent observations that are
closer to those that are expected. Either approach may minimize
the free energy or prediction error.
Given that an agent must minimize Free Energy over time,
taking action in the world entails additional challenges. Taking
action implies choice i.e., to do this or that. And each choice
has consequences that will unfold in the future. Therefore, in
order to minimize Free Energy an agent must be able to model
diﬀerent counterfactual scenarios and their associated “expected
free energy” (Parr et al., 2022). Such imagined sequences of
actions are “policies, ” and choosing between policies based
on their expected free energy is Bayesian Model Selection. In
generating these scenarios of possible action sequences and
their consequences, one is creating “Memories of the Future”
(Ingvar, 1985). This function of imagining and planning actions
is thought to depend on the on the prefrontal cortex (Schacter
et al., 2012; Fuster and Bressler, 2015). As such there are
implications for this capacity as a function of stress and of
development (Arnsten et al., 2015).
Intractable complexity as mental
disorder
Using Ainsworth’s Strange Situation Hopkins illustrates
the concept of computational complexity as Mental Disorder
(Hopkins, 2016). Placed in a room with mom and toys,
infants happily explore and play. Then mom leaves the
room and the infant is left with a stranger experiencing
unexpected uncertainty. Upon mom’s return, the unsettled,
surprised infant needs to minimize uncertainty. Attachment
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 07 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 8
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
to mom prompts a kinematic trajectory of approach. Anger
toward mom for abandonment prompts a trajectory of
avoidance. Securely attached infants approach mom, express
anger, accept comforting, settle quickly, and resume play.
Those with disorganized attachment are unable to manage the
computational complexity, and enact an incoherent kinematic
trajectory with elements of approach and avoidance. In other
words, when faced with diﬀerent possible courses of action,
each with it’s own uncertainty, the computations necessary
to select a single, best course of action “seize up.” The
resulting behavior reﬂects the inability to choose, and they
remain in an unsettled state for a prolonged time. Per
Hopkins: “The complexity of aﬀordance competition and
action selection in this basic social decision is so magniﬁed
by conﬂict as to render the required computations too
emotionally complex for their generative models to manage.”
Furthermore “the conﬂicts and traumas that Freud thought
responsible for recourse to phantasy/virtual reality in mental
disorder should be seen as forms of neurocomputational
complexity, and that mental disorder is the product of such
complexity together with the mechanisms that have evolved to
reduce it.”
Self-knowledge as inference
Clinical presentation often takes the form of “something is
happening to me and I want it to stop.” As observed by Freud
there is typically a failure of First Person Authority, or absence
of agency. It is happening “to me.” The therapist’s assumption in
Coherence Therapy is that the client is producing the symptom
because it is necessary according to his current construction of
reality (Ecker, 2016). The accumulation of evidence to support
this belief requires exploration and development of the client’s
self-knowledge.
From the perspective of Active Inference, insight or
explaining one’s actions can be regarded as the product of
inference (Parr and Pezzulo, 2021). Attempting to explain
one’s behavior retrospectively requires comparison of diﬀerent
policies (sequences of actions) and their expected consequences.
Based on the observed consequences one can select the policy
that best explains the data. “I did that because I believed
that this would happen.” This is analogous to post hoc model
selection in science where experimental outcomes are used to
disambiguate competing hypotheses yielding inference to the
best explanation. Agent based simulations using this framework
have produced some interesting results.
Parr and Pezzulo’s ﬁndings support their hypothesis that
insight is confabulation that is constrained by data to a
greater or lesser degree, depending on the quality of the data
used to formulate the explanation (Parr and Pezzulo, 2021).
Furthermore they observed the emergence of replay, an analog
of episodic memory which is both declarative, and embedded
in a context. Taken together these ﬁndings suggest that the
quality of insight resulting from inference varies widely and
improves with episodic declarative memories that are embedded
in context.
With these observations in mind the Coherence Therapist
begins Discovery with the client having essentially no insight.
“This symptom is happening to me for no clear reason.”
Therefore the self-knowledge inferential process begins with
a therapist assumption that attempts to increase the client’s
hypothesis space to include the possibility that the symptom
is logical and that there is a clear (hidden) cause that involves
self. In other words, a new hypothesis needs to be added to
the subject’s model in order to adequately account for current
observations (Smith et al., 2020). The client is invited to enter
and explore the space, and a Duet for One ensues (Friston and
Frith, 2015). This leads toward synchronization of the therapist
and client model of symptom causality, driven by the high
precision (conﬁdence) of the therapist’s belief that the symptom
is a logical product of the client’s self, driven by a particular
construction of reality. This is a crucial step in repair of the
client’s capacity for inference on this issue.
The process of Discovery employs a well-deﬁned
methodology, but is not prescriptive and does not have a
protocol per se (Ecker, 2016). Rather the guiding imperative
is Active Inference to the best explanation. The principal
question is “What model causes production of this symptom?”
All actions taken by the therapist including asking questions,
suggesting experiments, clarifying responses, reﬂecting
back observations of behavior etc., are designed to create
epistemic aﬀordances that reduce uncertainty and answer this
principal question. Bayesian model selection is repeatedly
enacted as the therapist considers and chooses which policies
(experiments) will provide the greatest information gain
and maximize reduction in uncertainty (FitzGerald et al.,
2014). This process is analogous to the Scientiﬁc Method
as experiments are chosen for the highest likelihood of
disambiguating between competing hypotheses. The absence
of a protocol in the crucial Discovery phase of CT may
seem surprising, however, is supported by recent Active
Inference simulations of linguistic dialog. To wit: “ . . . the
purposeful, inquisitive and abductive behaviors are all emergent
properties of minimizing (expected) free energy. In other
words, there is no need to handcraft any rules. . .” (Friston et al.,
2020).
Consider a commonly employed experiment in Discovery.
“Imagine being in the situation where the symptom typically
occurs, without the symptom” (Ecker, 2016). A priori
this is a high yield experiment as it oﬀers an epistemic
aﬀordance as well as potential pragmatic (therapeutic)
value. Recent empiric work in Endogenously Generated
Emotion (EGE) suggests that simulation of a novel experience
activates the Salience Network (correlating with subjective
core aﬀect) and the Default Mode Network (correlating
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 08 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 9
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
with the generation of representations) coordinated by
the Frontoparietal Control Network. This results in an
aﬀectively charged experience of something that has never
occurred (Engen et al., 2017). With memory of actual events
being the substrate of simulation (Schacter et al., 2007;
Buckner et al., 2008), there is a sleight of hand in this
Discovery experiment in that the client is potentially guided
to remembering and re-experiencing a repressed memory.
The AIMCT posits that memory control bias against recall
and reexperiencing of the associated physiological state,
is a common cause of impaired inference that precludes
representational redescription, experience of agency and
contextual embedding. Policy selection in the moment of a
childhood, emotionally urgent situation is unavailable for
revision and optimization. As a knowledge construct, the
schema lacks the desirable attributes of context or episodic
detail and functions as a suboptimal prior giving rise to Bayes
Optimal Pathology.
What does the Active Inference of
Coherence Therapy look like?
Lacking an explicit protocol, the Discovery Phase of CT is
challenging to describe. A useful analogy for the process is that
of a Forensic Sketch Artist. Beginning with a sparse description
from a witness, the artist renders an image or “prediction”
of what the suspect looks like. The witness gives feedback on
the image e.g., “the nose is too large and the lips are too
thin.” The artist uses this feedback or prediction error to revise
the image. Successive iterations of this process minimize the
prediction error until a satisfactory, detailed representation is
obtained. In a similar fashion the Coherence Therapist collects
verbal reports, observations of somatic behavior, associations,
results from experiments etc., and sketches the emerging model
that is then subject to error correction by the client. While
clients typically have great diﬃculty in articulating what the
model is initially, they have little diﬃculty in identifying what
is wrong with a proposed model, thus driving eﬀective revision
by the client-therapist system. This is consistent with the
constructivist notion that in order to deﬁne what something
is, one must deﬁne what it is not (Kelly, 1991). And as
the emerging model approaches the client’s implicitly held
model, there is robust aﬀective resonance. “That’s it exactly!. . .
that’s how it works! . . . my body is vibrating” . . .”I can’t help
but smile” etc. (Ecker et al., 2012). Such aﬀective resonance
with involuntary activation of facial musculature has been
captured in the clinical concepts of “limbic music” and “the
face of ﬂuency” (Murray, 1992; Topolinski et al., 2009). These
responses are consistent with the reward of reduced uncertainty
and structure learning that leads to “a ha!” or “eureka”
moments of insight (Friston K. J. et al., 2017; Friston et al.,
2020).
Discovery resembles simulated
annealing
The Active Inference of Discovery as described above
is essentially a search for the implicit model driving
symptom production. The goal is to ﬁnd the model with
the greatest evidence.
Model evidence can be decomposed into accuracy minus
complexity. Therefore maximizing model evidence requires
attention not only to accuracy, but to complexity as well.
There is a cost for complexity. Overly complex models are
not useful. The Discovery process, roughly captured in the
Forensic Sketch Artist analogy above, progressively optimizes
model evidence with shifts in hypotheses that capture and
lose accuracy, and increase and decrease complexity. Essentially
this is the application of Occams’s razor, or the principle of
parsimony. As attributed to Einstein, “everything should be
made as simple as possible, but not simpler.” For example an
overly parameterized model will be rejected by the client when
it doesn’t ﬁt a particular instance that comes to mind i.e., it
doesn’t adequately generalize. As a result, parameters will be
pruned and the model subject to re-testing. The more iterations,
the more likely the global minima of free energy is found.
This process is analogous to simulated annealing in computer
science where broad “high temperature” searches gradually give
way to more narrow “low temperature” searches as the optimal
solution is approached (Gopnik et al., 2017). In this process the
therapist plays an important role in regulating the “temperature”
of the search, beginning by encouraging broad exploration in
an apparently empty hypothesis space- “I don’t see how this
symptom could make sense, but okay, I’ll try. . ..”
Toward a process theory-how might it
work in the brain?
Application of Bayes Optimal Pathology presents two key
questions for computational neuropsychology (Parr et al., 2018).
The ﬁrst question is “what are the prior beliefs that would have to
be held to make this behavior optimal?” The AIMCT has argued
that a core activity of CT lies in answering this question through
active inference and representational redescription that leads to
Structure Learning. Having identiﬁed the (putative) suboptimal
priors, the next question is “what are the biological substrates of
these priors”?
Active Inference provides a principled framework for
understanding behavior. As with any normative theory, its
ultimate utility depends on how well it explains empiric
observations and generates testable predictions (Bowers and
Davis, 2012). Speciﬁcally, this means generating hypotheses
grounded in physiologically plausible mechanisms that are
answerable to empiric data, so called process theories (Parr
et al., 2022). Process theories attempt to oﬀer an answer of
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 09 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 10
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
how the phenomenon in question actually works in the brain
with speciﬁc references to anatomy and physiology. Recent work
oﬀers preliminary support for some process theories suggested
by Active Inference (Friston K. et al., 2017). What follows is a
preliminary sketch of a process theory regarding the genesis of
suboptimal priors, including the apparent compromise of the
inference process that precludes optimization of these priors.
How might people get stuck with beliefs that are resistant to
change and cause symptoms? What structures and mechanisms
might be involved?
Memory suppression regulates affect
Freud postulated that painful, unwanted memories could
be excluded from awareness via a process he called Repression
(Freud et al., 1961). Utilizing fMRI Anderson et.al. conﬁrmed
the existence of an “active forgetting process” he called
suppression, that established a framework for the study of
“motivated forgetting” (Anderson et al., 2004). To remember
entails some degree of reactivation of the physiology, and re-
experiencing of the associated aﬀect (Daselaar et al., 2008;
Danker and Anderson, 2010). Memory is thus an important
source of endogenously generated emotion (Engen et al., 2017).
As such it has been suggested that memory control is an
important mechanism of aﬀective regulation (Benoit et al., 2014;
Catarino et al., 2015; Streb et al., 2016; Engen and Anderson,
2018; Mary et al., 2020). However, while suppressing retrieval of
a memory may help to regulate aﬀect, there appear to be costs as
well (Smith et al., 2016).
Memory suppression interferes with
representational redescription
Suppression of memory retrieval is thought to utilize
the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex to dynamically
inhibit hippocampal activity while simultaneously inhibiting
extra-hippocampal regions supporting the retrieval of aﬀect
(amygdala) and scene features (sensory cortex) (Benoit
and Anderson, 2012; Benoit et al., 2014; Depue et al., 2015;
Gagnepain et al., 2017). The parietal cortex is believed to be a key
intermediary in episodic retrieval suppression, as it is in retrieval
(Shimamura, 2011; Paz-Alonso et al., 2013). Suppression of
the retrieval process thus disrupts the reconstruction of the
episodic memory by inhibiting the hippocampus, amygdala
and sensory cortex. There is evidence to suggest that retrieval
suppression with reduction in hippocampal activity may result
in a “virtual lesion” that leaves an “amnestic shadow” beyond
the repressed memory extending to memories that are close in
time to the suppression (Hulbert et al., 2016). It also appears
to render the related information unavailable for further
processing e.g., representational redescription and inference.
This is consistent with Freud’s notion of a repressed memory
that maintains causal eﬃcacy driving symptom production
outside of conscious awareness.
Recruiting motivation to recall a
repressed memory
Typically forged in childhood in an emotionally urgent
situation the “emotional truth” or implicit schema is often
associated with a painful memory that has been suppressed.
Accessing the memory is avoided because it is painful (Ecker,
2015). However, the presenting symptom is also problematic,
if not painful. When placed in the framework of the AIMCT,
the discomfort of the symptom drives exploration leading
toward the retrieval of the suppressed memory and associated
schema. In this context the suppressed memory is not simply a
painful (re-) experience to be avoided, but a potential epistemic
aﬀordance with pragmatic utility. Retrieval of the experience
may facilitate representational redescription of the implicit
schema with the emergence of agency and therefore control over
the symptom. This shift in memory control reﬂects a crucial
aspect of Active Inference and the Bayesian Brain: we are in
charge of selecting the data we sample in trying to adapt to our
world (Pezzulo et al., 2018). And the choice of what memories
are sampled appears to play a signiﬁcant role in the pathogenesis
of suboptimal priors. Coherence Therapy appears to recruit
motivation to retrieve the painful suppressed memory thus
making a diﬀerent choice that leads to repair of the inference
process.
Motivation drives the approach or
avoidance of knowing
Recently the theory of epistemic motivation has been
integrated with active inference dissolving the dichotomy
between motivation and cognition (Kruglanski et al., 2020).
As the quintessential mechanism of knowledge construction,
inference is argued to be suﬀused with motivation (Pezzulo
et al., 2018). The essence of this idea is that motivational
bias is present in the choice of policies pursued for epistemic
aﬀordances. Sometimes we want to know e.g., “I think I did
well so I’m going to try to ﬁnd out what grade I received.”
This leads to behavior that provides epistemic aﬀordance e.g.,
going to the classroom where the grades are posted. At other
times we don’t want to know e.g., “I think I failed so I’m going
to get something to eat.” In this case a policy is chosen with
no apparent epistemic aﬀordance regarding the grade. More
accurately, ignorance is pursued as the desired state. Of note is
that the policy also reﬂects motivation to realize a “not hungry,
satisﬁed state.” The epistemic aﬀordance pursued is regarding
food, not grades. From this perspective motivation plays a
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 10 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 11
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
crucial role in epistemic foraging and therefore the knowledge
construction resulting from active inference.
Utilizing the Structural Model of neocortical organization
(Barbas and Rempel-Clower, 1997) the Adaptive Bayes Process
Model suggests how relatively undiﬀerentiated limbic cortex
can inﬂuence highly diﬀerentiated hetero-modal cortex thus
infusing motivation into the computations of the neocortex to
facilitate Motivated Control (Tucker and Luu, 2021). Limbic
and subcortical homeostatic control provide aﬀectively charged
expectancies which are incorporated to facilitate allostasis, the
motive control of expectancies for future events. With this, the
Adaptive Bayes Process Model suggests a neuropsychology to
explain how motivation can be “baked in” to cognition and the
Bayesian Brain.
Returning to Discovery in CT, the therapist’s high precision
(conﬁdence) belief that an implicit model necessitating
production of the symptom can be found and will be useful
provides motivation for active inference for both parties. To
wit: “It emerged that the key condition for brief deep work
was the therapist’s conviction that the unconscious constructs
generating the client’s problem are immediately accessible and
changeable from the start of therapy” (Ecker and Hulley,
1996). Recent empiric work suggests that such “ . . .optimistic
expectancies involve particularly strong predictions of reward
causing automatic guidance of attention to reward . . .” (Singh
et al., 2020). This is consistent with the idea that motivation
inﬂuences epistemic foraging from the start (Kruglanski et al.,
2020). In addition to the therapist’s optimism, the client’s
subjective distress regarding the symptom provides motivation.
Potentially these jointly held motivations can prevail over the
drive to suppress a relevant memory. If so, how this might work
in the brain.
Attention drives low conﬁdence
memory search
The question “in what way does the symptom make
sense for you?” invites a goal directed memory search.
The Attention to Memory Model posits that the Dorsal
Parietal Cortex is associated with the allocation of attentional
resources to memory retrieval according to the goals of
the person (top-down attention) (Cabeza et al., 2008). The
dorsal parietal cortex is thought to modulate memory retrieval
activity in the medial temporal lobe while the ventral
parietal cortex detects when relevant memories have been
retrieved, prompting a shift in attention to the retrieved
contents (bottom-up attention (Corbetta et al., 2008). The
dorsal parietal cortex is particularly important in eﬀortful,
“attention demanding low conﬁdence searches” where the
rememberer is unsure if they know something (“vaguely
familiar”) (Ciaramelli et al., 2020). If memory retrieval is
successful the ventral parietal cortex will capture attention to
the MTL output with the experience of “recollection” with
episodic details.
The challenge of a successful attention demanding low
conﬁdence search is reﬂected by the assertion that directing
attention toward the coherence of the symptom (and its implicit
model) is the central activity in Coherence Therapy (Ecker
and Toomey, 2008). Therapist attention is important in part
because the products of the search including associations,
somatic expression etc., are often not recognized by the client as
being relevant (Ecker and Hulley, 1996). Recall the progressive
“explicitization” of Karmiloﬀ Smith requiring “scaﬀolding” as
the knowledge is re-represented into a new structure. In this
“bootstrapping” process the client doesn’t know the structure he
is building, and therefore can’t always recognize the products
of the search as being “building blocks” of the new structure.
Therapist attention to capture and reﬂect back the “building
blocks” is thus crucial.
As noted previously attentional resources for recall are
allocated according to the goals of the person. Autobiographical
memories are multifaceted constructs that contain conceptual as
well as perceptual details. Recall of autobiographical events are
thought to occur on a gradient of abstraction from conceptual
to perceptually based episodic memory as a function of the
goal of remembering (Sheldon et al., 2019). This results from
specialization with the anterior hippocampus being activated in
conceptual recall, while the posterior hippocampus is activated
in perceptual recall. And it has been suggested that being able
to recall along a gradient of abstraction depending on the goal
is important in maximizing the adaptive function of memory.
For example, a memory that is recalled conceptually without
grounding in episodic detail has the potential to be deployed
in a context inappropriate manner (van Kesteren and Meeter,
2020). This is often the case with the suboptimal priors identiﬁed
in Coherence Therapy (Ecker, 2016). In contrast, the AIMCT
argues that the product of Active Inference in Discovery is a
(relatively) optimized schema that is capable of generalization
but is grounded in context/episodic detail.
Successful Discovery in CT yields an explicit schema
that drives symptom production and is typically characterized
by three elements: an emotional wound, a presupposition,
and protective actions (Ecker and Hulley, 1996). Emotional
wounds reﬂect a continuum of stressful experiences up to
and including overt psychological trauma. Presuppositions are
unexamined assumptions taken from experience that are part
of the subjective model of how the world is, or how it works.
Protective actions serve to avoid any unwanted experience or
event and can take an extremely wide range of forms e.g.,
dissociation, compulsion, low self-worth, depression, shame etc.
Note that protective actions include mental actions as well as
overt physical action. From the perspective of the AIMCT the
explicit schema is the suboptimal prior that both illuminates the
compromise of active inference in the client, and provides a path
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 11 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 12
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
to repair. To understand why, review of Active Inference under
stress is helpful.
Active inference and stress
Faced with a threat, an individual must respond to
ensure survival. This requires calculating expected free energy
including epistemic and pragmatic terms (Linson et al., 2018).
The individual must consider diﬀerent policies or sequences of
actions that will minimize uncertainty through an optimized
combination of exploration and exploitation leading to the
preferred outcome. Then the best one must be selected. He must
try to choose the most viable path to his desired future.
Faced with a potential existential threat e.g., an active
shooter, short term thermodynamic considerations are
paramount (Linson et al., 2020). The imperative is to reduce
expected free energy quickly [Hamilton’s principle of least
action (Parr et al., 2022)]. A policy to reduce uncertainty by
exploration to better assess the threat runs the risk not only
of putting oneself more directly in harm’s way, but also in
wasting valuable time and energy that could be used for escape.
Individuals diﬀer in how much evidence they seek before
abandoning assessment and trying to escape. More formally,
the diﬀerence in the precision of prior preferences for avoiding
harm is a sensory evidence accumulation threshold that serves
as a crossover point from exploration to exploitation. At the
crossover point the individual stops considering “what is it”
and acts on the prior belief of mortal danger to “get safe.”
Agent based modeling of this type of scenario has yielded some
interesting results.
Agent based modeling of Active Inference under stress has
been used to explore a model of PTSD (Linson et al., 2020).
One important ﬁnding consistent with clinical phenomenology
is that “a high negative preference (set by evolution or learning)
for a stressor dependent outcome rapidly leads to exploitation
(pragmatic foraging) before further state estimation.” The
resulting exploitation has been called a “stressor mitigation
policy.” “I really don’t want to experience this bad thing so I
don’t bother to ﬁnd out if I’m actually dealing with this bad
thing, I just do this action to avoid the bad thing.” And crucially,
this may lead to a fearful cue being taken not as a possible state
of aﬀairs prompting attempts to conﬁrm, but as conﬁrmatory
evidence itself. The curiosity reﬂected by foraging behavior has
been replaced by a state of pragmatic defensive responding.
The greater the balance is tipped away from exploration, the
greater the compromise of the inference process. In this way
PTSD has been conceptualized as being a condition of stress
induced impairment on a continuum, where prior beliefs of
threat are not subject to updating by sensory samples (Linson
and Friston, 2019). Inference Interrupted.
The AIMCT posits the following scenario as the
pathogenesis of the typical Symptom Requiring Emotional
Truth retrieved in Coherence Therapy. In an “emotionally
urgent situation in childhood, ” the client experiences
extreme surprizal (unexpected uncertainty) with formidable
computational complexity that precludes optimal inference.
High Nor-epinephrine compromises frontal lobe function
including evaluation of context and planning (Schacter et al.,
2012; Arnsten et al., 2015; Fuster and Bressler, 2015). Unable
to infer to the contrary, the threat may be treated as an
existential threat. The complexity of calculating expected
free energy for diﬀerent courses of action makes policy
selection challenging, and a policy is selected (“a protective
action”) to reduce uncertainty as rapidly as possible. (Free
Energy reduction according to Hamilton’s principle of least
action). The policy selected is an a priori high probability
“sure thing.” In some cases, this may be an evolutionarily
conserved response e.g., behavioral arrest or dissociation.
A premium is placed on “never again” having that experience.
If the “protective action” is successful, it persists as implicit
procedural knowledge (KarmiloﬀñSmith Level I) to be used
when needed. Computational complexity has been managed
by a policy that requires minimal exploration and has minimal
parameters e.g., no consideration of context. As a policy it
is “good enough” (Gopnik et al., 2017) and is aﬀorded high
precision going forward because “it works” to avoid the dreaded
situation.
The experience of extreme surprizal including physiological
state, intractable complexity and negative aﬀect is the
“emotional wound” of the schema. Taken together these
aversive elements prompt avoidance of the experience. This
includes avoidance in thought. The individual avoids recall to be
spared the interoception and pain of re-experiencing. Memory
control blocks recall and the experience is unavailable for
representational redescription. It remains implicit procedural
knowledge in the system manifesting as automatic behavior
when triggered by particular circumstance. Further Inference is
precluded as the schema remains “modular” and isolated from
other processors and types of knowledge. At that more benign
end of the spectrum the schema may function as a suboptimal
prior simply because it is never aﬀorded the attention necessary
for re-representation. “I never really thought it through.”
As suggested by the SOMA framework strong schemas
may operate automatically outside of conscious awareness
and control as long as the eﬀects on behavior are adaptive
(Cleeremans et al., 2020). However, with attention the contents
of a schema may be brought to awareness to gain control
when behavior is not adaptive. The AIMCT posits that the
implicit schema adopted in an emotionally urgent situation
in childhood operates automatically and is adaptive, until
it isn’t. As the individual develops and matures her world
becomes more complicated and circumstances change. From
an objective function landscape perspective, the landscape
has danced. What was once a local peak, a good enough
solution, is now a valley. This necessitates search, and an
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 12 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 13
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
increase in the complexity in the modeling of her world in
order to remain a good regulator of that world (Conant and
Ross Ashby, 1970). When that doesn’t occur due to blocked
inference, unwanted consequences of her actions on the world
begin to accumulate in the form of symptoms. Motivation
to gain control builds. Coherence Therapy through an act
of coordinated active inference repairs the inference process
facilitating representational redescription with the emergence of
context, agency and control.
Clinical case vignette
JS was a 62 y/o woman who presented with decades of
horriﬁc compulsive nightmares while dreaming, and while
awake. These involved being physically tortured, critically
injured in a variety of accidents, or sexually assaulted. This
occurred several times a week while awake and while sleeping.
For example, contemplating a drive to visit a friend she would
imagine her car breaking down and being sexually assaulted,
killed, and stuﬀed into the trunk by a man who stopped
to help. Multiple courses of psychotherapy, medication, and
behavioral interventions over the years had not signiﬁcantly
impacted these symptoms, despite ameliorating debilitating
anxiety and depression. Coherence Therapy was initiated with
the goal of “understanding how these symptoms might make
sense.” Discovery (active inference eﬀecting representational re-
description) yielded the following Emotional Truth (suboptimal
prior). “My mother doesn’t protect me, so it’s critical that
I imagine the worst case scenario so I am prepared for
anything and can protect myself.” The emotional wound
was a suppressed memory of terror as she was driven in a
car by her intoxicated father, with her mother’s knowledge.
The pre-supposition was “I have to do this by myself, no
one else is going to help me.” And “I need to consider
anything that might ever happen.” The protective action
was to anticipate any and all possibilities that she could
think of so she would have a plan for survival when she
needed it, and would not be “caught oﬀ guard” (extreme
surprizal) again.
Almost immediately following conscious expression the
patient began to take exception with the presuppositions that
contradicted her living knowledge. “My mother is deceased. I’m
an adult and can protect myself. When my alcoholic ex-husband
put my kids and I at risk I divorced him. I’ve been married for
years to a loving husband who has helped me when I needed it.
My life is good. I don’t need to do this anymore.”
Without further intervention the symptom frequency
rapidly decreased over a period of weeks. The nightmares
stopped. When the habitual thoughts did occur, they were
rapidly followed by the thought “I don’t need to do
this anymore” and ceased. She remains symptom free at
4 year follow up.
From the existing conceptualization of CT the implicit
emotional truth was “retrieved” from “memory systems other
than those that hold one’s explicit, autobiographical, episodic
knowledge of past events” and made explicit (Ecker et al., 2012)
(No physiological mechanisms or hypotheses oﬀered to explain
“retrieval, ” how schema becomes explicit etc.) The schema
was presumed to have been “locked away by extraordinarily
durable synapses.” When the schema was confronted by
contradictory living knowledge the mismatch triggered memory
reconsolidation. This resulted in “unlearning” and “erasure” of
the schema. “The process of unlearning and erasing that schema
or mental model thoroughly resolves and puts to rest a core,
personal theme of emotional distress . . ..”(Ecker and Bridges,
2020). In summary, “the optimal process of psychotherapy
consists of guiding the profound unlearning of the symptom-
generating emotional learnings, nullifying and erasing them via
the memory reconsolidation process” (Ecker and Bridges, 2020).
From the perspective of the AIMCT the client experiences a
state of extreme surprizal with unexpected uncertainty (in a car
being driven by drunk father). The computational complexity
of calculating expected free energy to facilitate actions to ensure
survival is formidable. Therefore a “stressor mitigation policy” is
adopted to avoid ever ﬁnding herself in that situation again. This
policy entails running simulations of an inﬁnite set of “worst
case scenarios.” It is deployed without epistemic foraging to
determine if it is necessary (Am I actually in danger at this time,
in this context?). As a child with an alcoholic father and a mother
with a demonstrated failure to protect her, it is a “good enough”
policy that is adaptive.
The experience was terrifying and the policy adopted
serves to avoid having the experience again. This includes
re-experiencing the aﬀect of terror and the physiological
arousal accompanying recall of this episodic memory. Memory
control mechanisms presumably involving the right dorsolateral
PFC suppress recall and help to regulate aﬀect in an
(initially) adaptive action. The policy continues to run
outside of awareness. The unintended consequences begin to
accumulate including nightmares and compulsive simulation
of personal danger. The active suppression of recall renders
the episodic memory unavailable for active inference and
representational redescription.
The accumulation of unintended consequences (symptoms)
motivates seeking treatment. Guided by the framework of
Bayes Optimal Pathology the therapist assigns high precision
(conﬁdence) to the existence of a suboptimal prior and initiates
active inference to identify the hidden causes of the client’s
behavior. This is a goal directed “low conﬁdence search” likely
involving the frontal and dorsal parietal cortex. Motivation to
eradicate the symptom prevails over motivation to suppress
recall and the episodic memory is retrieved. “My father was
drunk, it was terrifying.” Through selective activation of sub-
regions in the hippocampus driven by the speciﬁc purpose of
remembering, the appropriate elements of memory (perceptual
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 13 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 14
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
vs. conceptual) are retrieved as the client’s brain re-represents
its own activity in an attempt to understand and gain control
over the unintended consequences of its actions. The result is a
model of herself with agency and control over the production
of her symptoms.
From the initial event to the present the client’s
circumstances have changed signiﬁcantly. The complexity of
her situation has increased as she is now an adult with life
experience, resources etc., that she didn’t have as a child.
Therefore her (old) model is no longer a good regulator of her
environment. Rapidly recognizing the shift in context (no longer
a dependent child) the problematic behavior is recognized as
unnecessary (I don’t need to do this anymore”). Rather than
“unlearning” or “erasing” anything, she has learned a model
of herself including motivation, behavior and consequences
that contains an appreciation of its former utility and current
irrelevance. This structure learning aﬀords conscious access,
agency, and control. And most importantly to the client,
eﬀortless cessation of the presenting symptom.
Conclusion
The AIMCT places Coherence Therapy in the framework of
the Free Energy Principle and the Bayesian Brain through the
lens of Bayes Optimal Pathology. Coordinated Active Inference
identiﬁes the putative Suboptimal Prior in the subject leading
to the repair of inference driven by reduction in free energy
through representational redescription that confers conscious
access, agency, control, and symptom resolution. In the process
Coherence Therapy recruits the motivation to access painful
memories. A process theory was proposed to explain how
shifts in memory control leading to de-repression might occur
given empiric data regarding motivated control, search and
memory in the brain. Potential questions for future research that
follow include: is there evidence of a R dorsal frontal activity
shift as motivation is recruited and a suppressed memory is
retrieved?, Is the dorsal parietal cortex engaged in the putative
“low conﬁdence search” for the suboptimal prior?
The identiﬁcation of the Suboptimal Prior in a subject may
also be used as a step toward identiﬁcation of phenotypes.
Suboptimal priors between subjects often show common
features e.g., “occurring early in life, in an emotionally charged
situation” (Ecker, 2016). Such observations can in turn be
used to model phenotypes that are then subjected to in silico
experimentation (Schwartenbeck and Friston, 2016). The results
of such experimentation may then inform improvements in
clinical practice e.g., extreme emotional stress may result
in excessive precision of the suboptimal prior such that
inference cannot be repaired through Coherence Therapy
without modulation of the precision through neurotransmitter
manipulation like dopamine blockade (Friston K. J. et al.,
2012). In other words, some people may fail to beneﬁt from
this form of psychotherapy until a speciﬁc neurodynamic state
is shifted pharmacologically. Thus, within the framework of
Active Inference, the clinical practice of Coherence Therapy can
help guide the research agenda for Computational Psychiatry,
the results of which can inform better practice (Corlett and
Fletcher, 2014). A virtuous cycle of Dual Aspect Monism where
the emergent properties of mind and brain resulting from the
underlying neural dynamics reﬂect and inform each other.
Psychodynamic Neuroscience.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in this study are
included in this article/supplementary material, further
inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.
Ethics statement
Written informed consent was obtained from the
individual(s) for the publication of any potentially identiﬁable
images or data included in this article.
Author contributions
The author conﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work
and has approved it for publication.
Conﬂict of interest
The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed
or endorsed by the publisher.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 14 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 15
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
References
Anderson, H. G. H. (1992). “The client is the expert, ” in Social construction
and the therapeutic process , ed. S. G. K. McNamee (Newbury Park, CA: Sage
Publications), 25ñ39.
Anderson, M. C., Ochsner, K. N., Kuhl, B., Cooper, J., Robertson, E., Gabrieli,
S. W., et al. (2004). Neural systems underlying the suppression of unwanted
memories. Science 303:232. doi: 10.1126/science.1089504
Arnsten, A. F. T., Raskind, M. A., Taylor, F. B., and Connor, D. F. (2015). The
eﬀects of stress exposure on prefrontal cortex: Translating basic research into
successful treatments for post-traumatic stress disorder.Neurobiol. Stress 1, 89ñ99.
doi: 10.1016/j.ynstr.2014.10.002
Barbas, H., and Rempel-Clower, N. (1997). Cortical structure predicts the
pattern of corticocortical connections. Cereb. Cortex 7, 635ñ646. doi: 10.1093/
cercor/7.7.635
Benoit, R. G., Hulbert, J. C., Huddleston, E., and Anderson, M. C. (2014).
Adaptive topñdown suppression of hippocampal activity and the purging of
intrusive memories from consciousness. J Cogn. Neurosci. 27, 96ñ111. doi: 10.
1162/jocn_a_00696
Benoit, R., and Anderson, M. (2012). Opposing mechanisms support the
voluntary forgetting of unwanted memories. Neuron 76, 450ñ460. doi: 10.1016/
j.neuron.2012.07.025
Botella, S., and Botella, C. (2004). The work of psychic ﬁgurability: Mental states
without representation. Abingdon: Routledge. doi: 10.4324/9780203342206
Bowers, J. S., and Davis, C. J. (2012). Bayesian just-so stories in psychology and
neuroscience. Psychol. Bull. 138, 389ñ414. doi: 10.1037/a0026450
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., and Schacter, D. L. (2008). The brain’s
default network: Anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Ann. N. Y. Acad.
Sci. 1124, 1ñ38. doi: 10.1196/annals.1440.011
Cabeza, R., Ciaramelli, E., Olson, I. R., and Moscovitch, M. (2008). The parietal
cortex and episodic memory: An attentional account. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.9, 613ñ
625. doi: 10.1038/nrn2459
Carhart-Harris, R. L., and Friston, K. J. (2010). The default-mode, ego-functions
and free-energy: A neurobiological account of Freudian ideas. Brain 133, 1265ñ
1283. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq010
Catarino, A., Küpper, C. S., Werner-Seidler, A., Dalgleish, T., and Anderson,
M. C. (2015). Failing to forget: Inhibitory-control deﬁcits compromise memory
suppression in posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychol. Sci. 26, 604ñ616. doi: 10.
1177/0956797615569889
Chamberlin, D. E. (2019a). The network balance model of trauma and
resolutionñlevel I: Large-scale neural Networks. J. EMDR Pract. Res. 13, 124ñ142.
doi: 10.1891/1933-3196.13.2.124
Chamberlin, D. E. (2019b). The predictive processing model of EMDR. Front.
Psychol. 10:2267. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02267
Ciaramelli, E., Burianov, H., Vallesi, A., Cabeza, R., and Moscovitch, M. (2020).
Functional interplay between posterior parietal cortex and hippocampus during
detection of memory targets and non-targets. Front. Neurosci. 14:563768. doi:
10.3389/fnins.2020.563768
Cieri, F., and Esposito, R. (2019). Psychoanalysis and neuroscience: The bridge
between mind and brain. Front. Psychol. 10:1983. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01983
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and
the future of cognitive science. Behav. Brain Sci. 36, 181ñ204. doi: 10.1017/
S0140525X12000477
Clark, A. (2016). Surﬁng uncertainty: Prediction, action, and the embodied
mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190217013.
001.0001
Clark, A. (2018). A nice surprise? Predictive processing and the active pursuit of
novelty. Phenomenol. Cogn. Sci. 17, 521ñ534. doi: 10.1007/s11097-017-9525-z
Clark, A., and Karmiloﬀ-Smith, A. (1993). The Cognizer’s innards: A
philosophical and psychological perspective on the development of thought.Mind
Lang. 8, 487ñ519. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0017.1993.tb00299.x
Cleeremans, A., Achoui, D., Beauny, A., Keuninckx, L., Martin, J.-R., Muñoz-
Moldes, S., et al. (2020). Learning to be conscious. Trends Cogn. Sci. 24, 112ñ123.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2019.11.011
Conant, R. C., and Ross Ashby, W. (1970). Every good regulator of a system
must be a model of that system. Int. J. Syst. Sci. 1, 89ñ97. doi: 10.1080/
00207727008920220
Corbetta, M., Patel, G., and Shulman, G. L. (2008). The reorienting system of
the human brain: From environment to theory of mind. Neuron 58, 306ñ324.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.04.017
Corlett, P. R., and Fletcher, P. C. (2014). Computational psychiatry: A Rosetta
stone linking the brain to mental illness. Lancet Psychiatry 1, 399ñ402. doi:
10.1016/S2215-0366(14)70298-6
Danker, J. F., and Anderson, J. R. (2010). The ghosts of brain states past:
Remembering reactivates the brain regions engaged during encoding. Psychol.
Bull. 136, 87ñ102. doi: 10.1037/a0017937
Daselaar, S. M., Rice, H. J., Greenberg, D. L., Cabeza, R., LaBar, K. S., and Rubin,
D. C. (2008). The spatiotemporal dynamics of autobiographical memory: Neural
correlates of recall, emotional intensity, and reliving. Cereb. Cortex 18, 217ñ229.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhm048
Daunizeau, J., den Ouden, H. E. M., Pessiglione, M., Kiebel, S. J., Stephan,
K. E., and Friston, K. J. (2010). Observing the observer (I): Meta-Bayesian models
of learning and decision-making. PLoS One 5:e15554. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0015554
Depue, B. E., Orr, J. M., Smolker, H. R., Naaz, F., and Banich, M. T. (2015).
The organization of right prefrontal networks reveals common mechanisms of
inhibitory regulation across cognitive, emotional, and motor processes. Cereb.
Cortex 26, 1634ñ1646. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhu324
Doya, K., Ishii, S., Pouget, A., and Rao, R. P. N. (2006). Bayesian brain:
Probabilistic approaches to neural coding . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. doi: 10.
7551/mitpress/9780262042383.001.0001
Ecker, B. (2015). Memory reconsolidation understood and misunderstood. Int.
J. Neuropsychother. 3, 2ñ46. doi: 10.12744/ijnpt.2015.0002-0046
Ecker, B. (2016). Coherence therapy practice manual . Oakland, CA: Coherence
Psychology Institute LLC.
Ecker, B. (2018a). Clinical translation of memory reconsolidation research:
Therapeutic methodology for transformational change by erasing implicit
emotional learnings driving symptom production.Int. J. Neuropsychother.6, 1ñ92.
doi: 10.12744/ijnpt.2018.0001-0092
Ecker, B. (2018b). “Workshopñcoherence therapy, ” in Proceedings of the
psychotherapy networker conference, Washington, DC.
Ecker, B., and Bridges, S. K. (2020). How the science of memory reconsolidation
advances the eﬀectiveness and uniﬁcation of psychotherapy. Clin. Soc. Work J. 48,
287ñ300. doi: 10.1007/s10615-020-00754-z
Ecker, B., and Hulley, L. (1996). Depth-oriented brief therapy: How to be brief
when you were trained to be dee–and vice versa . San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass
Publishers.
Ecker, B., and Toomey, B. (2008). Depotentiation of symptom-producing
implicit memory in coherence therapy. J. Construct. Psychol. 21, 87ñ150. doi:
10.1080/10720530701853685
Ecker, B., Ticic, R., and Hulley, L. (2012). Unlocking the emotional brain:
Eliminating symptoms at their roots using memory reconsolidation. New York, NY:
Routledge. doi: 10.4324/9780203804377
Eliasmith, C. (2003). Moving beyond metaphors: Understanding the mind for
what it is. J. Philos. 100, 493ñ520. doi: 10.5840/jphil2003100102
Engen, H. G., and Anderson, M. C. (2018). Memory control: A fundamental
mechanism of emotion regulation. Trends Cogn. Sci. 22, 982ñ995. doi: 10.1016/j.
tics.2018.07.015
Engen, H. G., Kanske, P., and Singer, T. (2017). The neural component-process
architecture of endogenously generated emotion. Soc. Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 12,
197ñ211. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsw108
FitzGerald, T. H., Dolan, R. J., and Friston, K. J. (2014). Model averaging,
optimal inference, and habit formation.Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8:457. doi: 10.3389/
fnhum.2014.00457
Fleming, S. M. (2020). Awareness as inference in a higher-order state space.
Neurosci. Conscious 2020:niz020. doi: 10.1093/nc/niz020
Freud, S. (1895). A project for a scientiﬁc psychology , Standard Edn, Vol. 1.
London: Hogarth Press, 283ñ397.
Freud, S., Strachey, J., Freud, A., Rothgeb, C. L., Richards, A., Strachey, A., et al.
(1961). The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud.
London: Hogarth Press.
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the brain?Trends
Cogn. Sci. 13, 293ñ301. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A uniﬁed brain theory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127ñ138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. J., and Stephan, K. E. (2007). Free-energy and the brain. Synthese.
159, 417ñ458. doi: 10.1007/s11229-007-9237-y
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 15 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 16
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., and Pezzulo, G. (2017).
Active inference: A process theory.Neural Comput. 29, 1ñ49. doi: 10.1162/NECO_
a_00912
Friston, K. J., Lin, M., Frith, C. D., Pezzulo, G., Hobson, J. A., and Ondobaka,
S. (2017). Active inference, curiosity and insight. Neural Comput. 29, 2633ñ2683.
doi: 10.1162/neco_a_00999
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., Yuﬁk, Y., Sajid, N., Price, C. J., and Holmes, E. (2020).
Generative models, linguistic communication and active inference. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 118, 42ñ64. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.07.005
Friston, K., Adams, R. A., Perrinet, L., and Breakspear, M. (2012). Perceptions
as hypotheses: Saccades as experiments. Front. Psychol. 3:151. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2012.00151
Friston, K. J., Shiner, T., FitzGerald, T., Galea, J. M., Adams, R., Brown, H.,
et al. (2012). Dopamine, aﬀordance and active inference. PLoS. Comput. Biol.
8:e1002327. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002327
Friston, K., and Frith, C. (2015). A duet for one. Conscious Cogn. 36, 390ñ405.
doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2014.12.003
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., Doherty, J. O., and
Pezzulo, G. (2016). Active inference and learning. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 68,
862ñ879. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.06.022
Frith, C. D. (2012). The role of metacognition in human social interactions.
Philos. Trans. R Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.367, 2213ñ2223. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2012.0123
Fuster, J. M., and Bressler, S. L. (2015). Past makes future: Role of pFC in
prediction. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 27, 639ñ654. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_00746
Gagnepain, P., Hulbert, J., and Anderson, M. C. (2017). Parallel regulation of
memory and emotion supports the suppression of intrusive memories.J. Neurosci.
37:6423. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2732-16.2017
Gopnik, A., and Wellman, H. M. (2012). Reconstructing constructivism: Causal
models, Bayesian learning mechanisms, and the theory theory. Psychol. Bull. 138,
1085ñ1108. doi: 10.1037/a0028044
Gopnik, A., Grady, S., Lucas, C. G., Griﬃths, T. L., Wente, A., Bridgers, S., et al.
(2017). Changes in cognitive ﬂexibility and hypothesis search across human life
history from childhood to adolescence to adulthood. Pro.c Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
114, 7892ñ7899. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1700811114
Hobson, J. A., Gott, J. A., and Friston, K. J. (2021). Minds and brains, sleep and
psychiatry. Psychiatr. Res. Clin. Pract. 3, 12ñ28. doi: 10.1176/appi.prcp.20200023
Hohwy, J. (2013). The predictive mind. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199682737.001.0001
Holmes, J., and Nolte, T. (2019). “Surprise” and the Bayesian brain: Implications
for psychotherapy theory and practice. Front. Psychol. 10:592. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2019.00592
Hopkins, J. (2012). “Psychoanalysis, representation and neuroscience: The
Freudian unconscious and the Bayesian brain, ” in From the couch to the
lab: Psychoanalysis, neuroscience and cognitive psychology in dialogue , eds A.
Fotopoulu, D. Pfaﬀ, and M. Conway (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 230ñ265.
doi: 10.1093/med/9780199600526.003.0014
Hopkins, J. (2016). Free energy and virtual reality in neuroscience and
psychoanalysis: A complexity theory of dreaming and mental disorder. Front.
Psychol. 7:922. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00922
Hulbert, J. C., Henson, R. N., and Anderson, M. C. (2016). Inducing
amnesia through systemic suppression. Nat. Commun. 7:11003. doi: 10.1038/
ncomms11003
Ingvar, D. H. (1985). “Memory of the future”: An essay on the temporal
organization of conscious awareness. Hum. Neurobiol. 4, 127ñ136.
Johnson, B., and Flores Mosri, D. (2016). The neuropsychoanalytic approach:
Using neuroscience as the basic science of psychoanalysis. Front. Psychol. 7:1459.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01459
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a cognitive science of
language, inference, and consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Karmiloﬀ-Smith, A. (1979). A functional approach to child language: A study of
determiners and reference. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Karmiloﬀ-Smith, A. (1986). From meta-processes to conscious access: Evidence
from children’s metalinguistic and repair data.Cognition 23, 95ñ147. doi: 10.1016/
0010-0277(86)90040-5
Karmiloﬀ-Smith, A. (1994). Précis of beyond modularity: A developmental
perspective on cognitive science. Behav. Brain Sci. 17, 693ñ707. doi: 10.1017/
S0140525X00036621
Kelly, G. (1991). The psychology of personal constructs. London: Routledge.
Kruglanski, A. W., Jasko, K., and Friston, K. (2020). All thinking is ‘Wishful’
thinking. Trends Cogn. Sci. 24, 413ñ424. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2020.03.004
Lanius, R. A., Frewen, P. A., Tursich, M., Jetly, R., and McKinnon, M. C. (2015).
Restoring large-scale brain networks in PTSD and related disorders: A proposal
for neuroscientiﬁcally-informed treatment interventions. Eur. J. Psychotraumatol.
6:27313. doi: 10.3402/ejpt.v6.27313
Levine, H. B. (2012). The colourless canvas: Representation, therapeutic action
and the creation of mind. Int. J. Psychoanal. 93, 607ñ647. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-
8315.2012.00574.x
Linson, A., and Friston, K. (2019). Reframing PTSD for computational
psychiatry with the active inference framework. Cogn. Neuropsychiatry 24, 347ñ
368. doi: 10.1080/13546805.2019.1665994
Linson, A., Clark, A., Ramamoorthy, S., and Friston, K. (2018). The active
inference approach to ecological perception: General information dynamics for
natural and artiﬁcial embodied cognition.Front. Robot. AI 5:21. doi: 10.3389/frobt.
2018.00021
Linson, A., Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2020). Active inference, stressors, and
psychological trauma: A neuroethological model of (mal)adaptive explore-exploit
dynamics in ecological context. Behav. Brain Res. 380:112421. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.
2019.112421
Mary, A., Dayan, J., Leone, G., Postel, C., Fraisse, F., Malle, C., et al. (2020).
Resilience after trauma: The role of memory suppression. Science 367:eaay8477.
doi: 10.1126/science.aay8477
Murray, G. B. (1992). Limbic music. Psychosom. J. Consult. Liaison Psychiatry
33, 16ñ23. doi: 10.1016/S0033-3182(92)72016-7
Panagiotaropoulos, T. I., Wang, L., and Dehaene, S. (2020). Hierarchical
architecture of conscious processing and subjective experience. Cogn.
Neuropsychol. 37, 180ñ183. doi: 10.1080/02643294.2020.1760811
Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2017). The active construction of the visual world.
Neuropsychologia 104, 92ñ101. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2017.08.003
Parr, T., and Pezzulo, G. (2021). Understanding, explanation, and active
inference. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 15:772641. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2021.772641
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., and Friston, K. J. (2022). Active inference: The free energy
principle in mind, brain, and behavior . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. doi: 10.7551/
mitpress/12441.001.0001
Parr, T., Rees, G., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Computational neuropsychology and
bayesian inference. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 12:61. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00061
Paz-Alonso, P. M., Bunge, S. A., Anderson, M. C., and Ghetti, S. (2013). Strength
of Coupling within a mnemonic control network diﬀerentiates those who can
and cannot suppress memory retrieval. J. Neurosci. 33, 5017ñ5026. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.3459-12.2013
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Hierarchical active inference:
A theory of motivated control. Trends Cogn. Sci. 22, 294ñ306. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.
2018.01.009
Schacter, D. L, Addis, D. R., Hassabis, D., Martin, V. C., Spreng, R. N., and
Szpunar, K. K. (2012). The future of memory: Remembering, imagining, and the
brain. Neuron 76, 677ñ694. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.11.001
Schacter, D. L., Addis, D. R., and Buckner, R. L. (2007). Remembering the
past to imagine the future: The prospective brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 657ñ661.
doi: 10.1038/nrn2213
Schwartenbeck, P., and Friston, K. (2016). Computational phenotyping in
psychiatry: A worked example. eNeuro 3, 1ñ18. doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0049-16.
2016
Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T. H., Mathys, C., Dolan, R., Wurst, F.,
Kronbichler, M., et al. (2015). Optimal inference with suboptimal models:
Addiction and active Bayesian inference. Med. Hypotheses 84, 109ñ117. doi: 10.
1016/j.mehy.2014.12.007
Sheldon, S., Fenerci, C., and Gurguryan, L. (2019). A neurocognitive perspective
on the forms and functions of autobiographical memory retrieval. Front. Syst.
Neurosci. 13:4. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2019.00004
Shimamura, A. P. (2011). Episodic retrieval and the cortical binding of relational
activity. Cogn. Aﬀect. Behav. Neurosci. 11, 277ñ291. doi: 10.3758/s13415-011-
0031-4
Singh, L., Schüpbach, L., Moser, D. A., Wiest, R., Hermans, E. J., and
Aue, T. (2020). The eﬀect of optimistic expectancies on attention bias:
Neural and behavioral correlates. Sci. Rep. 10:6495. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-
61440-1
Smith, R., Alkozei, A., Lane, R. D., and Killgore, W. D. S. (2016). Unwanted
reminders: The eﬀects of emotional memory suppression on subsequent neuro-
cognitive processing. Conscious Cogn. 44, 103ñ113. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2016.
07.008
Smith, R., Schwartenbeck, P., Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2020). An active
inference approach to modeling structure learning: Concept learning as an
example case. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 14:41. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2020.00041
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 16 frontiersin.org
fnhum-16-955558 December 21, 2022 Time: 15:5 # 17
Chamberlin 10.3389/fnhum.2022.955558
Solms, M., and Turnbull, O. H. (2011). What is neuropsychoanalysis.
Neuropsychoanalysis 13, 133ñ145. doi: 10.1080/15294145.2011.10773670
Streb, M., Mecklinger, A., Anderson, M. C., Johanna, L.-H., and Michael, T.
(2016). Memory control ability modulates intrusive memories after analogue
trauma. J. Aﬀect. Disord. 192, 134ñ142. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2015.12.032
Strelnikov, K. (2014). Neuroenergetics at the brain-mind interface: A conceptual
approach. Cogn. Process 15, 297ñ306. doi: 10.1007/s10339-014-0609-1
Toomey, B., and Ecker, B. (2007). Of neurons and knowings: Constructivism,
coherence psychology, and their neurodynamic substrates. J. Construct. Psychol.
20, 201ñ245. doi: 10.1080/10720530701347860
Topolinski, S., Likowski, K. U., Weyers, P., and Strack, F. (2009). The
face of ﬂuency: Semantic coherence automatically elicits a speciﬁc pattern of
facial muscle reactions. Cogn. Emot. 23, 260ñ271. doi: 10.1080/0269993080199
4112
Tucker, D. M., and Luu, P. (2021). Motive control of unconscious inference:
The limbic base of adaptive Bayes. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 128, 328ñ345. doi:
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.05.029
van Kesteren, M. T. R., and Meeter, M. (2020). How to optimize knowledge
construction in the brain. NPJ Sci. Learn. 5:5. doi: 10.1038/s41539-020-0
064-y
Wald, A. (1947). An essentially complete class of admissible decision functions.
Ann. Math. Stat. 10, 549ñ555. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177730345
Zhang, P., Jamison, K., Engel, S., He, B., and He, S. (2011). Binocular rivalry
requires visual attention. Neuron 71, 362ñ369. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.05.035
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 17 frontiersin.org