fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 1
TYPE Hypothesis and Theory
PUBLISHED 25 October 2022
DOI 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Antonino Carcione,
Terzo Centro di Psicoterapia, Italy
REVIEWED BY
J. Shashi Kiran Reddy,
ThoughtSeed Labs, India
Zhen-Dong Wang,
Shanghai University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, China
Daniela Flores Mosri,
Universidad Intercontinental, Mexico
*CORRESPONDENCE
Jicheng Chen
chenjicheng2008@163.com
Linlin Chen
linlinchen0707@163.com
SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to
Perception Science,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Neuroscience
RECEIVED 22 June 2022
ACCEPTED 30 September 2022
PUBLISHED 25 October 2022
CITATION
Chen J and Chen L (2022) The hard
problem of consciousness—A
perspective from holistic philosophy.
Front. Neurosci.16:975281.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
COPYRIGHT
© 2022 Chen and Chen. This is an
open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which
does not comply with these terms.
The hard problem of
consciousness—A perspective
from holistic philosophy
Jicheng Chen* and Linlin Chen*
Department of Vasculocardiology, Shenzhen Longhua District Central Hospital, Guangdong
Medical University, Shenzhen, China
Based on a material view and reductionism, science has achieved great
success. These cognitive paradigms treat the external as an objective
existence and ignore internal consciousness. However, this cognitive
paradigm, which we take for granted, has also led to some dilemmas related
to consciousness in biology and physics. Together, these phenomena reveal
the interaction and inseparable side of matter and consciousness (or body
and mind) rather than the absolute opposition. However, a material view
that describes matter and consciousness in opposition cannot explain the
underlying principle, which causes a gap in interpretation. For example,
consciousness is believed to be the key to inﬂuencing wave function collapse
(reality), but there is a lack of a scientiﬁc model to study how this happens.
In this study, we reveal that the theory of scientiﬁc cognition exhibits a
paradigm shift in terms of perception. This tendency implies that reconciling
the relationship between matter and consciousness requires an abstract
theoretical model that is not based on physical forms. We propose that
the holistic cognitive paradigm offers a potential solution to reconcile the
dilemmas and can be scientiﬁcally proven. In contrast to the material view,
the holistic cognitive paradigm is based on the objective contradictory
nature of perception rather than the external physical characteristics. This
cognitive paradigm relies on perception and experience (not observation) and
summarizes all existence into two abstract contradictory perceptual states
(Yin-Yang). Matter and consciousness can be seen as two different states
of perception, uniﬁed in perception rather than in opposition. This abstract
perspective offers a distinction from the material view, which is also the
key to falsiﬁcation, and the occurrence of an event is inseparable from the
irrational state of the observer’s conscious perception. Alternatively, from the
material view, the event is random and has nothing to do with perception. We
hope that this study can provide some new enlightenment for the scientiﬁc
coordination of the opposing relationship between matter and consciousness.
KEYWORDS
hard problem of consciousness, reductionism, holistic philosophy, perception,
contradiction, free energy principle, quantum mechanics
Frontiers in Neuroscience 01 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 2
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
Introduction
In the past few 100 years, biology and physics have
achieved remarkable success. On the basis of material view
and reductionism, we regarded the external as an objective
being and ignored the inner conscious experience. The
natural phenomena and laws are described by observation and
statistics and the macroscopic phenomena are explained by
microscopic quantum. For example, the phenomenon of life is
explained by cells and the origin of the universe is explained
by microscopic quantum. We have long been accustomed
to deploying the cognitive paradigm of reductionism. Its
underlying assumptions and methods are taken for granted.
However, this cognitive paradigm has brought about a series
of puzzles about consciousness in both biology and physics,
reﬂecting its limitations.
Over the past few decades, neural and cognitive scientists
have made remarkable progress in studying consciousness from
a physical level (Dehaene and Changeux, 2011; Boly et al., 2013;
Owen, 2019). Koch et al. (2016) argue that we are now at a
point where we can understand consciousness in a scientiﬁc
way, such as neuronal correlates of consciousness (NCC), and
not as a philosophical question, especially in the ﬁeld of visual
consciousness (Crick and Koch, 1998; Koch et al., 2016), and
these represent the functional side of consciousness research.
However, subjective experiences cannot be explained from an
objective standpoint. Relatedly, how do organisms produce the
meaning of life that we experience, and how it relates to the
brain (the mind–body problem) (Reddy, 2016; Levin, 2020)?
This represents the “hard problem of consciousness” (Chalmers,
1998; Solms, 2014, 2021; Solms and Friston, 2018).
From another point of view, similar to the above problem,
there is a contradiction between free will and causality based
on time and space, which cannot be currently explained by
reductionism (Heisenberg, 2009; Rappaport, 2011; Hillman,
2018). For humans, if our brain produces certain thoughts, we
can detect the electrical activity in the corresponding regions of
the brain with instruments, but we do not have an idea what
causes nerve cells to become excited. We do not get excited by
an external electrode stimulation, which is perceptually called
free will.
We establish causality based on time and space but, in an
experiment like this, the electrical excitation of the brain’s nerves
is triggered by invisible thoughts or motivation that we think
of as autonomous without any physical cause. But we do not
know exactly how invisible thoughts lead to physical changes in
the brain. This feature of consciousness undoubtedly challenges
the idea of causality, dependent on space and time. Is the sense
of freedom we perceive not subject to the laws of the physical
world? If we attribute the neuroelectric excitation to the external
physical environment, it means that we are like a robot, free
will is just a mechanical reﬂection of the environment, a kind
of illusion. Although there is some neurobiological evidence
against the nature of free will, the evidence is not convincing.
More importantly, if free will is an illusion, how do we explain
the meaning of life? (Brass et al., 2019; Lavazza, 2019).
The cognitive paradigm of material view and reductionism
also leads to the puzzle of consciousness in quantum physics.
Matter and consciousness, which used to be philosophical
issues, have become concrete scientiﬁc problems (Frank, 2015).
Quantum mechanics has revealed some puzzling microscopic
phenomena, such as wave-particle duality and quantum
entanglement. These phenomena have challenged classical
thinking regarding the objective physical reality and suggest
an inseparable aspect of matter and consciousness, in which
we cannot treat consciousness as an illusion. To solve the core
problem of how quantum random collapse produces a well-
ordered world, scientists have focused on consciousness as the
key. John von Neumann argued that only consciousness could
eventually collapse the wave function to produce a deﬁnite
reality (Neumann, 2020). Eugene Paul Wigner argued that the
role of conscious creatures in quantum mechanics must be
diﬀerent from that of inanimate measuring devices (Wigner
et al., 1992). In 2007, Robert Lanza and Bob Berman came
up with a new concept termed biocentrism (Lanza, 2012).
They proposed that order or reality requires the presence of a
conscious observer. However, how consciousness causes wave
function collapse (or aﬀects reality) remains unclear.
In conclusion, we think that although these consciousness-
related puzzles take diﬀerent forms in diﬀerent disciplines,
what they have in common is that they jointly reveal that
matter and consciousness (body-mind) interact and cannot
be separated, but they lack a scientiﬁc explanation of the
underlying principle and mechanism. For example, how can
abstract subjective experiences lead to physical neural excitation
(we cannot observe any medium)? How does consciousness
aﬀect wave function collapse? The cognitive paradigm of
the material view, which puts matter and consciousness in
opposition, will lead to such gaps in interpretation. We propose
there is another cognitive paradigm that can reconcile the
antagonistic relationship between matter and consciousness and
reconcile these dilemmas.
Currently, scientists are trying to build models to
understand the nature of consciousness (Seth and Bayne,
2022). The free energy principle proposed by Friston and
Stephan (2007) is applied to explain this puzzle and it has
become a compelling solution (Solms, 2018, 2021). The
precursor to the free-energy principle was a way of describing
how the brain works. At every level, the brain’s prediction of
what the most likely experience will be in a given environment
is compared with the actual information received from the
senses. If the prediction is not correct, then higher levels of
the nervous system are required (Friston and Stephan, 2007;
Ramstead et al., 2018). The free energy principle describes
the mind–brain system as any other adaptive biological
system, connecting psychological sciences, neuroscience, and
Frontiers in Neuroscience 02 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 3
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
related ﬁelds in conﬂuence and synergy with psychoanalytic
concepts (Cieri and Esposito, 2019). In addition, there are
some other well-known theories. Integrated information
theory (IIT), developed by Tononi and collaborators, focuses
on the objectivity of subjective experience itself (Koch et al.,
2016). The orchestrated objective reduction (or “Orch OR”)
model, developed by Hameroﬀ and Penrose, has suggested that
consciousness is the result of the collapse of wave functions
caused by quantum gravity in microtubules (Hameroﬀ, 2012;
Hameroﬀ and Penrose, 2014). These hypotheses oﬀer a deeper
insight into the understanding of the phenomenal aspect of
consciousness (Rees et al., 2002).
Philosophical perspective may oﬀer inspiration for scientiﬁc
studies and provide theoretical foundations for understanding
the relationship between matter and consciousness (or the
nature of consciousness; Churchland and Churchland, 1997;
Sturm, 2012). The confusion aﬄicting physics today has led
scientists to understand the universe from a more holistic
perspective. Niels Bohr believed that the Taiji diagram (the logo
of holistic philosophy) contained the principle of wave-particle
duality (Capra, 2000), and quantum physicist Bohm (2004) tried
to explain the origins of order from the perspective of wholeness
in his ontological picture of the universe. However, we still need
to build a more detailed theoretical model of consciousness
that can be described scientiﬁcally on the basis of a deeper
understanding of holistic philosophy.
There are signiﬁcant cultural and cognitive diﬀerences
between the East and West (Wang et al., 2021). The material
view is not the only cognitive paradigm in which we describe
the movement and development of the universe, the Book of
Changes and Tao Te Ching tend to understand the world from
a holistic perspective (Yutang, 1948).
This holistic philosophy has profoundly aﬀected diﬀerent
cultural forms of the East and provided a series of eﬀective
social applications (Liu, 2008; Kafatos and Y ang, 2016). As an
important work from the perspective of holistic philosophy, this
study discusses our understanding of Tao Te Ching. We propose
that the theory of scientiﬁc cognition exhibits a paradigm shift in
terms of perception. With a tendency implying that reconciling
the dilemma of consciousness requires an abstract theoretical
model that is not based on physical forms, the Taiji diagram in
the philosophy of the holistic view is a candidate. We propose
that the holistic perspective provides a potential solution and
new inspirations to solve current reductionism-based scientiﬁc
dilemmas.
Objectivity is the foundation for establishing a theoretical
system in both the material view and holistic view. The
cognitive paradigm of holistic philosophy is based on the basic
objectivity of perception, which shows the objective nature
of contradiction beyond the control of the individual, but
intuitively, we think of it as subjective or as belonging to
an individual. Although objectivity is abstract, it is the basis
and key to establishing a holistic description system, just
like our description of the objectivity of diﬀerent physical
quantities. The holistic view relies on conscious experience
(rather than observation) and reduces everything to two
abstract perceptual states: Yin-Y ang. We regard matter and
consciousness as two contradictory perceptual states that
are uniﬁed in perception. Their unity implies that the
inner and the outer are not absolute opposites, but that
there is an interconvert relationship between the two. This
perspective avoids the dilemma of consciousness caused by
the emphasis of the material view on the external objective
description. We will elaborate on the holistic philosophy in the
following paragraphs.
Holistic philosophy
Different explanations of the origin and
evolution of the universe from Tao Te
Ching
Tao Te Ching , written by Lao Zi, has had a profound
inﬂuence worldwide. It oﬀers a representative interpretation of
holistic philosophy, although there is no uniﬁed interpretation
of the book. In this part, we ﬁrst introduce the core ideas of the
holistic philosophy in the Tao Te Ching. We will discuss this in
detail with some examples in the following chapters. Its ﬁrst and
most important chapter includes a brief exposition of the origin
of everything:
The Tao that can be told of, Is not the Absolute Tao;/The
Names that can be given, Are not Absolute Names./The
Nameless is the origin of Heaven and Earth, The Named is
the Mother of All Things./Therefore: Oftentimes, one strips
oneself of passion/In order to see the Secret of Life; Oftentimes,
one regards life with passion,/In order to see its manifest
forms./These two (the Secret and its manifestations) Are (in
their nature) the same;/They are given diﬀerent names, When
they become manifest./They may both be called the Cosmic
Mystery:/Reaching from the Mystery into the Deeper Mystery,
Is the Gate to the Secret of all life (Yutang, 1948).
We think this chapter has the following three meanings:
Existence is relative and an objective
material entity independent of
perception is essentially indescribable
The creation of everything (reality or a phenomenon to be
described, such as the state of a particle rather than a particle
entity) and perception occur simultaneously and irreplaceably;
they are two sides of the same coin. This diﬀers greatly from
the objective observations that we assume in intuition and
basic scientiﬁc assumptions. According to our understanding,
Frontiers in Neuroscience 03 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 4
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
a state of being always requires symmetric physical descriptors,
such as up and down, large and small, light and heavy,
and more and less. An alphabet without letters cannot be
described, and, in the same way, being or matter cannot
exist without these contradictory descriptors (diﬀerence), which
cannot exist independently from perception. In other words,
an objective material entity or physical descriptor (state)
cannot exist independent of perception (Lanza, 2012). For
example, the statement “our bodies are made up of cells, ”
is usually thought of as an objective phenomenon, and cells
are an objective existence that is the same for everyone,
whether you know or observe them or not. However, according
to our understanding of Tao Te Ching , the observed cells
(“The Named” in Tao Te Ching ) and the feeling of the
person describing the cells (“The Nameless” in Tao Te Ching ,
cannot be concretized) are two objective states of existence
that appear simultaneously and cannot be replaced by one
another.
On one hand, cells exhibit external physical characteristics,
such as mass and size, which can be observed, and the
objectivity of cells is thus recognized. On the other, a doctor
who knows a lot about cells and a patient who is being
treated have diﬀerent perceptions of the “cell” (a material
entity regarded as objective, which forms diﬀerent perceptual
states for doctor and patient) that result in diﬀerent realities
or state of feelings caused by their diﬀerent roles (the doctor
and the patient are, respectively, active or passive reality).
This has important meaning beyond physical form; although
it cannot be described concretely, it is also an objective aspect.
Therefore, if the cell is deﬁned as a material entity that is
objective or the same to everyone, this sort of cognition is
one-sided. Although we can explain the body in terms of the
laws of cells based on reductionism, we also know that a
group of cells does not equal a person. Subjective experience
cannot be explained ( Figure 1 ). A holistic view focuses on
the objectivity of these abstract perceived states (the meaning
of feeling and subjective experience) rather than external
physical forms. It can be used to build a diﬀerent descriptive
system depending on the perception that completely diﬀers
from material views. Many social applications of the East,
such as traditional Chinese medicine, acupuncture, architectural
design styles, and culture overall, derive from this philosophical
view.
An objective law describing everything
independent of perception does not
exist too
While we may ponder whether the world is deterministic or
non-deterministic, which remains unclear, holistic philosophy
may provide a reference point for this question. When we
undertake scientiﬁc explorations, we see ourselves as observers
based on the distinction between our physical form and external
objects, which we take for granted. According to reductionism,
we have succeeded in explaining macroscopic phenomena in
terms of microscopic quanta. This leads us to believe that
we can construct a theory explaining everything based on
reductionism. Following this assumption, external objective
laws and the movement of the universe have nothing to do
with perception. However, according to our understanding
of holistic philosophy, a theory of everything cannot exist
independently of perception. An objective law describing the
evolution of everything (reality) independent of perception does
not exist, and we cannot make objective remarks as independent
observers or separate perception from the laws of nature.
Conscious experiences and preferences in feelings participate in
the creation of order/reality. We will discuss this assumption in
detail in the next chapter.
The way order and reality occur
depends on the state of perception
In Chapter 42 of Tao Te Ching , Lao Zi deﬁned the
development trend of everything as follows:
“Out of Tao, One is born;/Out of One, Two;/Out of Two,
Three;/Out of Three, the created universe./The created
universe carries the yin at its back, and the yang in
front;/Through the union of the pervading principles it
reaches harmony” (Yutang, 1948).
As per our understanding, based on the perceived
diﬀerences in the positions of the two sides of a conﬂict, the
development of reality always tends toward the “good” side of
feelings (it is a relative concept that depends on perception),
such as reasonableness, balance, equality, unity, and fairness
(the created universe carries the Yin at its back and the Y ang
in front). Otherwise, it will increasingly encounter resistance,
making this form untenable and leading to either a collapse or a
shift to the opposition.
In general, the movement of everything is always from
opposition to unity. The frame of reference that inﬂuences
reality is an internal rather than an external concrete frame
of reference. In other words, causality is not external but
inseparable from perception, being a relative concept depending
on the state of perception.
If body and mind are two appearances (aspects) of the same
underlying thing, then what stuﬀ is the underlying thing made
of? In other words, using the analogy of thunder and lightning,
what is the metapsychological equivalent of “electricity” i.e., the
thing that gives rise to thunder and lightning, both? (Solms,
2018).
According to holistic philosophy, matter and consciousness
(body–mind, external or internal) are not opposites, but two
Frontiers in Neuroscience 04 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 5
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
FIGURE 1
The material view and the holistic view put different emphasis on objectivity. (A) Cells are considered objective material entities that are the
same for everyone whether you know/observe it or not. This paradigm focuses on external objectivity based on observation. (B) Understanding
the rules of the cell can cure disease, although this effect is universally applicable, however, the different experience on the “same and
objective” cells results in different fates. Different “fates” are also another aspect of objectivity. This paradigm emphasizes the objectivity of
feelings and experiences rather than external physical forms.
sides of the same coin. They are seen as two states that can be
separated by perception (represented by Yin-Y ang), which can
be used to describe the evolution of reality in a paradigm shift
way. Rather than relying on observations and statistics, this kind
of description relies on conscious experience. In contrast to the
material view, the unity of matter and consciousness at the level
of perception also implies that the occurrence of reality is an
inseparable process from conscious experience.
For example, over the process of evolution, the nests that
ants build to adapt to their environment must have changed
dramatically, and we are using the ant nest as a metaphor for
reality (the result of an event or phenomenon being observed).
If we observe a nest of ants and replace any individual ant, we
will ﬁnd that the construction of the ant nest will not be aﬀected.
We think of the individual as unimportant; ants build nests by
instinct, which is unconscious behavior. This is just a description
of a static phenomenon, the individual conscious experience of
ants is ignored. However, we know (through perception and
empathy, rather than observation) that the structure of ant nests
also evolves and this process is not random; it depends on the
constant adjustment of the invisible individual’s perceptual state
to adapt to the external environment.
In other words, reality comes from the interaction of the
individual (inner feelings and experiences) with the external
environment and depends on the preferences or tendencies in
perception. The irrational sense (to seek a more harmonious
state of feeling) is a factor in the creation of observed reality,
although this is not visible to the observer. It is an abstract
and relative concept. This is an important diﬀerence between
holism and material view. As an observer, reductionism tries
to ﬁnd causes from the outside and descriptions of concrete
objects’ motion. Following a holistic view, perception is an
objective being, the occurrence of reality is inseparable from
the state of conscious experience (inner). Although we use ants
as an example, according to holism, this description applies
to everything, even if the object is a microparticle or abiotic
(the created universe carries the “Yin” at its back and the
“Y ang” in front).
This is not to say that inanimate objects or particles have
perception or consciousness, but that the state of perception
itself is objective. It is an objective existence born together from
subject and object. Unlike material views, which treat external
material entities as objective beings, in a holistic view, the state
of perception (Yin-Y ang; is the individual’s reality passive or
active, free or not free, purpose achieved or not achieved) and
the preference of feeling is the most objective existence. It
does not depend on external physical forms to describe objects,
but diﬀerent realities (reality is passive/Yin or active/Y ang)
experienced through perception. Therefore, the object described
through a holistic view is abstract reality (reality is relative,
and the “same” phenomenon means diﬀerent things to diﬀerent
people) inseparable from perception, strongly diﬀering from
material views ( Figure 2 ). Why can reality be described? In
later chapters, we will discuss the objectivity of perception, its
character beyond individual control determines the basis on
which reality can be described.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 05 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 6
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
FIGURE 2
Different characteristics of material view and holistic view. In these two different cognitive paradigms, we propose that the cognitive paradigm
based on the view of matter has signiﬁcant, concrete and widely disseminated characteristics. Holism, on the other hand, is inaccurate and
abstract because of its reliance on experience and perception. The social applications derived from it have similar characteristics, focusing on
the internal inﬂuence of external reality and purpose rather than tools invention. For example, traditional Chinese medicine, tenon and mortise,
acupuncture and moxibustion, architectural style and soon. This paper tries to put forward a hypothesis that can be scientiﬁcally tested to prove
the rationality of this philosophical paradigm and provide reference to solve the paradox of consciousness in biology and physics.
Discussion on the development of
characteristics of scientiﬁc
cognition
Scientiﬁc cognition shows a signiﬁcant
paradigm shift trend from opposition
to unity in terms of perception
In (section “The paradigm-shifting trends of reality depend
on irrational feelings”) we propose that an objective law
describing everything independent of perception does not exist.
Here, we will discuss in detail why the process of scientiﬁc
exploration is not just a process of objective observation.
The term “paradigm shift” was ﬁrst coined by the twentieth-
century philosopher Thomas Kuhn. In Kuhn’s view, a paradigm
is a speciﬁc knowledge system formed by a series of results
obtained from scientiﬁc research (Kuhn, 2004). The widespread
acceptance of a paradigm indicates the maturation of a
scientiﬁc ﬁeld. When existing paradigms fail to explain certain
natural phenomena, new paradigms that can explain them
emerge. Kuhn also believed that there is nological relation
between the new paradigm and the old paradigm. In other
words, new theoretical paradigms cannot be deduced from
old paradigms by relying on logic ( Figure 3 ). However, if
we analyze key scientiﬁc theories of physics and biology
from the perspective of their historical development, we
will ﬁnd that the cognitive pattern (we are concerned not
with the mathematical or physical form of the theories but
with their abstract meaning in perception) abstracted by
these revealed phenomena show surprising similarities and
development trends.
Physics
Before Copernicus, the Earth was thought to be the center
of the universe. In 1543, Copernicus formally proposed the
heliocentric theory, placing the sun at the center of the universe.
In terms of spatial arrangement, this theory overturned the
self-centered (human) cognitive model.
In 1687, Newton proposed the law of universal gravitation,
which became the cornerstone of classical physics. This allows
us to accurately describe the motion of objects based on the
principle of force interactions. A simple linear causal cognitive
model is created based on the opposition between time and
space. Newton’s view of space and time dominated physics for
over 200 years until Einstein’s theory of relativity deepened our
FIGURE 3
The development characteristics of scientiﬁc cognition. (A)
Theoretically, the development of scientiﬁc cognition should be
a linear process. (B) Thomas Kuhn thought that the
development of scientiﬁc cognition is a non-linear paradigm
shift process, and there is not a logical relation between the new
paradigm and the old paradigm.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 06 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 7
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
understanding of Time and Space (quality and energy), which do
not exist independently and are naturally linked. This discovery
overturned the opposing relationship of time and space and
indicated the universality of connections on a material level.
Nonetheless, the observer and the object remained in a state of
opposition (more basic forms of opposition).
In the nineteenth century, scientists came together to
develop quantum theory, represented by the phenomenon
of wave-particle duality and quantum entanglement. At the
microscopic quantum level, the description of a quantum state
requires a conscious observer, and the observer and the object
(subject and object) are inseparable. It further deepened the
scope of a universal connection based on the indivisibility
of relativistic space-time, thereby challenging the most basic
scientiﬁc assumptions about the distinction between subject and
object based on physical form opposites.
Biology
In biology, scientiﬁc cognition developed similarly. In the
seventeenth century, species were believed to be created by God
and human beings had a core status in nature. However, in 1858,
Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace proposed the theory
of natural selection at the Linnean Society in London, explaining
the orderly evolution of biological species, including humans.
This theory subverted the self/human-centered cognitive
paradigm for positioning biological species in nature.
Before the work of the Austrian biologist Gregor Johann
Mendel, people’s understanding of biological traits was vague
and abstract. Biological traits showed the dual characteristics
of heredity and variation, similar to the cognition of the
motion of stars and objects before Newton’s theory of universal
gravitation. In the middle of the nineteenth century, ﬁndings
in molecular biology revealed that interactions between ligands
and receptors produce information transfers that form the basis
of microscopic activities. In 1865, Mendel revealed the laws of
segregation and independent assortment in genetics (dominant
and recessive genes) following 8 years of experiments with
hybrid peas. Based on the principle of interaction, biology has
moved away from the abstract perception of phenomena to
a concrete description, to a more uniﬁed understanding of
biological traits at the microlevel.
Microbiological studies in recent decades have revealed
a very complex network of molecular interactions. Although
the importance of molecules varies, in essence, there is
no simple linear cause and eﬀect in the determination of
biological phenotypes, and compensatory eﬀects are common
among molecules. At the microlevel, the transition has moved
from simple linear causal cognition to non-linear universal
molecular interactions.
In 1992, the discovery of mirror neurons further
demonstrated that we learn about the world not just by
independent observation but through perception and
imitation (Dapretto et al., 2006; Falck-Ytter et al., 2006;
Rizzolatti and Sinigaglia, 2016). For example, monkeys
watching one another eat have neural activity in the same
regions of the brain. This reﬂects the non-absoluteness and
indivisibility of the role of the observer and the observed object,
which is a relationship of inclusion, analogous to quantum
phenomena in physics from an abstract meaning. By describing
the developmental process from the core scientiﬁc theories
mentioned above, we can roughly conclude that scientiﬁc
cognition has the following characteristics.
First, from self/human-centered cognition to self/humans
are not special cognitive conclusions/trends and from the
antagonistic relationship based on physical forms to the
indivisibility of the subject and object (internal and external,
consciousness and matter). We are aware of our existence
because of the diﬀerences in external physical characteristics
with the outside world, and we deﬁne ourselves/human
beings in terms of these physical or biological characteristics.
In the development of science, our cognition of these
descriptive quantities is also a synchronous process of redeﬁning
ourselves/human beings. This process shows a trend from the
perception that the self/human is special to the perception
that the self is not special (or from self-centeredness to the
cognitive conclusion of the self/human is not special). For
example, we originally deﬁned ourselves in terms of unique
biological traits, distinguishing ourselves from other living or
non-living beings through biological trait diﬀerences. Then, the
theory of natural selection (the form of contradiction is the
relationship between the individual and environment) broke
down this notion of the special status of humans in nature.
Subsequent scientiﬁc exploration revealed that these traits are
non-special and can be explained uniformly at the microlevel
by genes and proteins (proteins are extrinsic exhibitors and
genes are arbiters).
In other words, in the development of cognition, the
contradictory form is always from the most intuitive and
obvious form (in terms of perception) to the most subtle and
hidden form of contradiction (this relates to the relationship
between two basic descriptors of a theoretical paradigm. For
example, natural selection explains evolution by describing the
relationship between individuals and the environment, and the
theory of relativity describes the relationship between mass
and energy). This blurs the boundary between the subject and
objects and is beyond the distinction of external physical forms
(Table 1). Some experiments reveal inclusive relations between
the two sides of the contradiction, and the contradictory form
is ultimately the manifestation of the most basic relationship
between the subject (consciousness) and the object (matter).
This is from the antagonistic relationship established in the
earliest view of the matter to the phenomenon that they
contain one another, but a theoretical framework that can be
proved scientiﬁcally describing the uniﬁed relationship between
matter and consciousness (or object and subject) is still lacking
(Figure 4 ). For example, our most conspicuous perception is
Frontiers in Neuroscience 07 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 8
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
TABLE 1 The paradigms in different stages of scientiﬁc cognition show a regular tendency in terms of perception.
Core theories listed represent
phenomena or reality revealed
by diﬀerent stages of paradigm
The shared meaning abstracted from the revealed
phenomenon or reality (in terms of perception rather
than speciﬁc mathematical or logical descriptors)
Diagrams used to represent
the state of perception
abstracted from the
phenomena and its
evolution tendency
Biology Physics
Paradigm
1
Humans are
unique in nature
Geocentrism;
The earth is the
center of the
universe
Depend on the distinction of external physical forms, the relationship
between subject and object is antagonistic. It was believed that the
self/human has a special status or location in the universe. The spheres of
diﬀerent shapes and colors represent the diﬀerence in physical form (mass,
volume, speed, anything that can be described) between the self/human
and external objects. The big yellow circle represents subject, and the
surrounding spheres are around it, indicating that self/human has a strong
feeling that self/human is very special in universe.
Paradigm
2
Theory of
natural selection
(individuals
need to adapt to
environment)
Heliocentric
theory
Human beings have no special or core status in the universe and are
common species in nature. The heliocentric theory suggests that the earth
revolves around the sun. The circle in the center of the diagram became
signiﬁcantly smaller and lighter, indicating that the feeling that human is
very special is weakened compared with the former paradigm.
Paradigm
3
Ligand and
receptor
interaction.
Laws of
inheritance
based on
dominant and
recessive genes
The theory of
gravity
A linear cognitive model is established based on the principle of
interaction and determinism is gradually formed. Physics takes force as
the basic concept; while biology forms information transmission based on
the interaction between ligand and receptor. Make a mathematically
descriptive connections between descriptive quantities/characteristics, but
the relationship between time (energy) and space (mass) is antagonistic.
Paradigm
4
A universal
network of
interactions
between
molecules
The theory of
relativity
This paradigm further expands the scope of universal connection, time
and space are inseparable and not antagonistic relation. On the physical
level, there was a universal connection between objects, and the abstract
concept of “ﬁeld or network” was more suitable to describe the real
connection pattern between objects. Meanwhile, determinism reached its
peak, but subject and object are opposites. The use of grids to describe the
interaction between objects in the diagram is used to represent ubiquity
and abstraction.
Paradigm
5
Mirror neurons
were found
Wave-particle
duality and
quantum
entanglement
At the micro level, the cognition of the objective world is challenged; the
scope of connection is further expanded, not only is there a universal
connection between the physical level, the contradictory nature (wave or
particle characteristics) of objects is inseparable from the subject. We are
more confused about the nature of consciousness than ever before. For
example, in mirror neuron experiments, relying solely on brainwaves
cannot distinguish between object and subject, showing inclusion relation
of object and subject beyond external physical form. In the diagram, the
observer is inseparable from the state of objects being observed. The
diﬀerent features of exterior objects are represented by contradictory
nature (black or white). A grid describes an indivisible abstraction
connection between subject and object, external and internal. But a
scientiﬁc theoretical framework to describe the relationship between inner
and outer is still lacking.
We think it contains the following three features: (1) In terms of perception, the contradictory form of diﬀerent paradigm (for example, the theory of relativity describes the relationship
between mass and energy) goes from obvious to basic, from kinds of distinction on physical forms to subject and object (external and internal) inseparable. (2) The development of
scientiﬁc cognition is also a synchronous process of breaking the feeling state that the self/human is very special in terms of external physical form distinctions. (3) The trend of reality
paradigm shift dependent on the state of perception, in other words, state of consciousness acts as an abstract frame of reference to determine the occurrence of reality, reality is not a
purely objective process observed by the observer. There are no objective laws independent of perception.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 08 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 9
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
that the self is a unique and conscious species of animal in
the universe. The revealed reality or phenomenon of scientiﬁc
activities always tends to take place in the opposite direction,
which is a natural tendency for unifying the diﬀerences and
unique characteristics in an external physical form that one feels
naturally at the beginning. This trend and regular development
process cannot be separated from the state of perception as
reference frames, and they move in a formalized non-linear way.
From this point of view, scientiﬁc cognition itself (the reality or
phenomenon revealed) based on perception can be deduced in
a paradigmatic way.
Second, referring to external physical form, diﬀerent
disciplines and theories are independent. However, there are
obvious similarities in the abstract meanings of phenomena
revealed by paradigms in diﬀerent disciplines. For example,
the concept of mirror neurons in biology shares similar
abstract implications to the phenomenon of quantum wave-
function collapse in physics. They both revealed the inclusive
relations and inseparable relationship between two aspects in a
contradiction (subject and object).
For a long time, science has been deﬁned as an objective
description of the laws of nature. We are only objective
observers exploring objective laws. Biology and physics, based
on reductionism, seek to explain the universe through the
motions of microscopic cells and quanta, but why do scientiﬁc
theories (the reality or phenomenon revealed) show regular
paradigm shifts and signiﬁcant similarities in perception
between diﬀerent disciplines ( Figure 4 )? We argue that
this implies that scientiﬁc cognition itself may not just be
an objective and independent process of observation but
a synchronous process that constantly breaks down self-
particularity (based on external physical forms) perception
states contained in a more uniﬁed framework of laws,
reﬂecting the natural trend for everything to move from
opposition to unity. Hegel did not separate nature from
history. For the ﬁrst time, he described the natural, historical,
and spiritual world as a uniﬁed process and tried to
reveal the regularity and objectivity of its movement and
believed it was the contradiction that led to the change
and development of movement (Hegel, 1994, 2004). This
view is also supported by our discussion of trends in
scientiﬁc cognition in this section, as follows: the laws
of nature and the laws of society are an inseparable
process, which can be seen as the paradigm shift process,
the reality or phenomena revealed by scientiﬁc theories
is inseparable from perception state, and the occurrence
of reality is not just governed by an external objective
law.
It is worth noting that the dominant view of our current
“human-special” concept is that only humans or higher animals
have consciousness. Thus, the distinction between the inanimate
and the living, matter and consciousness, and external and
internal may also be a problem we need to address.
The next possible paradigm: the unity relations
of matter and consciousness at the perception
level
To reconcile the gap between body and mind, Solms (1997)
argues that the solution to this problem must reduce its
psychological and physiological to a single physical abstraction
(Solms, 1997, 2014). From the perspective of holistic philosophy,
the development trend of scientiﬁc cognition also supports this
view. Depending on perception, scientiﬁc cognitive theory itself
presents a regular paradigm shift trend. Based on the discussion
in the previous chapter, we try to deduce the next possible
paradigm or framework and propose scientiﬁc hypotheses that
can be veriﬁed through experiments.
The external (object) and the internal (subject) are
indivisible (showing that both sides of the contradiction are
inclusive). For example, the wave and particle properties
exhibited by a quantum are inseparable from the observer,
and the observing subject and object in the mirror neuron
cannot be distinguished by external forms. The paradigmatic
shift trend of reality is from self/human-centered cognition to
the conclusion that the self is not special, from the external
physical characteristics of antagonistic relationships to unity
(inseparable from perception), and it shows a tendency to
distinguish objects beyond external physical forms. A paradigm
that can be mathematically described must be represented in
contradictory forms (e.g., mass and energy, dominant and
recessive genes), and the contradictory forms that construct the
new theory increasingly tend to be the most basic and the most
subtle forms distinguished by perception.
Based on the above three features, we propose the next
possible cognitive paradigm: a more abstract presentation
form of contradiction that transcends physical form, which
is distinguished by perception to describe the shift of reality
in a paradigmatic manner. This possible next paradigm
is the basis of holistic philosophy, marked by the Taiji
Diagram (depending on conscious experience, all existence
is summarized as contradictory perception states of Yin-
Y ang, replacing concrete physical features). The two sides
of contradiction are interdependent, interlaced, and inter-
transformed. This interpretation is based on our understanding
of the Tao Te Ching, and its rationality needs to be supported
scientiﬁcally (Table 2).
We propose that matter and consciousness are not two
opposite existences but two completely diﬀerent contradictory
states of perception. They can be represented by the abstract
Yin-Y ang (Yin: has characteristics in perception like abstract,
internal, hidden, defensive, and passive; Y ang: has characteristics
in perception like concrete, external, prominent, aggressive,
and active). They can be distinguished and are uniﬁed at the
perception level. Since they are two sides of the same coin,
this can be demonstrated by the inﬂuence of “internal” state of
consciousness on the “external” occurrence of reality.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 09 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 10
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
FIGURE 4
Contradiction forms of paradigm in different stages are from obvious to hidden, from intuitive to basic in terms of perception. Objects in
completely different physical forms (For example, genes and the earth) can be reduced to two contradictory (Yin-Yang) perceptual states. Yin:
shows characteristics in perception like abstract, internal, hidden, defensive, passive etc.; and Yang: On the other hand, shows characteristics in
perception like concrete, external, prominent, aggressive, positive etc. On the contrary, in order of precedence, Yin is in front and Yang is behind
(Yin-Yang instead of Yang-Yin). For example, the exterior of a tree comes from hidden roots. Genes are the determinants of heredity, not
proteins. Therefore, the causal view of holistic philosophy is internal, and the material view seeks external cause and effect. Paradigm l: In the
most intuitive state of perception, according to external physical form, human beings are the most advanced creatures in nature and are very
special beings. Thus, the self/human has core status (exhibiting abstract features of “Yang”) relative to the other creatures, while other creatures
are relatively insigniﬁcant (exhibiting abstract features of "Yin"); the other stars revolve around the earth and are therefore passive and active
relationship (Yin and Yang, respectively). Paradigm 2: The theory of natural selection suggests that the individual needs to adapt to the
environment, so the individual is in a passive status (Yin) and the environment is in an active status (Yang); the heliocentric theory proposes that
the earth revolves around the sun, so the sun is active (Yang) and the earth is passive (Yin). Paradigm 3: Genes are the internal determinants of
biological traits (Yin) with hidden characteristics, while external traits are mainly presented by proteins (Yang); two descriptors in the equation of
universal gravitation, F = Gmlm2/r2. Mass (m) is perceived ﬁrst and distance (r) second, so distance is Yin and mass is Yang (Just like a cup, the
surrounding outer wall is focused by perception ﬁrstly, and the empty part inside is focused secondly, but the two together can hold water as a
cup). Paradigm 4: Mendel proposed the most basic genetic law was based on dominant gene (A) and recessive gene (a). The recessive gene
(Yin) was in a hidden status compared with the dominant gene (Yang); in the theory of relativity (E = mc2), the relationship between two
fundamental descriptors, mass exhibits concrete characteristics (Yang), while energy is an abstract state (Yin). Paradigm 5: Matter exhibits
remarkable and concrete characteristics (Yang), consciousness is abstract and hidden (Yin), you can’t see it but you can feel it. Both physics and
biology reveal an inseparable relationship between matter and consciousness or subject and object. It should be emphasized that this empirical
division of Yin and Yang according to experience and perception is not absolute. For example, in rare cases, proteins can also serve as genetic
material, reﬂecting a mutually inclusive relationship between contradictions.
Modern biology and physics are based on material views and
reductionism, whereby scientists seek to explain the universe
through an understanding of the laws of microscopic cells
and material “entities” such as quanta. However, the most
fundamental assumptions of this cognitive paradigm have been
challenged by some of the phenomena and most fundamental
problems revealed by recent science ( Figure 5A). For example,
biology is confused about issues like free will and causality
based on space-time, the phenomenon of hyperspace-time
quantum entanglement discovered by physicists, and how
consciousness causes wave function collapse (aﬀecting reality).
These phenomena reveal the inclusive relations between two
sides of contradictions (subject and object, consciousness and
matter, internal and external), but the descriptive theoretical
framework for reconciling (unifying) the opposite relationship
of matter and consciousness has not been established. We
propose that the cognitive paradigm of a holistic view based on
perception provides the possibility to reconcile these paradoxes.
From this point of view, the confusion of biology and physics
about consciousness can be uniﬁed into one same problem:
how reality is created depends on the state of perception (not
subjective intent and purpose; Figure 5B). We will elaborate on
this hypothesis in the following sections.
The paradigm-shifting trends of reality
depend on irrational feelings
The occurrence of reality is inseparable from
irrational feelings
Panksepp’s work led to the recognition of the importance
of emotion in the study of consciousness and he coined the
Frontiers in Neuroscience 10 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 11
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
TABLE 2 Describing the evolution of reality in terms of perceived abstract contradictions (Yin-Yang) may be the next paradigm reconciling the
antagonistic relationship between matter and consciousness.
Core theories listed represent phenomena or
reality revealed Y diﬀerent stages of paradigm
The shared meaning abstracted
from the revealed phenomenon or
reality (in terms of perception
rather than speciﬁc mathematical
or logical descriptors)
Diagrams used to
represent the state of
perception abstracted
from the phenomena
and its shift tendencyBiology Physics
The supposed
paradigm 6
What is the function of
subjective experience? The
free will is at odds with
causality based on material
view.
How consciousness causes
wave function collapse
(aﬀecting the occurrence of
reality/order)
Matter and consciousness are not opposites
but are uniﬁed in perception, they are two
diﬀerent states of perception (it is represented
by the abstract Yin-Y ang).
Both the subject and the object are represented
by the abstract Taiji diagram, and there is no
external physical form distinction between
subject and objects (self/human is not special
in terms of external physical form). The dotted
box in the diagram indicates that the essential
state of things is relative and inseparable from
perception. Describe fate or reality in terms of
perception (experience) is the subject of this
paradigm. Fate or reality can be described in a
paradigm shift way and inseparable from
perception (irrational side)? This paradigm
also happens to be the cognitive basis of
holistic philosophy.
phrase Aﬀective Neuroscience in 1991 (Panksepp, 1992; Davis
and Montag, 2018). To distinguish it from rationality more
obviously, we used the word irrationality rather than sensibility
(in this manuscript these two words have the same meaning) to
refer to the sense of reasonableness as a result of experience, the
experience involving emotion with no thinking. According to
Solms, if we want to coordinate psychological and physiological
aspects to explain consciousness, we must focus on the feeling
and experience.
If the internal experience of having a memory and
the neuronal assemblage embodying that same memory
(pictured externally, through optogenetics, for example) are two
realizations of a single underlying thing, then what is “memory”
itself made of? The answer is that it is abstracted from both
manifestations. Memory is not a stuﬀ; it is a function. If we
want to identify a mechanism that explains the phenomena
of consciousness (in both its psychological and physiological
aspects) we must focus on the function of feeling, the technical
term for which is “aﬀect.” That is why it is easy to agree that
consciousness is not just another cognitive function (Solms,
2018).
In the ﬁrst paragraph of this section, we mentioned
Thomas Kuhn’s suggestion that scientiﬁc cognitive processes are
paradigm-shifting processes that cannot be logically inferred.
We believe that the shifting of scientiﬁc paradigms depends
on the irrational side of feelings. It is an irrational tendency
of movement, irreversible and relative, and is also an objective
movement form that exists in contrast to logical/rational
characteristics. For example, in the ancient days of human
civilization, people advocated for “an eye for an eye, a tooth for
a tooth, ” which they deemed reasonable. Now, if someone hurts
another person with an axe, instead of punishing them in the
same manner, we imprison them. This reality evolves depending
on the abstract and irrational “sense of reasonableness.”
From simple linear causal to non-linear compensation, the
development trend of reality is formed. This trend cannot be
independent of perception and experience, as there is no logical
or physical connection between imprisonment and the axe. It
cannot be strictly quantiﬁed, but it shows a clear trend at the
perceptual level. If we turn this phenomenon upside down, we
will ﬁnd that it is extremely disharmonious at the feeling level
and will cause chaos and collapse in reality, which does not
conform to the developmental trend of things, and thus the
resistance encountered will grow.
Cognitive trends abstracted from phenomena revealed
by diﬀerent paradigms share similar characteristics. New
paradigms can be more consistent with the coordination of
irrational feelings than previous ones. These trends make sense
at the level of perception (a relative concept that can only
be deﬁned concerning previous paradigms) but not the other
way around. At the level of physical forms, some are even
as far apart as an axe and imprisonment. For example, waves
and particles in physics are completely unrelated in a way
similar to stem cells and diﬀerentiated cells in biology, and
yet, they are uniﬁed/similar in irrational feelings and represent
a potential state (which can become any speciﬁc state) and a
speciﬁc state of beings (abstract and concrete; Yin and Y ang,
respectively, not the other way around). The irrational feelings
Frontiers in Neuroscience 11 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 12
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
FIGURE 5
Dilemmas of consciousness in biology and physics may be reconciled by the holistic cognitive paradigm. (A) Reductionism seeks to explain
everything (the theory of everything has nothing to do with perception) by understanding the motion of microscopic atoms (quanta).
Phenomena revealed by quantum mechanics, such as wave-particle duality, challenge this basic cognitive paradigm. The nature of a quantum
(wave or particle) is inseparable from the observer (or consciousness). However, further mathematical descriptive theoretical framework based
on this paradigm has not been established. (B) The reality revealed by biology and physics presents a regular paradigm shift trend and has
similarities in terms of perception. The contradiction form (paradigm) in terms of perception gradually changes from obvious to the most basic,
from concrete to abstract. Both disciplines ultimately reveal, respectively, the limitations of cognitive paradigms based on material view,
reﬂecting the inclusive relationship between matter and consciousness (It was ﬁrst believed that the objective material world had nothing to do
with perception, and the two were opposites, using different ways of describing human society and nature). Following the previous paradigm,
we conjecture that the next paradigm will not be described in concrete physical form, but in the paradigm evolution of reality based on
perception and experience. In this paradigm, individuals are deﬁned in terms of different fates and realistic outcomes rather than physical forms.
inﬂuence the occurrence of an external reality. According to
holistic philosophy, the description of the world depends on
perception rather than observation, which means that the self
and everything are connected and indivisible from perception
(the distinction between subject and object is independent of
physical forms). Therefore, the irrational feelings we experience
are not subjective or individually owned, but one of the objective
tools for creating reality.
The reference frames for the occurrence of
reality are perceptual states rather than
external physical entities
In the process of scientiﬁc exploration, we are used to
the material view of cognition that sees the self/human as
an observer, and we separate social activity from scientiﬁc
exploration. Whereas human social activities focus on inner
feelings and experience, scientiﬁc activities are considered to
explore objective laws of nature as observers. However, we
ﬁnd that scientiﬁc laws that are regarded as objectives show
a regular paradigm shift trend that cannot be separated from
irrational perception, and ﬁnally ﬁnd that subject and object (or
consciousness and matter) cannot be separated. This shows that
there is no external objective law or material world separating
“inner” perception, and the absolute assumption of the self
as a pure observer is also limited. There is a more holistic
framework that can unify the antagonistic relationship between
consciousness and matter (subject and object), and we propose
that holistic philosophy oﬀers such a possibility.
Empiricists believe that human knowledge of the world
comes from human experiences, while rationalists believe that
human knowledge comes from human reasons. Kant, on the
other hand, reconciled the two views to some extent. Kant
believed that knowledge is obtained by human beings through
sense and reason at the same time. Experience is necessary
for the generation of knowledge, but it is not the only factor.
Rationality is needed to convert experience into knowledge. We
further extend this deﬁnition in this study (Kant, 1949).
Let us illustrate this abstract meaning with an example. If
we watch a basketball game, we might think that spectators have
no impact on the results of the game. In fact, from a holistic
perspective, the preferences of perception (irrational “sense of
reasonableness”) can inﬂuence the paradigm/style of the game in
Frontiers in Neuroscience 12 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 13
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
discontinuous ways (reality occurrence in paradigm-shift ways).
For example, a National Basketball Association (NBA) oﬀense
might ﬁrst shift from advocating a near-the-basket oﬀense to
a mid-range jump shot and ﬁnally shift to a focus on shooting
from outside the three-point line (the evolution of reality was
initially the most obvious pattern of rationality, the closer the
players were to the basket, the easier it was to shoot, based
on observation or rationality). This process is the change in
which the spectator can empathize through feeling with the
player (individual), feel/seek the path of least resistance to
attack, and not just as an objective spectator that has nothing
to do with the game, the reality tends to the path formed by
the game of two contradictory “forces or tools” (the state of
feeling as a spectator or as a player). Without empathy (relying
on perception rather than observation), the spectator will not
be able to understand or predict the paradigm shift trend of
this game (reality), and reality will always be subject to this
contradictory state and evolve regularly and periodically. This
process is a gradual movement from opposition in rationality
to unity in irrationality, from the outside to the inside, from
the most intuitive form in perception to a covert one (the
dominant oﬀense evolved from near the basket to the three-
point line, just as the cognitive paradigm of science is gradually
shifting from the outside world to the inner world), which
describes a holistic framework for the evolution of the reality.
This is the basic descriptive feature of holistic philosophy, which
relies on irrational perception and is abstract, rather diﬀerent
from reductionism.
Some successful old-school coaches may not understand
the development trend of this phenomenon and still yearn for
the game’s original shoot-under-the-basket style. This is because
they are used to the perception of preferences as spectators (the
spectator always tends to like an intense game) while ignoring
the feeling of the optimal oﬀensive choice as a player in the game
(lack of empathy based on perception). As a result, they have no
way of predicting where the game paradigm is going. Just as the
scientiﬁc system based on reductionism ignores the objectivity
of perception and regards the self/human as an independent
observer (or treats experiences and feelings as subjective beings,
independent of the physical world), it cannot continue to rely
on the basic assumptions of observation and rationality (the
view of matter as opposed to consciousness) to explain the
origin of macroscopic order. This cognitive paradigm develops
so habitually that we take it for granted, until it is challenged by
paradox phenomena revealed by biology and physics. Therefore,
we think that the evolution of reality paradigms is always driven
by these two abstract contradictory tools or two contradictory
statuses of feeling.
It must be emphasized that this phenomenon does not
apply only to the activities of human social activity but to the
scope of the evolution of everything (the object described by the
holistic view is reality itself). These two tools (Yin and Y ang,
rational and irrational perception) are two objective tools for
creating reality, and not the subjective form that belongs to
the individual. In a holistic view, the individual is regarded
as non-special, and the subject and objects are connected,
indivisible, and uniﬁed through perception. Self/human are
also a contradictory existence connected to perception, so they
cannot be independent of natural laws as observers, and their
perception state as the reference system participates in the
occurrence of reality.
The objectivity of perception
Contradictory nature that can be
experienced by perception is the
objective form of being
In this chapter, we will discuss the theoretical basis on which
reality can be described objectively by perception. The split-
brain experiments shed some light on the contradictory nature
of consciousness. In the 1940s, scientists cut the corpus callosum
of epilepsy patients who did not respond to medical treatment.
However, split-brain individuals whose corpus callosum has
been incised have a distinct feeling of division or the act of
division. For example, when Sperry injected a command to raise
one’s hand or bend one’s knee into the left side of the split-
brain, the patient’s right side obeys the command but the left side
does not; there are many other similar contradictory behaviors
(Gazzaniga, 2005; Volz and Gazzaniga, 2017; de Haan et al.,
2020).
According to Hegel, everything contains a contradiction,
which is the root of all movements. At the same time, he
also regarded the development of contradiction as a process
from in-itself to self-action. Opposition, distinction, and unity
are diﬀerent stages of contradiction development. Only after
experiencing the contradiction of opposites will the unity of new
contradictions be realized; opposite contains unity, and unity
also contains the opposite. This dialectical thought is similar to
the connotation of the Taiji diagram (Hegel, 1983, 2004).
Intuitively, though, internal perception is seen as
subjective, it also has an objective nature of contradiction
beyond the control of any individual. It does not belong
to anyone/existence, but it is dynamically connected with
any existence on the level of perception. Therefore, the
contradictory nature of being experienced by perception is
actually the source of creation (it divides existence into two
contradictory perceptual states, Yin-Y ang, which are connected
with perception), which exists dynamically in an abstract but
in a perceivable way and is not a subordinate feature that we
can induce from material world phenomena, and this subjective
level of objectivity is one of the bases for the holistic philosophy
to describe the development of the evolution of reality.
Perception, which is perceived as subjective and is
considered unique to human beings or higher animals, is
Frontiers in Neuroscience 13 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 14
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
remarkably objective. For example, if told not to think about
what a tall, red spruce looks like, a person cannot help but
imagine it. If we ﬂip a coin 10 times and every time it comes
out heads, we will become increasingly curious and try to ﬁnd
the cause and eﬀect, and if the results become increasingly
balanced, we will experience the same kind of confusion. Once
science ﬁnds and deﬁnes a rule, for example, that a random
mutation of a base is selected by nature to lead to the evolution
of a species, it also means that this statement will no longer
be objective. We will continue to master targeted base-editing
techniques to modify living species and reality will always move
in the opposite direction, since objective observation and feeling
preference cannot coexist. As science advances, we acquire
even more sophisticated and high-resolution photography, but
by contrast, forms of artistic expression begin to seek more
abstract ways of expressing the uniqueness and meaning of their
existence, we worship the spotlight of the stage, but once it
reaches its peak, the noise makes feelings pursue being ordinary
and vice versa. This perceptual contradiction is the most basic
objective feature of the inner. The holism cognitive paradigm
reduces everything to an abstract state of Yin and Y ang, which is
not merely the nature of external self-expression, but inseparable
from internal perception or conscious experience. Therefore,
Yin-Y ang is regarded as the co-creation of subject and object
and is inseparable from perception. On the other hand, the
material view focuses on describing the objectivity of external
physical properties (describing the object from the relationship
of opposites), ignoring the basic unity relationship between
internal perception and external.
This state of contradiction is a fundamental pattern beyond
the control of any individual and, at this level, everything is
connected in perception rather than demonstrating an external
space split, and this suggests that, contrary to our intuition, we
are not masters of perception; a new self-model based on the
principle of Taiji expounded on the contradictory nature of the
self (Wang et al., 2019; Wang and Wang, 2020).
Of note, when we interpret the relationship between matter
and consciousness, we deﬁne consciousness as one of the
abstract states of perception, as opposed to the states of
concrete perception that form. For the most part, we use the
word perception alone as the creator of all things, similar to
the concept of Tao, but this description is not appropriate.
The creator cannot be described by language or any concrete
measure. If it is deﬁned as one of these, then it means that
it is no longer the other, and it loses its totipotency. We
still use this word, in part to highlight the indivisibility of
creation and perception, but habit is what keeps us from ﬁnding
more appropriate words to replace this word. In other words,
perception is not owned by the individual. What deﬁnes us as
individuals are the diﬀerent realities (active or passive, goals
achieved or not achieved, the diﬀerent outcomes of events
experienced by individuals) that we perceive. Since they can
only be experienced and not observed, we intuitively think
of them as belonging to the individual/human, not to other
animals or non-living things, forming a worldview of matter
as opposed to consciousness. The view of matter deﬁnes the
individual in terms of biological or physical characteristics,
while what determines reality is the contradictory nature of
inner perception, which is beyond the control of the individual.
We believe that this interdependence of internal and
external at the perception level is the most fundamental form
of movement. At this level, everything is naturally connected
and in perpetual motion, resulting in reality never occurring in
a static, linear, or causal manner, detached from the perception
of the subject. At any time, in the form of potential indivisible
contradictory non-linear ﬂuctuations, the dynamics alternating
between the law and the irregular are the basic characteristics of
the universe, nature, society, and other evolution of reality.
Explanation of quantum entanglement
based on holistic philosophy
Our explanation for why the hyperspace–time entanglement
occurs between two particles born in the same system is as
follows. (1)We will ignore the objectivity of the inner and
simply seek the connection between “two particles, ” from the
meterial view. It is not that two-particle entities are mysteriously
interacting in hyperspace. As two ends of a contradiction,
internal and external are born at the same time and are
inseparable. The quantum state (topspin or backspin) observed
by the observer is inseparable from perception, so they are
not constrained by time and space. From a holistic view, the
“particle” of a material entity independent from perception
neither exists nor can be described, and beings can only exist in
terms of contradictory physical properties (up and down, right
and left, black and white, etc.) that cannot be separated from
perception. Diﬀerent observers are essentially diﬀerent states of
a conscious experience.
(2) In the previous section, we argued that the contradictory
nature of inner perception is the most objective form of
existence and that the material entity, which although gives us
a very real objective sense, is not the most essential existence,
objectivity is relative. It is only the side that is conspicuously
perceptible to perception (Y ang: a conspicuous, speciﬁc,
prominent perceptual state). The occurrence of quantum
entanglement depends on the rational “sense of reasonableness”
(it is reasonable for external phenomena to remain symmetrical
if they are based on observation or rationality).
(3) In other words, if we regard that the symmetric
descriptors topspin and backspin are born at the same time as
an occurrence of the result of an event (reality), the reference
frame for quantum entanglement occurrence is the rational
“sense of reasonableness” of perception. What we see is only
the conspicuous aspect of conscious perception (Y ang). But
according to the material view, we only mistakenly regard it
Frontiers in Neuroscience 14 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 15
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
FIGURE 6
Interpretation of quantum entanglement based on holistic view. (A) Material view. Based on the difference in external physical form, observer
and objects are opposites. External phenomena are irrelevant to the observer (or perception/consciousness). It cannot explain the
hypertemporal effects of quantum entanglement. (B) Holistic view. Depending on perception, observer and object are uniﬁed. Perception is
co-created by subject and object. In other words, what we intuitively regard as subjective, individual and abstract being (experience and feeling)
can be described scientiﬁcally (Yin-Yang) and used as frame of reference to describe the occurrence of fate or reality of the observers, from the
material view, the state of the quantum in boxes A and B is an objective random process.
as an observed process rather than a happening process that is
inseparable from perception.
(4) The other irrational side (a state of conscious feeling
that depends on the experience of the observer) is hidden
and dynamic and is diﬃcult to describe using explicit linear
equations (Yin: a hidden, abstract state of perception). For
example, just as one plus one equals two is generally accepted
from rationality and logic, we ﬁnd that in social activities
and speciﬁc situations, one plus one can have any possible
outcome in diﬀerent realistic situations. However, this conscious
experience is dynamic and needs to be in a relative situation
to form a generally recognized (objective) state of reasonable
feeling. It is in a hidden and unstable status that cannot be
absolutized. However, that does not mean that it is not one
objective side creating the order of reality.
Therefore, if the above explanation is correct, what we need
to demonstrate is that the quantum state observed in diﬀerent
places is not random (the reality of the observer; which is
regarded as random according to material views). It can be
aﬀected by the state of perception of the observer and, more
speciﬁcally, the state of conscious feeling formed by experience
on the irrational side ( Figure 6 ). Shaping the speciﬁc state
of perception (irrational side) of the observer can aﬀect the
reality of the observer (the observed probability of upspin or
downspin).
A preliminary discussion of hypothesis
proof
From a material view, the connection between objects
requires force as a medium, and the force originates in the
interchange of microscopic particles. Therefore, we are puzzled
by the spatio-temporal nature of quantum entanglement. In
a holistic view, the nature of connections between objects
depends on irrational perception (for example, the fact that
trees and grass, as well as the sun and moon, can produce
similar Y ang and Yin states of perception, rather than the
other way around, is a fundamental property of perception,
despite their diﬀerences in physical level). Unity in perception
Frontiers in Neuroscience 15 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 16
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
TABLE 3 A contrast between the material view and the holistic view cognitive paradigm.
Material view Holistic view Additional remarks
Description method Rely on observation, rationality (it can
be referred to by an asterisk
 ).
Rely on conscious experience,
irrationality. (it can be referred to by
an asterisk
 ).
The materialistic view is the cognitive paradigm to
which we are most accustomed, and the underlying
assumption of human beings as observers is not
even questionable, while the holistic view, which
relies on perception, is easily ignored or regarded
as the ownership of individuals.
The relationship between
matter and consciousness
Matter and consciousness (or object
and subject) are opposites.
As two objective states of being that
can be distinguished by perception,
uniﬁed in perception.
In terms of the objectivity of perception, the
abstract perception of Yin-Y ang is objective
existence, just as the objective features of external
objects is observed, but it is an abstract form.
The object being
described
It describes external physical
characteristics, and has nothing to do
with perception.
It contains both subject and object;
describes the happen probability of an
event (reality, object) of an observer
(subject).
In the holistic view, the internal state of conscious
perception aﬀects reality, so a precise description
must include subject and object.
Diﬀerent emphasis on
objectivity
Focus on the objectivity of external
physical form. Mass, size, momentum,
etc.,
Focus on the objectivities of
perception. (1) Contradictory nature;
(2) Irrational conscious perception;
(3) Always seek a more harmonious
state of being (a relative concept that
depends on perception).
Objectivity is the basis on which a cognitive
paradigm is constructed. We argue that objectivity
has two diﬀerent way of description, focusing on
the external and the internal respectively, satisfying
rational and irrational “sense of reasonableness”.
The contact between
objects
Particles exchange (physical medium
that can be observed) can form
diﬀerent forces, which mediates the
connection between objects.
Depending on conscious experience
(it’s an abstract being that can be
experienced but cannot be observed),
the things are summed up as Yin-
Y ang perceptual state, which is not
arbitrary and can form a common
irrational feeling.
In the interpretation of the origin of all things (the
habitual description of the material view) or the
evolution of reality (the habitual description of the
holistic view); they try to explain through
microscopic quantum and abstract Yin- Y ang
respectively, inseparable from conscious
experience.
means that connection does not need any material medium.
Taking the double slit interference experiment as an example,
the particle’s choice to take slit A or slit B as the path is
regarded as random under a material view. Researchers shaping
the speciﬁc state of consciousness of the observer (irrational
side, depending on individual experience) will not inﬂuence
the result of the observer. Otherwise, doing so would aﬀect the
result without any material medium participation. Due to space
limitations, we do not discuss further details of the experimental
design in this study.
Many scientists believe that consciousness is the key to the
collapse of the wave function, but we still need a model that can
be scientiﬁcally validated. According to our previous analyses,
existence is manifest in a contradictory way that is inseparable
from perception. It is a comprehensive feeling state of the
connection between objects generated based on experience and
a dynamic superposition of irrationality and rationality (for
the sake of the statement and later experimental veriﬁcation,
we replace Yin-Y ang with rationality–irrationality), rather than
objective material entities.
What we want to emphasize is that in the perception
of the relationships between objects, which is also the
essential/objective state of connection between objects in a
holistic view, the abstract state of perception is a state
of superposition of rationality and irrationality (the mutual
inclusion relationship in Taiji diagram), and the rational
conclusion is only a one-sided illusion, a state in the conspicuous
feeling state (Y ang). Just as feelings of self tend to focus
on physical features, body shape, and needs, rather than
on the other side, empathy (or we can say both selﬁshness
and selﬂessness) is the natural contradiction of the self, but
selﬂessness is often in the hidden status of paradoxical side
(Yin) as it forms a scientiﬁc cognitive system based on
rationality/physical forms. However, the development trend of
reality/paradigms leans toward the direction pointed out by
this abstract irrational perception side, as we discussed in the
previous chapter, on the development of scientiﬁc cognition.
Thus, by shaping and inﬂuencing the irrational side of the
observer’s state of perception, the reality of the observer can
be described and predicted by the researcher. This process is
considered random or indescribable based on a material view.
Conclusion
Physics and biology together reveal some puzzling
phenomena related to consciousness. Although they are
manifested in diﬀerent forms, they both imply the interaction
and indivisible features between matter and consciousness,
which cannot be reconciled by the cognitive paradigm of
materialism and reductionism which describes matter and
consciousness in opposition. In this study, we propose that a
perception-based holistic view cognitive paradigm is a potential
solution to reconcile this dilemma.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 16 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 17
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
The material view explains phenomena based on forces, and
the connection between objects depends on the exchange of
microscopic particles. We can explain some natural phenomena
from the level of physics and form causality based on time and
space. Therefore, the deﬁnition of causality in the material view
requires a physical medium and is conﬁned to space and time,
which we take for granted. However, this cognitive paradigm
fails to explain some consciousness-related phenomena such as,
how does the mind lead to physical changes in the body, how
does consciousness lead to the collapse of wave functions, and
why does quantum entanglement appear to be independent of
space and time? In these phenomena and eﬀects, we cannot
observe any medium involved, so this violates the causality
based on the material view, leading to a paradox or gap
in interpretation.
On the contrary, the holistic view relies on the conscious
experience to distinguish the thing into a Yin–Y ang perceptual
state, subject and object can not independently described at
the perceptual level. Yin and Y ang, in other words, do not
simply refer to the characteristics of the object itself. It is
inseparable from the subject’s descriptive means (diﬀerent
conscious experiences), but intuitively, we think of conscious
experience as subjective and belonging to the individual. The
cognitive paradigm of holism does not describe matter and
consciousness in opposition, or ignore either of them, but
regards them as two objective states of being that can be
distinguished by perception (e.g., concrete or abstract; rational
or irrational), uniﬁed in perception. This has two meanings:
(1) The inner is as objective as the outer, (2) because they are
two sides of the same coin uniﬁed in perception, the reality
(outer) and the inner can interact, which can be seen as a state
switch manifested by the objective nature of consciousness. To
be more precise, the occurrence of an event (external) from with
the sense of reasonableness that come from irrationality as a
reference frame, which does not require any physical medium
and is not constrained by space and time.
This leads to a signiﬁcant diﬀerence. The material view
opposes the subject (internal) to the object, which is described
as an objective physical being that is same to all observers. The
description of the holistic view describes the subject (conscious
experience) and the object (external) together on the basis of
perception. Therefore, it describes the results of events rather
than physical features, such as the reality of an observer. The two
cannot be independent or described in opposition because the
reality varies with the observer’s state of consciousness (Table 3).
For example, in the experiment of quantum entanglement,
from the material view, the observer only describes the state
of the particle objectively, which has nothing to do with the
conscious experience of the observer. Therefore, the state of the
particle observed by the observer is considered to be random.
According to holism, the observer’s irrational conscious state
will aﬀect the probability of the observed particle state, and
the conscious state is closely related to life experience. In other
words, the perceived asymmetry of what is regarded as an
objective being is the root cause of order (reality does not
happen randomly), and this makes it possible to scientiﬁcally
prove the cognitive paradigm of holistic view philosophy. Due
to space constraints, we do not discuss the details of the
experimental design here. We elaborate it in detail in another
article published in the preprint (doi: 10.31219/osf.io/c3neq).
Objectivity is the foundation on which a discipline or
theory is built. The holistic cognitive paradigm is based on
the objectivity of perception. Although it is abstract, it can
be described scientiﬁcally (do not rely on reason and logic).
According to our understanding of the Tao Te Ching , in
this study, we introduce three basic objective properties of
perception. (1) Contradictory nature. Conscious experience,
though intuitively viewed as subjective, belongs to the
individual. On the contrary, perception presents a contradictory
and objective nature beyond individual control. What the
individual experiences is only the sensory state (Yin or Y ang;
positive or negative) formed by the diﬀerent reality determined
by this objective nature. This means that the observer’s reality
is descriptive, not random and unpredictable, but indescribable
from the viewpoint of force and reductionist. Let’s use the
analogy of the relationship between DNA and living things. On
the surface, we believe that organisms possess DNA, but in fact,
this relationship is inverted. DNA determines biological traits
according to objective genetic laws, and individuals only show
diﬀerent biological traits that have been determined.
(2) Irrational conscious experience. The irrational conscious
experience can summarize things into Yin–Y ang states of
perception. This induction is not arbitrary but has an objective
standard, which is not essentially diﬀerent from the description
of external physical objectivity that we rely on reductionism,
except that one is abstract and the other is concrete. (3) Always
seek a more harmonious state of being (a relative concept that
depends on perception). It determines that the development of
reality has a relative direction and trend, for example, scientiﬁc
cognition itself shows a regular inertial development trend.
The holistic cognitive paradigm also provides the possibility
to coordinate the contradiction between determinism and
non-determinism. Due to the objectivity of perception, the
occurrence of reality is descriptive and regular. However,
this does not mean that the observer’s reality is completely
determined (determinism), it is probabilistic and independent
of perception. Since it is inseparable from perception, which
always pursues a more harmonious state of being (the third
objectivity), reality will change due to the switch of the
observer’s state of consciousness, reﬂecting the subjective
initiative of consciousness.
For example, according to holism, we can describe a person’s
reality in terms of conscious experience. If we just observe (in
Frontiers in Neuroscience 17 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 18
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
fact, this assumption is not entirely accurate because observation
and feeling contain each other and can only be said to have
a minimal probability of inﬂuence), then this probabilistic
description can be veriﬁed. However, if we tell the observer
what is going to happen to him, the state of consciousness of
the person who is told will change because perception is always
pursuing a more harmonious state, and then the probability of
his reality will naturally change. Due to the contradictory nature
of consciousness, it refuses to be completely determined and it
also rejects absolute disorder. For example, if we are told not
to think about a big mangrove, we cannot help but imagine it.
We think that there is no right or wrong distinction between
the material view and the holistic view. The construction of
these two cognitive paradigms originates from two diﬀerent
ways of looking at things (observation or perception) and forms
two diﬀerent sense states of rationality. The diﬀerent cognitive
paradigms and ways of solving problems (it is also a reality-
creation process) have limitations and should be complementary
(Capra, 2000).
In conclusion, based on the understanding of Tao Te
Ching, a representative work of holistic philosophy, we (1)
deduced the next possible cognitive paradigm from a holistic
view through trends of scientiﬁc cognitive development and
proposed a preliminary scientiﬁc hypothesis; (2) summarized
the confusion around consciousness in biology and physics
as the same problem (of how to describe the evolution
of reality depending on perception) and highlighted that
holistic philosophy can solve this problem; and (3) we
provided a new interpretation of quantum entanglement
according to holistic philosophy, which is falsiﬁable. As
interdisciplinary propositions, diﬀerent disciplines are
trying to describe consciousness from diﬀerent perspectives
(Friston and Stephan, 2007; Arsiwalla and Verschure, 2018;
Marchetti, 2018). We believe that combinations of approaches
from these diﬀerent disciplines in the future will help us uncover
the puzzles related to consciousness.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are
included in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries
can be directed to the corresponding author/s.
Author contributions
JC constructed the theory and wrote the manuscript. LC
revised and edited the manuscript. Both authors approved the
submitted version.
Funding
This work was supported by the Shenzhen Outbound
Postdoctoral Research Fund (2020) and the Guangdong
Regional Joint Fund (Grant no. 2021A1515111224).
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the editor and the reviewers for their
constructive suggestions, which have greatly improved this
article. Mengmeng Han provided valuable suggestions during
manuscript preparation. Some literature that inspired the
author includes the following: Erwin Schrodinger’s What is
Life?; Stephen Hawking’sA Brief History of Time; Peter Russell’s
From Science to God: A Physicist’s Journey into the Myths of
Consciousness; Jared Diamond’sThe Third Orangutan ; and Joe
DiSpinez’sA Course of Change.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed
or endorsed by the publisher.
References
Arsiwalla, X. D., and Verschure, P. (2018). Measuring the Complexity of
Consciousness. Front. Neurosci. 12:424. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00424
Bohm, D. J. (2004). Wholeness and the Implicate Order . Shanghai: Shanghai
Science and Technology Education Press.
Boly, M., Seth, A. K., Wilke, M., Ingmundson, P., Baars, B., Laureys, S., et al.
(2013). Consciousness in humans and non-human animals: Recent advances and
future directions. Front. Psychol. 4:625. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00625
Brass, M., Furstenberg, A., and Mele, A. R. (2019). Why neuroscience does not
disprove free will. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.102, 251–263. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.
2019.04.024
Capra, F. (2000). The Tao of Physics:An Exploration of the Parallels
between Modern Physics and Eastern Mysticism . Boston, MA: Shambhala
Publications, Inc.
Chalmers, D. J. (1998). The problems of consciousness. Adv. Neurol. 77, 7–16.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 18 frontiersin.org
fnins-16-975281 October 19, 2022 Time: 15:29 # 19
Chen and Chen 10.3389/fnins.2022.975281
Churchland, P. M., and Churchland, P. S. (1997). Recent work on consciousness:
Philosophical, theoretical, and empirical. Semin Neurol. 17, 179–186. doi: 10.1055/
s-2008-1040928
Cieri, F., and Esposito, R. (2019). Psychoanalysis and neuroscience: The bridge
between mind and brain. Front. Psychol. 10:1790. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01983
Crick, F., and Koch, C. (1998). Consciousness and neuroscience. Cereb. Cortex
8, 97–107. doi: 10.1093/cercor/8.2.97
Dapretto, M., Davies, M. S., Pfeifer, J. H., Scott, A. A., Sigman, M., Bookheimer,
S. Y., et al. (2006). Understanding emotions in others: Mirror neuron dysfunction
in children with autism spectrum disorders. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 28–30. doi: 10.1038/
nn1611
Davis, K. L., and Montag, C. (2018). Selected Principles of Pankseppian Aﬀective
Neuroscience. Front. Neurosci. 12:1025. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.01025
de Haan, E. H. F., Corballis, P. M., Hillyard, S. A., Marzi, C. A., Seth, A.,
Lamme, V. A. F., et al. (2020). Split-brain: What we know now and why this
is important for understanding consciousness. Neuropsychol. Rev. 30, 224–233.
doi: 10.1007/s11065-020-09439-3
Dehaene, S., and Changeux, J. P. (2011). Experimental and theoretical
approaches to conscious processing. Neuron 70, 200–227. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.
2011.03.018
Falck-Ytter, T., Gredeback, G., and von Hofsten, C. (2006). Infants predict other
people’s action goals.Nat. Neurosci. 9, 878–879. doi: 10.1038/nn1729
Frank, A. (2015). Uncertain for a century: Quantum mechanics and the dilemma
of interpretation. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1361, 69–73. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12972
Friston, K. J., and Stephan, K. E. (2007). Free-energy and the brain.Synthese 159,
417–458. doi: 10.1007/s11229-007-9237-y
Gazzaniga, M. S. (2005). Forty-ﬁve years of split-brain research and still going
strong. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 653–659. doi: 10.1038/nrn1723
Hameroﬀ, S. (2012). How quantum brain biology can rescue conscious free will.
Front. Integr. Neurosci. 6:93. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2012.00093
Hameroﬀ, S., and Penrose, R. (2014). Consciousness in the universe: A review
of the ’Orch OR’ theory.Phys. Life Rev. 11, 39–78. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2013.08.002
Hegel, G. W. F. (1983). Hegel and the Human Spirit . Detroit, MI: Wayne State
University Press.
Hegel, G. W. F. (1994). Lectures on the Philosophy of Spirit 1827–8 (R. R.
Williams, Trans.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hegel, G. W. F. (2004). “Hegel’s Philosophy of Mind, ”In Hegel’s Philosophy of
Nature. Eds A. V. Miller and J. N. Findlay (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Heisenberg, M. (2009). Is free will an illusion? Nature 459, 164–165. doi: 10.
1038/459164a
Hillman, B. J. (2018). Free Will. J. Am. Coll. Radiol. 15:1355. doi: 10.1016/j.jacr.
2018.07.012
Kafatos, M. C., and Y ang, K. H. (2016). The quantum universe: Philosophical
foundations and oriental medicine. Integr. Med. Res. 5, 237–243. doi: 10.1016/j.
imr.2016.08.003
Kant, I. (1949). The Philosophy of Kant. New York, NY: Modern Library Press.
Koch, C., Massimini, M., Boly, M., and Tononi, G. (2016). Neural correlates
of consciousness: Progress and problems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17, 307–321. doi:
10.1038/nrn.2016.22
Kuhn, T. S. (2004). The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions . Beijing: Beijing
University Press.
Lanza, B. B. A. R. (2012). Biocentrism. Chongqing: Chongqing Press.
Lavazza, A. (2019). Why Cognitive sciences do not prove that free will is an
epiphenomenon. Front. Psychol. 10:326. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00326
Levin, C. F. A. M. (2020). How do Living Systems Create Meaning?Philosophies
5:36. doi: 10.3390/philosophies5040036
Liu, J. (2008). An Introduction to Chinese Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge
University.
Marchetti, G. (2018). Consciousness: A unique way of processing information.
Cogn. Process 19, 435–464. doi: 10.1007/s10339-018-0855-8
Neumann, J. V. (2020). Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics .
Beijing: Beijing Science Press.
Owen, A. M. (2019). The search for consciousness. Neuron 102, 526–528. doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2019.03.024
Panksepp, J. (1992). A critical role for "aﬀective neuroscience" in resolving what
is basic about basic emotions. Psychol. Rev. 99, 554–560. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.
99.3.554
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering
Schrodinger’s question: A free-energy formulation. Phys. Life Rev. 24, 1–16. doi:
10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Rappaport, Z. H. (2011). The neuroscientiﬁc foundations of free will.Adv. Tech.
Stand Neurosurg. 59, 3–23. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0673-0_1
Reddy, C. P. J. S. K. (2016). Science, subjectivity & reality. J. Conscious. Explor.
Res. 7, 333–336.
Rees, G., Kreiman, G., and Koch, C. (2002). Neural correlates of consciousness
in humans. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 261–270. doi: 10.1038/nrn783
Rizzolatti, G., and Sinigaglia, C. (2016). The mirror mechanism: A basic
principle of brain function.Nat. Rev. Neurosci.17, 757–765. doi: 10.1038/nrn.2016.
135
Seth, A. K., and Bayne, T. (2022). Theories of consciousness. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
23, 439–452. doi: 10.1038/s41583-022-00587-4
Solms, M. (1997). What is consciousness?J. Am. Psychoanal. Assoc.45, 681–703.
doi: 10.1177/00030651970450031201
Solms, M. (2014). A neuropsychoanalytical approach to the hard problem of
consciousness. J. Integr. Neurosci. 13, 173–185. doi: 10.1142/S0219635214400032
Solms, M. (2018). The Hard Problem of Consciousness and the Free Energy
Principle. Front. Psychol. 9:2714. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02714
Solms, M. (2021). The Hidden Spring: A Journey to the Source of Consciousness .
New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company Press.
Solms, M., and Friston, K. (2018). How and why consciousness arises: Some
considerations from physics and physiology. J. Conscious. Stud. 25, 202–238.
Sturm, T. (2012). Consciousness regained? Philosophical arguments for and
against reductive physicalism. Dialogues Clin. Neurosci. 14, 55–63. doi: 10.31887/
DCNS.2012.14.1/tsturm
Volz, L. J., and Gazzaniga, M. S. (2017). Interaction in isolation: 50 years
of insights from split-brain research. Brain 140, 2051–2060. doi: 10.1093/brain/
awx139
Wang, F. Y., Wang, Z. D., and Wang, R. J. (2019). The Taiji Model of Self.Front.
Psychol. 10:1443. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01443
Wang, Z. D., and Wang, F. Y. (2020). The taiji model of self II: Developing
self models and self-cultivation theories based on the chinese cultural traditions
of taoism and Buddhism. Front. Psychol. 11:540074. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.54
0074
Wang, Z. D., Wang, Y. M., Li, K., Shi, J., and Wang, F. Y. (2021). The comparison
of the wisdom view in Chinese and Western cultures. Curr. Psychol. 6, 1–12. doi:
10.1007/s12144-020-01226-w
Wigner, E. P., Wightman, A. S., and Mehra, J. (1992). The Collected Works of
Eugene Paul Wigner. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Yutang, L. (1948). The Wisdom of Laotse. New York, NY: Random House.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 19 frontiersin.org