fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 1
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 22 March 2021
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.647513
Edited by:
Gopikrishna Deshpande,
Auburn University, United States
Reviewed by:
Inês Hipólito,
Humboldt University of Berlin,
Germany
Chih-Mao Huang,
College of Biological Science
and Technology, National Chiao Tung
University, Taiwan
*Correspondence:
Filippo Cieri
ﬁlippocieri@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Cognitive Neuroscience,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience
Received: 30 December 2020
Accepted: 25 February 2021
Published: 22 March 2021
Citation:
Cieri F, Zhuang X, Caldwell JZK
and Cordes D (2021) Brain Entropy
During Aging Through a Free Energy
Principle Approach.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 15:647513.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.647513
Brain Entropy During Aging Through
a Free Energy Principle Approach
Filippo Cieri*, Xiaowei Zhuang, Jessica Z. K. Caldwell and Dietmar Cordes
Department of Neurology, Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, NV, United States
Neural complexity and brain entropy (BEN) have gained greater interest in recent years.
The dynamics of neural signals and their relations with information processing continue
to be investigated through different measures in a variety of noteworthy studies. The
BEN of spontaneous neural activity decreases during states of reduced consciousness.
This evidence has been showed in primary consciousness states, such as psychedelic
states, under the name of “the entropic brain hypothesis.” In this manuscript we
propose an extension of this hypothesis to physiological and pathological aging. We
review this particular facet of the complexity of the brain, mentioning studies that have
investigated BEN in primary consciousness states, and extending this view to the ﬁeld
of neuroaging with a focus on resting-state functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
We ﬁrst introduce historic and conceptual ideas about entropy and neural complexity,
treating the mindbrain as a complex nonlinear dynamic adaptive system, in light of the
free energy principle. Then, we review the studies in this ﬁeld, analyzing the idea that
the aim of the neurocognitive system is to maintain a dynamic state of balance between
order and chaos, both in terms of dynamics of neural signals and functional connectivity.
In our exploration we will review studies both on acute psychedelic states and more
chronic psychotic states and traits, such as those in schizophrenia, in order to show the
increase of entropy in those states. Then we extend our exploration to physiological and
pathological aging, where BEN is reduced. Finally, we propose an interpretation of these
results, deﬁning a general trend of BEN in primary states and cognitive aging.
Keywords: brain entropy, entropic brain, aging, fMRI, free energy, Alzheimer, neuroaging
The pessimist complains about the wind, the optimist waits for the wind to change; the realist
adapts the sails (Chamfort, 1795/1969).
INTRODUCTION
Several factors characterize the human brain as one of the most complex organs in nature. The
ﬁrst is the billions of neurons from which it is composed, and which are associated with high total
energy costs, expressed in the brain’s use of 20% of the body’s total energy, despite representing
only 2% of a person’s total body weight (Raichle and Gusnard, 2002). The number of neurons in an
individual’s brain is generally (and perhaps simplistically) assumed to be a determinant factor for
the computational power and expressive capability of the neurocognitive system. These billions of
neurons are frequently and evocatively compared to the number of stars in the Milky Way, which
contains an estimated 200–400 billion stars of diﬀerent brightness and size. This number is not
so far from the number of cells in the human brain. Our nervous system in fact has about 10 14
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 1 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 2
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
synapses linking approximately 86.1 ±8.1 billion neuronal and
84.6 ±9.8 billion nonneuronal cells (Azevedo et al., 2009).
Less than 20% of neurons are located in the cerebral cortex,
with the ratios between glial cells and neurons similar to those
found in other primates, calling into question the classical view
that humans stand out from other primates in their structural
brain composition, rather indicating that concerning numbers
of neuronal and nonneuronal cells, the human brain is an
isometrically scaled-up primate brain (Azevedo et al., 2009).
A second contributor to the complexity of the human brain
is the fact that it expresses more of the total genetic information
encoded in DNA than does any other organ in the human body
(Kandel et al., 2000). Between 30 and 50% of ∼25,000 known
protein coding genes are expressed in the human brain, the
highest level of gene expression compared with other mammals
and primates (Cáceres et al., 2003).
The last characteristic associated with the complexity of the
neurocognitive systemóthe most relevant to this manuscript and
certainly the most tautologicalóconcerns its complex behavior,
which recently led to the hypothesis of the entropic brain
(Carhart-Harris et al., 2014; Carhart-Harris, 2018), where the
term entropy refers to the second law of thermodynamics,
formulated in 1851 by Clausius, after Carnot’s work. In this
context, the quality of diﬀerent neurocognitive states can
be measurable by the entropic level, in a given parameter
of spontaneous brain activity, through electroencephalogram
(EEG), Magnetoencephalography (MEG), or the oxygen level-
dependent (BOLD) resting state signal of the functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (rs-fMRI). We focus our attention on this
latest approach.
Entropy, disorder, uncertainty, and complexity often are
used as synonymous in neuroscientiﬁc context and actually
there is an unquestionable connection between informational
uncertainty and physical disorder, with an underlying unity
linking generative processes of adaptation, mind, and life (Friston
et al., 2012a). Entropy is a measure of uncertainty and out of
thermodynamics, John Neumann ironically suggested to Claude
Shannon his new uncertainty measure’s name:
ìYou should call it entropy, for two reasons: in the ﬁrst place your
uncertainty has been used in statistical mechanics under that name,
so it already has a name. In the second place, and more important,
no one really knows what entropy really is, so in a debate you will
always have the advantage” (cited in Tribus and McIrvine, 1971).
John Neumann’s words are true especially when this idea
is applied to the brain entropy (BEN). In this paper we
review the studies that have investigated this complexity.
Through the review of these works, we also describe the
neurocognitive1 system as engaged to reach a diﬃcult balance
between order and chaos.
As a measure of uncertainty, Pincus (1991) claimed that
entropy measures the randomness and predictability of stochastic
1In this manuscript we use the term neurocognitive or mindbrain system
interchangeably, meaning that the brain (neuro) and mind (cognitive) are two
aspects of the same ìdimension” according to thedual aspect monism(Solms, 1997;
Solms and Turnbull, 2003; Atmanspacher and Fuchs, 2014; Solms and Friston,
2018; Solms, 2019).
processes, generally increasing with greater randomness, where
more entropy corresponds to greater complexity. In order to
describe the BEN within the neurocognitive system, it is useful
to deﬁne some characteristics of the system.
Alive complex biological systems have speciﬁc features, such
as a boundary, in principle able to distinguish an inside and an
outside of the system, allowing the diﬀerentiation between the
organism and the ìnon-organism.” Friston (2010) propose the
assumption to adopt the statistical tool of the Markov blanket to
describe this characteristic2. The system is composed by simpler
components (in the case of the brain, for example, neurons,
synapses, networks, etc.), which can interact and communicate
with one another in hierarchical and bidirectional ways (Kelso
et al., 2009), with feedback mechanisms 3. Also, the components
are in nonlinear dynamic relationship, with non-proportional
interaction between input and output 4. Related to this feature,
the system has a hierarchical and emergent behavior, in which
the whole model can behave in new and diﬀerent ways than the
hierarchically underlying components. Moreover, the system has
the characteristic of autopoiesis (Maturana and Varela, 1980),
which refers to a system capable of reproducing and maintaining
itself, allowing its evolution. The system obeys adaptation in a
Darwinian evolutionary sense, which means that it evolves and
adapts: in the case of the brain we should observe a dynamic
neurocognitive adaptation5.
As previously noted, the idea of BEN in neuroscience
is related to the idea of uncertainty, which is in turn
linked to many other concepts in physics, chemistry and
biology, including randomness and information theory
(Shannon, 1948), which produces several diﬀerent deﬁnitions
(Vaillancourt and Newell, 2002).
The BEN measures the uncertainty of neuronal ﬂuctuations
across time, whereas free-energy measures the uncertainty of
beliefs encoded by neuronal ﬂuctuations (Carhart-Harris and
Friston, 2019). According to the free energy principle (FEP;
Friston et al., 2006) the brain is an open, adaptive, complex
system far from equilibrium and as with any adaptive self-
organizing biological system in nonequilibrium steady-state with
the environment, it must reduce its free energy to resist a natural
tendency to disorder (Ashby, 1947; Friston, 2010). Self-organized
2Although the Markov blanket idea was born as a statistical tool used in machine
learning, performing a useful function in artiﬁcial Bayesian networks, in this
manuscript we adopt and endorse the Fristonian concept (expressed for example
in Allen and Friston, 2013; Clark, 2017; Friston, 2018; Kirchhoﬀ et al., 2018; Cieri
and Esposito, 2019; Ramstead et al., 2019), in which the idea of Markov blanket is
extended further and wider to almost every level of organization in nature, from
cells to brains and beyond to populations and even entire societies and cultures.
From a biological perspective, for instance the plasmalemma is the natural Markov
blanket of the neuron, able to make possible both the diﬀerentiation and the
communication between the internal and external states (Cieri and Esposito, 2019;
Ramstead et al., 2019). Currently there is an active and important discussion about
whether this construct should be interpreted in a realistic way, applied to biological
systems (Bruineberg et al., 2020; van Es and Hipólito, 2020; Beni, 2021).
3For example, with reentrant interactions among widely distributed brain regions
(Edelman, 1993).
4We can summarize this characteristic with the gestaltic motto: ìthe whole is more
than the sum of its parts.”
5For an interesting discussion on the dissipative structures in biological systems
see Goldbeter (2017, 2018), in which he discusses biological rhythms as speciﬁc
source of dissipative structures in biology.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 2 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 3
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
systems move from disorganized to organized structure-function.
In this manuscript, through the review of the studies in this
ﬁeld, we point out that even though the brain must reduce its
free energy, avoiding disorder, it must also maintain a certain
degree of complexity, meaning a dynamic equilibrium in variety
and criticality. This complexity will be reviewed both in studies
of neuronal ﬂuctuations across time and in research works that
have used functional connectivity (FC) exploration during resting
state. Although the necessity of the system is to reduce the
entropy, the goal does not seem to be the ìdark room” (Friston
et al., 2012b), or ìsimplicity, ” or negentropy, rather a diﬃcult
balance between order and chaos in the speciﬁc environment of
the agent. Using the words of Merleau-Ponty (1963):
ìEach organism, in the presence of a given milieu, has its
optimal conditions of activity and its proper manner of realizing
equilibrium” and (each organism) “modiﬁes its milieu according to
the internal norms of its activity” (pp. 148, 154).
Since complex cognitive functions are globally organized in
the neural system, and arise from elemental functions that
are locally organized (Luria, 1980), cortical functions reﬂect
this organization in global and local milieu (Bressler and
Kelso, 2016). In fact, according to Edelman (1987), the most
fundamental brain operations are integration and segregation.
The neural complexity introduced by Tononi et al. (1994),
describes anatomical and physiological diﬀerences in FC between
local segregation and global integration during perception and
behavior, where segregation means statistical independence of
small subparts of the system (the parts of the system behave
independently) and functional integration is the signiﬁcant
deviations from independence, measured through statistical
entropy and mutual information (the model behaves as one)6.
Shannon entropy’s equation is a method to estimate the
average minimum number of bits, or events (in terms of
information), needed to encode a string of symbols, based on the
frequency of the symbols.
H =−
n∑
i=1
pi ×log2 (pi) (1)
Where H is the entropy and pi is the probability of a given event.
The Information Theory (Shannon, 1948) provides a method
to measure how much information we have after we receive a
message, knowing that with any new message the goal is to know
more (have more information) than we did before. The entropy is
the average of information (uncertainty) inherent to any message
released. The less likely, the greater is the information.
In terms of FC when connections between regions of diﬀerent
networks are poor, those regions are segregated, with no
eﬃciency in their mutual interaction. Conversely, numerous
connections between regions of diﬀerent networks lead to a
globally integrated, synchronized network, without segregation
within the single parts, as in the case of an epileptic seizure, where
the activities of many neurons are highly correlated and strongly
6Entropy and mutual information are considered only in their statistical meaning
(as the multivariate generalizations of variance and covariance in univariate
statistics; Tononi et al., 1998).
coordinated (Beggs and Timme, 2012), but less diﬀerentiated
and informative. According to the most inﬂuential theories in
cognitive neuroscience the neural correlates of consciousness can
be traced in temporally evolving dynamic processes (Tononi,
2008; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011; Northoﬀ and Huang, 2017;
Solms and Friston, 2018). One of these theories by Giulio Tononi
(see Tononi, 2012, for an exposition of the theory) claims that
every conscious experience must be informative, diﬀerentiated
and integrated. When brain’s regions become disconnected, as
occurs for example during anesthesia, consciousness fades.
Complexity is achieved in systems where integration and
segregation are balanced and coexist. A complex system can
combine the presence of functionally specialized (segregated)
modules with a strong number of intermodular (integrating)
links (Rubinov and Sporns, 2010). The human mindbrain
system has a larger repertoire of potential neurocognitive states
than other species, and this factor is a key property of its
greater complex behavior (Tononi, 2012). One of the features
related to this greater complexity is an entropy-extension,
rather than an entropy-reduction, as one of the processes
of human consciousness evolution, subsequently followed by
entropy-reduction, through a reorganization of the system
(Carhart-Harris et al., 2014).
As previously noted, the idea of entropy originates from
thermodynamics and the termpsychodynamics (thermodynamics
applied to the mindbrain system) itself was introduced in 1874 by
Wilhelm von Brücke, a known German physiologist and Freud’s
supervisor at University of Vienna. Together with Hermann
von Helmholtz, Brücke proposed that all living organisms are
energy-systems, responding to the same thermodynamics laws.
Since Freud was both a Brücke student and a deep admirer of
Helmholtz, he adopted his psychodynamic view of the mindbrain
as a natural extension of the thermodynamic approach. The
connection between physics and neural sciences ﬁnds one of the
most important precedents and founder in van Helmholtz (1962)
and his thermodynamic view applied to the brain functioning, as
we see further in the next sessions.
Entropy is described by the second law of thermodynamics.
The ﬁrst law is about the conservation of energy among processes,
claiming that the quantity of energy in a system remains the same.
In other words, energy cannot be created or destroyed in the
universe. The second law of thermodynamics describes entropy,
concerning the directionality of energy: a direction naturally
moving toward a more disordered (entropic) state in any isolated
system, meaning that the process will naturally proceed from
lower to higher entropy, with a trajectory which describes the
arrow of time, as a measurement of entropy within a system.
Even if the total amount of entropy in a system is not easy to
calculate, it is easier to measure entropy’s variation within it. For
a thermodynamic system in which there is a heat transfer of size
Q at a temperature T, entropyórepresented in this case by Sóas
two functions of state, can be measured as:
1S =1Q/T (2)
However, in this case the measurement of changes in the
entropy level is relative to systems that are idealized, simple,
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 3 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 4
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
microscopic, and isolated. These features are abstract, not
suitable for biological living systems, which are usually open
and complex. In fact, as recalled by Schrödinger (1944) and von
Bertalanﬀy (1969/2009) living systems do not obey the second law
of thermodynamics.
Prigogine (1967) pointed out the irreversibility of all natural
processes, highlighting that irreversible conditions far from
equilibrium (steady-states), may originate spontaneously and
may transform from disorder (thermal chaos) into order
(negentropy), emphasizing the interaction of a system with its
surroundings. Unlike thermodynamics, cognitive neuroscience
works with complex systems. When entropy increases, the
arrow of time progresses toward disorder, but according to
Prigogine, at some point it may achieve the appearance of
order, despite a loss of potential. He called the structures
resulting from an irreversible process dissipative to emphasize
that they exist only in open systems far from equilibrium,
in conjunction with the environment, with ﬂuctuations, and
a nonlinear interaction mechanism (Prigogine and Stengers,
1984). As recalled by Buzsáki (2019) using the logic of ì entropy
explains time,” time should move backward in biological systems
since in self-organized system entropy decreases (p. 247). Into
this theoretical framework comes the FEP , where all biological
systems are driven to reduce an information-theoreticónot in
thermodynamic senseóquantity known as ìfree energy” (Friston
et al., 2012a), where in open systems we focus on minimizing
the related concept of free energy rather than the maximizing
entropy. The equilibrium comes between energy and entropy
(Prigogine and Stengers, 1984, p. 126). Again, the FEP considers
the system in informational rather than thermodynamic terms.
In this manuscript we reﬂect on studies about BEN, especially
in aging, considering the mindbrain system and neuroaging itself
as a natural, biologic, complex, and irreversible process with
nonlinear interactions and a source of oscillations and spatio-
temporal organization. As we address in more details in the
forthcoming sections, the complexity becomes super-critical in
case of primary states. On the other hand complexity naturally
decreases during aging and it is abnormally reduced during
neurodegeneration, becoming ìpathologically sub-critical.”
BRAIN ENTROPY IN DIFFERENT STATES
OF THE SYSTEM
As Mattei (2014) highlights, neuroscientiﬁc studies use nonlinear
methods to explore patterns of cell ﬁring (Thomas et al., 2013),
autonomic systems (Tseng et al., 2013), synchronization of neural
networks (Yu et al., 2011), EEG data (Abásolo et al., 2007),
and noise modulation in the cerebellum (Tokuda et al., 2010).
Neuroimaging approaches can explore function and variability
of the brain through diﬀerent methods. As we noted, it can be
calculated in an information theoretic sense, as the magnitude
of entropy in a given framework of spontaneous brain activity,
such as oscillations in electrical potentials recorded with EEG
or MEG. It can also be assessed with the BOLD rs-fMRI
signal (Ogawa, 1990) as temporal dynamics of neuronal activity.
The BOLD signal explores brain ﬂuctuations self-organized
into internally coherent spatiotemporal patterns of activity, an
expression of neural systems engaged during diﬀerent cognitive
states (called intrinsic or resting state networksóRSNs; Fox
and Raichle, 2005). These networks are spatially segregated
brain regions, intrinsically co-activated and deactivated across
time. This synchronized activation gives rise to FC as temporal
correlations between spatially distinct neurophysiological events
(Friston et al., 1993) in which multiple cerebral regions,
even those anatomically distant, are activated and deactivated
simultaneously during both task and resting states (Biswal
et al., 1995). These temporal ﬂuctuations of brain activity
are an intrinsic property of the system which underlies brain
communication within a speciﬁc RSN and between diﬀerent
RSNs. Nonlinear statistical measures are used to calculate the
regularity of biological signals, with neuroimaging approaches
that use the concept of entropy to measure brain complexity.
Although we focus our attention on aging, we ﬁrst introduce
the entropic brain hypothesis through the states in which it
has been proposed.
Brain Entropy in Psychedelic States
The entropic brain hypothesis (Carhart-Harris et al., 2014;
Carhart-Harris, 2018) ﬁrst arose to answer the question: ì what
happens to human neurocognitive functionality when non-
ordinary states occur? ” The neurodynamics of primary states 7
are more entropic than secondary states. In fact one of the
most important actions of psychedelic compounds is to increase
BEN, with a direct behavioral eﬀect of increasing the richness
of conscious experience (Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2019).
The psychedelic state is considered an archetype of primitive
states of consciousness that precededófrom an ontogenetic
and phylogenetic viewóthe development and evolution of
modern, human, adult, ordinary waking consciousness (Carhart-
Harris et al., 2014). Under the eﬀect of psychedelic drugs
such as psilocybin and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), the
brain reaches greater complexity, compared to normal waking
consciousness, giving rise to a more critical activity, as shown
by recent fMRI studies (Atasoy et al., 2017; Muthukumaraswamy
and Liley, 2018; Varley et al., 2020). These studies support the
reduced hierarchy in favor of an increased anarchy activity,
with a scale-free organization eﬀect (Carhart-Harris and Friston,
2019). In fact one of the critical eﬀects of psychedelics is a
loss of synchronization and a decreasing of oscillatory power
in higher level cortical regions via serotonin 2A receptors (5-
HT2AR) mediated excitation of deep-layer pyramidal neurons
in these regions (Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2013; Tagliazucchi
et al., 2014). Psychedelic compounds in fact, upregulate 5-
HT2AR and this mechanism can facilitate adaptation to the
environment, which is continuously changing and variable
(Carhart-Harris and Nutt, 2017). One example is by promoting
divergent thinking, favoring psychological ﬂexibility, creating
new and eﬀective cognitive, emotional, and behavioral strategies
7We are referring to the processes described by the Freudian metapsychology
(Freud, 1940), in which Freud distinguished two ways of mental functioning: the
primary and the secondary processes, corresponding to the pleasure and reality
principle, respectively. Friston (2010) calls it secondary consciousness, which
pays deference to reality by carefully sampling the world and learning from its
encounters (Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2010; Cieri and Esposito, 2019).
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 4 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 5
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
(Kuypers et al., 2016) and impairing conventional cognition
(Bayne and Carter, 2018). In this context it is interesting to
note that, consistent with our hypothesis, divergent thinking and
creativity has been recently correlated with BEN at the level
of the left dorsal anterior cingulate cortex/pre-supplementary
motor area and left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Shi et al.,
2020). Divergent thinking seems to be related to the functional
dynamics of the control networks involved in cognitive ﬂexibility
and inhibitory control.
Analyses of Lempel-Ziv complexity through MEG, measuring
spontaneous neural activity eﬀects of LSD and psilocybin and
psychedelic-like drugs, have shown increased BEN in psychedelic
states (Schartner et al., 2017). Importantly, the magnitude of
this higher entropy correlates with the subjective intensity of
the drug experience (Schartner et al., 2017). Similar results
were obtained using fMRI, again under psychedelic-like drugs,
where the magnitude of increased BEN predicted subsequent
alteration in personality two weeks later (Lebedev et al., 2016).
Further support through fMRI has been observed in studies with
ayahuasca (a South American psychotropic plant tea, containing
dimethyltryptamine), which showed increased brain complexity
under the eﬀect of this compound, using EEG and the Lempel-Ziv
measure (Viol et al., 2017; Timmermann et al., 2018).
FMRI studies, focused on psilocybin eﬀects, conﬁrm an
expanded repertoire of brain states under LSD and this eﬀect
correlates, again, with the experience and the intensity of the
subjective ìtrip” (Atasoy et al., 2017).
The RSNs which exhibited the most signiﬁcant changes,
correspond to higher brain systems such as the Default Mode
Network, or Default Network (DN 8; Raichle and Snyder, 2001),
executive control and attention networks rather than primary
sensory and motor networks. This outcome is consistent with
the regional distribution of 5-HT2A receptors (Tagliazucchi et al.,
2014), as we noted, strictly related to the action mechanism of
these compounds.
Adult mindbrain in normal and awake conditions works
through a ìcritical-behavior.” In other words the activity of the
brain continuously transits between two phases: one in which
the brain action increases and ampliﬁes over time and another
in which the activity rapidly reduces and dies (Beggs and Plenz,
2003). The transition between these two phases seems to be
associated with ordinary consciousness state of ìneurocognitive
eﬃciency”: the system has an internal (unconscious) model of
the world and through the active inferences, create predictions
about expectations. The diﬀerence between predicted sensory
information (prior probability) and the real sensory information
(posterior probability) gives rise to a prediction error (Hohwy,
2013), where surprise, or free energy, can be decomposed into
complexity minus accuracy (Cieri and Esposito, 2019).
Studies on the investigation of the LSD eﬀects on brain
networks (Preller et al., 2019) using rs-fMRI have conﬁrmed
reduced top–down ﬂow from the posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC) to the thalamus. In other words, it seems that compared
8According to Andrews-Hanna et al. (2014) we use default network rather than
default mode network , because the mode part refers to a more passive state. We
want to point out the adaptive functions of the network (extend beyond the resting
state), in ontologic and phylogenetic sense, especially important in our context.
to psychedelic states, in normal conditions subjects are more
able to integrate and interpret external information from the
environment, and predict errors, using ìregular” bottom-up
sensory cortices and heteromodal association top-down cortices
with their higher value of intermodularity. The thinking style of
normal states can have access to the analytical and convergent
expression. On the other hand, the psychedelic-primary states
move the neurocognitive activity toward a state of increased
BEN (i.e., neural activity is more random and cognition is more
ìanarchic”) without possibility of access to forms of analytical
and convergent thinking. Primary consciousness is associated
with unconstrained cognition and less ordered (higher-entropy)
neurodynamics, whereas secondary consciousness is associated
with constrained cognition and more ordered neurodynamics.
Relaxed beliefs under psychedelics (REBUS; Carhart-Harris
and Friston, 2019) describes an anarchic neural activity, in
which from one hand, there is an increased bottom-up signaling,
more sensitive to external (environment) and internal (somatic,
visceral, and emotional-limbic) stimuli. On the other hand, the
system is exposed to a decreased top-down sensory inhibition,
meaning less perceptual restriction. These two dimensions
of the system are mutually dependent and critical in their
dynamic balance.
There are other human conditions with a negative correlation
with BEN, or in other words closer to sub-level of criticality,
such as mood disorders (e.g, depression; Akdemir Akar et al.,
2015), but the results on this ﬁeld are contradictory (Mendez
et al., 2012) and perhaps suggest that the relationship between
BEN and depression maybe subtype and state speciﬁc (e.g., see
Akdemir Akar et al., 2015), as well as sensitive to medication
status (Mendez et al., 2012). The analysis of these conditions
is beyond the scope of this work. Nevertheless, there are
some analogies that appear evident between psychedelic states
and psychotic traits and statesósuch as schizophrenia. These
analogies concern for example a direction of divergent thinking
and/or reduced analytical abilities (Kuypers et al., 2016). In
the next section we describe the BEN in these psychotic traits
and states. Compared to acute psychedelic states, BEN is more
problematic to investigate in these conditions because they are
more shaped by the interaction of biopsychosocial factors, thus
they are as multifaceted as human personality can be. On the
other hand, psychedelic states have the power to channel and
identify a neurocognitive eﬀect more homogeneously thanks
to the acute eﬀect of the compound used, albeit inﬂuenced
by the biopsychosocial factors. In case of states or traits
of psychosis, caution is needed and general and conclusive
statements should be avoided.
Brain Entropy in Schizophrenia
The dysconnection hypothesis (Friston and Frith, 1995; Friston
et al., 2016) postulates that the neural correlate of schizophrenia
comes from an abnormal interaction between specialized brain
regions, resulting in defective integration of activity in distributed
networks, and therefore in cognitive disintegration. According to
Friston et al. (2016), from a system perspective in psychosis we
observe an abnormal balance of synaptic eﬃcacy that mediates
the (context-sensitive) inﬂuence of intrinsic and extrinsic
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 5 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 6
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
(long-range) connectivity. Since we need our brain for our
active inference, the disconnection hypothesis postulates that the
psychopathology must be evident as a failure of the inference
process, due to a defect in the modulation of sensory states.
It means that the individual cannot ignore stimuli. Statistically
speaking everything becomes surprising, because not predictable
(Friston et al., 2016). From a synaptic view there is a gain when
we have a synchronous exchange of neuronal signals (Chawla
et al., 1999). In schizophrenia, synaptic pruning seems to be
abnormal from puberty, snipping oﬀ far too many dendritic
spines (Feinberg, 1990; Glausier and Lewis, 2013; Kandel, 2018).
Bordier et al. (2018), recently used the graph-theory approach
to demonstrate that in patients with schizophrenia there is an
abnormal connectivity organization in terms of participation
coeﬃcient 9, with higher values in sensorimotor and primary
visual cortices compared to healthy controls (HCs). In healthy
subjects this value is higher in heteromodal association corticesó
with the aim to integrate informationóand lower at the level
of sensory cortices (Fornito et al., 2015). Conversely, in patients
with schizophrenia, more disconnection is found in frontal and
parietal cortices, including heteromodal and associative areas,
compared to HCs. As in the case of acute psychedelic conditions,
the brain’s top-down functions fail in predicting errors in
schizophrenia (Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2019).
The vision system might play a key role in this context. In fact,
as human being, our surviving and development largely depend
on our complex process of sight, which convey information from
the environment, on which we base a good part of our movement,
orientation, active inferences and behavior. Interestingly, in
this regard, Silverstein et al. (2012) and Silverstein and Rosen
(2015) have found an anticorrelation between schizophrenia and
congenital blindness, recently conﬁrmed by Pollak and Corlett
(2019). As shown by these authors congenital blindness seems
to act as a protective factor against schizophrenia. The last
study used a Bayesian prediction error minimization model,
exploring how congenital blindness may increase precision (and
consequent stability) of higher-level (including supramodal)
priors, focusing on visual loss-induced changes in N-methyl- D-
aspartate (NMDA) receptor structure and function as a possible
mechanistic substrate.
The sense of sight is fundamental in the construction of
the individual internal world model, especially in our species,
where visual inputs have primacy in sculpting prior hypothesis
about the reality (Pollak and Corlett, 2019). Accordingly with
the mentioned evidence and consistently with our speculation,
congenital blindness appears to protect against schizophrenia,
showing an increased precision of higher-level priors in people
blind from birth, providing a less complex system, which acts
as a protective factor against the disease. We agree with the
authors of this study that propose that the neurocognitive
system of the congenital blind patients have more precision of
higher-level priors. Therefore, the irregularities that characterize
schizophrenia have less impact on congenitally blindness because
of the stability of their higher-level supramodal representations
9A method that measures the diversity of a single node, or its intermodularity.
Nodes with high values represent more projections to other modules.
(Pollak and Corlett, 2019). Absence (but not subsequent loss)
of visual information might make the integration of top-down
active inference and bottom-up information ìless complex” or
ìmore manageable, ” in congenital blindness, especially in a
species in which the sense of sight plays such a fundamental
role in its evolution, both from an ontogenetic and phylogenetic
perspective. Decreasing the intensity, variety and complexity of
stimuli, can lead to a protective eﬀect against schizophrenia, in
which greater signal complexity results in defective integration
in distributed networks and in cognitive disintegration 10. In
congenital blindness, the visual cortex shifts its function to
process auditory and tactile stimuli (Poirier et al., 2006), showing
an important role of cross-modal plasticity.
At the level of the multimodal integration networks in
congenitally blind patients, there is increased interconnectivity
across multimodal integration areas and between modal regions
and multimodal integration cortices, compared to sighted
controls (Ortiz-Terán et al., 2016). As this latest study points
out, visual deprivation results in cortical reorganization which
seems to make easier the elaboration of non-visual information
and aids in overall perception, saliency and environmental
characterization.
Schizophrenic patients could show diﬀerent level (depth)
of disconnection: between the individual and the external
environmentóin terms of behavioral symptoms, such as isolation
and social withdrawal; between emotion and knowledge; will and
action (Frith, 2007); and an innermost disconnection within the
parts of system itself (neural networks) in terms of FC (Friston
and Frith, 1995; Friston et al., 2016).
Pincus (1991) has introduced the Approximate Entropy
(ApEn) in order to calculate the regularity and complexity
for the analysis of short and noisy brain signal time series,
measuring the normal distribution (Richman and Moorman,
2000). The idea is that the time series in which elements are
repeated, give rise to more ordered structures, with a lower
amount of entropy. Sample Entropy (SampEn) is a variant of
Approximate Entropy (ApEn) 11 to characterize the complexity
within dynamic FC, estimated by applying the sliding-window
correlation technique. SampEn was introduced by Richman and
Moorman (2000) to reduces the bias of ApEn, to count each
sequence as matching itself to avoid the occurrence of ln (0)
in the calculations. SampEn avoids the problem of vector self-
matching, not including it in the analysis. This technique has been
recently used (Jia et al., 2017) to show that BEN of the amygdala-
cortical connectivity decreases with advancing age, but this eﬀect
disappears in patients with schizophrenia. In other words, these
authors have shown the general loss of brain complexity (in
terms of FC) related to neuroaging, which will be explored in
depth in the next sections, but they also added the evidence
10This hypothesis can be conceivable only in case of congenital blindness;
otherwise for late onset of blindness the possibility of developing hallucinatory
episodes, is greater, which is in turn consistent with our speculation, because in
this case a new unexpected uncertainty of the system comes suddenly, thus the
surprise increases in a system not ìprepared” for the new disordered condition.
11Both ApEn and SampEn have the aim to estimate predictability within a time
series. ApEn has the characteristic of dependence on data length, while SampEn is
data length independent.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 6 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 7
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
that schizophrenia is able to ìcontrast” this age eﬀect. This study
provides a demonstration about more entropy associated with
schizophrenia with a reversed trend in aging. Even though a
ìcompensation eﬀect” might be too speculative, it is interesting
to note that positive symptoms of schizophrenia physiologically
improve with aging (Jeste and Maglione, 2013).
A more recent study (Salman et al., 2019) used dynamic
FC, supporting the increased subcortical hyperconnectivity,
translated in higher entropy in the whole brain and in
the functional domain level of patients with schizophrenia,
compared to HCs.
Sokunbi et al. (2014) explored the entropy of the brain signal
itself, rather than the complexity of FC, ﬁnding global and
regional diﬀerences between patients with schizophrenia and
HCs while performing a social exclusion task. These authors
have used two diﬀerent entropy measures: SampEn and Hurst
Exponent (HE), where this latter method is used to calculate
the brain complexity, computing fractal complexity of the time
series. It measures how persistent a fractal process is, or how
self-similar (predictable) a signal is within a process 12. The
results of this study show that patients have more entropic
fMRI signal, globally and locally, than HCs, according to both
measures used. One of the most signiﬁcant regions found in
this study is the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, which has been
reported in fMRI studies to have a key role in responses to
social exclusion (Eisenberger et al., 2003), in emotional working
memory and the experience of Self (Smith et al., 2018). Patients
with schizophrenia have shown higher entropy of the brain signal
compared to HCs, also using EEG approach (Raghavendra et al.,
2009). Neuroleptic use seems to decrease the abnormally higher
EEG disorganization in these patients; this eﬀect might be due to
a dopaminergic modulation eﬀect in frontal regions (Takahashi
et al., 2010), which is in line with the disconnection theory of
schizophrenia by Friston and Frith (1995). Takahashi et al. (2010)
highlight how their evidence of increased BEN is an example
of the underlying disorganized spiking activity in schizophrenia,
consistently with our view.
ENTROPY IN AGING
Physiologic processes have a complex organization, operating on
regulatory models and feedback loops over multiple scales of
time and space (Lipsitz and Goldberger, 1992). These processes
interact with one another in a nonlinear fashion (Goldberger
et al., 2002; Manor and Lipsitz, 2013), having nonlinear
dynamics marked by ﬂuctuations over multiple temporospatial
scales (Costa et al., 2002). This dynamic complexity typical
of physiologic processes decreases with aging in cardiovascular
(Costa et al., 2008), respiratory (Peng et al., 2002), central nervous
(Y ang et al., 2013), and motor control (Costa et al., 2008; Manor
and Lipsitz, 2013) systems, and this loss of complexity in aging is
directly associated with more diﬃculty adapting to stress (Lipsitz
12The value of HE is expressed in a range of time series between 0 and 1, where
1 = 0.5 represents a random white noise series; 2 = 0 < H < 0.5 is a rough
anticorrelated series, and 3 = 0.5 < H < 1 describes a positively correlated series
(Tagliazucchi et al., 2013; Sokunbi et al., 2014).
and Goldberger, 1992). Lipsitz and Goldberger (1992) claimed
that fractals and chaos theory are a useful approach to study these
changes. Fractals are irregular structures composed by complex
patterns, with the feature of self-similarity, where the structure
of the smaller-scale mirrors the form of the larger-scale. We can
observe examples of fractals in nature, such as Brownian crystal
growth and lightning structure, in the human body, such as the
blood vessel of the tracheobronchial tree and neural organization
(Zueva, 2015). We can also observe evocative fractal ideas in art,
as in some Pollock paints, as ìOne number 31, 1950” (see Taylor
et al., 1999 for an interesting discussion about the mentioned
Pollock’s paint and fractals).
During development, the complexity and computational
power of the mindbrain system increases along with the
complexity of the external environment, in ìnormal” conditions.
The neuroaging process is physiologically related to decreased
power to receive and elaborate on information from the external
environment. This decreasing is in part related to sensory
impairment, which negatively aﬀects the sensory–cognitive
interface on which we rely, preventing the correct bottom-
up process needed for the update of the prior information of
the model ( prior probability ) with new information from the
environment (posterior probability).
The physiological aging process can aﬀect all of the senses,
causing gradual losses to the sensory system. Thus, loss of
vision, hearing and olfaction are physiologically linked to the
impairment of the neurocognitive system. Impairment in visual
acuity, contrast sensitivity, dark adaptation, spatial contrast
sensitivity, scotopic dysfunction and general visual processing
are common even in people without any speciﬁc structural
vision pathology, such as glaucoma or cataracts (Schaie, 1996).
Vision impairment can aﬀect cognitive function (Alzheimer’s
Association, 2013) and the use of eyeglasses to correct vision,
decreases depressive symptoms (Petersen et al., 2001), often
present in aging cognitive impairment and neurodegeneration
(Cieri et al., 2017).
On the other hand, hearing loss is the third most common
health disorder in older adults (Blackwell et al., 2014) and in
elderly it is associated with 30–40% steeper cognitive impairment
compared to subjects without hearing decline and with a 24%
increased risk of cognitive impairment (Lin et al., 2013). The
hearing decreasing in aging is also linked to faster decreases in the
volume of brain regions that are important for spoken language
processing and other cognitive functions (McEwen, 2000). There
are many evidences that vision and hearing decline are associated
with greater risk of cognitive impairment (Lupien et al., 2009). In
fact, hearing loss has recently been described as a modiﬁable risk
for Alzheimer’s disease (Livingston et al., 2020).
Along with the mentioned sensory impairment, the olfaction
declines signiﬁcantly during aging, in more than 50% of elderly
between 65 and 80 years old and between 62 and 80% of those
over the age of 80 (Doty et al., 1984). Starting from 60 years,
many features of olfaction and the overall smell function start
to decline. This speciﬁc sensory impairment is also a typical
symptom in Parkinson Disease and longitudinal research has
shown that olfactory decline is correlated with higher risk in
development of the disease (Haehner et al., 2007). Parkinson’s
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 7 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 8
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
patients report rates of smell impairment in a range between 75
and 95% (Oppo et al., 2020). Olfaction is not exclusively impaired
in patients with Parkinson; it is also an early feature of AD and
it has been shown to predict progression from mild cognitive
impairment (MCI) to AD (Postuma et al., 2015).
From a functional perspective, sensory impairments might
have a causal role in cognitive decline, increasing the cognitive
load, limiting the neural resources needed for optimal cognitive
performance, decreasing the bottom-up sensory perception,
therefore preventing the update of the system through
posterior probability. Decline of sensory input could also
directly aﬀect brain structure and function, for instance it can
overload neurocognitive circuitry from resource demands to
address poor signal-to-noise ratios. Moreover, sensory loss
may lead to depression, social isolation, and lack of physical
activity, which could in turn increase cognitive impairment
(Whitson et al., 2018).
As we see further in the next sections, the evidence shows
that with aging we observe an overall decrease of BEN, both in
terms of electrical signal complexity and integration-segregation
FC of the neural networks, which become less complex. During
the neurocognitive aging process (especially in its pathological
vein) the system seems to lose its general ì goodness” to receive
information and apply an eﬃcient perceptual synthesis, good
factorization of the putative causes of sensations, losing the
ability to update, interpret and predict the reality. Associate to
this factor there is the progressive loss to anticorrelate speciﬁc
networks during cognitive task and resting state. In fact, in terms
of the fMRI BOLD signal, the young healthy neurocognitive
system expresses the mutual inhibition of activity at diﬀerent
cortical regions, leading to anticorrelated dynamics (Dehaene
and Changeux, 2011). This ability declines during physiological
aging and MCI (Esposito, Cieri et al., 2018; Figure 1 ). At the
same time the system applies some adaptive strategies, such as a
more local (segregated) than distributed (integrated) information
processing (Heisz et al., 2015).
Brain Entropy in Physiological Aging
As noted above, the general loss of dynamic complexity associated
with aging has been explored in other physiological measures,
such as cardiovascular, respiratory, or motor control systems,
as well as through diﬀerent imaging methods such as fMRI,
EEG, and MEG. Here we focus our attention to the BEN in
physiological and pathological aging, investigated through the
rs-fMRI approach (Table 1).
FIGURE 1 |Default Network (DN) and Dorsal Attention Network (DAN) anticorrelations. The maps show DN-DAN anticorrelations for healthy young subjects, healthy
elders, and MCI subjects. For each group a positive correlation with the PCC time course is observed in the angular gyrus, Medial Frontal Gyrus and Hippocampus
regions, according to topography of DN. For each group, a negative correlation with the PCC time course was observed in the Inferior Parietal Sulcus, Frontal Eye
Field, ACC and Middle Temporal Gyrus. These regions overlap with the DAN nodes. This anticorrelation is reduced in elderly and MCI patients compared to young
individuals (Esposito, Cieri et al., 2018).
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 8 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 9
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
TABLE 1 |Rs-fMRI studies on BEN in aging.
Measure Study Stage Groups Results
Hurst Exponent
(HE)
Wink et al.,
2008
Young HCs,
Elderly HCs
11 young HCs; Age: 22.4
11 elderly HCs; Age: 65.3
Decreased BEN (increased HE) age-related in bilateral-MTL, Hp, amygdala and
parahippocampal gyrus
Hurst Exponent
(HE)
Dong et al.,
2018
Maturation 116 HCs
Age range: 19-85
Decreased BEN (increased HE) age-related in frontal and parietal lobes;
increased BEN in insula, limbic, and temporal lobe; Sex differences: M > F in
parietal lobe
Aproximate
Entropy (APEn) +
Sample Entropy
(SampEn)
Sokunbi et al.,
2015
Maturation 86 HCs
Age range 19–85 years
Decreased ApEn age-related whole and regional: frontal, limbic, temporal,
cerebellum and parietal lobes; No signiﬁcant correlation between SampEn and
age
Multi Scale
Entropy (MSE)
Smith et al.,
2014
Maturation
GM and WM
8 young HCs; Age: 23
8 elderly HCs; Age: 66
MSE increased in GM at higher scales, resembles that of f−1 noise, compared
to WM; BEN at shortest scale dominated by noise; ﬁltering noise out contrast
sharper between GM and WM at longer time scales; more activity in young
versus elderly in DN
Multiscale
Entropy (MSE)
Yang et al.,
2013
Young HCs,
Elderly HCs
56 Young HCs; Age: 27.5
99Elderly HCs; Age: 80.6
Decreased MSE in the elderly in the OC, PCC, Hp, SOG, caudate, and
thalamus; Most signiﬁcant in PCC; MSE curve proﬁle shows a decreased MSE
with increased scale factors
Shannon Entropy
(SE)
Lou et al., 2019 Elderly HCs 188 Elderly HCs;
Age: 70.8
Decreased SE age-related in the r-IFG, l-IPG, r-amygdala, r-Hp, left
parahippocampal cortex; High BEN values mainly distributed in the frontal and
temporal lobes; occipital and parietal regions exhibit a more stable pattern with
low diversity values
Approximate
Entropy (APEn)
Liu et al., 2013 Maturation
and fAD
8 young HCs; Age: 23
8 elderly HCs; Age: 66
22 fAD (PSEN1, APP)
Age: 41.2
Decreased ApEn age-related in elderly HCs in bilateral angular gyri, r-MTG,
r-SMG and PCC, compared to young HCs; Decreased ApEn AD-related in Prc,
right SMG AG, bilateral superior parietal regions; Main effect of age on mean
ApEn values in GM more than WM
Multi Scale
Entropy (MSE)
Smith et al.,
2015
Elderly HCs,
MCI,
GM and WM
25 elderly HCs; Age: 70
25 MCI; Age: 70
Lower BEN across all scales (dominance of external noise) in WM; High BEN at
lower scales, where the noise dominates the entropy and GM not
distinguishable from WM; DN highest level of irregularity
Multiscale
Entropy (MSE)
Grieder et al.,
2018
Elderly HCs,
AD
14 elderly HCs; Age: 67
15 AD; Age: 67
Decreased MSE in AD compared to HC increasing scale; DMN-related signal
ﬂuctuation less complex in AD at lower frequencies. More entropy in the HC
from scales 1–4, followed by a decrease from scales 5–10
Multiscale
Entropy (MSE)
Niu et al., 2018 Elderly HCs,
EMCI, LMCI,
AD
30 elderly HCs; Age: 74.1
33 EMCI; Age: 72
32 LMCI; Age: 72.5
29 AD; Age: 72.3
Decreased MSE in MCI and AD patients associated with cognitive decline on
multiple time scales (from 2 to 6) especially occipital, frontal, temporal, limbic,
and parietal lobes, compared to HCs; Shortest scale, entropy dominated by
high frequency ﬂuctuations from random noise; Filtering out random
ﬂuctuations, bigger contrast at longer time scales
Permutation
Entropy (PE)
Wang et al.,
2017
Elderly HCs,
EMCI, LMCI,
AD
30 Elderly HCs; Age: 74.1
33 EMCI; Age: 72
32 LMCI; Age: 72.5
29 AD; Age: 72.3
Decreased PE in AD than MCI and HCs especially in the occipital, frontal, and
temporal lobes; Signiﬁcant negative correlations between PE and ReHo in
patients at the inferior and middle frontal gyrus; MMSE, FAQ and CDR scores,
revealed an increasing symptom load with decreasing PE
Sample Entropy
(SampEn)
Wang, 2020 Elderly HCs
SMC, EMCI,
LMCI, AD
54 elderly HCs; Age: 75.3
27 SMC; Age 72.4
58 EMCI; Age: 71.5
38 LMCI; Age: 71.8
34 AD; Age: 72.4
SampEn slightly increased from HCs to SMC and EMCI, it quickly fell below the
BEN level of HCs in LMCI, showing a further steep in AD with an accelerated
pace, speciﬁcally at the level of the DN and the executive control network
(including the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and lateral parietal cortex)
BEN, brain entropy; Development, from infancy to adulthood; Maturation, from adulthood to elderly; Age, mean age age; HCs, healthy controls; SMC, signiﬁcant memory
concern; fAD, familiar Alzheimer; SZ, schizophrenic; M, Male; F, Female; PSEN1, Presenilin-1 gene; APP , Amyloid Precursor Protein mutation gene; ReHo, regional
homogeneity; GM, gray matter; WM, white matter; Hp, hippocampus; MTG, mid temporal gyrus; SMG, supramarginal gyrus; AG, angular gyrus; PCC, posterior cingulate
cortex; Prc, Precuneus; OC, olfactory cortex; SOG, superior occipital gyrus; LG, lingual gyrus; STC, superior temporal cortex; ACC, anterior cingular cortex; IFG, inferior
frontal gyrus; IPG, inferior parietal gyrus; MTL, medial temporal lobes; DN, default network; MMSE, Mini Mental State Examination; FAQ, Functional Activities Questionnaire;
CDR, Clinical Dementia Rating.
During aging we observe a general cognitive change in all
the cognitive spectrum, including attention, language, memory,
inhibitory control and other executive functions. The discussion
of these changes is beyond the scope of this manuscript (see
Cabeza et al., 2018; but also Grady, 2012, for a review) and we
focus our attention to the BEN changes during physiological and
pathological aging.
Brain entropy is investigated through nonlinear methods, such
as the aforementioned HE, used to estimate the fractal complexity
comparing two groups of young and elderly individuals, showing
in the latter group decreased entropy of the signal at the level of
bilateral hippocampus, as one of the most important and aﬀected
regions in aging (Wink et al., 2008). The same approach has been
more recently used to calculate the complexity of rs-fMRI during
maturation in 116 HCs between 19 and 85 years old, showing a
signiﬁcant association between the mean HE of whole brain gray
matter and the age of participants, where decreasing BOLD signal
complexity (higher HE) is correlated to aging (Dong et al., 2018).
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 9 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 10
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
This reduced complexity is particularly focused at the level of the
frontal and parietal lobes, but at the same time this study points
out an increased complexity at the level of limbic regions, such
as insula. The authors have speculated that this increase may be
related to the higher involvement of limbic areas in emotional
states, which do not become impaired with age and sometimes
improve in some aspects (see Nashiro et al., 2012 for the emotion
paradox in neuroaging).
Combining SampEn with Fuzzy Approximate Entropy,
Sokunbi et al. (2015) explored the brain aging dynamics in
maturation in 86 HCs with age range 19–85 years, demonstrating
that the mean whole and regional BEN show signiﬁcant negative
correlation with age; speciﬁcally, at the local level within the
frontal, parietal, limbic, temporal, and cerebellum parietal lobes.
Multi Scale Entropy (MSE; Costa et al., 2002) applies
SampEn to diﬀerent coarse-sampled scales from the original time
series, in order to diﬀerentiate complex processes from random
ﬂuctuations by exploiting diﬀerences between signal and noise
across multiple time scales, because the noise signal can show
a high level of complexity as well. BEN may not be directly
interpreted as the degree of complexity, because random noise
defers the highest entropy but it does not represent the most
complex process (Smith et al., 2014). It is critical to estimate
whether the information transferred is the same across scales.
MSE diﬀerentiate random noise from complex signals, where
random noise decreases with longer time scales. This method
consists of a set of SampEn values under multiple time scales,
which reﬂects the complexity of time series on multiple scales.
Thus, it can be used to compare the complexity of diﬀerent time
series, based on the speciﬁc trend of SampEn changes with scales
(McIntosh, 2019). MSE has been also used to compare white
versus gray matter in young versus elderly by Smith et al. (2014),
showing higher BEN in white compared to gray matter at shorter
time scales and the opposite at lower temporal frequencies. Both
groups young and elderly show complexity at increasing scale.
Values of entropy are similar at low scales between young and
elderly, with dominance of noise at higher frequencies. Filtering
out random ﬂuctuations (noise), the entropy diﬀerence between
groups becomes more evident in the range of low frequencies, in
regions including the DN (Smith et al., 2014).
Older subjects also exhibit signiﬁcant MSE reduction at the
level of olfactory cortex, superior occipital gyrus, and thalamus,
compared to the younger group, during resting state (Y ang
et al., 2013). Importantly, this latter study has shown that the
most signiﬁcant values of reduced entropy are at the level
of the PCC, caudate and hippocampal cortex, as important
components of the DN, compared to young individuals (Y ang
et al., 2013). The DN is involved in cognitive functions, such as
autobiographical, episodic memory and self-referential processes
(Buckner and Carroll, 2007; Cieri and Esposito, 2018). The
PCC is part of the posterior nodes of the DN and it shows
signiﬁcant modiﬁcation in aging, especially pathological (e.g.,
AD), indicating amyloid deposition and reduction of metabolism,
also in preclinical conditions and APOE- ε4 carriers (Sperling
et al., 2009; Caldwell et al., 2019). Moreover, the PCC, precuneus,
and associated paramedian thalamic nuclei, are suggested as a
strategic intersection for coordinating the interactions among
diﬀerent sensory areas and frames of reference concerning the
body and the environment. In fact, bilateral lesions to these areas
are related to a virtual breakdown of information integration in
the thalamocortical system (Tononi, 2004).
Interestingly, McIntosh et al. (2013), using diﬀerent imaging
techniques, such as both EEG and MEG, have explored age
diﬀerences through MSE and FC, showing that at coarse
scales a decreasing of complexity is observed, while at ﬁne
scales the opposite occurs. Healthy elderly subjects seem more
prone to process information in local rather than distributed
ways. The anticorrelation between ﬁne and coarse timescales
in the older group suggests a shift in the direction of adaptive
local processing in healthy aging. Importantly their cognitive
performance, measured by MoCA, seem to be correlated with
their physical activity, whereas this correlation is not true for
younger individuals (Heisz et al., 2015).
Shannon entropy (SE) has been used to correlate BEN and
aging, showing a decrease of age-related complexity in the whole
brain as well as in the right inferior frontal gyrus, right amygdala,
right hippocampus, and left parahippocampal gyrus at the
frequency interval of 0.06–0.12 Hz (Lou et al., 2019). However,
this study points out that whole-brain resting state entropy
reﬂects general cognitive ﬂexibility and information processing,
measured by typical executive functions neuropsychological tests.
The most complex regions found by these authors, were located
at the level of frontal and temporal lobes, while a more stable
pattern was found in the occipital and parietal regions. The areas
correlated with low age-related complexity are mainly located in
the DN and frontoparietal control network. Importantly, unlike
the other studies analyzed, here complexity is more closely related
to a speciﬁc cognitive aspect such as mental ﬂexibility, adding
a putative neurophysiological mechanism of cognitive ﬂexibility,
or at least a closer link between BEN and cognition (Lou et al.,
2019). This link is consistent with the general decrease of the
neurocognitive ﬂexibility in aging found both on a cognitive level
and on a neural signal level.
Brain Entropy in Pathological Aging
If the decrease in entropy is associated to a general aging
of the system, which loses its optimal functionality, then we
should be able to observe even a greater loss of entropy in a
system aﬀected by neurodegeneration, such as AD ( Table 1 ).
Beyond schizophrenia, AD represents another example of a
disconnection syndrome (Geschwind, 1965; Delbeuck et al.,
2003; Contreras et al., 2019). Participation coeﬃcient and degree
centrality13, as measures of connectivity of the graph theory
approach, have shown that brain regional nodes with the
highest number of connections (edges) to other regions are the
most frequently lesioned by several brain diseases, including
schizophrenia and AD (Crossley et al., 2014). The brain regions
most critical to intermodular communication are also more
likely to be pathologically lesioned. In fact, in AD cortical
hubs have been suggested to be critical areas, concentrating
most of the amyloid- β deposition (Buckner et al., 2009).
13Degree centrality is a measure of centrality, which calculates the number of
connections (i.e., edges) of a node, distinguishing hubs and non-hubs.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 10 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 11
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
Moreover, in the transneuronal tau propagation hypothesis
in AD, the tau pathology seems to spread through neuronal
connections, rather than anatomical proximity (Kaufman et al.,
2016; Franzmeier et al., 2020), supporting the essential role
of connection-disconnection in AD. In these patients, the DN,
the salience network and the frontoparietal control network
display a signiﬁcant network isolation, or greater connectivity
distances, from the rest of the brain, giving more evidence to the
disconnection of the system (Costumero et al., 2020).
A trend of less entropy of brain oscillations in the DN
regions has been found using ApEn to explore the BOLD signal
complexity of cognitive decline associated with familial AD in
gray and white matter compared to HCs (Liu et al., 2013),
consistently with studies showing decreasing FC in these areas
with aging (Damoiseaux et al., 2006). This FC is further reduced
in AD patients and persons at risk for dementia, such as APOE-ε4
carriers (Caldwell et al., 2019).
Some studies have shown a correlation between complexity
at low frequencies in speciﬁc nodes and FC in the same node
(Wang et al., 2017), which is consistent with the idea that the
complexity of the signal at low frequencies should be correlated
with information transfer between nodes of a network. In
contrast, other studies have shown a negative correlation between
complexity at low frequencies and FC, suggesting that a less
complex signal is more regular and that regularity should increase
the probability of a phase relationship between diﬀerent brain
areas, and thereby synchrony and information exchange across
distributed regions (Ghanbari et al., 2015). As we noticed the
association between entropy and FC is still unclear and much less
is the role of the APOE-ε4 genotype in this relationship.
Smith et al. (2015) have extended their initial investigation
(2014) of the regularity with which the brain reconstructs
temporal activity patterns by measuring the stability of recurring
subsequences in the rs-fMRI signal, to subjects with MCI showing
similar reduction of MSE, again at the level of regions of the DN,
such as precuneus, PCC, angular cortex, and medial prefrontal
cortex, of cognitively impaired patients.
Lower levels of entropy in DN regions have been found in
most scales (Grieder et al., 2018) in AD subjects, showing a
constant reduction of complexity with increasing scales in this
form of dementia, compared to HCs and a mean-MSE group
comparison that showed decreased right-hippocampus entropy
in the AD patients. The latter study has shown distinct patterns
between the two groups, with DN-related signal ﬂuctuation
less complex in AD at lower frequencies. Speciﬁcally, there is
more entropy in HCs from scales 1–4, followed by a decrease
from scales 5–10. As the authors point out, this distinct
behavior between HCs and AD might reﬂect a disturbed regional
functional integrity in the patients group, as it has been proposed
that higher frequencies are related to intra-regional processing,
whereas lower frequencies are thought to be closely associated
with inter-regional FC (McIntosh et al., 2013; McDonough and
Nashiro, 2014; Wang et al., 2017; Grieder et al., 2018).
Comparison between HCs, MCI, and AD patients, exploring
the BOLD signal diﬀerences has shown signiﬁcant diﬀerences,
especially at the level of occipital, frontal, temporal, limbic, and
parietal lobes (Niu et al., 2018), using the MSE. Speciﬁcally, lower
BEN found in MCI and AD patients associated with cognitive
decline on multiple time scales (from 2 to 6) compared to
the elderly healthy group. At the shortest scale, the entropy is
dominated by high frequency ﬂuctuations from random noise;
ﬁltering out the random ﬂuctuations, the bigger BEN contrast is
at longer time scales. HCs have shown higher entropy than MCI,
and MCI had higher values than AD patients, supporting the
hypothesis that BEN decreases with age, especially in cognitive
pathological aging, such as MCI and AD.
Decreased complexity in AD patients has been also found
again at the level of the medial prefrontal cortex of the DN
regions (Wang et al., 2017), using SE applied to permutation
vectors (permutation entropy; Bandt and Pompe, 2002). This
technique analyzes the irregularity of non-stationary time series
considering only the ranks of the samples, not their metrics.
Again, the last work has shown decreased complexity in MCI
and AD patients compared to elderly cognitively HCs, with an
interesting and signiﬁcant increase of the symptom load with
decreased complexity of the brain (Wang et al., 2017).
Another recent paper (Wang, 2020) conﬁrmed that the
BEN decreased in the AD continuum. The authors have used
SampEn, showing that although the BEN level slightly increased
from cognitively healthy aging to signiﬁcant memory concern
and EMCI, it quickly fell below the BEN level of HCs in
LMCI, showing a further steep in AD with an accelerated pace,
speciﬁcally at the level of the DN and the executive control
network (including the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and lateral
parietal cortex).
The evidences seem to support a trajectory in which there
is a loss of complexity during aging, especially in the cognitive
pathological form, such as MCI and AD. In the next section,
we interpret these results in the light of the FEP and the
idea of criticality.
BEN CRITICALITY AND THE FREE
ENERGY PRINCIPLE
According to the FEP the mindbrain system tries to reduce
entropy, but consistently with the studies reviewed, the aim of
the system it is not the ìdark room, ” simplicity, as the opposite
of complexity, or negentropy as the opposite of entropy. In fact,
neurocognitive systems that predict complex environments will
ﬁnd the ìdark room” surprising and will leave at the earliest
opportunity (Friston et al., 2012b). In a healthy and awake
condition, the adult individual mindbrain system must be able
to maintain a dynamic and complex level of criticality, where the
idea of criticality is intended as a transition ìzone” rather than a
static and ﬁxed point (Moretti and Munoz, 2013; Carhart-Harris
et al., 2014).
The fact that the brain is considered a system that wanders
near a critical dynamic zone between states of order and disorder
is widely accepted in cognitive neuroscience (Chialvo, 2010;
Carhart-Harris et al., 2014; Tagliazucchi, 2017). In fact, the
system self-organizes under normal conditions into transiently
stable spatiotemporal conﬁgurations (Mantini et al., 2007; Deco
and Corbetta, 2011) and this instability is maximal at a point
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 11 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 12
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
where the global system is critically poised in a transition zone
between order and chaos (Tononi et al., 1994). In the current
context, the ìmetastability” (Tognoli and Kelso, 2014) of a neural
network is a measure of the variance in the network’s intrinsic
synchrony over time.
The survival of a species depends on its adaptive capability
to the environment, which in turn depends on the ability of
members to react adequately when the environment changes.
Although the neurocognitive system needs to resist disorder,
it does not mean that it works better without complexity.
Members (and groups) that express more variability have more
probability to survive than members (and groups) with less
variability. In this framework, neurodynamics of modern healthy
adults, work better at a critical level, whereas primary states are
more ìentropic, ” meaning that they work at super-critical levels,
exhibiting more pronounced characteristics of surprise. On the
other hand, with aging we observe a natural reduction of this
criticality, which becomes extremely sub-critical in pathological
aging such as AD.
Free energy principle in the neurocognitive system is linked
to BEN in an information theoretical sense, where the brain
tries to resist disorder, making assumptions and interpretations
on reality, through active inference (Friston et al., 2012a). This
makes the human neurocognitive model a hypothesis testing
system (Gregory, 1980), in which it tries to guess the best
statistical approximation (generative models) of the causes from
the sensorial apparatus, through the Bayesian approach, updating
the system (Friston, 2010). van Helmholtz (1962) claimed that
perception of the world is not direct, but instead depends on
unconscious inferences, or expectations that model perceptions,
even before we can consciously perceive any speciﬁc object. He
called the ì likelihood principle ” a predictive coding approach,
also eloquently described by Chris Frith (2007) as ì a fantasy that
coincides with reality.”
Free energy principle comes from the Helmholtz view and
the computational work of Dayan et al. (1995), where the brain
tries to make sense of the world, anticipating reality through
predictions, active inferences, representations of the environment
based on personal experience and expectations, learning from
experience, with the goal of limiting the entropy, the uncertainty.
Any self-organizing system, including the human neurocognitive
model, resists the distributed eﬀects of a natural increase in
entropy for its existence, development, and evolution, by trying
to minimize free energy (Friston, 2010; Cieri and Esposito, 2019).
Our system has evolved with the imperative to decrease the
uncertainty within the system and between the system and the
outside, with instructions for neuronal messages to interpret
the reality and update constantly its own model. The brain
has a model of the world and tries to update it using new
information from sensory inputs (van Helmholtz, 1962; Gregory,
1980; Ballard et al., 1983; Friston et al., 2006). The mindbrain
system works as a Helmholtz, or inference machine, performing
inferences according to the Bayesian approach, updating the
prior information of the model with new information from the
environment. Here the Bayesian estimation success in matching
will increase the reliability of the model (increasing the posterior
probability), while failure will decrease it with an increase
of free energy and uncertainty. The automatic activity of the
system in terms of prediction or active inference gives rise to
a discrepancy between perceptual data from the external world
and internal representations. This discrepancy, which is the
divergence between complexity minus accuracy, produced by
Bayesian belief updating is the free energy (Hopkins, 2016). This
free energy generates uncertainty or surprise. The aim of the
system is adaptation to the complexity generated by reality.
As we have seen, individuals with congenitally blindness show
increased stability of higher-level priors, possibly via increased
NMDAR-mediated signaling (Pollak and Corlett, 2019), because
sense of sight confers consistency (Nardini et al., 2008), especially
in a species like us, in which the sight conveys a lot of diﬀerent
information about the external states (environment). In sensory
healthy systems visual loss will decline the precision of visual
input. In aging, especially cognitively pathological, the sensory
system loss its eﬃciency and the requested increased top-down
modulatory signalingóas a way to guarantee stability of higher
level priorsóis impaired, in a double feedback vicious circle.
Given the premise of the mentioned characteristics it makes
sense the cited important features of neural complexity as the
ability (and the necessity) of the brain to explore alternative
states (Friston et al., 2012a). This dynamic criticality (Chialvo
et al., 2007), gives the system the opportunity to be more ﬂexible
and adaptable to change. This can be seen as a paradox of the
system, in which it needs ìinstability” to be more dynamically
and ìadaptively stable.”
Complex behavior of neurons enables them to switch readily
between diﬀerent states (Schiﬀ et al., 1994), providing the
ﬂexibility needed. This ﬂexibility, at a diﬀerent scale level, is
the key of the neurocognitive system, making it suitable and
adaptable. This ìself-organized criticality” is seen in complex
adaptive systems, as neural networks, able to show a complex
dynamic balance , in which the system needs to integrate and
segregate information. The image emerging illustrates a system
that needs a critical world to survive, displaying critical behavior
(Beggs and Plenz, 2003; Chialvo et al., 2007). As we noted,
critical behavior means that activity of the brain continuously
transits between two phases, one in which activity increases
and ampliﬁes over time and another in which activity rapidly
reduces and dies (Beggs and Plenz, 2003). Between these two
phases, there is a critical zone in which the system increases
information processing.
In ontogenetic sense, from birth to adulthood, the direction
in structural network modules seems to proceed toward a
more segregated system, with weaker connections between
modules and stronger connections within modules, associated
to cognitive development and speciﬁcally with an improvement
of executive functions (Baum et al., 2017). This is consistent
with the cybernetic perspective by Bateson (1972) in which
the system is regulated by a constraint that is an economy of
alternatives, which is in turn a neural networks application of
the Occam razor’s principle, where the system tries to ﬁnd the
easiest possible explanation that provides an accurate account
of the sensorium (Tononi, 2012; Friston et al., 2015; Cieri and
Esposito, 2019). This more segregated system does not mean
isolation. In fact, the healthy young system needs a balance
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 12 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 13
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
between segregation and integration in terms of FC. For instance,
better performances in spatial working memory task seem to be
associate with higher global eﬃciency and modularity, in which
the networks show strong segregation, with better integration
(short pathways) between its nodes to increase the eﬃciency in
global communication between brain modules (Alavash et al.,
2015). The complexity of the system, between segregation and
integration, makes ﬂexibility possible; according to this ﬂexibility,
RSNs must have the capability to correlate/anticorrelate among
them (Esposito, Cieri et al., 2018).
During resting state, the brain cortex prominently expresses
α brainwaves (e.g., ∼10 Hz), associated with diﬀerent functions,
including top-down inhibition (Klimesch et al., 2007), top-down
prediction and information processing (Mayer et al., 2016). This
activity seems to be associated with the DN activity (Mantini
et al., 2007), as part of neural correlates of the ìego integrity”
(Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2010; Cieri and Esposito, 2019).
One peculiar feature of the system is its dynamic characteristic
to wander, or not establish into any speciﬁc state with the
propensity to destroy its own ﬁxed pointsóa characteristic
named autovitiation (Friston et al., 2012a) to emphasize
the fundamental role that self-induced instabilities play in
maintaining peripatetic, or wandering, itinerant dynamics. Those
dynamics in turn enable the aforementioned neural ﬂexibility for
correlation and anticorrelation of networks. Since the external
environment is complex and changes constantly across time,
this complexity aﬀects the neurocognitive system, requiring
variability of states for an eﬀective and rapid adaptation to
the uncertainty of reality. For this reason, the brain self-
organizes its behavior through transiently stable spatiotemporal
conﬁgurations. This ﬂuctuation reaches its peak when the system
is in critical position of transition between order and chaos
(Tononi et al., 1994). As we have seen, in primary states this
position becomes super-critical during non-ordinary states such
as state and traits of psychosis (e.g., schizophrenia) and acute
psychedelic state, in which the activity of the system is more
entropic compared to secondary states. Both acute and chronic
conditions reviewed show a more anarchic brain functioning,
with increased bottom-up signaling and reduced top-down
sensory inhibition. On the other hand we observe a decreasing of
BEN during cognitive physiological and especially pathological
aging (e.g., MCI and AD), in which we observe a decreased
bottom-up signaling and impaired top-down mechanisms. This
decreasing of BEN is consistent with the loss of complexity in
cardiovascular (Costa et al., 2008), respiratory (Peng et al., 2002),
central nervous (Y ang et al., 2013), and motor control (Costa
et al., 2007; Manor and Lipsitz, 2013) systems, associated with
more diﬃculty adapting to stress.
The complexity of neural networks seems to grow with
the complexity of cognitive and behavioral functions, in a
nonlinear dynamic way, where extreme network dynamics might
be incapable of sustaining a coherent cognitive ﬂow, showing
an ìinverted-U” relationship (McIntosh, 2019). The studies
taken into consideration on this matter seem to describe a
trajectory in which the complexity of the neurocognitive system
seems to increase until there is a complexity decreasing in
the system (internal and external states) during the neuroaging
process, with many age-related changes associated with a reduced
dynamic complexity and more diﬃculty adapting to stress
(Lipsitz and Goldberger, 1992). In this trajectory the complexity
increases in development and declines with aging, especially in
pathological manifestations, such as MCI and AD. Consistently
with this hypothesis, the complexity of cognition seems to be
maximal around 25 years (Gauvrit et al., 2017), which is in
turn consistent with the peak presence of α brainwaves (Basar
and Güntekin, 2009), and the serotonin 2A receptor densities
(Sheline et al., 2002).
DISCUSSION
ìThe brain is an information-processing organ made marvelously
powerful not by its mystery but its complexity (Kandel, 2006; p. 6).
Entropy is the diﬃculty in predicting one or more results,
inversely proportional to the power to predict a pattern, a
given state, or a signal within a speciﬁc state. It measures the
randomness and predictability of stochastic processes. In this
manuscript we argued that during ontogenetic development,
complexity of the environment and consequently of the brain,
naturally increase in order to adapt to the changing environment.
In primary states the BEN increases over level of criticality, and
during cognitive aging this complexity decreases.
Even evidence that showed decreased BOLD signal complexity
in regions such as frontal and parietal lobes, have found, on
the other hand increased complexity in other regions (Dong
et al., 2018) such as insula, limbic, and temporal lobe in elderly
individuals, consistent with the idea of age related changes in
regions more typically involved in more ìcognitive” task, but
not in regions more typically involved in more ìemotional”
reactions, showing a possible association to the emotion paradox
in neuroaging (Nashiro et al., 2012).
The greater repertoire of potential mental states of the
human neurocognitive system comes from the complexity of the
environment and the ability to interact with it. This relationship
between systems aﬀects the complexity of the brain, which
operates in turn on the complexity of the environment in a
double feedback mechanism. Evolution, as well as individual
learning, can act in a similar manner on the brain, because
the evolution can also be formulated as learning statistical
structure in the environment and distilling that structure into
the phenotype (Paulin, 2005; Friston and Buzsáki, 2016). In this
context, the ontogenetic increase of BEN during development
seems to recapitulate the phylogenetic increase. Humans have the
most complex cognition and behavior, compared to other animal
species. Similarly, humans have the most prominent presence of
α brainwaves, compared to other mammals and primates (Basar
and Güntekin, 2009) and the adult healthy brain have the higher
neural complexity and cognition (Gauvrit et al., 2017). Studies
of comparative neurosciences have shown that two human
frontoparietal networks may be evolutionarily novel (Dehaene
and Changeux, 2011; Mantini et al., 2013), where phylogenetic
changes in terms of expansion and complexity may underlie the
acquisition of novel cognitive abilities during evolution (Duncan
et al., 2000; Dehaene et al., 2003). Particularly important for
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 13 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 14
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
our context, it has been proposed that the DN has expanded
its functions in support of spontaneous cognition (Mantini
et al., 2011). An entropy-extension as one of the processes
of human consciousness evolution, subsequently followed by
an entropy-reduction (Carhart-Harris et al., 2014) might be
a speciﬁc characteristic adaptable both in phylogenetic and
ontogenetic sense.
Buzsáki (2019), claims that ìthe mystery is always in the
middle, ” speculating that the diversity of the brain, in terms of
neuronal ﬁring rates, connection strength between neurons, and
the magnitude of their concerted actionówhich can vary by three
to four orders of magnitude and respects a logarithmic ruleó
is the essential backbone that provides stability, resilience, and
robustness to brain networks (p. 25). Criticality is known to
confer functional advantages to a system in terms of maximizing
the capacity and eﬃciency of information processing through
optimizing adaptability while preserving order (Shew and Plenz,
2013) and it stands to reason that a system moving closer
to criticality and/or shifting closer to the super-critical end of
a critical zone is likely to favor ﬂexibility and susceptibility
to perturbation over preservation as well as exploration over
exploitation (Cohen et al., 2007).
The word entropy is composed by two Greek words ìen, ” which
means inside and ì trope, ” meaning transformation14. Although
it might be a mistake try to solve a topic whose complexity is
ingrained, in a simplistic way, it seems reasonable to expect a
general increasing of complexity during individual development,
when we observe a continue transformation of the external and
the internal states, associated with a general increase of stimuli
from internal and external environments. Likewise, the aging
processóespecially in its cognitively pathological veinóseems
to be associated with less complexity, related to a reduction
in the sensory ability to receipt stimuli in a bottom-up way
and cognitive capability to process interpret and integrate those
stimuli in a top-down manner.
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The ﬁrst limitation of the investigation of BEN through rs-
fMRI is that this topic is still in its infancy, especially with
the FEP approach. Furthermore, these data contains a large
fraction of noise, from multiple sources such as head-motion
and physiological oscillations. Also, rs-fMRI article reviewed
in the current manuscript focused on the FC (both static and
dynamic) and the related BEN changes, which do not involve
any directionality in the connectivity. A possible future direction
might be focusing in studies of eﬀective connectivity and the
related BEN changes, more adapt to explore the neuronal
basis of metastability, through the dynamic causal modeling
(Zarghami and Friston, 2020).
Moreover, although, as we have seen most evidence speaks
in favor of a general loss of complexity with aging, there are
some exceptions (Vaillancourt and Newell, 2002; Y ao et al., 2013)
which have proposed that complexity of physiologic signals might
14The word was introduced by Rudolf Clausius, who decided to use the letter S to
indicate entropy in honor of Sadi Carnot, a theoretical father of thermodynamics.
increase in aging. Among others, the great presence of noise, the
speciﬁc method used, global versus regional results, age range and
time scale, exist for these discrepancies. Changes in complexity
cannot be characterized in a simplistic and unidirectional way,
depending on the spatiotemporal dynamics (McIntosh, 2019).
Future directions in this ﬁeld might include the exploration
of the BEN and complexity with development, aging and
psychopathology, through diﬀerent time scales (coarse and ﬁne).
In addition, the investigation of BEN and its association with FC
may yield interesting results.
Another important future direction might be the study of
BEN in its association with genetics. We know that genetics
plays a role in AD, for example in the case of the APOE,
where the ε4 carriers can be associated with amyloid deposition
and reduced FC at the level of DN. We also know that in
schizophrenia we can have genetic components in schizophrenia,
such as the pathogenetic implications for NMDA receptors and
their interactions with neuromodulatory transmitters. In the next
future it will be important take in consideration these features
correlated to the BEN.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author/s.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
FC Study conception and design and draft manuscript
preparation. XZ revised the manuscript critically for important
intellectual content. JC revised the manuscript critically for
important intellectual content. DC revised the manuscript
critically for important intellectual content. All authors reviewed
the results and approved the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.
FUNDING
Research reported in this publication was supported by an
Institutional Development Award (IDeA) from the National
Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes
of Health under grant number 5P20GM109025. In addition,
research reported in this publication was supported in part by a
grant from The Women’s Alzheimer’s Movement/Maria Shriver
to Caldwell. A private grant from the Peter and Angela Dal
Pezzo funds, a private grant from Lynn and William Weidner, a
private grant from Stacie and Chuck Matthewson, and the young
scientist award at Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain
Health (Keep Memory Alive Foundation).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We appreciate the writing and editing services provided by
Laura Cordes, which have been particularly valuable both to our
imaging team and the Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 14 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 15
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
REFERENCES
Abásolo, D., James, C. J., and Hornero, R. (2007). Non-linear analysis of
intracranial electroencephalogram recordings with approximate entropy and
Lempel-Ziv complexity for epileptic seizure detection. Annu. Int. Conf. Proc.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 1953–1956. doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2007.4352700
Akdemir Akar, S., Kara, S., Agambayev, S., and Bilgiç, V. (2015). Nonlinear analysis
of EEGs of patients with major depression during diﬀerent emotional states.
Comput. Biol. Med. 67, 49–60. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2015.09.019
Alavash, M., Doebler, P., Holling, H., Thiel, C. M., and Gieﬂing, C. (2015). Is
functional integration of resting state brain networks an unspeciﬁc biomarker
for working memory performance? Neuroimage 108, 182–193. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2014.12.046
Alzheimer’s Association (2013). Alzheimer’s Association and Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention The Healthy Brain Initiative: The Public Health Road
Map for State and National Partnerships, 2013–2018 . Chicago, IL: Alzheimer’s
Association.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., and Spreng, R. N. (2014). The default
network and self-generated thought: component processes, dynamic control,
and clinical relevance. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1316, 29–52. doi: 10.1111/nyas.
12360
Ashby, W. R. (1947). Principles of the self-organising dynamic system. J. Gen.
Psychol. 37, 125–128. doi: 10.1080/00221309.1947.9918144
Atasoy, S., Roseman, L., Kaelen, M., Kringelbach, M. L., Deco, G., and Carhart-
Harris, R. L. (2017). Connectome-harmonic decomposition of human brain
activity reveals dynamical repertoire re-organization under LSD. Sci. Rep.
7:17661.
Atmanspacher, H. C., and Fuchs, A. (2014). The Pauli-Jung Conjecture and Its
Impact Today. Luton: Andrews UK Limited, 182.
Azevedo, F. A., Carvalho, L. R., Grinberg, L. T., Farfel, J. M., Ferretti, R. E., Leite,
R. E., et al. (2009). Equal numbers of neuronal and nonneuronal cells make the
human brain an isometrically scaled-up primate brain. J. Comp. Neurol. 513,
532–541. doi: 10.1002/cne.21974
Ballard, D. H., Hinton, G. E., and Sejnowski, T. J. (1983). Parallel visual
computation. Nature 306, 21–26. doi: 10.1038/306021a0
Bandt, C., and Pompe, B. (2002). Permutation entropy: a natural complexity
measure for time series. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88:174102. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.
88.174102
Basar, E., and Güntekin, B. (2009). Darwin’s evolution theory, brain oscillations,
and complex brain function in a new ìCartesian view.”Int. J. Psychophysiol. 71,
2–8. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2008.07.018
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in Anthropology,
Psychiatry, Evolution, and Epistemology. San Francisco, CA: Chandler Pub. Co.
Baum, G. L., Ciric, R., Roalf, D. R., Betzel, R. F., Moore, T. M., Shinohara, R. T.,
et al. (2017). Modular segregation of structural brain networks supports the
development of executive function in youth. Curr. Biol. 27, 1561–1572.e8. doi:
10.1016/j.cub.2017.04.051
Bayne, T., and Carter, O. (2018). Dimensions of consciousness and the psychedelic
state. Neurosci. Conscious. 2018:niy008.
Beggs, J. M., and Plenz, D. (2003). Neuronal avalanches in neocortical circuits.
J. Neurosci. 23, 11167−11177. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-35-11167.2003
Beggs, J. M., and Timme, N. (2012). Being critical of criticality in the brain. Front.
Physiol. 3:163. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2012.00163
Beni, M. D. (2021). A critical analysis of Markovian monism. Synthese 16, 1–21.
doi: 10.1007/s11229-021-03075-x
Biswal, B., Yetkin, F. Z., Haughton, V. M., and Hyde, J. S. (1995). Functional
connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-
planar MRI. Magn. Reson. Med. 34, 537–541. doi: 10.1002/mrm.191034
0409
Blackwell, D. L., Lucas, J. W., and Clarke, T. C. (2014). Summary Health
Statistics for US Adults: National Health Interview Survey, 2012. Vital Health
Statistics, Series 10, No. 260. Atlanta, GA: National Center for Health Statistics,
CDC.
Bordier, C., Nicolini, C., Forcellini, G., and Bifone, A. (2018). Disrupted modular
organization of primary sensory brain areas in schizophrenia.Neuroimage Clin.
18, 682−693. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2018.02.035
Bressler, S. L., and Kelso, J. A. S. (2016). Coordination dynamics in cognitive
neuroscience. Front. Neurosci. 10:397. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00397
Bruineberg, J., Krzysztof, D., Joe, D., and Manuel, B. (2020). The Emperor’s new
Markov Blankets. Available online at: http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/id/eprint/
18467 (accessed November 30, 2020).
Buckner, R. L., and Carroll, D. C. (2007). Self-projection and the brain. Trends
Cogn. Sci. 11, 49–57. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2006.11.004
Buckner, R. L., Sepulcre, J., Talukdar, T., Krienen, F. M., Liu, H., Hedden, T., et al.
(2009). Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping,
assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 29,
1860–1873. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.5062-08.2009
Buzsáki, G. (2019). The Brain from Inside Out. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Cabeza, R., Albert, M., Belleville, S., Craik, F. I. M., Duarte, A., Grady, C. L., et al.
(2018). Maintenance, reserve and compensation: the cognitive neuroscience
of healthy ageing. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 701–710. doi: 10.1038/s41583-018-
0068-2
Cáceres, M., Lachuer, J., Zapala, M. A., Redmond, J. C., Kudo, L., Geschwind,
D. H., et al. (2003). Elevated gene expression levels distinguish human from
non-human primate brains. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 13030–13035.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2135499100
Caldwell, J. Z. K., Zhuang, X., Leavitt, M. J., Banks, S. J., Cummings, J., and Cordes,
D. (2019). Sex moderates amyloid and apolipoproteinε4 eﬀects on default mode
network connectivity at rest. Front. Neurol. 10:900. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2019.
00900
Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2018). The entropic brain - revisited. Neuropharmacology
142, 167–178. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.03.010
Carhart-Harris, R. L., and Friston, K. J. (2010). The default-mode, ego-functions
and free-energy: a neurobiological account of Freudian ideas. Brain 133, 1265–
1283. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq010
Carhart-Harris, R. L., and Friston, K. J. (2019). REBUS and the anarchic brain:
toward a uniﬁed model of the brain action of psychedelics. Pharmacol. Rev. 71,
316–344. doi: 10.1124/pr.118.017160
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Leech, R., Hellyer, P. J., Shanahan, M., Feilding, A.,
Tagliazucchi, E., et al. (2014). The entropic brain: a theory of conscious
states informed by neuroimaging research with psychedelic drugs. Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 8:20. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00020
Carhart-Harris, R. L., and Nutt, D. J. (2017). Serotonin and brain function:
a tale of two receptors. J. Psychopharmacol. 31, 1091–1120. doi: 10.1177/
0269881117725915
Chamfort, S. R. N. (1795/1969). Products of the Perfected Civilization: Selected
Writings of Chamfort, trans. W. S. Merwin New York, NY: Macmillan. (Original
work published in 1795, in French).
Chawla, D., Rees, G., and Friston, K. J. (1999). The physiological basis of attentional
modulation in extrastriate visual areas. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 671–676. doi: 10.1038/
10230
Chialvo, D. R. (2010). Emergent complex neural dynamics. Nat. Phys. 6, 744–750.
doi: 10.1038/nphys1803
Chialvo, D. R., Balenzuela, P., and Fraiman, D. (2007). ìThe brain: what is critical
about it?, ” inCollective Dynamics: Topics on Competition and Cooperation in the
Biosciences, eds L. M. Ricciardi, A. Buonocore, and E. Pirozzi (New York, NY:
Vietri sul Mare), 28–45.
Cieri, F., and Esposito, R. (2018). Neuroaging through the lens of the resting state
networks. Biomed. Res. Int. 2018:5080981. doi: 10.1155/2018/5080981
Cieri, F., and Esposito, R. (2019). Psychoanalysis and neuroscience: the bridge
between mind and brain. Front. Psychol. 10:1983. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.
01983
Cieri, F., Esposito, R., Cera, N., Pieramico, V., Tartaro, A., and Di Giannantonio,
M. (2017). Late-life depression: modiﬁcations of brain resting state activity.
J. Geriatr. Psychiatry Neurol. 30, 140–150. doi: 10.1177/0891988717700509
Clark, A. (2017). ìHow to knit your own markov blanket: resisting the second
law with metamorphic minds, ” in Philosophy and Predictive Processing , eds T.
Metzinger and W. Wiese (Frankfurt: MIND Group, Frankfurt am Main).
Cohen, J. D., McClure, S. M., and Yu, A. J. (2007). Should I stay or should I go? How
the human brain manages the trade-oﬀ between exploitation and exploration.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 362, 933–942. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2007.
2098
Contreras, J. A., Avena-Koenigsberger, A., Risacher, S. L., West, J. D., Tallman,
E., McDonald, B. C., et al. (2019). Resting state network modularity along
the prodromal late onset Alzheimer’s disease continuum. NeuroImage Clin.
22:101687. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2019.101687
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 15 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 16
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
Costa, M., Ghiran, I., Peng, C. K., Nicholson-Weller, A., and Goldberger, A. L.
(2008). Complex dynamics of human red blood cell ﬂickering: alterations with
in vivo aging. Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlin Soft. Matter Phys. 78:020901.
Costa, M., Goldberger, A. L., and Peng, C. K. (2002). Multiscale Entropy analysis of
complex physiologic time series. Phys. Rev. Lett. 89:068102.
Costa, M., Priplata, A. A., Lipsitz, L. A., Wu, Z., Huang, N. E., Goldberger, A. L.,
et al. (2007). Noise and poise: enhancement of postural complexity in the
elderly with a stochastic-resonance-based therapy. Europhys. Lett. 77:68008.
doi: 10.1209/0295-5075/77/68008
Costumero, V., Marin-Marin, L., Calabria, M., Belloch, V., Escudero, J., Baquero,
M., et al. (2020). A cross-sectional and longitudinal study on the protective
eﬀect of bilingualism against dementia using brain atrophy and cognitive
measures. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 12, 1–10. doi: 10.1186/s13195-020-0581-1
Crossley, N. A., Mechelli, A., Scott, J., Carletti, F., Fox, P. T., McGuire, P., et al.
(2014). The hubs of the human connectome are generally implicated in the
anatomy of brain disorders. Brain J. Neurol.137(Pt 8), 2382–2395. doi: 10.1093/
brain/awu132
Damoiseaux, J. S., Rombouts, S. A. R. B., Barkhof, F., Scheltens, P., Stam, C. J.,
Smith, S. M., et al. (2006). Consistent resting-state networks across healthy
subjects. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 13848–13853. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
0601417103
Dayan, P., Hinton, G. E., Neal, R. M., and Zemel, R. S. (1995). The helmholtz
machine. Neural Comput. 7, 889–904.
Deco, G., and Corbetta, M. (2011). The dynamical balance of the brain at rest.
Neuroscientist 17, 107–123. doi: 10.1177/1073858409354384
Dehaene, S., and Changeux, J. P. (2011). Experimental and theoretical approaches
to conscious processing. Neuron 70, 200–227. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.
03.018
Dehaene, S., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., and Cohen, L. (2003). Three parietal circuits
for number processing. Cogn Neuropsychol. 20, 487–506. doi: 10.1080/
02643290244000239
Delbeuck, X., Van der Linden, M., and Collette, F. (2003). Alzheimer’s disease as a
disconnection syndrome? Neuropsychol. Rev. 13, 79–92.
Dong, J., Jing, B., Ma, X., Liu, H., Mo, X., and Li, H. (2018). Hurst exponent
analysis of resting-state fMRI signal complexity across the adult lifespan. Front.
Neurosci. 12:34. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00034
Doty, R. L., Shaman, P., Applebaum, S. L., Giberson, R., Siksorski, L., and
Rosenberg, L. (1984). Smell identiﬁcation ability: changes with age. Science
1984, 1441–1443. doi: 10.1126/science.6505700
Duncan, J., Rüdiger, J. S., Kolodny, J., Bor, D., Herzog, H., Ahmed, A., et al. (2000).
A neural basis for general intelligence. Science 289, 457–460.
Edelman, G. M. (1987). Neural Darwinism: The Theory of Neuronal Group
Selection. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Edelman, G. M. (1993). Neural darwinism: selection and reentrant signaling
in higher brain function. Neuron 10, 115–125. doi: 10.1016/0896-6273(93)
90304-A
Eisenberger, N. I., Lieberman, M. D., and Williams, K. D. (2003). Does rejection
hurt? An FMRI study of social exclusion. Science 302, 290−292. doi: 10.1126/
science.1089134
Esposito, R., Cieri, F., Chiacchiaretta, P., Cera, N., Lauriola, M., Di Giannantonio,
M., et al. (2018). Modiﬁcations in resting state functional anticorrelation
between default mode network and dorsal attention network: comparison
among young adults, healthy elders and mild cognitive impairment patients.
Brain Imag. Behav. 12, 127–141. doi: 10.1007/s11682-017-9686-y
Feinberg, I. (1990). Cortical pruning and the development of schizophrenia.
Schizophr. Bull. 16, 567–568. doi: 10.1093/schbul/16.4.567
Fornito, A., Zalesky, A., and Breakspear, M. (2015). The connectomics of brain
disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 15, 159–172. doi: 10.1038/nrn3901
Fox, M. D., and Raichle, M. E. (2005). The human brain is intrinsically organized
into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
102, 9673–9678. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0504136102
Franzmeier, N., Neitzel, J., Rubinski, A., Smith, R., Strandberg, O., Ossenkoppele,
R., et al. (2020). Functional brain architecture is associated with the rate of
tau accumulation in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Commun. 11:347. doi: 10.1038/
s41467-019-14159-1
Freud, S. (1940). An Outline of Psychoanalysis. Std Edn, Vol. 23. London: Vintage.
Friston, K. (2010). Free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory?Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 10, 1–12. doi: 10.1002/
9781119375463.ch1
Friston, K. (2018). Am I Self-Conscious? (Or Does Self-Organization Entail Self-
Consciousness?). Front. Psychol. 9:579. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00579
Friston, K., Breakspear, M., and Deco, G. (2012a). Perception and self-organized
instability. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 6:44. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2012.00044
Friston, K., Brown, H. R., Siemerkus, J., Stephan, K. E. (2016). The dysconnection
hypothesis (2016). Schizophr Res. 176, 83–94. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2016.07.014
Friston, K., and Buzsáki, G. (2016). The functional anatomy of time: what and when
in the brain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 500–511. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2016.05.001
Friston, K., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle of the brain.
J. Physiol. 100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001
Friston, K., Levin, M., Sengupta, B., and Pezzulo, G. (2015). Knowing one’s place:
a free-energy approach to pattern regulation. J. R. Soc. Interface 12, 1–12.
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.1383
Friston, K., Thornton, C., and Clark, A. (2012b). Free-energy minimization and the
dark-room problem. Front. Psychol. 3:130. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00130
Friston, K. J., and Frith, C. D. (1995). Schizophrenia – a disconnection syndrome.
Clin. Neurosci. 1995, 89–97.
Friston, K. J., Frith, C. D., Liddle, P. F., and Frackowiak, R. S. J. (1993).
Functional connectivity: The principal-component analysis of large (PET) data
sets. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 13, 5–14. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.1993.4
Frith, C. (2007). Making up the Mind: How the Brain Creates Our Mental World .
Hoboken, NJ: Blackwell Publishing.
Gauvrit, N., Zenil, H., Soler-Toscano, F., Delahaye, J. P., and Brugger, P. (2017).
Human behavioral complexity peaks at age 25.PLoS Comput. Biol.13:e1005408.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005408
Geschwind, N. (1965). Disconnexion syndromes in animals and man. Brain 88,
237–294. doi: 10.1093/brain/88.2.237
Ghanbari, Y., Bloy, L., Christopher Edgar, J., Blaskey, L., Verma, R., and Roberts,
T. P. L. (2015). Joint analysis of band-speciﬁc functional connectivity and signal
complexity in autism. J. Aut. Dev. Disord. 45, 444–460. doi: 10.1007/s10803-
013-1915-7
Glausier, J. R., and Lewis, D. A. (2013). Dendritic spine pathology in schizophrenia.
Neuroscience 251, 90–107. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.04.044
Goldberger, A. L., Amaral, L. A., Hausdorﬀ, J. M., Ivanov, PCh, Peng, C. K., and
Stanley, H. E. (2002). Fractal dynamics in physiology: alterations with disease
and aging. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99(Suppl. 1), 2466–2472. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.012579499
Goldbeter, A. (2017). Dissipative structures and biological rhythms. Chaos
27:104612. doi: 10.1063/1.4990783
Goldbeter, A. (2018). Dissipative structures in biological systems: bistability,
oscillations, spatial patterns and waves. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 376:20170376.
doi: 10.1098/rsta.2017.0376
Grady, C. L. (2012). The cognitive neuroscience of ageing. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13,
491–505. doi: 10.1038/nrn3256
Gregory, R. L. (1980). Perceptions as hypotheses. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B
Biol. Sci. 290, 181–197.
Grieder, M., Wang, D. J. J., Dierks, T., Wahlund, L.-O., and Jann, K. (2018). Default
mode network complexity and cognitive decline in mild Alzheimer’s disease.
Front. Neurosci. 12:770. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00770
Haehner, A., Hummel, T., Hummel, C., Sommer, U., Junghanns, S., and
Reichmann, H. (2007). Olfactory loss may be a ﬁrst sign of idiopathic
parkinson’s disease.Mov. Disord. 22, 839–842. doi: 10.1002/mds.21413
Heisz, J. J., Gould, M., and McIntosh, A. R. (2015). Age-related shift in neural
complexity related to task performance and physical activity. J. Cogn. Neurosci.
27, 605–613. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_00725
Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind . Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:
10.1093/ acprof:oso/9780199682737.001.0001
Hopkins, J. (2016). Free energy and virtual reality in neuroscience and
psychoanalysis: A complexity theory of dreaming and mental disorder. Front.
Psychol. 7:922. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00922
Jeste, D. V., and Maglione, J. E. (2013). Treating older adults with schizophrenia:
challenges and opportunities. Schizophr. Bull. 39, 966–968. doi: 10.1093/schbul/
sbt043
Jia, Y., Gu, H., and Luo, Q. (2017). Sample entropy reveals an age-related reduction
in the complexity of dynamic brain. Sci. Rep. 7:7990. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-
08565-y
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 16 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 17
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
Kandel, E. R. (2006).In Search of Memory: The Emergence of a New Science of Mind.
New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Co.
Kandel, E. R. (2018). The Disordered Mind: What Unusual Brains Tell Us About
Ourselves. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Kandel, E. R., Schwartz, J. H., and Jessell, T. M. (2000). Principle of Neural Science
(New York: McGraw-Hill, Health Professions Division).
Kaufman, S. K., Sanders, D. W., Sharma, A. M., Thomas, T. L., Ruchinskas,
A. J., Vaquer-Alicea, J., et al. (2016). Tau prion strains dictate patterns of cell
pathology, progression rate, and regional vulnerability in vivo. Neuron 92,
796–812. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.09.055
Kelso, J. A. S., de Guzman, G. C., Reveley, C., and Tognoli, E. (2009).
Virtual Partner Interaction (VPI): exploring novel behaviors via coordination
dynamics. PLoS One 4:e5749. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005749
Kirchhoﬀ, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., and Kiverstein, J. (2018).
The Markov blankets of life: autonomy, active inference and the free
energy principle. J. R. Soc. Interface. 15:20170792. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.
0792
Klimesch, W., Sauseng, P., and Hanslmayr, S. (2007). EEG alpha oscillations: the
inhibition-timing hypothesis. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev.53, 63–88. doi: 10.1016/
j.brainresrev.2006.06.003
Kuypers, K. P., Riba, J., de la Fuente Revenga, M., Barker, S., Theunissen, E. L., and
Ramaekers, J. G. (2016). Ayahuasca enhances creative divergent thinking while
decreasing conventional convergent thinking. Psychopharmacology (Berlin)
233, 3395–3403. doi: 10.1007/s00213-016-4377-8
Lebedev, A. V., Kaelen, M., Lovden, M., Nilsson, J., Feilding, A., Nutt,
D. J., et al. (2016). LSD-induced entropic brain activity predicts subsequent
personality change. Hum. Brain Mapp. 37, 3203–3213. doi: 10.1002/hbm.2
3234
Lin, F. R., Y aﬀe, K., Xia, J., Xue, Q. L., Harris, T. B., Purchase-Helzner, E., et al.
(2013). Hearing loss and cognitive decline in older adults. JAMA Int. Med. 173,
293–299. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.1868
Lipsitz, L. A., and Goldberger, A. L. (1992). Loss of ‘complexity’ and aging. Potential
applications of fractals and chaos theory to senescence. JAMA 267, 1806–1809.
doi: 10.1001/jama.1992.03480130122036
Liu, C. Y., Krishnan, A. P., Y an, L., Smith, R. X., Kilroy, E., Alger, J. R., et al.
(2013). Complexity and synchronicity of resting state blood oxygenation level-
dependent (BOLD) functional MRI in normal aging and cognitive decline.
J. Magn. Reson. Imag. JMRI 38, 36–45. doi: 10.1002/jmri.23961
Livingston, G., Huntley, J., Sommerlad, A., Ames, D., Ballard, C., Banerjee, S.,
et al. (2020). Dementia prevention, intervention, and care: 2020 report of
the Lancet Commission. Lancet 396, 413–446. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)
30367-6
Lou, W., Wang, D., Wong, A., Chu, W. C. W., Mok, V. C. T., and Shi, L. (2019).
Frequency-speciﬁc age-related decreased brain network diversity in cognitively
healthy elderly: a whole-brain data-driven analysis. Hum. Brain Mapp. 40,
340–351. doi: 10.1002/hbm.24376
Lupien, S. J., McEwen, B. S., Gunnar, M. R., and Heim, C. (2009). Eﬀects of
stress throughout the lifespan on the brain, behaviour and cognition. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 10, 434–445. doi: 10.1038/nrn2639
Luria, A. R. (1980). Higher Cortical Functions in Man, 2 Edn. New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Manor, B., and Lipsitz, L. A. (2013). Physiologic complexity and aging: implications
for physical function and rehabilitation. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol.
Psychiatry 45, 287–293. doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2012.08.020
Mantini, D., Corbetta, M., Romani, G. L., Orban, G. A., and Vanduﬀel, W. (2013).
Evolutionarily novel functional networks in the human brain? J. Neurosci. 33,
3259–3275. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4392-12.2013 (Erratum in: J Neurosci.
2013 Jun 26;33(26):10934).
Mantini, D., Gerits, A., Nelissen, K., Durand, J. B., Joly, O., Simone, L., et al. (2011).
Default mode of brain function in monkeys. J. Neurosci. 31, 12954–12962.
doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.2318-11.2011
Mantini, D., Perrucci, M. G., Del Gratta, C., Romani, G. L., and Corbetta, M. (2007).
Elec- trophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 13170–13175.
Mattei, T. A. (2014). Unveiling complexity: non-linear and fractal analysis in
neuroscience and cognitive psychology. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 8:17. doi:
10.3389/fncom.2014.00017
Maturana, H. R., and Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition . London: D
Reidel.
Mayer, A., Schwiedrzik, C. M., Wibral, M., Singer, W., and Melloni, L. (2016).
Expecting to see a letter: alpha oscillations as carriers of top-down sensory
predictions. Cereb. Cortex 26, 3146–3160. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhv146
McDonough, I. M., and Nashiro, K. (2014). Network complexity as a measure
of information processing across resting-state networks: evidence from the
Human Connectome Project. Front. Hum. Neurosci.8:409. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.
2014.00409
McEwen, B. S. (2000). Eﬀects of adverse experiences for brain structure and
function. Biol. Psychiatry 2000, 721–731. doi: 10.1016/s0006-3223(00)00964-1
McIntosh, A. R. (2019). Neurocognitive Aging and Brain Signal Complexity. In
Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Psychology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McIntosh, A. R., Vakorin, V., Kovacevic, N., Wang, H., Diaconescu, A., and
Protzner, A. (2013). Spatiotemporal dependency of age-related changes in brain
signal variability. Cereb. Cortex 24, 1806–1817. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht030
Mendez, M. A., Zuluaga, P., Hornero, R., Gomez, C., Escudero, J., Rodriìguez-
Palancas, A., et al. (2012). Complexity analysis of spontaneous brain activity:
eﬀects of depression and antidepressant treatment. J. Psychopharmacol. 26,
636–e643.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1963). The Structure of Behavior , trans. A. L. Fisher. Boston,
MA: Beacon Press Boston. (Copyright © 1963 by Beacon Press; originally
published in French under the title La Structure du Comportement, copyright
© 1942 by Presses Universitaires de France).
Moretti, P., and Munoz, M. A. (2013). Griﬃths phases and the stretching of
criticality in brain networks. Nat. Commun. 4:2521.
Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., Carhart-Harris, R. L., Moran, R. J., Brookes,
M. J., Williams, T. M., Errtizoe, D., et al. (2013). Broadband cortical
desynchronization underlies the human psychedelic state. J. Neurosci. 33,
15171–15183. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2063-13.2013
Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., and Liley, D. T. (2018). 1/f electrophysiological spectra
in resting and drug-induced states can be explained by the dynamics of
multiple oscillatory relaxation processes. Neuroimage 179, 582–595. doi: 10.
1016/j.neuroimage.2018.06.068
Nardini, M., Jones, P., Bedford, R., and Braddick, O. (2008). Development of cue
integration in human navigation. Curr Biol. 18, 689–693. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.
2008.04.021
Nashiro, K., Sakaki, M., and Mather, M. (2012). Age diﬀerences in brain activity
during emotion processing: Reﬂections of age-related decline or increased
emotion regulation? Gerontology 58, 156–163. doi: 10.1159/000328465
Niu, Y., Wang, B., Zhou, M., Xue, J., Shapour, H., Cao, R., et al. (2018).
Dynamic complexity of spontaneous bold activity in Alzheimer’s disease and
mild cognitive impairment using multiscale entropy analysis. Front. Neurosci.
12:677. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00677
Northoﬀ, G., and Huang, Z. (2017). How do the brain’s time and space
mediate consciousness and its diﬀerent dimensions? Temporo-spatial theory
of consciousness (TTC). Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 80, 630–645. doi: 10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2017.07.013
Ogawa. (1990). Brain magnetic resonance imaging with contrast dependent on
blood oxygenation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 87, 9868–9872. doi: 10.1016/
0005-2736(76)90348-5
Oppo, V., Melis, M., Melis, M., Tomassini Barbarossa, I., and Cossu, G. (2020).
ìSmelling and Tasting” Parkinson’s disease: using senses to improve the
knowledge of the disease. Front. Aging Neurosci. 12:43. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2020.
00043
Ortiz-Terán, L., Ortiz, T., Perez, D. L., Aragón, J. I., Diez, I., Pascual-Leone, A., et al.
(2016). Brain Plasticity in blind subjects centralizes beyond the modal cortices.
Front. Syst. Neurosci. 10:61. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2016.00061
Paulin, M. G. (2005). Evolution of the cerebellum as a neuronal machine for
Bayesian state estimation. J. Neural Eng. 2, S219–S234.
Peng, C. K., Mietus, J. E., Liu, Y., Lee, C., Hausdorﬀ, J. M., Stanley, H. E., et al.
(2002). Quantifying fractal dynamics of human respiration: age and gender
eﬀects. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 2002, 683–692. doi: 10.1114/1.1481053
Petersen, R. C., Doody, R., Kurz, A., Mohs, R. C., Morris, J. C., Rabins, P. V.,
et al. (2001). Current concepts in mild cognitive impairment. Arch. Neurol. 58,
1985–1992.
Pincus, S. M. (1991). Approximate entropy as a measure of system complexity.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 88, 2297–2301. doi: 10.1073/pnas.88.6.2297
Poirier, C., Collignon, O., Scheiber, C., Renier, L., Vanlierde, A., Tranduy, D., et al.
(2006). Auditory motion perception activates visual motion areas in early blind
subjects. Neuroimage 31, 279–285. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.11.036
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 17 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 18
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
Pollak, T. A., and Corlett, P. R. (2019). Blindness, Psychosis, and the Visual
Construction of the World. Schizophr Bull doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbz098 [Epub
Ahead of Print].
Postuma, R. B., Berg, D., Stern, M., Poewe, W., Olanow, C. W., Oertel, W., et al.
(2015). MDS clinical diagnostic criteria for Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord.
30, 1591–1601. doi: 10.1002/mds.26424
Preller, K., Razi, A., Zeidman, P., Stämpﬂi, P., Friston, K. J., and Vollenweider,
F. (2019). Eﬀective connectivity changes in LSD-induced altered states of
consciousness in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116, 2743–2748. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1815129116
Prigogine, I. (1967). Introduction to Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes , 3rd
Edn. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Prigogine, I., and Stengers, I. (1984). Order out of Chaos. New York, NY: Bantam.
Raghavendra, B. S., Dutt, D. N., Halahalli, H. N., and John, J. P. (2009). Complexity
analysis of EEG in patients with schizophrenia using fractal dimension.Physiol.
Meas. 30, 795−808. doi: 10.1088/0967-3334/30/8/005
Raichle, M. E., and Gusnard, D. A. (2002). Appraising the brain’s energy budget.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 10237–10239. doi: 10.1073/pnas.172399499
Raichle, M. E., and Snyder, A. Z. (2001). A default mode of brain function. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 676–682.
Ramstead, M., Kirchhoﬀ, M. D., Constant, A., and Friston, K. (2019). Multiscale
integration: beyond internalism and externalism. Synthese 198, 41–70. doi: 10.
1007/s11229-019-02115-x
Richman, J. S., and Moorman, J. R. (2000). Physiological time-series analysis
using approximate entropy and sample entropy maturity in premature infants
Physiological time-series analysis using approximate entropy and sample
entropy. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circul. Physiol. 278, H2039–H2049.
Rubinov, M., and Sporns, O. (2010). Complex network measures of brain
connectivity: Uses and interpretations. NeuroImage 52, 1059–1069. doi: 10.
1016/j.neuroimage.2009.10.003
Salman, M. S., Vergara, V. M., Damaraju, E., and Calhoun, V. D. (2019). Decreased
cross-domain mutual information in schizophrenia from dynamic connectivity
states. Front. Neurosci. 13:873. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00873
Schaie, K. A. (1996). Intellectual Development in Adulthood: The Seattle
Longitudinal Study, 1 Edn. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Schartner, M., Carhart-Harris, R., Barrett, A., Seth, A. K., and
Muthukumaraswamy, S. D. (2017). Increased spontaneous MEG signal
diversity for psychoactive doses of ketamine, LSD and psilocybin. Sci. Rep.
7:46421. doi: 10.1038/srep46421
Schiﬀ, S. J., Jerger, K., Duong, D. H., Chang, T., Spano, M. L., and Ditto, W. L.
(1994). Controlling chaos in the brain. Nature 370, 615–620. doi: 10.1038/
370615a0
Schrödinger, E. (1944). What is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst.
Technol. J. 27, 379–423.
Sheline, Y. I., Mintun, M. A., Moerlein, S. M., and Snyder, A. Z. (2002). Greater
loss of 5-HT(2A) receptors in midlife than in late life. Am. J. Psychiatry 159,
430–435. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.159.3.430
Shew, W. L., and Plenz, D. (2013). The functional beneﬁts of criticality in the cortex.
Neuroscientist 19, 88–100. doi: 10.1177/1073858412445487
Shi, L., Beaty, R. E., Chen, Q., Sun, J., Wei, D., Y ang, W., et al. (2020). Brain
entropy is associated with divergent thinking. Cereb. Cortex 30, 708–717. doi:
10.1093/cercor/bhz120
Silverstein, S. M., and Rosen, R. (2015). Schizophrenia and the eye. Schizophr. Res.
Cogn. 2, 46–55.
Silverstein, S. M., Wang, Y., and Keane, B. P. (2012). Cognitive and neuroplasticity
mechanisms by which congenital or early blindness may confer a protective
eﬀect against schizophrenia. Front. Psychol. 3:624. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.
00624
Smith, R., Lane, R. D., Sanova, A., Alkozei, A., Smith, C., and Killgore,
W. D. S. (2018). Common and unique neural systems underlying the working
memory maintenance of emotional vs. bodily reactions to aﬀective stimuli: the
moderating role of trait emotional awareness. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 12:370.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00370
Smith, R. X., Janna, K., Ances, B., and Wang, D. J. (2015). Wavelet-based regularity
analysis reveals Recurrent Spatiotemporal Behavior in Resting-state fMRI.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 36, 3603–3620. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22865
Smith, R. X., Y an, L., and Wang, D. J. J. (2014). Multiple Time scale complexity
analysis of resting state FMRI. Brain Imaging Behav. 8, 284–291. doi: 10.1007/
s11682-013-9276-6
Sokunbi, M. O., Cameron, G. G., Ahearn, T. S., Murray, A. D., and Staﬀ,
R. T. (2015). Fuzzy approximate entropy analysis of resting state fMRI signal
complexity across the adult life span. Med. Eng. Phys. 37, 1082–1090. doi:
10.1016/j.medengphy.2015.09.001
Sokunbi, M. O., Gradin, V. B., Waiter, G. D., Cameron, G. G., Ahearn,
T. S., Murray, A. D., et al. (2014). Nonlinear complexity analysis of brain
FMRI signals in schizophrenia. PLoS One 9:e95146. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0095146
Solms, M. (1997). What is consciousness? [and response to commentaries].
J. Amer. Psychoanal. Assn. 45, 681–778. doi: 10.1177/0003065197045003
1201
Solms, M. (2019). The hard problem of consciousness and the free energy principle.
Front. Psychol. 9:2714. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02714
Solms, M., and Friston, K. (2018). How and why consciousness arises:
Some considerations from physics and physiology. J. Conscious. Stud. 25,
202–238.
Solms, M., and Turnbull, O. (2003). The Brain and the Inner World: An
Introduction to the Neuroscience of Subjective Experience. London: Karnac.
Sperling, R. A., LaViolette, P. S., O’Keefe, K., O’Brien, J., Rentz, D. M., Pihlajamaki,
M., et al. (2009). Amyloid deposition is associated with impaired default
network function in older persons without dementia. Neuron 63, 178–188.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.07.003
Tagliazucchi, E. (2017). The signatures of conscious access and its phenomenology
are consistent with large-scale brain communication at criticality. Conscious.
Cognit. 55, 136–e147.
Tagliazucchi, E., Carhart-Harris, R., Leech, R., Nutt, D., and Chialvo,
D. R. (2014). Enhanced repertoire of brain dynamical states during the
psychedelic experience. Hum. Brain Mapp. 35, 5442–5456. doi: 10.1002/hbm.2
2562
Tagliazucchi, E., von Wegner, F., Morzelewski, A., Brodbeck, V., Jahnke, K., and
Laufs, H. (2013). Breakdown of long-range temporal dependence in default
mode and attention networks during deep sleep. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
110, 15419–15424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1312848110
Takahashi, T., Cho, R. Y., Mizuno, T., Kikuchi, M., Murata, T., Takahashi, K.,
et al. (2010). Antipsychotics reverse abnormal EEG complexity in drug-naive
schizophrenia: a multiscale entropy analysis. Neuroimage 51, 173–182. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.02.009
Taylor, R., Micolich, A., and Jonas, D. (1999). Fractal analysis of Pollock’s drip
paintings. Nature 399:422. doi: 10.1038/20833
Thomas, P., Straube, A. V., Timmer, J., Fleck, C., and Grima, R. (2013). Signatures
of nonlinearity in single cell noise-induced oscillations. J. Theor. Biol. 335,
222–234. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2013.06.021
Timmermann, C., Roseman, L., Williams, L., Erritzoe, D., Martial, C., Cassol, H.,
et al. (2018). DMT models the near-death experience. Front. Psychol. 9:1424.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01424
Tognoli, E., and Kelso, J. A. (2014). The metastable brain. Neuron 81, 35–48.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.12.022
Tokuda, I. T., Han, C. E., Aihara, K., Kawato, M., and Schweighofer, N. (2010).
The role of chaotic resonance in cerebellar learning. Neural Netw. 23, 836–842.
doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2010.04.006
Tononi, G. (2004). An information integration theory of consciousness. BMC
Neurosci. 5:42. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-5-42
Tononi, G. (2008). Consciousness as integrated information: a provisional
manifesto. Biol. Bull. 215, 216–242. doi: 10.2307/25470707
Tononi, G. (2012). Integrated information theory of consciousness: an updated
account. Arch. Ital. Biol. 150, 56–90.
Tononi, G., McIntosh, A. R., Russell, D. P., and Edelman, G. M. (1998). Functional
clustering: Identifying strongly interactive brain regions in neuroimaging data.
NeuroImage 7, 133–149. doi: 10.1006/nimg.1997.0313
Tononi, G., Sporns, O., and Edelman, G. M. (1994). A measure for brain
complexity: relating functional segregation and integration in the nervous
system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91, 5033–5037. doi: 10.1073/pnas.91.11.
5033
Tribus, M., and McIrvine, E. C. (1971). Energy and Information. Sci. Am. 225,
179–190.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 18 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513
fnhum-15-647513 March 16, 2021 Time: 16:33 # 19
Cieri et al. Brain Entropy During Aging
Tseng, L., Tang, S. C., Chang, C. Y., Lin, Y. C., Abbod, M. F., and Shieh, J. S.
(2013). Nonlinear and conventional biosignal analyses applied to tilt table test
for evaluating autonomic nervous system and autoregulation. Open Biomed.
Eng. J. 7, 93–99. doi: 10.2174/1874120720130905004
Vaillancourt, D. E., and Newell, K. M. (2002). Changing complexity in human
behavior and physiology through aging and disease. Neurobiol. Aging 23, 1–11.
doi: 10.1016/S0197-4580(01)00247-0
van Es, T., and Hipólito, I. (2020). Free-Energy Principle, Computationalism and
Realism: a Tragedy . [Preprint]. Available online at: http://philsci-archive.pitt.
edu/id/eprint/18497 (accessed on March 8, 2021).
von Helmholtz, H. (1962). ìConcerning the perceptions in general, ” inTreatise on
Physiological Optics, 3 Edn. Vol. III (translated by J. P. C. Southall 1925 Opt.
Soc. Am. Section 26, reprinted New York: Dover).
Varley, T. F., Carhart-Harris, R., Roseman, L., Menon, D. K., and Stamatakis,
E. A. (2020). Serotonergic psychedelics LSD & psilocybin increase the
fractal dimension of cortical brain activity in spatial and temporal domains.
Neuroimage 220:117049. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117049
Viol, A., Palhano-Fontes, F., Onias, H., de Araujo, D. B., and Viswanathan, G. M.
(2017). Shannon entropy of brain functional complex networks under the
inﬂuence of the psychedelic Ayahuasca. Sci. Rep. 7:7388.
von Bertalanﬀy, L. (1969/2009). General Systems Theory: Foundations,
Development, Applications . New York, NY: George Braziller. (Original
work published in 1969).
Wang, B., Niu, Y., Miao, L., Cao, R., Y an, P., Guo, H., et al. (2017). Decreased
complexity in Alzheimer’s disease: resting-state fMRI evidence of brain entropy
mapping. Front. Aging Neurosci. 9:378. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00378
Wang, Z. (2020). Brain entropy mapping in healthy aging and Alzheimer’s disease.
Front. Aging Neurosci. 12:596122. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2020.596122
Whitson, H. E., Cronin-Golomb, A., Cruickshanks, K. J., Gilmore, G. C., Owsley,
C., Peelle, J. E., et al. (2018). American geriatrics society and national institute
on aging bench-to-bedside conference: sensory impairment and cognitive
decline in older adults. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 66, 2052–2058. doi: 10.1111/jgs.
15506
Wink, A. M., Bullmore, E., Barnes, A., Bernard, F., and Suckling, J. (2008).
Monofractal and multifractal dynamics of low frequency endogenous brain
oscillations in functional MRI. Hum. Brain Mapp. 29, 791–801. doi: 10.1002/
hbm.20593
Y ang, A. C., Huang, C. C., Yeh, H. L., Liu, M. E., Hong, C. J., Tu, P. C., et al.
(2013). Complexity of spontaneous BOLD activity in default mode network is
correlated with cognitive function in normal male elderly: a multiscale entropy
analysis. Neurobiol. Aging 34, 428–438. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.
05.004
Y ao, Y., Lu, W. L., Xu, B., Li, C. B., Lin, C. P., Waxman, D., et al. (2013). The
increase of the functional entropy of the human brain with age.Sci. Rep. 3:2853.
doi: 10.1038/srep02853
Yu, H., Wang, J., Liu, Q., Wen, J., Deng, B., and Wei, X. (2011). Chaotic phase
synchronization in a modular neuronal network of small-world subnetworks.
Chaos 21:043125. doi: 10.1063/1.3660327
Zarghami, T. S., and Friston, K. J. (2020). Dynamic eﬀective connectivity.
Neuroimage 207, 116453. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116453 (Erratum in:
Neuroimage. 2020 Nov 1;221:117304) NOPMID
Zueva, M. V. (2015). Fractality of sensations and the brain health: the theory
linking neurodegenerative disorder with distortion of spatial and temporal
scale-invariance and fractal complexity of the visible world. Front. Aging
Neurosci. 7:135. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2015.00135
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Cieri, Zhuang, Caldwell and Cordes. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No
use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 19 March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 647513