Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 28 August 2019
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01983
Edited by: 
Jim Hopkins,  
University College London,  
United Kingdom
Reviewed by: 
Patrick Connolly,  
Hong Kong Shue Yan University, 
Hong Kong
Karl Friston,  
University College London,  
United Kingdom
*Correspondence: 
Filippo Cieri  
filippocieri@gmail.com
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to  
Psychoanalysis and 
Neuropsychoanalysis,  
a section of the journal  
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 10 April 2019
Accepted: 13 August 2019
Published: 28 August 2019
Citation:
Cieri F and Esposito R (2019) 
Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience: 
The Bridge Between Mind and Brain.
Front. Psychol. 10:1983.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01983
Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience: 
The Bridge Between Mind and Brain
Filippo Cieri1* and Roberto Esposito2
1Department of Neurology, Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, NV, United States, 2Department of 
Radiology, Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedali Riuniti Marche Nord, Pesaro, Italy
In 1895 in the Project for a Scientific Psychology, Freud tried to integrate psychology and 
neurology in order to develop a neuroscientific psychology. Since 1880, Freud made no 
distinction between psychology and physiology. His papers from the end of the 1880s to 
1890 were very clear on this scientific overlap: as with many of his contemporaries, Freud 
thought about psychology essentially as the physiology of the brain. Years later he had 
to surrender, realizing a technological delay, not capable of pursuing its ambitious aim, 
and until that moment psychoanalysis would have to use its more suitable clinical method. 
Also, he seemed skeptical about phrenology drift, typical of that time, in which any 
psychological function needed to be located in its neuroanatomical area. He could not 
see the progresses of neuroscience and its fruitful dialogue with psychoanalysis, which 
occurred also thanks to the improvements in the field of neuroimaging, which has made 
possible a remarkable advance in the knowledge of the mind-brain system and a better 
observation of the psychoanalytical theories. After years of investigations, deriving from 
research and clinical work of the last century, the discovery of neural networks, together 
with the free energy principle, we are observing under a new light psychodynamic 
neuroscience in its exploration of the mind-brain system. In this manuscript, we summarize 
the important developments of psychodynamic neuroscience, with particular regard to 
the free energy principle, the resting state networks, especially the Default Mode Network 
in its link with the Self, emphasizing our view of a bridge between psychoanalysis and 
neuroscience. Finally, we suggest a discussion by approaching the concept of Alpha 
Function, proposed by the psychoanalyst Wilfred Ruprecht Bion, continuing the association 
with neuroscience.
Keywords: psychoanalysis, neuroscience, free energy principle, resting state network, default mode network
The real difference lies rather in the fact that the kind and direction of the physical vectors in Aristotelian 
dynamics are completely determined in advance by the nature of the object concerned. In modern physics, 
on the contrary, the existence of a physical vector always depends upon the mutual relations of several physical 
facts, especially upon the relation of the object to its environment.
Levin (1935), p. 35.
Cieri and Esposito Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
INTRODUCTION
Cognitive neuroscience has made remarkable advances also 
thanks to the progresses in neuroimaging techniques, such 
as Positron Emission Tomography (PET) and functional 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI). One of the most important 
aims of this discipline is the understanding of human brain 
function. The dialogue between cognitive neurosciences and 
psychoanalysis is not new, but recently it has become more 
prolific in the exploration of the relationship between mind 
and brain, already wished for by Freud more than a century 
ago and, among others, by the Nobel Prize winner Kandel 
(1999), when he  asserts that psychoanalysis still represents 
the most coherent and intellectually satisfying view of the 
mind and can help neurobiologists to plan their work.
To date neurosciences do not provide a consistent, consensual 
and comprehensive theory about the human brain-mind function, 
however it is a paramount tool in order to investigate structures 
and functions about mind-brain in its physiological and 
pathological development. Psychoanalysis flourished more than 
a century ago, but despite the first enthusiasm derived from 
initial fruitful dialogue with neuroscience, we  are rather far 
from understanding the biological basis for all psychoanalytic 
theoretical frameworks, and this should not be  the common 
goal of psychoanalysts or neuroscientists in their daily work. 
Although neuroscience and psychoanalysis share the same 
scientific object of interest, meant as a knowledge in-depth 
analysis about the functioning of mind-brain system, they use 
different tools of investigation, different methods and different 
languages, which requires a separation and distinction, albeit 
within an ongoing and steady dialogue between the two fields.
Since the birth of psychoanalysis, Freud has attempted to 
maintain a focus on the neurophysiological phenomena 
underlying the psychic processes observed. He  had to abdicate 
the pursuit of his dream, first because the technologies available 
at his time were not sufficiently advanced to seek his 
neuroscientific ambition and on the other side because of his 
skepticism about the widespread phrenologic view and the 
disposition to fit any mental process in its specific brain region. 
This typical localizationist view was back in vogue after the 
important Paul Broca’s discoveries in 1861, about the areas of 
language and his homonymous aphasia, determined by the 
lesion of an area that still maintains today Broca’s name. Interest 
was renewed but not completely new, given that since the 
beginning of the 19th century Franz Joseph Gall, pioneer in 
the study of the cerebral cortex, focused his neuroanatomical 
investigation on the attribution of specific psychic functions 
to specific brain structures. In the first phrenology view Gall 
believed that man’s moral and intellectual faculties were innate 
and strictly connected to the organization of the brain. He also 
proposed a localizationism view of the brain where single 
regions were responsible for a given mental faculty, and he finally 
suggested that the development of mental faculties in an 
individual would lead to a growth or larger development in 
the sub-region responsible for them.
The phrenology with Gall and the Broca’s localizationism 
were both a kind of view, an attitude which never satisfied 
Freud, skeptical about the possibility of embedding every single 
mental function in its own presumed brain region, frustrated 
by a static and essentially mechanistic approach, immediately 
aware about the simplistic, reductive and reductionist imprint 
of the method. On the contrary he  was starting to develop 
an increasingly dynamic vision of mind and brain.
The old reduction of mental functions to brain structures 
still finds today numerous supporters and attempts. As Tretter 
and Löffler-Stastka (2018) pointed out, this attempt encompasses 
a lot of well-known epistemological, methodological, and 
conceptual inconsistencies ( Block, 1980 ; Chalmers, 1996 ; 
Craver, 2007 ).
After his experience at the Salpêtriere Hospital in Paris, 
Freud began to think about large brain networks with a variety 
of functions, with mutual activation and inhibition properties. 
An inference that anticipated the concept of neural networks , 
as large brain areas able to activate and inhibit, depending 
on the activity performed. During the same period, he matured 
the idea that in the brain there were no isolated centers, or 
autonomous functions, but instead systems responsible for 
complex cognitive purposes, composed by several regions, able 
to be  modified by experience.
This dialectic reflects modern day distinctions between 
functional segregation (or specialization) and integration that 
have dominated thinking about modern brain imaging. In other 
words, does one understand distributed processing in terms 
of specialized regions or the integration and coordination of 
neuronal activity across brain hierarchies?
Freud’s concept of large brain networks – against the 
localizationism and reductionist view – showed to anticipate 
a road that would lead to the concept of complex functional 
systems, developed more than 50 years later by Lurija (1976) , 
founder of neuropsychology, whose central aim was to reject 
the idea of reductionism in psychology.
In his Project ( Freud, 1895/1963 , 1895/1966), Freud tried 
to explain at various levels the physiological basis of memory, 
hypothesizing that one of the neurophysiological prerequisites 
necessary for this function was a system of barriers, which 
he  named “contact-barrier. ” He  used this term to describe the 
neurophysiological entity which 11 years later, Charles Scott 
Sherrington named synapses.
The anticipation of wide and widespread systems dedicated 
to the realization of cognitive purposes, which today we know 
as neural networks, becomes impressive within the parallelism 
between the functions of the ego and specific neural networks, 
particularly Default Mode Network (DMN), one of the most 
studied brain networks by the neuroscientific community. 
Raichle and colleagues coined the term “Default Mode” in 
2001 ( Raichle et  al., 2001 ); they used PET and described a 
specific brain state of “rest, ” a concept intended to quickly 
become fundamental in the study of the brain. DMN’s functions 
seem to play the same mediation function attributed by Freud 
to the ego ( Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2010 ). In particular, 
within the DMN, specific regions seem to support the monitoring 
phases regarding psychological state ( Phan et  al., 2002 ), 
considered areas in which the internal stimuli (bodily and 
proprioceptive sensations) and inputs from the external 
Cieri and Esposito Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
environment (e.g., visual and auditory) converge for their 
integration and development. We will discuss this specific 
aspect further later.
In the last 10 years, the free energy principle has become 
the royal road  in the dialogue between neuroscience and 
psychoanalysis, the bridge between mind and brain. It is linked 
to the work of Friston and colleagues ( Friston et  al., 2006 ; 
Friston, 2010) and it describes the function of the mind-brain 
system as any other adaptive biological system, connecting 
psychological sciences, neurosciences and related fields in perfect 
confluence and synergy with psychoanalytic concepts ( Hopkins, 
2012). This approach shows many similarities with typical 
psychoanalytical concepts as the secondary principle of mental 
functioning (Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2010), unconsciousness 
and motivation ( Hopkins, 2012 ), complexity of emotions in 
attachment (Hopkins, 2015), wish fulfillment within dreaming 
(Hopkins, 2016 ), quantitative approach for a formulation of 
conflict ( Hopkins, 2016 ), and the energic theory within 
psychoanalysis ( Connolly, 2016 ).
The free energy principle considers the brain as a hierarchical, 
inferential, Helmholtzian machine, where large-scale intrinsic 
networks occupy supraordinate levels of hierarchical brain 
systems that try to optimize their representation of the sensorium, 
minimizing the amount of free energy ( Friston et  al., 2006 ). 
It represents a process formally close to Freudian metapsychology, 
in which Freud distinguished two ways of mental functioning: 
the primary and the secondary processes, corresponding to 
the pleasure and reality principle, respectively. According to 
the free energy principle the Bayesian brain uses the Bayesian 
probability approach to formulate perception as a constructive 
process based on internal or generative models ( Knill and 
Pouget, 2004; Friston et  al., 2006). The brain, with its personal 
model of the world ( von Helmholtz, 1962 ; Gregory, 1980 ), 
tries to optimize this model using new information coming 
from sensory inputs ( Ballard et  al., 1983 ; Friston, 2005). These 
Bayesian formulations represent a fundamental advance over 
earlier formulations of optimization in the brain that inherit 
from behaviorism (e.g., reinforcement learning and optimal 
control) by explicitly considering (Bayesian) beliefs. In other 
words, the imperatives for neuronal message passing are framed 
in terms of belief updating. In this setting, the free energy 
functional that underwrites active inference under the FEP is 
actually a functional (i.e. function of a function) of probabilistic 
beliefs. This is important because it furnishes a calculus of 
beliefs that is much easier to relate to psychoanalytic constructs 
(relative to cost or value functions used in behaviorism).
At Freud’s time, one of the most important mental 
disorders was hysteria, quite widespread among the population 
at the end of the 1800s. Within this syndrome, neurologists, 
psychiatrists, psychologists and psychoanalysts – mostly 
under the debate of the schools of Salpetriêre and Nancy 
and their leaders Charcot and Bernheim, respectively – 
were especially interested about the link between mind 
and body. Among these scholars there was a young Freud 
as well, who tended to attribute a central role to the body 
in its connection to the mind. In his Studies on Hysteria 
(Freud, 1895/1963 , 1895/1966 ), he  observed somatic 
symptoms associated with mental disorders, underlying a 
close psychosomatic  connection, after which he  elaborated 
the concept of drive (Instincts and their Vicissitudes, Freud, 
1915). With his second topical, in the ego and the id, the 
psychoanalytic meaning of the body assumes even greater 
centrality: “the ego is first and foremost bodily entity” 
(Freud, 1923 ). Freud thought of the ego as an entity derived 
from bodily sensations, especially from the sensations coming 
from the surface of the body. Over the years and deepening 
of clinical practice, psychoanalysis has begun to configure 
the link between body and mind not only as fundamental 
in structuring the ego and with a key role in the relationship 
with reality, but also with a vision of greater continuity 
and dynamic fluidity between organic and psychic dimensions, 
in which the free energy principle represents a useful bridge 
for the comprehension and communication between 
neuroscience and psychoanalysis.
Bion (1959)  elaborated Freud’s writing “Formulations on 
the Two Principles of Mental Functioning” ( Freud, 1911 ), 
particularly focusing his observation on the body and sensory 
organs as instruments of access to the perception of reality. 
Bion considered thought and emotion as inseparable 
components, underlying the central role of the body as the 
start for the thought phenomena. He  focused his observation 
on sense organs as instruments of access to the perception 
of reality, explaining how thought is a direct evolution of 
body sensations. Bion reversed the traditional philosophical 
conception in which mind produces thoughts: in his theory, 
there are first thoughts, and mind arises to think them. In 
other words, mind-body unit is constituted by the body that 
is in contact with external reality, then there are internal and 
external sensations, their perception and elaboration that 
generate emotions, moods and finally thoughts that 
we eventually perceive as products of the mind ( Ciocca, 2015 ). 
All this process is supported by α-function. The capacity to 
transform the sense impressions related to an emotional 
experience, into α-elements is described as continuous in both 
sleeping and waking states ( Mellor, 2018 ).
Bion builds a unique model of mind functioning, where 
the mind faces up continuously to new experiences that cause 
an emotional impact (positive or negative), and he  proposes 
a general model of functioning of mind in which mental growth 
depends on the ability of the mind to digest new experiences 1.
In our manuscript, we  try to move through development 
of a systemic view of the mind, taking in considerations of 
psychoanalytic models from Freud to Bion, their connections 
with modern neuroscience and neural networks, underlying 
the role of the Free Energy Principle as a bridge between 
mind and brain. We try to assume a methodological parallelism 
as it was seen for instance by the founder of General Systems 
Theory, Ludwig von Bertalanffy ( von Bertalanffy, 1967 ), in 
which a systemic non-reductive multi-level approach might 
offer better options for integration ( Miller, 1978 ; Tretter and 
Löffler-Stastka, 2018 ).
1 Technically, the digestion of new experiences corresponds to the “data assimilation” 
or “evidence accumulation” implicit in “belief updating” under the FEP .
Cieri and Esposito Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FREE  
ENERGY PRINCIPLE
Despite the extraordinary progresses made by psychology and 
cognitive neurosciences – among others the deepening of 
memory functioning and neuroimaging methods – there are 
few global theories regarding the operating of mind-brain, and 
no generalized or complete agreement in the neuroscientific 
community, not even with regard to the meaning of consciousness 
and unconscious. The proposal of the free energy principle 
(FEP henceforth) for adaptive systems provides a unified theory 
of action, perception, and learning ( Friston, 2009 ).
According to Friston (2009) , the FEP argues that any self-
organizing system in nonequilibrium steady-state with its 
environment must minimize its free energy, describing how 
adaptive systems (as biological organisms) resist a natural 
tendency to disorder ( Ashby, 1947 ; Kauffman, 1993 ; Friston, 
2009). The defining characteristic of biological systems is their 
attempt to maintain a state of balance toward the constant 
changes in the environment ( Ashby, 1947 ; Kauffman, 1993 ), 
as any homeostatic principle. In the allostatic principle proposed 
by Sterling and Eyer in 1988, also called a major revision 
(McEwen, 2004 ), replacement ( Sterling, 2004 ) of the classical 
theory of homeostasis, the brain is identified as the central 
mediator of ongoing system-wide physiological adjustment to 
environmental challenge ( Sterling and Eyer, 1988 ; McEwen, 
2007). Both homeostasis and allostasis are endogenous systems 
engaged in maintaining an internal balance of the organism, 
coping with the continuous internal and external changes.
FEP rests on the idea that all biological systems instantiate 
a hierarchical generative model of the world that implicitly 
minimizes its sensory entropy by minimizing the level of its 
free energy ( Ramstead et  al., 2018 ). In other words, self-
organizing systems, including human being as an example of 
biological organism, must resist the distributed effects of a 
natural increase in entropy for their existence, development, 
and evolution by trying to minimize free energy.
According to Friston et  al. (2015a) , these self-organizing 
systems must have a specific identifiable boundary condition: 
the so-called Markov blanket, which acts as a protective screen, 
described by Friston et  al. (2015a)  as a veil through which 
we  are able to recognize and distinguish an internal side 
from an external environment of an organism, inferring the 
external or internal causes of sensations, perceptions, or 
changes. The Markov blanket is not only a protective screen 
thanks to which we  can infer the external causes of the 
sensorium, it is also operates as a “projection screen” onto 
which sensory impressions are cast – that are actively solicited 
by habitual mechanisms (i.e., reflexes mediated by active states), 
which are used to make sense of the world ( Friston et  al., 
2015a). As any other screen, the Markov blanket allows the 
separation of an internal dimension from an external 
environment of an organism, as the case of the cell, which 
typically represents an immediate and primordial example of 
a living system with a Markov blanket ( Kirchhoff et  al., 2018 ; 
Mellor, 2018 ). In this view, the boundaries of a neuron are 
defined by the external cell membrane, called plasmalemma, 
which is the Markov blanket of the neuron, ensuring separation 
and identification between an external environment and an 
internal state, protecting the cell from the external environment, 
guaranteeing its functions also through this distinction of 
environments and different electrical charges.
As Connolly (2018) points out, the Freudian energic theory 
has been widely critiqued by some authors, such as the lack 
of empirical evidence from neuroscience of the energic processes 
as described in “The Project” ( Zepf, 2010 ), or the well-known 
critique by Rapaport (1960), which underlined the impossibility 
of direct energic processes observation in the clinical situation 
(Connolly, 2018 ). Although we  cannot observe directly the 
energy and measure it during the clinical situation (the usefulness 
of which would be  rather limited in any case), we  can see 
the implicit or explicit physiological and psychological attempts 
by the patients to avoid surprises, especially with non-psychotic 
patients, who often seem to “prefer and choose” unpleasant 
and/or painful states (e.g., repetitive, anxious, depressive), but 
perfectly known, compared to a choice of a change, which 
apparently could bring emotional, personal, social, or professional 
benefits, but includes an unavoidable change, surprise, novelty, 
a new unknown and therefore strongly aversive state. These 
attempts are definitely psychological and physiological, thus 
of physical nature.
The mind-brain system tries to maintain the states within 
physiological bounds, which means trying to maintain a 
condition where the chances of surprise are minimized, ensuring 
that internal states remain within physiological and acceptable 
bounds for the organism. These kinds of attempts are often 
steady and strenuous, and they are felt as real imperatives 
in clinical, psychotherapeutic/psychoanalytic settings, in which 
patients try to avoid surprises and novelties often might 
be  represented by a change of job, partner, or change of any 
other current distressing situation. A clinical frame experienced 
as painful by a patient who feels stuck but somehow safer 
in the current situation experienced as suffering but known, 
and for this reason is “preferred” to a new one that is potentially 
and surprisingly dangerous. During this clinical moment it 
is possible to observe the individual’s effort engaged in his 
data assimilation  from the environment, comparing it with 
the internal data and reality, trying to keep down the entropy 
levels and minimizing the possibility of surprise, avoiding 
excessive energy investment in an extremely hard and tiring 
psychophysical work.
As we  mentioned, in the Bayesian brain principle the 
brain acts having a model of the world ( von Helmholtz, 
1962; Gregory, 1980 ), working through active inference, as 
an inference machine, generating actively predictions ( von 
Helmholtz, 1962 ; Gregory, 1980 ; Dayan et  al., 1995 ; Friston, 
2010), and with this principle the brain tries to resist to a 
natural tendency to disorder, maintaining a sustained and 
homoeostatic exchange with its environment. According to 
Friston (2010) , the brain’s attempt to minimize the variations 
of free energy (maximizing Bayesian model evidence) not 
only provides a principled explanation for perceptual (Bayesian) 
inference in the brain but can also explain action and behavior 
(Ortega and Braun, 2010 ). Helmholtz’s model about the brain 
Cieri and Esposito Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
as an inference machine ( Helmholtz, 1866/1962 ; Dayan et al., 
1995) remains a key concept in neurobiology ( Gregory, 1980 ) 
and psychology.
In this framework the brain works continuously trying to 
find pattern – thereby reducing free energy and minimizing 
surprise2 – an effort that tries to reduce the free energy, 
minimizing the surprise from the system. This effort for the 
most part takes place in a completely implicit, unconscious 
way. For the individual, surprise means high level of free 
energy, leading the system to possible incorrect, erroneous, 
and unreliable predictions in relation to the world around it 
(Friston et  al., 2015b ). In psychoanalysis, this inaccurate 
prediction is translated as a poor testing of reality. Optimal 
reality testing would therefore require a minimization or 
reduction in free energy (surprise). This is implicit in belief 
updating that converts prior beliefs into posterior beliefs that 
minimize free energy. This can be thought of as the mathematical 
image of “binding energy” in a Freudian sense, where this 
“binding” occurs within the boundary established by the Markov 
blanket ( Friston et  al., 2015b ).
The link between free energy and complexity is 
straightforward: free energy or surprise can be  decomposed 
into complexity minus accuracy. This means that minimizing 
surprise (or maximizing model evidence) entails a maximization 
of accuracy in terms of explaining sensory impressions while, 
at the same time, minimizing complexity. This corresponds to 
Occam’s principle and says that we  try to find the simplest 
possible explanations that provide an accurate account of 
our sensorium.
According to Hopkins (2016), the FEP allows one to observe 
how the statistical conception of complexity employed by Friston 
and colleagues relates to emotional conflict and trauma; how 
symptoms as well as dreams can be  understood in terms of 
complexity-reduction; how in a similar way REM dreaming 
reduces complexity though the consolidation/reconsolidation 
of memory; and how complexity and the mechanisms that 
have evolved to reduce it seem to play a key role for the 
understanding of mental disorders.
FEP today has a fundamental role in the dialogue with 
neurosciences and within psychoanalysis itself, describing an 
important model in understanding and deepening the functioning 
of the mind-brain system, offering a bridge between neural 
and psychological processes. As pointed out by Hopkins (2016), 
this linking of complexity, dreaming, and disorder also indicates 
that Freud and free association offer a clear and sharp path 
with cognitive science, free energy neuroscience, and 
computational psychiatry in order to create a consistent and 
solid connection between the psychological and neuroscientific 
views ( Hopkins, 2016 ).
2 An interesting corollary of surprise minimization is that we  are compelled to 
seek out novelty, because novelty affords the opportunity to reduce expected 
surprise or uncertainty. One common feature found in non-psychotic patients 
concerns a certain “extension” , or shift of discomfort from surprise to novelty 
in general, as if any novelty could lead to a risk of compromising the system. 
This mechanism is easily found in depressive, anxious or obsessive patients, 
in which we  can observe how they try to avoid and defend themselves from 
novelty, as well as from surprise, repeating their same known and “safe” patterns.
Thanks to the dialogue with neuroscience and the FEP , 
Freud’s free energy can be  related to the potentially unifying 
paradigm advanced by Friston and colleagues, giving us the 
opportunity to better understand the mind-brain system in 
functional and dysfunctional disposition, through the 
investigation of psychoanalytic theory and models.
RESTING STATE NETWORKS AND THE 
DEFAULT SELF
In the Ego and the Id ( Freud, 1923 ), Freud claims that the 
ego is not master in its own house, in other words the conscious 
instance is neither the only responsible nor the most important 
factor for the human behavior. The ego is influenced by the 
contradictory impulses of other instances, whose actions are 
often hidden. These other instances are the id, present at birth, 
established by constitution, consisting of impulses and instincts 
that originate from the bodily organization, finding expression 
in a psychic unknown form. The other instance, to which the 
ego is exposed, originates from the internalization of behavior 
codes, injunctions, social prohibitions felt as constraint and 
impediment to the enjoyment of satisfaction, a censorship system 
that regulates the passage by the instinct from the id to the 
ego. It is a kind of moral censor able to judge human instinctive 
acts and desires, based mainly on models of value that the 
child brings from his relationship with parents, often almost 
completely unconsciously. Freud named this instance superego.
The concept of psychic function elaborated by Freud seems 
to be  consistent with the latest physiological results on the 
functional organization of the cerebral cortex. The ego is a 
mental structure characterized by the function of mediating 
between the inner world, pulses, impulses, desires from the 
id, prohibitions from superego and stimuli of external reality 
by ensuring integration and continuity of the individual. This 
operating entity identified by Freud finds numerous points of 
contact today with recent studies coming from the resting 
state networks of the brain.
As with Freud, many other scientists have tried to explain 
the organization of thinking apparatus with different theories. 
The father of American psychology, James (1890), proposed the 
idea of stream of consciousness , underlying how the daily life 
mental activity flows smoothly with or without the presence 
of specific stimuli from the external environment. During this 
state of consciousness, the individual is engaged in recording 
all the information-bodily sensations (somesthesic and vegetative), 
experiencing free association of stimuli such as thoughts, memories, 
past experience, inner dialogue, mental images, emotions, day 
dreaming, planning future events, and other activities. In this 
state the mind jumps from one thought to another with fluidity 
and usually with readiness ( Cieri and Esposito, 2018). This state 
of mind, nowadays called Random Episodic Silent Thinking 
(REST; Andreasen et  al., 1995), emphasizes the free and errant 
nature of this way of thinking, partly in contrast with the 
engagement of mind during cognitive tasks.
Among modern neuroimaging techniques, today fMRI and 
Magnetoencephalography (MEG) allow for the study of the 
Cieri and Esposito Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
brain in vivo, opening the intersection of anatomy and functions 
(Cieri and Esposito, 2018 ). fMRI can be  performed during 
the execution of an experimental paradigm involving specific 
cognitive tasks or to study spontaneous oscillations of brain 
activity while the REST of the subject (resting-state fMRI, 
rs-fMRI; Raichle et  al., 2001 ; Buckner et  al., 2008 ; Cieri and 
Esposito, 2018; Esposito et al., 2018a ). Since it does not require 
any task, rs-fMRI is characterized as particularly suitable for 
studies on subjects such as children and elders, because this 
protocol does not require any particular skill or specific attention 
focus from the subject, increasing the compliance of the 
participant and reducing intersubjective variability due to the 
task performance ( Esposito et al., 2018a ). Indeed, in recent 
years a growing number of studies showed that rs-fMRI could 
be considered as an additional important tool for the investigation 
of physiological and pathological mental conditions.
Spontaneous brain activity generated in absence of cognitive 
task has been discussed in the last two decades, representing 
a pivotal role among psychological and cognitive neuroscientific 
fields. Many neuroimaging studies considered this brain activity 
a functioning model of the mind. Cerebral activity recorded 
during cognitive tasks showed a baseline low frequency 
fluctuation (0.01–0.1 Hz). In this light some researchers examined 
these cerebral baseline activities based on the idea that those 
low levels of brain activity could represent real active states, 
and that brain activation patterns represent a shift in focus 
from an internal self-referential state to an external focus 
(Raichle et al., 2001 ). This discovery encouraged neuroscientists 
to begin to consider two different types of neuronal activity: 
evoked and spontaneous ( Fox and Raichle, 2007 ; Barrett and 
Simmons, 2015). Brain spontaneous activity has received growing 
attention ( Buckner et  al., 2008 ) in the last decade, supported 
by several studies showing electric activity, hemodynamic and 
metabolic parameters, spontaneous fluctuations of membrane 
potential, spontaneous spikes and neurotransmitter release 
(O’Donnell and van Rossum, 2014 ).
During the early 21st century, several studies using PET 
(Shulman et  al., 1997 ) and task-fMRI ( Gusnard and Raichle, 
2001) identified specific regions active during cognitive task 
execution and other brain areas active during different REST 
conditions. These latter neural regions constituted a network 
involving both hemispheres: the Medial Prefrontal Cortex 
(MPFC), the Posterior Cingulate Cortex (PCC), the Inferior 
Parietal Lobules (IPL), and Hippocampal Regions (HP), forming 
the neural network called DMN, engaged when mental activity 
is internally directed, when an individual is left “undisturbed” 
to think about himself, wondering about his life, his past or 
future. One hypothesis about the DMN’s functioning concerns 
its involvement in inner mental processes far from all external 
stimuli, building dynamic mental simulations based on past 
personal experiences used in recalling memories; it also 
supports the mental process about the future, and generally 
when an individual imagines alternative scenarios to the 
present ( Buckner, 2013 ). This network is also known as a 
task-negative network because its regions are typically 
deactivated during execution of attention demanding tasks 
(Passow et  al., 2015 ).
For many years, modern neuroimaging techniques neglected 
this important spontaneous activity of the brain, focusing only 
on changes evoked by external cognitive tasks. During the 
last two decades, rs-fMRI has become a most utilized tool to 
study the brain in vivo , especially for those patients less 
cooperative as we  mentioned, offering detailed and clear 
information about the spontaneous brain dynamics in both 
physiological and pathological conditions ( Cieri and Esposito, 
2018). Indeed, one of the most important common aims of 
neuroscience is to identify early biomarkers in order to reach 
an early diagnosis, providing a timely and specific treatment, 
even if today we are far from understanding, the neurobiological 
or neuropsychological markers of all neurological or 
neuropsychiatric conditions. An important step for neuroscientists 
and psychoanalysts, useful to reach the mentioned aim to 
identify early biomarkers, is linked to the deepening of the 
relationship between mind and brain and mind and body 
communication. According to Solms (2019) , adopting a dual-
aspect monist position on the philosophical mind-body problem 
allows one to find the causal mechanism of consciousness not 
in the manifest brain but rather in its functional organization, 
which ultimately underpins both the physiological and the 
psychological manifestations of experience. Adopting a dual-
aspect monist position, using neuroimaging techniques and 
approaches such as FEP will allow psychoanalysis and 
neuroscience to investigate this functional organization, studying 
in deep analysis the mechanisms underlying physiological or 
pathological human conditions. In this sense and with this 
common aim, the resting state networks together with the 
FEP could play a key role in the study of the mind-brain system.
Within this dialogue, the DMN seems to play the same 
function of mediation attributed by Freud to the ego, and 
some authors have spoken about Default Self ( Beer, 2007; Qin 
and Northoff, 2011 ) in order to define the DMN as a kind 
of biomarker of the Self. Nevertheless, the experience in the 
perception of the Self is extremely complex, characterized by 
high variability, and it is not always easy and clear to distinguish 
the Self from all other phenomena related to cognitive processes. 
In any case, the role of DMN within the functions of the Self 
is conspicuous as shown from several psychopathological studies, 
where the impairment of DMN connectivity associated with 
an impairment of Self ’s experience is noticeable.
RESTING STATE NETWORKS IN 
NEUROPSYCHIATRY
In recent years, there has been a growing interest about abnormal 
functional connectivity in neurologic and neuropsychiatric 
disorders, although the results remain debatable. For instance, 
despite still controversial claims, DMN shows anticorrelated 
activity with another REST network, the Dorsal Attention 
Network (DAN), conversely active during externally-directed 
cognition, such as cognitive tasks that require conscious and 
focused attention. This anticorrelation could be  impaired in 
some neurological conditions such as Mild Cognitive Impairment 
(MCI – Esposito et al., 2018a ).
Cieri and Esposito Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
Although the focus of this article is not about the use of 
resting state functional connectivity to assess brain circuits in 
psychiatric or neurological disorders, it is certainly useful to 
underline some important issues and connections. Abnormal 
functional connectivity could be  found both in studies on 
neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric disorders, including 
anxiety, major depressive disorder (MDD), bipolar disorder 
(BD), obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), schizophrenia 
(SZ), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD), Eating Behavior Disorder (EBD), 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), and other neurodegenerative disorders 
(Buckner, 2013; Andrews-Hanna et al., 2014; Cieri and Esposito, 
2018; Esposito et al., 2018a ).
In the physiological aging process, the integrity of the 
DMN is diminished both in function ( Andrews-Hanna et  al., 
2007; Cieri and Esposito, 2018 ) and structure ( Turner and 
Spreng, 2015 ), and these changes are associated with MCI, 
especially in memory functions. Moreover, social cognitive 
impairments in aging have been associated with reductions 
in activity within the Dorso Medial Prefrontal Cortex (DMPFC; 
Moran et  al., 2013 ). These impairments increase in the 
dimensions of pathological aging as AD and forms of 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), including semantic 
dementia (SD) and behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia 
(bvFTD – Andrews-Hanna et  al., 2014 ).
Schizophrenic patients have shown a dysfunction of an 
important area of DMN, the Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC) 
associated with difficulty of recognizing actions and functions, 
correlating with their positive symptoms ( Carter et  al., 2001 ). 
ACC reduces its activity during external cognitive stimulation, 
highlighting its fundamental role in self-referential mental 
activity, in close relation with another important region in 
this process: the anterior insula (AI). Coactivation of these 
two areas might play a key role in establishing the self-functions 
(Esposito et  al., 2018a ,b). In schizophrenic patients, we  can 
observe the typical lack of symbolic ability, lack of activity to 
make predictions, and mental simulations, often accompanied 
by the absence of dream activity.
As Andrews-Hanna et al. (2014) pointed out, both the nature 
and topographical locations of DMN alterations differ across 
disorders, paralleling varied symptom profiles. While disorders 
of integrity (e.g., AD) are often associated with hypo-activation 
or connectivity of a particular DMN component and impairments 
in specific aspects of self-generated cognition, disorders of 
content (e.g., depression) and regulation (e.g., ADHD) are 
typically associated with hyperactivation and hyperconnectivity, 
paralleled by polarized or excessive forms of self-generated 
thought ( Andrews-Hanna et  al., 2014 ). Moreover, the body 
image disturbance in EBD may be supported by a modification 
in connectivity within specific cortical areas like the precuneus 
(PrC; Seojung et  al., 2014 ), and this result could represent 
the neural correlates underlying increased self-focus, rumination, 
and cognitive control in relation to eating disorders and the 
impairment about the body perception (Esposito et al., 2018a,b).
Within the DMN, specific regions support the self-reported 
mental processes, monitoring psychological states ( Phan et  al., 
2002) and could be considered regions of convergence receiving 
internal (bodily and proprioceptive sensations) and external 
inputs (visual and auditory), for their integration and 
development. These areas are the cortical midline regions and 
among these regions the most important are MPFC and ACC, 
associated with the control of various functions such as selecting 
or inhibition of some response, monitoring the conflict and 
identification of errors ( Schneider et  al., 2008 ). ACC plays a 
fundamental role in affective evaluation ( Allman et  al., 2001 ), 
conflict monitoring and detection ( Botvinick et  al., 2004 ), 
response selection ( Awh and Jonides, 2001 ), and attentional 
control ( Posner, 1994 ).
Andrews-Hanna (2012) and Buckner (2013) hypothesize that 
one of the major functions of the DMN, perhaps the most 
important, is to support internal mental simulations used 
adaptively. This concept is consistent with FEP in which the 
system is engaged with its simulations, searching of patterns, 
trying to maintain an internal sensitive balance of the organism, 
supporting internal mental simulations used in an adaptive 
way. In other words, the research of patterns claimed by the 
FEP is consistent with the DMN’s most important role, mediating 
between the external and internal stimuli, building dynamic 
mental simulations based on past personal experiences used 
in recalling memories. This is the same function attributed 
by Freud to the ego ( Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2010 ).
The “investment” of the system in energy terms, in trying 
to keep lower levels of entropy, decreases the chances of having 
to face surprises or when optimally attuned to the world, seek 
out novel situations that will minimize surprise in the future 
(i.e., expected surprise or uncertainty).
Many neuropsychiatric and neurological diseases are 
characterized by the impairment or lack of important symbolic 
function, strictly linked to the Self and to the ability of the 
system to support internal mental simulations used in adaptive 
way. Recent findings suggest the existence of a frontoparietal 
control system consisting of flexible hubs that regulate distributed 
systems (e.g., visual, limbic, motor) according to current task 
goals ( Cole et  al., 2014 ; Cieri et  al., 2017 ).
DMN seems to directly contribute to all inner mental 
processes supported by the MPFC and its links to the HP , 
with its known key role in memory functions. To support 
this complex interaction, DMN is constituted by two subsystems. 
The first is the temporal-mesial subsystem, associated with 
mnemonic processes, activated during retrieval of past memory; 
this subsystem is predominantly made up of HP and shows 
high connectivity with another two important brain regions 
typically active during memory tasks: PCC/PrC (Posterior 
Cingulate Cortex/Precuneus) and IPL. The second subsystem 
is connected to the MPFC, specifically dorsal-MPFC activated 
during mental situations of self-exploration and sensations. The 
results suggest that self-referential mental activity engages a 
preferential MPFC subsystem ( Szpunar et  al., 2007 ). These 
functions are closely related to DMN anatomy: two interactive 
subsystems whose predominant areas are HP and MPFC that 
converge on the retrosplenial cortex (PCC/PrC).
In the last two decades, rs-fMRI studies have allowed the 
identification of a set of different networks, not only the DMN, 
identified in a series of resting-state functional connectivity 
Cieri and Esposito Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
studies (Greicius et  al., 2003; Fransson, 2005; Fox et  al., 2006). 
In fact, besides the DMN, at least 10 RSN networks have 
been consistently described in healthy populations ( Mantini 
et  al., 2009 ; van den Heuvel and Hulshoff Pol, 2010 ; Deco 
et al., 2011 ), highlighting that the human brain has a network-
based organization at REST. Of these 10, the most studied 
include the DMN, the Salience Network (SN), the Control 
Executive Network (CEN) (lateralized in both hemispheres), 
the primary Sensory Motor Network (SMN), the Extrastriate 
Visual System (EsV), and the DAN ( Deco and Corbetta, 2011 ).
Important to note in this context is the DAN and its specific 
behavior related to DMN and the Self. DAN includes Inferior 
Parietal Sulcus (IPS), Frontal Eye Field (FEF), ACC, and bilateral 
Middle Temporal Gyrus (MidTempG), and it has received much 
attention because – conversely to DMN – it is called the task-
positive network, being active during cognitive tasks which 
demand attention and mental control ( Corbetta and Shulman, 
2002; Fox et  al., 2006 ; Esposito et  al., 2018a ,b). DMN and 
DAN show a pattern of anticorrelation in their activity in 
both task and resting state studies, suggesting that they are 
intrinsically organized into anticorrelated networks ( Fransson, 
2005; Esposito et al., 2018a ,b). This DAN-DMN anticorrelation 
during resting state may represent a cerebral mechanism 
supporting cognitive functions (Gopinath et al., 2015), switching 
focus between internal, supported by DMN, and external 
channels and attention demanding events, supported by DAN 
(Esposito et al., 2018a ,b). Interestingly, this negative correlation 
between DAN and DMN modifies its function during life span. 
In fact, consistently with function and evolution of the Self, 
it appears during the first year and it strengthens during the 
second year of life ( Barber et  al., 2013 ).
As mentioned, the concept of Self cannot be  seen as a 
static and steady entity, but rather dynamic in its development 
and evolution. Developmental psychology claims that a first 
concept of Self flourishes between the first and second year 
of life, when the child begins to recognize himself as an object. 
According to Craig (2011) , the most important sign of self-
awareness is the ability of the child to recognize himself in 
the mirror. In parallel, with the growth of the individual Self, 
the negative correlation between DAN and DMN becomes 
stronger in adults to support the development of executive 
functions and working memory from childhood to adulthood 
(Andrews-Hanna et  al., 2007 ; Cieri and Esposito, 2018 ).
Following this process, a decreased anticorrelation between 
these two networks starts to appear weaker during physiological 
aging ( Wu et  al., 2011 ), increasing its weakness in the case 
of MCI ( Esposito et  al., 2018a ,b), representing a possible 
biomarker of neuroaging, cognitive decline, and first impairment 
of self-functions.
DMN AND FREUDIAN SECONDARY 
PRINCIPLE
Carhart-Harris and Friston (2010)  proposed the consistency 
of the Freudian concept of secondary process with the DMN 
functions, capable of self-organizing and suppressing free energy, 
such as the anarchic and unconstrained endogenous activity 
from the limbic and paralimbic systems. The mind-brain system 
tries to maintain its state within physiological bounds, trying 
to minimize the possibility of surprise. This constant attempt 
to avoid surprise, ensuring that the states remain within 
physiological bounds, is consistent with the neurophysiological 
functions of the brain, specifically with the function of DMN.
According to Carhart-Harris and Friston (2010) , the 
construct validity of Freud’s hierarchical organization of the 
mind, with its distinction between id and ego – belonging 
to the primary and secondary processes, respectively – can 
be  enhanced by remarkable consistency with contemporary 
models of cognition based on hierarchical Bayesian inference 
and Helmholtzian free energy. In fact, Freudian metapsychology 
distinguished two ways of mental functioning, the primary 
and the secondary processes, corresponding to the pleasure 
and reality principle, respectively. The primary process is 
driven by the pleasure principle, which is in turn driven by 
the id and its instinctual functioning with its instincts and 
desires, without taking into account the constraints of the 
external environment with its rules and laws. The secondary 
process, also called the reality principle, is governed by the 
ego, which controls the instant gratification mentality of the 
id. The reality principle is the ability of the mind to assess 
the reality of external world and to act accordingly with it, 
as opposed to the pleasure principle.
Freud studied the function of the mind through these 
different processes, as two fundamentally different styles of 
cognition, also through a study of non-ordinary states of 
consciousness (e.g., hallucinations and dreams), in which 
he recognized a mode of cognition characterized by a primitive 
style of thinking ( Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2010 ). 
He  speculated that in these primitive non-ordinary states of 
consciousness, the exchanges of neuronal energy are free, and 
he designated it as the primary process (Freud, 1940). Moreover, 
in these non-ordinary states, he  identified the loss of certain 
functions, usually present in “normal” waking cognition, ascribing 
these functions to a central organization of the ego, which 
works in order to minimize free energy of the mind, underlying 
the specific property of this function belonging to the secondary 
process, defining its aim as one of converting free energy into 
bound energy states ( Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2010 ).
The Freudian concept of reality principle seems consistent 
with the functional role of the DMN in its hierarchical and 
self-organizing role of suppressing free energy originated from 
subordinate levels, such as the limbic and paralimbic systems. 
In fact, the Freudian secondary process with its top-down 
mode of operation, in which it transforms free energy of the 
lower levels into bound energy trying to keep the system on 
physiologically acceptable levels, seems to be  consistent with 
the functions of the DMN.
Under this mapping between Freudian and Helmholtzian 
models, is possible to link the energy associated with the 
primary process and the free energy of Bayesian formulations; 
in both accounts, higher cortical areas try to organize the 
activity from the lower-levels through suppression of their free 
energy ( Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2010 ).
Cieri and Esposito Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
Another important feature of DMN consistent with FEP is 
the mentioned anticorrelation, the inverse relationship of its 
neurophysiological activity with DAN ( Corbetta and Shulman, 
2002; Fransson, 2005; Fox et al., 2006 ; Esposito et al., 2018a ,b). 
These intrinsic networks correspond to the high-levels of an 
inferential hierarchy, which function to suppress the free energy 
of lower levels (i.e. suppress prediction errors with top-down 
predictions), associating this optimization process with the 
Freudian secondary process. Also, the failures of top-down 
control with non-ordinary states of consciousness, such as early 
and acute psychosis, the temporal-lobe aura, dreaming, and 
hallucinogenic drug states ( Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2010 ), 
might be  associated with an impairment of the supraordinate 
system, as DMN is unable to control in a top-down mode 
the excess of the free energy from the lower system.
Moreover, as we  noticed, the DMN functional connectivity 
seems to become relatively weak in the elderly ( Damoiseaux 
et  al., 2006 ; Andrews-Hanna et  al., 2007 ), representing a 
neurological impairment of the mechanism able to support 
cognitive functions, switching the focus from the inside supported 
by DMN, to the outside supported by DAN. We  can observe 
the higher control system apparently impaired and unable to 
bind the free energy, making difficult the executions of cognitive 
tasks. In cases of ADHD ( Castellanos et  al., 2008 ) or impulse 
control disorders ( Church et al., 2009 ), the hierarchically lower 
system seems to become too active to be  managed by the 
hierarchically superior system, operating a sort of “mutiny, ” 
or “hijacking, ” leading to an impairment of the system control.
MPFC-PCC connectivity is entirely absent in infants (Fransson, 
2005) and the DMN develops through ontogeny, in a way 
that runs parallel to the emergence of the individual Self with 
its complex functions.
The spontaneous fluctuations in neuronal activity from 
cortical nodes of DMN suppress or contain the unconstrained 
and anarchic endogenous activity of limbic and paralimbic 
systems (Helmholtz free energy). This neurobiological view 
rests on the basis of the brain as a hierarchical, inferential, 
Helmholtzian machine, in which large-scale intrinsic networks 
such as the DMN are located at higher levels of cerebral 
hierarchy and work to optimize the representation of the 
sensorium, minimizing the level of free energy. As Carhart-
Harris and Friston (2010) indicate, this optimization, formulated 
as minimizing free energy, is similar to the treatment of energy 
in Freudian formulations, and developing these points of contact 
may help anchor Freudian concepts to more rigorous biological 
phenomena, helping not only psychoanalysis but the entire 
neuroscientific field.
As Solms (2014)  specifies, when Friston claims about 
minimizing prediction error and giving up on predictive models 
that do not correspond to external states, he is making reference 
to Freud’s reality principle, while in a different frame of reference. 
Freud’s descriptions of the secondary process are consistent 
with the functional anatomy of large-scale intrinsic networks 
and how this process works to minimize free energy, with its 
hierarchical organization and continuous and constant attempt 
trying to keep low levels of surprise. Also, as outlined above, 
this concordance find is an interesting conceptual hook trough 
the development of functional connectivity between the nodes 
of the DMN during ontogeny, as a process that runs parallel 
to the emergence of the Self ’s functions.
Freud always explained clinical phenomena in terms of 
natural forces and energies, not surprisingly he  was a student 
of Helmholtz’s medical school and in this regard, it is interesting 
to note that in 1898 Wilhelm Fliess – an otorhinolaryngologist, 
passionate scholar of psychoanalysis, and close friend of Freud – 
sent to him two big volumes of Helmoltz’s lessons as a gift  
in honor of their good friendship and their common attendance 
and interest in the famous physiologist’s lessons and theories.
In the context of the dialogue between psychoanalysis and 
neuroscience, it might be  beneficial for the neuroscience field 
to try to find contact points with psychoanalysis in order to 
nourish an inextricable dialogue, started from the birth of 
psychoanalysis which can certainly improve, providing benefits 
to the understanding of the mind-brain system in physiological 
and pathological conditions.
WILFRED RUPRECHT BION: THE 
THEORY OF “ALPHA FUNCTION”
Freud described the establishment of the principle of reality, 
underlying how consciousness develops through the perception 
of the outside world and in addition to the dualism of pleasure-
sorrow (the principle of Nirvana – primary narcissism), 
perception is characterized by manifold sensory qualities (Freud, 
1911). Freud’s principle of reality is the ability of the mind 
to assess the outside world, acting accordingly with it in opposed 
direction to the principle of pleasure ( Freud, 1940 ). Thought 
is a substitute for motor discharge, even though the latter 
never stops functioning as a mechanism to release psyche. 
The establishment of the principle of reality allows the 
development of a mental function to defer instant gratification, 
the governing principle of the actions taken by the ego, after 
its slow development from a “pleasure-ego” into a “reality-ego” 
(Freud, 1940 ).
What Freud defined as attention, a mental function that 
explores outside world, is consistent with Bion’s alpha function 
(α-function), theorized in “Learning From Experience” ( Bion, 
1962a). In the personality, there are several factors that combined 
with each other form the personality functions, a term with 
which Bion intends the mental activity (Bion, 1962a,b). Through 
α-function, non-mental elements (sensory impressions, 
β-elements) are processed into mental elements (α-elements), 
giving them an emotional connotation (good, pleasant, 
unpleasant, and bad). β-elements are the raw material of mental 
process, impressions of sensory activation, perceptions of 
internal and external body state changes that have no meaning 
and are perceived physically. Everything that is emotionally 
lived must be at first elaborated by the α-function; this implies 
that emotional experiences, lived both during sleep and 
wakefulness, must be elaborated by α-function. When a patient 
is insufficient in α-function, the β-elements are not thinkable 
and they can fall under projective identification (Acting-Out). 
In this case, a patient cannot transform sensory impressions 
Cieri and Esposito Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
into α-elements and therefore cannot dream. In order to learn 
from experience, α-function must operate on the basis of 
emotional experience by generating α-elements that will be used 
by thought that works in the dream and in the unconscious 
(Bion, 1962a, 1973). Dream and α-function are located between 
conscious and unconscious, differentiating them through a 
barrier that Bion calls the contact barrier  that preserves 
personality from psychotic state. α-function (both awake and 
during sleep) transforms sensory impressions linked to a specific 
emotional experience in α-elements that proliferate and condense, 
forming the contact barrier. The elements can pass freely 
through the contact barrier between conscious and unconscious 
states, and the dreams allow us to access directly the contact 
barrier ( Bion, 1962a ; Mellor, 2018 ).
Psychotic patients do not have α-function, resulting in 
the inability to transform sensorial impressions into α-elements, 
to dream and to generate conscious and unconscious. In 
fact, the contact barrier, with its properties necessary to 
distinguish mental phenomena (conscious and unconscious), 
is missing in psychotic patients and replaced by the beta 
screen (β-screen) composed of β-elements. Psychotic patients 
invert α-function, and sensory impressions are no longer 
used to form α-elements and the contact barrier. α-elements, 
contact barrier, unconscious thoughts, and dreams are redirected 
to β-elements and projected to form the β-screen. The inversion 
of α-function does not recompose β-elements but creates 
“bizarre objects . ” Indeed, β-elements are sensory impression 
and do not have traces of personality, while bizarre objects 
have traces of personality (ego and super-ego). α-function, 
during the transformation of emotional experience into 
α-elements, plays a key role in the sense of reality and its 
inactivity produces disastrous effects on personality such as 
deep psychotic deterioration.
According to Freud, thoughts are born through the absence, 
while for Bion thoughts are precedent to thinking, and the 
latter develops for the necessity to treat thoughts. Bion 
hypothesized that the mind is a container of thoughts and 
the α-function develops to contain and process thoughts. It 
is possible to disengage the mind from thoughts by primitive 
defense mechanisms, such as expulsion ( Freud, 1937 ), if the 
personality is prepared to avoid frustration. If, on the other 
hand, personality is dominated by the impulse to bear and 
change frustration, it will think the thoughts. If the patient 
is not able to think his own thoughts, he will have an increase 
in frustration. Bion underlines that the bear of frustration 
is a genetically pre-established factor of personality. Models 
of mental functioning are characterized by the inability to 
tolerate frustration, suffering, anxiety, and the need to use 
powerful defense mechanisms: splitting, projection, and 
projective identification. However, Bion adds that the defense 
mechanisms concern not only emotions and feelings. Indeed, 
he  proposes a psychotic defense mechanism that splits and 
free ourselves not only of the intolerable affective content, 
but of the apparatus that allows its perception, a kind of 
amputation of specific mind functions. Psychotic defense 
leads to the impoverishment not only of emotions but also 
of mental abilities.
All the noted Bion’s mind-body unit is in contact with the 
external reality with the internal sensations supported by 
α-function. In light of this hypothesis, the mind-body relationship 
must be seen in continuous dynamism: in harmonic condition, 
body and mind are integrated with each other, while in 
disharmonic condition a messy sensoriality that hampers thinking 
predominates (Ferrari, 1992; Lombardi and Pola, 2010; Lombardi, 
2016). In “Transformations” ( Bion, 1965 ), Bion introduces the 
concept of O. O is the origin as in the geometrical example 
of the Cartesian axes: experiencing O represents the experience 
of whole sensations and emotions, which are activated in contact 
with reality.
As we  noted, Francis Joseph Gall ( Livianos-Aldana et  al., 
2007) was the first neuroscientist to study the cerebral cortex, 
underlying that the brain was made up of several interconnected 
areas and each of these areas with a specific function. 
Questioning René Descartes’s theory of mind-body dualism, 
Gall argued that the brain was the seat of intelligence, a 
theory that was elaborated only after the development of 
modern psychology. Thanks to Gall’s theory, mind was no 
longer considered separate from body, but as an integral 
part of the organism in its totality. He  noted that the brain 
was the organ delegated to intellectual, moral and affective 
faculties, identifying higher psychic functions in the frontal 
cortex. Empirically, through fMRI studies, cortical midline 
structures and DMN have often been highlighted to be specific 
for the Self ( Qin and Northoff, 2011 ). DMN is involved in 
internally oriented self-related processing that comprises 
surveillance of internal states (emotional, bodily), resulting 
in what is called “mind wandering” ( Mason et  al., 2007 ). 
Observing resting state networks in their totality, including 
the subnetworks ( Deco et al., 2011 ) and their interconnection, 
we may better understand the mind-body unit. Menon (2011)  
talks about the “Triple Network, ” underlying functional 
interchange between three neural networks: DMN, SN, and 
CEN. Specifically, DMN with its areas MPFC, PCC, Angular 
Gyrus, and medial temporal lobe structures plays and important 
role in monitoring self-referential mental activity; the SN 
through ACC and Insula, receives and elaborates body 
sensations and cognitive relevant events engaging frontoparietal 
systems; CEN, whose key nodes include the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and PCC, maintains and elaborates 
working memory information and decision-making of goal-
directed behavior. These networks interact dynamically, 
mediating cognitive and emotional states ( Yu et  al., 2018 ). 
The SN ( Seeley et al., 2007 ) is involved in bottom-up direction 
of salience events, involved in detecting, integrating and 
filtering relevant interoceptive, autonomic and emotional 
information, and it plays a key role modulating and switching 
other resting state networks ( Menon and Uddin, 2010 ).
Activation of SN determines an increase of connectivity 
between DMN and CEN, modulating not only the activation 
of the networks but also their interconnectivity ( Di and 
Biswal, 2015 ). SN indeed represents core hubs of the whole 
brain sending information in other regions and networks. 
SN through the AI constitutes the hub involved in the 
registration of internal (body sensations) and external salient 
Cieri and Esposito Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
events, sending information to DMN that integrates and 
elaborates information supporting mental activity connected 
with the Self ( Craig, 2010 ). AI elaborates affective information, 
pain and empathy, whereas the dorsal part of ACC (dACC) 
was most closely associated with conflict resolution and 
cognitive control. The insula and dACC probably constitute 
a functional circuit involved in interoceptive and affective 
processes and form an anatomically tightly coupled network 
ideally placed to integrate information from several brain 
regions. The insula distributes sensory information coming 
from the body, in contact with the external reality, and 
transmits it to further brain regions that allow its processing. 
In summary, the insula supports emotional experience resulting 
from bodily states. In line with Bion’s theory, bodily sensations 
shape emotional experiences, and experiencing O implies 
the possibility to record the sensations, perceptions and 
emotions that are activated in contact with reality and therefore 
experiencing them ( Damasio, 1996 ; Ciocca, 2015 ). The insula 
is anatomically situated in a brain area connected with several 
neural functional circuits supporting cognitive, homeostatic, 
and affective systems and constitutes a bridge between brain 
regions involved in monitoring internal states (visceral sensory, 
somatic sensory processes, autonomic regulation of the 
gastrointestinal tract and heart; Menon and Uddin, 2010 ) 
and that support their processing. The insular cortex registers 
body sensations and through the interaction with other brain 
areas, gives rise to emotions that modulate the behavior 
(Singer et  al., 2009 ; Craig, 2010 ). Craig and colleagues, in 
an animal model, identified an ascending pathway from the 
spinal cord (lamina I  neurons in the spinal cord) through 
the spinothalamic tract, passing through the Nucleus of the 
Solitary Tract (NTS) and ventromedial nucleus of the thalamus 
and finally landing at the dorsal insula projecting information 
to AI and ACC ( Critchley and Harrison, 2013 ). They called 
this pathway the “ homeostatic afferent pathway ” ( Craig, 2009 ) 
that carries information about the body. Particularly, 
information arising from the body reaches the middle and 
posterior parts of the insula and then is projected in the 
anterior insula. The awareness of salient events is represented 
in the anterior insula, whereas more sensory attributes are 
represented posteriorly ( Craig, 2002 ). The insula represents 
a core area that receives bodily information, filtering salient 
stimuli, processing them and then engaging, through ACC, 
the CEN that supports working memory, higher order cognitive 
processes and the DMN that supports cognitive functions 
and Self.
The Freudian description of the mind underlines how bodily 
experience gives rise to and shapes thought. Pre-reflective 
representations of visceral states of the Self are linked to 
activations in the posterior and middle Insula; DMN is engaged 
when introspection and reflection are needed ( Critchley and 
Harrison, 2013 ). Interactions between the DMN and insula 
support the ability to represent one’s bodily states to enable 
conscious reflection on those states (Molnar-Szakacs and Uddin, 
2013). Thoughts derive from integrated physiological activation 
filtered by the insula and he mind develops to process, contain 
and give them meaning through DMN.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The dialogue between neuroscience and psychoanalysis is still 
complex and often conflicting; a controversy deriving foremost 
from the complexity of the study object: the mind-brain system, 
perhaps the most complex and challenging subject for the 
human being, from a scientific, philosophical, and psychological 
point of view. A second reason, which probably did not favor 
the discourse between these two disciplines, derives from the 
conceptual conflict of conceiving a system able to study itself. 
Both in the case of neuroscience as in the case of psychoanalysis, 
the subject and the object of the investigation coincide, and 
this aspect becomes an evident limitation in the study of any 
phenomenon. Specifically, these two disciplines use different 
tools and methods, sharing the same target: the knowledge 
of the mind-brain system, its development, and its physiological 
and pathological expressions. The differences in methods and 
tools used have not discouraged and should not discourage 
at all this fundamental relationship. Instead, the innovative 
approach of resting state network investigations has facilitated 
the communication, opening new horizons. Resting state networks 
in general and DMN in particular opened a window on 
neurophysiological mechanisms linked to spontaneous thought 
processes, not exclusively related to the active execution of 
cognitive tasks. The greater knowledge of neural networks 
functioning allows a theoretical deepening on spontaneous and 
unconscious thought processes and in general on mind-brain 
functioning and on the mind-body relationship. Although the 
beginnings of modern neuroscience have been characterized 
by a cognitive psychology approach, with a tendency to exclude 
affective, emotional and unconscious processes – in which the 
unconscious was often defined as implicit or unaware – over 
time thanks to scientific evidence and clinical practice, it was 
no longer possible to exclude emotional and unconscious states 
from neuroscientific studies. This point brought neuroscience 
back to the approach originally conceived by Freud with the 
investigation through the resting state networks that confirms 
and deepens this relationship. Progresses made in the field of 
neuroimaging allow a deeper and more detailed investigation, 
therefore a greater understanding of psychoanalytic theory, 
models and observations, and the mind-brain system in its 
functions and dysfunctions, finding in concepts such as FEP 
its natural meeting point, its bridge between mind and brain, 
in which Freud’s more speculative free energy theory, based 
on the clinical method, find a natural connection with the 
more rigorous methods of neuroscience, a goal to which Freud 
himself aspired since the birth of psychoanalytic theories.
FEP takes elements from the Bayesian and Helmoltzian 
approaches, conceiving the human mind as perpetually committed 
in active inference, analyzing data from the sensorium and 
from external reality, comparing and analyzing them, trying 
to keep down the entropy levels and therefore minimize the 
possibility of surprise (and seeking out opportunities to minimize 
surprise), thereby avoiding excessive levels of free energy (Friston, 
2010). Seth and Friston (2016 ) recently described active 
interoceptive inference, providing an interesting and detailed 
set of concepts within which to conceive the neurofunctional 
Cieri and Esposito Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
basis of emotion, embodied selfhood and allostatic control. 
The neuronal activity encodes expectations about the causes 
of sensory input, where these expectations aim to minimize 
prediction error and where the prediction error lies in the 
difference between (ascending) sensory input and (descending) 
predictions of that input. This minimization rests upon recurrent 
neuronal interactions between different levels of the cortical 
hierarchy. For interoceptive inference, predictions issue from 
visceromotor areas and project to viscerosensory areas (to 
provide corollary feedback) as well as to brainstem and subcortical 
areas (to engage autonomic homoeostatic reflexes). The authors 
point out how visceromotor predictions are best interpreted 
as providing homoeostatic set-points that enslave autonomic 
reflexes and guide allostatic (behavioral and physiological) 
responses via interoceptive prediction errors at different 
hierarchical levels and timescales ( Seth and Friston, 2016 ).
In the FEP the brain acts having a model of the world, 
working through active inference generating actively predictions 
to minimize the variations of free energy (maximizing Bayesian 
model evidence), providing a principled explanation for perceptual 
inference in the brain. With this principle, the brain tries to 
resist its natural tendency to disorder, maintaining a sustained 
and homoeostatic exchange with the environment.
As we mentioned, the DMN is consistent with ego functions 
and with its target of containing free energy levels of underlying 
structures, a function of the secondary process. The result is 
a top-down hierarchy of DMN which aims to reduce the free 
energy associated with the Freudian primary process. The cortical 
regions modulate the activity of subcortical areas, ontogenetically 
and phylogenetically older, through the lowering and optimization 
of free energy. Freudian constructs of the primary and secondary 
processes seem to have neurobiological substrates, consistent 
with self-organized activity in hierarchical cortical systems, and 
Freudian descriptions of the ego are consistent with the functions 
described of the DMN with its reciprocal exchanges with 
subordinate limbic and paralimbic brain systems.
Even in Bion’s theory, the body is in close contact with external 
reality; internal and external sensations trough α-function shape 
emotional experiences and finally thoughts. Learning from 
experience represents the attempt of individuals to experience 
the emotion of the moment without running away in the knowledge, 
which would be  the result of a defense mechanism aimed at 
the avoidance of that specific emotional state. The insula, with 
its connections with several neural functional circuits, supports 
emotional experience resulting from bodily states.
The anterior insular cortex is a part of the visceromotor 
area, situated at the top of an interoceptive hierarchy ( Seth and 
Friston, 2016); it receives ascending projections from viscerosensory 
areas (e.g., posterior and mid-insula) and their descending 
connections engage a range of subcortical, brainstem, and spinal 
cord targets involved in visceromotor control, such as the 
periaqueductal gray and the parabrachial nucleus ( Seth and 
Friston, 2016). The anterior insula constitutes a hub involved 
in the registration body sensations and filters external salient 
events, then sending information to the DMN that integrates 
and elaborates information supporting mental activity connected 
to the Self. The insula and dACC constitute a functional circuit 
that integrates information from several brain regions. They form 
an anatomically tightly coupled network ideally placed to distribute 
sensory information to further brain regions that allow 
their processing.
As we  noted, Bion (1959) focused his observation on body 
and sensory organs as instruments of access to the perception 
of reality, considering thought and emotion inseparable components 
of the same process, underlying the central role of the body as 
the start for the thought phenomena. In his theory, digestion 
of new experiences corresponds to the “data assimilation” or 
“evidence accumulation” implicit in “belief updating” under the FEP .
Although we  do not know if psychoanalysis should help 
to plan the work of neurobiology, as claimed by Kandel 20 
years ago ( Kandel, 1999 ), we  believe that a dialogue between 
these two disciplines should increase in light of new developments, 
without prejudices in name of curiosity and respect for the 
history, tools, methodologies, and languages used by the different 
approaches, in order to reach important advances in the 
knowledge of the mind-brain system, in which other disciplines 
as psychiatry, psychology, and neurology could naturally take 
advantage in order to improve the diagnostic and therapeutic 
approach to mental suffering.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
RE and FC equally contributed to the manuscript.
 
REFERENCES
Allman, J. M., Hakeem, A., Erwin, J. M., Nimchinsky, E., and Hof, P . (2001). 
The anterior cingulate cortex: the evolution of an interface between emotion 
and cognition. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.  935, 107–117. doi: 10.1111/(ISSN) 
1749-6632
Andreasen, N. C., O’Leary, D. S., Cizadlo, T., Arndt, S., Rezai, K., Watkins, G. L., 
et al. (1995). Remembering the past: two facets of episodic memory explored 
with positron emission tomography. Am. J. Psychiatry  152, 1576–1585. doi: 
10.1176/ajp.152.11.1576
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2012). The brain’s default network and its adaptive role 
in internal mentation. Neuroscientist 18, 251–270. doi: 10.1177/1073858 
411403316
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., and Spreng, R. N. (2014). The default network 
and self-generated thought: component processes, dynamic control, and clinical 
relevance. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.  1316, 29–52. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12360
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Lustig, C., Head, D., 
Raichle, M. E., et  al. (2007). Disruption of large-scale brain systems in 
advanced aging. Neuron 56, 924–935. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.10.038
Ashby, W . R. (1947). Principles of the self-organising dynamic system. J. Gen. 
Psychol. 37, 125–128. doi: 10.1080/00221309.1947.9918144
Awh, E., and Jonides, J. (2001). Overlapping mechanisms of attention and 
spatial working memory. Trends Cogn. Sci . 5, 119–126. doi: 10.1016/
s1364-6613(00)01593-x
Ballard, D. H., Hinton, G. E., and Sejnowski, T. J. (1983). Parallel visual 
computation. Nature 306, 21–26. doi: 10.1038/306021a0
Barber, A. D., Caffo, B. S., Pekar, J. J., and Mostofsky, S. H. (2013). Developmental 
changes in within- and between-network connectivity between late childhood 
and adulthood. Neuropsychologia 51, 156–167. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia. 
2012.11.011
Barrett, L. F ., and Simmons, W . K. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in the 
brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.  16, 419–429. doi: 10.1038/nrn3950
Cieri and Esposito Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
Beer, J. S. (2007). The default self: feeling good or being right? Trends Cogn. 
Sci. 11, 187–189. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2007.02.004
Bion, W . R. (1959). “ Attacks on linking” in Melanie Klein today: Developments 
in theory and practice. Volume 1: Mainly theory. 1988 . ed. E. Bott Spillius 
(London: Routledge).
Bion, W . R. (1962a). A theory of thinking. Int. J. Psychoanal.  43, 178–186.
Bion, W . R. (1962b). Learning from experience . London: Heinemann.
Bion, W . R. (1965). Transformations. London: Heinemann.
Bion, W . R. (1973). Elements of psycho-analysis . London: Heinemann.
Block, N. (1980). Readings in philosophy of psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Botvinick, M. M., Cohen, J. D., and Carter, C. S. (2004). Conflict monitoring 
and anterior ci ngulate cortex: an update. Trends Cogn. Sci.  8, 539–546. doi: 
10.1016/j.tics.2004.10.003
Buckner, R. L. (2013). The brain’s default network: origins and implications 
for the study of psychosis. Dialogues Clin. Neurosci.  15, 351–358.
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., and Schacter, D. L. (2008). The brain’s 
default network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Ann. N. Y. 
Acad. Sci.  1124, 1–38. doi: 10.1196/annals.1440.011
Carhart-Harris, R. L., and Friston, K. J. (2010). The default-mode, ego-functions 
and free-energy: a neurobiological account of Freudian ideas. Brain 133, 
1265–1283. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq010
Carter, C. S., MacDonald, A. W . 3rd., Ross, L. L., and Stenger, V . A. (2001). 
Anterior cingulate cortex activity and impaired self-monitoring of performance 
in patients with schizophrenia: an event-related fMRI study. Am. J. Psychiatry 
158, 1423–1428. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.158.9.1423
Castellanos, F . X., Margulies, D. S., Kelly, C., Uddin, L. Q., Ghaffari, M., 
Kirsch, A., et  al. (2008). Cingulate-precuneus interactions: a new locus of 
dysfunction in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 
63, 332–337. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.06.025
Chalmers, D. J. (1996). The conscious mind: In search of a fundamental theory . 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Church, J. A., Fair, D. A., Dosenbach, N. U., Cohen, A. L., Miezin, F . M., 
Petersen, S. E., et al. (2009). Control networks in paediatric Tourette syndrome 
show immature and anomalous patterns of functional connectivity. Brain 
132, 225–238. doi: 10.1093/brain/awn223
Cieri, F ., and Esposito, R. (2018). Neuroaging through the lens of the resting 
state networks. Biomed. Res. Int.  2018:5080981. doi: 10.1155/2018/5080981
Cieri, F ., Esposito, R., Cera, N., Pieramico, V ., Tartaro, A., and Di Giannantonio, M. 
(2017). Late-life depression: modifications of brain resting state activity.  
J. Geriatr. Psychiatry Neurol.  30, 140–150. doi: 10.1177/0891988717700509
Ciocca, A. (2015). Storia della psicoanalisi . Bologna: Il Mulino.
Cole, M. W ., Repovs, G., and Anticevic, A. (2014). The frontoparietal control 
system: a central role in mental health. Neuroscientist 20, 652–664. doi: 
10.1177/1073858414525995
Connolly, J. P . (2016). Principles of organization of psychic energy within 
psychoanalysis: a systems theory perspective . Unpublished doctoral thesis. 
Pretoria: University of South Africa.
Connolly, P . (2018). Expected free energy formalizes conflict underlying defense 
in Freudian psychoanalysis. Front. Psychol. 9:1264. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01264
Corbetta, M., and Shulman, G. L. (2002). Control of goal-directed and stimulus-
driven attention in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.  3, 201–215. doi: 10.1038/
nrn755
Craig, A. D. (2002). How do you  feel? Interoception: the sense of the 
physiological condition of the body. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.  3, 655–666. doi: 
10.1038/nrn894
Craig, A. D. (2009). How do you  feel – now? The anterior insula and human 
awareness. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.  10, 59–70. doi: 10.1038/nrn2555
Craig, A. D. (2010). The sentient self. Brain Struct. Funct.  214, 563–577. doi: 
10.1007/s00429-010-0248-y
Craig, A. D. (2011). Significance of the insula for the evolution of human 
awareness of feelings from the body. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.  1225, 72–82. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.05990.x
Craver, C. (2007). Explaining the brain . Univ. Oxford: Oxford Press.
Critchley, H. D., and Harrison, N. A. (2013). Visceral influences on brain and 
behavior. Neuron 77, 624–638. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.02.008
Damasio, A. R. (1996). The somatic marker hypothesis and the possible functions 
of the prefrontal cortex. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci.  351, 
1413–1420.
Damoiseaux, J. S., Rombouts, S. A., Barkhof, F ., Scheltens, P ., Stam, C. J., 
Smith, S. M., et  al. (2006). Consistent resting-state networks across healthy 
subjects. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  103, 13848–13853. doi: 10.1073/pnas. 
0601417103
Dayan, P ., Hinton, G. E., and Neal, R. M. (1995). The Helmholtz machine. 
Neural Comput. 7, 889–904. doi: 10.1162/neco.1995.7.5.889
Deco, G., and Corbetta, M. (2011). The dynamical balance of the brain at 
rest. Neuroscientist 17, 107–123. doi: 10.1177/1073858409354384
Deco, G., Jirsa, V . K., and McIntosh, A. R. (2011). Emerging concepts for the 
dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 
12, 43–56. doi: 10.1038/nrn2961
Di, X., and Biswal, B. B. (2015). Characterizations of resting-state modulatory 
interactions in the human brain. J. Neurophysiol. 114, 2785–2796. doi: 10.1152/
jn.00893.2014
Esposito, R., Cieri, F ., Chiacchiaretta, P ., Lauriola, M., Di Giannantonio, M., 
Tartaro, A., et  al. (2018a). Modifications in resting state functional 
anticorrelation between default mode network and dorsal attention network: 
comparison among young adults, healthy elders and mild cognitive 
impairment patients. Brain Imaging Behav.  12, 127–141. doi: 10.1007/
s11682-017-9686-y
Esposito, R., Cieri, F ., di Giannantonio, M., and Tartaro, A. (2018b). The role 
of body image and self-perception in anorexia nervosa: the neuroimaging 
perspective. J. Neuropsychol. 12, 41–52. doi: 10.1111/jnp.12106
Ferrari, A. B. (1992). L ’eclissi del corpo. Borla: Roma.
Fox, M. D., and Raichle, M. E. (2007). Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity 
observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.  
8, 700–711. doi: 10.1038/nrn2201
Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Zacks, J. M., and Raichle, M. E. (2006). Coherent 
spontaneous activity accounts for trial-to-trial variability in human evoked 
brain responses. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 23–25. doi: 10.1038/nn1616
Fransson, P . (2005). Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an 
fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function 
hypothesis. Hum. Brain Mapp.  26, 15–29. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20113
Freud, S. (1940). An outline of psychoanalysis. Std Edn. Vol. 23 . London: Vintage.
Freud, S. (1911). Formulations on the two principles of mental functioning. Std 
Edn. Vol. 12.  218–286.
Freud, S. (1895/1963). “On the grounds for detaching a particular syndrome 
from neurasthenia under the description ‘anxiety neurosis’” in The standard 
edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud. Vol. 3,  ed. 
J. Strachey trans. (London: The Hogarth Press).
Freud, S. (1895/1966). “Project for a scientific psychology” in The standard 
edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud. Vol. 1,  ed. J. 
Strachey trans. (London: The Hogarth Press).
Freud, S. (1915). Instincts and their vicissitudes. The standard edition of the 
complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud, volume XIV (1914–1916): 
On the history of the psycho-analytic movement, papers on metapsychology 
and other works. 109–140.
Freud, S. (1923). “The ego and the Id” in The standard edition of the complete 
psychological works of Sigmund Freud: The ego and the Id and other works . 
Vol. 19, eds. J. Strachey, A. Fre ud, A. Strachey and A. Tyson, (London: 
Vintage), 1–66.
Freud, A. (1937). The ego and the mechanisms of defence . London: Hogarth 
Press and Institute of Psycho-Analysis.
Friston, K. J. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. 
Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci.  360, 815–836.
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain? 
Trends Cogn. Sci.  13, 293–301. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle of the 
brain. J. Physiol.  100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001
Friston, K., Levin, M., Sengupta, B., and Pezzulo, G. (2015a). Knowing one’s 
place: a free-energy approach to pattern regulation. J. R. Soc. Interface  12, 
1–12. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.1383
Friston, K., Rigoli, F ., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., and Pezzulo, G. 
(2015b). Active inference and epistemic value. Cogn. Neurosci.  6, 187–214. 
doi: 10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053
Gopinath, K., Krishnamurthy, V ., Cabanban, R., and Crosson, B. A. (2015). 
Hubs of anticorrelation in high-resolution resting-state functional 
Cieri and Esposito Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
connectivity network architecture. Brain Connect.  5, 267–275. doi: 10.1089/
brain.2014.0323
Gregory, R. L. (1980). Perceptions as hypotheses. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 
Ser. B Biol. Sci.  290, 181–197.
Greicius, M. D., Krasnow, B., Reiss, A. L., and Menon, V . (2003). Functional 
connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode 
hypothesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 253–258. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0135058100
Gusnard, D. A., and Raichle, M. E. (2001). Searching for a baseline: functional 
imaging and the resting human brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.  2, 685–694. doi: 
10.1038/35094500
Helmholtz, H. (1866/1962). “Concerning the perceptions in general” in Treatise on 
physiological optics. 3rd Edn. Vol. III. ed. J. Southall trans. (New Y ork: Dover).
Hopkins, J. (2012). “Psychoanalysis, representation and neuroscience: the Freudian 
unconscious and the Bayesian brain” in From the couch to the lab: Psychoanalysis, 
neuroscience and cognitive psychology in dialogue . eds. A. Fotopoulu,  
D. Pfaff and M. Conway (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 230–265.
Hopkins, J. (2015). “The significance of consilience: psychoanalysis, attachment, 
neuroscience, and evolution” in Psychoanalysis and philosophy of mind: 
Unconscious mentality in the 21st century . eds. S. Boag, L. Brakel and  
V . Talvitie (London: Karnac), 47–136.
Hopkins, J. (2016). Free energy and virtual reality in neuroscience and 
psychoanalysis: a complexity theory of dreaming and mental disorder. Front. 
Psychol. 7:922. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00922
James, W . (1890). “The principles of psychology” (London: MacMillan).
Kandel, E. (1999). Biology and the future of psychoanalysis: a new intellectual 
framework for psychiatry revisited. Am. J. Psychiatry  156, 505–524.
Kauffman, S. (1993). The origins of order: Self-organization and selection in 
evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., and Kiverstein, J. (2018). The 
Markov blankets of life: autonomy, active inference and the free energy 
principle. J. R. Soc. Interface  15:20170792. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0792
Knill, D. C., and Pouget, A. (2004). The Bayesian brain: the role of uncertainty 
in neural coding and computation. Trends Neurosci.  27, 712–719. doi: 
10.1016/j.tins.2004.10.007
Levin, K. (1935). “Dynarnic theory of personality” in Psychology ed. J. F . Dashiell 
(New Y ork and London: McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.).
Livianos-Aldana, L., Rojo-Moreno, L., and Sierra-Sanmiguel, P . F . J. (2007). 
Gall and the phrenological movement. Am. J. Psychiatry 164:414. doi: 10.1176/
ajp.2007.164.3.414
Lombardi, R. (2016). Metà prigioniero, metà alato. La dissociazione corpo-mente 
in psicoanalisi . Bollati Boringhieri: Torino.
Lombardi, R., and Pola, M. (2010). The body, adolescence, and psychosis. Int. 
J. Psychoanal. 91, 1419–1444. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-8315.2010.00356.x
Lurija, A. R. (1976). Working brain: An introduction to neuropsychology . ISBN 
046509208X (ISBN13: 9780465092086).
Mantini, D., Corbetta, M., Perrucci, M. G., Romani, G. L., and Del Gratta, C. 
(2009). Large-scale brain networks account for sustained and transient activity 
during target detection. NeuroImage 44, 265–274. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage. 
2008.08.019
Mason, M. F ., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. M., Grafton, S. T., 
and Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering minds: the default network and stimulus-
independent thought. Science 315, 393–395. doi: 10.1126/science.1131295
McEwen, B. S. (2004). “Protective and damaging effects of the mediators of 
stress and adaptation: allostasis and allostatic load” in Allostasis, homeostasis, 
and the costs of physiological adaptation . ed. J. Schulkin (Cambridge, MA: 
Cambridge University Press), 65–98.
McEwen, B. S. (2007). Physiology and neurobiology of stress and adaptation: 
central role of the brain. Physiol. Rev.  87, 873–904. doi: 10.1152/physrev. 
00041.2006
Mellor, M. J. (2018). Making worlds in a waking dream: where Bion intersects 
Friston on the shaping and breaking of psychic reality. Front. Psychol. 9:1674. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01674
Menon, V . (2011). Large-scale brain networks and psychopathology: a unifying 
triple network model. Trends Cogn. Sci.  15, 483–506. doi: 10.1016/j.
tics.2011.08.003
Menon, V ., and Uddin, L. Q. (2010). Saliency, switching, attention and control: 
a network model of insula function. Brain Struct. Funct.  214, 655–667. doi: 
10.1007/s00429-010-0262-0
Miller, J. G. (1978). Living systems . New Y ork: McGraw-Hill.
Molnar-Szakacs, I., and Uddin, L. Q. (2013). Self-processing and the default 
mode network: interactions with the mirror neuron system. Front. Hum. 
Neurosci. 7:571. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00571
Moran, L. V ., Tagamets, M. A., Sampath, H., O’Donnell, A., Stein, E. A., 
Kochunov, P ., et  al. (2013). Disruption of anterior insula modulation of 
large-scale brain networks in schizophrenia. Biol. Psychiatry  74, 467–474. 
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.02.029
O’Donnell, C., and van Rossum, M. C. (2014). Systematic analysis of the 
contributions of stochastic voltage gated channels to neuronal noise. Front. 
Comput. Neurosci. 8:105. doi: 10.3389/ fncom. 2014. 00105
Ortega, P . A., and Braun, D. A. (2010). A minimum relative entropy principle 
for learning and acting. J. Artif. Intell. Res.  38, 475–511.
Passow, S., Specht, K., Adamsen, T. C., Biermann, M., Brekke, N., Craven, A. R., 
et  al. (2015). Default-mode network functional connectivity is closely related 
to metabolic activity. Hum. Brain Mapp. 36, 2027–2038. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22753
Phan, K. L., Wager, T., Taylor, S. F ., and Liberzon, I. (2002). Functional 
neuroanatomy of emotion: a meta-analysis of emotion activation studies in 
PET and fMRI. NeuroImage 16, 331–348. doi: 10.1006/nimg.2002.1087
Posner, M. I. (1994). Attention: the mechanisms of consciousness. 1994. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  91, 7398–7403.
Qin, P ., and Northoff, G. (2011). How is our self related to midline regions 
and the default-mode network? NeuroImage 57, 1221–1233. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2011.05.028
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W . J., Gusnard, D. A., 
and Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default mode of brain function. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA  98, 676–682. doi: 10.1073/pnas.98.2.676
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P . J., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering 
Schrödinger’s question: a free-energy formulation. Phys. Life Rev.  24, 1–16. 
doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Rapaport, D. (1960). The structure of psychoanalytic theory. Psychol. Issues 2, 
1–158.
Schneider, F ., Bermpohl, F ., Heinzel, A., Rotte, M., Walter, M., Tempelmann, 
C., et al. (2008). The resting brain and our self: self-relatedness modulates 
resting state neural activity in cortical midline structures. Neuroscience 157, 
120–131. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.08.014
Seeley, W . W ., Menon, V ., Schatzberg, A. F ., Keller, J., Glover, G. H., Kenna, H., 
et  al. (2007). Dissociable Intrinsic Connectivity Networks for Salience 
Processing and Executive Control. J. Neurosci. 27, 2349–2356. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.5587-06.2007
Seojung, L., Kyung, B. K., Jeonghun, K., Jung-Hyun, L., Kee, N., and Y oung-Chul, 
J. (2014). Resting-state synchrony between anterior cingulate cortex and 
precuneus relates to body shape concern in anorexia nervosa and bulimia 
nervosa. Psychiatry Res.  221, 43–48. doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2013.11.004
Seth, A. K., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the 
emotional brain. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 371:20160007. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0007
Shulman, G. L., Fiez, J. A., Corbetta, M., Buckner, R. L., Miezin, F . M., 
Raichle, M. E., et  al. (1997). Common blood flow changes across visual 
tasks: II. Decreases in cerebral cortex. J. Cogn. Neurosci.  9, 648–663. doi: 
10.1162/jocn.1997.9.5.648
Singer, T., Critchley, H. D., and Preuschoff, K. (2009). A common role of 
insula in feelings, empathy and uncertainty. Trends Cogn. Sci.  13, 334–340. 
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.05.001
Solms, M. (2014). A neuropsychoanalytical approach to the hard problem of 
consciousness. J. Integr. Neurosci. 13, 173–185. doi: 10.1142/S0219635214400032
Solms, M. (2019). The hard problem of consciousness and the free energy 
principle. Front. Psychol. 9:2714. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02714
Sterling, P . (2004). “Principles of allostasis: optimal design, predictive regulation, 
pathophysiology, and rational therapeutics” in Allostasis, homeostasis, and 
the costs of physiological adaptation. ed. J. Schulkin (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge 
University Press).
Sterling, P ., and Eyer, J. (1988). “ Allostasis: a new paradigm to explain 
arousal  pathology” in Handbook of life stress, cognition, and health .  
eds.  S. Fisher and J. Reason (Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons), 
629–649.
Szpunar, K. K., Watson, J. M., and McDermott, K. B. (2007). Neural substrates 
of envisioning the future. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  104, 642–647. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0610082104
Cieri and Esposito Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 August 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1983
Tretter, F ., and Löffler-Stastka, H. (2018). Steps toward an integrative clinical 
systems psychology. Front. Psychol. 9:1616. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01616
Turner, G. R., and Spreng, R. N. (2015). Prefrontal engagement and reduced 
default network suppression co-occur and are dynamically coupled in older 
adults: the default-executive coupling hypothesis of aging. J. Cogn. Neurosci.  
27, 2462–2476. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_00869
van den Heuvel, M. P ., and Hulshoff Pol, H. E. (2010). Exploring the brain 
network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity. Eur. 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 20, 519–534. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2010.03.008
von Bertalanffy, L. (1967). General system theory: Foundations, development, 
applications. New Y ork: George Braziller.
von Helmholtz, H. (1962). “Concerning the perceptions in general” in Treatise 
on physiological optics, 3rd Edn. Vol. III  (translated by J. P . C. Southall 
1925 Opt. Soc. Am. Section 26, reprinted New  Y ork: Dover, 1962).
Wu, J. T., Wu, H. Z., Y an, C. G., Chen, W . X., Zhang, H. Y ., He, Y ., et  al. 
(2011). Aging-related changes in the default mode network and its anti-correlated 
networks: a resting-state fMRI study. Neurosci. Lett. 504, 62–67. doi: 10.1016/j.
neulet.2011.08.059
Yu, Y ., Y ang, J., Ejima, Y ., Fukuyama, H., and Wu, J. (2018). Asymmetric 
functional connectivity of the contra- and ipsilateral secondary somatosensory 
cortex during tactile object recognition. Front. Hum. Neurosci.  11:662. doi: 
10.3389/fnhum.2017.00662
Zepf, S. (2010). Libido and psychic energy – Freud’s concepts reconsidered. 
Int. Forum Psychoanal.  19, 3–14. doi: 10.1080/08037060802450753
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was conducted 
in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed 
as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Cieri and Esposito. This is an open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY) . The 
use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the 
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original 
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. 
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with 
these terms.