Modelling mood updating: a proof of
principle study
James E. Clark and Stuart Watson
Background
Recent developments in computational psychiatry have led to
the hypothesis that mood represents an expectation (prior belief)
on the likely interoceptive consequences of action (i.e. emotion).
This stems from ideas about how the brain navigates its external
world by minimising an upper bound on surprisal (free energy) of
sensory information and echoes developments in other per-
ceptual domains.
Aims
In this paper we aim to present a simple partial observable
Markov decision process that models mood updating in
response to stressful or non-stressful environmental fluctuations
while seeking to minimise surprisal in relation to prior beliefs
about the likely interoceptive signals experienced with specific
actions (attenuating or amplifying stress and pleasure signals).
Method
We examine how, by altering these prior beliefs we can model
mood updating in depression, mania and anxiety.
Results
We discuss how these models provide a computational account
of mood and its related psychopathology and relate it to previous
research in reward processing.
Conclusions
Models such as this can provide hypotheses for experimental
work and also open up the potential modelling of predicted
disease trajectories in individual patients.
Keywords
Bipolar affective disorders; depressive disorders; anxiety disor-
ders; aetiology; cognitive neuroscience.
Copyright and usage
© The Author(s), 2022. Published by Cambridge University Press
on behalf of the Royal College of Psychiatrists. This is an Open
Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution licence (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution
and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
Computational approaches to psychiatric illness attempt to develop
mathematical models describing cognitive processes and their
mapping to underlying neuronal processes.
1– 4 They have resulted
in descriptions of psychosis,5 autism6 and more recently mood dis-
orders7 in terms of false inferences in the brain (see below) and the
resulting theories have accumulated significant experimental
backing.
In this paper we aim to show that mood states (both healthy and
pathological) can be described in terms of basic computational prin-
ciples. We start with an overview of the principles underlying com-
putational psychiatry and how they might be applied to mood
disorders and present a model of mood updating drawing on
these principles. The ensuing results are discussed in the context
of individual and group phenotyping in mood disorders.
The brain must infer the likely causes of sensations
The idea that the brain does not have direct access to its external
world stems from ancient ideas in philosophy of mind.
8 This separ-
ation between internal and external world is essential if self-organis-
ing systems are to maintain a stable internal milieu and avoid the
‘decay to equilibrium’.
9 This implies the existence of a Markov
blanket for such systems10,11 – a statistical boundary that induces
a conditional independence between internal and external states
within a system and separates these systems from a chaotic environ-
ment. One consequence of this, however, is that the brain cannot
directly access the external world (described as hidden states in
the literature on self-organisation) that it must still perceive and
navigate – instead it must make inferences based on the information
it does have access to: basic sensory data (sensory states) and previ-
ous experience of similar encounters (i.e. a specific model of the
world). For example, visual and auditory information may not
accurately discriminate birds from planes from superheroes; but
past experience dictates the object in my line of vision is probably
the former. Via a separate line of reasoning the same idea was pio-
neered by Helmholtz as unconscious (inductive) inference whereby
sensations alone are insufficient to explain perception. What is
required is an abductive framework in which sensations are inter-
preted in the context of past experience to explain their likely
causes – a process broadly analogous to syllogistic reasoning.
12
Inferences of this sort are Bayesian and therefore rely on prior
beliefs (built from previous experience) about causes of received
information (i.e. hidden states). Priors are characterised by their
mean (expectation) and precision (inverse variance) and describe
a priori which hidden states the brain expects to encounter and
how certain it is to encounter them. The role of precision in infer-
ence is critical. If a prior is very certain then sensations must be
highly incongruent to result in a meaningfully different posterior,
whereas a very uncertain (vague) prior is highly susceptible to
even slight deviations from expectations. Certainty or uncertainty
is a function of consistency in previous experiences– so the brain
is confident about the likely causes of sensations if the same sensa-
tions have previously been related to the same causes. This has
important implications for psychopathology as discussed below.
Prediction errors, entropy and free-energy minimisation
If the brain makes Bayesian inferences about hidden states then we
can express the difference between priors and actual events in terms
of prediction errors (i.e. what did I think was going to happen versus
what actually happened). We can further cast prediction errors in
terms of the surprisal associated with events under a given model
(past experience). Surprisal affords the brain an opportunity to
alter expectations (i.e. to learn) so that expectations are more
closely aligned to the most recent events, although the extent to
which this occurs is determined by the precision of expectations.
This is usually beneficial and allows the brain to categorise events
The British Journal of Psychiatry(2023)
222, 125–134. doi: 10.1192/bjp.2022.175
125
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.2022.175 Published online by Cambridge University Press
that are broadly similar but that differ slightly in the sensations they
cause (as no two events will be completely identical). Too broad a
precision would result in overattribution of meaning to events
that should be trivial and too narrow would result in novel events
being misattributed as familiar (more on this later).
The long-term average of surprisal is entropy, a term that quan-
tifies the brain’s uncertainty about hidden states over time. In order
to avoid categorisation mistakes as described above, and to success-
fully navigate hidden states, entropy must be minimised within the
constraints of prior experience (in order to limit the dispersion or
dissipation of an organism ’s physiological and belief states
13).
Perceptual inference therefore becomes a problem of minimising
surprisal (or optimising evidence for the brain’s generative model)
associated with hidden states. Unfortunately direct calculation of
surprisal is intractable
14 (it would involve integration over too
large a probability space) and instead the brain minimises (or at
least appears to minimise) a more tractable upper bound on surpri-
sal, which is termed free energy.
11,15,16 When fleshed out mathem-
atically we reach an intuitive conclusion that free energy can be
minimised (i.e. perceptual inference is made) by either changing
expectations so they are more in line with actual events, or by
acting to attenuate prediction errors and in doing so maintaining
expectations.
17 Action aimed at fulfilling expectation corresponds
to the process of active inference.18
When inference goes wrong
Thus far we have described how the brain minimises free energy in
order to infer the hidden states that cause observable sensory input.
In the face of prediction errors it does this either by changing expec-
tations or attenuating error signals. However, we noted earlier that
the precision of prior beliefs plays a crucial role in this process. If the
precision of prior beliefs is too high then novel events (which should
change expectations) are ignored and if it is too low then events that
should be familiar (and therefore should not alter expectations) can
substantially change priors. This explanation for perception and
action has led quite naturally to descriptions of hallucinations as
perceptual inference based on overly precise priors.
19– 21 This
theory supposes that prior beliefs in perceptual stimuli are so
strong that resulting inferences are resistant to the empirical
absence of such stimuli. In contrast, delusions are the result of
imprecise prior beliefs such that sensory attenuation fails and sensa-
tions inappropriately alter priors
22 – phenomenologically this
results in the attribution of meaning to events that should be trivial.
Mood and mood disorders
Thus far discussion has focused on exteroceptive perception,
although there is a growing body of evidence that interoceptive
inference (perceiving the body’s own physiology) plays a crucial
role in emotion.
23– 26 According to this view the emotional
content of hidden states must be inferred through the interoceptive
signals (such as heart rate, adrenaline, cortisol) they cause (note
similarities to existing psychological theories of emotion27). Active
inference can be used to attenuate signals that are discordant with
priors and amplify signals that agree with priors. By extending the
schema described thus far to hierarchical Bayesian inference we
have proposed that mood acts as a hyper-prior (a belief about a
belief) over the precision of lower-level perceptual priors.
7 A more
straightforward way of framing this is that mood determines the
strength of beliefs about the likely consequences of action.
Emotion therefore corresponds toshort-term fluctuations in the
actual outcomes of our action, whereas mood represents long-
term expectations about the emotional states we are likely to
encounter. Healthy mood states involve priors that are not
overly precise and so allow for changes in mood over time
according to actual emotional content of events encountered.
For example, in a negative mood state an agent will expect to
encounter negative (i.e unsurprising or expected) events but is
not resistant to signals that violate these predictions. If they are
then to experience positive events their mood will correspond-
ingly become more positive.
Similarly to their role in perceptual abnormalities, priors that
are precise or imprecise induce pathological mood states. As such,
we have proposed that depression is the result of a precise hyper-
prior in negative outcomes of action with ensuing attenuation of
contradictory signals. This results in events that should be positive
(and would not be so unsurprising in healthy states) being experi-
enced as relatively negative (because they are now unsurprising).
Mania represents the opposite state so that events are experienced
as positive regardless of their objective emotional content. In con-
trast, anxiety states represent an imprecise hyper-prior over nega-
tive outcomes. Such states prevent action designed to resolve
uncertainty (i.e. attenuation of interoceptive signals). As such, we
propose that mood states can be described according to their coor-
dinates in a two-dimensional schema characterised by the expect-
ation and precision of hyper-priors on the interoceptive
consequences of action.
When we talk about pleasurable and stressful outcomes, we do
not imply that an observation is affectively valenced. We simply
mean that certain (positive) outcomes are,a priori, preferred over
other (negative) outcomes. These prior preferences play the role
of reward, when it comes to selecting various actions (see below).
In other words, a stress signal is simply an observation that an indi-
vidual does not anticipate encountering, whereas a pleasure signal is
a familiar outcome that is,a priori, unsurprising (i.e. rewarding).
In this paper we describe a model of mood in which beliefs
about the stressful content of hidden states are updated using the
formalism described thus far.
Method
Our model is a partially observable Markov decision process
(POMDP) consisting of a state space in which there are:
(a) two possible states (‘stressful’ and ‘not stressful’); and
(b) two possible observations ( ‘stress signals ’ and ‘pleasure
signals’).
The system can choose from one of five possible actions in each
state (‘attenuate pleasure signals’, ‘amplify pleasure signals’, ‘attenu-
ate stress signals’, ‘amplify stress signals’, ‘wait’) that generate obser-
vations with a given probability.
We modelled healthy mood updating, depression, mania and
anxiety. The differences between these POMDPs lie in differences
in the transition and observation probability matrices (seeFig. 1).
In healthy mood updating the agent is confident that a stressful
state will yield stress signals and that non-stressful states will yield
pleasure signals. As such, the system will attempt to maintain its
belief states (i.e. the probability that an event is stressful or not
stressful according to the previous state) but will update them
accordingly in the face of conflicting observations. In contrast the
depression model was given very strong prior beliefs that it would
receive stress signals, regardless of the action it took. The mania
model was given very strong prior beliefs that it would receive pleas-
ure signals and the anxiety model was given very weak prior beliefs
that it would receive stress signals.
The values used for probabilities are arbitrary but are designed
to broadly highlight the underlying principles central to our theories
described above. We acknowledge this partitioning of mood states is
Clark & Watson
126
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.2022.175 Published online by Cambridge University Press
somewhat simplistic, however, our model should suffice to illustrate
the principles discussed above.
It should be noted that our model is a special case of active infer-
ence, where policy selection is treated at as a form of planning as
inference
28– 30 and policies are selected to minimise expected free
energy.31 Under some simplifying assumptions (namely there is
no intrinsic or epistemic value associated with any policy), expected
free energy reduces to expected reward, where reward is the prior
(log) likelihood of an outcome. In this special case, one can use
the Bellman optimality equation to identify the best action from
any given inferred state. In turn, this allows one to use standard
POMPD technology to simulate active inference. In this setting
the most valuable policy at any point in a POMDP is given by the
Bellman optimality equation
32 (see Supplementary Appendix 1;
supplementary material is available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/
bjp.2022.175) with reward manually specified according to
surprisal.
Directly solving this equation is intractable, and so we use an
approximate solution in which continuous belief states are discre-
tised in a grid and a parameterised convex combination sought
that necessarily provides an upper boundary on the true optimal
value function.
33– 35 This boundary is then minimised to find the
most appropriate approximate solution.
All the models were run in the POMDP package36 in the R stat-
istical environment37 and the output presented as a network in
which nodes correspond to belief states and edges the transitions
between them if certain signals are received. Within each node
the optimal action for the system at that time is also presented.
Networks were constructed using the Qgraph package in R.
38 We
also present the frequency density plot of each belief state in the
network and the bargraph corresponding to the frequency with
which the model is is each belief state. R code used can be found
in Supplementary Appendix 2.
Results
The network of healthy mood updating is presented inFig. 2(a).T h e r e
are six nodes representing various degrees of certainty/uncertainty
that the event encountered is stressful. Note that when the agent is
a= b=
C=
–1
VAmss
VAtps
VAtss
VAmps
VAmsp
VAtpp
VAtsp
VAmpp
–1
/g83p|/g93/g68/g74
/g83s|/g93/g68/g74
/g83/g93t|/g93t_1/g68/g74
/g83/g93t|/g93t_1/g68/g74
/g83/g85t|/g93t_1/g68/g74
/g83/g85t|/g93t_1/g68/g74
/g83p|/g85/g68/g74
/g83s|/g85/g68/g74
Fig. 1 This figure shows the relationship among different states in the model. Observable states are shown in panels with solid lines, whereas
hidden states are in panels with broken lines. The environment in this case (shown in the bottom right panel) is either stressful or non-stressful.
The system (in this case modelling an agent attempting to infer the emotional content of the environment) will attempt to match their own
internal (emotional) states to the environment. The environment generates observations that are either pleasurable (P –the sun icon) or stressful
(S – the storm-cloud). The system must then use these observations to infer the state of the environment and will do so by minimising the
difference between its expectations (the‘mood’of the system in our model) and the environment. The top panel is, therefore, the internal state
(emotion) of the system at any point– again this is either stressful (ζ) or pleasurable (ρ). Matrix (a) is the likelihood matrix and shows the
probability that observations are interpreted as stressful or pleasurable under the current internal state and the policy (αγ) being followed at the
time. The system can transition to a different state or maintain its current state. Whether it does this or not is a function of the policy the system is
following at any given time and the state at the previous time point. These probabilities are reflected in the transition probability matrix (b). The
policy (or action) of the system is to either amplify or attenuate stress signals according to the optimality function where value is equal to inverse
surprisal or model evidence. This is reflected in the reward matrix (c) and highlights the fact that Bellman optimality is a special case of free-
energy minimisation. The probability of an observation is conditional on the state of the system and its current policy. The system can either wait,
minimise or amplify stress/pleasure signals. Our conjecture is that mood functions as a (hyper)prior distribution over the likely emotional
outcomes of any given policy (action). This is best reflected in the probability values in matrix (b), and means that the most valuable policy is the
one that minimises the difference between the expected and actual emotional states. This can be achieved either though attenuation or
amplification of sensory signals, or by altering the system’s own internal states (i.e. changing mood). We propose that a healthy system is
relatively receptive to changes in the emotional content of the environment, whereas pathological mood states result in either policy failure or
inappropriate policy that results in mood states resistant to environmental signals– as detailed in the main text.
Modelling mood updating
127
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.2022.175 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Pleasure Signals
(a)
(b)
Pleasure Signals
Stress Signals
Stress Signals
Pleasure Signals
Pleasure Signals
Pleasure Signals
Pleasure Signals
Stress SignalsStress SignalsAmSS
AtSS
AmPS
AtPS
AmSS
AmSS
Stress Signals
Stress Signals
1.5
1.0
Frequency density0.5
0.0
0.00 0.25 0.50
Probability that event is stressful
0.75 1.00
Fig. 2 (a) This network shows how belief states about the stress content of the environment are updated in a healthy mood state. Arrows
indicate transitions between belief states based on the type of signals the agent observes. The coloured edges of each node represent the
probability that the environment is stressful (dark blue portion) or non-stressful (light blue portion). Text within each node represents the optimal
action that the agent will take given the current belief state. (b) This figure shows a frequency density plot of the probability that an event is
decided to be stressful by the agent in healthy mood updating. Note that there is roughly equal density shared between being certain an event is
non-stressful and certain an event is stressful. The key to the healthy mood network, therefore, is an ability to transition between mood states
and a resistance to uncertainty about outcomes of action (the region in the middle of the distribution). AmSS, amplify stress signals; AtSS,
attenuate stress signals; AmPS, amplify pleasure signals; AtPS, attenuate pleasure signals.
Clark & Watson
128
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.2022.175 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Pleasure Signals
AmPS
AmSS
AtPS AtSS
AmPS
Pleasure Signals
Pleasure Signals
Pleasure Signals
Pleasure Signals
Stress Signals
Stress Signals
Stress Signals
Stress Signals
Stress Signals
(a)
(b)
2.0
1.5
Frequency density
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.00 0.25 0.50
Probability that Event is Stressful
0.75 1.00
Fig. 3 (a) This network shows how belief states about the stress content of the environment are updated in a depressed mood state. Arrows
indicate transitions between belief states based on the type of signals the agent observes. The coloured edges of each node represent the
probability that the environment is stressful (dark blue portion) or non-stressful (light blue portion). Text within each node represents the optimal
action that the agent will take given the current belief state. Note that if enough stress signals are received the agent becomes stuck in a loop in
which belief states are constantly expecting a stressful environment and action is aimed at maintaining this belief, despite conflicting signals. (b)
This figure shows a frequency density plot of the probability that an event is inferred to be stressful by the agent in depressed mood updating. In
this case the distribution is skewed to the right (in contrast toFig. 2(b)) indicating a much greater frequency of a stressful environment. AmSS,
amplify stress signals; AtSS, attenuate stress signals; AmPS, amplify pleasure signals; AtPS, attenuate pleasure signals.
Modelling mood updating
129
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.2022.175 Published online by Cambridge University Press
very certain in a particular outcome it attempts to amplify signals that
correspond to its current belief state, although when it is less certain,
the optimal policy switches to attenuating belief-inconsistent signals.
Importantly, in this model belief states are altered in line with over-
whelming evidence with the aim of producing certainty in current
mood states. This results in the frequency density graph shown in
Fig. 2(b) that reflects an agent capable of visiting mood states
between stressful and not stressful, with reasonable confidence.
Interestingly, the agent seems to show pleasure-seeking behav-
iour, spending most time confident it will encounter a non-stressful
environment, although (crucially) this does not preclude an appro-
priate mood response to received stress signals. Supplementary
Table 1 shows the belief distributions for each node in the network.
This is in contrast to the modelled depressed system. We see in
Fig. 3(a) that this agent still experiences events as not stressful,
although if stress signals are received the belief states of the agent
have a permanent expectation of stress. This is to such an extent
that if pleasure signals are received they are attenuated until stress
signals are received, resulting in a highly certain belief that events
are stressful. The resultant frequency density graph is skewed
towards increased probability of stressful outcomes ( Fig. 3(b))
with most time spent in stressful belief states.
The probability that an event will be experienced as stressful in
this case is much greater than in the healthy model (Fig. 4(a)).
Supplementary Table 2 shows the belief distributions for each
node in the network.
Mean Probability that Events is
Stressful
Total Expected Reward
Healthy Depression
Mood State
Mania Anxiety
0.56
(a)
(b)
0.54
0.52
0.48
0.46
0.44
0.42
0.4
0.5
Heallthy
–1.1
–1.15
–1.25
–1.35
–1.4
–1.2
–1.3
Depression Mania Anxiety
Fig. 4 (a) Bar graph showing mean probability in each mood state,
across all belief states, that the agent thinks an event is stressful.
The healthy mood state shows a more balanced probability,
whereas in depression and anxiety the agent is more likely to
believe events are stressful. In mania, events are more likely
labelled as non-stressful. (b) Bar graph showing total expected
reward from most valuable policy in each mood state. Depression
and mania are associated with lower rewards, although not as low
as the anxiety state. This is because reward in this context is framed
in terms of minimising surprisal (maximising model evidence) that
relies on certainty in belief states.
Pleasure Signals
Pleasure Signals
Pleasure SignalsPleasure Signals
Stress Signals
Stress Signals
Stress Signals
Stress Signals
AmSS
AmPS
AtSS
AtPS
2.5
(a)
(b)
2.0
1.5
Frequency density
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.00 0.25 0.50
Probability that Event is Stressful
0.75 1.00
Fig. 5 (a) This network shows how belief states about the stress
content of the environment are updated in a manic mood state.
Arrows indicate transitions between belief states based on the type of
signals the agent observes. The coloured edges of each node
represent the probability that the environment is stressful (dark blue
portion) or non-stressful (light blue portion). Text within each node
represents the optimal action that the agent will take given the
current belief state. Note that if enough pleasure signals are received
the agent becomes stuck in a loop in which belief states are
constantly expecting a non-stressful environment and action is aimed
at maintaining this belief, despite conflicting signals. (b) This figure
shows a frequency density plot of the probability that an event is
inferred to be stressful by the agent in manic mood updating. In this
case the distribution is skewed to the left (in contrast toFig. 1(b))
indicating a much greater frequency of a non-stressful environment.
AmSS, amplify stress signals; AtSS, attenuate stress signals; AmPS,
amplify pleasure signals; AtPS, attenuate pleasure signals.
Clark & Watson
130
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.2022.175 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Stress Signals
Stress Signals
(a)
(b)
Any Signals
AtSS
AmSS
AmPS
AmPS
AmPS
Stress Signals
Stress Signals
Stress Signals
Pleasure Signals
Pleasure Signals
Pleasure Signals
4
3
2
1
0
0.00 0.25 0.50
Probability that Event is Stressful
Frequency density
0.75
Fig. 6 (a) This network shows how belief states about the stress content of the environment are updated in the anxiety mood state. Arrows
indicate transitions between belief states based on the type of signals the agent observes. The coloured edges of each node represent the
probability that the environment is stressful (dark blue portion) or non-stressful (light blue portion). Text within each node represents the optimal
action that the agent will take given the current belief state. In this case nodes are generally much more uncertain. Note that, unlike the other
models, the agent attempts to amplify belief-consistent signals under uncertainty. Eventually, if enough stress signals are received, the agent
becomes stuck in a node characterised by uncertainty about a stressful environment that is maintained whichever signals are received. (b) This
figure shows a frequency density plot of the probability that an event is inferred to be stressful by the agent in anxious mood updating. In this
case the distribution is quite normal with a peak at an uncertain belief in a stressful outcome. We propose this inability to resolve uncertainty is
central to anxiety states. AmSS, amplify stress signals; AtSS, attenuate stress signals; AmPS, amplify pleasure signals; AtPS, attenuate pleasure
signals.
Modelling mood updating
131
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.2022.175 Published online by Cambridge University Press
The model of mania was essentially the opposite of the depres-
sion model whereby consistent pleasure signals resulted in a loop in
which stress signals are attenuated and a belief state in a non-stress-
ful outcome is maintained ( Fig. 5(a)). Ensuing graphs shows
increased probability that events will be experienced as not stressful
(Figs. 4(a)and 5(b)). Supplementary Table 3 shows the belief distri-
butions for each node in the network.
The anxiety network (Fig. 6(a)) was characterised by much
more uncertainty. Although there are still belief states in where
non-stressful expectations are held, if the agent experiences
enough stress signals it becomes stuck in a final node characterised
by relative imprecision in expected outcomes. Crucially, action in
the active inference framework requires precise beliefs hence the
self-reinforcing nature of this loop. This is reflected in a frequency
density with a peak at low stressful probability, but with compara-
tively wider tails (Fig. 6(b)). Interestingly, the probability of an
event being interpreted as stressful was lower than that found in
the depression network, although still higher than that in the
healthy agent (Fig. 4). Supplementary Table 4 shows the belief dis-
tributions for each node in the network.
Total expected reward (framed in terms of negative surprisal or
model evidence) was highest in the healthy agent, although both
depression and mania yielded greater rewards than anxiety (Fig. 4(b)).
Discussion
Main findings
In this paper we have presented a POMDP of healthy mood updat-
ing, framed in terms of active inference, and subsequently compared
it with models of depression, mania and anxiety. The ensuing simu-
lations show that healthy mood involves amplifying signals consist-
ent with highly certain belief states, and attenuating signals
inconsistent with uncertain beliefs– although it is crucially able
to fluctuate between interpretation of events as stressful and not
stressful with some certainty. In contrast the agent with depression,
after experiencing significant stress, became resistant to the typically
belief-altering effects of pleasure signals. Similarly, mania resulted in
belief states resistant to stress signals. Modelled anxiety resulted in
generally uncertain belief states, and significant stress resulted in a
highly uncertain belief in stressful outcomes that was characterised
by failure of action to resolve uncertainty and was therefore main-
tained despite any type of signal.
Interpretation of our findings
Recent theoretical work has proposed that we can frame mood,
computationally, as prior beliefs about the likely consequences of
action (i.e. emotion) with mood disorders represented at the
extrema of expectations and certainty about these priors. Our
results support this. One particularly interesting feature of the
healthy model was the value placed in amplifying belief-consistent
signals when belief states were certain, and attenuating belief-incon-
sistent signals when belief states were uncertain. There are multiple
studies of exteroception showing an increase in bottom-up signal
amplification when outcomes are predictable
39– 41 whereas sensory
attenuation is reserved to resolve uncertainty. The same phenomena
are yet to be explored fully in interoception although they have been
hypothesised.
23,42 Intuitively, these findings suggest that behaviour
aimed at fulfilling expectations is more likely when such expecta-
tions are certain whereas attenuation, in contrast, is used in times
of uncertainty in an attempt to maintain current belief states. If
both forms of action fail to suppress prediction error then expecta-
tions must change.
By altering the agent’s predictions about the effects of action on
hidden and sensory states we were able to model pathological mood
states. In our model of depression, the agent was relatively certain
that whatever action it took it would result in a stressful outcome.
This meant that once it experienced sufficient stress signals it
entered a loop in which pleasure signals could only reduce certainty
in a stressful hidden state until they were attenuated and certainty
regained. This corresponds with evidence that brain reward-learn-
ing signals in patients with depression are blunted, whereas punish-
ment signals are enhanced.
43– 45 Interestingly, the distinction
between attenuation and amplification of signals is also important
here, with recent work suggesting patients show hyposensitivity to
reward, but not hypersensitivity to punishment,
46 although the
latter phenomenon has been observed elsewhere.47
Interestingly, in the anxiety model prolonged stress induced a
state of uncertain belief in stressful events (in line with our theoretical
work) that was maintained regardless of further signals received. In
this case the agent attempted to amplify stress signals, rather than
attenuate pleasure signals– in contrast to the other models tested.
Failure of sensory attenuation is likely to be a key mechanism in
the maintenance of a highly uncertain belief state and intuitively
represents a failure to rule out possible but unexpected outcomes of
action (equivalent to a type 2 error in statistical reasoning). These
types of errors in reasoning have been reported in healthy individuals
with high trait anxiety during a target-identification task
48,49 with
some evidence that patients with anxiety disorders have exaggerated
responses to interoceptive signals.
50,51 Our results are in line with
these findings and support the idea that a key difference between
anxiety and depressed states is failure of interoceptive attenuation
with resulting prolonged uncertainty about emotional states.
We also found that expected reward (framed in terms of
expected model evidence or negative surprisal) was greatest in the
healthy model. It was, however, also lower in the anxiety model
compared with the depressed or manic model. Recall that the fre-
quency density plots above suggest that healthy mood updating is
characterised by certainty in expected outcomes (be they positive
or negative) and the agent spends very little of its time in an uncer-
tain belief state. Expected reward in mood disorders will corres-
pondingly be lower in systems that spend more time in uncertain
belief states– as is reflected in our results. A key observation here
is that mood disorders are the product of Bayes optimal behaviour
in terms of maximising expected reward in the context of altered
prior beliefs about the outcomes of action. Therapeutic approaches
will therefore necessarily result in suboptimal behaviour (relative to
current internal models) if priors (initially) remain unaltered. In this
sense it is interesting that antidepressants induce rapid changes in
emotional processing despite taking longer to alter mood.
52 This
observation may also have particular relevance in treatment resist-
ant disorders that, intuitively, may be characterised by especially
certain priors.
Ultimately, the type of model we have presented may prove
useful in modelling disease trajectories in groups of patients– or
potentially individual patients. This, however, would require a con-
ceptual leap in experimentally quantifying belief states. Heuristic
approaches in psychosis have used mismatch negativity blood-
oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) responses or time spent observing
novel information to model the processing of uncertainty although
this does not provide values for exact belief states. One possibility is
to establish how such belief states are biologically encoded in the
pharmacology and connectivity of neuromodulator systems. Our
model predicts that brains must encode (hyper)priors in their func-
tional anatomy. Specifically, expectations will correspond to top–
down drives of neuromodulator systems while precision is
encoded in the gain control afforded to ascending prediction
error signals. This may explain common findings in systems such
Clark & Watson
132
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.2022.175 Published online by Cambridge University Press
as the hypothalamus– pituitary– adrenal axis in mood and mood dis-
orders53– 55 but requires formal testing. This could be done, for
example, by comparing serial cortisol measurements in response
to expectation violation in patients and controls and examining
changes under various pharmacological conditions (for example
corticosteroid receptor blockade). Establishing the biological corre-
lates of belief states in healthy and pathological mood would provide
a reasonable method to evaluate various (POMDP) models for best
fit in specific groups or possibly individuals.
Implications
In this paper we have discussed recent theoretical developments in
computational psychiatry that aim to describe mood and, therefore,
mood disorders in terms of prior beliefs about the likely consequences
of action. We used a POMDP model of various mood states to show
how agents in various mood states might update their beliefs under
such a formulation. Our results showed that healthy mood updating
was characterised by switching between relative certainty in stressful
and non-stressful outcomes with sensory attenuation employed as an
optimal policy when belief states were uncertain. In contrast, depres-
sion and mania were characterised by inappropriate attenuation to
maintain relatively fixed belief states whereas anxiety was charac-
terised by inappropriate uncertainty that precluded previously
optimal attenuation strategies.
We have discussed our results in relation to existing findings
and elaborated on future developments that this approach might
yield. Ultimately, the aim of this type of modelling strategy would
be to model group, or even individual, disease trajectories with
greater accuracy than existing models.
James E. Clark , Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University,
UK; Stuart Watson , Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle
University, UK; and Cumbria, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust, UK
Correspondence: Stuart Watson. Email:stuart.watson@newcastle.ac.uk
First received 31 Jul 2022, final revision 2 Nov 2022, accepted 11 Nov 2022
Supplementary material
To view supplementary material for this article, please visithttps://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.2022.
175.
Data availability
Data availability is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analysed in this
study.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the reviewers for their extremely helpful comments and suggestions in the
revising of the manuscript.
Author contributions
J.E.C. developed the theoretical ideas behind the project, designed the computational models,
ran and analysed the simulations and wrote the drafts of the paper. S.W. developed the theor-
etical ideas behind the project and revised subsequent versions of the paper.
Funding
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency, commercial or not-for-profit
sectors.
Declaration of interest
None.
References
1 Friston KJ, Stephan KE, Montague R, Dolan RJ. Computational psychiatry: the
brain as a phantastic organ.Lancet Psychiatry2014; 1: 148–58.
2 Frässle S, Yao Y, Schöbi D, Aponte EA, Heinzle J, Stephan KE. Generative
models for clinical applications in computational psychiatry.Wiley Interdiscip
Rev Cogn Sci2018; 9: e1460.
3 Montague PR, Dolan RJ, Friston KJ, Dayan P. Computational psychiatry.Trends
Cogn Sci2012; 16:7 2–80.
4 Van den Bergh O, Lehnen N. Embracing computational approaches can
stimulate clinical psychology research.Clin Psychol Eur2019; 1:1 –4.
5 Sterzer P, Adams RA, Fletcher P, Frith C, Lawrie SM, Muckli L, et al. The pre-
dictive coding account of psychosis.Biol Psychiatry2018; 84: 634–43.
6 Jacob S, Wolff JJ, Steinbach MS, Doyle CB, Kumar V, Elison JT.
Neurodevelopmental heterogeneity and computational approaches for
understanding autism.Transl Psychiatry2019; 9:1 –12.
7 Clark JE, Watson S, Friston KJ. What is mood? A computational perspective.
Psychol Med2018; 48: 2277–84.
8 Descartes R, Ariew R, Cress DA.Meditations, Objections, and Replies. Hackett
Publishing, 2006.
9 Schrodinger E.What Is Life?Cambridge University Press, 1944.
10 Friston K. Life as we know it.J R Soc Interface2013; 10: 20130475.
11 Kirchhoff M, Parr T, Palacios E, Friston K, Kiverstein J. The Markov blankets of
life: autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle.J R Soc Interface
2018; 15: 20170792.
12 Barlow H. Conditions for versatile learning, Helmholtz’s unconscious infer-
ence, and the task of perception.Vision Research1990; 30(11): 1561–71.
13 Friston K, Thornton C, Clark A. Free-energy minimization and the dark-room
problem. Front Psychol2012; 3: 130.
14 Buckley CL, Kim CS, McGregor S, Seth AK. The free energy principle for action
and perception: a mathematical review.J Math Psychol2017; 81:5 5–79.
15 Friston K. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory?Nat Rev Neurosci
2010; 11: 127–38.
16 Friston K. The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain?Trends Cogn
Sci 2009; 13: 293–301.
17 Karl F. A free energy principle for biological systems.Entropy2012; 14: 2100–21.
18 Friston K. Active inference and free energy.Behav Brain Sci2013; 36: 212.
19 Benrimoh D, Parr T, Vincent P, Adams RA, Friston K. Active inference and
auditory hallucinations.Comput Psychiatry2018; 2: 183–204.
20 Corlett PR, Horga G, Fletcher PC, Alderson-Day B, Schmack K, Powers III AR.
Hallucinations and strong priors.Trends Cogn Sci2019; 23: 114–27.
21 Siemerkus J, Tomiello S, Stephan KE. Bayesian inference and hallucinations in
schizophrenia. Brain 2019; 142: 2178–81.
22 Stuke H, Weilnhammer VA, Sterzer P, Schmack K. Delusion proneness is linked
to a reduced usage of prior beliefs in perceptual decisions.Schizophr Bull
2019; 45:8 0–6.
23 Seth AK, Friston KJ. Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain.
Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci2016; 371: 20160007.
24 Barrett LF. The theory of constructed emotion: an active inference account of
interoception and categorization.Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci2017; 12:1 –23.
25 Seth AK. Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self.Trends
Cogn Sci2013; 17: 565–73.
26 Critchley HD, Garfinkel SN. Interoception and emotion.Curr Opin Psychol2017;
17:7 –14.
27 Damasio AR. The somatic marker hypothesis and the possible functions of the
prefrontal cortex.Philos Trans R Soc London B Biol Sci1996; 351: 1413–20.
28 Attias H. Planning by probabilistic inference. InInternational Workshop on
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics:9 –16. PMLR, 2003.
29 Botvinick M, Toussaint M. Planning as inference.Trends Cogn Sci2012;16: 485–8.
30 Kaplan R, Friston KJ. Planning and navigation as active inference.Biol Cybern
2018; 112: 323–43.
31 Friston K, Rigoli F, Ognibene D, Mathys C, Fitzgerald T, Pezzulo G. Active
inference and epistemic value.Cogn Neurosci2015; 6: 187–214.
32 Bradtke SJ, Duff MO. Reinforcement learning methods for continuous-time Markov
decision problems. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems(eds DS
Touretzky, MC Mozer, ME Hasselmo): 393–400. MIT Press, 1995.
33 Zhou R, Hansen EA. An improved grid-based approximation algorithm for
POMDPs. In: IJCAI: 707-16. 2001.
34 Spaan MT. Partially observable Markov decision processes. InReinforcement
Learning (eds MA Wiering, M van Otterlo): 387–414. Springer, 2012.
Modelling mood updating
133
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.2022.175 Published online by Cambridge University Press
35 Lovejoy WS. Computationally feasible bounds for partially observed Markov
decision processes.Oper Res1991; 39: 162–75.
36 Kamalzadeh H, Hahsler M. POMDP: introduction to partially observable Markov
decision processes.Tekn Rapport2019.
37 Team RC. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R, 2013.
38 Epskamp S, Cramer AO, Waldorp LJ, Schmittmann VD, Borsboom D. qgraph:
network visualizations of relationships in psychometric data.J Stat Softw2012;
48:1 –18.
39 Moran RJ, Campo P, Symmonds M, Stephan KE, Dolan RJ, Friston KJ. Free
energy, precision and learning: the role of cholinergic neuromodulation.J
Neurosci 2013; 33: 8227–36.
40 Auksztulewicz R, Barascud N, Cooray G, Nobre AC, Chait M, Friston K. The
cumulative effects of predictability on synaptic gain in the auditory processing
stream. J Neurosci2017; 37: 6751–60.
41 Brown HR, Friston KJ. Dynamic causal modelling of precision and synaptic gain
in visual perception— an EEG study.Neuroimage 2012; 63: 223–31.
42 Owens AP, Allen M, Ondobaka S, Friston KJ. Interoceptive inference: from com-
putational neuroscience to clinic.Neurosci Biobehav Rev2018; 90: 174–83.
43 Ubl B, Kuehner C, Kirsch P, Ruttorf M, Diener C, Flor H. Altered neural reward
and loss processing and prediction error signalling in depression.Soc Cogn
Affect Neurosci2015; 10: 1102–12.
44 Kumar P, Goer F, Murray L, Dillon DG, Beltzer ML, Cohen AL, et al. Impaired
reward prediction error encoding and striatal-midbrain connectivity in
depression. Neuropsychopharmacol 2018; 43: 1581–8.
45 Eshel N, Roiser JP. Reward and punishment processing in depression.Biol
Psychiatry 2010; 68: 118–24.
46 Mukherjee D, Filipowicz A, Vo KD, Satterthwaite T, Kable J. Reward and pun-
ishment reversal learning in major depressive disorder.Journal of Abnormal
Psychology 2020; 129(8): 810–
23.
47 Hevey D, Thomas K, Laureano-Schelten S, Looney K, Booth R. Clinical
depression and punishment sensitivity on the BART.Front Psychol2017; 8:
670.
48 Huang H, Thompson W, Paulus MP. Computational dysfunctions in
anxiety: failure to differentiate signal from noise.Biol Psychiatry2017; 82:
440–6.
49 Aylward J, Valton V, Ahn W-Y, Bond RL, Dayan P, Roiser JP, et al. Altered
learning under uncertainty in unmedicated mood and anxiety disorders.Nat
Hum Behav2019; 3: 1116–23.
50 Domschke K, Stevens S, Pfleiderer B, Gerlach AL. Interoceptive sensitivity in
anxiety and anxiety disorders: an overview and integration of neurobiological
findings. Clin Psychol Rev2010; 30:1 –11.
51 Pang J, Tang X, Li H, Hu Q, Cui H, Zhang L, et al. Altered interoceptive processing
in generalized anxiety disorder– a heartbeat-evoked potential research.Front
Psychiatry 2019; 10: 616.
52 Harmer CJ, Goodwin GM, Cowen PJ. Why do antidepressants take so long to
work? A cognitive neuropsychological model of antidepressant drug action.Br
J Psychiatry2009; 195: 102–8.
53 Pariante CM, Lightman SL. The HPA axis in major depression: classical theories
and new developments.Trends Neurosci2008; 31: 464–8.
54 Klaassens ER, Giltay EJ, Cuijpers P, van Veen T, Zitman FG. Adulthood trauma
and HPA-axis functioning in healthy subjects and PTSD patients: a meta-ana-
lysis. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2012; 37: 317–31.
55 Murri MB, Prestia D, Mondelli V, Pariante C, Patti S, Olivieri B, et al. The HPA axis
in bipolar disorder: systematic review and meta-analysis.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 2016; 63: 327–42.Psychiatry
in literature
Machado de Assis
C. V. Haldipur
Machado de Assis (1839– 1908) is a well-known Brazilian writer, grandson of a freed slave, among whose vast literary opus is
a satirical novella The Alienist, published in 1882. The central character of the novella is a physician Dr Becamarte, a
consummate scientist, who married a woman based on her physical and anatomical characteristics such as a strong
pulse, excellent eyesight and regular sleep patterns.
He soon realised that the care of the soul is the‘worthiest concern for a doctor’ and turned his attention to the care of mad
persons in the town. He was an avid student of Islamic medical texts and based his approach to treatment and diagnosis on
those texts. Citing one such text that mad persons were saintly because God took their wits so that they would not sin, which
he attributed it to a pontiff, Becamarte convinced the town council to build an asylum for the town’s mad persons.
The asylum was soon built, and the doctor began what he considered his primary work, which was to study madness,
classifying its diverse manifestations and finding a purely scientific explanation of its basic cause at a human level. He
classified inmates into two main categories– violent or non-violent– and then further classified them based on various
delusions and hallucinations. Originally he thought that madness was a small island in the ocean of sanity, but he came
to see it more as an entire continent and not an island. Everyone was mad: gamblers, gossipers, people who exaggerated
or prevaricated did not escape the doctor’s emissaries. Soon, the majority of the town’s inhabitants were in the asylum–
including, at one point, the doctor’s wife.
Townspeople soon realised what was happening and started‘a pork chop revolution’ and took over the town council. The
leader of the revolt, the town barber, went to see the doctor. A contretemps ensued when the leader of the revolt said to the
doctor that most of his patients were sane; but that, he added, was a scientific issue and could not be resolved by politics.
Becamarte thereafter had an epiphany and came to believe that that disequilibrium of the mental faculties is normal and
perfect equilibrium abnormal. The asylum was now admitting different groups of patients: those who were modest, truthful
and sincere. A modest poet was cured when Becamarte made the town crier announce in the streets that the poet’s work
rivalled the greatest compositions of all times.
The doctor then released all the inmates and entered the asylum himself. He died there seven months later.
In this parable, Becamarte serves as a metonym for psychiatry: devoted to scientific understanding of the cause of madness and
finding a cure for it, enduring its fair share of revolts; but then motivated by hubris focused less on caring for the truly mad in our
society than on all the aspects of human behaviour, and in the process blurring the distinction between madness and normality.
© The Author(s), 2023. Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of the Royal College of Psychiatrists
The British Journal of Psychiatry(2023)
222, 134. doi: 10.1192/bjp.2022.163
Haldipur
134
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.2022.175 Published online by Cambridge University Press