The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance Theory, 20; 73-91 (1995) 
© 1995 The Geneva Association 
Risk-Aversion Concepts in Expected- and 
Non-Expected-Utility Models 
MICHELE D. COHEN 
G.E.M.E., Universite de Paris I, 12 Place du Pantheon, 75005 Paris, France 
Abstract 
The non-expected-utility theories of decision under risk have Iilvored the appearance of new notions of increasing 
risk like monotone increasing risk (based on the notion of comonotonic random variables) or new notions of 
risk aversion like aversion to monotone increasing risk, in better agreement with these new theories. After a 
survey of all the possible notions of increasing risk and of risk aversion and their intrinsic definitions, we show 
that contrary to expected-utility theory where all the notions of risk aversion have the same characterization (u 
concave), in the framework of rank-dependent expected utility (one of the most well known of the non-expected­
utility models), the characterizations of all these notions of risk aversion are different. Moreover, we show that, 
even in the expected-utility framework, the new notion of monotone increasing risk can give better answers to 
some problems of comparative statics such as in portfulio choice or in partial insurance. This new notion also 
can suggest more intuitive approaches to inequalities measurement. 
Key words: increasing risk, risk aversion, non-expected utility 
For most economists, risk aversion is exactly captured by the concavity of the utility func­
tion, and indeed, in the framework of expected-utility (EU) theory, which is their implicit 
model, risk averters-when intrinsically defined as those people who always prefer the ex­
pectation E(X) to the random variable X-are characterizable by concave utilities. 
For some authors, such as Allais [1952], diminishing marginal utility of wealth under 
certainty being meaningful is the natural interpretation of concavity of utility. Thus, for 
them, two independent psychological traits are necessarily and abusively linked in EU theory 
and a more flexible model is needed. During the last decade, several authors (Macbina 
[1982a], Quiggin [1982], Yaari [1987], Segal [1989], and Allais [1987] himself), motivated 
by the poor quality of EU theory as a descriptive model, l have proposed various models, 
more general than EU theory. In these models, as we shall see, risk aversion no longer 
necessarily goes along with a concave utility function, unless, perhaps, the very definition 
of risk aversion is reconsidered. 
The consideration of several models makes it necessary to look for intrinsic-that is, 
model-free-definitions of risk aversion. 
In the literature on decision under risk, in addition to the already mentioned concept 
of weak risk aversion (E(X) preferred to X), there is another classical concept -strong risk 
aversion: a decision maker is strongly risk averse if he prefers the random variable X to 
any random variable ythat is a "mean preserving spread" of X (Hadar and Russell [1969], 
Rothschild and Stiglitz [1970]). 
Presented at the Twenty-First Seminar of the European Group of Risk and Insurance Economists, Thulouse, Sep­
tember 1994. 
74 MICHELE D. COHEN 
In EU theory, these two notions coincide and are both characterized by the concavity 
of the utility function. For this reason, these two notions have often been considered as 
identical, whereas this identity is valid only in the framework of EU theory. 
Corresponding to the emergence of new models of decision making under risk, new con­
cepts of increasing risk and of risk aversion have appeared. In particular, Quiggin [1992] 
has introduced the notion of monotone increasing risk and the corresponding notion of 
monotone risk aversion. These two definitions involve comonotonic random variables2 and 
are thus particularly fitted to Quiggin's rank-dependent expected-utility (ROEU) theory 
[1982], one of most well-known generalizations of EU theory, in which comonotonicity 
plays a fundamental part at the axiomatic level. 
This by no means implies that these new notions do not have any interesting properties 
in the EU framework. On the contrary, as we shall see, they allow better answers to some 
problems of comparative statics. 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, I give the intrinsic definitions of the 
different notions of risk aversion found in the literature and their main properties. In Sec­
tions 2 and 3, I give the characterization of these different definitions in the framework 
of the EU model (Section 2) and in the framework of the rank-dependent expected-utility 
(ROEU) model (Section 3). I show, in Section 4, that the new notions of monotone in­
creasing risk and monotone risk aversion will allow (1) better answers to some problems 
of comparative statics such as in portfolio theory, or in partial insurance, even in the 
framework of the EU model (2) a more intuitive approach to the measurement of inequalities. 
Some concluding remarks are provided in the last section. 
L Intrinsic definitions of risk aversion 
1.1. Notations 
Let V = {X, y, ... } be the set of random variables from a set 0 = {w} of states of nature 
to a set e of outcomes. Here we assume that risk prevails and describe it through 0 = [0, 1] 
endowed with the uniform probability measure and that e = [-M, M] C IR.3 We denote 
by v* the set {Y E V/W1 :?! W2 ~ Y(W1) :?! Y(W2)}' A decision maker has a preference 
relation >= on V (the corresponding relations ~ and - are defined as usual). 
Since any outcome c of e can be identified with the degenerate random variable Ic(w) 
= c for any winO, preferences on V induces preferences on e, which is also denoted 
by >=. For any X in V, we denote by Fx (respectively Gx) the cumulative (resp. decumu­
lative) distribution function of X (Gx = 1 - Fx) and by E(X), the expected value of X. 
Let £ be the set of cumulative probability distribution functions on e. 
The first axiom required by most models under risk, though often implicitly, is the 
following: 
Ao: All random variables generating the same probability distribution over e are 
indifferent. 
Because of this assumption, throughout this paper, we can use the same symbol >= to 
denote the preference relations on V and £. 