Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 150 (2023) 105208
Available online 2 May 2023
0149-7634/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Understanding visual hallucinations: A new synthesis 
Daniel Collerton
a , *
, James Barnes
b
, Nico J. Diederich
c
, Rob Dudley
d
, Dominic ffytche
e
, 
Karl Friston
f
, Christopher G. Goetz
g
, Jennifer G. Goldman
h
, Renaud Jardri
i
, 
Jaime Kulisevsky
j , q , r
, Simon J.G. Lewis
k
, Shigetoshi Nara
l
, Claire O ’ Callaghan
k
, 
Marco Onofrj
m
, Javier Pagonabarraga
j , q , r
, Thomas Parr
f
, James M. Shine
k
, Glenn Stebbins
g
, 
John-Paul Taylor
n
, Ichiro Tsuda
o
, Rimona S. Weil
f , p 
a
School of Psychology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle University, Third Floor, Biomedical Research Building, Newcastle upon 
Tyne NE4 5PL UK 
b
Fatima College of Health Sciences, Department of Psychology, Al Mafraq, Abu Dhabi, UAE 
c
Department of Neurology, Centre Hospitalier de Luxembourg, 4, rue Barbl ´e, L-1210 Luxembourg-City, Luxembourg 
d
Department of Psychology, University of York, York YO10 5DD, UK 
e
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology, and Neuroscience, King ’ s College London, de Crespigny Park, London SE5 8AF, UK 
f
Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, London WC1N 3AR, UK 
g
Rush University Medical Center, Suite 755, 1725 W Harrison St, Chicago IL 60612, USA 
h
JPG Enterprises LLC, Medical Division, Chicago, IL 60614 USA 
i
Lille University, INSERM U-1172, Centre Lille Neuroscience & Cognition, CURE platform, Fontan Hospital, CHU Lille, France 
j
Movement Disorders Unit, Sant Pau Hospital, Hospital Sant Pau., C/ Mas Casanovas 90., 08041 Barcelona, Spain 
k
ForeFront Parkinson ’ s Disease Research Clinic, Brain and Mind Centre, School of Medical Sciences, University of Sydney, 100 Mallett Street, Camperdown, NSW 2050, 
Australia 
l
Dept. Electrical & Electronic Engineering, Okayama University, Tsushima-naka, 3 – 1-1, Okayama 700 – 8530, Japan 
m
Clinica Neurologica, Department of Neuroscience, Imaging and Clinical Science, University "G.d ’ Annunzio" of Chieti-Pescara, via Polacchi 39, 66100, Chieti, Italy 
n
Newcastle Biomedical Research Centre, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle University, NE4 5PL, UK 
o
Chubu University Academy of Emerging Sciences and Center for Mathematical Science and Artificial Intelligence, Chubu University, Kasugai, Aichi 487 – 8501, Japan 
p
Dementia Research Centre; Movement Disorders Centre, University College London, London WC1N 3BG, UK 
q
UniversitatAut `onoma de Barcelona, Spain 
r
CIBERNED(Network Centre for Neurodegenerative Diseases), Spain   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Visual hallucination 
Vision 
Visual perception 
Misperception 
Lewy body 
Eye disease 
Charles Bonnet syndrome 
Psychosis 
Anomalous experiences 
ABSTRACT  
Despite decades of research, we do not definitively know how people sometimes see things that are not there. 
Eight models of complex visual hallucinations have been published since 2000, including Deafferentation, Re -
ality Monitoring, Perception and Attention Deficit, Activation, Input, and Modulation, Hodological, Attentional 
Networks, Active Inference, and Thalamocortical Dysrhythmia Default Mode Network Decoupling. Each was 
derived from different understandings of brain organisation. To reduce this variability, representatives from each 
research group agreed an integrated Visual Hallucination Framework that is consistent with current theories of 
veridical and hallucinatory vision. The Framework delineates cognitive systems relevant to hallucinations. It 
allows a systematic, consistent, investigation of relationships between the phenomenology of visual hallucina -
tions and changes in underpinning cognitive structures. The episodic nature of hallucinations highlights separate 
factors associated with the onset, persistence, and end of specific hallucinations suggesting a complex rela -
tionship between state and trait markers of hallucination risk. In addition to a harmonised interpretation of 
existing evidence, the Framework highlights new avenues of research, and potentially, new approaches to 
treating distressing hallucinations.  
* Correspondence to: Faculty of Medical Sciences, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle University, Third Floor, Biomedical Research Building, Newcastle 
upon Tyne NE4 5PL, UK. 
E-mail address: daniel.collerton@ncl.ac.uk (D. Collerton).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 
journal homepag e: www.else vier.com/loc ate/neubio rev 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105208    
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 150 (2023) 105208
2
Each morning, I saw a Japanese lady from my ward window. She 
used to come out from the ward further up and sit around the corner. She 
had a cream and black jacket and white sneakers, and sleek black hair in 
a Japanese style. She never said anything but I was worried to death 
about her. The wind was howling and the rain fell and she was soaking 
wet. 
Description of a recurrent hallucination from a person with a diagnosis of 
dementia with Lewy bodies . 
1. The challenges of understanding visual hallucinations 
“ To see is to believe ” is a commonplace expression. Seeing things that 
are not truly there challenges our basic intuition of a world outside 
ourselves that we can take as real because it is accurately perceived. The 
link between visual perception and reality breaks down in numerous 
ways creating, as we illustrate in Fig. 1 , a wide range of non-veridical 
visual experiences. Foremost amongst these experiences are visual hal -
lucinations, which themselves come in many forms ranging from simple 
fleeting shapes or lights via intermediate forms to the realistic images in 
exquisite detail illustrated in the quote. 
In this paper, we address purely visual (i.e. unimodal) complex 
(sometimes referred to as “ formed ” ) hallucinations of meaningful per -
cepts, such as people, faces, animals, or objects ( ffytche, 2005 ; Manford 
and Andermann, 1998 ; Santhouse, Howard, and ffytche, 2000 ). Though 
these phenomena are found in many clinical and non-clinical settings 
throughout life, our attention is on those experienced in adulthood 
( Collerton, Perry, and McKeith, 2005 ). This focus on unimodal visual 
hallucinations is not to dismiss the relevance of multimodal hallucina -
tions or simpler perceptual phenomena; rather it is an effort to tackle, in 
a parsimonious fashion, a phenomenon of significant clinical and 
theoretical importance in its most usual form that, once understood, will 
allow further studies of its variants. 
Thus, we will focus on those recurrent hallucinations that most often 
(though not always as we discuss later) are associated with clinical 
neurological or perceptual disorders, and that have the striking char -
acter illustrated in the quote. They are most commonly of a human 
figure or face, though animals, objects and meaningful patterns are also 
frequent. They generally move. They are perceptually convincing. They 
occur episodically at particular times and in particular places ( Collerton 
et al., 2005 ). 
1.1. The importance of complex visual hallucinations 
Interest in complex visual hallucination comes from a number of 
sources. They are fascinating phenomena in their own right. Conse -
quently, they have attracted attention for centuries with repeated at -
tempts to understand them within the explanatory frameworks of the 
time ( Berrios and Markova, 2015 ). 
Currently, pure visual hallucinations are recognised as characteristic 
of neurological diseases including Lewy body disorders (Parkinson ’ s 
disease ( Barnes and David, 2001; Goetz, Ouyang, Negron, and Stebbins, 
2010; Goetz, Stebbins, and Ouyang, 2011 ), Parkinson ’ s disease de -
mentia, and dementia with Lewy bodies ( Mosimann et al., 2006 )), and 
rarer disorders such as peduncular hallucinosis ( Benke, 2006 ) and nar -
colepsy ( Leu-Semenescu et al., 2011 ), as well as the Charles Bonnet 
syndrome of eye disease ( ffytche, 2005 ). Multimodal hallucinations with 
a visual component are found in advanced Lewy body disorders ( Goetz, 
Stebbins, and Ouyang, 2011; Montagnese et al., 2021 ), in delirium 
( Webster and Holroyd, 2000 ), and in psychotic disorders ( Dudley et al., 
2018; Waters et al., 2014 ) such as schizophrenia ( Chouinard et al., 2019; 
Fig. 1. Complex visual hallucinations and other experiences. Seeing things that are not there encompasses a wide range of fuzzy, hard to precisely define phenomena 
( Blom, 2015 ) including from left to right: presence, passage, fortification, and simple (or unformed) hallucinations, illusions, voluntary images, multimodal hal -
lucinations with a visual component, flashbacks, and dreams (see Glossary for definitions). In the centre are the formed hallucinations of faces, figures, and animals 
that we address. 
D. Collerton et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 150 (2023) 105208
3
David et al., 2011; Gauntlett-Gilbert and Kuipers, 2005; Toh, 
McCarthy-Jones, Copolov, and Rossell, 2019; Van Ommen et al., 2016 ). 
They are often accompanied by impairments in perception; other 
perceptual phenomena such as illusions; and other forms of hallucina -
tions such as presence and passage, especially in neurodegenerative 
disorders as they progress ( Goetz et al., 2010, 2011 ). They tend to be 
associated with high rates of distress, possibly reflecting secondary de -
lusions ( Gauntlett-Gilbert and Kuipers, 2005; Scott, Schein, Feuer, and 
Folstein, 2001 ), with carer stress ( Renouf, ffytche, Pinto, Murray, and 
Lawrence, 2018 ), and in some disorders, faster disease progression 
( Ibarretxe-Bilbao et al., 2010 ) and greater institutionalization ( Aarsland, 
Larsen, Tandberg, and Laake, 2000 ). Treatments are of limited effec -
tiveness ( Collerton and Taylor, 2013; O ’ Brien et al., 2020 ). 
2. Understanding how hallucinations occur 
2.1. Problems with current approaches 
Given their impact, there have been numerous attempts to account 
for how well-formed recurrent visual hallucinations occur; some based 
in a specific clinical disorder, others with an aim to be more generally 
applicable. However, progress has been limited. 
We have identified eight distinct models that have been developed 
since 2000. All are anchored in a mechanistic approach to the core 
phenomenon of complex visual hallucinations, though some have wider 
aims than just accounting for these specific experiences. For example, 
they may also seek to explain commonly co-occurring visual experiences 
such as simple or passage hallucinations ( F ´enelon et al., 2000; Urwyler 
et al., 2014 ) or multimodal hallucinations ( Fernyhough, 2019 ). Simi -
larly, they might address associated symptoms such as fluctuations 
( O ’ Brien et al., 2005 ), disturbances of the sleep-wake cycle ( F ´enelon 
et al., 2000; Goetz et al., 2010; Mosimann et al., 2006 ), delusions 
( Holroyd et al., 2001 ), and insight ( Llebaria et al., 2010 ) or distress 
( Dudley et al., 2012 ). 
We illustrate the disparity of these theories ’ approaches in Table 1 
(Further details of each can be found in Fig. 3 ). Developed by re -
searchers working in different scientific domains, the explanations show 
no obvious commonality in explicit paradigms or frameworks of brain 
organisation and range widely in the cognitive systems that they focus 
on. Thus, their true similarities or differences, or strengths and weak -
nesses are hard to judge or synthesize into a unified model ( Muller, 
Shine, Halliday, and Lewis, 2014 ). 
As a consequence of these disparities, there has been no step-by-step 
conceptual evolution towards a unified model in the last twenty years, 
despite a burgeoning volume of clinical and experimental data. This 
leaves open major questions such as how hallucinations occur only in 
some people and only at some times, or how phenomenology can vary 
from person to person and from time to time. Without a common 
theoretical framework, our ability to derive unique predictions from 
each model such that research data can be used easily and unambigu -
ously to test single or combined models is highly limited. Furthermore, 
since models differ in the breadth of cognitive functions that they 
address, it is hard to assess their degree of overlap; in particular whether 
a direct effect on a specific function in one model might be mimicked by 
an indirect effect in another. For example, the acquisition of visual 
sensory data might be impoverished directly by eye damage or indirectly 
by dysfunctional spatial attention. 
To remedy this systemic weakness in the field we set out to create 
such a single representation. 
2.2. Our proposed visual hallucination framework 
Given that the primary distinction between a veridical and a hallu -
cinatory subjective perception lies in its relationship to what is really out 
there, for the purposes of the framework, we have taken the default 
position that the subjective quality of both hallucinations and veridical 
perceptions are the same. There are numerous other possible relation -
ships between veridical and hallucinatory representations (see 
Table 1 
Models of the genesis of unimodal visual hallucinations since 2000 in chronological order.  
Model Area of 
application 
Explanatory framework Modulated process Ascending modulating factors Descending modulating 
factors 
Deafferentation ( Burke, 2002 ) Eye disease Sensory 
neurophysiology 
Neural activity underlying 
visual perception 
Chronic loss of visual input 
leading to spontaneous activity 
(hyperexcitability / release) in 
early visual areas 
Not integral to the model 
Reality Monitoring ( Barnes, 
Boubert, Harris, Lee, and 
David, 2003 ) 
Parkinson ’ s 
disease 
Reality monitoring Attribution of percepts as 
internal or external 
Attended sensory input Excessively convincing 
internal imagery to be taken as 
real 
Perception and Attention 
Deficit ( Collerton et al., 
2005 ) 
General 
model 
Biased competition 
perceptual processing 
Perceptual activity Poor visual perception Impaired attention 
AIM ( Diederich, Goetz, and 
Stebbins, 2005 ) 
Lewy body 
disorders 
Activation, Input, 
Modulation (AIM) 
model 
Visual memories Poor visual processing Defective central monitoring 
Hodological ( ffytche (2008) } General 
model 
Cortical connectivity Decreased integration of 
visual perception network 
Altered short range connectivity 
between visual processing areas 
Altered long range 
connectivity between frontal, 
parietal and occipital areas 
Attentional Networks ( Shine, 
Halliday, Naismith, and 
Lewis, 2011; Shine, 
O ’ Callaghan, Halliday and 
Lewis, 2014 ) 
Lewy body 
disorders 
Failure across 
disseminated 
functional networks 
Default mode network has 
aberrant connectivity with 
the visual regions, which is 
not over-ridden by normal 
functional processes 
Ambiguous percepts due to 
heightened salience modulated 
by Ventral Attentional Network 
and poor visual processing 
Inability to recruit the dorsal 
attentional network to over- 
ride abnormal connectivity 
between default mode 
network and visual regions 
Active Inference ( Friston, 
2005; Benrimoh, Parr, 
Adams, and Friston, 2019; 
Zarkali et al., 2019 ) 
General 
model 
Bayesian inference Posterior probability Lowered precision of the 
likelihood of sensory data 
Influence of an incorrect prior 
belief 
Thalamocortical Dysrhythmia 
Default Mode Network 
Decoupling Hypothesis ( 
Onofrj et al., 2019 ) 
Lewy body 
disorders 
Thalamocortical neural 
synchronisation / 
Attentional networks 
Decoupling of default mode 
network 
Not integral to the model Frontal attentional network 
Models which aimed to explain complex visual hallucinations were identified from MEDLINE and SCOPUS searches supplemented by reference lists, citations, and 
recommendations from authors. A timescale of 2000 – 2023 was used to identify current models. 
D. Collerton et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 150 (2023) 105208
4
Macpherson, 2013 for an exploration of other potential conceptualisa -
tions) and we admit that there is little evidence to confirm this parsi -
monious assumption, though the proposition is intrinsic to the 
perceptually convincing characteristics of complex visual hallucina -
tions. Many people describe them as appearing as real as veridical 
perceptions. 
Hence our working hypothesis is that there is no fundamental 
qualitative difference in perceptual representation between a veridical 
and a hallucinatory perception of the same image: I.e. a hallucination of 
a face is underpinned by the same processes as a veridical perception of 
the same face in the fusiform face area – or in the case of the distorted 
faces or figures which are not uncommon in hallucinations ( Santhouse 
et al., 2000 ), the same as veridical perceptions of similarly distorted 
objects. The limited evidence that does bear upon this hypothesis comes 
from functional imaging which has indicated that the same brain areas 
are activated in both hallucinatory and veridical perception ( ffytche 
et al., 1998; Goetz, Vaughan, Goldman, and Stebbins, 2014; Zmigrod, 
Garrison, Carr, and Simons, 2016 ). However, since the imaging tech -
niques used in such studies are insensitive to possible differences at the 
level of neural circuitry, this is a hypothesis that needs testing. A sys -
tematic comparison of activation patterns associated with phenomeno -
logically similar hallucinated, looked at, and imagined objects would 
allow a more direct comparison of the representations of these different 
types of perceptions. Never the less, this assumption does allow us to 
investigate how complex hallucinations can happen within the same 
framework as veridical perceptions, rather than having to develop two 
separate frameworks. 
Given that hallucinations interrupt the flow of veridical visual 
perception, we have placed the transition processes in visual perception 
from what has been seen to what is seen to what will be seen at the centre of 
our Framework. Accounts of these processes have been most developed 
in generative processing approaches, particularly the Active Inference 
theory of hallucinations, though similar processes are described in many 
current theories of visual perception. The key concept here is that what 
is seen (termed a posterior in computational approaches) is a modifi -
cation of what was expected to be seen (a prior) before encountering 
relevant sensory data. In turn each posterior is a prior for the next 
perception ( Benrimoh et al., 2019; Jardri and Den `eve, 2013; Spratling, 
2017 ). Predictions (sometimes called expectancies) of forthcoming 
sensory data are derived from what has been seen. These predictions of 
visual data are compared with the encountered visual input, and mis -
matches between predicted and actual input (prediction errors) are used 
to update perception. 
In order to integrate the eight explanations of how there can be 
episodic disconnections between what is ‘out there ’ in the environment 
and what is ‘in there ’ within the brain, we needed to integrate these state 
concepts of data predictions, gathering of sensory data, and the com -
parison of actual and predicted data with the wider cognitive structures 
found in trait accounts. 
3. Developing the framework 
3.1. Process 
Representatives from all the extant modelling groups in Table 1 
together with other active researchers in visual hallucinations worked 
together to produce an agreed harmonized Visual Hallucinations 
Framework, to show how existing models could fit within that master 
construct, and to demonstrate the benefits of a unified approach. Sadly, 
William (Liam) Burke who developed the Deafferentation model died in 
2018, so Dominic ffytche took the lead in integrating this approach into 
the Framework. 
We agreed that we would not try to evaluate the correctness of each 
other ’ s hallucination theories since evidence is often lacking or ambig -
uous. Instead, we chose to provide a solid, unified, up-to-date, inclusive, 
conceptual framework or basic structure for the science of visual 
hallucinations that could be utilized immediately, and critically refined 
or extended in the future. Thus, we set out to identify a set of core 
functional concepts in existing models that would be necessary and 
sufficient to build an inclusive framework, to translate these into a 
common language, and to arrange their explicit relationships in accor -
dance with the wider perceptual literature. In developing the Frame -
work, we were mindful of the need to keep it as simple as possible to 
facilitate communication and testability, while balancing this against 
the need to capture the details of individual models. 
3.2. Specific challenges in developing a harmonized framework 
3.2.1. Historical roots of models 
Some of the many challenges arose from the independent historical 
roots of theories. Trait models of hallucinations which address factors 
that make hallucinatory episodes more likely were generally influenced 
by the neuropathology of clinical disorders with high levels of halluci -
nations. They concentrate on cognitive structure (e.g. Collerton et al., 
2005 ) with those structural elements mainly coming from the classic 
neuropsychological paradigm of functionally specialised modules (e.g. 
Collerton et al., 2005 : F ´enelon et al., 2000 : O ’ Brien et al., 2005 ). In 
contrast, state models which model factors associated with a specific 
hallucinatory episode (e.g. Todo, 2020 ) have been based on information 
processing models of whole brain dynamics drawn from a different 
paradigm; that of computational approaches using generative (also 
called constructive) predictive processing theory (e.g. Jardri and 
Den `eve, 2013 ). 
Terminology for basic concepts also differed. For example, biased 
processing towards a specific perceptual outcome has been expressed in 
the neuropsychological construct, attention ( Shine et al., 2011, 2014 ); in 
the biological phenomenon of synaptic gain ( Brown and Friston, 2012 ); 
or in the computational term, precision ( Friston, 2017 ). 
3.2.2. Defining complex visual hallucinations 
Furthermore, seeking to explain complex visual hallucinations de -
pends upon them being a coherent, consistent phenomenon which 
reliably differs from other visual phenomena. This raises the question of 
how to define and capture these experiences. Complexity arises when 
trying to define this concept more tightly ( Blom, 2015 ) and distinguish it 
from other visual experiences. Even apparently simple characteristics 
can prove difficult to pin down; both conceptually, and in practice. In  
Table 2 we summarise the common characteristics of definitions of vi -
sual hallucinations, illustrate the phenomena which hallucinations are 
distinguished from by each characteristic, and why distinctions are not 
absolute. This leaves open the question of how to deal with intermediate 
cases – for example, perceptions which might be classified as potentially 
illusionary or potentially hallucinatory. Resolution of this question will 
depend upon clearer understandings of the mechanisms which underlie 
these different phenomena. If the links between sensory data and sub -
jective perception can be rigorously specified in hallucinations and in 
illusions, then it will be easier to classify phenomena. 
We therefore agreed on a pragmatic definition: that a complex visual 
hallucination is seeing a recognisable thing that is not there, and by 
extension, that our models seek to account for the experiences of people 
who tell us that they are seeing things, when no-one else does. 
3.2.3. The validity of an integrated approach 
The models were so varied in the disorders that drove their creation, 
their basic frameworks - whether neural, computational, or neuropsy -
chological – and the specific functions included in each that there was a 
question as to whether developing a harmonized framework is a valid 
undertaking. Given that this is the first iteration of the Framework, we 
believe that it has plausible content and construct validity which can be 
tested and refined in future research. Ultimately, however, we believe 
that it is the predictive validity of a model which is most crucial and 
most immediately addressable – what can the Framework and its 
D. Collerton et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 150 (2023) 105208
5
application tell us about the future that we did not otherwise know? In 
our case, as we later show, what predictions can we derive from a new 
Visual Hallucination Framework that consideration of individual ap -
proaches do not generate? 
Two lines of evidence increased our confidence that an overall 
framework might be feasible: firstly, each model explicitly aimed to 
account for the same subjective phenomenon - a complex visual hallu -
cination – and secondly many functional concepts recurred in different 
models, suggesting at least some overlap in approaches. 
In the event, we were able to derive a consensus Framework that was 
acceptable to all contributors via multiple recursive versions based on 
the interplay between drafts of the framework and the details of indi -
vidual models, guided by the authors of those approaches and other 
contributors and based on a shared attempt to translate different con -
cepts from varying paradigms into agreed cognitive functions such as 
attention, memory, or perception. We show the results in Fig. 2. 
4. The Visual Hallucination Framework and understanding 
existing models 
Though it was always believed by researchers that models over -
lapped to some extent, a crystalizing benefit of the Framework is that it 
gives far greater clarity than previously possible, not only to major 
similarities between approaches but also to contrasts. This allows easier 
comparisons between, or potentially integration of, theories. 
4.1. Applying the Framework to each model 
Fig. 3 shows the application of the Framework to each individual 
model. Each was fitted by the relevant research group in the first 
instance, then sense checked by other authors. 
Fig. 3 shows how despite each of the eight models coming from 
different starting places, they can all be related to the Visual Halluci -
nation Framework. These mappings highlight the benefits of fitting 
models to the same basic structure. Firstly, we can set boundaries around 
which cognitive systems are necessary and sufficient to include in 
causative models. Secondly, the Framework facilitates comparisons 
between models. Variations between which functions are included in 
different models give a straightforward means of deriving unique pre -
dictions from each. To give just one example, Perception and Attention 
Deficit (Fig. 3c) would predict that impairments in object but not spatial 
attention would increase the frequency of complex visual hallucinations, 
while Active Inference (Fig. 3g) would suggest that impaired modulating 
but not attentional orienting or object attention would increase fre -
quency. Conversely, associations with sensory data would not distin -
guish between any of the models. 
4.2. Applying each model to the Framework 
We can go on to more directly compare models by putting them all on 
the same Framework. Fig. 4 shows the results. Doing so illustrates quite 
how wide a range of functions different models have included. There is a 
common thread in that every theory assigns an important role to the 
quality of sensory data, with impacts either from direct disturbances in 
the eye and visual pathways (Deafferentation, AIM, Hodological), or 
indirect effects via arousal (AIM, Attentional Networks) or via aspects of 
attention (AIM, Attentional Networks, Thalamocortical Dysrhythmia 
Default Mode Decoupling) on the acquisition (Active Inference) or 
representation (Active Inference, Perception and Attention Deficit) of 
visual information in cortex. 
Outside of this overlap in the role of sensory data, causal factors that 
occur in more than one model are more variable. 
For example, descending factors include overly precise and hence 
influential priors – due to excessive influence from intention/motiva -
tion/emotion expectations (as in Attentional Networks, Fig. 3f), or 
memories of previous hallucinations or other images (AIM, Fig. 3d) - 
perhaps in combination with a lack of influence of context data, due in 
turn to a failure to attend to the context (Attentional Networks) or an 
inability to perceive it due to sensory loss (Deafferentation, Fig. 3a). 
Ascending factors include both a direct loss of data from the eye due 
to local disease (which might paradoxically increase the influence of 
sensory data through hyper-excitability of primary visual cortex, Deaf -
ferentation, Fig. 3a), or from environmental factors such as poor lighting 
or impoverished visual environments. Data might also be indirectly 
reduced due to impaired spatial attention (Attentional Networks), object 
attention (Perception and Attention Deficit, Fig. 3c), or both; caused 
either directly by impairments of attentional processing, or indirectly by 
reduced arousal (AIM). The influence of data might be reduced due to a 
breakdown within the process of relating perceptual priors to evidence 
(Perception and Attention Deficit). 
Loss of connectivity (Hodological, Fig. 3e) or synchronisation (Tha -
lamocortical Dysrhythmia Default Mode Decoupling, Fig. 3h) might 
mimic the effects of loss of functions by interrupting information flow. 
In terms of the influence of sensory input on data comparison, one 
model (Perception and Attention Deficit) sees a central role for the 
comparison process per se, but others (Deafferentation, Hodological, 
Thalamocortical Dysrhythmia Default Mode Decoupling) suggest that 
the results of that comparison fail to modify what is being seen, while 
Active Inference implies potential effects at several levels. An inability to 
build current context from perception is a central feature of two models 
(Reality Monitoring, Thalamocortical Dysrhythmia Default Mode 
Decoupling), while limitations in the linkage of context, emotion, 
intention, and, particularly, memory feature in three (Reality Moni -
toring, Attentional Networks, AIM). 
Table 2 
Components of definitions of complex visual hallucinations.  
Characteristics of visual hallucinations Phenomena distinguished from Challenges 
A visual perception of something which is 
not out there in the visual environment 
Veridical or illusionary perception of 
things which are in the visual 
environment. 
Knowing what is truly out there in the visual environment depends upon what other 
people may, or may not notice, or subjective evidence from other senses (Aynsworth, 
Collerton, and Dudley, 2017). Even if the environment is known, the links between what 
is there and what is seen is not a one-to-one correspondence, as for example change 
blindness, the inability to perceive significant changes in the visual environment ( 
Jensen, Yao, Street, and Simons, 2011), illustrates. 
Which has the subjective quality of a 
veridical perception 
Visual distortions We do not have direct way of knowing whether someone else’s perceptions appear real 
to them, other than by inference from what they say, or what they do (Aynsworth et al., 
2017). 
Which is outside of voluntary control Voluntary visual imagery A great deal of visual perception is outside of voluntary control (e.g.Prinzmetal, McCool, 
and Park, 2005), and some complex visual hallucinations are controlled, at least to a 
degree, directly or indirectly by the people experiencing them (Diederich, Pieri, and 
Goetz, 2003). 
And which occurs when awake Dreams There is not a sharp dividing line between sleep and waking, and there are whole classes 
of complex visual hallucinations – hypnagogic and hypnopompic - which occur on the 
transitions between waking and sleeping (Azis et al., 2020).  
D. Collerton et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 150 (2023) 105208
6
This particular pattern of partial overlaps in models highlights two 
extreme possibilities. On the one hand, there might be no consistent 
single or unifying cause of visual hallucinations even those with the 
same content. Instead there are many triggering pathways in different 
disorders or circumstances, all of which lead to hallucinations as a final 
outcome. Hence, the scientific challenge would be to identify which 
cause or pathway is active in a specific instance with the clinical 
implication that treatments would be highly specific. The alternate 
extreme would be that there is only one common final pathway for each 
type of complex visual hallucination but that the scattering of research 
field has obscured this cause: regardless of the type of precipitant, once 
activated, hallucinations have a single anatomical or functional con -
nectome. Hence, a treatment that blocks entry to that pathway would 
stop hallucinations regardless of precipitant. If this latter possibility is 
the correct one, then we have to take up the challenge of identifying 
which existing model or fusion of models best captures that causal path. 
We suggest that there may be aspects of truth in both extremes: there 
may be a common final pathway that leads to the occurrence of a 
particular type of complex hallucination, a face or animal for example, 
but there are also factors that account for variations in phenomenology 
among people and disorders. If correct, this would suggest a shift in 
research strategies towards investigating not only group commonalities 
but also individual variations relevant to hallucinations. 
The clustering of models around central roles for visual data and its 
comparison with predicted data in causing a hallucination suggests that 
this area is the best candidate for a common pathway and that explo -
ration of these functions and of their underlying neurobiology in the 
early visual cortex and the ventral visual stream will prove fruitful. 
Fig. 2. Harmonised framework for aspects of visual 
perception relevant to hallucinations. Descending in -
fluences are shown in blue, and ascending in red. Hori -
zontal influences are in green. The grey blur over memory, 
context, emotion, and intention is to indicate that these 
factors interact to create complex expectancies. Terms are 
defined in the text and Glossary. Linking arrows show the 
specfic relationships between concepts, bearing in mind 
that the influence of these varies dynamically instant by 
instant. The level of detail for each function was deter -
mined by the need to incorporate distinctions in exisiting 
theories. Thus, perception and attention are much more 
fractionated than memory or context. Similarly, variables 
in the Bayesian approach to perception are shown since 
they are central to theories of hallucinations, but those in 
other areas such are memory are not. Expectancies act to 
bias perception towards particular results. They can be 
generally conceptualised as brain states that reflect prior 
information about what is possible or probable in the 
forthcoming sensory environment: i.e. what is expected to 
be seen in that context ( Parr, Rees, and Friston, 2018 ). In 
state models, predictions of sensory level data are central. 
Trait models, in contrast, have tended to emphasise higher 
order expectances which develop from an interaction be -
tween memories, both episodic and semantic, of past 
similar visual environments (which we can label as mem -
ory expectancies), the current visual context (context ex -
pectancies), future intentions and motivations (intentional 
and motivational expectancies), and emotions (emotional 
expectancies). As with perception, each of these functions 
has its own subfunctions, some of which are highlighted in 
specific models as seen in Fig. 3 . Emphasising the circular 
interactions between these functions, the visual context is 
created from the data arising from current visual (and 
other sensory) perceptions. In addition to their direct role 
in modifying predicted data, we suggest that expectancies 
also indirectly affect sensory data gathering and processing via attention: a central feature of most theories of hallucinations. Attention prioritizes that subset of visual 
data deemed to be of the highest relevance to the organism ’ s expectancies, thus modulating the quality, and prediction of quality, of ascending visual signals. We 
have separated attention into two main components, each of which has specific effects on different aspects of sensory data: object attention which primarily acts on 
the processing of already gathered data, and spatial attention which both influences the acquisition of sensory data and its subsequent processing ( Parr and Friston, 
2019; Summerfield and Egner, 2009 ). Spatial attention needs to be further fractionated into two intertwined aspects, attentional orienting and attentional modu -
lation. Attentional orienting directs vision by eye and other movements towards expected places in the visual context where the sensory evidence which is most 
relevant to testing expected data can be gathered. Attentional modulation uses covert mental saccades to increase or reduce ‘gain ’ to parts of the visual field, without 
moving the eyes. The place of arousal (a complex concept related to level of consciousness and the sleep-wake cycle and a key factor in clinical models of hallu -
cinations (e.g., Diederich et al., 2005 ; Manford and Andermann, 1998 ) is more uncertain in the cognitive literature. It impacts on processing at multiple levels and 
potentially has a bimodal influence: extremely high or low levels of arousal may be particularly associated with hallucinatory episodes. In visual perception, arousal 
can bias processing in favour of goal-relevant or perceptually conspicuous stimuli ( Mather and Sutherland, 2011 ). We therefore suggest that its primary effects 
relevant to hallucinations are at the level of intentional expectancies acting on attention, and on prediction errors. Thus, being very under or over aroused may lead to 
combined effects on expectancies and on sensory data, potentially accounting for the relationship of visual hallucinations to sleep disorders ( Goetz et al., 2010 ) and 
sleep transitions ( Azis, Ristanovic, and Mittal, 2020 ) - while maintaining a distinction between hallucinations and dreams - and delirium ( Webster and Holroyd, 
2000 ). Information flow through these structures is extremely dynamic with high frequency updating of perceptions and data and rapid variation in the contributions 
of different components of the Framework over a range of timescales ( Hasson, Yang, Vallines, Heeger, and Rubin, 2008; Kiebel, Daunizeau, and Friston, 2008; 
Perdikis, Huys, and Jirsa, 2011 ). The synchronised functioning of these components depends on a variety of mechanisms, including thalamocortical interactions 
( McCormick, McGinley, and Salkoff, 2015; Shine, 2021 ) with desynchrony producing dysfunctional information flow ( Corlett, 2019 ; Onofrj et al., 2019 ; Shine et al., 
2011, 2014 ,).   
D. Collerton et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 150 (2023) 105208
7
Fig. 3. Details of specific models and their relationship to the Framework. Green shading indicates which aspects of the Framework are mapped to in each model, 
with the green text indicating the specific effects on functions. 3a Deafferentation. Functional mechanism: false sensory data becomes overly influential, overriding 
the results of data comparison and expectancies to become incorporated into a hallucinatory perception. The hallucinated perception is replaced by a veridical one 
when the strength of the false sensory evidence reduces, or expectancies and data comparison override it. Components of framework mapped to: sensory data from 
the eye and data comparison Neurobiological underpinnings: false sensory data results from hyper-excitability and spontaneous activation of the primary visual 
cortex caused by chronic loss of visual input. 3b Reality Monitoring Functional mechanism: a combination of visual processing deficits and episodic memory 
impairment, combined with source-monitoring errors. Components of framework mapped to: sensory data, and memory/semantic structures. The model distin -
guishes between belief and expectation. Belief is a mental acceptance of something, regardless of supporting empirical evidence: resulting in the mental claim that 
what is seen is true. Expectation is the act or state of expecting an event as about to happen which could then be processed as true or untrue. Neurobiological 
underpinnings: frontal (source monitoring), medial temporal (memory), and ventral visual (visual processing) cortices. 3c Perception and Attention Deficit. Func -
tional mechanism: sensory evidences are relatively uninfluential due to failures in visual perception in combination with more imprecise data comparison due to a 
failure in object attention. An image (the hallucination) which is least inconsistent with expectancies and expected perceptions is “ seen ” . This hallucination then 
persists since it generates the immediate context which in turn reinforces expectancies which are most consistent with the hallucination. That hallucination is then 
not modified to something more veridical because of imprecise data comparison. Components of model mapped to: object attention, sensory data, and the data 
comparison. Neurobiological underpinnings: dorsolateral frontal cortex (object attention), ventral visual stream (visual perception). 3d AIM. Functional mechanism: 
poor visual processing in combination with defective central monitoring and impaired attentional focus leads to deblocking of visual memories. Components of 
framework mapped to: sensory data from the eye, arousal, attention, and memory/semantic structures. Neurobiological underpinnings: Parkinson ’ s disease related 
retinopathy and functional alterations of extra-striate visual pathways (visual processing), brainstem pathology (disordered sleep-wake and dream regulation systems 
leading to impaired attention and memory control). 3e Hodological. Functional mechanism: transient topological (cortical area based) activity occurs at the time of a 
visual hallucination within the context of transient or persistent hodological (cortical connectivity based) factors such as hypo-or hyper-connectivity between brain 
regions. Components of framework mapped to: messaging between functions. Neurobiological underpinnings: cortical connectivity. 3 f Attentional Networks. 
Functional mechanism: heightened arousal leads to an upregulated Ventral Attention Network (VAN). Concurrent sensory data errors arise from poor sensory ev -
idences as a result of pathological changes not only in the eye but also across visuospatial processing regions of the brain. Concurrently, there is an increased level of 
activity within the Default Mode Network (DMN) leading to increased self-referential expectancies with impaired cognition impacting upon the recall of accurate 
memories. During a hallucination, the usual VAN and DMN integration with the Dorsal Attention Network (DAN) which would coordinate exogenous attention is lost 
and there is increased coupling between the DMN and the visual network allowing the perception of ‘false ’ perceptions to be experienced. At the termination of the 
hallucination, normal function of the DAN is restored, suppressing activity in the VAN and DMN so that exogenous attention is again functional. Components of 
framework mapped to: sensory data, arousal, attention, and expectancies. Neurobiological underpinning: eye and visual cortex (sensory data), connectivity of 
D. Collerton et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 150 (2023) 105208
8
Complementing this commonality, the relative scattering of models in 
terms of higher-level influences might suggest a more varied or indi -
vidual contribution from those factors. Thus, hallucinations of known 
people in familiar settings experienced in Parkinson ’ s disease ( Urwyler 
et al., 2014 ) may be related to context and memory, while the bizarre 
and distorted hallucinations of eye disease ( Santhouse et al., 2000 ) may 
suggest a particular contribution from partial or distorted context ex -
pectancies influenced by limited sensory data. 
Higher level influences may also be relevant to extending the 
Framework to account for hallucinations with more than just a visual 
component. In contrast to the visual hallucinations in Lewy body dis -
orders and eye disease (90% plus of which are unimodal, at least in those 
disorders ’ earlier stages ( Dudley et al., 2019 )), those seen in other dis -
orders are much more often accompanied by hallucinations in other 
sensory domains ( Montagnese et al., 2021 ), sometimes simultaneously. 
The mechanisms underlying simultaneous multimodal hallucinations 
are not well understood, but could reflect common expectancies across 
modalities or cross modality priming ( Fernyhough, 2019 ). Hence, the 
association in schizophrenia between multimodal hallucinations, psy -
chological trauma and distress ( David et al., 2011; Medjkane et al., 
2020 ) may in this disorder indicate a strong role for the memory and 
emotion expectancies in the Framework. 
5. A sharper focus on the dynamics of hallucinatory episodes 
If there is a final common pathway, it will only be fully active during 
the hallucinatory state, even if aspects of it persist outside hallucinatory 
episodes as trait factors ( Goetz et al., 2014; Stebbins et al., 2004 ). 
Testing which traits are associated with hallucinations is relatively 
straightforward since participants can be assessed at any time, though 
there are unresolved questions about the relative contributions of acute 
and chronic impairments and compensations at the mechanistic level 
attentional networks (expectancies, attention, and arousal). 3 g Active Inference. Functional mechanism: an imbalance in the precision of (confidence attached to) 
priors (expected perceptions) and likelihoods (chance of specific sensory data associated with that perception) allows a false inference to be sustained in the absence 
of confirmatory sensory data. This occurs either through an over confident prior belief, or by sensory data being discounted if likelihood is overly imprecise such that 
prediction errors can be ignored. Although precise data may be available, if the brain ascribes a sufficiently low precision (i.e., attends away) from these data, the 
resulting percepts will be formed as if no precise data were available. Components of framework mapped to: expectancies and sensory data. Spatial attention is 
particularly relevant in its effect on modulation of gain, rather than orientation. Neurobiological underpinnings: multiple potential processes. In Charles Bonnet 
syndrome, primary eye disease deprives the brain of precise visual data, leaving prior beliefs the sole arbiters of visual perception. In Lewy body disease, the same 
mechanism may be at play at higher levels of sensory processing. For instance, impaired cholinergic signalling might reduce the precision assigned to parts of the 
visual stream, partially decoupling visual perception from sensory input. 3 h Thalamocortical Dysrhythmia Default Mode Network Decoupling hypothesis. Functional 
mechanism: The frontal attentional network is inhibited, favouring decoupling of the Default Mode Network and leading to random formation of connections that 
link strong autobiographical correlates to trivial stimuli. Components of framework mapped to: attention, memory, expectancies, and sensory data Neurobiological 
underpinnings: thalamocortical dysrhythmia. 
Fig. 3. ( continued ). 
D. Collerton et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 150 (2023) 105208
9
( Collerton et al., 2005; Bowman, Bruce, Colbourn, and Collerton, 2017 ), 
and whether initial and subsequent hallucinations are generated in the 
same way; given that repeated content may create memory expectances 
which increase the chance of their reoccurrence. 
Assessing the functional changes associated with the dynamics of 
hallucinatory episodes is much more challenging given the relative 
unpredictability of specific episodes for most people, and that halluci -
nations ’ responsiveness to the environment tends to mean that they 
disappear in experimental settings ( Dujardin et al., 2020 ). Much of the 
data in this area therefore comes from participants who have unusually 
consistent hallucinations and who can therefore be assessed outside and 
within hallucinatory episodes ( ffytche et al., 1998; Goetz et al., 2014 ), or 
from hallucination-like phenomena such as pareidolia and other mis -
perceptions, which can be experimentally induced ( Shine et al., 2014; 
Bowman et al., 2017 ). 
5.1. A key role for transition processes 
The episodic nature of hallucinations confirms that the traits asso -
ciated with their occurrence are necessary but insufficient to account for 
why hallucinatory states occur. Otherwise, hallucinations would be 
continually present, which in the great majority of cases, they are not. 
That most perception, even in people who hallucinate and even during 
hallucinations ( Collerton et al., 2005 ), is veridical suggests that there is 
some transient disturbance of processing additional to traits which is 
associated with hallucinatory episodes. That even a “ normal ” visual 
system can experience hallucinations in unusual circumstances such as 
sensory deprivation ( Mason and Brady, 2009 ) or bereavement ( Cas -
telnovo et al., 2015 ) or very occasionally for no apparent cause ( Vellante 
et al., 2012 ) suggests that periodic instability in visual perception is 
inescapable. Hence, understanding hallucinatory states is underpinned 
by understanding how the perceptual system can move from a state of 
stable veridical perception through a destabilized state to stable hallu -
cinatory perception and then via further destabilization back to stable 
veridical perception ( Corlett et al., 2019; Series, Reichert, and Storkey, 
2010 ). 
Veridical transitions within the highly dynamic visual system have 
two requirements which may also be relevant to a transition from 
veridical to hallucinatory perception. Firstly, visual perception has to 
both capture stability and allow change; for example, seeing the same 
person from different angles as they move around, or seeing something 
new in an existing visual scene. Secondly, the subjective experience of 
continuous veridical perception has to be maintained despite gaps in 
sensory input caused, for example, by eye movement. Together, these 
factors suggest that there are resilient mechanisms that maintain con -
tinuity from one veridical perception to another which must break down 
in hallucinations ( Ross, Morrone, Goldberg, and Burr, 2001 ). Under -
standing these mechanisms will be central to understanding how 
hallucinatory episodes can occur. 
5.2. Questions on onset, persistence, and end 
Taken together with the proposal that veridical perception is main -
tained by a continual transformation from what has been seen to what is 
seen, this emphasis on hallucinatory episodes encourages a move from 
the general question of how hallucinations occur towards three separate 
questions which address firstly the onset, secondly the persistence, and 
thirdly, the end of hallucinatory episodes. Hence, we need to investigate 
those dynamical changes within the Framework which are associated 
with sequential phases of hallucinations.  
Thus, we seek to understand:  
1. Under which conditions can a discontinuity arise within the process 
of modifying what was veridically seen, such that hallucinatory 
content takes the place of the next potential veridical perception? 
Referring to Fig. 2 suggests further areas of investigation:  
a. The discontinuity may lie in the transition process per se (the 
mechanisms that adjudicate between what has been seen and 
what is to be seen), or in the contributions of what was previously 
seen, or of visual data to an intact process, or all of these?  
b. Is the process active (another factor knocks out the veridical 
perception), or is it is passive (another factor fills the void left by 
the absence of the veridical perception)?  
c. Which factors influence the form of the non-veridical perception? 
To what extent are these determined by expectations, or by sen -
sory data? 
2. How does the hallucinatory perception become excessively influen -
tial relative to sensory or other evidence and, or to veridical expec -
tancies for the period that the hallucination is maintained?  
3. Under what conditions does the hallucinatory perception become 
modified to be replaced by a veridical perception? And as with onset:  
a. Is the discontinuity dependent on the transition process per se, or 
in the contributions of what was previously seen, or of visual data 
to an intact process, or all of these?  
b. Is the process active (another factor knocks out the hallucinatory 
perception), or is it passive (another factor fills the void left by the 
absence of the hallucinatory perception)? 
Fig. 4. Existing models and the framework. For 
clarity the Hodological model is shown sepa -
rately where it does not overlap with other 
models since it focusses on connecting tracts 
rather than functions. AI, Active Inference; 
AIM, Activation-Input-Modulation; AN, Atten -
tional Networks; D, Deafferentation; H, Hodo -
logical; PAD, Perception and Attention Deficit; 
RM, Reality Monitoring; TDDMN, Thalamo -
cortical Dysrhythmia Default Mode Network 
Decoupling. Relevant functions for models of 
hallucinations are highlighted in green and 
labelled by the models which feature them, 
accepting that the roles of specific functions 
may differ in detail.   
D. Collerton et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 150 (2023) 105208
10
Answering these questions will cast light on variations in the fre -
quency and duration of hallucinatory episodes, and on the relationship 
between trait and state factors. 
Importantly, as illustrated later in the discussion of the role of neu -
rotransmitters, longstanding traits which increase the chance of hallu -
cinatory episodes may be differentially associated with the onset, 
persistence, and end of specific occurrences, and hence have different 
relationships with transitions between veridical and hallucinatory 
states. 
5.3. Gaps in current knowledge 
Posing these questions highlights gaps in our current knowledge of 
the phenomenology of visual hallucinations. Critically, very little is 
known about the subjective experience of transitions into and out of 
hallucinatory episodes. Are there intermediate perceptual forms be -
tween the veridical and hallucinatory which any model would need to 
account for? If so, is there any relationship that these forms may have to 
the phenomena such as illusions and pareidolia that are often associated 
with hallucinations ( Fazekas, 2021 ). In addition, linkages to simulta -
neous transitions in wider systems such as arousal or alertness need to be 
investigated. Trait factors would suggest that these are likely to be 
significant. 
Consideration of the Framework suggests temporal, structural, and 
dynamical constraints that are relevant in understanding and hence 
modelling hallucinatory episodes. 
In terms of timescales, perceptual updating occurs around every 
100 ms ( Marom, 2010 ). Hence, the relatively rare onset of hallucina -
tions even in people who are prone to them and the usual duration of 
hallucinatory episode of seconds to minutes, together suggest that 
triggers for the transition to or from hallucinations are highly infrequent 
in comparison to factors that maintain either veridical or hallucinatory 
perception. 
The restricted but distributed structural pathology associated with 
hallucinatory traits ( Erskine et al., 2019 ) implies that the functioning of 
partially lesioned systems is critical in understanding their occurrence. 
In providing an overall set of relationships for the key functions relevant 
to hallucinations, in conjunction with neuropathological or imaging 
data, the Framework facilitates modelling of these types of systems 
without being either over or under inclusive. 
The highly complex, nonlinear perceptual system has a capacity for 
unstable, chaotic dynamics if normal compensatory mechanisms are 
disturbed. Hence, dynamical modelling has to address how transitions 
may occur in these types of systems ( Tsuda, Yamaguti, and Watanabe, 
2016 ). As an instance, transient fluctuations in distributed neuro -
modulatory systems may shift functioning past a critical level into a 
dynamic far-from-equilibrium hallucinatory state ( Collerton et al., 
2016; Tsukada, Fujii, Aihara, and Tsuda, 2015 ); and in Parkinson ’ s 
patients, those with visual hallucinations show differences in dynamic 
transitions between states compared with patients without visual hal -
lucinations ( Zarkali et al., 2021 ). Computational simulations suggest 
that lesioned systems can switch from transitions between attractor 
states (analogous to a transitioning from one perception to another) to 
remaining in one state (analogous to being stuck in a hallucinatory 
episode) depending on the overall activity of the system ( Fujii, Tsukada, 
Tsuda, and Aihara, 2015; Nara, Fujii, Tsukada, and Tsuda, 2019, 2022 ). 
This formulation indicates that the processes driving states may be more 
distributed than the traits which make them likely, and places emphasis 
on the mechanisms by which the brain maintains the synchronised 
functioning of different parts of the Framework ( Onofrj et al., 2019 ). 
6. Relationships with brain function 
Though this framework is functional rather than neurobiological, 
since it incorporates classic neuropsychological functions, relationships 
to brain systems can be sketched out. 
The details of the models in Fig. 3 illustrate how arousal, sensory 
data, expectancies, and attention have been mapped to specific brain 
perceptual and cognitive systems by individual research groups. For 
example, Perception and Attention Deficit highlights the ventral visual 
stream and Attentional Networks, the eye and early visual cortex. As 
would be expected from the range of functions included in different 
models, relevant brain systems also vary to some degree, though there is 
consistent inclusion of early visual cortex (Deafferentation, Reality 
Monitoring, Attentional Networks, Active Inference), the dorsal (Deaf -
ferentation, Attentional Networks) and ventral (Reality Monitoring, 
Perception and Attention Deficit, AIM, Attentional Networks, Active 
Inference) visual streams, together with frontal (Reality Monitoring, 
Perception and Attention Deficit, Attentional Networks) and medial 
temporal (Reality Monitoring, AIM, Attentional Networks) cortex and 
their interconnectors (Hodological) and regulators (Thalamocortical 
Dysrhythmia Default Mode Decoupling). 
In terms of neuromodulatory systems, the key neurotransmitters 
associated with hallucinations, acetylcholine, dopamine, and serotonin 
( Russo et al., 2019 ), have distinct roles within the Framework and may 
have particular relevance to different phases of hallucinatory episodes. 
Acetylcholine has been associated with the precision of sensory and 
other signals ( Marshall et al., 2016; Moran et al., 2013; Warburton, 
Wesnes, Edwards, and Larrad, 1985 ) implying that dysfunction may 
account for a failure to update prior beliefs when sensory evidence is 
inconsistent with visual percepts, with potentially particular relevance 
to the persistence of a hallucination. Dopaminergic neurones are known 
to play a key role in computing and signalling prediction errors ( Schultz, 
Dayan, and Montague, 1997; Watabe-Uchida, Eshel, and Uchida, 2017 ) 
and in encoding the salience of environmental stimuli ( Diederen and 
Fletcher, 2021; Schultz, 2016 ). Thus, abnormal dopamine signals can 
produce an enhanced significance of external stimuli ( Kapur, 2003 ) and 
increase the salience of an environmental stimulus by giving a small 
prediction error much larger weight ( Fletcher and Frith, 2009 ). Hence, 
dopaminergic function might be especially relevant in the onset and end 
of hallucinations - consistent with functional changes in anterior insular 
cortex that predate hallucination onset ( de Pierrefeu et al., 2018 ). Se -
rotonin modulates early sensory processing as well as behavioural re -
sponses to visual inputs ( Jacob and Nienborg, 2018; Nour and 
Carhart-Harris, 2017 ) and agents reducing transmission at seroto -
nergic receptors are known to be effective in suppressing visual hallu -
cinations ( Zoldan, Friedberg, Livneh, and Melamed, 1995 ) while 
serotonergic agonists can induce them ( Stahl, 2018 ), potentially sug -
gesting a role in transitions to and from veridical vision. 
7. Research priorities 
One of the most quickly realised benefits of an integrated framework 
is that it allows existing data to be analysed in a consistent way. In the 
future, it facilitates a number of different avenues of research with 
complementary strengths to come together with a common language 
and structure so that simultaneous predictions can be made at several 
explanatory levels. For instance, a link between impaired attentional 
orienting and hallucinations should be seen in poor performance on 
neuropsychological tests of spatial attention and in reduced activation in 
relevant attentional networks on functional imaging during spatial 
attentional tasks, as well as being able to be formally modelled as 
reduced precision in the Active Inference theory of hallucinations. 
More generally, phenomenological research in conjunction with 
experimental cognitive tasks and functional imaging can link the char -
acter of specific hallucinations to changes in particular functions such as 
arousal, memory, or attention (e.g. Zmigrod et al., 2016 or 
´
Cur ˇci ´c-Blake 
et al., 2017 from the perspective of auditory hallucinations). Compari -
sons of hallucinatory perceptions with voluntary and veridical images 
with the same content can clarify the relationships between these forms 
of perception. Studies of the structural pathology of disorders with high 
levels of hallucinations can produce evidence of chronic constraints on 
D. Collerton et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 150 (2023) 105208
11
the visual system (e.g. O ’ Brien et al., 2005 ). The effects of these con -
straints can be modelled in computational approaches to understand the 
dynamics of hallucinatory perception (e.g., Collerton et al., 2016 ; Fujii 
et al., 2015 ; Jardri and Den `eve, 2013 ; Nara et al., 2019, 2022 ; Tsukada 
et al., 2015 ). Pharmacological (e.g. Russo et al., 2019 ) or environmental 
(e.g. O ’ Brien et al., 2020 ) manipulation of hallucinations in conjunction 
with functional imaging of hallucinatory episodes (e.g. ffytche et al., 
1998 ; Goetz et al., 2014 ) can probe transition processes. 
8. Clinical implications 
This Hallucination Framework has clinical implications for treating 
hallucinations when they are clinically pertinent or distressing ( Coller -
ton and Taylor, 2013 ). A lack of effective treatments in combination 
with a reluctance to discuss hallucinations ( Menon, 2005 ) has led to a 
substantial burden on those who experience them, and on the people 
around them. 
As we indicate in the section on neurotransmitters, different factors 
may be relevant in the onset, offset, or persistence of hallucinations. The 
Framework allows a strategic approach to investigating potential 
treatments; in particular whether combining interventions aimed at 
different components has synergistic benefits. Improving the amount or 
quality of visual data through addressing eyesight, attention, or arousal; 
improving alertness; modifying context expectancies through changing 
the visual environment; or reducing the contributions of memory ex -
pectancies are all thought to have positive effects in at least some cases 
( Barnes, Connelly, Boubert, and Maravic, 2013; Diederich et al., 2003; 
Falloon and Talbot, 1981; Singh, Sharan, and Kulhara, 2003 ), as do 
some medications ( Collerton and Taylor, 2013 ). However, what is not 
yet known is whether each provides broadly the same benefit since they 
all target a common hallucination pathway, or, as seems more probable 
given their putative mechanisms, whether each affects different com -
ponents of the pathway with potential additive benefits. In any event, 
providing acceptable, credible, benign explanations based upon sound 
science for these phenomena could be effective in reducing stigma and 
distress ( Barnes et al., 2013; Diederich et al., 2003; Falloon and Talbot, 
1981; Singh et al., 2003 ). 
9. In summary 
In order to reconcile different approaches to explaining visual hal -
lucinations, we have developed a new conceptual Visual Hallucination 
Framework. Its specificity and inclusiveness have set initial boundaries 
around relevant cognitive systems and will allow theories to be more 
easily compared or integrated in the future. The Framework provides a 
structure for investigating potential common and individual causative 
pathways, and in putting a new focus on the mechanisms of hallucina -
tory episodes, suggests potential temporal, structural, and dynamic 
constraints in simulating these. 
We have also perforce produced a pragmatic consensus view of the 
various components of visual perception and how these relate to each 
other. This clinically driven development of theory has analogies with 
how research on aphasia has refined models of language ( Vasishth et al., 
2019 ), and studies of amnesia those of memory ( Squire and Zola, 1997 ) 
and suggests that the interplay between investigation of clinical disor -
ders of vision and normal human perception is equally fruitful. 
Funding/Financial support 
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding 
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. 
Robert Dudley receives grant income for trials of psychological 
therapy for unusual experiences like visions (NIHR), works in the NHS 
offering treatment for visual hallucinations, and receives workshop fees 
for teaching on this topic. 
Dominic H ffytche was supported by the National Institute for Health 
Research (NIHR) Maudsley Biomedical Research Centre and Dementia 
Unit and, with John-Paul Taylor and Daniel Collerton, NIHR Programme 
Grants for Applied Research (SHAPED RP-PG-0610 – 10100). 
Christopher C Goetz has received funding to Rush University Medical 
Center from National Institutes of Health, Department of Defense, Par -
kinson ’ s Foundation. and Michael J. Fox Foundation for Research. 
Jennifer G Goldman has received salary support from Shirley Ryan 
AbilityLab, Lewy Body Dementia Association Research Center of 
Excellence, Acadia, American Parkinson ’ s Disease Association, Michael 
J. Fox Foundation, and Parkinson ’ s Foundation; honoraria from Inter -
national Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society, and Parkinson ’ s 
Foundation. 
Jaime Kulisevsky received research support for Instituto de Salud 
Carlos III and European Huntington ’ s Disease Network. 
Shigetoshi Nara was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers 
JP17H01794, JP20H04246, JP20K11985, JP20K12002, and the Coop -
erative Research Program of "Network Joint Research Center for Mate -
rials and Devices". 
Claire O ’ Callaghan was supported by a Neil Hamilton Fairley 
Fellowship from the Australian National Health and Medical Research 
Council (GNT1091310). 
James M Shine was supported by a project grant from the Australian 
National Health and Medical Research Council (GNT1156536). 
Simon Lewis is supported by a National Health and Medical Research 
Council Leadership Fellowship (1195830). 
Glenn T Stebbins has received grant and research support from Na -
tional Institutes of Health, Department of Defense, Michael J. Fox 
Foundation for Parkinson ’ s Research, Dystonia Coalition, CHDI Man -
agement, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, International Parkinson and 
Movement Disorder Society, CBD Solutions. Honoraria were received 
from the International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society, 
American Academy of Neurology, Michael J. Fox Foundation for Par -
kinson ’ s Research, Food and Drug Administration, National Institutes of 
Health, Alzheimer ’ s Association. Salary support was received from Rush 
University Medical Center. 
John-Paul Taylor is supported by the NIHR Newcastle Biomedical 
Research Centre. 
Ichiro Tsuda was partially supported by the JST Strategic Basic 
Research Programs (Symbiotic Interaction: Creation and Development 
of Core Technologies Interfacing Human and Information Environments, 
CREST Grant Number JPMJCR17A4). He was also partially supported by 
a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas (Non-Linear 
Neuro-Oscillology: Towards Integrative Understanding of Human Na -
ture, KAKENHI Grant Number 15H05878), and Grant Number 
17H01794 from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and 
Technology, Japan. 
Rimona S Weil receives a Wellcome Clinical Research Career 
Development Fellowship (205167/16/Z). 
Data availability 
No data was used for the research described in the article. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Soraya Lewis for creating Fig. 1 . We would 
like to thank reviewers for their contributions to improving the 
Framework. 
Conflicts of interest 
The following authors report no competing interests: James Barnes, 
Robert Dudley, Nico Diederich, Dominic ffytche, Karl Friston, Simon 
Lewis, Shigetoshi Nara, Claire O ’ Callaghan, Javier Pagonabarraga, 
James M Shine, Ichiro Tsuda. 
Daniel Collerton has received royalty payments from Wiley 
D. Collerton et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 150 (2023) 105208
12
publishers. 
Christopher C Goetz has received faculty stipends from the Interna -
tional Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society, Guest professorship 
honoraria provided by University of Chicago and Illinois State Neuro -
logical Society, and a stipend as Volume Editor from Elsevier Publishers. 
He has also received royalty payments from Elsevier Publishers and 
Wolters Kluwer Publishers. 
Jennifer G Goldman has received grant/research support from Aca -
dia Pharmaceuticals and honoraria from Medscape. 
Renaud Jardri has been invited to scientific meetings and expert 
boards by Lundbeck, Janssen and Otsuka. 
Jaime Kulisevsky has received fees for presentations or advisory 
boards from: Teva, UCB, Roche, Abbvie, Zambon, Bial, Sanofii and 
Neuroderm. 
Marco Onofrj has served on the scientific advisory boards of Glax -
oSmithKline, Novartis, Lundbeck, Eisai, Valeant, Medtronic, and New -
ron; has received speaker honoraria from Zambon, the World Parkinson 
Congress, the Movement Disorder Society, and the Atypical Dementias 
congress; publishing royalties from Springer; was an invited guest and 
lecturer for the Mental Disorders in Parkinson Disease Congress; serves 
on the editorial board of Medicine (Baltimore) and Frontiers in Neuro -
science; has been employed as a speaker for Boehringer Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline, UCB, and Zambon; and has received research support 
from the Italian Ministry of Health and the Italian Ministry of Education. 
Glenn Stebbins received compensation for consulting and advisory 
board membership from Acadia Pharmaceuticals, Adamas Pharmaceu -
ticals, Biogen, Ceregene, CHDI Management, Neurocrine Biosciences, 
Pfizer, Tools-4-Patients, Ultragenyx and the Sunshine Care Foundation. 
John-Paul Taylor has received speaker fees from GE Healthcare. He 
has consulted for Kirin Kyowa and Sosei-Heptares. 
Rimona S Weil has received speaking honoraria from GE Healthcare 
and writing honoraria from Britannia. 
References 
Aarsland, D., Larsen, J.P., Tandberg, E., Laake, K., 2000. Predictors of nursing home 
placement in Parkinson ’ s disease: a population-based, prospective study. J. Am. 
Geriatr. Soc. 48, 938 – 942 . 
Aynsworth, C., Collerton, D., Dudley, R., 2017. Measures of visual hallucinations: review 
and recommendations. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 57, 164 – 182 . 
Azis, M., Ristanovic, I., Mittal, V.A., 2020. Hypnagogic and hypnopompic hallucinations: 
Considerations for clinical high-risk assessment and targets for future research. 
Schizophr. Res. 222, 514 – 515 . 
Barnes, J., David, A.S., 2001. Visual hallucinations in Parkinson ’ s disease, a review and 
phenomenological survey. J. Neurol., Neurosurg. Psychiatry 70, 727 – 733 . 
Barnes, J., Boubert, L., Harris, J., Lee, A., David, A.S., 2003. Reality monitoring and 
visual hallucinations in Parkinson ’ s disease. Neuropsychologia 41, 565 – 574 . 
Barnes, J., Connelly, V., Boubert, L., Maravic, K., 2013. Behavioural coping patterns in 
Parkinson ’ s patients with visual hallucinations. J. Neuropsychol. 7, 326 – 334 . 
Benke, T., 2006. Peduncular hallucinosis. J. Neurol. 253, 1561 – 1571 . 
Benrimoh, D., Parr, T., Adams, R.A., Friston, K., 2019. Hallucinations both in and out of 
context: an active inference account. PLoS One 14, e0212379 . 
Berrios, G.E., Markova, I.S., 2015. Visual hallucinations: history and context of current 
research. In: Collerton, D., et al. (Eds.), The Neuroscience of Visual Hallucinations . 
Wiley Blackwell, pp. 1 – 22 . 
Blom, J.D., 2015. Defining and measuring hallucinations and their consequences – what 
is really the difference between a veridical perception and a hallucination? 
Categories of hallucinatory experiences. In: Collerton, D., et al. (Eds.), The 
Neuroscience of Visual Hallucinations . Wiley Blackwell, pp. 23 – 45 . 
Bowman, A.R., Bruce, V., Colbourn, C.J., Collerton, D., 2017. Compensatory shifts in 
visual perception are associated with hallucinations in Lewy body disorders. Cogn. 
Res.: Princ. Implic. 2, 1 – 9 . 
Brown, H.R., Friston, K.J., 2012. Dynamic causal modelling of precision and synaptic 
gain in visual perception — an EEG study. Neuroimage 63, 223 – 231 . 
Burke, W., 2002. The neural basis of Charles Bonnet hallucinations, a hypothesis. 
J. Neurol., Neurosurg. Psychiatry 73, 535 – 541 . 
Castelnovo, A., Cavallotti, S., Gambini, O., D ’ Agostino, A., 2015. Post-bereavement 
hallucinatory experiences: a critical overview of population and clinical studies. 
J. Affect. Disord. 186, 266 – 274 . 
Chouinard, V.A., Shinn, A.K., Valeri, L., Chouinard, P.A., Gardner, M.E., Asan, A.E., 
¨
Ongür, D., 2019. Visual hallucinations associated with multimodal hallucinations, 
suicide attempts and morbidity of illness in psychotic disorders. Schizophr. Res. 208, 
196 – 201 . 
Collerton, D., Taylor, J.P., 2013. Advances in the treatment of visual hallucinations in 
neurodegenerative diseases. Future Neurol. 8, 433 – 444 . 
Collerton, D., Perry, E., McKeith, I., 2005. Why people see things that are not there: a 
novel perception and attention deficit model for recurrent complex visual 
hallucinations. Behav. Brain Sci. 28, 737 – 757 . 
Collerton, D., Taylor, J.-P., Tsuda, I., Fujii, H., Nara, S., Aihara, K., Katori, Y., 2016. How 
can we see things that are not there? Current insights into complex visual 
hallucinations. J. Conscious. Stud. 23, 195 – 227 . 
Corlett, P.R., Horga, G., Fletcher, P.C., Alderson-Day, B., Schmack, K., Powers III, A.R., 
2019. Hallucinations and strong priors. Trends Cogn. Sci. 23, 114 – 127 . 
´
Cur ˇci ´c-Blake, B., Ford, J.M., Hubl, D., Orlov, N.D., Sommer, I.E., Waters, F., Aleman, A., 
2017. Interaction of language, auditory and memory brain networks in auditory 
verbal hallucinations. Prog. Neurobiol. 148, 1 – 20 . 
David, C.N., Greenstein, D., Clasen, L., Gochman, P., Miller, R., Tossell, J.W., 
Rapoport, J.L., 2011. Childhood onset schizophrenia: high rate of visual 
hallucinations. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 50, 681 – 686 . 
Diederen, K.M., Fletcher, P.C., 2021. Dopamine, prediction error and beyond. 
Neuroscientist 27, 30 – 46 . 
Diederich, N.J., Pieri, V., Goetz, C.G., 2003. Coping strategies for visual hallucinations in 
Parkinson ’ s disease. Mov. Disord. 18, 831 – 832 . 
Diederich, N.J., Goetz, C.G., Stebbins, G.T., 2005. Repeated visual hallucinations in 
Parkinson ’ s disease as disturbed external/internal perceptions: focused review and a 
new integrative model. Mov. Disord. 20, 130 – 140 . 
Dudley, R., Wood, M., Spencer, H., Brabban, A., Mosimann, U.P., Collerton, D., 2012. 
Identifying specific interpretations and use of safety behaviours in people with 
distressing visual hallucinations: an exploratory study. Behav. Cogn. Psychother. 40, 
367 – 375 . 
Dudley, R., Aynsworth, C., Cheetham, R., McCarthy-Jones, S., Collerton, D., 2018. 
Prevalence and characteristics of multi-modal hallucinations in people with 
psychosis who experience visual hallucinations. Psychiatry Res. 269, 25 – 30 . 
Dudley, R., Aynsworth, C., Mosimann, U., Taylor, J.P., Smailes, D., Collerton, D., 
Urwyler, P., 2019. A comparison of visual hallucinations across disorders. Psychiatry 
Res. 272, 86 – 92 . 
Dujardin, K., Roman, D., Baille, G., Pins, D., Lefebvre, S., Delmaire, C., Jardri, R., 2020. 
What can we learn from fMRI capture of visual hallucinations in Parkinson ’ s disease. 
Brain Imaging Behav. 14, 329 – 335 . 
Erskine, D., Taylor, J.P., Thomas, A., Collerton, D., McKeith, I., Khundakar, A., 
Morris, C., 2019. Pathological changes to the subcortical visual system and its 
relationship to visual hallucinations in dementia with Lewy bodies. Neurosci. Bull. 
35, 295 – 300 . 
Falloon, I.R., Talbot, R.E., 1981. Persistent auditory hallucinations: coping mechanisms 
and implications for management. Psychol. Med. 11, 329 – 339 . 
Fazekas, P., 2021. Hallucinations as intensified forms of mind-wandering. Philos. Trans. 
R. Soc. B 376, 20190700 . 
F ´enelon, G., Mahieux, F., Huon, R., Zi ´egler, M., 2000. Hallucinations in Parkinson ’ s 
disease: prevalence, phenomenology and risk factors. Brain 123, 733 – 745 . 
Fernyhough, C., 2019. Modality-general and modality-specific processes in 
hallucinations. Psychol. Med. 49, 2639 – 2645 . 
ffytche, D.H., 2005. Visual hallucinations and the Charles Bonnet syndrome. Curr. 
Psychiatry Rep. 7, 168 – 179 . 
ffytche, D.H., 2008. The hodology of hallucinations. Cortex 44, 1067 – 1083 . 
ffytche, D.H., Howard, R.J., Brammer, M.J., David, A., Woodruff, P., Williams, S., 1998. 
The anatomy of conscious vision: an fMRI study of visual hallucinations. Nat. 
Neurosci. 1, 738 – 742 . 
Fletcher, P.C., Frith, C.D., 2009. Perceiving is believing: a Bayesian approach to 
explaining the positive symptoms of schizophrenia. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 48 – 58 . 
Friston, K.J., 2005. Hallucinations and perceptual inference. Behav. Brain Sci. 28, 
764 – 766 . 
Friston, K.J., 2017. Precision psychiatry. Biol. Psychiatry.: Cogn. Neurosci. 
Neuroimaging 2, 640 – 643 . 
Fujii, H., Tsukada, H., Tsuda, I., Aihara, K., 2015. Visual hallucinations in dementia with 
Lewy bodies (I): a hodological view. Advances in Cognitive Neurodynamics (IV). 
Springer,, Dordrecht, pp. 441 – 445 . 
Gauntlett-Gilbert, J., Kuipers, E., 2005. Visual hallucinations in psychiatric conditions: 
appraisals and their relationship to distress. Br. J. Clin. Psychol. 44, 77 – 87 . 
Goetz, C.G., Ouyang, B., Negron, A., Stebbins, G.T., 2010. Hallucinations and sleep 
disorders in PD: ten-year prospective longitudinal study. Neurology 75, 1773 – 1779 . 
Goetz, C.G., Stebbins, G.T., Ouyang, B., 2011. Visual plus nonvisual hallucinations in 
Parkinson ’ s disease: development and evolution over 10 years. Mov. Disord. 26, 
2196 – 2200 . 
Goetz, C.G., Vaughan, C.L., Goldman, J.G., Stebbins, G.T., 2014. I finally see what you 
see: Parkinson ’ s disease visual hallucinations captured with functional 
neuroimaging. Mov. Disord. 29, 115 – 117 . 
Hasson, U., Yang, E., Vallines, I., Heeger, D.J., Rubin, N., 2008. A hierarchy of temporal 
receptive windows in human cortex. J. Neurosci. 28, 2539 – 2550 . 
Holroyd, S., Currie, L., Wooten, G.F., 2001. Prospective study of hallucinations and 
delusions in Parkinson ’ s disease. J. Neurol., Neurosurg. Psychiatry 70, 734 – 738 . 
Ibarretxe-Bilbao, N., Ramirez-Ruiz, B., Junque, C., Marti, M.J., Valldeoriola, F., 
Bargallo, N., Tolosa, E., 2010. Differential progression of brain atrophy in 
Parkinson ’ s disease with and without visual hallucinations. J. Neurol., Neurosurg. 
Psychiatry 81, 650 – 657 . 
Jacob, S.N., Nienborg, H., 2018. Monoaminergic neuromodulation of sensory processing. 
Front. Neural Circuits 12, 51 . 
Jardri, R., Den `eve, S., 2013. Computational models of hallucinations. In: Jardri, R., 
Cachia, A., Thomas, P., Pins, D. (Eds.), The Neuroscience of Hallucinations. Springer, 
New York, NY, pp. 289 – 313 . 
Jensen, M.S., Yao, R., Street, W.N., Simons, D.J., 2011. Change blindness and 
inattentional blindness. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Cogn. Sci. 2, 529 – 546 . 
D. Collerton et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 150 (2023) 105208
13
Kapur, S., 2003. Psychosis as a state of aberrant salience, a framework linking biology, 
phenomenology, and pharmacology in schizophrenia. Am. J. Psychiatry 160, 13 – 23 . 
Kiebel, S.J., Daunizeau, J., Friston, K.J., 2008. A hierarchy of time-scales and the brain. 
PLoS Comput. Biol. 4, e1000209 . 
Leu-Semenescu, S., De Cock, V.C., Le Masson, V.D., Debs, R., Lavault, S., Roze, E., 
Arnulf, I., 2011. Hallucinations in narcolepsy with and without cataplexy: contrasts 
with Parkinson ’ s disease. Sleep. Med. 12, 497 – 504 . 
Llebaria, G., Pagonabarraga, J., Martínez-Corral, M., García-S ´anchez, C., Pascual- 
Sedano, B., Gironell, A., Kulisevsky, J., 2010. Neuropsychological correlates of mild 
to severe hallucinations in Parkinson ’ s disease. Mov. Disord. 25, 2785 – 2791 . 
Macpherson, F., 2013. The philosophy and psychology of hallucination: an introduction. 
In: Macpherson, F., et al. (Eds.), Hallucination: Philosophy and Psychology. MIT 
Press, pp. 1 – 38 . 
Manford, M., Andermann, F., 1998. Complex visual hallucinations. Clin. Neurobiol. 
Insights Brain 121, 1819 – 1840 . 
Marom, S., 2010. Neural timescales or lack thereof. Prog. Neurobiol. 90, 16 – 28 . 
Marshall, L., Mathys, C., Ruge, D., De Berker, A.O., Dayan, P., Stephan, K.E., 
Bestmann, S., 2016. Pharmacological fingerprints of contextual uncertainty. PLoS 
Biol. 14, e1002575 . 
Mason, O.J., Brady, F., 2009. The psychotomimetic effects of short-term sensory 
deprivation. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 197, 783 – 785 . 
Mather, M., Sutherland, M.R., 2011. Arousal-biased competition in perception and 
memory. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 6, 114 – 133 . 
McCormick, D.A., McGinley, M.J., Salkoff, D.B., 2015. Brain state dependent activity in 
the cortex and thalamus. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 31, 133 – 140 . 
Medjkane, F., Notredame, C.E., Sharkey, L., D ’ hondt, F., Vaiva, G., Jardri, R., 2020. 
Association between childhood trauma and multimodal early-onset hallucinations. 
Br. J. Psychiatry 216, 156 – 158 . 
Menon, G.J., 2005. Complex visual hallucinations in the visually impaired: a structured 
history-taking approach. Arch. Ophthalmol. 123, 349 – 355 . 
Montagnese, M., Leptourgos, P., Fernyhough, C., Waters, F., Lar ø i, F., Jardri, R., 
Urwyler, P., 2021. A review of multimodal hallucinations: categorization, 
assessment, theoretical perspectives, and clinical recommendations. Schizophr. Bull. 
47, 237 – 248 . 
Moran, R.J., Campo, P., Symmonds, M., Stephan, K.E., Dolan, R.J., Friston, K.J., 2013. 
Free energy, precision and learning: the role of cholinergic neuromodulation. 
J. Neurosci. 33, 8227 – 8236 . 
Mosimann, U.P., Rowan, E.N., Partington, C.E., Collerton, D., Littlewood, E., O ’ Brien, J. 
T., McKeith, I.G., 2006. Characteristics of visual hallucinations in Parkinson disease 
dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies. Am. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 14, 153 – 160 . 
Muller, A.J., Shine, J.M., Halliday, G.M., Lewis, S.J., 2014. Visual hallucinations in 
Parkinson ’ s disease: theoretical models. Mov. Disord. 29, 1591 – 1598 . 
Nara, S., Fujii, H., Tsukada, H., Tsuda, I., 2022. Visual hallucinations in dementia with 
Lewy bodies originate from necrosis of characteristic neurons and connections in 
three-module perception model. Sci. Rep. 14172 . 
Nara, S.A., Fujii, H., Tsukada, H., Tsuda, I., 2019. A three-modules scenario in an 
interpretation of visual hallucination in dementia with Lewy bodies and preliminary 
results of computer experiments. 2019 Int. Jt. Conf. Neural Netw. IEEE 1 – 8 . 
Nour, M.M., Carhart-Harris, R.L., 2017. Psychedelics and the science of self-experience. 
Br. J. Psychiatry 210, 177 – 179 . 
O ’ Brien, J., Taylor, J.P., Ballard, C., Barker, R.A., Bradley, C., Burns, A., Weil, R.S., 2020. 
Visual hallucinations in neurological and ophthalmological disease: pathophysiology 
and management. J. Neurol., Neurosurg. Psychiatry 91, 512 – 519 . 
O ’ Brien, J.T., Firbank, M.J., Mosimann, U.P., Burn, D.J., McKeith, I.G., 2005. Change in 
perfusion, hallucinations and fluctuations in consciousness in dementia with Lewy 
bodies. Psychiatry Res.: Neuroimaging 139, 79 – 88 . 
Onofrj, M., Espay, A.J., Bonanni, L., Delli Pizzi, S., Sensi, S.L., 2019. Hallucinations, 
somatic-functional disorders of PD-DLB as expressions of thalamic dysfunction. Mov. 
Disord. 34, 1100 – 1111 . 
Parr, T., Friston, K.J., 2019. Attention or salience? Curr. Opin. Psychol. 29, 1 – 5 . 
Parr, T., Rees, G., Friston, K.J., 2018. Computational neuropsychology and Bayesian 
inference. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 61 . 
Perdikis, D., Huys, R., Jirsa, V.K., 2011. Time scale hierarchies in the functional 
organization of complex behaviors. PLoS Comput. Biol. 7, e1002198 . 
de Pierrefeu, A., Fovet, T., Hadj-Selem, F., L ¨ofstedt, T., Ciuciu, P., Lefebvre, S., 
Duchesnay, E., 2018. Prediction of activation patterns preceding hallucinations in 
patients with schizophrenia using machine learning with structured sparsity. Hum. 
Brain Mapp. 39, 1777 – 1788 . 
Prinzmetal, W., McCool, C., Park, S., 2005. Attention: reaction time and accuracy reveal 
different mechanisms. J. Exp. Psychol.: Gen. 134, 73 – 92 . 
Renouf, S., ffytche, D., Pinto, R., Murray, J., Lawrence, V., 2018. Visual hallucinations in 
dementia and Parkinson ’ s disease: a qualitative exploration of patient and caregiver 
experiences. Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 33, 1327 – 1334 . 
Ross, J., Morrone, M.C., Goldberg, M.E., Burr, D.C., 2001. Changes in visual perception at 
the time of saccades. Trends Neurosci. 24, 113 – 121 . 
Russo, M., Carrarini, C., Dono, F., Rispoli, M.G., Di Pietro, M., Di Stefano, V., Onofrj, M., 
2019. The pharmacology of visual hallucinations in synucleinopathies. Front. 
Pharmacol. 10, 1379 . 
Santhouse, A.M., Howard, R.J., ffytche, D.H., 2000. Visual hallucinatory syndromes and 
the anatomy of the visual brain. Brain 123, 2055 – 2064 . 
Schultz, W., 2016. Dopamine reward prediction-error signalling: a two-component 
response. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17, 183 – 195 . 
Schultz, W., Dayan, P., Montague, P.R., 1997. A neural substrate of prediction and 
reward. Science 275, 1593 – 1599 . 
Scott, I.U., Schein, O.D., Feuer, W.J., Folstein, M.F., 2001. Visual hallucinations in 
patients with retinal disease. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 13, 590 – 598 . 
Series, P., Reichert, D., Storkey, A.J., 2010. Hallucinations in Charles Bonnet syndrome 
induced by homeostasis: a deep Boltzmann machine model. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. 
Syst. 23, 2020 – 2028 . 
Shine, J.M., 2021. The thalamus integrates the macrosystems of the brain to facilitate 
complex, adaptive brain network dynamics. Prog. Neurobiol. 199, 101951 . 
Shine, J.M., Halliday, G.M., Naismith, S.L., Lewis, S.J., 2011. Visual misperceptions and 
hallucinations in Parkinson ’ s disease: dysfunction of attentional control networks? 
Mov. Disord. 26, 2154 – 2159 . 
Shine, J.M., O ’ Callaghan, C., Halliday, G.M., Lewis, S.J., 2014. Tricks of the mind: visual 
hallucinations as disorders of attention. Prog. Neurobiol. 116, 58 – 65 . 
Singh, G., Sharan, P., Kulhara, P., 2003. Role of coping strategies and attitudes in 
mediating distress due to hallucinations in schizophrenia. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 
57, 517 – 522 . 
Spratling, M.W., 2017. A review of predictive coding algorithms. Brain Cogn. 112, 
92 – 97 . 
Squire, L.R., Zola, S.M., 1997. Amnesia, memory and brain systems. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. 
Lond. Ser. B: Biol. Sci. 352, 1663 – 1673 . 
Stahl, S.M., 2018. Beyond the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia to three neural 
networks of psychosis: dopamine, serotonin, and glutamate. CNS Spectr. 23, 
187 – 191 . 
Stebbins, G.T., Goetz, C.G., Carrillo, M.C., Bangen, K.J., Turner, D.A., Glover, G.H., 
Gabrieli, J.D.E., 2004. Altered cortical visual processing in PD with hallucinations: 
an fMRI study. Neurology 63, 1409 – 1416 . 
Summerfield, C., Egner, T., 2009. Expectation (and attention) in visual cognition. Trends 
Cogn. Sci. 13, 403 – 409 . 
Todo, M., 2020. Towards the interpretation of complex visual hallucinations in terms of 
self-reorganization of neural networks. Neurosci. Res. 156, 147 – 158 . 
Toh, W.L., McCarthy-Jones, S., Copolov, D., Rossell, S.L., 2019. Have we overlooked the 
significance of multimodal hallucinations in schizophrenia? Psychiatry Res. 279, 
358 – 360 . 
Tsuda, I., Yamaguti, Y., Watanabe, H., 2016. Self-organization with constraints — a 
mathematical model for functional differentiation. Entropy 18, 74 . 
Tsukada, H., Fujii, H., Aihara, K., Tsuda, I., 2015. Computational model of visual 
hallucination in dementia with Lewy bodies. Neural Netw. 62, 73 – 82 . 
Urwyler, P., Nef, T., Killen, A., Collerton, D., Thomas, A., Burn, D., Mosimann, U.P., 
2014. Visual complaints and visual hallucinations in Parkinson ’ s disease. Park. 
Relat. Disord. 20, 318 – 322 . 
Van Ommen, M.M., Van Beilen, M., Cornelissen, F.W., Smid, H.G.O.M., Knegtering, H., 
Aleman, A., GROUP Investigators, 2016. The prevalence of visual hallucinations in 
non-affective psychosis, and the role of perception and attention. Psychol. Med. 46, 
1735 – 1747 . 
Vasishth, S., Nicenboim, B., Engelmann, F., Burchert, F., 2019. Computational models of 
retrieval processes in sentence processing. Trends Cogn. Sci. 23, 968 – 982 . 
Vellante, M., Lar ø i, F., Cella, M., Raballo, A., Petretto, D.R., Preti, A., 2012. 
Hallucination-like experiences in the nonclinical population. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 200, 
310 – 315 . 
Warburton, D.M., Wesnes, K., Edwards, J., Larrad, D., 1985. Scopolamine and the 
sensory conditioning of hallucinations. Neuropsychobiology 14, 198 – 202 . 
Watabe-Uchida, M., Eshel, N., Uchida, N., 2017. Neural circuitry of reward prediction 
error. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 40, 373 . 
Waters, F., Collerton, D., Ffytche, D.H., Jardri, R., Pins, D., Dudley, R., Lar ø i, F., 2014. 
Visual hallucinations in the psychosis spectrum and comparative information from 
neurodegenerative disorders and eye disease. Schizophr. Bull. 40 (Suppl_4), 
S233 – S245 . 
Webster, R., Holroyd, S., 2000. Prevalence of psychotic symptoms in delirium. 
Psychosomatics 41, 519 – 522 . 
Zarkali, A., Adams, R.A., Psarras, S., Leyland, L.A., Rees, G., Weil, R.S., 2019. Increased 
weighting on prior knowledge in Lewy body-associated visual hallucinations. Brain 
Commun. 1 (1) fcz007 .  
Zarkali, A., Luppi, A.I., Stamatakis, E.A., Reeves, S., McColgan, P., Leyland, L.-A., Lees, A. 
J., Weil, R.S., 2021. Chang. Dyn. Transit. Integr. Segreg. S. Under Vis. hallucinations 
Parkinson ’ s Dis. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.06.21.449237 . 
Zmigrod, L., Garrison, J.R., Carr, J., Simons, J.S., 2016. The neural mechanisms of 
hallucinations: a quantitative meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies. Neurosci. 
Biobehav. Rev. 69, 113 – 123 . 
Zoldan, J., Friedberg, G., Livneh, M., Melamed, E., 1995. Psychosis in advanced 
Parkinson ’ s disease: treatment with ondansetron, a 5 – HT3 receptor antagonist. 
Neurology 45, 1305 – 1308 . 
Glossary 
Attention: Processes that prioritize those (sensory) data sources relevant to task demands 
over others in order to bias perception 
Spatial attention: Processes that direct visual perception towards relevant parts of the visual 
field 
Precision (confidence): The confidence assigned to probability distributions in internal 
generative models. Highly confident or precise distributions have greater influence on 
perception, e.g., data assumed to be generated in a precise way cause more belief- 
updating than those assumed to be generated more stochastically 
Cortical excitability: Strength of neuronal response to a given stimulus 
Deafferentation: Loss of neural input to sensory system 
Expectancy: The chance of particular perceptions or data being present in a specific visual 
environment 
Formed or complex hallucination: A perception of a meaningful image of something which is 
not there in the visual environment, often a person or animal 
D. Collerton et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 150 (2023) 105208
14
Fortification hallucination: Jagged lines in part of the visual field, often associated with 
migraine 
Illusion: An incorrect perception of an object which is in the visual environment 
Likelihood probability: Chance of sensory data given some hypothesis or cause of those data. 
Multimodal hallucination: A hallucination in two or more sensory modalities at the same 
time, for example a face which speaks 
Object Attention: Processes that prioritize data relevant to aspects of a perceived object 
Pareidolia: The propensity to see meaningful images in meaningless shapes. For example, 
faces in clouds. 
Passage hallucination: A brief hallucination of something passing in the peripheral visual 
field 
Posterior probability: Belief about a hypothesis or causes of sensory data after having 
observed those data. What is believed to have been “seen” 
Prediction error: Mismatch between expected and actual sensory data 
Predictive processing (generative perception): Framework for visual perception in which what 
is “seen” is an internal model which is validated against sensory data 
Presence hallucination: A feeling of the presence of someone or something, in the absence of 
seeing it. 
Prior probability (sometimes termed an empirical prior or prior belief): Belief about some 
hypothesis or cause of sensory data before making any observations of those data. 
Simple or unformed hallucination: A perception of meaningless dots or shapes which are not 
there in the visual environment 
Synaptic gain: Process of modulating transmission between neurons 
Unimodal hallucination: A hallucination in a single sensory modality, for example a purely 
visual hallucination of a face 
Veridical perception: A perception that matches what is there in the visual environment 
Voluntary image: A conscious imaging of a perception in the mind’s eye 
D. Collerton et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               