Citation: Collerton, D.; Tsuda, I.;
Nara, S. Episodic Visual
Hallucinations, Inference and Free
Energy. Entropy 2024, 26, 557.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e26070557
Academic Editor: Mihaly Mezei
Received: 15 May 2024
Revised: 21 June 2024
Accepted: 26 June 2024
Published: 28 June 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
entropy
Review
Episodic Visual Hallucinations, Inference and Free Energy
Daniel Collerton 1, *
 , Ichiro Tsuda 2
 and Shigetoshi Nara 3
1 Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU, UK
2 AIT Center, Sapporo City University, Sapporo 005-0864, Japan; i.tsuda@scu.ac.jp
3 Graduate School of Environmental, Life, Natural Science and Technology, Electrical and Electronic
Engineering Department, Okayama University, Okayama 700-8530, Japan; nara@ec.okayama-u.ac.jp
* Correspondence: daniel.collerton@ncl.ac.uk
Abstract: Understandings of how visual hallucinations appear have been highly inﬂuenced by gener-
ative approaches, in particular Friston’s Active Inference conceptualization. Their core proposition is
that these phenomena occur when hallucinatory expectations outweigh actual sensory data. This
imbalance occurs as the brain seeks to minimize informational free energy, a measure of the distance
between predicted and actual sensory data in a stationary open system. We review this approach in
the light of old and new information on the role of environmental factors in episodic hallucinations.
In particular, we highlight the possible relationship of speciﬁc visual triggers to the onset and offset
of some episodes. We use an analogy from phase transitions in physics to explore factors which
might account for intermittent shifts between veridical and hallucinatory vision. In these triggered
forms of hallucinations, we suggest that there is a transient disturbance in the normal one-to-one
correspondence between a real object and the counterpart perception such that this correspondence
becomes between the real object and a hallucination. Generative models propose that a lack of
information transfer from the environment to the brain is one of the key features of hallucinations. In
contrast, we submit that speciﬁc information transfer is required at onset and offset in these cases.
We propose that this transient one-to-one correspondence between environment and hallucination is
mediated more by aberrant discriminative than by generative inference. Discriminative inference
can be conceptualized as a process for maximizing shared information between the environment
and perception within a self-organizing nonstationary system. We suggest that generative inference
plays the greater role in established hallucinations and in the persistence of individual hallucinatory
episodes. We further explore whether thermodynamic free energy may be an additional factor in
why hallucinations are temporary. Future empirical research could productively concentrate on three
areas. Firstly, subjective perceptual changes and parallel variations in brain function during speciﬁc
transitions between veridical and hallucinatory vision to inform models of how episodes occur.
Secondly, systematic investigation of the links between environment and hallucination episodes to
probe the role of information transfer in triggering transitions between veridical and hallucinatory
vision. Finally, changes in hallucinatory episodes over time to elucidate the role of learning on
phenomenology. These empirical data will allow the potential roles of different forms of inference in
the stages of hallucinatory episodes to be elucidated.
Keywords: Active Inference; generative inference; free energy; visual hallucination; discriminative
inference; phase transition
1. Introduction
In addition to his substantial contributions in many ﬁelds of neuroscience, Karl Friston
has been one of the key theorists on the mechanisms underlying visual hallucinations. His
2005 commentary, “Hallucinations and perceptual inference” [1] on Collerton et al.’s Target
Article “Why people see things that are not there” [2] was the ﬁrst explicit application of
generative approaches underpinned by mechanisms to minimize free energy to understand
visual hallucinations. He has continued this active participation through to the 2023
Entropy 2024, 26, 557. https://doi.org/10.3390/e26070557 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 2 of 19
publication of an extensive review of existing models and a new integrated theoretical
framework for modelling hallucinations [3]. It is therefore a great pleasure to participate in
this Special Issue of Entropy to mark his 65th birthday.
We have taken the opportunity to give a personal perspective on how generative and
other mechanisms have inﬂuenced the understanding of hallucinations over the last twenty
years, to highlight some current areas where data and theory are lacking, and to suggest
fruitful avenues of research for the future.
1.1. The Importance of Visual Hallucinations
Visual hallucinations come in a variety of different forms and occur in many different
people. In this paper, we will focus on complex, sometimes called formed, hallucinations of
meaningful things, usually of people, faces, animals, or objects [2,3]. These experiences can
be an infrequent feature of normal life for many people. However, they are predominantly
associated with three groups of clinical disorders: Lewy body disorders such as Parkinson’s
disease, visual impairment due to various eye diseases, and psychotic disorders such as
schizophrenia. They are often a clinical marker of increased disease severity and greater
personal impact. Hence, understanding their genesis in order to improve treatments is an
area of active investigation.
Hallucinations are a variation on veridical perception. Veridical perception depends
upon the synchronized function of multiple interacting sensory and cognitive systems [4].
Each is functionally specialized and acts at different levels and timescales. Though not
always error-free, the output of these systems in terms of an object perception is remarkably
consistent. Hence, veridical vision can be characterized as a one-to-one correspondence
between what is perceived and what is out there, with the added property that this corre-
spondence is consistent from one person to another: if I see a dog, other people will also
see a dog.
Visual hallucinations, in contrast, are deﬁned as seeing something that is not there [2,3].
Thus, the usual correspondence is lost. If I and most others see an empty room, the
hallucinator sees a person in that room that neither I nor those others can see. (They
may also have the additional property that this corresponding hallucination is unique to
that individual, though this is not established given the rareness of people hallucinating
alongside each other.)
An under-recognized corollary of this deﬁnition is that hallucinations are equally char-
acterized by not seeing something that is there. Thus, as Figure 1 illustrates, a hallucination
is both to perceive an incorrect object and to fail to perceive the correct object.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 19 
 
 
understand visual hallucinations. He has continued this active participation through to 
the 2023 publication of an extensive review of existing models and a new integrated the-
oretical framework for modelling hallucinations [3]. It is therefore a great pleasure to par-
ticipate in this Special Issue of Entropy to mark his 65th birthday. 
We have taken the opportunity to give a personal perspective on how generative and 
other mechanisms have influenced the underst anding of hallucinations over the last 
twenty years, to highlight some current area s where data and theory are lacking, and to 
suggest fruitful avenues of research for the future. 
1.1. The Importance of Visual Hallucinations 
Visual hallucinations come in a variety of different forms and occur in many different 
people. In this paper, we will focus on complex, sometimes called formed, hallucinations 
of meaningful things, usually of people, faces, animals, or objects [2,3]. These experiences 
can be an infrequent feature of normal life for many people. However, they are predomi-
nantly associated with three groups of clin ical disorders: Lewy body disorders such as 
Parkinson’s disease, visual impairment due to various eye diseases, and psychotic disor-
ders such as schizophrenia. They are often a clinical marker of increased disease severity 
and greater personal impact. Hence, understanding their genesis in order to improve 
treatments is an area of active investigation. 
Hallucinations are a variation on veridical perception. Veridical perception depends 
upon the synchronized function of multiple interacting sensory and cognitive systems [4]. 
Each is functionally specialized and acts at different levels and timescales. Though not 
always error-free, the output of these systems in terms of an object perception is remark-
ably consistent. Hence, veridical vision can be characterized as a one-to-one correspond-
ence between what is perceived and what is out there, with the added property that this 
correspondence is consistent from one person to another: if I see a dog, other people will 
also see a dog.  
Visual hallucinations, in contrast, are defined as seeing something that is not there 
[2,3]. Thus, the usual correspondence is lost. If I and most others see an empty room, the 
hallucinator sees a person in that room that neither I nor those others can see. (They may 
also have the additional property that this corresponding hallucination is unique to that 
individual, though this is not established given the rareness of people hallucinating along-
side each other.) 
An under-recognized corollary of this definition is that hallucinations are equally 
characterized by not seeing something that is there. Thus, as Figure 1 illustrates, a hallu-
cination is both to perceive an incorrect object and to fail to perceive the correct object.  
 
Figure 1. Reconstruction of a hallucination of a person in a room. To see the ﬁgure that is not there is
also to fail to see the lamp and green cushion that are there.
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 3 of 19
1.2. Generative Models of Visual Perception
This corollary is particularly relevant for generative models of perception, such as
those that provide the foundation for Friston and colleagues’ Active Inference account of
visual hallucinations [3]. Generative approaches propose that subjective visual and other
perceptions map onto internal representations of the world. These representations are
continually transformed to minimize any mismatch between predictions of sensory data
derived from them and actual sensory data. Hence, they are updated to reﬂect what is
actually there (Figure 2).
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 19 
 
 
Figure 1. Reconstruction of a hallucination of a person in a room. To see the figure that is not there 
is also to fail to see the lamp and green cushion that are there. 
1.2. Generative Models of Visual Perception 
This corollary is particularly relevant for generative models of perception, such as 
those that provide the foundation for Friston and colleagues’ Active Inference account of 
visual hallucinations [3]. Generative approaches propose that subjective visual and other 
perceptions map onto internal representations of the world. These representations are 
continually transformed to minimize any mismatch between predictions of sensory data 
derived from them and actual sensory data. He nce, they are updated to reflect what is 
actually there (Figure 2).  
 
Figure 2. Generative model of visual perception. The perception is driven by expectations which are 
created by a complex interaction of higher-level cognitive functions. Predictions of incoming sen-
sory data drawn from that perception are then compared with actual sensory data, with the percep-
tion then being modified to minimize any mismatch. Expectations also drive attention and action to 
focus the gathering of sensory data on areas that are most relevant to testing predictions. Further 
details are in Collerton et al., 2023 [3]. 
Since generative models are not directly derived from sensory data but from internal 
predictions of what should be seen, they always have the potential to see something that 
is not there—to hallucinate. It is the rapid, accurate adjustment of the internal model in 
response to mismatches between what is expected to be seen and what is there to be seen 
that keeps them veridical. Hence, perception  remains swift and accurate even if percep-
tions are unpredictable, for example, when watching a film or television program in which 
there are quick discontinuous changes in scenes and objects. 
1.3. Active Inference and Hallucinations 
As applied to hallucinations, Active Inference therefore combined two factors to ex-
plain why hallucinations occur. Firstly, there is an internal representation of the world 
which contains the hallucinated perception—an expectation of seeing the thing that is not 
Figure 2. Generative model of visual perception. The perception is driven by expectations which are
created by a complex interaction of higher-level cognitive functions. Predictions of incoming sensory
data drawn from that perception are then compared with actual sensory data, with the perception
then being modiﬁed to minimize any mismatch. Expectations also drive attention and action to focus
the gathering of sensory data on areas that are most relevant to testing predictions. Further details
are in Collerton et al., 2023 [3].
Since generative models are not directly derived from sensory data but from internal
predictions of what should be seen, they always have the potential to see something that
is not there—to hallucinate. It is the rapid, accurate adjustment of the internal model in
response to mismatches between what is expected to be seen and what is there to be seen
that keeps them veridical. Hence, perception remains swift and accurate even if perceptions
are unpredictable, for example, when watching a ﬁlm or television program in which there
are quick discontinuous changes in scenes and objects.
1.3. Active Inference and Hallucinations
As applied to hallucinations, Active Inference therefore combined two factors to ex-
plain why hallucinations occur. Firstly, there is an internal representation of the world
which contains the hallucinated perception—an expectation of seeing the thing that is not
there. Secondly, there is a failure to adapt that representation in the absence of correspond-
ing sensory information—an inability to see the thing that is there. Computationally, there
are two factors. Either an over-conﬁdent prior belief in the hallucinatory perception is
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 4 of 19
given too high a weight in computations, and/or sensory data are given too low a weight.
In the latter case, data may be absent. Alternatively, they may be ignored if present because
they are predicted to be so imprecise as to be irrelevant.
1.4. The Challenge of Episodic Hallucinations
Recently, there has been an upsurge of interest in why hallucinations do not happen
more frequently. Most of the factors in all models are consistently present, so why are
hallucinations not? As Figure 3 shows, visual hallucinations are episodic. Even in people
who are prone to hallucinations, most visual perception is veridical. If it is incorrect, the
error lies in not recognizing what is there—agnosia rather than hallucinations. That is, it
is the corollary to but not the proposition that a hallucination is seeing something that is
not there. Even in the 4% of people with eye disease who report continual hallucinations,
individual hallucinations are temporary.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 19 
 
 
there. Secondly, there is a fa ilure to adapt that representation in the absence of corre-
sponding sensory information—an inability to  see the thing that is there. Computation-
ally, there are two factors. Either an over-c onfident prior belief in the hallucinatory per-
ception is given too high a weight in computations, and/or sensory data are given too low 
a weight. In the latter case, data may be absent. Alternatively, they may be ignored if pre-
sent because they are predicted to be so imprecise as to be irrelevant. 
1.4. The Challenge of Episodic Hallucinations 
Recently, there has been an upsurge of interest in why hallucinations do not happen 
more frequently. Most of the factors in all models are consistently present, so why are 
hallucinations not? As Figure 3 shows, visual hallucinations are episodic. Even in people 
who are prone to hallucinations, most visual perception is veridical. If it is incorrect, the 
error lies in not recognizing what is there—ag nosia rather than hallucinations. That is, it 
is the corollary to but not the proposition that a hallucination is seeing something that is 
not there. Even in the 4% of people with eye disease who report continual hallucinations, 
individual hallucinations are temporary.  
 
Figure 3. Frequency and duration of the visual halluci nations reported in the previous month by 
controls (reported by 15% of sample) and three at -risk groups: participants with eye disease (ED, 
75% of sample), participants with Parkinson’s disease (PD, 51% of sample), and participants with 
Lewy body disease (LBD, 70% of sample). The majority of participants in all groups had hallucina-
tions less than daily for less than two hours. Data taken from Urwyler et al., 2016 [5]. 
As applied to Active Inference, why are priors only occasionally overly precise, and 
why are sensory data only sometimes under-precise or absent?  
Figure 3. Frequency and duration of the visual hallucinations reported in the previous month by
controls (reported by 15% of sample) and three at-risk groups: participants with eye disease (ED, 75%
of sample), participants with Parkinson’s disease (PD, 51% of sample), and participants with Lewy
body disease (LBD, 70% of sample). The majority of participants in all groups had hallucinations less
than daily for less than two hours. Data taken from Urwyler et al., 2016 [5].
As applied to Active Inference, why are priors only occasionally overly precise, and
why are sensory data only sometimes under-precise or absent?
1.5. Biases in the Data on How Hallucinations Occur Only Sometimes
In trying to answer this question, it is striking that the overwhelming majority of
research on visual hallucinations over the last two decades has focused on the people who
experience them. Of the ten most highly cited non-review papers on visual hallucinations
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 5 of 19
on Web of Science [6–15], three were purely observational and evaluated the characteristics
of people who hallucinated, ﬁve compared people who hallucinate with similar clinical
states who do not, and two compared people when they were and were not hallucinating.
Even looking at less inﬂuential papers, there have been no publications which have tracked
transitions from veridical to hallucinatory vision, and none which have systematically
looked at links between the environment and hallucinations.
Models of how hallucinations occur are therefore almost exclusively based upon what
happens in the brains of people who have hallucinations. The most recent summary of
models (Figure 4) illustrates this blind spot for external factors which might account for why
hallucinations occur episodically—no approaches explicitly include environmental factors.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 19 
 
 
1.5. Biases in the Data on How Hallucinations Occur Only Sometimes 
In trying to answer this question, it is striking that the overwhelming majority of 
research on visual hallucinations over the last two decades has focused on the people who 
experience them. Of the ten most highly cited non-review papers on visual hallucinations 
on Web of Science [6–15], three were purely observational and evaluated the characteris-
tics of people who hallucinated, five compared people who hallucinate with similar clini-
cal states who do not, and two compared people when they were and were not halluci-
nating. Even looking at less influential papers, there have been no publications which 
have tracked transitions from veridical to hallucinatory vision, and none which have sys-
tematically looked at links between the environment and hallucinations. 
Models of how hallucinations occur are th erefore almost exclusively based upon 
what happens in the brains of people who have hallucinations. The most recent summary 
of models (Figure 4) illustrates this blind spot for external factors which might account for 
why hallucinations occur episodically—no approaches explicitly include environmental 
factors. 
 
Figure 4. Mapping of models of hallucinations developed over the last two decades onto aspects of 
visual systems (derived from Colle rton et al., 2023 [3]). Depth of color indicates the number of ap-
proaches which highlight a specific aspect, with darker green indicating a greater number of mod-
els. Thus, sensory data, attention, and expectancies are common to most models. Further details of 
each model are in Collerton et al., 2023. 
An analogy can help explore why comparing hallucinating and no-hallucinating 
states has intrinsic limitations. We can consider a hallucinatory image as a transient state 
of the perceptual system. The movement from  veridical to hallucinatory perception is 
therefore a transition from one state to another. 
In his 2007 paper [16], Friston states that organisms aim to maintain homeostasis by 
avoiding physical first-order phase transitions such as those between solids and liquids. 
We suggest that there is a si milar principle is at work within brain systems. Organisms 
seek to maintain a stationary state of perception in which objects in the environment have 
a consistent unique mapping onto internal representations. We propose that hallucinatory 
perception is a qualitatively different state which transitions from this stationary mapping 
to a nonstationary transitory idiosyncratic mapping during hallucinatory episodes (see 
legend to Figure 5 for more details).  
Looking for inspiration from other system s which exhibit qualitative changes sug-
gests that physical phase transitions may be a useful heuristic [17,18]. Similar analogies 
Figure 4. Mapping of models of hallucinations developed over the last two decades onto aspects
of visual systems (derived from Collerton et al., 2023 [ 3]). Depth of color indicates the number
of approaches which highlight a speciﬁc aspect, with darker green indicating a greater number of
models. Thus, sensory data, attention, and expectancies are common to most models. Further details
of each model are in Collerton et al., 2023.
An analogy can help explore why comparing hallucinating and no-hallucinating states
has intrinsic limitations. We can consider a hallucinatory image as a transient state of the
perceptual system. The movement from veridical to hallucinatory perception is therefore a
transition from one state to another.
In his 2007 paper [16], Friston states that organisms aim to maintain homeostasis by
avoiding physical ﬁrst-order phase transitions such as those between solids and liquids.
We suggest that there is a similar principle is at work within brain systems. Organisms
seek to maintain a stationary state of perception in which objects in the environment have a
consistent unique mapping onto internal representations. We propose that hallucinatory
perception is a qualitatively different state which transitions from this stationary mapping
to a nonstationary transitory idiosyncratic mapping during hallucinatory episodes (see
legend to Figure 5 for more details).
Looking for inspiration from other systems which exhibit qualitative changes suggests
that physical phase transitions may be a useful heuristic [ 17,18]. Similar analogies have
been used in conceptualizing the transition from walking to running [19]. In particular, we
can consider the hallucinatory phase as an informational transition from a stable veridical
phase, to a mixed-phase regime [Figure 5] which, as Figure 1 illustrates, retains aspects of
veridical perception along with hallucinatory elements.
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 6 of 19
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 19 
 
 
have been used in conceptualizing the transition from walking to running [19]. In partic-
ular, we can consider the hallucinatory phase as an informational transition from a stable 
veridical phase, to a mixed-phase regime [Figure 5] which, as Figure 1 illustrates, retains 
aspects of veridical perception along with hallucinatory elements. 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 5. (a) Illustration of the correspondence between features of episodes of visual hallucinations 
and first-order phase transitions. We use the analogy that veridical perception is akin to a stable 
Figure 5. (a) Illustration of the correspondence between features of episodes of visual hallucinations
and ﬁrst-order phase transitions. We use the analogy that veridical perception is akin to a stable solid
such as ice—there is a consistent ordered one-to-one mapping between object and perception—and
that fully hallucinatory vision is sufﬁciently distinct from fully veridical vision to be analogous to
a different state, akin to water. However, panoramic hallucinations in which veridical vision is
entirely replaced by a hallucinatory scene are rare [20], and are only reported in eye disease. Most
hallucinations, including those in eye disease, are of a hallucinatory element within a veridical
scene as illustrated in Figure 1. In these cases, a partially disordered mixed-phase regime of solid
(veridical) and liquid droplets (hallucinations) is a better analogy. T—temperature; Tt—transition
temperature. (b) Illustration of the correspondence between features of episodes of visual hallucina-
tions and the second-order phase transition between ferromagnetic and paramagnetic states [17,18].
T—temperature; Tc—critical (Curie) temperature; and H—strength of magnetic ﬁeld.
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 7 of 19
Four aspects of physical phase transitions highlight areas where current data are lacking.
Firstly, these transitions only occur for a relatively restricted set of values for relevant
variables. Investigating variables outside of that range is not productive. To take our
melting analogy in Figure 5a, temperature comparisons above or below melting point tell
us nothing about the speciﬁc temperature at which partial melting occurs. At present,
research designs have achieved the equivalent of comparing locations (people) in which ice
(veridical perception) is common with locations (people) where liquid water (hallucination)
is common. Though differences between a fridge and a freezer can suggest factors which
inﬂuence the occurrence of ice, they provide little insight into the process by which ice
transforms into water. Comparing a freezer when it is turned on and turned off (people
when they are not or are hallucinating) gives greater speciﬁcity in identifying relevant
variables to consider in the transition from ice to water, but still leaves the actual process
a mystery.
Secondly, the transition between phases reﬂects processes which are not present at
other times. Comparing ice and water droplets or ferromagnetic and paramagnetic states
(veridical vision and hallucinations) does not directly indicate the process that takes one
to the other. Thus, nucleation, the ﬁrst step of self-organization in a phase transition from
solid to liquid, can only be studied during melting.
Additionally, within the critical transition region, processes ﬂuctuate in response to
their intrinsic dynamics, leading to ﬁnite durations which may map onto the transient
phenomena seen in network models of hallucinations in, for example, Lewy body disor-
ders [21].
Finally, comparing ﬁrst- and second-order transitions puts a focus on how little we
currently know of the phenomenology of transitions between veridical and hallucinatory
vision. In contrast with ﬁrst-order transitions, those of the second order occur without a
discontinuous shift in physical properties. Whether transitions are abrupt or gradual may
suggest which analogy is more apt.
Our analogy therefore suggests that it will be productive to identify novel processes
which are associated with hallucinations, and to focus investigations on the values of factors
just around the time of transition.
1.6. Evidence on the Role of Information T ransfer from the Environment in T riggering Hallucinations
What might be a novel process, akin to nucleation, that starts the transition between
veridical and hallucinatory vision?
Reviewing the evidence above indicates that the predominant paradigm has been to
treat the brain as the sole thing that needs to be understood if we are to model hallucinations.
Generative models in particular suggest that it is when the brain is cut off from external
information that hallucinations are more likely.
However, the brain does not function as a closed system, as there is a continual
ﬂow of information associated with both energy and material transfer between it and the
environment [16]. Indeed, veridical perception is deﬁned by the relationship between
perception and that environment, and hallucination is deﬁned by a different relationship.
The granular relationship of the environment to hallucinations is poorly understood.
What evidence there is, though mainly anecdotal, does suggest regularities in when and
where hallucinatory episodes occur [22]. Thus, hallucinations are classically said to occur in
a limited number of settings and to be more common at some times of the day than others.
In support of this view, Figure 6 is a rare example of systematic data from a small study
on eye disease and psychosis which shows that the majority of participants experienced
hallucinations in fewer than 10 locations.
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 8 of 19
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 19 
 
 
The granular relationship of the environment to hallucinations is poorly understood. 
What evidence there is, though mainly anecdo tal, does suggest regularities in when and 
where hallucinatory episodes occur [22]. Thus, hallucinations are classically said to occur 
in a limited number of settings and to be more common at some times of the day than 
others. In support of this view, Figure 6 is a rare example of systematic data from a small 
study on eye disease and psychosis which shows that the majority of participants experi-
enced hallucinations in fewer than 10 locations.  
 
Figure 6. Data from daily diaries collected over a one- month period on total number of locations 
that participants with either eye disease (ED) or psychosis (PSY) recorded visual hallucinations 
(VH). Taken from Hannant, 2016 [23]. 
Further evidence, some of it older and some very new, supports the possibility that 
particular information transfer is relevant to understanding how episodic hallucinations 
occur. However, it is limited and drawn from treatment studies that did not specifically 
focus on direct environment–hallucination links. 
Thus, two case studies recently reported by Ishimaru and colleagues [24] showed 
potential relationships between specific item s in the environment and particular visual 
hallucinations. Removing that item mitigated the hallucination. They reported cushions 
on a settee triggering hallucinations of a boy, patterns on a carpet, hallucinations of chil-
dren and hanging clothes, a vision of a person (Figure 7). This suggests several one-to-one 
relationships between trigger objects and ha llucinations. There was not the normal one-
to-one mapping, but a new one. This was not consistent (or stationary), however, since 
sometimes the trigger object was seen correc tly. Where others would see a cushion, the 
hallucinator saw a boy, where others saw cl othes, a person, and a pattern on a carpet, 
children. To return to Figure 1, there is the possibility not that the person is seen instead 
of the cushion and lamp, but that the cushion and lamp are seen as a person. 
Figure 6. Data from daily diaries collected over a one-month period on total number of locations
that participants with either eye disease (ED) or psychosis (PSY) recorded visual hallucinations (VH).
Taken from Hannant, 2016 [23].
Further evidence, some of it older and some very new, supports the possibility that
particular information transfer is relevant to understanding how episodic hallucinations
occur. However, it is limited and drawn from treatment studies that did not speciﬁcally
focus on direct environment–hallucination links.
Thus, two case studies recently reported by Ishimaru and colleagues [ 24] showed
potential relationships between speciﬁc items in the environment and particular visual
hallucinations. Removing that item mitigated the hallucination. They reported cushions on
a settee triggering hallucinations of a boy, patterns on a carpet, hallucinations of children
and hanging clothes, a vision of a person (Figure 7). This suggests several one-to-one
relationships between trigger objects and hallucinations. There was not the normal one-
to-one mapping, but a new one. This was not consistent (or stationary), however, since
sometimes the trigger object was seen correctly. Where others would see a cushion, the
hallucinator saw a boy, where others saw clothes, a person, and a pattern on a carpet,
children. To return to Figure 1, there is the possibility not that the person is seen instead of
the cushion and lamp, but that the cushion and lamp are seen as a person.
Turning to offset, twenty years ago, Diederich et al. [25] surveyed people who manage
their own hallucinations and found that changes in the visual environment such as turning
on a light or looking away can be effective in restoring veridical vision.
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 9 of 19
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 19 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Mapping from environment to perception from Ishimaru et al. [24]. The pictures are of the 
objects which were associated with specific halluci nations and the text is a description of each hal-
lucination. 
Turning to offset, twenty years ago, Diederich et al. [25] surveyed people who man-
age their own hallucinations and found that changes in the visual environment such as 
turning on a light or looking away can be effective in restoring veridical vision. 
2. Re-Conceptualizing Hallucinatory Episodes 
2.1. Onset of a Hallucinatory Episode—How Something Different Is Seen to What Is There 
If hallucinations are specific to particular features of the environment, are generative 
models sufficient to account for hallucination onset, or is a different process, analogous to 
nucleation, required? 
Previous models of hallucinations have suggested that these regularities are due to a 
general effect of visual and temporal context. These factors are potentially modulated by 
internal factors such as diurnal fluctuations in arousal and alertness, as illustrated in Fig-
ure 8. Thus, Active Inference would propose that a particular image of a child would be 
so highly expected (the representation so precise) in that temporal and spatial context that 
the child representation over-rides possibly degraded sensory data derived from a cush-
ion at that particular point in that particular place.  
How plausible is this explanation? Direct evidence is lacking. There are data that 
people who hallucinate tend to see objects in  meaningless noise (pareidolia) more [26], 
suggesting a general increased bias towards expectations influencing perception when 
sensory data are limited. And the more that a hallucination occurs in a specific context, 
the more that it would be expected, suggesting that specific expectancies could be learnt. 
However, generative models do not obviously account for the first occurrence of a hallu-
cination when there should not be any high expectation to see that specific perception. 
Furthermore, the finding that removing the cushion significantly reduces the frequency 
of hallucination heightens the possibility that there is a specific one-to-one mapping be-
tween the cushion and the hallucination, not a more general link between the visual con-
text and the hallucination, and not a lack of sensory data. If that latter were the case, then 
removing the cushion would have little effect on the occurrence of the hallucination. 
We therefore suggest that the current balanc e of evidence (such as it is) means that, 
in at least some cases, hallucinatory episodes are potentially triggered and ended by spe-
cific information transfer from the environment.  This raises the possibility that, as far as 
the perceptual system is concerned, the hallucination is not due to a lack of sensory data, 
but that it is a response to a specific pattern of information. To put it another way, there is 
an idiosyncratic perception of an object—som ething is seen, but not what other people 
would see as that object.  
Figure 7. Mapping from environment to perception from Ishimaru et al. [ 24]. The pictures are of
the objects which were associated with speciﬁc hallucinations and the text is a description of each
hallucination.
2. Re-Conceptualizing Hallucinatory Episodes
2.1. Onset of a Hallucinatory Episode—How Something Different Is Seen to What Is There
If hallucinations are speciﬁc to particular features of the environment, are generative
models sufﬁcient to account for hallucination onset, or is a different process, analogous to
nucleation, required?
Previous models of hallucinations have suggested that these regularities are due to
a general effect of visual and temporal context. These factors are potentially modulated
by internal factors such as diurnal ﬂuctuations in arousal and alertness, as illustrated in
Figure 8. Thus, Active Inference would propose that a particular image of a child would be
so highly expected (the representation so precise) in that temporal and spatial context that
the child representation over-rides possibly degraded sensory data derived from a cushion
at that particular point in that particular place.
How plausible is this explanation? Direct evidence is lacking. There are data that
people who hallucinate tend to see objects in meaningless noise (pareidolia) more [ 26],
suggesting a general increased bias towards expectations inﬂuencing perception when
sensory data are limited. And the more that a hallucination occurs in a speciﬁc context,
the more that it would be expected, suggesting that speciﬁc expectancies could be learnt.
However, generative models do not obviously account for the ﬁrst occurrence of a hal-
lucination when there should not be any high expectation to see that speciﬁc perception.
Furthermore, the ﬁnding that removing the cushion signiﬁcantly reduces the frequency of
hallucination heightens the possibility that there is a speciﬁc one-to-one mapping between
the cushion and the hallucination, not a more general link between the visual context and
the hallucination, and not a lack of sensory data. If that latter were the case, then removing
the cushion would have little effect on the occurrence of the hallucination.
We therefore suggest that the current balance of evidence (such as it is) means that, in
at least some cases, hallucinatory episodes are potentially triggered and ended by speciﬁc
information transfer from the environment. This raises the possibility that, as far as the
perceptual system is concerned, the hallucination is not due to a lack of sensory data, but
that it is a response to a speciﬁc pattern of information. To put it another way, there is an
idiosyncratic perception of an object—something is seen, but not what other people would
see as that object.
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 10 of 19
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 19 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Generative inference and context effects. Pr eceding perceptions create a visual context 
which, in combination with memories of previous hallucinations, leads to heightened expectancies 
of that hallucination recurring which are not corrected to veridical perception because of a lack of 
effective prediction errors due either to sensory data being absent or disregarded. Figure adapted 
from Collerton et al., 2023 [3]. 
How might it be that a cushion is seen as a boy or hanging clothes as a person? One 
possibility is that the trigger object looks so much like the hallucinated perception, that 
what is seen is a misperception or illusion rather than a true hallucination. This is not 
impossible. For example, one of Ishimura’s participants saw hanging clothes as a figure, 
an obvious overlap in form. However, we suggest that this is not the whole explanation, 
given that there is no obvious overlap in form between the triggers and hallucinations of 
the boy and children (Figure 7). 
The alternative, then, is that for the hall ucinator the cushion genuinely looks like a 
boy for some of the time. That is, that the sensory data derived from the cushion lead to 
an internal representation of a boy. Generative inference does not provide an obvious 
mechanism for this link. 
However, this mapping may be understandable within the framework provided by 
another form of inference which the brain may also be capable of exhibiting—discrimina-
tive inference. 
Discriminative inference is another model of how the brain links sensory data to in-
ternal representations [27]. It can be conceptualized as an inversion of generative ap-
proaches. Generative discrimination infers sensory data on the basis of expected percep-
tions, while discriminative inference infers perceptions on the basis of sensory data. Thus, 
it “emphasizes bottom-up signal flow, describing vision as a largely feedforward, discrim-
inative inference process that filters and tran sforms the visual information to remove ir-
relevant variation and represent behaviorally relevant information in a format suitable for 
downstream functions of cognition and behavioral control. In this conception, vision is 
driven by the sensory data, and perception is direct because the processing proceeds from 
the data to the latent variables of interest” (Figure 9). Whether these two forms of inference 
reflect the functioning of different brain sy stems or different modes of functioning of 
Figure 8. Generative inference and context effects. Preceding perceptions create a visual context
which, in combination with memories of previous hallucinations, leads to heightened expectancies
of that hallucination recurring which are not corrected to veridical perception because of a lack of
effective prediction errors due either to sensory data being absent or disregarded. Figure adapted
from Collerton et al., 2023 [3].
How might it be that a cushion is seen as a boy or hanging clothes as a person? One
possibility is that the trigger object looks so much like the hallucinated perception, that
what is seen is a misperception or illusion rather than a true hallucination. This is not
impossible. For example, one of Ishimura’s participants saw hanging clothes as a ﬁgure,
an obvious overlap in form. However, we suggest that this is not the whole explanation,
given that there is no obvious overlap in form between the triggers and hallucinations of
the boy and children (Figure 7).
The alternative, then, is that for the hallucinator the cushion genuinely looks like a
boy for some of the time. That is, that the sensory data derived from the cushion lead
to an internal representation of a boy. Generative inference does not provide an obvious
mechanism for this link.
However, this mapping may be understandable within the framework provided by another
form of inference which the brain may also be capable of exhibiting—discriminative inference.
Discriminative inference is another model of how the brain links sensory data to inter-
nal representations [27]. It can be conceptualized as an inversion of generative approaches.
Generative discrimination infers sensory data on the basis of expected perceptions, while
discriminative inference infers perceptions on the basis of sensory data. Thus, it “empha-
sizes bottom-up signal ﬂow, describing vision as a largely feedforward, discriminative
inference process that ﬁlters and transforms the visual information to remove irrelevant
variation and represent behaviorally relevant information in a format suitable for down-
stream functions of cognition and behavioral control. In this conception, vision is driven
by the sensory data, and perception is direct because the processing proceeds from the
data to the latent variables of interest” (Figure 9). Whether these two forms of inference
reﬂect the functioning of different brain systems or different modes of functioning of com-
mon systems is not established. However, they are commonly modeled using different
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 11 of 19
algorithms, exhibit different computational efﬁciencies in various scenarios, and show
different strengths in accounting for perceptual phenomena. Taken together, these contrasts
imply that the distinction between these types of inference has heuristic value in drawing
attention to different ways in which perceptual systems may be functioning at different
stages of hallucinations.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 19 
 
 
common systems is not established. However, they are commonly modeled using differ-
ent algorithms, exhibit different computational efficiencies in various scenarios, and show 
different strengths in accounting for percep tual phenomena. Taken together, these con-
trasts imply that the distinction between these types of inference has heuristic value in 
drawing attention to different ways in which perceptual systems may be functioning at 
different stages of hallucinations. 
 
Figure 9. Putative role of aberrant disc riminative inference in creati ng hallucinations. There is a 
direct link between the sensory data associated with a triggering object in the environment and the 
consequent hallucinatory perception. Figure adapted from Collerton et al., 2023 [3]. 
Discriminative inference has properties which make it attractive in explaining the 
link between a specific object and a hallucination. In theory, discriminative inference can 
lead to a direct link between any sensory input and any perception. These perceptions are 
much less bound by wider context than generative models propose. Furthermore, once a 
link is established, as far as the brain is concerned, that representation is what is really out 
there, and is relatively impervious to change. Additionally, discriminative inference sup-
ports one- or few-shot learning, meaning that a reliable link could be established from a 
single experience of a hallucination. Discriminative inference could form our analogy with 
nucleation in phase transitions. 
However, this still leaves the question of how that link is established in the first place 
(as is also the case, however, with generative inference). Here we have to hypothesize. 
Several propositions are required. If we accept that the brain has a strong bias towards 
seeing something meaningful, as pareidolia would suggest, and that because of impair-
ments in the visual system it cannot see what is there, as high rates of agnosia suggest [28], 
then it must see the least unlikely object that it can [29]. And in this case, based upon the 
setting and the characteristics of the cushion, the least unlikely thing to see is a boy. 
Though this conclusion is rather a leap, it does produce testable predictions of relation-
ships between objects and perceptions in people prone to hallucinations. 
Accepting that the link between trigger and hallucination, especially before halluci-
nations are well established, indicates that the brain is predominantly using 
Figure 9. Putative role of aberrant discriminative inference in creating hallucinations. There is a
direct link between the sensory data associated with a triggering object in the environment and the
consequent hallucinatory perception. Figure adapted from Collerton et al., 2023 [3].
Discriminative inference has properties which make it attractive in explaining the
link between a speciﬁc object and a hallucination. In theory, discriminative inference can
lead to a direct link between any sensory input and any perception. These perceptions are
much less bound by wider context than generative models propose. Furthermore, once
a link is established, as far as the brain is concerned, that representation is what is really
out there, and is relatively impervious to change. Additionally, discriminative inference
supports one- or few-shot learning, meaning that a reliable link could be established from a
single experience of a hallucination. Discriminative inference could form our analogy with
nucleation in phase transitions.
However, this still leaves the question of how that link is established in the ﬁrst place
(as is also the case, however, with generative inference). Here we have to hypothesize. Sev-
eral propositions are required. If we accept that the brain has a strong bias towards seeing
something meaningful, as pareidolia would suggest, and that because of impairments in
the visual system it cannot see what is there, as high rates of agnosia suggest [28], then it
must see the least unlikely object that it can [29]. And in this case, based upon the setting
and the characteristics of the cushion, the least unlikely thing to see is a boy. Though this
conclusion is rather a leap, it does produce testable predictions of relationships between
objects and perceptions in people prone to hallucinations.
Accepting that the link between trigger and hallucination, especially before hallucina-
tions are well established, indicates that the brain is predominantly using discriminative
rather than generative inference at that point raises the question of why discriminative
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 12 of 19
inference predominates at that time. The current answer is that we do not know. How-
ever, our analogy with phase transitions may suggest why we do not know, in that the
transition from solids to liquids occurs only within a very limited range of combined
values of relevant variables such as temperature, pressure, and purity. Within that limited
range, new processes such as nucleation occur. By analogy, the relative infrequency of
hallucinatory perception may suggest that a particular infrequently occurring combination
of factors within a limited range of values induces aberrant discriminative inference and a
hallucination. Since we have not observed inference under those conditions, we cannot yet
determine relevant factors.
2.2. Types of Inference and Variational Principles
In Table 1, we highlight the key differences we have discussed between the potential
roles of discriminative and generative inference in hallucinations as well as two associated
factors, Shannon surprise and nonstationary systems, which may further tilt the balance
towards the relevance of discriminative inference in hallucination onset.
Table 1. Comparison between discriminative and generative inference in relations to hallucinations.
Type of Inference Discriminative Generative
Role in veridical perception
Rapid recognition of
behaviourally signiﬁcant
information for perception
Perception of complex,
convolved scenes, and objects
within them.
Relationship to environment Associated with speciﬁc
objects (e.g. cushion)
Associated with general
context
Stage of hallucinatory episode
it applies to Onset and offset Persistence
Information transfer from
environment Direct and speciﬁc Indirect and less speciﬁc via
context and error term
Information Framework
Self-organization under
constraints (maximization of
shared information)
Minimization of free energy
(Kullback–Leibler divergence
and Shannon surprise)
Mechanism of hallucination
Self-organization of potential
perceptions to maximise
shared information between
distorted sensory information
and perception.
Overly precise expectations
(priors) combined with
imprecise or absent sensory
data.
Applicable system Nonstationary open
nonequilibrium system
Stationary open
nonequilibrium system
If it is the case that the brain is using a different form of inference when hallucinations
are triggered, what might be the conditions under which that form of inference predom-
inates. Consequently, what is the variational principle best suited to modelling it? Is
minimization of free energy still the most compelling analogy, or would another principle
better describe the phenomena at hand [30,31]?
In this section, we explore some potential extensions of the free energy formula-
tion as applied to hallucinations and suggest alternative approaches to supplement its
undoubted strengths.
2.2.1. Shannon Surprise and Discriminative Inference
In information theory, free energy is deﬁned as a combination of Kullback–Leibler
(KL) divergence and Shannon surprise. K-L divergence is a measure of the separation of
two probability distributions, which in the case of Active Inference are predicted and actual
sensory data. Shannon surprise is an estimate of how unlikely a particular environmental
event might be. Friston argues persuasively that as organisms learn about their environ-
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 13 of 19
ment, they construct their generative models of the world and act on those such as to
maximize the predictability of what happens to them and hence to minimize surprise [16].
As a consequence, Shannon surprise can be neglected in most cases. Thus, free energy
becomes equivalent to KL divergence alone, and can be restated as a form of Bayesian
inference (See Appendix A for further details).
However, in the case of hallucinatory episodes, Shannon surprise may be signiﬁcant,
at least at onset. At these points, there is a distinct discontinuity between the preceding
veridical perception and the hallucination such that the hallucination cannot be predicted
from the normal relationship between the world model and the environment.
Since the Shannon surprise is signiﬁcant, Bayesian inference with its basis in transi-
tions from prior to posterior probability distributions is not relevant, and another process
may look like a more attractive explanation. Since discriminative inference is specialized to
rapidly categorize unexpected but behaviorally relevant information, it is a good candidate
process to supplement generative inference in highly surprising circumstances. Indeed, sig-
niﬁcant Shannon surprise may be a general signal that the brain is shifting to discriminative
inference in that instance.
2.2.2. Variational Principles for Nonstationary Brain Dynamics
We have suggested that the mapping between an object in the environment and
perception is a key factor in modelling transitions between veridical and hallucinatory
vision. In veridical vision, this relationship is stationary—it does not vary over time, nor
does it change from observer to observer. Bayesian inference is a powerful approach
for modelling stationary systems. However, hallucinatory episodes are by their nature
nonstationary. They are not stable over time nor, probably, between observers. Thus,
nonstationary variational principles are needed to model these phenomena. Nonstationary
brain dynamics are highly complex and transitory when interacting with environments,
thereby yielding intricate transitions between various “quasi attractors” or semi-stable
states [32].
Several potential methods have therefore been proposed to deal with nonstationary
states. We will highlight one, “self-organization with constraints” [ 33,34], which was
developed as a guiding variational principle to overcome non-stationarity in open bound-
ary systems.
Constraints act upon a whole system such as a brain so that elementary dynamics
can be self-organized to yield functional differentiations even under nonstationary dynam-
ics [35]. Constraints can be intentional but quantitative, such as the maximization of mutual
information or minimization of consumed energy. Although such constraints might appear
at ﬁrst glance to provide a top-down signal, in practice processing of bottom-up signals
become predominant, since information contained in input signals facilitates functional
differentiation for each elementary dynamical system. Thus, the predominant direction of
information ﬂow under nonstationary open boundary conditions is more like that proposed
for discriminative inference than that for generative inference.
In summary, we suggest that discriminative inference, signiﬁcant Shannon surprise,
non-stationarity, and self-organization with constraints provide an alternative approach to
modelling the onset of hallucinatory episodes.
2.3. Persistence of Hallucinations
If discriminative inference is relevant in the onset of a hallucination, might it also
account for the persistence of hallucinations? Here, there is a less convincing argument that
generative inference needs supplementing.
As we noted in Section 1.1, the persistence of hallucinations means that a key fea-
ture of generative models, responsiveness to prediction errors, is absent, otherwise the
hallucination would disappear almost before it was experienced. Generative models can
account for this absence by a combination of a high expectation of seeing (or continuing
to see) the hallucination, and a restricted impact of sensory data. The presence of the
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 14 of 19
hallucination in itself might plausibly suggest that the impacts of these two factors are
intensiﬁed. Hence, a hallucinatory perception could both increase the expectation for that
perception to occur, and shift attention from disconﬁrming data, given that attention is
focused on the hallucinatory perception. Thus, Active Inference alone may be sufﬁcient to
account for the persistence of a hallucinatory episode.
2.4. Ending of Hallucination
Both forms of inference can provide an explanation for why hallucinations end. For
Active Inference, once the representation is activated, and becomes over-valued, it is not
challenged by sensory data until these sensory data become so inconsistent that the data
mismatch over-rides the representation. For discriminative inference, once the trigger looks
different enough, then the correspondence it has with hallucinations becomes sufﬁciently
distant that another perception is inferred. The observation from Ishimaru et al. [24] that
sometimes the cushion triggers the perception of a cushion and sometimes that of a boy
together with Diederich et al.’s [25] ﬁndings that changing illumination alone can stop a
hallucination suggest that changing the visual information coming into the brain in quite
subtle ways is sufﬁcient to initiate or abolish a hallucination even if the trigger object
remains. This argues for a highly speciﬁc link between information coming from the object
and the associated hallucinatory representation which needs to be maintained for the
hallucination to continue.
The role of highly speciﬁc information may point towards the contributions of speciﬁc
perceptual systems in different stages of hallucinations. For example, luminosity informa-
tion is relayed by the magnocellular visual system [ 36]. That turning on lights reduces
hallucinations suggests that data ﬂow via this pathway can reset vision towards veridicality.
2.5. Momentary Non-Equilibrium Thermodynamic Processes, Free Energy and the Transience
of Hallucinations
Thus far, we have explored the potential roles of speciﬁc factors in triggering or
abolishing hallucinatory episodes. In this ﬁnal section, we will brieﬂy raise the possible
contribution of the thermodynamics of brain processes [37] to these phenomena.
As used in information theory, free energy is not the same concept as thermodynamic
free energy, though their mathematical treatment is equivalent under some conditions. We
show in Appendix A how the treatment of thermodynamic free energy is a more general
formulation of that for informational free energy.
Energy consumption is associated with any information processing in the brain.
Prompted by our analogy with phase transitions in which thermodynamic free energy is
key, there may be useful questions to be raised not only of the role of energetic considera-
tions in hallucinatory transitions, but also of how intrinsic brain dynamics are related to
the ﬁnite duration of hallucinatory episodes.
A null hypothesis would be that the energetic costs of veridical and hallucinatory
vision are not different. However, as we note in Section 2.1, discriminative and generative
inference have varying computational costs in different scenarios. Taken with hallucinatory
episodes being both rare and transitory, this raises the possibility that energetic factors are
relevant. However, deﬁning and measuring these factors is challenging.
3. Future Research Directions
Our analogy with phase transitions strongly suggests that relevant evidence to con-
strain possible models enough to make them testable needs direct observations of transi-
tions between veridical and hallucinatory perception.
Ideally, there should be a small number of critical variables to investigate akin to
temperature, pressure, or purity. However, brain systems are far more complex than solids
or liquids, with an almost inﬁnite number of potential variables which would be impossible
to measure or model. We need to reduce the combinatorial explosion that brain complexity
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 15 of 19
produces to a tractable level. Hence, temperature or other phase transition variables map
onto complex combinations of brain factors.
Consideration of the Consensus Framework as it applies to discriminative and genera-
tive inference (Figures 7 and 9) can provisionally identify a limited number of variables
which are directly linked to the hallucinatory representation. Hence, sensory data and
attentional modulation of already gathered sensory data, together with expectations of
speciﬁc perceptual representations, are key factors. Other functions such as context or
orienting attention have indirect effects via these factors and so are of secondary importance.
Focusing on these three key variables with algorithms aimed at either minimizing free
energy or maximizing shared information should produce testable models.
However, there is a further complication in that there is no obvious way in which
these cognitive functions could be observed during hallucinatory transitions. While there
are tasks to measure attentional or perceptual performance, they would both affect and
be affected by hallucinations. Therefore, studies may need to look at putative underlying
brain functions, though this in itself introduces a further potentially unreliable mapping
from cognitive to brain function [27]. A focus on brain function might, however, usefully
limit relevant variables. For example, if as proposed in Section 2.4, speciﬁc brain pathways
are inﬂuential in particular stages of hallucinatory episodes, identifying these as regions of
interest would increase the power of analyses.
Additionally, observing these potential brain transitions is extremely challenging,
given limitations in current technologies and methodologies. The responsiveness of hallu-
cinations to the environment means that to actively investigate them is often to change or
abolish them. Finding participants who can be observed during transitions, though not
impossible, is quite a hurdle to overcome [ 38]. Furthermore, the timescales over which
these transitions appear to occur (though very poorly documented), are shorter than those
at which imaging technologies operate.
Nevertheless, there are some areas which could be proﬁtably investigated at present.
One is the phenomenology of transitions. Are these unitary phenomena or of heteroge-
nous types, abrupt or gradual, smooth or irregular, directly from one veridical object to a
corresponding hallucinatory object or via intermediate forms? Knowing what to account for
in modelling transitions will constrain potential explanations and direct theories towards
the most productive analogies.
A second area would be to systematically explore the link between the environment
and hallucinations, building on the work of Ishimaru and Diederich and colleagues [24,25].
Varying environmental factors to assess their impact on the onset and offset of hallucinatory
episodes will clarify the relationship of information transfer from the environment to
hallucinatory representations.
Inferential models and their instantiation by network algorithms are learning models
which adapt over time as new information is accrued. Hallucinations are also known
to change over time, and it seems likely that the mechanisms that create them may also
vary to account for these changes. We have proposed that the factors relevant in an initial
hallucination may be different from those active in a well-established hallucination. Single
hallucinations are a not infrequent experience for much of the non-clinical population
(around 20% in last month [39]), suggesting that relatively random ﬂuctuations in percep-
tual systems may lead to one instance of hallucinating. However, repeated hallucinations
suggest systematic biases are active, such as increased expectancies, degraded perception,
or robust linkages between speciﬁc environments and hallucinations. Investigating hallu-
cinations at different stages of “maturity” may therefore be another means of testing the
relative contributions of diverse factors.
4. Conclusions
We have explored the application of generative models and the free energy principle
to explain how hallucinations are episodic. Our conclusion is that, as for all of the current
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 16 of 19
approaches, the ability of generative models to account for why hallucinations occur at
only some times and in only some places is underspeciﬁed.
We suggest that generative approaches may have particular strengths in accounting for
established hallucinations and the persistence of speciﬁc episodes. We raise the possibility
that the action of another form of inference altogether, discriminative inference, may be
more inﬂuential in early hallucinations, and in the onset and offset of episodes. We present
some data that allow this possibility.
Primarily though, we highlight large gaps in our present knowledge of what we are
trying to explain. In large part, this reﬂects a historic lack of focus on the episodic nature of
hallucinations. We expect that as a greater amount of systematic evidence is gathered on
hallucinatory transitions, models will be reﬁned and be more able to be tested.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, D.C., S.N. and I.T.; writing—original draft preparation,
D.C.; writing—review and editing, D.C., S.N. and I.T. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: S.N. was partly supported by ﬁve funding sources; JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers
JP20H04246, JP20K11985, JP20K12002, and JP23K11256, and the Cooperative Research Program of
“Network Joint Research Center for Materials and Devices” in the Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science and Technology, Japan. I.T. was partially supported by the JST Strategic Basic Research
Programs (Symbiotic Interaction: Creation and Development of Core Technologies Interfacing Human
and Information Environments, CREST Grant Number JPMJCR17A4).
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to acknowledge images kindly provided by Daiki
Ishimaru, Hideki Kanemoto and colleagues for use in Figure 7.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
Appendix A
This Appendix provides a brief review with some notes on the free energy principle,
based on Bayesian inference.
Let x be environmental (latent) variables, and y be sensory signals. In a generative
model, we suppose that the human brain infers external phenomena indicated by x, from
sensory signals, y. In the following, p(A|B) indicates a conditional probability of the event
A occurring, provided that the event B has occurred. p(A, B) indicates a joint probability
of both events A and B occurring. p(A) indicates a marginal distribution of A.
Hence, the brain can create p(x, y) (the generative model) with equality p(x, y) =
p(x|y)p(y), using the distribution of sensory signals. Adopting a Bayesian estimation
represented by p(x|y) = p(y|x) p(x)
p(y) , this generative model can be written as p(x, y) =
p(y|x)p(x). In active inference, a prior probability is given by p(x), which implies an a
priori belief, whereas p(x|y) implies an a posteriori belief. For this latter, let q(x) be an
approximate a posteriori probability distribution. Now, consider the difference between the
two probability distributions in an informational sense, which can be represented by the
Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence, D(q(x) ∥p(x
⏐⏐⏐y)) = ∫
q(x)log ( q(x)
p(x|y) )dx by deﬁnition.
Then, we easily derive the following equation:
D(q(x) ∥p(x|y)) =
∫
q(x)log q(x)
p(x, y) dx −(−log p(y)). (A1)
It should be noted, however, that q(x) is absolutely continuous with respect to p(x|y) ,
such that the Radon–Nikodym derivative dq(x)/dp(x|y) exists. This demands that a small
change in approximate inferred results for external phenomena, which may cause a change
in expectancies, follows a small change in a posteriori belief for these phenomena. This
seems to be reasonable in the context of Active Inference, in which case we can use the
above KL divergence.
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 17 of 19
Here, we assume that p(x, y) follows Gibbs distribution, e−U(x,y)/kBT, where U(x, y)
is internal energy, T is an absolute temperature, and kB is the Boltzmann constant. This
assumption stems from Jaynes’ maximum entropy principle: one should take a proba-
bility distribution such as maximizing entropy when any appropriate distribution is not
known [40]. Thus, internal energy takes the following expression:
U(x, y) = −kBTlogp(x, y) (A2)
= −kBTlogp(y|x) −kBTlogp(x). (A3)
Equation (A3) implies that the internal energy can be expressed by a summation of
energy associated with perceiving signals and latent energy included in the latent variable.
Taking an average of internal energy with an approximate a posteriori probability
distribution q(x), and using a formula that [free energy] equals [averaged internal en-
ergy] minus ([temperature] times [entropy]) in the sense of Helmholtz, free energy can be
expressed in the following way.
F(q, p; y) =
∫
q(x)U(x, y)dx −(−T
∫
q(x)log q(x)dx) (A4)
= −kBT
∫
q(x)log p(y|x)dx −kBT
∫
q(x)log p(x)dx + T
∫
q(x)log q(x)dx (A5)
= kBT
∫
q(x)log p(x)
p(x, y) dx −kBT
∫
q(x)log p(x)dx −T(−
∫
q(x)log q(x)dx) (A6)
= kBT
∫
q(x)log 1
p(x, y) dx −T(−
∫
q(x)log q(x)dx). (A7)
Equation (A5) comes from the expression (A3) of internal energy. This implies that free
energy here is interpreted as energy necessary only for perception independent of approxi-
mate a posteriori belief.
Equations (A6) and (A7) are given in order so that their relationship to Bayesian
inference can be seen. It should be noted that Equation (A7) is straightforwardly derived
from the expression of internal energy, Equation (A2) and the deﬁnition of free energy.
From Equations (A1) and (A7), in the case of kB = 1 and T = 1, Friston’s for-
mula D(q(x) ∥p(x|y)) = F(q, p; y) −(−log p(y)) is derived, as F(q, p; y) becomes equal
to
∫
q(x)log q(x)
p(x,y) dx. The second term, −log p(y), is called a Shannon surprise. If a sensory
signal does not change, the variational principle obeys the requirement of a free energy
minimum. However, drawing an inference about the environment by a living organism
also demands changing sensory signals in an active inference. This leads to the additional
requirement of minimizing a Shannon surprise. Then, a variation should be taken for a
whole of KL divergence.
The assumption that kB = 1 and T = 1 is allowed if we think of information contents
only. However, if we consider the energetics associated with information processing, which
are important in biological, particularly neural systems, by inquiring how much energy is
necessary for the concerned information processing, the following formula should be taken
into account:
D(q(x) ∥p(x|y)) = F(q, p : y)/kBT −(1/kB −1)
∫
q(x)log q(x)dx −(−log p(y)). (A8)
In order to show the biological signiﬁcance of the Boltzmann constant and real values
of absolute temperature, let us consider, for example, amount of energy necessary for
reproduction of nucleotide, which can be estimated by kB NATlog g
δ in the formulation as
birth and death process, where g indicates a generation rate, δ a decay rate, kB Boltzmann
constant, 1.38 ×10−23J/K, NA Avogadro constant, 6.02 ×1023/mol, and T absolute tem-
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 18 of 19
perature [41]. According to the estimation by England, one can obtain the following energy
amount estimated as amount of heat released for reproduction: forT = 300 K, 6.2 kcal/mol
in case of RNA, while 15.6 kcal/mol in case of DNA, which exceeds an allowed value
by thermodynamics, 10 kcal/mol. This implies that DNA was organized to use much
more entropy production than RNA, such as maintaining information contents of the gene
following RNA’s reproduction speed [41].
Although this is an application at the microscopic level, both the Boltzmann constant
and absolute temperature are important even at the macroscopic levels of information
processing associated with the mass dynamics of neural networks and consequent ener-
getics, such as the dynamic change in the activity of neural networks to reﬂect different
information contents, for example, between veridical and hallucinatory perception.
References
1. Friston, K.J. Hallucinations and perceptual inference. Behav. Brain Sci.2005, 28, 764–766. [CrossRef]
2. Collerton, D.; Perry, E.; McKeith, I. Why people see things that are not there: A novel perception and attention deﬁcit model for
recurrent complex visual hallucinations. Behav. Brain Sci.2005, 28, 737–757. [CrossRef]
3. Collerton, D.; Barnes, J.; Diederich, N.J.; Dudley, R.; Friston, K.; Goetz, C.G.; Goldman, J.G.; Jardri, R.; Kulisevsky, J.; Lewis, S.J.;
et al. Understanding visual hallucinations: A new synthesis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.2023, 150, 105208. [CrossRef]
4. Shimojo, S.; Paradiso, M.; Fujita, I. What visual perception tells us about mind and brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA2001, 98,
12340–12341. [CrossRef]
5. Urwyler, P .; Nef, T.; Müri, R.; Archibald, N.; Makin, S.M.; Collerton, D.; Taylor, J.P .; Burn, D.; McKeith, I.; Mosimann, U.P . Visual
hallucinations in eye disease and Lewy body disease. Am. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry2016, 24, 350–358. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. McKeith, I.; Del Ser, T.; Spano, P .; Emre, M.; Wesnes, K.; Anand, R.; Cicin-Sain, A.; Ferrara, R.; Spiegel, R. Efﬁcacy of rivastigmine
in dementia with Lewy bodies: A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled international study. Lancet 2000, 356, 2031–2036.
[CrossRef]
7. Silbersweig, D.A.; Stern, E.; Frith, C.; Cahill, C.; Holmes, A.; Grootoonk, S.; Seaward, J.; McKenna, P .; Chua, S.E.; Schnorr, L.; et al.
A functional neuroanatomy of hallucinations in schizophrenia. Nature 1995, 378, 176–179. [CrossRef]
8. Fénelon, G.; Mahieux, F.; Huon, R.; Zi égler, M. Hallucinations in Parkinson’s disease: Prevalence, phenomenology and risk
factors. Brain 2000, 123, 733–745. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Harding, A.J.; Broe, G.A.; Halliday, G.M. Visual hallucinations in Lewy body disease relate to Lewy bodies in the temporal lobe.
Brain 2002, 125, 391–403. [CrossRef]
10. Tien, A.Y. Distribution of hallucinations in the population. Soc. Psychiatry Psychiatr. Epidemiol.1991, 26, 287–292. [CrossRef]
11. Aarsland, D.; Marsh, L.; Schrag, A. Neuropsychiatric symptoms in Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 2009, 24, 2175–2186.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Howard, R.J.; Brammer, M.J.; David, A.; Woodruff, P .; Williams, S. The anatomy of conscious vision: An fMRI study of visual
hallucinations. Nat. Neurosci.1998, 1, 738–742.
13. Harding, A.J.; Stimson, E.; Henderson, J.M.; Halliday, G.M. Clinical correlates of selective pathology in the amygdala of patients
with Parkinson’s disease.Brain 2002, 125, 2431–2445. [CrossRef]
14. Barber, R.; Scheltens, P .; Gholkar, A.; Ballard, C.; McKeith, I.; Ince, P .; Perry, R.; O’brien, J. White matter lesions on magnetic
resonance imaging in dementia with Lewy bodies, Alzheimer’s disease, vascular dementia, and normal aging.J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiatry 1999, 67, 66–72. [CrossRef]
15. Lobotesis, K.; Fenwick, J.D.; Phipps, A.; Ryman, A.; Swann, A.; Ballard, C.; McKeith, I.G.; O’brien, J.T. Occipital hypoperfusion on
SPECT in dementia with Lewy bodies but not AD. Neurology 2001, 56, 643–649. [CrossRef]
16. Friston, K.J.; Stephan, K.E. Free-energy and the brain. Synthese 2007, 159, 417–458. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Fowler, R.H.; Guggenheim, E.A. Statistical Thermodynamics; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1965.
18. Kittel, C.; Kroemer, H. Thermal Physics; W. H. Freeman and Company: New York, NY, USA, 1980.
19. Diedrich, F.J.; Warren, W.H., Jr. Why change gaits? Dynamics of the walk-run transition.J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform.
1995, 21, 183. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Blom, J.D. Deﬁning and measuring hallucinations and their consequences–what is really the difference between a veridical
perception and a hallucination? Categories of hallucinatory experiences. In The Neuroscience of Visual Hallucinations; Collerton, D.,
Mosimann, U.P ., Perry, E., Eds.; John Wiley and Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2014; pp. 23–45.
21. Nara, S.; Fujii, H.; Tsukada, H.; Tsuda, I. Visual hallucinations in dementia with Lewy bodies originate from necrosis of
characteristic neurons and connections in three-module perception model. Sci. Rep.2022, 12, 14172. [CrossRef]
22. O’Brien, J.; Taylor, J.P .; Ballard, C.; Barker, R.A.; Bradley, C.; Burns, A.; Collerton, D.; Dave, S.; Dudley, R.; Francis, P .; et al. Visual
hallucinations in neurological and ophthalmological disease: Pathophysiology and management. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry
2020, 91, 512–519. [CrossRef]
23. Hannant, D. Distress Associated with Visual Hallucinations in the Psychosis Spectrum and Eye Disease: What are the Contributing
Factors? Doctorate in Clinical. Psychology Thesis, Teesside University, Middlesbrough, UK, 2016.
Entropy 2024, 26, 557 19 of 19
24. Ishimaru, D.; Kanemoto, H.; Hotta, M.; Nagata, Y.; Koizumi, F.; Satake, Y.; Taomoto, D.; Ikeda, M. Case Report: Environmental
Adjustment for Visual Hallucinations in Dementia with Lewy Bodies Based on Photo Assessment of the Living Environment.
Front. Psychiatry2024, 15, 1283156. [CrossRef]
25. Diederich, N.J.; Pieri, V .; Goetz, C.G. Coping strategies for visual hallucinations in Parkinson’s disease.Mov. Disord.2003, 18,
831–832. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Yokoi, K.; Nishio, Y.; Uchiyama, M.; Shimomura, T.; Iizuka, O.; Mori, E. Hallucinators ﬁnd meaning in noises: Pareidolic illusions
in dementia with Lewy bodies. Neuropsychologia 2014, 56, 245–254. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Peters, B.; DiCarlo, J.J.; Gureckis, T.; Haefner, R.; Isik, L.; Tenenbaum, J.; Konkle, T.; Naselaris, T.; Stachenfeld, K.; Tavares, Z.; et al.
How does the primate brain combine generative and discriminative computations in vision? arXiv 2024, arXiv:2401.06005.
28. Collerton, D.; Burn, D.; McKeith, I.; O’Brien, J. Systematic review and meta-analysis show that dementia with Lewy bodies is a
visual-perceptual and attentional-executive dementia. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord.2003, 16, 229–237. [CrossRef]
29. Bowman, A.R.; Bruce, V .; Colbourn, C.J.; Collerton, D. Compensatory shifts in visual perception are associated with hallucinations
in Lewy body disorders. Cogn. Res. Princ. Implic.2017, 2, 26. [CrossRef]
30. Buckley, C.L.; Kim, C.S.; McGregor, S.; Seth, A.K. The free energy principle for action and perception: A mathematical review.J.
Math. Psychol.2017, 81, 55–79. [CrossRef]
31. Hodson, R.; Mehta, M.; Smith, R. The empirical status of predictive coding and active inference. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.2023, 157,
105473. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Tsuda, I. Chaotic itinerancy and its roles in cognitive neurodynamics. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.2015, 31, 67–71. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Haken, H. Synergetics: An Introduction: Nonequilibrium Phase Transitions and Self-Organization in Physics, Chemistry, and Biology: 1
(Springer Series in Synergetics); Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1983.
34. Nicolis, G.; Prigogine, I. Self-Organisation in Non-Equilibrium Systems; Wiley Neuroscience: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 1977.
35. Tsuda, I.; Watanabe, H.; Tsukada, H.; Yamaguti, Y. On the Nature of Functional Differentiation: The Role of Self-Organization
with Constraints. Entropy 2022, 24, 240. [CrossRef]
36. Cheng, A.; Eysel, U.T.; Vidyasagar, T.R. The role of the magnocellular pathway in serial deployment of visual attention.Eur. J.
Neurosci. 2004, 20, 2188–2192. [CrossRef]
37. Colombo, M.; Palacios, P . Non-equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle in biology.Biol. Philos.2021, 36, 41.
[CrossRef]
38. Dujardin, K.; Roman, D.; Baille, G.; Pins, D.; Lefebvre, S.; Delmaire, C.; Jardri, R. What can we learn from fMRI capture of visual
hallucinations in Parkinson’s disease.Brain Imaging Behav.2020, 14, 329–335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Aynsworth, C.; Rolinson, J.; Pervez, M.; Collerton, D.; Dudley, R. What is the frequency and nature of visual hallucinations in
non-clinical participants? Psychol.Psychother. Theory Res. Pract.2023, 96, 281–295. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40. Jaynes, E.T. Information theory and statistical mechanics. Phys. Rev.1957, 106, 620. [CrossRef]
41. England, L. Statistical physics of self-reproduction. J. Chem. Phys.2013, 139, 121923. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.