Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-018-01932-w
S.I.: FIRST PRINCIPLES IN SCIENCE
First principles in the life sciences: the free-energy
principle, organicism, and mechanism
Matteo Colombo 1 · Cory Wright 2
Received: 20 November 2017 / Accepted: 3 September 2018 / Published online: 10 September 2018
© The Author(s) 2018
Abstract
The free-energy principle states that all systems that minimize their free energy resist
a tendency to physical disintegration. Originally proposed to account for percep-
tion, learning, and action, the free-energy principle has been applied to the evolution,
development, morphology, anatomy and function of the brain, and has been called a
postulate,a n unfalsiﬁable principle ,a natural law , and an imperative. While it might
afford a theoretical foundation for understanding the relationship between environ-
ment, life, and mind, its epistemic status is unclear. Also unclear is how the free-energy
principle relates to prominent theoretical approaches to life science phenomena, such
as organicism and mechanism. This paper clariﬁes both issues, and identiﬁes limits
and prospects for the free-energy principle as a ﬁrst principle in the life sciences.
Keywords Adaptation · Free energy · Life · Mechanism · Organicism
1 Introduction
According to the free-energy principle (FEP), all systems that minimize their free
energy resist a tendency to physical disintegration. Originally proposed to explain
how sensory cortex infers the causes of its inputs and learns causal regularities, FEP
has been used to elucidate the function of action, perception, and attention, and to
account for organisms’ evolution and development (Friston 2003, 2009, 2010a, 2013;
Friston et al. 2006; Friston and Stephan 2007).
B Matteo Colombo
M.Colombo@uvt.nl
Cory Wright
cory.wright@zoho.com
1 Tilburg Center for Logic, Ethics, and Philosophy of Science, Tilburg University, P .O. Box 90153,
5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands
2 Department of Philosophy (MHB–917), California State University Long Beach, 1250 Bellﬂower
Boulevard, Long Beach, CA 90840-2408, USA
123
S3464 Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488
Advocates have claimed FEP offers a “framework within which to explain the
constitutive coupling of the brain to the body and the environment,” which provides
“a normative, teleological essence to the synthesis of biology and information,” and
which may illuminate the continuity between life and mind (Allen and Friston 2018,
p. 2476).
Advocates also present FEP as a “mandatory principle” or “imperative” for bio-
logical systems, and as a principle enjoying a “fundamental status” in neuroscience
(Friston et al. 2006, p. 71; Friston and Stephan 2007). The principle purportedly “ap-
plies to any biological system […] from single-cell organisms to social networks”
(Friston 2009, p. 293).
Although these dramatic ascriptions have attracted attention in philosophy and
the life sciences, FEP’s epistemic status remains opaque, along with its exact role
in biological and neuroscientiﬁc theorizing. Conspiring against its accessibility are
the varying formalisms and formulations of FEP , the changing scope of application,
reliance on undeﬁned terms and stipulative deﬁnitions, and the lack of clarity in the
logical structure of the reasoning leading to FEP .
Regarding its role in theorizing, FEP conﬂicts with tenets of two of the most promi-
nent contemporary theoretical approaches in the life sciences: organicism (Gilbert and
Sarkar 2000; Soto et al. 2016) and mechanism (Brandon 1984; Bechtel and Richardson
1993/2010). Regarding its epistemic status, one worry is that FEP lacks explanatory
power because it “is divorced from the biophysical reality of the nervous system”
(Fiorillo 2010, p. 605). The principle’s unifying power has been called into question,
too. Some have suggested that FEP provides an implausible model of the functional
roles of perception and action (Gershman and Daw 2012; Colombo 2017; Klein 2018);
others have argued that FEP doesn’t deliver a grand unifying theory, and a plurality
of modeling approaches is preferable for explaining complex neurophysiological and
cognitive phenomena (Marblestone et al. 2016; Colombo and Wright 2017). Also con-
troversial is how FEP illuminates the continuity between life and mind, synthesizing
biology and information—especially if FEP is committed to some form of cognitivism
(Hohwy 2016; Kirchhoff and Froese 2017).
According to organicists (aka ‘holists’), phenomena studied in the life sciences
should be explained by appealing to whole organisms. Organicists appeal to the princi-
ples of biological autonomy and adaptivity (V arela et al. 1974; Di Paolo and Thompson
2014; Moreno and Mossio 2015), organization as closure of constraints (Maturana
1975; Mossio et al. 2016), and variation as extended criticality (Montévil et al. 2016).
While FEP borrows the formalism of random dynamical systems to explain the behav-
ior and nature of organisms, organicists maintain that the formalisms borrowed from
current theories in physics are not apt for the representation of life science phenomena
(Longo et al. 2012).
According to mechanists, phenomena studied in the life sciences should be
explained by appealing to the component parts and operations of mechanisms, where
a mechanism is a spatiotemporally-organized composite system producing a phe-
nomenon (Bechtel and Richardson 1993/2010; Darden 2006). While FEP is used to
logically derive claims about structural and functional properties of the brain “a priori,
on the basis of purely theoretical considerations” (Friston 2003, p. 1325), mechanistic
123
Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488 S3465
philosophers argue that laws and logical deduction do not adequately capture expla-
nation in the life sciences (Glennan 2017).
In this paper, we clarify the epistemic status of FEP by answering two sets of
questions. First: what are the inferential steps leading to FEP? And how do they
relate to one another? Second: what’s the relationship between FEP and central tenets
of the organicist and mechanistic philosophies when it comes to adequate scientiﬁc
representation of the phenomena of life?
To answer these questions, we carefully reconstruct the reasoning leading to FEP
(Sect. 2) and then deploy a contrastive strategy to bring out salient assumptions of
FEP . We argue that FEP is inconsistent with a tenet of organicism, speciﬁcally that
the formalism and concepts of current physical theories are not apt for the scientiﬁc
representation of organisms and their behaviors (Sect. 3). We also show that FEP is
inconsistent with mechanistic approaches in the life sciences, which eschew laws and
theories and take the explanatory power of scientiﬁc representations to be dependent on
the degree of relevant biophysical detail they include. After we clarify the status of FEP
as a ﬁrst principle (Sect. 4), we conclude by suggesting that understanding phenomena
in the life sciences should allow for incompatible approaches with varying degrees of
idealization (Sect. 5). In particular, the axiomatic, idealizing, ﬁrst-principles approach
favored by free-energy theorists should be pursued in the life sciences alongside the
synthetic approaches favored by organicists, and the analytic approaches favored by
mechanists.
2 The transcendental argument
Free-energy theorists formulate FEP in various ways. Depending on the exact for-
mulation, the scope of application of FEP varies. One formulation has FEP focused
on brains, aiming to clarify the functional signiﬁcance of their activity and structural
connectivity (Friston 2003, 2009; Friston et al. 2006). Another has FEP ranging over
any biological entity, process, or complex system— including brainless organisms like
single cells and plants, evolutionary processes by natural selection, and ecosystem-
s—and aiming to explain how biological systems can maintain their physical integrity
in a changing environment (Friston 2013; Hobson and Friston 2016). In yet another
formulation, FEP applies to any complex adaptive system, including physical infor-
mation systems and non-biological systems like social networks and artefacts (Friston
2009, p. 293).
Under any formulation, the reasoning leading to FEP has the form of a transcen-
dental argument for the conclusion that FEP is a condition on the very possibility of
existence of adaptive systems. At its most general, the argument proposes that adaptive
systems would be impossible unless FEP were true. In Friston’s words: “systems that
do not minimize free energy cannot exist” (Friston 2013, p. 2). While asserted to be a
condition of possibility on systems’ existence, FEP is offered to help leverage ‘that-
actually’ explanations of biological systems’ capacity for maintaining their physical
integrity by behaving adaptively.
The transcendental deduction of FEP involves six main steps organized in two
batches:
123
S3466 Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488
1. If a system Σ acts selectively on the environment to avoid phase transitions and
is in a non-equilibrium steady-state, then Σ behaves adaptively.1
2. Σ behaves adaptively only if Σ preserves its physical integrity by maintaining
its “characteristic” variables within homeostatic bounds despite environmental
ﬂuctuations. 2
3. Σ acts selectively on the environment to avoid phase transitions and is in a
non-equilibrium steady-state just in case Σ preserves its physical integrity by
maintaining its “characteristic” variables within homeostatic bounds despite
environmental ﬂuctuations.
4. Σ preserves its physical integrity by maintaining its “characteristic” variables
within homeostatic bounds despite environmental ﬂuctuations just in case Σ
places an upper bound on the informational entropy ( average surprise ) of its
possible sensory states.
5. If Σ minimizes the free energy of its possible sensory states, then Σ places an
upper bound on the informational entropy of its possible sensory states. 3
6. Any system Σ that places an upper bound on the informational entropy of
its possible sensory states will preserve its physical integrity by maintaining
its “characteristic” variables within homeostatic bounds despite environmental
ﬂuctuations.
∴ 7. Any system Σ that minimizes the free energy of its possible sensory states
will preserve its physical integrity by maintaining its “characteristic” variables
within homeostatic bounds despite environmental ﬂuctuations.
The ﬁrst three claims comprise the ﬁrst batch, where (1) states a thermodynamically
sufﬁcient condition on adaptive behavior, (2) states a homeostatically necessary con-
dition, and (3) functions as a bridge principle that connects physical and biological
predicates expressing properties of a system’s behaving adaptively. The bridge is
derivable from the conjunction of its left-to-right conditional, which follows directly
from (1) to (2), and the stipulation of its suppressed right-to-left converse. The next
three claims comprise the second batch, where (4) stipulatively connects homeostasis
to information-theoretic quantities, and (5) states that free-energy minimization is a
sufﬁcient condition for placing an upper bound on the informational entropy of the
1 As explained in Sect. 2.1, equilibrium refers to thermodynamic equilibrium. A system is in a steady state
if the variables deﬁning the behavior of the system are unchanging with time. An equilibrium state is a
special case of a steady state. (A system in equilibrium is one in a steady state; the converse isn’t necessarily
true.)
2 V alues of these characteristic variables would be observable properties of “the extended phenotype of the
organism—its morphology, physiology, behavioural patterns, cultural patterns, and designer environments,”
and would be phase functions of an attracting set of the organism’s states (Ramstead et al. 2018,p .3 ) .T h e
idea is that any living system possesses an ‘attracting set’, i.e., a set of states towards which it will tend to
evolve, for a wide variety of values of its initial states, and “this set of attracting states can be interpreted as
the extended phenotype of the organism” (ibid). Free-energy theorists’ transcendental deduction assumes
that an attracting set in a system open to its external milieu is formally equivalent to a steady-state solution
that is far from equilibrium.
3 According to some formulations, any system that conserves its boundaries “can be described as” modeling
its external milieu or “can be cast as” minimizing free energy (Hobson and Friston 2016, p. 246; Ramstead
et al. 2018, p. 2). In other formulations, the system itself is said to be the modeler (Friston 2011). We address
this confusion in Sect. 3.
123
Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488 S3467
sensory states of a system. 4 Claim (6) expresses a sufﬁcient condition for a system’s
preserving its physical integrity. Claim (7) expresses FEP , and follows from the two
batches of claims.
The modal force of FEP , as well as its claim to being an a priori ﬁrst principle, depend
on free-energy theorists’ stipulations about the semantic equivalence between concepts
from different disciplines, like the equivalences between the concepts of adaptive
value, surprisal, and model evidence, and on their interpretation of probability. We’ll
consider their understanding of adaptive living systems in Sect. 2.2, and put into focus
the other assumptions underlying their reasoning in Sect. 3.
2.1 Thermodynamics
The argument for FEP begins with the observation that some systems maintain their
physical integrity, displaying adaptive behavior amid a changing environment. Such
systems are thermodynamically open, persisting far from their thermodynamic equi-
librium state (Friston et al. 2006, pp. 71–72; Friston and Stephan 2007, pp. 421–422).
Systems that are thermodynamically open exchange matter and energy with their sur-
roundings. For example, both snowﬂakes and bacteria exchange chemicals and energy
with their surroundings. Snowﬂakes acquire and lose matter and heat under the causal
pressures of their environment, and bacteria allow matter and energy to cross their
cytoplasmic membranes. Closed systems have boundaries that matter from their sur-
roundings cannot cross. Earth, for example, exchanges energy with its surroundings,
but hardly any matter. Isolated systems exchange neither energy nor matter with their
surroundings. The universe and a closed thermos bottle are examples of isolated sys-
tems.
4 Premise 5 should be treated with care. First, in machine learning, free energy is a variational bound
on informational entropy that often plays a central role in variational Bayesian inferences. Where X is an
observed variable (e.g., a sensory sample) and Z a hidden random variable of interest (e.g., an environmental
cause of a sensory sample), the idea behind variational Bayesian inference is to ﬁnd some approximation
distribution density q(Z) that is tractable and that is as close as possible to the true posterior distribution
p(Z|X). As the approximation distribution can have its own parameters q(Z|θ), the problem of inferring
the value of Z given the value of X can be understood as an optimization problem, in which one aims to
ﬁnd the parameter values that minimize some objective function and make q as close as possible to the
posterior of interest. To measure the closeness of the two distributions q(Z)a n d p(Z|X), a common metric is
the Kullback–Leibler divergence. Second, free-energy theorists argue that organisms cannot minimize the
informational entropy of their sensory states (i.e., ‘surprisal’) directly, because this involves the intractable
problem of computing marginal probabilities. Instead, they argue that organisms can tractably minimize
the informational entropy of their sensory states indirectly, by minimizing a bound called ‘variational
free energy’. As Buckley et al.’s ( 2017) helpful mathematical review makes clear, this claim requires
qualiﬁcation, since variational free energy is a tight bound on surprisal only when the organism’s current
‘best guess’ of the causes of its sensory input (represented by a ‘recognition density function’ q(Z)) is
identical with the posterior density of environmental states given the organism’s sensory input p(Z|X).
Finding an optimal recognition density that is identical with the posterior is non-trivial, and requires further
assumptions about its form, and about the form of the dynamics in the environment. “Furthermore, while
this process furnishes the organism with an approximation of surprisal it does not minimise it. Instead the
organism can minimise variational free energy (VFE) further by minimising surprisal indirectly by acting
on the environment and changing sensory input” (Buckley et al. 2017, p. 59). We’ll return on both these
points in Sect. 2.4. We are grateful to anonymous reviewers, including a key architect of FEP , for pressing
us to clarify this reconstruction.
123
S3468 Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488
Rather than properties of Σ—like being thermodynamically open, or being in
equilibrium—it may be useful to speak of (sets of) states. The term state here refers
to a property instance at a time. V elocities, for example, are states: different objects
can have different velocities over time but only a single velocity at any given time. A
system’s states are speciﬁed by the values of sets of measurable macroscopic variables,
including geometric, thermal, mechanical, and chemical properties at a given time
scale, and can typically be associated with mathematical representations, e.g., vectors
in a vector- or state-space. Such variables are related to one another in law-like ways,
and so provide a way to deduce changes in the system’s behavior over time.
When systems are left to themselves and external conditions are unchanging, their
states change until there are no net ﬂows of matter or energy either within the system
or between it and its surroundings. This state is thermodynamic equilibrium. Although
most systems found in nature aren’t in equilibrium, there are important differences
across systems. In comparison to snowﬂakes left to themselves, bacteria are far from
their equilibrium state: while their chemical and metabolic properties change, the
bacteria can acquire energy and nutrients, and maintain a non-equilibrium steady state
to avoid thermodynamic equilibrium.
When systems change states, they undergo a process. The succession of a system’s
states deﬁnes the process’s path or trajectory. Some processes involve abrupt discon-
tinuous transitions between solid, liquid, or gaseous states of matter. These transitions
are called phase transitions . When systems undergo phase transitions, some of their
physical properties change—often resulting from changes in temperature, pressure, or
other surrounding conditions. For example, snowﬂakes will phase transition into water
droplets when external temperature reaches its melting point. Many biological sys-
tems also undergo phase transitions, where their morphological and metabolic proﬁles
change dramatically. These transitions depend on phenotypic plasticity, which is the
ability of biological systems with one genotype to change their phenotype in response
to changing environmental conditions. Examples include temperature-dependent sex
determination in some ﬁsh and reptiles, eye-spot formations in some butterﬂies, and
insect metamorphosis.
Because of the second law of thermodynamics, the path of the process undergone
by a system isolated from all external inﬂuences eventually goes into a state of ther-
modynamic equilibrium. There are several formulations of the law (Ufﬁnk 2001). One
formulation refers to thermodynamic entropy, which is a state variable measuring the
amount of “disorder” (or randomness) in a system, and implies that entropies of iso-
lated systems not in equilibrium typically increase over time, approaching maximum
value at equilibrium. It is a function of a system’s state, and captured by the formula: S
/equal1k log(W). This formula describes the entropy S of a system in terms of the logarithm
of the number of possible microstates W /equal1{w
1, w2,…, wn} that are consistent with
the macroscopic states of the system, where k is the Boltzmann constant.
Comparing snowﬂakes with water vapor offers one intuitive way of visualizing
the notion of “disorder” associated with thermodynamic entropy. Water vapor in a
container can have many possible arrangements of individual molecules consistent
with the macroscopic properties of the gas like its volume and pressure. Because
snowﬂakes’ molecules are constrained by crystalline bonds, the number of possible
conﬁgurations of individual molecules consistent with the macroscopic properties of
123
Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488 S3469
snowﬂakes is smaller. Snowﬂakes have less entropy than water vapor: they are less
“disordered” (random).
2.2 From thermodynamics to homeostasis
Free-energy theorists claim that biological systems apparently “resist” or “violate” the
second law of thermodynamics (or more accurately, the ﬂuctuation theorem) because
they maintain their physical integrity in the face of random ﬂuctuations in the envi-
ronment (see e.g., Friston and Stephan 2007, pp. 421–422; Ramstead et al. 2018,2
ff.).
Biological systems are open systems that maintain order (thermodynamic entropy)
by exchanging energy and matter with their surroundings. Upon considering all such
exchanges, the total entropy of the system and its environment increases over time in
ways that can be described by thermodynamical laws. It’s this capacity for “negative
entropy”—acting selectively upon their environments and metabolizing food, which
distinguishes living from non-living systems (Collier 1986; Schrödinger 1992; Collier
and Hooker 1999; Morowitz and Smith 2007; Bailly and Longo 2009).
A system’s capacity to act selectively upon its environment enables the system to
maintain its physical integrity amid changing environmental conditions. Friston and
Stephan ( 2007) illustrate this point with a ﬁctitious example. They compare regu-
lar snowﬂakes with winged snowﬂakes that can act on their environment. Regular
snowﬂakes are passively pushed around by environmental forces until their temper-
atures reach a certain threshold, where they undergo phase-transitions, losing their
integrity and turning into water droplets. Because winged snowﬂakes can ﬂy and keep
certain altitudes, they can maintain their temperature within bounds and away from
their melting point. Maintaining their temperature within certain bounds is a necessary
condition for the winged snowﬂakes to keep a non-equilibrium steady state so that they
may avoid a phase transition and disintegration. So, winged snowﬂakes can maintain a
“relatively constant milieu” despite environmental changes—that is, maintain home-
ostasis—via behaviors that adjust to new or changing conditions while maintaining
their macroscopic properties within bounds. Because their behaviors enable winged
snowﬂakes to maintain homeostasis, those behaviors, unlike regular snowﬂakes, are
said to be adaptive.
We have two conditions on a system’s adaptive behavior. One is in terms of ther-
modynamics: if systems act selectively upon their environments to preclude phase
transitions and stay away from thermodynamic equilibrium, then they behave adap-
tively. Another is in terms of homeostasis: if systems behave adaptively, then they
change their relationships with their environments to maintain vital physiological
variables within certain bounds.
Free-energy theorists link adaptivity directly to viability, understood in terms of
homeostasis, similarly to Ashby’s ( 1960, p. 58) account of adaptation as ultrastabil-
ity did. For free-energy theorists, characteristics for phase-dependent measurement
function—or as Ashby called them, “essential variables”—must be kept within viable
limits to prevent the system from dying rapidly or disintegrating from phase transi-
123
S3470 Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488
tions. Like Ashby ( 1960), free-energy theorists relate thermodynamic and biological
formulations of adaptive processes.
Speciﬁcally, free-energy theorists assume that any living system possesses a ran-
dom dynamical attractor—a set of states towards which a dynamical system tends to
evolve for a wide variety of initial conditions of the system’s state. This attractive set is
interpreted as the system’s extended phenotype, which includes characteristics deﬁn-
ing a kind of biological system. Under appropriate conditions, any system possessing
a random dynamical attractor can be shown to be formally equivalent to any system
at a steady state far from equilibrium, where the system’s “characteristic” variables
are within homeostatic bounds (Friston 2012; Ramstead et al. 2018,p .2 ) .
5 In other
words, the paths of the processes of adaptive (living) systems fall within a speciﬁc,
relatively narrow region of all possible states in their phase space. For Friston, no less
than Ashby, survival is equivalent to the system’s being in that narrow region.
With these physical and biological formulations articulated, the argument’s next
step is to deploy the mathematics of random dynamical systems theory and information
theory to answer the following question. What characteristics must biological systems
possess to maintain their path within a speciﬁc (homeostatic) region that precludes
phase transitions?
2.3 From homeostasis to surprise
Physical systems can be represented as sets of variables. Different values of these
variables pick out different states of the systems. The set of all possible states of a
system can be represented as a state space, which allows one to describe the system and
its changes in time. A phase space is a continuous state space described with a smooth
manifold. A space’s dimensionality depends on how many variables are needed to
describe the target system and its dynamics. Each state of the system is represented
with a point in the state space. Given the state of the system at any moment, one can
use an evolution rule, which can be either deterministic or stochastic, to describe the
next states of the system in state space.
Friston ( 2012, 2013) represents biological systems as random dynamical systems,
with state spaces partitioned into external and internal states. External states corre-
spond to environmental causes that generate sensory samples (also known as sensory
input, sensory outcomes, sensory data,o r evidence), which affect the system’s internal
state. A subset of states (known as Markov blanket —more on this momentarily) can
ground a separation between the internal states of the system and the external states of
the environment. A further subset of these separating (blanket) states is distinguished
as its so-called active states , where different values of an active state determine dif-
ferent positions of the system in the environment.
The justiﬁcation for partitioning these states appeals to the construct markov
blanket (Friston 2013). Pearl ( 1988) introduced this concept in relation to Markov
5 Equating adaptation and viability renders Ashby’s concept of essential variables unclear. If essential,
in what sense can its values be transgressed without causing death? Or, if such transgression is possible,
then in what sense are they essential? The construct allostasis may offer, here, a way to understand how
organisms can operate outside of normal set-points and approximate equilibria values, without leading to
the total cessation of all physiological function.
123
Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488 S3471
networks for representing probabilistic knowledge. Roughly, given a set of random
variables N, the Markov blanket for a variable x ∈N is the subset M containing all
random variables that “shield” x from all the other variables in N. Fixing the values of
the variables in M leaves x conditionally independent of all other random variables;
hence, the Markov blanket of a random variable is the only knowledge one may need
to predict the behavior of that variable (Pearl 1988, 97 ff.).
In machine learning, Markov blankets help address problems with constructing sets
of causal models from sample data that are as small as possible, and help search these
sets to ﬁnd a true causal model (Spirtes et al. 2000). Friston ( 2013), however, sup-
poses further that Markov blankets are objective features of the real world separating
the states internal to biological systems from those external to them (more on this
reiﬁcation in Sect. 3). His mathematical representation of system’s exchanges with
their environments involves four basic types of quantities (for a helpful review of the
mathematical details, see Buckley et al. 2017):
1. external states Ψ /equal1{ψ1,… , ψn} standing in for the environmental causes of
sensory states;
2. active states A ={ a1,… , an} that change what external states the system samples;
3. sensory states (or samples) D ={ d1,… , dn} that depend upon active and internal
states of the system;
4. a generative model M deﬁned in terms of its parameters or sufﬁcient statistics, and
would be “encoded” by the system’s internal states.
For biological systems, free-energy theorists assume that an organism’s phenotype,
deﬁned as “the repertoire of physiological and sensory states in which an organism
can be” (Friston 2010a, p. 127), is constituted by the organism’s internal states and
its Markov blanket, which comprises active and sensory states.
Free-energy theorists represent the organism’s internal states with the parameters
(or sufﬁcient statistics) of a posterior probability distribution over external states gen-
erating sensory samples (Friston and Stephan 2007, p. 424). The parameters would be
physically realized as weights and biases of networks in the organism’s brain, and are
optimized—where optimization consists in ﬁnding values for these parameters that
minimize or maximize an objective function—in relation to a generative model.
Biological systems’ phenotypes are said to “entail” the generative model (Friston
2012), where entailment here means that external states can be (inductively) inferred
on the basis of sensory states, and that this inference implicitly assumes a generative
model (i.e., a probabilistic speciﬁcation of how sensory states are generated by external
states). Given how free-energy theorists deﬁne phenotype, the generative model M
provides the probability that a certain kind of system obtains any possible state in
state space. In short, according to free-energy theorists, for any phenotype, there is a
generative model M that renders the internal states of the phenotype as the sufﬁcient
statistics of posterior densities of external states under M.
In the winged snowﬂake example, external states include ambient temperature, wind
direction, and other environmental factors that generate sensory samples (or inputs)
inﬂuencing the snowﬂake’s internal state. Internal states include its temperature and
the strength of its microcrystals’ electrostatic bonds, but also active states like its local
position in the environment at a time. The snowﬂake’s active state includes its position
123
S3472 Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488
in the environment, so that changing this active state will lead to a change in position;
and, by changing position in the environment, the snowﬂake receives different sensory
samples (or experiences different sensory states). Given the kind of system a winged
snowﬂake happens to be, it’s improbable that states where its temperature is higher
than 0 °C will obtain.
With respect to cells, external states include ambient temperature and pH. These
states generate sensory samples (i.e., energy arrays impinging on organisms’ sensory
surfaces) that inﬂuence the state of transmembrane receptors. The cell’s internal states
include the concentration of intracellular metabolites, but also active states, like the
motion of ﬂagella at times, that change how the cell’s environment inﬂuences the cell’s
receptors. Given the kind of system a cell happens to be, it’s improbable that states
where its temperature is higher than 50 °C will obtain.
Given the four basic quantities (for external, sensory, active, and internal states of a
biological system) and their relationships of probabilistic conditional (in)dependence,
one can examine what characteristics a random dynamical system must possess so
that its physical states “are conﬁned to a bounded subset of states and remain there
indeﬁnitely” (Friston 2012, p. 2106). This subset of states in state space is a random
dynamical attractor corresponding to a set of (non-equilibrium) steady states, where
levels of variables representing the sensory states of the system—like temperature,
pH, glucose, blood oxygenation, etc.—are within homeostatic bounds. To learn what
characteristics biological systems must possess if they are to maintain their path within
a speciﬁc (homeostatic) region that precludes phase transitions, free-energy theorists
ask what dynamics such systems must exhibit for a random dynamical attractor to
obtain.
If one then stipulates that “biological systems move around in their state space,
but revisit a limited number of states” that correspond to homeostatic steady states far
from equilibrium (Friston 2013, p. 11), then, of all possible obtaining states, there’s a
small number that they will achieve in their lifetime with a high probability. All other
states will be obtained with an exceedingly low probability.
To capture this idea formally, free-energy theorists use the information-theoretic
concept surprise. The average surprise of sampling some outcome corresponds to
Shannon’s entropy, which is formally similar to the thermodynamic concept entropy.
Speciﬁcally, the surprise of sampling some sensory outcome (or experiencing some
sensory state) can be represented with the negative log probability: −log p(D = d
t+1|at,
M). This measure quantiﬁes the improbability that a sensory outcome dt+1 is sampled,
given action at and the generative model M. If the sensory outcome is “incompatible”
with M and at, then the sensory sample dt+1 is surprising. If there’s a high probability
that biological systems are found at any point in their lifetime in homeostatic states,
then environmentally-generated sensory samples will be unsurprising. Sensory sam-
ples generated by all other external states in the environment will be highly surprising.
2.4 From surprise to free energy
If one stipulatively deﬁnes adaptively-behaving system as any system whose behavior
minimizes the average surprise of its sensory states, then actual systems behaving adap-
123
Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488 S3473
tively must sample unsurprising sensory outcomes. That is, the system’s objective is to
maximize model evidence p(D = dt+1|M), or minimize surprise −log p(D = dt+1|at, M).
This means, formally, that the system must select actions that optimize the function:
G(at ) /equal1log
∫
p(D /equal1dt+1,Ψ /equal1ψt+1|A /equal1at , M) dΨ
where p(D = dt+1, Ψ /equal1ψt+1|A /equal1at, M) is the joint density of sensory samples (i.e.,
sensory states) D and their generating causes Ψ in the environment, conditioned on
action and on a generative model. This density factors into a likelihood p(D = dt+1|Ψ /equal1
ψt+1, A /equal1at, M) and prior density p(Ψ /equal1ψt+1|M), which jointly specify the generative
model “entailed by” the system’s phenotype. Optimizing G(at) requires changes in
actions of systems with phenotype corresponding to the generative model M.
For most problems, optimizing G(at) involves an intractable marginalization over
(hidden) environmental states Ψ . To overcome computational intractability, a varia-
tional (or recognition) density q(Ψ , μ) can be introduced to deﬁne another quantity
that is greater than surprise. This quantity—called free energy—provides a bound on
the integral mentioned above, and is a function of sensory samples and internal states
of the system. It is deﬁned thus:
F(dt+1,μt+1|at ) /equal1−⟨log p(D /equal1dt+1,Ψ /equal1ψt+1|A /equal1at )⟩q + ⟨log q(Ψ /equal1ψt+1,μt+1)⟩q
Under certain assumptions (cf., Dayan et al. 1995; MacKay 1995), optimizing F(dt+1,
μt+1|at) is computationally tractable. In the context of FEP , this optimization involves
changes only to internal parameters μ or to the action parameter a, which can be
controlled by the system.
Because the free-energy function F is greater than G, by acting on the environment
to minimize the free energy of their sensory samples, biological systems would avoid
surprising sensory states. If they avoid surprising sensory states, biological systems
may attain a homeostatic state; and by selecting actions that attain homeostatic states,
biological systems will thereby behave adaptively and preserve their physical integrity.
And by FEP , any system that minimizes the free energy of its sensory states with respect
to action, or its internal parameters, will avoid phase transitions, which would make
its physical disintegration unlikely.
3 FEP and organicism
Having articulated the steps involved in the reasoning to FEP , let’s examine two dimen-
sions along which FEP and organicism appear inconsistent: their understanding of how,
adaptive organisms should be represented, and their interpretation of probability.
3.1 How to represent organisms?
Free-energy theorists formulate FEP using the traditional modeling tools of random
dynamical systems in thermodynamics, and represent organisms’ adaptive dynamics
123
S3474 Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488
as trajectories through attractive non-equilibrium states in phase space. For organicists,
however, organisms’ adaptive dynamics cannot be adequately represented with this
tool predeﬁned over the “characteristic” variables individuating kinds of biological
systems (Longo et al. 2012).
Organicists have different options for justifying this claim. They may deny the
existence of an organism’s characteristics, or deny that characteristic variables (if
they exist) can be reliably identiﬁed for any biological system. Another option is
to emphasize that the mathematical tools used to represent and explain biological
phenomena are merely that—abstract mathematical tools that can be used to describe
how one state evolves into another state over time. For instance, Chater and Oaksford
forewarn about the risk of conﬂating scientiﬁc models and their targets of the models
with this example:
the theory of aerodynamics is a crucial component of explaining why birds can
ﬂy. But clearly birds know nothing about aerodynamics, and the computational
intractability of aerodynamic calculations does not in any way prevent birds
from ﬂying. Similarly, [systems] do not need to calculate their optimal behavior
functions to behave adaptively. They simply have to use successful algorithms;
they do not have to be able to make the calculations that would show that these
algorithms are successful. ( 2000, p. 110)
The suggestion is that the properties of the models used to represent organisms should
not be directly ascribed to the organisms’ biological or cognitive equipment. If so, this
would bear directly on the posit of free energy, which free-energy theorists introduce
because the optimization problem described in Sect. 2.4 is intractable. Yet, if there’s
no imperative for organisms themselves to compute solutions to the optimization
problem, and the optimization problem is a problem life scientists need to solve to
understand organism’s behavior, then the motivation to advance FEP dissipates.
Free-energy theorists assume that organisms are ergodic: their phase averages (i.e.,
average values of speciﬁed functions of their microscopic states) are identical to aver-
ages over time of quantities measurable from microscopic states. For ergodic systems,
the dynamics of a system’s microstates—e.g., its biomolecular kinematics—are suf-
ﬁciently random, and the coupling between the system and the external states in its
environment is sufﬁciently slow, such that the microscopic dynamics of the system’s
states can be replaced by a random sample from the ensemble density of the micro-
scopic states. This ensemble density assigns a probability to each possible microscopic
conﬁguration, and can be used to derive predictions about macroscopic properties of
the system as those expected in the ensemble. Given ergodicity, for any region of
phase space, the average time the system spends in that region is proportional to the
region’s “attractiveness.” Ergodic systems will repeatedly revisit the neighborhoods
of attracting states. So, if organisms are ergodic, they can be represented as random
dynamical attractors in phase space. If such ergodic dynamical systems also possess a
Markov blanket, then “[they’ll] appear to actively maintain their structural and dynam-
ical integrity” (Friston 2013, p. 10). Under certain conditions, such systems will appear
to minimize their free energy.
Organicists will be quick to note that we cannot assign meaningful probabilities to
the microscopic states of organisms because organisms, at all levels of organization,
123
Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488 S3475
cannot explore all possible paths in phase space. “Not only will we not make all possible
proteins of length 200 or 2000, we will not make all possible organs, organisms, social
systems, [… t]here is an indeﬁnite hierarchy of non-ergodicity as the complexity of the
objects we consider increases” (Kauffman 2013, p. 167). For organicists, ergodicity is
biologically irrelevant simply because organisms are non-ergodic (Longo et al. 2012).
If ergodicity were biologically irrelevant, and the average of any measure of the state
of an organism doesn’t converge over a sufﬁcient period of time, then it is a misleading
idealization to represent an organism’s phenotype with an invariant ergodic ensemble
density (assuming it can be meaningfully deﬁned) that speciﬁes the probability, for
any possible microstate, that the organism is in a certain macrostate. And it would
also be biologically irrelevant to note that, under ergodic assumptions, the long-term
average of surprise is entropy.
While organicists may think of FEP as misleading and biologically irrelevant, free-
energy theorists would counter by asserting that the notion of an attracting set itself
implies ergodicity. So, if all living systems possess an attracting set, then they must
be ergodic too; and if those systems are ergodic, then they will possess characteristic,
relatively stable, measureable properties. For free-energy theorists, the dynamics of
such systems will appear to place an upper bound on their informational entropy,
and to maximize the evidence for a model M of external states “entailed” by their
characteristic properties. This behavior—they would conclude—can be expressed as
approximate Bayesian (active) inference about the causes of sensory states in terms
of minimizing variational free energy.
6
On the other hand, organicists have argued that organisms constitute historically
grounded constraints on energy ﬂows, where their phase space continually changes,
and so organicists deny that living systems are aptly represented with a classical
phase space. Since attracting sets are subsets of classically predeﬁned phase spaces,
organicists deny the assumption that all living systems’ characteristic behavior is
aptly represented with an attracting set. Hence, for organicists, the implication from
attracting sets to ergodicity is a red herring.
Representing organisms and their dynamics while idealizing their non-ergodic sta-
tus would prevent taking seriously the historical considerations of lineage that are
essential to understanding what organisms are, and how they change over time. If
historical considerations and lineage matter to understanding organisms and their
dynamics, then biological systems should be represented as “speciﬁc” and their tra-
jectories as “generic.” Instead, for organicists, free-energy theorists get it backward:
physical systems are “generic,” while their trajectories “speciﬁc” (Longo and Montévil
2013: ch. 7).
If physical systems were “generic,” then different types of systems could be indi-
viduated by properties such as mass, charge, temperature, or momentum. Position
and momentum, for example, characterize mechanical systems. The mathematical
representation of physical systems of the same type will preserve formal symmetries
6 This inference-optimization bridge, which we also mentioned in fn. 4, is a powerful feature of variational
methods that treat statistical inference problems as optimization problems. Minimizing variational free
energy can thus be understood as approximate Bayesian inference, in the sense that minimizing free energy
is formally equivalent to optimizing a variational bound on Bayesian model evidence.
123
S3476 Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488
between their deﬁning characteristics. 7 Each symmetry in mathematical representa-
tion implies that certain physical properties of the system, such as total kinetic energy,
are conserved and remain unchanged as the system evolves over time (Gross 1996).
However, for tokens of the same type of physical system, trajectories (or paths) would
be “speciﬁc” since they are uniquely determined by the rules of the system’s evolution
given its initial state.
In free-energy theorists’ representations, organisms are “generic.” Their represen-
tation in terms of actions, internal states, and generative models preserves symmetries
in formulations of FEP . Trajectories in the phase space of organisms would be “speci-
ﬁc” according to FEP , because solutions of FEP for a given kind of organism yield
a unique trajectory in phase space given the initial state of the organism.
8 Properties
of organisms like lineage and heritability would just be an expression of a speciﬁc
trajectory on a generic manifold, namely the attracting set.
For Longo et al. ( 2012), organisms should instead be represented as “speciﬁc,”
while their trajectories “generic.” Because of their historicity and materiality, organ-
isms wouldn’t possess general characteristics that allow for mathematically invariant
representations. They write,
In biology, symmetries at the phenotypic level, are continually changed, begin-
ning with the least mitosis, up to the “structural bifurcations” which yield
speciations in evolution. Thus, there are no biological symmetries that are a
priori preserved. […] There are no sufﬁciently stable mathematical regularities
and transformations to allow an equational and lawlike description entailing the
phylogenetic and ontogenetic trajectories. ( 2012, p. 1390)
So, from organicists’ perspective, organisms cannot—unlike non-living physical sys-
tems—be represented with a ﬁxed phase space and rules of evolution predeﬁned over
some set of “characteristic,” mathematically invariant variables.
The disagreement between free-energy theorists and organicists cuts deeper still.
Free-energy theorists take an adaptationist and selectionist standpoints in biology,
whereby “selection explains how biological systems arise and the only outstand-
ing issue is what characteristics they must possess” (Friston and Stephan 2007,
p. 423). Organicists reject the adaptationist and selectionist perspectives, which—they
argue—are insufﬁcient for explaining the autonomy of living beings, and their capac-
ities to regulate their processes in relation to environmental conditions registered as
viable or unviable, improving or deteriorating (Di Paolo and Thompson 2014; Moreno
and Mossio 2015).
7 For example, in Newtonian mechanics, given two bodies with the same mass starting from rest and moving
in opposite directions with different velocities along the same axis, the total kinetic energy of the systems
comprised of the two bodies remains the same if the velocities are interchanged. That is, the solution of the
equation yielding the total kinetic energy will be the same.
8 Friston (2012) relates this result to the principle of least action (PLA). In Hamilton’s formulation, action is
deﬁned as the integral along possible paths of a system’s process connecting two speciﬁed states. According
to PLA, the actual path of the process between initial and ﬁnal states in a speciﬁed time is a dynamical
system’s trajectory in phase space, which is found “by imagining all possible trajectories that the system
could conceivably take, computing the action for each of these trajectories, and selecting one that makes
the action locally stationary” (Gray 2009).
123
Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488 S3477
Furthermore, following Ashby ( 1940), FEP emphasizes homeostatic stability as the
core feature of organisms. Accordingly, organisms should be represented as random
dynamical attractors. Contemporary organicists like Longo and colleagues emphasize
that organisms are fundamentally ever-changing processes, maintained in relatively
stable conditions by further processes. Longo and Montévil ( 2013), for instance,
advance the idea that organisms should be represented as attaining extended critical
phase transitions. Free-energy theorists generally construe undergoing a phase transi-
tion as equivalent to biological disintegration and death—although there are several
examples of phase transitions in biology, such as metamorphosis, that are consistent
with an attracting set, and, arguably, with FEP too (Clark 2017).
Even so, Longo and Montévil ( 2013) argue that organisms’ adaptive behavior
should be represented as a continuous critical transition from one phase to another,
whereby organisms are continuously reconstructed with variations in their dynamic
couplings with ecosystems. The basic idea is that ancestry continuously co-constitutes
and reshapes organisms as well as by their interactions with ecosystems. This idea ﬁts
a growing wealth of evidence concerning phenotypic plasticity, whereby organisms
with the same genotype can generate differing phenotypes through their interactions
with the environment, which recreate novel conditions of existence passed on to their
descendants (Montévil et al. 2016).
Free-energy theorists would again note that evolution, and natural selection in par-
ticular, is also a free-energy minimizing process (Hobson and Friston 2016; Ramstead
et al. 2018). But, for organicists, selectionism, and the ﬁxation on surprise-minimizing
processes obscure the historically-grounded, environmentally co-constituted nature of
biological adaptivity.
One last dimension of disagreement concerns the interpretation of the probabilities
involved in scientiﬁc representations of changing organisms. Probability plays a central
role in free-energy theorists’ accounts. Adaptive organisms are said to be embodied
generative models of their environments, where a generative model M speciﬁes the
probability that a certain external state, sensory input, and internal state occur together
(Friston 2013). Organisms are said to have Markov blankets separating their internal
states from the external environment, deﬁned over a set of random variables and
a probability measure (Kirchhoff et al. 2018). Furthermore, Friston ( 2009, 2010b)
claims FEP entails the Bayesian brain hypothesis, which implies that nervous systems
represent probability distributions and store generative models and prior probabilistic
knowledge about the world, and that neural networks can perform statistical inferences
based on these probabilities (Knill and Pouget 2004; Colombo and Seriès 2012).
Finally, free energy itself is a bound on surprise (or information entropy), and surprise
is a probabilistic measure of the uncertainty of sampling some sensory data, given a
generative model.
Neglect of both the differing scope of distinct formulations of FEP (as applied
to non-biological adaptive systems, organisms, or brains at a certain time scale) and
the interpretations of the probabilities in different formulations of FEP has generated
disagreement—particularly about whether FEP is committed to positing mental rep-
resentations and to an essentially inferential picture of cognition. To move the debate
forward, at least two questions should be distinguished. First, should we understand
FEP as a modeler’s tool to characterize and predict adaptive behavior, or should it
123
S3478 Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488
be understood as an objective feature of target systems? Second, in determining the
scope of FEP , how should the probabilities it posits be interpreted? Should they be
understood epistemically or physically?
Some researchers in the organicist tradition seem to interpret the probabilities
involved in FEP physically, as the frequency or propensity of the occurrence of some
event (e.g., Bruineberg et al. 2018; Kirchhoff and Froese 2017). When FEP targets
brains, these researchers reject the idea that brains literally represent probabilities
and draw inferences. Other researchers have interpreted the probabilities involved in
FEP epistemically, as rational degrees of belief in the occurrence of some event and
the willingness to act on this belief. When FEP targets brains, these researchers tend
to suggest that brains literally represent probabilities, possess Markov blankets, and
draw inferences (e.g., Hohwy 2016). For his part, Friston ( 2013) seems to interpret
the probabilities involved in FEP as objective features of real-world systems; they
aren’t just modeling tools useful to capture the ﬂuctuating dynamics of biological sys-
tems. Risking conﬂation of scientiﬁc models and their targets, Friston ( 2011, 2013)
claims that brains themselves represent probabilities about the occurrence of events,
and that brains make inferences about the causes of their sensory inputs, based on
neurally-encoded statistical models.
Let’s consider the ﬁrst idea. In formulating FEP , one need initially specify a system’s
phase space (or sample space) and a desired non-equilibrium steady state distribution in
it. One can then optimize the non-equilibrium steady-state distribution by minimizing
the free energy of samples generated by the environment with respect to actions and
a generative model. The system—claims Friston ( 2011, 2013)—will then appear to
sample its environment as if it were aiming at maximizing the evidence for its own
existence. However, the construction of ‘as if’ explanations falls short when the goal is
construed as specifying the real nature of biological explananda. Where the functional
capacities attributed to those systems prove intractable, resorting to such explanations
won’t circumvent the problem, even when the computations involved are construed
as subsymbolic, ofﬂine, heuristic, or approximate (van Rooij et al. 2018).
The desired steady-state distribution of an organism is, by deﬁnition, just the organ-
ism’s evolved extended phenotype. This means that minimizing free energy would be
equivalent to maximizing expected adaptive value: surprising states would just be, by
deﬁnition, maladaptive. One way to support this deﬁnition is to note that organisms,
and brains, are immersed in a “statistical bath” of energy arrays from the environment
impinging on their sensory surfaces. These energy arrays would sculpt phenotypes,
associated with a certain non-equilibrium steady-state distribution, which the organism
would update as a function of its sensory samples.
However, organicists will argue that deﬁning adaptivity as unsurprisingness is mis-
guided and relies on implausible assumptions. With Longo et al. ( 2012), one may
note that a desired non-equilibrium steady state distribution is only deﬁnable on a
predeﬁned phase space. If it’s not possible to predeﬁne a phase space for biological
systems, the deﬁnition will be undercut—and with it, the justiﬁcation for believing
that the probabilities involved in FEP are not mere modeling tools but are objective
features of living systems.
Furthermore, leaving on the side free-energy theorists’ selectionist perspective,
one may ﬁnd implausible that surprising events should always be maladaptive. Using
123
Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488 S3479
Gershman and Daw’s examples, “[s]hould the ﬁrst amphibian out of water dive back
in? If a wolf eats deer not because he is hungry, but because he is attracted to the
equilibrium state of his ancestors, would a sudden bonanza of deer inspire him to
eat only the amount to which he is accustomed?” ( 2012, p. 306). If adaptivity is
stipulatively deﬁned in terms of minimization of surprise, then some instances of
adaptive behavior will consist in seeking out novel situations that may provide systems
the opportunity to resolve expected surprise.
Let’s assume that the probabilities involved in FEP aren’t simply modelers’ tools,
and turn to the second question about how to interpret these probabilities. In its maximal
scope formulation, the probabilities involved in FEP should be interpreted physically,
as objective propensities or frequencies. (After all, it makes little sense to say that
an amoeba has a certain degree of belief that a bacterium is in the premises.) Phys-
ical interpretations of probabilities cohere both with how probabilities are generally
understood in statistical mechanics, as well as with the suggestion that inference talk
is inapposite to the behavior of organisms like an amoeba or bacterium, understood as
dynamical systems coupled with their environment (Bruineberg et al. 2018).
9 Finally,
a propensity-based interpretation clariﬁes the sense in which FEP isn’t a tautology,
just like it isn’t a tautology to say that dice produce odd numbers more often than
threes—more on tautology and FEP in Sect. 4.1. Propensities of free-energy minimiz-
ing organisms to survive, or of dice to fall equally often on each side, permit fallible
predictions about their behaviors.
Yet, a propensity interpretation of the probabilities involved in FEP is questionable.
For starters, it’s opaque what sort of property a propensity is. If propensities are causal
tendencies, then they should be asymmetric relationships just like causal relationships;
but then propensities cannot be probabilities (Humphreys 1985). After all, probabilities
can be reversed: given the probability of E given C, there is the probability of C given E,
which is a theorem in the Kolmogorov’s axiomatization of probability. If propensities
are probabilities that obey Kolmogorov’s axioms, they can also be reversed: e.g., a
given Marans chicken has the propensity to lay brown eggs, just as a given brown
egg would have a propensity to have been laid by a Marans chicken (which makes no
causal sense).
9 The notion of inference in FEP also requires clariﬁcation. Bruineberg et al. claim that, “[w]ithin the Free
Energy framework, the notion of ‘inference’ is much more minimal and does not involve any propositions:
any dynamical system A coupled with another B can be said to “infer” the “hidden cause” of its “input” (the
dynamics of B) when it reliably co-varies with the dynamics of B and it is robust to the noise inherent in
the coupling” ( 2018, p. 2436). They invoke Huygens’s case of the synchronization of two pendulum clocks
to illustrate this “minimal” sense of inference. Three points in response. First, whether or not the concept
inference in FEP involves propositions depends how to understand the probabilities featuring in the free
energy framework. If these probabilities are modelers’ tools without actual counterparts in target systems,
then inference may involve propositions, viz., those propositions entertained by scientists when they
make inferences about target systems on the basis of the mathematics of random dynamic systems theory.
Second, reliable covariance robust to noise falls within the extension, not of the concept inference, but of
some successor notion; so Bruineberg et al. have not illustrated a “minimal sense” so much as they’ve just
changed the subject. Third, Huygens observed phase/-opposition coupling between two pendulum clocks
hanging from a beam or from a board sitting on two chairs. But FEP is formulated within the mathematics
of random dynamical systems, and Huygens’s case has not been aptly represented as a problem in parameter
estimation in dynamical systems—a problem that FEP is supposed to help solve (see Oliveira and Melo
2015). Ultimately, Bruineberg et al.’s claim does not settle the question of how inference should be
understood within the free-energy framework.
123
S3480 Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488
If propensities are instead long-run relative frequencies, then a reference class
should be deﬁned. For biological organisms, such a reference class would correspond
to a phase space; but if a phase space cannot be predeﬁned for an organism, the
probabilities involved in FEP cannot be deﬁned.
Suppose instead that the probabilities in FEP are understood epistemically as ratio-
nal degrees of belief. This interpretation is most plausible when FEP is restricted to
whole, cognitively-sophisticated animals, i.e., to creatures possessing mental repre-
sentations and capacities for rational inference. Organisms would thus act adaptively
by minimizing a free-energy bound deﬁned over internal, graded, epistemic states
representing events in the environment.
While this interpretation wouldn’t mitigate the problem of deﬁning a phase space (or
sample space) for organisms, Friston and colleagues surmise that “sustained exposure
to environmental inputs causes the internal structure of the brain to recapitulate the
causal structure of those inputs. In turn, this enables efﬁcient perceptual inference”
(Friston et al. 2006, p. 77). This suggestion risks obfuscating that adaptive pressures
on biological observers are generally unrelated to the accuracy of their epistemic
states. From an evolutionary perspective, good prior beliefs should promote adaptive
ﬁtness, not simply match relative frequencies in the environment. From a statistical
perspective, prior beliefs that merely “recapitulate” observed environmental statistics
do not obviously “enable efﬁcient inference.” They instead lead to overﬁtting, which
in turn “leads to a fragility of performance in future encounters with the same class
of environments, which is maladaptive” (Feldman 2017, p. 31). More entropic priors
that do not recapitulate the statistics of the environment will avoid overﬁtting, and
may generally be more apt to “optimize the ﬁt between mind and world” (ibid.).
4 FEP and mechanism
We now turn to mechanistic philosophy, and argue that FEP is inconsistent with mech-
anism along two dimensions of representation: the dependence of explanatory force
on describing mechanisms and the rejection of the idea that life science phenomena
can be adequately explained through an axiomatic, physics-ﬁrst approach.
4.1 How to explain life phenomena?
Free-energy theorists appeal to FEP in explanations of various phenomena, including
Hebb’s rule and spike-timing dependent plasticity, the multiplicity and hierarchical
organization of cortical layers, their reciprocal connection with distinct feedforward
and feedback properties, and the existence of adaptation and repetition suppression
(Friston 2010a). Such explanations are thought of axiomatically, as logical deductions
from sets of axioms and formulae (Friston 2012). Stipulative deﬁnitions, like living
system as an attracting set in a phase space or adaptive behavior as behavior that reduces
average surprise, provide the bridge principles that connect theoretical predicates from
different disciplines, and that allow free-energy theorists to attempt the deductions
needed to claim reductions of other principles to FEP . In their sweeping attempt to
123
Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488 S3481
explain these and other phenomena, and to reduce their theories and principles to
FEP , free-energy theorists have also claimed for their theory another virtue: a grand
theoretical uniﬁcation (Friston 2010a; Hohwy 2014).
In presenting these features, FEP is apparently at odds with mechanists’ emphasis
that life science phenomena should be explained by appeal to mechanisms, and that
adequate strategies for explanation in the life sciences should involve decomposing
these mechanisms into component parts and operations and providing an account of
how these parts and operations work together to produce the phenomenon.
FEP and mechanism are related by their common emphasis on function. Both free-
energy theorists and mechanists can agree that FEP provides an idealized functional
principle. Where they diverge is over whether and when functional accounts of bio-
logical phenomena sufﬁce for adequate explanation, or whether structural details of
component parts and mechanistic organization are also necessary for such functional
accounts to have explanatory power.
Progress in the life sciences—and especially the cognitive and behavioral sci-
ences—often begins by empirically identifying and adequately describing a functional
capacity. Descriptions of that capacity then allow for the method of functional analysis,
wherein that capacity is functionally decomposed in terms of its constituent proper-
ties, processes, and components. Functional properties of a system have traditionally
been individuated by their relations to inputs, outputs, and other internal properties of
the system under investigation—that is, by their causal role. By redescribing systems’
capacities in terms of their functional properties and dispositions, functional analysis
offers scientists a way to tackle the target phenomenon. But it also offers the potential
for prediction and explanation, as empirical applications of FEP demonstrate (e.g.,
Bastos et al. 2012).
FEP provides an analysis of adaptive behavior, in the sense that it assumes a thermo-
dynamically sufﬁcient condition on adaptive behavior, and a homeostatically necessary
condition. In the abstract, FEP requires an interplay between four sets variables: sen-
sory samples D that inﬂuence a system Σ’s internal states, and active states A that
inﬂuence the external states of the local environment Ψ . The mathematical dependen-
cies between Σ (D, A), and Ψ deﬁne free energy over Σ as a function of D and a
probabilistic representation of its causes—the thought being that a system’s capacity
to adapt to its environment can be functionally analyzed in terms of suppression of
free energy, via internal representations that readjust state changes in its transduc-
ers (to maintain or improve perceptual ﬁdelity) or effectors (to maintain or promote
successful control).
For their part, mechanists have argued that functional analyses lack explanatory
power, as they are mechanism sketches (Piccinini and Craver 2011). Mechanism
sketches are conceived of as incomplete representations of (the function of) a mech-
anism, in which some relevant aspects—either component parts or their operations,
or their organization—are omitted from the explanation. Biological or cognitive func-
tions may be decomposed into their constituent properties, processes, or subroutines;
and decomposition may detail a capacity as a nexus of functional relationships between
variables standing for component operations, without thereby specifying how the
capacity is actually realized. Mechanists acknowledge that functional decompositions
of capacities into modeled causal and non-causal operations within a mechanism
123
S3482 Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488
constrain the possible structures and conﬁgurations that might perform those oper-
ations; but they are equally keen to emphasize that structural decompositions into
modeled components within a mechanism can also constrain the possible functions
and conﬁgurations performed. Details about the relevant physiological and anatom-
ical components of mechanisms are necessary to ﬁlling in mechanism sketches by
localizing each operation to its respective component part (Bechtel and Richardson
1993/2010).
Free-energy theorists’ functional analyses appeal to states and dynamics that ide-
alize away from the biophysical details of the structural complexity of actual systems.
While functional analyses may be construed as mechanism sketches, FEP itself doesn’t
provide in any obvious sense a sketch of a mechanism, since it swings free of the need
to supply any microstructural, biophysical, or anatomical detail. Mechanists would
therefore conclude that FEP lacks explanatory power (Kaplan and Craver 2011).
Free-energy theorists may reply that FEP deﬁnes a class of process models that
provide hypotheses about how spatiotemporally organized components and opera-
tions in biological systems might carry out free-energy minimization. For example,
some have suggested that FEP is algorithmically carried out by predictive coding, and
that predictive coding is physically realized by speciﬁc hierarchically-structured neu-
ronal assemblies (Friston 2009; Bastos et al. 2012). Accordingly, certain higher-order
neuronal assemblies would output predictions of the states of lower-order assemblies,
which are then compared with the actual states of the lower-order assemblies to form
prediction errors that are passed back up the hierarchy to update the predictions from
higher-order neural assemblies. The recurrent exchange of signals between adjacent
neural assemblies resolves prediction error at each level, resulting in hierarchically
deep, neurally-encoded accounts of sensory inputs.
While it may go some way toward meeting the demands of ﬁlling out a mecha-
nism sketch, this suggestion is inadequate for mechanists. First, predictive coding is
only one of several possible algorithms that may be used to optimize energy func-
tions. Since many of them might be empirically adequate but difﬁcult to disentangle,
concerns of underdetermination may emerge. Second, while predictive coding has
been used to model some aspects of visual perception (Rao and Ballard 1999), “the
experimental evidence for it seems currently inconclusive in the sense that it does not
rule out Bayesian inference with a direct variable code, potentially in combination
with a variety of non-probabilistic processes” (Aitchison and Lengyel 2017, p. 224).
Third, because FEP is intended to generalize beyond organisms with a nervous sys-
tem, predictive coding would need to be a mechanism by which all adaptive systems
work—from bacteria, to winged snowﬂakes and bladder cells, to plants and social
networks. Obviously, for such a wide array of systems, appealing to message-passing
in neuronal hierarchies as a relevant mechanism by which they operate is insufﬁciently
general. Fourth and ﬁnally, even if issues of underdetermination were put aside and
the experimental evidence for predictive coding were overwhelming, and even if it
were shown to be the generalized mechanism by which all adaptive systems work,
mechanists would be positioned to claim that ﬁlling out the mechanism sketch is what
matters: appeals to the mechanism of predictive coding—not FEP—are what provides
explanatory depth. For mechanists, functional descriptions of capacities that require
123
Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488 S3483
mechanistic analysis to achieve this depth can be important principles, but not foun-
dational ones that do the heavy lifting in ultimately explaining biological phenomena.
Free-energy theorists may simply reject the idea that adequate scientiﬁc repre-
sentation of life science phenomena must target the component parts and operations
and internal organization of mechanisms. Exemplifying this rejection is Chirimuuta’s
(2018) contention that several explanatorily adequate models in computational neuro-
science are non-mechanistic. The models she considers would be instances of “efﬁcient
coding explanation,” which, abstracting away from biophysical speciﬁcs, answer why
certain neuronal systems should behave in the ways described by the models. Based
on design principles informing the model, such explanations would thus identify the
functional utility of general patterns of behaviors instantiated by neural systems.
Similarly, free-energy theorists may argue that FEP is an optimality principle
in the life sciences (cf., Rice 2015). FEP , along with the class of process models
it deﬁnes, provides us with idealized, coarse-grained descriptions of certain func-
tional variables, which leverage varieties of realization types against the drive to
detail lower-level biomechanical structures essentially involved in producing target
explananda-phenomena. FEP , and the class of process models it deﬁnes, would omit
causal-mechanical detail and make biologically unrealistic assumption to focus atten-
tion on very general observable patterns displayed by biological systems, but also
by any other system behaving adaptively. Given that aim—they might claim—it’s
misguided to charge FEP for not providing us with mechanistic information.
4.2 FEP as a first principle?
As we have seen, explanations derived from FEP abstract away and distort most
of the mechanistic features of their target phenomena. But if FEP doesn’t aim at
uncovering mechanisms or difference-makers, then what’s its epistemic status vis-à-
vis mechanistic explanation, exactly?
Unfortunately, FEP’s epistemic status is muddled. It has been called an unfalsiﬁable
platitude,a n imperative,a tautology,a stipulative deﬁnition , paradigm, law of the life
sciences, law of nature ,a nap r i o r i ﬁrst principle ,a unifying explanation, and a simple
postulate or axiom . Wiese and Metzinger assert that “FEP can be regarded as the
fundamental theory, which can combine the different features of predictive processing
described above within a single, formally rigorous framework” ( 2017, p. 12). Friston
and collaborators contend that “free energy minimization may be an imperative for
all self-organizing biological systems” ( 2012, p. 2117), and that “the whole point of
[FEP] is to unify all adaptive autopoietic and self-organizing behavior under one simple
imperative; avoid surprises and you will last longer […]”, which is a principle so basic
that “there is no need to recourse to any other principles” (Friston et al. 2012), and
“The tautology here is deliberate, it appeals to exactly the same tautology in natural
selection (Why am I here?—because I have adaptive ﬁtness: Why do I have adaptive
ﬁtness?—because I am here). Like adaptive ﬁtness, the free-energy formulation is not
a mechanism or magic recipe for life; it is just a characterization of biological systems
that exist” (ibid.). For his part, Allen ( 2018, p. 19) characterizes FEP as a normative
123
S3484 Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488
theory, an axiomatic, self -evidently true natural law , and a tautologically true axiom ,
likening it to a paradigm, framework, and a research programme as well.
This rhetorical jumble makes it harder to understand the status of FEP as a ﬁrst
principle, and thus the contrast between FEP and mechanism. So, some clariﬁcation is
called for. To begin, one should not follow Allen or Wiese and Metzinger in confusing
principles with theories, paradigms, and research programmes, since these technical
terms refer to different species of scientiﬁc representations, with different properties
and scientiﬁc and philosophical purposes.
Likewise, that any self-conserving system, via environmental exchanges, must, as
a condition of possibility on its existence, minimize an information-theoretic bound
on a negative log probability is an intriguing thought—but not one that qualiﬁes as a
platitude or a truism, under any normal understanding of those concepts.
One plausible thought is that FEP is a ﬁrst principle because it’s an axiom or
postulate: “[t]he free-energy principle is a simple postulate that has complicated ram-
iﬁcations” (Friston 2011, p. 91), and again, “FEP derives [is?] a normative, a priori
ﬁrst principle from a provable deﬁnition of living systems” (Allen and Friston 2018,
p. 2473).10 And in fact, as mentioned, free-energy theorists attempt an enormous vari-
ety of derivations from FEP . In that sense, FEP may be said to play the role of a ﬁrst
principle. But while they utilize an axiomatic approach grounded in the mathematics
of theoretical physics (Friston 2012), FEP is a principle that is itself derived from
other statements and deﬁnitions. So, it is not an underived axiom or postulate. By
implication, principles like FEP need not be underived axioms to play the role of ﬁrst
principle in the life sciences.
Free-energy theorists often characterize FEP as a principle in the life sciences
because it’s “tautological,” even “unfalsiﬁable.” Such claims are not easily interpreted.
If FEP were a tautology, then free energy theorists may have a triviality problem. As
Klein remarks, “[a]ppeal to apparent tautologies should trouble you. For whatever
tautologies do, they don’t explain why things happen” ( 2018, p. 2552). Tautologies
may offer a starting point for explaining the end goal states of optimal systems, but the
empirical adequacy of models with added biophysical causal detail is far removed from
triviality. And the attempted explanations relying on FEP do not involve anything like
the decomposition and localization of biophysical mechanisms underlying adaptive
behavior.
Similarly, falsiﬁability is normally treated as a hallmark of any scientiﬁc claim;
so if principles must be falsiﬁable to be scientiﬁc and FEP is unfalsiﬁable, then FEP
is not a scientiﬁc principle.
11 What’s intended cannot be that FEP is unfalsiﬁable
because it’s merely stipulated; for while there are stipulative deﬁnitions involved in
the transcendental argument, FEP is not one of them. What’s intended cannot be that
FEP is unfalsiﬁable because it fails to be truth-apt either, since it would then not be
10 It’s unclear in what sense the deﬁnition of living system as an attracting set is “provable.” Deﬁnitions
are commonly restatements that do not stand in need of proof, or are even capable of being proved. More
plausibly, Friston and colleagues want to claim that the deﬁnition they propose is legitimate—though it’s
not obvious what criteria of legitimacy should be in place to evaluate this claim.
11 One reviewer encourages free-energy theorists to bite the bullet: “if a principle has to be falsiﬁable, then
FEP has no epistemic status.”
123
Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488 S3485
a law-like generalization, and could not serve as the conclusion of a transcendental
argument.
Presumably, then, FEP is like all other scientiﬁc principles in being truth-apt. But
unlike other principles such as Galileo’s principle describing the periodicity of pendula,
which subsequently enjoyed more accurate and precise formulations, it seems that
what’s intended is that principles like FEP or Hamilton’s PLA cannot but help survive
all scrutiny of their pedigree and have truth-values that cannot be improved upon.
In this sense, FEP might be a constraint that mechanist explanations in the life
sciences must honor, in so far as life scientists aim to determine which values of
some energy functional constitute the best available solution—given certain design
constraints—to the problem of maintaining the path of a target biological system in
state space within a speciﬁc (homeostatic) region that precludes phase transitions.
Unlike what advocates have claimed (e.g., Hohwy 2014), FEP-based theorizing is
not consistent with mechanists’ idea that the power of an explanation depends on its
capacity to uncover the mechanism of a target phenomenon. But unlike what mech-
anists will reply, the response is not obviously just to claim, “so much the worse for
FEP”. This apparent inconsistency is methodologically good: the boom of research
relying on FEP just highlights there is room for deductive systematization and physics-
ﬁrst approaches in life science theorizing (see also Gurova 2011). Rather than aiming
to represent difference-makers of life science phenomena, FEP instead aims to rep-
resent, in the language of information theory and random dynamical systems theory,
what characteristics complex systems must possess for self-maintenance and self-
regulation.
5 Conclusion: a plurality of principles
Living organisms are complex, adaptive systems that present both robust regularities
but also constant variation. Understanding their regularities and variations requires
conceptual frameworks in which knowledge from physics, chemistry, biology, ecology,
and ethology can be synthesized, using tools from mathematics and computational
theory. The diversity of expertise involved in understanding brains and organisms,
and the fragmentation in present-day neuroscience and biology, highlights the need
for principles that could afford a common intellectual framework for researchers from
different communities to work together to answers questions of common concern.
FEP is an impressive candidate for one such ﬁrst principle aiming to ground general,
idealized models for tracking one fundamental pattern underlying the robust regular-
ities and constant variation displayed by complex and diverse phenomena in the life
sciences. FEP symbolizes what a ﬁrst-principle, physics-ﬁrst, axiomatic approach to
the life sciences looks like, while it has crystallized the notion of prediction-error
minimization in philosophical and scientiﬁc debates as a central theoretical posit to
understanding life and mind.
In this paper, we have examined numerous disagreements between FEP and basic
tenets of organicism and mechanism concerning the scientiﬁc representation of life
phenomena. The incompatibility between these different approaches should not sug-
gest that only one of these approaches can aptly represent the phenomena of life. These
123
S3486 Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488
different approaches are meant to fulﬁll different epistemic aims of different scien-
tiﬁc communities; and these aims may be best pursued separately, with a plurality of
modeling tools (Mitchell 2002).
Life scientists and philosophers can, and often do, productively argue about the
aptness of modeling tools for their intended purposes. But they sometimes engage in
speculative metaphysics, by directly reading off metaphysical conclusions about the
nature of life and mind from usage of models they implicitly assume to be uniquely
apt. Some of the confusions in recent debates surrounding FEP , organicism, and mech-
anism depend on indulging this sort of metaphysics without carefully considering the
epistemic and pragmatic roles that “rampant and unchecked” idealizations, like those
involved in FEP , play in science (see Potochnik 2017 on the role of “rampant and
unchecked” idealizations in science).
Acknowledgements We would like to thank Marshall Abrams, Joe Dewhurst, Giuseppe Longo, Matteo
Mossio, Galen Pickett, the participants of the 2018 workshop “The Promise of Predictive Processing” at
Tufts University, and two anonymous referees for helpful conversations and comments on previous versions
of this paper. In addition, MC gratefully acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the Alexander von Humboldt
Foundation.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Interna-
tional License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
Aitchison, L., & Lengyel, M. (2017). With or without you: Predictive coding and Bayesian inference in the
brain. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 46, 219–227.
Allen, M., & Friston, K. (2018). From cognitivism to autopoiesis: Towards a computational framework for
the embodied mind. Synthese, 195, 2459–2482.
Ashby, W. (1940). Adaptiveness and equilibrium. British Journal of Psychiatry, 86, 478–483.
Ashby, W. (1960). Design for a brain . London: Chapman & Hall.
Bailly, F., & Longo, G. (2009). Biological organization and anti-entropy. Journal of Biological Systems, 17,
63–96.
Bastos, A., Usrey, W., Adams, R., Mangun, G., Fries, P ., & Friston, K. (2012). Canonical microcircuits for
predictive coding. Neuron, 76, 695–711.
Bechtel, W., & Richardson, R. (1993/2010). Discovering complexity: Decomposition and localization as
strategies in scientiﬁc research . Cambridge: MIT Press.
Brandon, R. (1984). Grene on mechanism and reductionism: More than just a side issue. PSA, 1984 (2),
345–353.
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not a scientist: The free-energy
principle from an ecological-enactive perspective. Synthese, 195, 2417–2444.
Buckley, C., Kim, C., McGregor, S., & Seth, A. (2017). The free energy principle for action and perception:
A mathematical review. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 81, 55–79.
Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (2000). The rational analysis of mind and behavior. Synthese, 122, 93–131.
Chirimuuta, M. (2018). Explanation in computational neuroscience: Causal and non-causal. The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 69, 849–880.
Clark, A. (2017). How to knit your own Markov blanket. In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy
and predictive processing . Frankfurt am Main: Open MIND Group.
Collier, J. (1986). Entropy in evolution. Biology and Philosophy, 1, 5–24.
Collier, J., & Hooker, C. (1999). Complexly organized dynamical systems. Open Systems and Information
Dynamics, 6, 241–302.
123
Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488 S3487
Colombo, M. (2017). Social motivation in computational neuroscience. Or if brains are prediction machines,
then the Humean theory of motivation is false. In J. Kiverstein (Ed.), Routledge handbook of philosophy
of the social mind (pp. 320–340). London: Routledge.
Colombo, M., & Seriès, P . (2012). Bayes in the brain—On Bayesian modelling in neuroscience. The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 63, 697–723.
Colombo, M., & Wright, C. (2017). Explanatory pluralism: An unrewarding prediction error for free energy
theorists. Brain and Cognition, 112, 3–12.
Darden, L. (2006). Reasoning in biological discoveries: Mechanisms, interﬁeld relations, and anomaly
resolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dayan, P ., Hinton, G. E., Neal, R., & Zemel, R. (1995). The Helmholtz machine. Neural Computation, 7,
889–904.
Di Paolo, E., & Thompson, E. (2014). The enactive approach. In L. Shapiro (Ed.), Routledge handbook of
embodied cognition (pp. 68–78). New Y ork: Routledge.
Feldman, J. (2017). What are the ‘true’ statistics of the environment? Cognitive Science, 41, 1871–1903.
Fiorillo, C. (2010). A neurocentric approach to Bayesian inference. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11, 605.
Friston, K. (2003). Learning and inference in the brain. Neural Networks, 16, 1325–1352.
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the brain? Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
13, 293–301.
Friston, K. (2010a). The free-energy principle: A uniﬁed brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11,
127–138.
Friston, K. (2010b). Is the free-energy principle neurocentric? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11, 605.
Friston, K. (2011). Embodied inference: Or I think therefore I am, if I am what I think. In W. Tschacher &
C. Bergomi (Eds.), The implications of embodiment (pp. 89–125). Exeter: Imprint Academic.
Friston, K. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy, 14, 2100–2121.
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface, 10, 20130475.
Friston, K., Kilner, J., & Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle for the brain. Journal of Physiology
Paris, 100, 70–87.
Friston, K., & Stephan, K. (2007). Free-energy and the brain. Synthese, 159, 417–458.
Friston, K., Thornton, C., & Clark, A. (2012). Free-energy minimization and the dark-room problem.
Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 130.
Gershman, S., & Daw, N. (2012). Perception, action and utility: The tangled skein. In M. Rabinovich, K.
Friston, & P . V arona (Eds.), Principles of brain dynamics: Global state interactions (pp. 293–312).
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gilbert, S., & Sarkar, S. (2000). Embracing complexity: Organicism for the 21st century. Developmental
Dynamics, 219, 1–9.
Glennan, S. (2017). The new mechanical philosophy . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gray, C. (2009). Principle of least action. Scholarpedia, 4, 8291.
Gross, D. (1996). The role of symmetry in fundamental physics. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 93, 14256–14259.
Gurova, L. (2011). Principles versus mechanisms in cognitive science. In V . Karakostas & D. Dieks (Eds.),
EPSA11 perspectives and foundational problems in philosophy of science (V ol. 2, pp. 393–403).
Hobson, J., & Friston, K. (2016). A response to our theatre critics. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 23,
245–254.
Hohwy, J. (2014). The neural organ explains the mind. In T. Metzinger & J. Windt (Eds.), Open Mind .
Frankfurt am Main: Open MIND Group.
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs, 50, 259–285.
Humphreys, P . (1985). Why propensities cannot be probabilities. Philosophical Review, 94, 557–570.
Kaplan, D. M., & Craver, C. (2011). The explanatory force of dynamical and mathematical models in
neuroscience: A mechanistic perspective. Philosophy of Science, 78, 601–627.
Kauffman, S. (2013). Evolution beyond Newton, Darwin, and entailing law. In C. Lineweaver, P . Davies, &
M. Ruse (Eds.), Complexity and the arrow of time (pp. 162–190). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Kirchhoff, M., & Froese, T. (2017). Where there is life there is mind: In support of a strong life-mind
continuity thesis. Entropy, 19, 169.
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov blankets of life:
Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface,
15(138), 20170792.
123
S3488 Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 14):S3463–S3488
Klein, C. (2018). What do predictive coders want? Synthese, 195, 2541–2557.
Knill, D., & Pouget, A. (2004). The Bayesian brain: The role of uncertainty in neural coding and computation.
Trends in Neurosciences, 27, 712–719.
Longo, G., & Montévil, M. (2013). Perspectives on organisms: Biological time, symmetries and singulari-
ties. Berlin: Springer.
Longo, G., Montévil, M., & Kauffman, S. (2012). No entailing laws, but enablement in the evolution
of the biosphere. In Proceedings of the 14th international conference on genetic and evolutionary
computation conference companion (pp. 1379–1392).
MacKay, D. J. C. (1995). Ensemble learning and evidence maximization. Technical Report . Cambridge:
Cavendish Laboratory University of Cambridge.
Marblestone, A., Wayne, G., & Kording, K. (2016). Towards an integration of deep learning and neuro-
science. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 10, 1–41.
Maturana, H. (1975). The organization of the living: A theory of the living organization. International
Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 7, 313–332.
Mitchell, S. (2002). Integrative pluralism. Biology and Philosophy, 17, 55–70.
Montévil, M., Mossio, M., Pocheville, A., & Longo, G. (2016). Theoretical principles for biology: V ariation.
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology, 122, 36–50.
Moreno, A., & Mossio, M. (2015). Biological autonomy: A philosophical and theoretical enquiry . Berlin:
Springer.
Morowitz, H., & Smith, E. (2007). Energy ﬂow and the organization of life. Complexity, 13, 51–59.
Mossio, M., Montévil, M., & Longo, G. (2016). Theoretical principles for biology: Organization. Progress
in Biophysics and Molecular Biology, 122, 24–35.
Oliveira, H., & Melo, L. V . (2015). Huygens synchronization of two clocks. Scientiﬁc Reports, 5, 11548.
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible inference . Los Altos:
Morgan Kaufmann.
Piccinini, G., & Craver, C. (2011). Integrating psychology and neuroscience: Functional analyses as mech-
anism sketches. Synthese, 183, 283–311.
Potochnik, A. (2017). Idealization and the aims of science . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P ., & Friston, K. (2018). Answering Schrödinger’s question: A free-energy
formulation. Physics of Life Reviews , 24, 1–16.
Rao, R., & Ballard, D. (1999). Predictive coding in the visual cortex: A functional interpretation of some
extra-classical receptive-ﬁeld effects. Nature Neuroscience, 2, 79–87.
Rice, C. (2015). Moving beyond causes: Optimality models and scientiﬁc explanation. Noûs, 49, 589–615.
Schrödinger, E. (1992). What is life? . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Soto, A., Longo, G., Miquel, P ., Montévil, M., Mossio, M., Perret, N., et al. (2016). Toward a theory of
organisms: Three founding principles in search of a useful integration. Progress in Biophysics and
Molecular Biology, 122, 77–82.
Spirtes, P ., Glymour, C., & Scheines, R. (2000). Causation, prediction, and search (2nd ed.). Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Ufﬁnk, J. (2001). Bluff your way in the second law of thermodynamics. Studies in History and Philosophy
of Modern Physics, 32, 305–394.
van Rooij, I., Wright, C., Kwisthout, J., & Wareham, T. (2018). Rational analysis, intractability, and the
prospects of ‘as if’-explanations. Synthese, 195, 491–510.
V arela, F., Maturana, H., & Uribe, R. (1974). Autopoiesis: The organization of living systems, its charac-
terization and a model. Biosystems, 5, 187–196.
Wiese, W., & Metzinger, T. (2017). V anilla PP for philosophers: A primer on predictive processing. In T.
Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy and predictive processing . Frankfurt am Main: Open MIND
Group.
123