CONCEPTUAL ANALYSIS
published: 19 July 2018
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01264
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264
Edited by:
Christoph Mathys,
Scuola Internazionale Superiore di
Studi Avanzati (SISSA), Italy
Reviewed by:
Tobias Nolte,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Karl Friston,
University College London,
United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
Patrick Connolly
patrickconnolly@live.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Psychoanalysis and
Neuropsychoanalysis,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 04 December 2017
Accepted: 29 June 2018
Published: 19 July 2018
Citation:
Connolly P (2018) Expected Free
Energy Formalizes Conﬂict Underlying
Defense in Freudian Psychoanalysis.
Front. Psychol. 9:1264.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01264
Expected Free Energy Formalizes
Conﬂict Underlying Defense in
Freudian Psychoanalysis
Patrick Connolly*
Department of Counselling and Psychology, Hong Kong Shue Ya n University, Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Freud’s core interest in the psyche was the dynamic unconsci ous: that part of the
psyche which is unconscious due to conﬂict (
Freud, 1923/1961). Over the course of his
career, Freud variously described conﬂict as an opposition to the discharge of activation
(Freud, 1950 ), opposition to psychic activity due to the release of unple asure ( Freud,
1990/1991), opposition between the primary principle and the reality principle ( Freud,
1911/1963), structural conﬂict between id, ego, and superego ( Freud, 1923/1961 ), and
ambivalence ( Freud, 1912/1963 ). Besides this difﬁculty of the shifting description of
conﬂict, an underlying question remained the speciﬁc share d terrain in which emotions,
thoughts, intentions or wishes could come into conﬂict with one another (the neuronal
homolog of conﬂict), and most especially how they may exist a s quantities in opposition
within that terrain. Friston’s free-energy principle (FEP henceforth) connected to the work
of Friston ( Friston et al., 2006; Friston, 2010 ) has provided the potential for a powerful
unifying theory in psychology, neuroscience, and related ﬁ elds that has been shown to
have tremendous consilience with psychoanalytic concepts (Hopkins, 2012 ). Hopkins
(2016), drawing on a formulation by Hobson et al. (2014) , suggests that conﬂict may
be potentially quantiﬁable as free energy from a FEP perspec tive. More recently, work
by Friston et al. (2017a) has framed the selection of action as a gradient descent of
expected free energy under different policies of action. Fr om this perspective, the article
describes how conﬂict could potentially be formalized as a s ituation where opposing
action policies have similar expected free energy, for exam ple between actions driven
by competing basic prototype emotion systems as described b y Panksepp (1998) . This
conﬂict state may be avoided in the future through updating t he relative precision of a
particular set of prior beliefs about outcomes: this has the result of tending to favor one
of the policies of action over others in future instances, a s ituation analogous to defense.
Through acting as a constraint on the further development of the person, the defensive
operation can become entrenched, and resistant to alterati on. The implications that this
formalization has for psychoanalysis is explored.
Keywords: free energy principle, conﬂict, psychoanalysis, defense, systems theory, neuropsychoanalysis
Connolly Expected Free Energy Formalizes Conﬂict
INTRODUCTION
The free-energy principle (FEP henceforth) connected to the
work of Friston (
Friston et al., 2006; Friston, 2010 ) has provided
the potential for a powerful unifying theory in psychology,
neuroscience and related ﬁelds that has been shown to have
tremendous consilience with psychoanalytic concepts (
Hopkins,
2012), and may well have tremendous potential as a unifying
metapsychological principle in psychoanalysis as well ( Connolly,
2016). A recent paper by Hopkins (2016) , drawing on a
formulation by Hobson et al. (2014) has suggested how the
free energy principle provides a basis for formalizing emotiona l
conﬂict as complexity which places a demand (or “aﬀective
load” following
Levin and Nielsen, 2009 ) on the capacity of the
underlying generative model that predicts sensory experienc e to
minimize that emotional complexity 1.
Hopkins’ formulation provides the seeds of a formal
description of conﬂict in the psychoanalytic sense. He descri bes
conﬂict as irresolvable complexity in the form of a complex set o f
simultaneous emotions that each separately motivate behavi oral
plans that are in conﬂict with one another. Hopkins (2016)
draws on the example of attachment related trauma in the
“strange situation” paradigm in which the disparate emotions
felt by the child when their mother leaves the room - and
more especially when she returns—lead to behavioral traject ories
that are fundamentally in conﬂict with one another (e.g., an ger
and fear). Since there is no single action that the child can
take that would simultaneously achieve predicted satisfact ion
for all of these conﬂicting trajectories, there may be persis tent
emotional complexity, which is Hopkins’ account of trauma in
this perspective.
Most importantly for this paper is how the description of
conﬂict in his paper is founded upon the concept of free energy,
and speciﬁcally the idea that distinct neural systems in the b rain
motivate competing plans of action which are expected to have
a high cost in terms of free energy for the alternate system. I n
short, the Free Energy Principle (FEP) perspective suggests th at a
person’s decision of which policy of action to follow is determi ned
by a computation of which policy is predicted to reduce the
physiological free energy (or information “surprise”) the mo st.
From this perspective psychoanalytic conﬂict is presented as
the state where diﬀerent potential policies of action have a
similar level of expected free energy, creating a subjective ly
unpleasant state of uncertainty of what to do. However, the
present formulation of conﬂict and defense also necessitate s a
metapsychological revision of the assumptions underlying th e
core concepts of conﬂict, defense and possibly repression in lin e
with a systems theory epistemology as spelled out in
Grobbelaar
(1989), which is addressed in the present article as well.
The ﬁrst section will brieﬂy describe the psychoanalytic
concept of conﬂict, and its role in shaping defensive behavior
and stable personality conﬁgurations in the person. The key
problem of neurological correlates (particularly quantitat ively
1The emotional complexity that is minimized here formally refers to the Kullb ack–
Leibler divergence between posterior beliefs about policies or co urses of action,
relative to prior beliefs, which will be explained later in this paper.
framed correlates) is presented, including the failed explan ation
of psychic energy. Following this, an account of conﬂict from
a statistical free-energy principle (henceforth FEP) perspect ive
is explored, particularly under “expected” free energy. This
formalization also suggests a route through which conﬂict is
resolved by alteration of the relative precisions of the (belie fs
about) opposing action policies. This alteration of precisions
presents a means of formalizing defense, which becomes
entrenched over time as a constraint on the future development
of the generative model. This forms the basis for exploring
the inertia of the generative model in terms of opposing the
installation of certain action policies in speciﬁed situatio ns, and
also as a basis for understanding resistance in psychoanalysis as
well. The implications of this particular formalization of co nﬂict
for psychoanalytic theory and practice is explored.
CONFLICT IN PSYCHOANALYSIS
Freud’s core interest in the psyche and behavior was in that
part of the person that was inﬂuenced by conﬂict. While he
noted that there were large sections of the psyche which were
not necessarily involved in conﬂict, his stated interest wa s in
the dynamic unconscious, which is that element of the psyche
which is unconscious due to conﬂict (
Freud, 1923/1961 ). Later
writers such as Hartmann (1964) sought to explore the conﬂict-
free elements of the ego, and broaden the scope of analysis. Bu t
within Freud’s description of the psyche, conﬂict plays a centr al
role in deﬁning behavior, emotional and psychical experience ,
and personality. However, Freud’s conceptions of the nature o f
conﬂict and the terrain in which it took place evolved through out
the course of his work.
Beginning with “The Project for a Scientiﬁc Psychology”
(written in the late 1890s and published posthumously), Freud
(1950) ﬁrst outlined conﬂict in terms of an energy present in
the nervous system (represented by a quantity he called “Qn”
that “cathected” or was contained within, the neurons). He th en
described what he called the primary principle of the nervous
system which was to discharge that activation, usually throug h
the motor apparatus and motor activity. His ﬁrst formulation
of conﬂict was a principle that operated in opposition to the
ﬁrst; he called this opposing principle the secondary principle,
which is the demand for discharge of activation to be inhibit ed,
delayed, and modiﬁed in order to result in adaptive behavior.
He suggested that this opposition took the form of what he
termed “lateral cathexes” (discharge through laterally bra nching
neurons) which drained the main channel of its activation to ward
discharge, and resulted in the activation being channeled a round
within a subsystem of the brain (the ψ -system which was a
forerunner of the ego) in a way similar to liquid in a system
of interconnecting pipes (
Holt, 1962 ). In this ﬁrst formulation
conﬂict evidently takes place on the terrain of energies distr ibuted
in the nervous system. Due to some diﬃculties he encountered
in developing this concept (which are described later in this
paper), this conceptual centrality of energy as a zone of conﬂic t
became partly displaced by the experiences of pleasure and
unpleasure, where the release of unpleasure results in oppositio n
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264
Connolly Expected Free Energy Formalizes Conﬂict
and suppression of mental activity that causes such unpleasura ble
discharge ( Freud, 1990/1991 ), though the neurophysiological
basis of this pleasure and unpleasure was never adequately
described in his work. Later,
Freud (1911/1963) reformulated the
primary process as the pleasure-unpleasure principle, which is
the tendency of the psyche to tend toward activity that produce s
pleasure and avoids unpleasure. In this formulation, the conﬂ ict
lay between the pleasure principle and a secondary principle
he now termed the reality principle, which was the need for
psychic activity to generate adaptive states and behaviors by
opposing the pleasure-principle. While this is formally similar t o
the primary and secondary process deﬁned in “the Project, ” he
had then moved away from formulating these principles either i n
neurological or in purely energic terms, though he often trie d to
relate the pleasure and unpleasure to energic terms in stateme nts
made throughout his work (
Connolly, 2016).
With the so-called “structural” shift toward Freud’s
(1923/1961) tripartite model of the psyche (the familiar id,
ego, and super-ego model), rather than deﬁning conﬂict in
terms of the distribution and opposition of energies in the
nervous system, conﬂict was rather stated in terms of the str uggle
between psychic structures (or systems): the push of the id
toward satisfaction, the punitive response of the super-ego, a nd
the ego which binds these dynamic forces. The resultant beha vior,
emotion or psychic experience was understood as a compromise
between these forces, at times expressed in energic terms, an d
at others as pleasure-unpleasure and the demands of reality.
This defensive compromise (which protects the person from
super-ego anxiety, as well as pressure for discharge from the i d)
is the operation of the ego (
Freud, 1923/1961 ). Given time, and
a relatively stable environment, these compromise operation s
gain stability, and form the recognizable characteristics of the
personality.
Beyond these descriptions of conﬂict, Freud also focussed
on the key problem of ambivalence in the human condition,
and most especially in people suﬀering from neurosis. In “The
Dynamics of the Transference, ”
Freud (1912/1963) explored
how analysis of neurotic symptoms often gave rise to powerful
ambivalence (and resistance) in the transference, and sugg ested
that the distorted defensive behaviors in such cases often r eﬂected
the diﬃcult compromise between the powerful ambivalent
emotions and their associated motives. Typical responses to t he
“strange situation” described in
Ainsworth and Bell (1970) and
Howe (2011), may reﬂect such behavioral compromises between
these conﬂicting emotional demands ( Hopkins, 2016).
THE PROBLEMS OF
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES
AND QUANTITATIVE EXPRESSION
Besides the problem of varying deﬁnitions described above,
Freud’s various formulations of conﬂict have faced more
fundamental diﬃculties. The two key problems referred to in
this paper are the problem of neurophysiological correlates of
conﬂict, and the related problem of the quantitative terrain of
conﬂict.
In terms of neurophysiological correlates of conﬂict, there
is a sizeable literature outside of psychoanalysis that has
attempted to discover correlates for conﬂict, though conﬂic t has
various deﬁnitions (and operationalization) in this litera ture,
including decisional conﬂict (between equivalent alterna tives),
cognitive conﬂict (conﬂict between values, actions, or beli efs),
informational conﬂict (receiving information containing
contradictions), and the task of sustaining conﬂicting plan s
within consciousness, amongst others (
Gray et al., 2013;
Pushkarskaya et al., 2015 ). However, these operationalizations
of conﬂict are not very similar to conﬂict in the Freudian sen se,
as given in the deﬁnitions at the outset of this paper, as they are
mostly conscious and not apparently related to repression in
any way.
Berlin and Montgomery (2017) have very recently reviewed
the existing literature on neurophysiological correlates of conﬂict
in the psychoanalytic sense. While their chapter draws togeth er
a number of interesting studies with ﬁndings that seem to hav e
implications for conﬂict, few of these studies focus explicit ly on
conﬂict itself and its key neural mechanism; many of the ﬁndi ngs
relevant to conﬂict from this literature are more speciﬁcall y about
repression, suppression and dissociation, though some do have
clear implications for conﬂict. Relevant work from this liter ature
is from
Shevrin et al. (1996) and Shevrin et al. (2013) . In their
approach, conﬂict words have been generated from transcripts
of interviews with subjects, and presented subliminally and
supraliminally. Measured responses were in terms of alpha
power (combined amplitude and frequency measures from EEG)
representing inhibitory responses toward words relevant to t he
conscious symptom (related to phobias in the studies). Findin gs
appeared to show a link between unconsciously perceived conﬂict
words acting as a prime for a greater alpha power inhibitory
response toward to conﬂict symptom words. This supports the
idea that unconscious conﬂicts are related to symptoms (such as
phobia), and that they involve inhibitory responses relevant to
symptoms, which was not found for conscious conﬂict words in
their study.
This distinction between conscious and unconscious conﬂic t
is supported by other studies. While the role of the anterior
cingulate cortex has been demonstrated in tasks involving
detection and processing of conﬂicts related to emotion
and autobiographical material (
Schmeing et al., 2013 ), work
by Dehaene et al. (2003) found that activation in the
anterior cingulate cortex, which often accompanies conscio us
conﬂict monitoring tasks, was absent in subliminal conﬂict s.
Interestingly, Anderson et al. (2004) demonstrated that conscious
suppression tasks can become automated in the sense of no
longer engaging conscious attention or control, after time and
repetition.
More studies focus explicitly on repression than on conﬂict,
and after a review of this ﬁeld,
Anderson and Hanslmayr
(2014) suggest that these ﬁndings point toward the role of
the lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) in mediating inhibitory
control processes, usually interacting with subcortical st ructures
including the hippocampus and other structures encoding
memories. A related set of ﬁndings (about inhibition of emot ion)
exist for dissociative mechanisms, such as for Depersonaliz ation
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264
Connolly Expected Free Energy Formalizes Conﬂict
Disorder where the right dorsolateral PFC increases attent ion
while the left PFC inhibits the amygdala and other limbic
structures. This seems related to ﬁndings for both dissocia tive
disorders as well as hypnotic states, in which prefrontal exec utive
structures are found to interfere in voluntary and automati c
processes (
Berlin and Montgomery, 2017 ). Another interesting
ﬁnding from dissociative processes is the ﬁnding of impaired
connectivity in brain areas (
Krystal et al., 1998 ). When set
alongside the ﬁndings of impaired connectivity in psychosis
(
Schmidt et al., 2015 ) together with the relative lack of activation
of conﬂict-related brain areas (including dorsolateral pre frontal
cortex) in fMRI data from participants with clinical high risk fo r
psychosis ( Colibazzi, 2016 , July), these ﬁndings seem to point
toward the role that connectivity must play in conﬂict, in the
sense that a minimum level of connectivity must be in place for
conﬂict to take the form as understood in Freud’s work.
While these ﬁndings have implications for psychoanalytic
conﬂict, they do not clarify a speciﬁc mechanism for conﬂict t hat
is distinct from a mechanism for repression or dissociation. In
part, this lack may be due to inherent diﬃculties in studying
conﬂict empirically, in the sense that the speciﬁc triggers of
conﬂict are unique to each person. Studies focusing on conﬂic t
may use transcripts from interviews to generate conﬂict-rel ated
stimuli for use in the research, such as in
Shevrin et al.
(2013) above. Kessler et al. (2017) similarly used participant
generated lists of positive and negative life events, followe d by
individual psychodynamic interviews based on operationaliz ed
psychodynamic diagnosis to create a list of cue sentences, us ed
in free association and subsequent recall tasks. The resour ces
needed for such individualized methods have undoubtedly
slowed the ﬁeld down. Further, the purpose of repression (and
perhaps dissociation) is to avoid or reduce conﬂict, and so it m ay
be problematic to measure conﬂict when successful repression
(or dissociation) is taking place.
A second and related problem with the psychoanalytic notion
of conﬂict is that any explanatory theory of this conﬂict must
not only specify a shared domain or terrain between conﬂictin g
psychic processes, but also a quantitative expression of those
processes such that the outcome can be understood as the
diﬀerence between these quantities. While it may be correct t o say
that brain regions such as the prefrontal cortex, anterior ci ngulate
cortex, limbic system, and hippocampus may be the terrain or
domain of conﬂict (perhaps in terms of competition for neural
resources or diﬀerential activation), this does not yet clar ify the
speciﬁc quantitative expression of the conﬂict.
Horowitz (1977)
suggested that the concept of conﬂict in psychoanalysis must
involve a quantitative expression of some kind:
“. . . the concept of conﬂict, deriving from the therapeutic meth od,
has been central to all psychoanalytic clinical theory, whether th e
locale of that conﬂict was with the environment or was intrapsych ic.
The dynamic and economic metapsychological viewpoints grew
out of the clinical data of conﬂict [emphasis in original]. How such
a conﬂict concept would look without “quantitative” assumptio ns
underlying it is unclear. It may be that a conﬂict concept would be
untenable without those quantitative assumptions. In any even t, no
set of critiques of the economic hypotheses of analysis has pres ented
a cogent set of alternatives in providing the underpinning for t he
dynamic viewpoints” (
Horowitz, 1977, p. 563).
We should agree with Horowitz that conﬂict is untenable
without quantity. For conﬂict to take place, not only should
two phenomena exist within a shared terrain in which they
can interact, but they should also be able to exert some form
of inﬂuence upon one another, which is meaningless if not
theoretically quantiﬁable (
Swanson, 1977).
THE FAILED SOLUTION OF PSYCHIC
ENERGY
Freud’s key attempt to provide this quantitative account of
conﬂict lay in his theories of psychic energy, and the principle
of inertia which was proposed as regulating those energies. Th is
is most pronounced with regard to the original formulation
of conﬂict (described at the outset of this paper) which is
conﬂict between the primary and secondary processes as deﬁned
in “The Project for a Scientiﬁc Psychology” (
Freud, 1950 ).
As described above, Freud proposed this conﬂict as a contest
between quantities of Qn in the nerves: the result was either that
the energy was retained in the ψ -system or progressed toward
motor discharge, or some compromise of the two. The result was
essentially determined by the levels of the quantities at pla y.
However, this explanation of cathexes of energy within
neurons failed. The energic theory has been widely critique d
by a number of authors, and a detailed review of this debate
that unfolded over several decades can be found in
Connolly
(2016). The most common critique has been the lack of any
sound empirical evidence from brain science of the energic
processes as described in “The Project” (
Basch, 1976; Swanson,
1977; Zepf, 2010 ), and what we now know about the nervous
system which is that action potentials vary in terms of frequen cy,
but not in terms of intensity or strength ( Pribram and Gill,
1976). Rapaport (1960) also outlined a familiar argument that
the energic processes can’t be observed directly in the clinic al
situation. However, the key failure that Freud himself was aw are
of, and which led him to eventually abandon “The Project” was
irresolvable internal contradiction in the proposed model. T his
was because his description of the higher functions of the psyc he
(e.g., consciousness, memory, attention, and others) reli ed on a
linear progression of stimulus energy from the sense organs and
sensory stimulus, through the ψ -system, the system of conscious
experience (or ω -system) and on to motor discharge. However,
once Freud tried show how this progression of energy through
these systems actually produced the phenomenology of attentio n,
consciousness, and memory, he was forced to add constructs,
revise, and rework, until he eventually radically changed t he
entire structure in the ﬁnal pages of the collected document,
and never elaborated further on this change, but instead tri ed to
suppress the text after that.
In later work, while Freud appeared to back away from further
theorizing about the quantities of Qn, he retained concepts o f
energy and cathexis, and in “The Interpretation of Dreams, ”
Freud (1900/1991) viewed conﬂict in terms of stimulus energ y
moving “forward” through the psychic apparatus (toward motor
discharge) being opposed by inhibition from the preconscious
gate to prevent unpleasurable discharge. At the same time
a regressive movement of excitation backwards through the
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264
Connolly Expected Free Energy Formalizes Conﬂict
apparatus took place (usually in sleep or hallucination),
“powered” in a sense both through inhibition, as well as
by a “pull” of powerful sensory memories (
Connolly, 2016 ).
Regarding this latter text, it is important to note that while
Freud was still talking about a contest between theoretical ly
quantiﬁable amounts of energy, he had moved further away
from specifying the physiological expression of the energy, an d
therefore further away from specifying the physiological ter rain
in which conﬂict between these energies could take place. Tho ugh
Freud (1920/1955) developed his ideas about psychic energy
further in “Beyond the Pleasure Principle, ” he never escaped
internal contradictions of his energic theory, nor came clo ser to
clarifying its physiological substrate (
Basch, 1976; Zepf, 2010 ),
despite continuing to use concepts of cathexis, discharge, an d
libido throughout his career ( Holt, 1962; Connolly, 2016 ).
Despite the failure of the energic theory to provide a
working quantitative account of conﬂict within psychoanaly sis,
the problem has remained as a troubled foundation of the ﬁeld
until recently.
CONFLICT WITHIN A FREE ENERGY
PRINCIPLE (FEP) PERSPECTIVE
Friston’s (2010) free energy principle has become of rapidly
growing interest to psychoanalysis due to signiﬁcant formal
similarities between FEP and several assumptions within
psychoanalysis, including the primary principle of mental
functioning (
Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2010 ), unconsciousness
and motivation ( Hopkins, 2012 ), emotional complexity in
attachment ( Hopkins, 2015 ), wish fulﬁllment within dreaming
(Hopkins, 2016 ), and the energic theory within psychoanalysis
(Connolly, 2016 ). The FEP also has the potential to oﬀer a
quantitative basis for a formulation of conﬂict as well ( Hopkins,
2016), which could solve the problem of a quantitative expression
of energy and conﬂict as well as its neurophysiological subst rate
or terrain.
Essentially, the FEP proposes that the physical structure of
all self-sustaining and adaptive creatures encodes a model o f
the sensory inputs emerging from their environment. The FEP
then states that living systems must then, either implicitly or
explicitly, minimize their variational free energy. What is meant
by variational free energy here is a quantity of information al
surprise or prediction error, which is the diﬀerence between
the sensory states predicted by the model, and those that
are actually received. This leads to living systems avoidin g
surprising or highly improbable states. This is consistent wi th
a principle from physics known as Hamilton’s principle of least
action (determining the path of lowest value), cast in terms o f
information theory. Mathematically, negative surprise is t he same
as (log) Bayesian model evidence (
Friston, 2009 ). This means
that creatures (or people) that minimize their free energy als o
maximize the evidence for their model of the world, or in other
words, are self-evidencing (
Hohwy, 2016 ). Importantly for the
present argument, free energy can be minimized (and model
evidence maximized) by one of two routes: either by an updatin g
of Bayesian beliefs encoded by the generative model of the
organism, or by taking an action which alters the sensory input s
of the organism in such a way that the surprise (or prediction
error) is reduced.
A core signiﬁcance of the FEP for psychoanalytic theory, is
that it oﬀers a potentially quantiﬁable formalization of Freu d’s
concept of psychic energy. However, FE is not a physical energy,
but an information theoretic concept; it does not quantify
a thermodynamic energy, but rather quantiﬁes a form of
information present in the system: in this case the biologica l
organism (
Friston, 2010 ). However, the FEP can still play a
very similar role in psychoanalytic theory to that played by th e
energic theory (as a formalization of the core motivator and
organizational principle of activity in the person and their mi nd),
though it may necessitate the incorporation of a systems theo ry
epistemology to adequately do so (
Connolly, 2016; Connolly and
van Deventer, 2017 ). Most importantly for the present paper, it
provides a basis for understanding how psychic processes can be
quantitatively expressed.
However, as indicated earlier, beyond this requirement of a
quantitative expression of conﬂict, there is the requiremen t of a
shared terrain in which these quantities can come to “oppose”
one another. A FEP perspective supplies this formalization of
the shared terrain, though noting both the scale-free natur e of
the FEP in the physiological organization of the organism, an d
also the complexity and diﬀerentiation within the organism.
Essentially, we might think of the overall organism as being
constituted of a massive complexity of subsystems, that exten d
from sub-cellular components or organelles (e.g., dendrites or
mitochondria), through cells (e.g., neurons or others), tis sues,
organs, systems and even higher levels of recursion. The
important insight here is that each of these subsystems obey t he
FEP , each tries to minimize its free energy. In other words, a ll
structures in the organism that have an identiﬁable boundar y
condition (a Markov blanket) minimize their free energy.
Further, the total free energy present in the whole organism i s
understood as the sum of the FE present in each of the constituen t
subsystems (
Friston et al., 2015a ). This has the implication that
while changes in the activity of the whole system (i.e., orga nism)
reduce the overall FE of the system, they may at the same time,
raise the FE of speciﬁc subsystems. An example might be the
organism’s response to muscles enduring sustained strain; wh ile
the organism’s overall FE might be lowered by the activation
of the sympathetic nervous system which brings needed oxygen
and nutrients to (and removes waste products from) the strain ed
muscle tissue, the tissues of the heart itself are pushed furth er
from equilibrium, and may experience a relative increase in FE
which is attempting (though initially failing) to drive the ov erall
system in the opposite direction, to reduce blood ﬂow. This
formulation now provides us a basis for understanding how a
theoretically quantiﬁable form of “conﬂict” (in a broad sen se)
can take place in the terrain of information exchange between
subsystems within the biological organism.
However, this deﬁnition of conﬂict in the organism is broade r
than that implied by psychoanalysis, as this form of conﬂict is
ubiquitous to every level of scale in the organism, whereas w e
might say that psychoanalytic conﬂict occurs at a particular l evel
of organization in the organism. We may even ﬁnd a range of
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264
Connolly Expected Free Energy Formalizes Conﬂict
similarly broad conﬂict phenomena at a psychological level of
interest in the organism which still do not precisely equate wi th
the psychoanalytic concept of conﬂict. There are a number of
such potential examples.
With regard to perception,
Hopkins (2012) describes a formal
similarity of this form of conﬂict with an artiﬁcially induce d
binocular rivalry paradigm, where the right and left eyes are
given diﬀerent objects in their ﬁeld of view (e.g., a face and a
house). The result is that perception oscillates between seein g
a house for some time, then a face for some time, and back
to a house, and so on. The neural structures that encode a
house image are in competition with those that encode a face
image to activate a dominant perceptual inference. Should the
house image become the ﬁrst dominant inference, then the
sensory stimuli that are associated with the face persist as s urprise
(prediction error); the persistent surprise feeds upwards to th e
higher levels again which shifts the dominant inference to t hat of
the face, where the stimuli from the house now feed upwards as
prediction error, and so on.
Hopkins (2012) suggests a consilience
between this process and that of the psychoanalytic unconscio us
where the dominating inference renders the conﬂicting stim uli
unconscious (usually on a more enduring basis), though the
surprise associated with the suppressed stimuli still motivat es
automatized unconscious behaviors, though they cannot bec ome
conscious inference. This scheme is easily extended to expla in the
repression of sexual excitement for example, where interocept ive
stimuli emerging from sexual excitement remain suppressed by
a more dominant inference that doesn’t integrate the stimul i,
which nonetheless can activate automatized behaviors. Thi s
mechanism of the unconscious is returned to later in the
paper.
Another example of this type of conﬂict in inference at
a “psychological” level of interest (close to, but perhaps not
the same as psychoanalytic conﬂict), refers to the perception
of emotion, or the occurrence of feeling two apparently
contradictory emotions at the same time, which we might
encapsulate in the statement “I don’t know what to feel,
nervous or excited.” Examples of such conﬂicting emotion
inference from experimental science might include the studi es
of misattribution of arousal (
Dutton and Aron, 1974; White
et al., 1981 ) where distinct sources of arousal may nonetheless
activate a dominant inference, for example where arousal due
to the eﬀort and nervousness from crossing a bridge appears to
increase perceptions of attractiveness of a research confede rate.
This highlights a potentially important aspect of active infer ence
in exchange with the world—and one’s body. Namely, one
has to infer the causes of all sorts of sensations; including
proprioceptive and interoceptive (i.e., motor and autonomic)
signals. In other words, we have to ﬁnd explanations that
account for all our sensations and select the most plausible
hypothesis that best explains them. This means that interocept ive
inference about the state of my body contextualizes exteroc eptive
sensory cues concerning “where I am” and “what I am doing.”
This means that sensations of autonomic arousal have to
be explained (away); thereby leading to the hypothesis or
explanation that “I am currently in a particular emotional
state.”
While the researchers in the above attribution studies have
not explicitly connected their experimental ﬁndings either wi th
psychoanalytic conﬂict literature or with active inference , they
may nonetheless demonstrate such competition for awareness
between conﬂicting emotional signals that may potentially be
explained from a FEP perspective in a similar way as the
binocular rivalry ﬁndings are explained in
Hopkins (2012) , in
that one inference tends to dominate at a time. As suggested
earlier however, while these examples occur at the level of inte rest
in psychology more broadly, they may not reﬂect examples at
a psychoanalytic level of explanation, as they primarily reﬂec t
conﬂicts in perception. From the earliest phases of Freud’s wor k,
psychoanalytic conﬂict has been linked to the inhibition of
action, typically through inhibition of the ﬂow of energy toward
discharge through the motor apparatus (
Freud, 1950; Breuer
and Freud, 1985/2004 ). Expected free energy oﬀers a formal
description of action selection ( Friston et al., 2017a ) that oﬀers
potential for such a formalization of psychoanalytic conﬂict.
EXPECTED FREE ENERGY AND
SELECTION OF ACTION
To understand psychoanalytic conﬂict—from the point of view o f
FE minimization—it is necessary to consider a slightly nuanc ed
aspect of the FEP; namely, active inference and planning of
action, or expected free energy. Expected free energy refers to
the predicted level of free energy after a course of action is
taken. A course of action is referred to here as a policy. A
priori, the probability of selecting a particular policy decrea ses
with the free energy expected under that policy. To refer to
another example found in
Hopkins (2012) , a person who is
experiencing surprise in the sense of interoceptive signals of
dehydration or thirst, may seek a glass of water, as that cours e
of action will have the lowest expected free energy of the
various possible courses of action. In this case a generative
model speciﬁes the expected free energy following alternativ e
courses of actions (i.e., policies) and the policy that leads t o
the least surprising outcomes is selected (i.e., “my thirst w ill be
quenched”).
To understand the nature of expected free energy, one can
decompose it in various ways. For the purposes of the current
argument, one can think of expected free energy as comprising
epistemic and pragmatic parts (
Friston et al., 2015b ). The
epistemic part tries to resolve uncertainty by taking actions with
high information gain—that resolve ambiguity about the sta te of
the world (e.g., Kapur, 2003; Itti and Baldi, 2009; Mirza et al.,
2016). The pragmatic part simply reﬂects the prior beliefs (e.g.,
about drinking water) or preferences ingrained in a generati ve
model through prior experience (or perhaps epigenetics). Friston
et al. (2017a) suggest that any organism that has prior beliefs
about its behavior must believe it will minimize expected fre e
energy or, more simply, resolve uncertainty under prior belie fs
about what will happen to it.
Friston et al. (2017a) suggest that it works as follows: where
sensory inputs generate surprise at lower levels of a hierarch y
of perceptual inference, they trigger potential action plans at
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264
Connolly Expected Free Energy Formalizes Conﬂict
higher levels. Those action plans can be evaluated in terms of
the expected free energy, informed by expectations encoded by a
hierarchical generative model. This is especially interest ing if one
considers organisms (particularly human beings) that enter tain
diﬀerent outcomes under diﬀerent choices (or “policies” of
action) at the same time. This allows for selecting actions t hat
have the smallest expected free energy (
Friston et al., 2015b ).
The researchers contend that this approach resolves the diﬃcu lt
problem of selection of action into an “easy” inference proble m.
This selection of action policies is usually expressed as a sof tmax
function where the probability of an action is equal to the
exponential of negative expected free energy (normalized so th at
the sum of probabilities is one;
Friston et al., 2017a ) and is
represented in Figure 1 below.
The authors demonstrate how this proposed process is
neuronally plausible:
“This reﬂects a process theory which associates the expected
probability of a state with the probability of a neuron (or pop ulation
of neurons) ﬁring and the logarithm of this probability with
postsynaptic membrane potential. In this approach, post-syna ptic
depolarization caused by aﬀerent input can be interpreted as free
energy gradients (or state prediction errors) that are linear mi xtures
of ﬁring rates in other neurons (or populations). These predi ction
errors drive changes in membrane potential and subsequent ﬁring
rates (
Friston et al., 2017a ).” (Connolly, 2017).
For those less familiar with the FEP , this process theory provi des
a concrete understanding of what the quantity of free energy is
(in terms of the nervous system at least), which is the level o f
inﬂuence that the activity of neurons or populations of neurons
have on the rest of the system.
FIGURE 1 | According to Friston et al. (2017a) , the nervous system calculates
the expected free energy of actions under different policie s of action, and
those with the lowest expected free energy gain dominance (a fter Connolly,
2017, with permission from the copyright holder).
Besides suggesting the neuronal plausibility of this approach
to action selection, Friston et al. (2017a) propose a potential
functional anatomy of the process as follows:
“Sensory evidence is accumulated to optimize expectations abo ut
the current state of the world, which are constrained by expecta tions
of past and future states. This corresponds to state estimation under
each policy the agent entertains. The quality of each policy is
evaluated in the ventral prefrontal cortex, possibly in combinat ion
with ventral striatum (
van der Meer et al., 2012 ), in terms of
its expected free energy. This evaluation and the ensuing policy
selection rest on expectations about future states. Note that the
explicit encoding of future states lends this scheme the abili ty to plan
and explore. After the free energy of each policy has been evaluated,
it is used to predict the subsequent hidden state through Bayesi an
model averaging (over policies). This enables an action to be sel ected
that is most likely to realize the predicted outcome. Once an act ion
has been selected, it generates a new observation, and the cycle
begins again (p. 19).”
While the authors’ proposed functional anatomy is not yet
supported with speciﬁc empirical proof, it is nonetheless
consistent with what is generally accepted about the functio nal
anatomy of the brain, and is presented by the authors as a possib le
anatomy rather than a proposed model. Its purpose is to oﬀer
support for the proposed formulation of action selection throug h
expected free energy by describing how it might be reﬂected in
the functioning of the brain.
Recent work on canonical microcircuits (
Bastos et al.,
2012) have also supported the idea that the layers of
cortical columns (including functional separation of highe r
and lower levels of neurons and interneurons) show this
form of hierarchical organization of neurons which is able t o
sustain the computations involved in estimating expected fre e
energy of this kind. In this work, aﬀerent projections from
lower-order areas feedforward prediction errors which exci te
expectancies encoded by populations of neurons connected at
that higher level; these oﬀer inhibitory feedback connectio ns,
through stimulating inhibitory interneurons in the lower- order
layers. This computational architecture allows for higher- order
expectations that strongly increase free energy to more stro ngly
inhibit lower-order stimuli that give rise to them, allowin g for
the phenomenology described above, which involve policies wi th
high expected free energy to be inhibited in favor of policies
which reduce the expected free energy.
The central importance that this formulation has for the
present paper, is that it oﬀers a great opportunity to provide a
formal description of conﬂict from a FEP perspective. Conﬂict,
from a FEP perspective can be formalized as follows: if every
action has roughly the same expected free energy there is no
clear winner—and the probability or belief distribution over
alternative ways forward becomes uncertain; in other words ,
beliefs about what I am doing have a low precision. This is the
mathematical homolog of conﬂict; namely, a loss of precision or
conﬁdence in what to do next, and is represented in Figure 2
below.
With this model or formalism in mind, we can now see how
diﬃcult it must be for a person who entertains diﬀerent actions
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264
Connolly Expected Free Energy Formalizes Conﬂict
FIGURE 2 | A mathematical or computational homolog of psychoanalytic
conﬂict (after Connolly, 2017 , with permission from the copyright holder).
or policies that each only satisfy one of a number of precise
prior beliefs. This is the form of irreducible uncertainty pos ed
by conﬂict problems, and is consilient with the description of
conﬂict within the psychoanalytic literature reviewed earli er.
CONFLICT IN THE STRANGE SITUATION
We may now apply this scheme to the formulation outlined in
Hopkins (2016) . The prototype emotion systems described by
Panksepp (1998) can be understood as functional subsystems
of the nervous system, ones that even have visually identiﬁa ble
boundary conditions, in some respects. As described in Hopkins
(2015) the strange situation simultaneously gives rise to
activation of a number of these prototype emotions systems.
Following the formulation in
Hopkins (2012) , each of these
will give rise to a (best-guess) belief that a particular beha vior
will satisfy demand from the prototype emotion system and
reduce the surprise associated with it. So, while it may be tha t
striking the mother may satisfy the RAGE system, it is also li kely
that this will increase the chance of losing her, which would
increase the free energy (surprise) associated with the FEAR
system. In terms of active inference, what is being said here
is that the particular structure of the RAGE and FEAR neural
systems encodes particular prior beliefs about outcomes that
can be realized by diﬀerent courses of action. The conundrum
here is that all available courses of action lead to violatio n of
prior beliefs (i.e., an increase in surprise or free energy) in
at least one dimension (i.e., the prototype emotions;
Panksepp
et al., 1984 ). This situation (represented in Figure 3) may make
it diﬃcult to reduce the FE of both of these systems, leading
to persistent distress (trauma, in Hopkins’ view), such as tha t
found in the “insecurely” attached pattern of response. In thi s
way, the insecurely attached child in the strange situation may
cycle between feelings of fear and rage, much as perception
FIGURE 3 | Conﬂict between similar levels of expected free energy of act ions
motivated by prototype emotion systems of FEAR and RAGE in th e strange
situation (after Connolly, 2017 , with permission from the copyright holder).
cycles in the binocular rivalry paradigm described in Hopkins
(2012), where the stimuli related to the currently non-dominant
inference persist as surprise (i.e., unresolved prediction er ror)
that pushes the alternative inference into dominance, and ba ck
again, and so on.
It is important to note that the example drawn from
Hopkins (2016) here is an example of an application of the
formal deﬁnition of conﬂict oﬀered in this paper which is
the situation of competing policies of action with relatively
similar free energy. Theoretically, other subsystems of th e brain,
other than the prototype emotion systems could demonstrate
this form of conﬂict, provided they are motivating competing
action plans, and produce meaningful increases in free energy .
Nonetheless, this example underlines the importance of the
prototype emotion systems delineated by
Panksepp (1998) ,
and their central signiﬁcance in a psychoanalytically-info rmed
description of human consciousness and behavior as described
in
Solms and Turnbull (2003) . Not only are these systems potent
sources of free energy in the organization of the brain, but
they also create the conditions for signiﬁcant conﬂict in ac tion
selection, and explain the intensity of agitation and emotio nal
distress caused by the persistent FE from activation not resol ved
by the currently dominant policy (or state estimation from
predicted actions;
Hopkins, 2016).
A detailed computational model of the interaction between
caregiver and child that simulates the emergence of an
attachment pattern in the child has recently been published by
Cittern et al. (2018) . In their model a Bayesian approach based
on active inference (based on the FEP) is deployed within a gam e
theoretical framework where a child agent has three availab le
actions, “seek, ” “guarded seek, ” or “avoid.” In return, a caregiving
agent may be “highly responsive, ” “inconsistently responsive , ”
and consistently “unresponsive, ” expressed in terms of “atten d”
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264
Connolly Expected Free Energy Formalizes Conﬂict
or “ignore” behavior. This model simulates a situation in wh ich
the interoceptive states of the child following “attend” or “ ignore”
behavior may steadily result in one of the typical organized
attachment patterns of “secure, ” “avoidant, ” or “ambivalen t.”
This simulation provides some support for the key propositions
of attachment theory which is that the pattern of caregiving
behavior shapes the subsequent attachment pattern of the chil d
(
Bowlby, 1969, 1973 ). Where aﬀective communication errors
(ACEs or cues that are misleading with regard to the subseque nt
behavior) are added to the model in the form of an exteroceptiv e
cue before the “attend” or “ignore” behavior, they add furth er
explanatory value. High levels of ACEs before inconsistent
responding produced an ambivalent attachment pattern, while
inconsistent cues before consistently distressing respond ing
produced a disorganized attachment model. This is in line with
research which has shown that aﬀective communication errors
are associated with both ambivalent and disorganized attac hment
patterns (
Bronfman et al., 1999; Safyer, 2013 ). The observation
that these models produce responses that are in line with what
is expected from previous theory and research on attachment, i s
oﬀered as strong support for a FEP based computational model
of the child’s responses to a caregiver (
Cittern et al., 2018 ). With
regard to the formulation being oﬀered in this paper, this work
supports the grounding of a process of conﬂict within a FEP-
based model, that may be organized by interactional process a s
suggested by
Hopkins (2016).
The present formulation of conﬂict also provides the basis
for generating a reformulation of a psychoanalytic explanati on
for the development of an unconscious due to defense, through
a description of how the brain processes and overcomes this
conﬂict state through an alteration of the relative “precisi ons” of
the demands associated with these emotion systems, describ ed
next.
DEFENSE AS ALTERED PRECISIONS
Referring back to the description of the expected free energy
of action policies in
Friston et al. (2017a) , prior beliefs about
outcomes (that underwrite pragmatic value) could themselve s
be inferred. This oﬀers an insight into how conﬂict could be
overcome or resolved: namely by assigning greater precision to a
particular set of prior beliefs about outcomes to resolve ambi guity
in situations of conﬂict. The term “precision” here refers to
the range of variation allowable within incoming informati on;
higher precision means that even minor variations in stimulu s
values may generate error, whereas lower precision means tha t
incoming information can vary a lot more before generating
surprise. We might use an analogy found in
Peterfreund and
Schwartz (1971) about a thermostat: if a thermostat only allows
for a variation of two degrees on either side of the optimum
temperature before activating an air conditioner, it will be
activated far more easily or often than a thermostat that all ows
variation of four degrees on either side. The narrower range of
variation allowed by the thermostat (two degrees) is simila r to a
situation of higher precision, where more minor variations c an
generate strong error.
In the above example, precision can be regarded as the
sensitivity of posterior beliefs to some form of evidence; in
other words, the conﬁdence we ascribe to evidence. Exactly t he
same interpretation applies to the precision of beliefs about
discrete outcomes; say, for example a number of competing or
conﬂicting policies. In economics, the precision corresponds t o
the sensitivity parameter of a softmax function; also known as
inverse temperature. In short, a precise belief distribution me ans
that there is one clear winner and we are conﬁdent about some
state of aﬀairs. In what follows, we will start by considering
the precision of beliefs about courses of action; i.e., “what am I
doing”—and then drill down to the prior beliefs about outcomes
that underwrite policy or action selection. The balancing of
diﬀerent prior preferences depends upon the precision of
these preferences, emphasizing one sort of outcome over
another.
Applying this to psychoanalytic conﬂict again, by assigning a
higher precision to one of the conﬂicting alternatives, ambi guity
or uncertainty (about policies) can be resolved because one
course of action reduces expected free energy more potently
than all alternative choices (there is now a clear winner,
in the economics sense described above). Intuitively, this is
essentially the same as assigning a greater “importance” to
minimizing the surprise of one of the subsystems as opposed to
the others, through altering the precision of prior preferences
about outcomes encoded by these subsystems. Referring back
to the previous example of prototype emotions, this would
be equivalent to assigning greater importance to satisfying
either the RAGE or FEAR prototype emotions, thus tipping
the balance of expected free energy in favor of one or the
other.
THE FORMATION OF AN UNCONSCIOUS
Signiﬁcantly, the consequence of this change, is that the ot her
non-dominant action plan is now no longer determining the
action plan that becomes represented in conscious experience
and is acted upon. However, the prediction error associated
with this now non-dominant alternative is not entirely remo ved
either—this persisting error may potentially be reﬂected in th e
apparently “unconscious” agitation or intensity that appears t o
accompany conﬂict in the clinical situation, even when the
person is only aware of the dominant inference regarding thei r
own mental states.
This formulation of overcoming conﬂict seems consilient
with
Freud’s (1915/1963)claim about the conﬂict that underlies
repression:
“Let us conﬁne ourselves to the clinical experience we meet wit h
in the practice of psychoanalysis. We then see that the satisfact ion
of an instinct under repression is quite possible; further, tha t in
every instance such a satisfaction is pleasurable in itself, bu t is
irreconcilable with other claims and purposes; it therefore c auses
pleasure in one part of the mind and ‘pain’ in another. We see then
that it is a condition of repression that the element of avoid ing ‘pain’
shall have acquired more strength than the pleasure of gratiﬁcat ion
(p. 105).”
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264
Connolly Expected Free Energy Formalizes Conﬂict
Stated in the language of the current paper, the pleasure of
gratiﬁcation of an instinct is here being understood as the
“pleasure” of reducing the FE of a subsystem (a “part of the
mind” as Freud suggests, in the current example, one of the
prototype emotion systems). However, despite this important
consilience with Freud’s perception of repression, the mechanism
of defense described here also has some important diﬀerences
from the accepted description of conﬂict and repression in
Freud’s work. Speciﬁcally, what is missing from this descript ion
of the dynamic unconscious is almost the entire description
from
Freud’s (1923/1961)structural theory, which is the role of
a repressive action from the ego to avoid anxiety. This might l ead
one to suggest that the unconsciousness described above (du e
to not activating a dominant prediction) is not the same thing
as that described by Freud. This is correct, it is not the same .
The formulation of conﬂict and unconsciousness being presen ted
here demand a diﬀerent metapsychological assumption from that
articulated in Freud’s work.
Speciﬁcally, what is needed to incorporate a FEP-inspired
description of conﬂict, repression and the unconscious withi n
Freudian metapsychology is a systems-based epistemology
which suggests that all the key mental processes of interest
to psychoanalysis must be located within a hierarchy of
organization, and must themselves be founded upon and
constrained by processes at lower levels of the hierarchy
(
Connolly and van Deventer, 2017 ). This was expressed best in
Grobbelaar (1989) as follows:
“As it stands now, Freud’s formulation of the process of censor ship
deﬁnes it as an ad hoc defensive maneuver by one system, the
ego, against another system, the unconscious, to stop dangero us
elements (dangerous to the organization of the ego) from enterin g
the ego. One should rather formulate from the bottom to the top,
that is, in a theoretical sense. One should begin by deﬁning the
inherent qualities in the lower-order elements which . . . make i t
impossible for them to be taken up in a higher order system . . .
(p. 142).”
He elaborated on this further:
“ . . . the principles determining the perception of thoughts w ill
be inherent in the thoughts themselves. Stated diﬀerently, if the
organization of the ideational domain does not allow for the
representation of certain ideas, thoughts or memories, then t hey
cannot become conscious (p. 139–140).”
The incredible value that the FEP (and more speciﬁcally the
current formulation of expected free energy of competing polic ies
of action) can have for psychoanalysis is that it oﬀers precisely
such an explanation that oﬀers a hierarchical description of
the processes and also implies that defense (or repression) as
a process must have its origin in process at a lower level of
organization than consciousness, as described next.
To view precisions in terms of a hierarchical arrangement of
functions in the brain, the precisions associated with a parti cular
level of functional hierarchy are essentially determined b y activity
and structure at higher levels of hierarchy than that level a t
which the conﬂict takes place. In one regard, this refers to th e
range of possible states that can be encoded by activity at the
higher levels. In terms of complexity of organization, it mea ns
that lower levels of complexity of encoding at the superordinat e
level result in higher levels of precision associated with sur prise
from subordinate levels (Mathys, personal communication, 1 4
July 2017). With regard to resolving conﬂict, this means that
the generative model at a higher order comes to encode a more
limited set of possible states with regard to one of the conﬂict ing
neural systems.
This is also important with regard to conscious experience.
If we suggest as
Hobson et al. (2014) have, that consciousness
might refer to the process of inference at higher levels of
brain hierarchies, then this might imply that the person in our
example would likely only consciously experience the fear-rel ated
response, and be less aware of anger in their response. Note tha t
it is possible that “automated” motor responses to anger, which
may be triggered at levels of processing far below consciousne ss,
such as forming a ﬁst or clenching teeth, may nonetheless pers ist
in the person’s behavior. However, we might expect that they
are usually not attended to by the person, though it is these
behaviors which may typically be pointed out to a client by a
psychoanalytically-oriented psychotherapist.
In this hierarchical setting, it is possible that policies unf old
at diﬀerent hierarchical levels, where the precision of prior
preferences—that underwrite expected free energy—are supplie d
by supraordinate levels. In what follows, I will use precision as
a shorthand for the precision of various prior preferences that
determine policy selection at each and every level of inferen ce.
This comfortably accommodates the above phenomenology. For
example, I can select low level (automatic and autonomic)
policies that entail “ﬁst clenching” and yet ignore this evid ence
that I am “angry” at a higher level of inference, if there is
a more plausible (or “important”) explanation or policy at
hand (e.g., “I must do this to avoid being frightened”). In
short, the precision-aﬀorded prior preferences throughout the
hierarchy play a crucial role in contextualizing the evidenc e
for my current narrative and course of action—that will
necessarily entail competition and ambiguity at each and eve ry
level2.
The present formulation oﬀers a potential formalization of
defense related to conﬂict. Here, defense must refer to constr aint
reﬂected in the encoding at a level of functional hierarchy
superordinate to that of action selection described earlier that
results in an imperative to favor one policy of action over othe rs.
Referring to the above example, this could mean favoring a
policy of action driven by the “FEAR” system rather than that
of “RAGE.” The result is that in future situations similar to that
which triggered the conﬂict, we might expect the child from th e
“strange situation” example to be more likely to show a fear-
related response and cling to the mother, and less likely to sho w
an angry response.
2For a technical illustration of this sort of deep hierarchical inf erence see Friston
et al. (2017b) which describes simulations dealing with the simple act of reading;
where choosing which page to look at contextualizes, and informs ch oosing which
sentence to sample, which contextualizes and informs, choosing th e word to ﬁxate
on—and so on).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264
Connolly Expected Free Energy Formalizes Conﬂict
THE ENTRENCHMENT AND
PROGRESSIVE COMPLEXITY OF DEFENSE
MECHANISMS THROUGH DEVELOPMENT
This formalization of defense has implications for the furth er
development of the person. The development of a person is
characterized as the emergence of successively higher leve ls of
hierarchical organization in the brain, as well as the progre ssive
increase of complexity within those levels.
Further, following
Grobbelaar (1989) , and Connolly and van
Deventer (2017) , we could state that the constraints that operate
at one level of a hierarchy must be reﬂected at higher levels o f
recursion. This means that the more “rigidly” encoded precis ions
of the defense must act as a constraint to the further developm ent
of the organism, including through hierarchically superord inate
levels. This is formally similar to Freud (1912/1963) statement in
“The Dynamics of the Transference”:
“Now our experience has shown that of these feelings which
determine the capacity to love only a part has undergone full
psychical development; this part is directed toward reality and can
be made use of by the conscious personality, of which it forms a
part. The other part of these libidinal impulses has been held up
in development, withheld from the conscious personality and from
reality, and . . . may remain completely buried in the unconsciou s so
that the conscious personality is unaware of its existence (p. 106 ).”
This developmental aspect of defense is a critical element of a
psychoanalytic view of the person. It is a common assumption
within a psychoanalytic approach that a wide range of diverse
adult behaviors are nonetheless thematically related to on e
another as being underpinned by a common defensive operation
which has its origin in a critical event or situation from ear ly
childhood (
Greenson, 1967). Returning to our example, we might
ﬁnd that the child who formed an imperative toward action
policies related to fear rather than anger in situations that activate
both (and that imperative has constrained further developmen t)
may as an adult exhibit a general inhibition of angry response s,
and privileging of fearful behaviors in situations that call for both.
For example, in a future adult relationship, when the person’s
partner arrives hours late for a meeting with little explanati on or
empathy, the person may appear to excessively seek reassurance
rather than (consciously) expressing anger. Similarly, the y may
usually advise friends to behave in a placatory manner instea d of
an angry one when feeling mistreated by their partners. They m ay
feel uncomfortable when observing someone expressing anger
at their partner over perceived neglect, and try to avoid being
exposed to situations where they might observe this behavior .
Though these behaviors occur in diﬀerent settings and situat ions,
and reﬂect a complexity of inﬂuences, the present formulation
attempts to show that they may indeed be traceable to a constra int
on the developing hierarchical structure of the generative m odel
that emerged at an early age, and became foundational to an
emerging structure of perceptual (and action) prediction.
This progressive development of complexity of behavior
and psychic activity associated with the defensive encoding of
precisions is connected with clinical theory in psychoanalys is
where it is proposed that the unconscious material comes into
association with other elements of structure in the psyche,
resulting in a diversiﬁcation of expression of the related
defense.
Freud (1915/1963) describes this process from a clinical
perspective:
“. . . repression proper [emphasis in original], concerns mental
derivatives of the repressed instinct-presentation, or suc h trains
of thought as, originating elsewhere, have come into associat ive
connection with it. . . . We have to consider. . . the attraction
exercised by what was originally repressed upon everything wit h
which it can establish a connection. Probably the tendency to
repression would fail of its purpose if these forces did not co operate,
if there were not something previously repressed ready to assim ilate
that which is rejected from consciousness. . . . we are inclined to . . .
forget too readily that repression does not hinder the instinctu al
presentation from continuing to exist in the unconscious and fro m
organizing itself further, putting forth derivatives and instit uting
connections (p. 106).”
The above quote focuses on the progressive association of wha t
is repressed with other elements of the psyche rather than the
constraint related to the defense. In the current formulatio n, we
might focus on the other side of the coin which is the increase d
precision of the now-dominant action policy, which must come
to be applied to all new situations which trigger the previously
conﬂicting state, such that the predictions associated with the
dominant defensive response become ever more elaborated,
through the ordinary development of the individual.
INERTIA AND THERAPEUTIC RESISTANCE
From the perspective of active inference, the tendency to incr ease
the complexity of generative modeling within a creature’s comfort
zone can be understood in terms of free energy minimization:
in the same way that expected free energy can be divided into
epistemic and pragmatic parts, the free energy itself can be
expressed as accuracy minus complexity (
Hopkins, 2016 ). This
means that as the generative model is optimized (i.e., learne d
through experience), it will try to provide more and more
accurate explanations for its sensations. This will necessa rily
incur a complexity cost. Provided the accuracy increases—wit h
learning—to a greater extent than the complexity, free energ y
will continue to decrease. This accuracy of the model is also
dependent in part on the relative plasticity of the environment ,
such that the person can shape the environment in such a way
that the generative model is accurate. This means that if a cr eature
can ﬁnd and construct its own “econiche” (an environment tha t
ﬁts and sustains the predictions of their model of the world),
that generative model will increase its complexity only up unt il
a point that there is no further gain (in terms of accuracy).
Beyond this point, the phenomenon of (statistical) overﬁtting
emerges. This corresponds to a failure to generalize the mode l
to slight changes in the data, which means our model is no long er
optimal to explain the normal levels of variation of data in our
econiche. In this case, the generative model then appears to re sist
further change, provided the environment adequately supports
the model as it is.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264
Connolly Expected Free Energy Formalizes Conﬂict
This process is important to psychoanalysis as it could explain
the tendency to maintain a particular defensive constraint i n
the encoding of precisions of prior preferences that shape
expected free energy and ensuing policies. These preferred
outcomes specify states that become attractor states; namel y;
states to which the system is attracted; thereby maintainin g its
own organization and remaining within particular boundary
parameters. The notion of self-maintenance and attractor st ates
speaks directly to the premise of the free energy formulation—
in the sense that the raison d’être for minimizing free energ y
is to establish and maintain experienced states within some
attracting set; speciﬁed largely by prior beliefs (
Friston, 2013 ).
This theme emerges at many levels in self-organization; ran ging
from self-assembly in computational chemistry and molecula r
biology ( Cademartiri et al., 2012; Friston et al., 2015a ), through
to autopoiesis (self-creation) in biological self-organiz ation
(Maturana and Varela, 1980; Thompson and Varela, 2001 ).
The key point here is that if the priors that anchor the
choice of action policies (to resolve conﬂict) become too
entrenched, a particular, self-fulﬁlling, self-sustainin g pattern
of behavior emerges. Indeed, if this pattern involves placato ry
or reassuring behavior in the face of apparently devaluing
behavior from others, one can imagine a particular personalit y
phenotype (or ego-structure) that avoids aggressive behavio rs
within relationships altogether, to the extent that this beh avior
is successful and sustainable in meeting the expectations of the
generative model.
The argument here is that “inertia” may reﬂect an
entrenchment of prior beliefs that are sculpted by the
imperative to avoid conﬂict and, in epistemic terms, the
implicit uncertainty. Again, we see the imperative of reducin g
expected free energy or uncertainty in driving both behavior
and the prior beliefs that underwrite that behavior. What
this means regarding the present formulation is that as the
generative model of the person continues to develop in
complexity and hierarchical organization, so the constrain t
of precisions regarding action policies related to conﬂict
come to be proportionally reﬂected in the generative
model as well (though noting that it is also depending on
the plasticity of the environmental niche as well). This
means that the free energy cost of altering the precision of
preferences that underwrite policy selection also increases with
development.
This is important to understanding the tendency toward
resistance in the therapeutic situation as well. Essentiall y, the
task of the psychoanalytic therapist is to help the client redu ce
the relative precision of the dominant response, and allowing
an increased precision of the opposing response such that
it can activate conscious-level inference, and thereby hav e
greater ﬂexibility in behavior. However, this is tantamoun t to
a kind of “attack” on the attractor state of the generative
model. The inertia of the present encoding of precisions as
described above clariﬁes the intensity with which the clien t
avoids this conﬂicting information in terms of actions take n
by the person to prevent the progress of the therapeutic
activity (
Nord et al., 2017 have recently connected the vigor of
avoidance activities with the predictions regarding the lik elihood
of catastrophe, providing interesting possibilities for a pred ictive
coding-informed perspective on avoidance, and potentially
therefore, resistance).
However, this resistance or inertia against psychological
change is not only evident in the actions the person takes
to prevent the therapeutic progress, but also the updating of
the generative model in such a way that the new information
is “explained away” in an intellectual sense. This may be
linked to the common observation in therapy where the
therapist’s interpretation, rather than facilitating the cli ent
toward meaningful restructuring of their ego defenses, rath er
just becomes another link in the chain of the client’s defenses .
The client understands or may even agree with the therapist,
but meaningful change does not take place. The client is able
to generate new verbalizations and thought in response to the
therapist’s eﬀorts that merely support the generative model rat her
than driving change. The present formulation describing the
progressive increases in complexity of the “defensive” genera tive
model helps make sense of this phenomenon as well.
SOME IMPLICATIONS FOR
PSYCHOANALYTIC THEORY AND
THERAPY
A useful element of the formulation presented in this paper is
that it appears to address the problems related to the “signal”
theory of unpleasurable discharge that
Freud developed in
“The Interpretation of Dreams” 1990/1991. Here, Freud was
pressed to explain how the psychic apparatus could prevent
the mind from thinking of or remembering psychic material
that caused unpleasurable discharge without experiencing it
ﬁrst. He suggested that there is a preliminary release of
unpleasure associated with psychic activity that acts as a sig nal
to the preconscious gate that discharge will cause unpleasure .
As suggested in
Grobbelaar (1989) and Connolly and van
Deventer (2017) , this process was never founded upon a suitable
explanatory framework. However, the present formulation usin g
expected free energy accomplishes this task. In essence, the
updating of the generative model after the ﬁrst experience of
conﬂict means that the conﬂict state itself becomes reﬂected
at a superordinate level of organization through the altered
precisions. The sensory stimuli which would previously have
generated the conﬂict state of uncertainty now generates th e
defense state that privileges one response over another. An
example of such a response might be an inhibitory response of
the prefrontal cortex toward the limbic system, which now occ urs
without necessarily reexperiencing the initial conﬂict sta te, but is
rather the result of a downward prediction encoded at a cortic al
level. In essence the conﬂict is now “predicted” and “resolve d”
through one stroke, through the precision weightings toward o ne
pole of the conﬂict now avoiding the uncertainty of the conﬂic t
state. Certainly, the organism also learns to avoid stimuli t hat
activate that state or the surprise related to it. As stated ea rlier,
this may be a reason why psychoanalytic conﬂict is diﬃcult to
measure in imaging of adult brains due to the fact that the
established inhibitory, repressive behaviors of the brain, may
often succeed in preventing the full experience of conﬂict as i t
has been deﬁned in this paper.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264
Connolly Expected Free Energy Formalizes Conﬂict
A last implication that will be examined here relates to
the role of therapy in restructuring the generative model. In
one sense, the therapist could just point out to the client that
there are actions that they are motivated to perform, though
they aren’t aware of it. Freud addressed such a situation in
“Wild psycho-analysis” (1910) where he suggested that simply
telling the client that they have unconscious motives are li kely
to make the client uncomfortable as it activates the conﬂict
around it. He felt that such direct statements without regar d to
the therapeutic process brought psychoanalysis into disrepute
as clients made so uncomfortable by comments such as this
were often vocal in their condemnation of professionals who
made such statements toward them, though Freud also felt
that in the long run they might ultimately be helped by such
statements as they drew the client’s attention to the diﬃcul ty,
at least. However, in that same paper, he suggested that a more
therapeutically eﬀective response (that also protected the dig nity
of the discipline) took into account two factors. Firstly, the
readiness of the client, in the sense that they themselves we re
“in the neighborhood of” recognizing the repressed motivati ons
themselves (which implies a lower FE cost in terms of perceivin g
it), but also that the relationship between therapist and cli ent
had reached a certain stage of emotional closeness in their
relationship. This last is critical in the sense that the inte nsity
or nature of the relationship with the therapist somehow alte rs
the computation made by the person in terms of precisions
related to expected free energy. An important question for fut ure
work is to state exactly how the relationship achieves this change
that allows a recalculation of precisions associated with th e
conﬂict situation and the prototype emotions often associate d
with these.
One idea worth considering is the psychoanalytic notion
of containment as articulated by
Bion (1963) . Based on
Klein’s (1946) concept, containment refers to the idea that
the painful emotions and anxieties experienced by a person
can in a sense be reduced in a relationship with another
person, through a projection of the painful experience into
the other who is experienced as becoming (through projective
identiﬁcation) the “bad” parts of the self. This seems to
reduce the intensity of the emotions activated, and make the
feelings seem more manageable. An example would be a person
managing feelings of anxiety at separating from a loved one by
(wrongly) perceiving a loved one as being very anxious about
them instead, and feeling contempt for the other’s perceived
dependency. In this way the other person “contains” the feelin gs
of anxiety. A precondition of this projective identiﬁcation i s
the experience of the other as “good” in the sense that they
can tolerate the negative emotions and be expected not to
retaliate or abandon the person—in this sense the relationsh ip
is perceived as safe, despite these projective identiﬁcations of
“bad” emotions. While the concept of containment from a
FEP perspective requires a detailed treatment of its own, we
could suggest that this perceived safety of the relationship
must surely alter the perceived consequences of acting on
emotions that might otherwise be repressed. Here we use
again the example from
Hopkins (2016) of the child who
showed a pattern of fear responses (e.g., seeking reassurance )
in key relationships while angry responses appeared absent,
and developed into an adult who repressed angry responses
in primary relationships. While the fear of expressing anger
may have overwhelmed the young child, the adult in therapy
who could feel anger toward a perceived abandonment by the
“safe” therapist can learn to anticipate a far lower free energ y
cost of acting on that anger toward the therapist. This also
forms the basis of
Freud’s (1912/1963) understanding of the
therapeutic mechanism of transference, where the repressed
emotion can be felt toward the therapist, allowing for it to ac hieve
consciousness where it might otherwise not have. However, t hese
remarks require more rigorous development in future than giv en
here.
CONCLUSION
The present paper has examined the Freudian notion of
conﬂict, and assumed that this part of the theory requires
a quantitative explanatory framework. After highlighting t he
failed explanation of Freud’s energic theory, a formulation
around expected free energy was shown to be a viable
alternative to the energic theory. This formulation proposes
a computational or mathematical formalization of conﬂict,
which refers to the situation of relatively equivalent expec ted
free energy of a number of actions under competing polices.
This formulation also oﬀers a formalization of defense as a
recalibration of precisions at a hierarchically superordina te
level of organization. This defensive organization is viewe d
as constraining the further development of the generative
model, such that it maintains an attractor state characteriz ed
by the defensive operation, though it manifests in behavior
in a complex and multi-faceted way. Implications of this
formulation were explored, with the ongoing question of the
role of the therapeutic relationship identiﬁed as an ongoing
question.
The free energy principle and predictive coding presents an
exciting opportunity to psychoanalysis, in that core conceptual
foundations of psychoanalysis can be re-examined in the light of
predictive coding, not only in order to demonstrate the viabil ity
of the basic theory of psychoanalysis relative to a foundation
in systems theory and neuroscience, but also to consider how
the theory may need to be recast in a newer systems-based
language that makes these links. Although some way oﬀ at
this stage, one of the practical utilities of having a formal
theory is that one can simulate active inference and dyadic
interactions. In principle, this makes it possible to create in
silico psychotherapy and provide proof of principle of some
of the dynamics that one might hypothesize. Such work may
also eventually inﬂuence the clinical practice and training o f
psychoanalytic theory.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author conﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work an d
approved it for publication.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264
Connolly Expected Free Energy Formalizes Conﬂict
REFERENCES
Ainsworth, M. D. S., and Bell, S. M. (1970). Attachment, exploration and
separation: illustrated by the behaviour of one-year-olds in a stra nge situation.
Child Dev. 41, 49–67. doi: 10.2307/1127388
Anderson, M. C., and Hanslmayr, S. (2014). Neural mechanisms of mot ivated
forgetting. Trends Cogn. Sci. 18, 279–292. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2014.03.002
Anderson, M. C., Ochsner, K. N., Kuhl, B., Cooper, J., Robertson , E., Gabrieli, S. W.,
et al. (2004). Neural systems underlying the supression of unwanted memories.
Science 303, 232–235. doi: 10.1126/science.1089504
Basch, M. F. (1976). Psychoanalysis and communication science . Annu.
Psychoanal. 4, 385–421
Bastos, A. M., Usrey, W. M., Adams, R. A., Mangun, G. R., Fries, P. , and Friston, K.
J. (2012). Canonical microcircuits for predictive coding. Neuron 76, 695–711.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.038
Berlin, H. A., and Montgomery, J. (2017). “Neural basis of intraspsyc hic and
unconscious conﬂict and repetition compulsion, ” in Psychoanalytic Perspectives
on Conﬂict, eds C. Christian, M. N. Eagle, and D. L. Wolitzky (New York, NY:
Routledge), 260–278.
Bion, W. R. (1963). Elements of Psycho-Analysis. London: William Heinemann.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and Loss: Attachment , Vol 1. New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and loss: Separation, anxiety and anger , Vol 2. New
York, NY: Basic Books.
Breuer, J., and Freud, S. (2004). Studies in Hysteria. New York, NY: Penguin Books
(Original work published in 1895).
Bronfman, E., Parsons, E., and Lyons-Ruth, K. (1999). Atypical Maternal Behavior
Instrument for Assessment and Classiﬁcation (AMBIANCE): Ma nual for Coding
Disrupted Aﬀective Communication. Harvard University Medical School,
unpublished manual.
Cademartiri, L., Bishop, K. J., Snyder, P. W., and Ozin, G. A. (201 2). Using shape
for self-assembly. Philos. Trans. Ser. A Math. Phys. Eng Sci. 370, 2824–2847.
doi: 10.1098/rsta.2011.0254
Carhart-Harris, R. L., and Friston, K. J. (2010). The default-mode , ego-functions
and free-energy: a neurobiological account of Freudian ideas. Brain 133,
1265–1283. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq010
Cittern, D., Nolte, T., Friston, K., and Edalat, A. (2018). Intrin sic and extrinsic
motivators of attachment under active inference. PLoS ONE 13:e0193955.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193955
Colibazzi, T. (2016) July. “Dealing with conﬂict: too little or to o much? perspectives
from the psychosis prodrome, ” in Paper Presentation at the 17th Annual
Neuropsychoanalysis Congress (Chicago, IL).
Connolly, J. P. (2016). Principles of Organization of Psychic Energy Within
Psychoanalysis: A Systems Theory Perspective . Unpublished doctoral thesis,
University of South Africa, Pretoria.
Connolly, P. (2017) July. “Expected free energy formalizes conﬂict a nd defense, ”
in Poster Session Presented at 18th Annual Congress of the Neurop sychoanalytic
Society (London).
Connolly, P., and van Deventer, V. (2017). Hierarchical recursiv e organization
and the free energy principle: from biological self-organization to the
psychoanalytic mind. Front. Psychol. 8:1695 doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01695
Dehaene, S., Artiges, E., Naccache, L., Martelli, C., Viard, A., S chürhoﬀ, F., et al.
(2003). Conscious and subliminal conﬂicts in normal subjects an d patients with
schizophrenia: the role of the anterior cingulate. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A . 100,
13722–13727. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2235214100
Dutton, D. G., and Aron, A. P. (1974). Some evidence for heighte ned sexual
attraction under conditions of high anxiety. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 30, 510–517.
doi: 10.1037/h0037031
Freud, S. (1911/1963). “Formulations regarding the two principles of me ntal
functioning, ” in The Collected Papers of Sigmund Freud Volume 6 : General
Psychological Theory: Papers on Metapsychology , ed P. Rieﬀ (New York, NY:
Collier Books), 21–28.
Freud, S. (1912/1963). “The dynamics of the transference, ” in The Collected Papers
of Sigmund Freud: Therapy and Technique , ed P. Rieﬀ (New York, NY: Collier
Books), 105–115.
Freud, S. (1915/1963). “Repression, ” in The Collected Papers of Sigmund Freud:
General Psychological Theory: Papers on Metapsychology , Vol. 6, ed P. Rieﬀ,
(New York, NY: Collier Books), 104–115.
Freud, S. (1920/1955). “Beyond the pleasure principle, ” in The Standard Edition
of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Volume XVIII (1920-
1922): Beyond the Pleasure Principle, Group Psychology and Other W orks ed J.
Strachey (London: Hogarth Press), 1–64.
Freud, S. (1923/1961). “The Ego and the Id, ” in The Standard Edition of the
Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Volume XIX (1923-1925) :
The Ego and the Id and Other Works, ed J. Strachey (London: Hogarth),
3–66.
Freud, S. (1950). “The project for a scientiﬁc psychology, ” in Pre-Psycho-Analytic
Publications and Unpublished Drafts The Standard Edition of the Complete
Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud (1886-1899), ed J. Strachey (London:
Hogarth Press), 281–399.
Freud, S. (1990/1991). The Interpretation of Dreams . Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 10:20130475.
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., and P ezzulo, G.
(2017a). Active inference: a process theory. Neural Comput. 29, 1–49.
doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00912
Friston, K., Levin, M., Sengupta, B., and Pezzulo, G. (2015a). K nowing one’s place:
a free-energy approach to pattern regulation . J. R. Soc. Interface 12, 1–12.
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.1383
Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T ., and Pezzulo, G.
(2015b). Active inference and epistemic value. Cogn. Neurosci. 6, 187–214.
doi: 10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053
Friston, K. (2009). The free energy principle: a rough guide to the bra in? Trends
Cogn. Sci. 13, 293–301. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005
Friston, K. J. (2010). A free energy principle for the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11,
127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy princ iple of the brain.
J. Physiol. 100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001
Friston, K. J., Rosch, R., Parr, T., Price, C., and Bowman, H. (2017 b). Deep
temporal models and active inference. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 77, 388–402.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.04.009
Gray, J. R., Bargh, J. A., and Morsella, E. (2013). Neural correlates of the essence of
conscious conﬂict: fMRI of sustaining incompatible intention s. Exp. Brain Res .
229, 453–465. doi: 10.1007/s00221-013-3566-5
Greenson, R. R. (1967). The Practice and Technique of Psychoanalysis. New York,
NY: InternationalUniversities Press.
Grobbelaar, P. W. (1989). Freud and Systems Theory: An Exploratory Statement.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Rand Afrikaans University, Jo hannesburg.
Hartmann, H. H. (1964). Essays on Ego Psychology. New York, NY: International
Universities Press.
Hobson, J. A., Hong, C. C., and Friston, K. J. (2014). Virtual realit y and
consciousness inference in dreaming. Front. Psychol. Cogn. Sci. 5:1133.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01133
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 50, 259–285.
doi: 10.1111/nous.12062
Holt, R. R. (1962). A critical examination of Freud’s concept of bou nd vs. free
cathexis. J. Am. Psychoanal. Assoc. 10, 475–525.
Hopkins, J. (2012). “Psychoanalysis, representation and neurosci ence: the Freudian
unconscious and the Bayesian brain, ” in From the Couch to the Lab:
Psychoanalysis, Neuroscience and Cognitive Psychology in Dia logue, eds A.
Fotopoulu, D. Pfaﬀ, and M. Conway (Oxford: Oxford University Press ),
230–265.
Hopkins, J. (2015). “The signiﬁcance of consilience: psychoana lysis, attachment,
neuroscience and evolution, ” in Psychoanalysis and Philosophy of Mind:
Unconscious Mentality in the 21st Century, eds S. Boag, L. A. W. Brakel, and
V. Talvitie (London: Karnac), 47–137.
Hopkins, J. (2016). Free energy and virtual reality in neuroscience and
neuropsychoanalysis: a complexity theory of dreaming and mental disord er.
Front. Psychol. Cogn. Sci. 7:922. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00922
Horowitz, M. H. (1977). The quantitative line of approach in psychoan alysis: a
clinical assessment of its current status. J. Am. Psychoanal. Assoc. 25, 559–579.
doi: 10.1177/000306517702500303
Howe, G. (2011). Attachment Across the Life Course . New York, NY: Palgrave
MacMillan.
Itti, L., and Baldi, P. (2009). Bayesian surprise attracts human at tention. Vision Res.
49, 1295–1306. doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2008.09.007
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264
Connolly Expected Free Energy Formalizes Conﬂict
Kapur, S. (2003). Psychosis as a state of aberrant salience: a frame work
linking biology, phenomenology, and pharmacology in schizophrenia. Am. J.
Psychiatry 160, 13–23. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.160.1.13
Kessler, H., Schmidt, A. C., Hildenbrand, O., Scharf, D., Kehyayan , A.,
and Axmacher, N. (2017). Investigating behavioral and psychoph ysiological
reactions to conﬂict-related and individualized stimuli as potent ial correlates
of repression. Front. Psychol. 8:1511. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01511
Klein, M. (1946). Notes on some schizoid mechanisms. Int. J. Psycho-Anal. 27,
99–110.
Krystal, J. H., Bremner, J. D., Southwick, S. M., and Charney, D. S. ( 1998).
“The emerging neurobiology of dissociation: implications for trea tment of
posttraumatic stress disorder, ” in. Trauma, Memory, and Dissociation, eds J. D.
Bremner and C. R. Marmar (Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press ),
321–363.
Levin, R., and Nielsen, T. (2009). Nightmares, bad dreams, and
emotion dysregulation. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 18, 84–88.
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8721.2009.01614.x
Maturana, H. R., and Varela, F. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition . London: D
Reidel.
Mirza, M. B., Adams, R. A., Mathys, C. D., and Friston, K. J. (2016 ). Scene
construction, visual foraging, and active inference. Front. Comput. Neurosci.
10:56. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2016.00056
Nord, C. M., Prabhu, G., Nolte, T., Fonagy, P., Dolan, R., and
Moutoussis, M. (2017). Vigour in active avoidance. Sci. Rep. 7:60.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-00127-6
Panksepp, J. (1998). Aﬀective Neuroscience. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Panksepp, J., Siviy, S., and Normansell, L. (1984). The psychobiolog y of play:
theoretical and methodological perspectives. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 8,
465–492. doi: 10.1016/0149-7634(84)90005-8
Peterfreund, E., and Schwartz, J. T. (1971). Information, Systems, and
Psychoanalysis: An Evolutionary Biological Approach to Psych oanalytic Theory.
Psychological Issues Monograph 25/26. New York, NY: Internation al
Universities Press.
Pribram, K., and Gill, M. M. (1976). Freud’s Project Reassessed.New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Pushkarskaya, H., Smithson, M., Joseph, J. E., Corbly, C., and Le vy, I. (2015).
Neural correlates of decision-making under ambiguity and conﬂict . Front.
Behav. Neurosci. 9:325. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2015.00325
Rapaport, D. (1960). The structure of psychoanalytic theory. Psychol. Iss. 2, 1–158.
Safyer, M. P. (2013). When Good Enough Mothering Is Not Good Enough: A
Study of Mothers’ Secure Base Scripts, Atypical and Disrupte d Caregiving and
the Transmission of Infant Attachment Quality. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis,
University of Michigan.
Schmeing, J.-B., Kehyayan, A., Kessler, H., Do Lam, A. T. A., Fell, J ., Schmidt,
A.-C., et al. (2013). Can the neural basis of repression be studied in the MRI
scanner? New Insights from Two Free Association Paradigms . PLoS ONE
8:e62358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062358
Schmidt, A., Diwadkar, V. A., Smieskova, R., Harrisberger, F., L ang, U. E.,
McGuire, P., et al. (2015). Approaching a network connectivity-dri ven
classiﬁcation of the psychosis continuum: a selective review and suggestions
for future research. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8:1047. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.
01047
Shevrin, H., Bond, J. A., Brakel, L., Hertel, R. K., and Williams, W.
J. (1996). Conscious and Unconscious Processes: Psychodynamic,
Cognitive and Neurophysiological Convergences. New York, NY: Guilford
Press.
Shevrin, H., Snodgrass, M., Brakel, L. A. W., Kushwaha, R., Kalaida , N., and
Bazan, A. (2013). Subliminal unconscious conﬂict alpha power inh ibits
supraliminal conscious symptom experience. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7:544.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00544
Solms, M., and Turnbull, O. (2003). The Brain and the Inner World: An
Introduction to the Neuroscience of the Subjective Experie nce. New York, NY:
Other Press.
Swanson, D. R. (1977). A critique of psychic energy as an explanat ory concept. J.
Am. Psychoanal. Assoc. 25, 603–633. doi: 10.1177/000306517702500306
Thompson, E., and Varela, F. (2001). Radical embodiment: neural
dynamics and consciousness. Trends Cogn. Sci. 5, 418–425.
doi: 10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01750-2
van der Meer, M., Kurth-Nelson, Z., and Redish, A. D. (2012). In formation
processing in decision-making systems. Neuroscientist, 18, 342–359.
doi: 10.1177/1073858411435128
White, G. L., Fishbein, S., and Rutsein, J. (1981). Passiona te love and misattribution
of arousal. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 41, 56–62. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.41.1.56
Zepf, S. (2010). Libido and psychic energy – Freud’s concepts reco nsidered. Int.
Forum Psychoanal. 19, 3–14. doi: 10.1080/08037060802450753
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Connolly. This is an open-access article distrib uted under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). T he use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the or iginal author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original pub lication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these t erms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1264