HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 26 September 2017
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01695
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Edited by:
Christoph Mathys,
Scuola Internazionale di Studi
Superiori Avanzati (SISSA), Italy
Reviewed by:
Jim Hopkins,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Karl Friston,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Tamara Fischmann,
International Psychoanalytic University
Berlin, Germany
*Correspondence:
Patrick Connolly
patrickconnolly@live.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Psychoanalysis and
Neuropsychoanalysis,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 02 April 2017
Accepted: 14 September 2017
Published: 26 September 2017
Citation:
Connolly P and van Deventer V (2017)
Hierarchical Recursive Organization
and the Free Energy Principle: From
Biological Self-Organization to the
Psychoanalytic Mind.
Front. Psychol. 8:1695.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01695
Hierarchical Recursive Organization
and the Free Energy Principle: From
Biological Self-Organization to the
Psychoanalytic Mind
Patrick Connolly1* and Vasi van Deventer2
1 Counselling and Psychology, Hong Kong Shue Yan University,Hong Kong, Hong Kong,2 Psychology, University of
South Africa, Pretoria, South Africa
The present paper argues that a systems theory epistemology (and particularly the
notion of hierarchical recursive organization) provides t he critical theoretical context within
which the signiﬁcance of
Friston’s (2010a)Free Energy Principle (FEP) for both evolution
and psychoanalysis is best understood. Within this perspec tive, the FEP occupies a
particular level of the hierarchical organization of the or ganism, which is the level of
biological self-organization. This form of biological sel f-organization is in turn understood
as foundational and pervasive to the higher levels of organi zation of the human organism
that are of interest to both neuroscience as well as psychoan alysis. Consequently, central
psychoanalytic claims should be restated, in order to be loc ated in their proper place
within a hierarchical recursive organization of the (situa ted) organism. In light of the
FEP the realization of the psychoanalytic mind by the brain s hould be seen in terms
of the evolution of different levels of systematic organiza tion where the concepts of
psychoanalysis describe a level of hierarchical recursive organization superordinate to
that of biological self-organization and the FEP . The impli cation of this formulation is
that while “psychoanalytic” mental processes are fundamen tally subject to the FEP ,
they nonetheless also add their own principles of process ov er and above that of the
FEP . A model found in Grobbelaar (1989) offers a recursive bottom-up description of
the self-organization of the psychoanalytic ego as depende nt on the organization of
language (and affect), which is itself founded upon the tend ency toward autopoiesis
(self-making) within the organism, which is in turn describ ed as formally similar to the
FEP . Meaningful consilience between Grobbelaar’s model an d the hierarchical recursive
description available in Friston’s (2010a) theory is described. The paper concludes that
the valuable contribution of the FEP to psychoanalysis unde rscores the necessity of
reengagement with the core concepts of psychoanalytic theo ry, and the usefulness that a
systems theory epistemology—particularly hierarchical re cursive description—can have
for this goal.
Keywords: psychoanalysis, neuropsychoanalysis, free energy principle, systems theory, hierarchical recursive
organization
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
INTRODUCTION
A question that is at the heart of the neuropsychoanalytic
project is the relationship between two levels of organizati on
within the human organism, between the neurological level a nd
the mental one. Professor Karl Friston’s free energy principl e
(FEP henceforth) of biological self-organization has captu red
the imagination of many within both the neuroscientiﬁc and
psychoanalytic ﬁelds as providing a very important new link
in our understanding of the body-mind relationship. However ,
it is important to understand this development within some
form of theoretical context that clariﬁes the correct implic ations
that this development has within the growing science of
neuropsychoanalysis, so that the importance of its role and
inﬂuence is neither over- nor under-estimated.
It is the view of the present paper that a systems theory
epistemology provides the critical theoretical context with in
which the signiﬁcance of Friston’s FEP is best understood.
Systems theory provides the concept of a “recursive descriptio n”
of organization of complex systems in the physical world, in
which the FEP enters at a particular level of that hierarchica l
organization, which is the level of biological self-organi zation.
This form of biological self-organization is in turn unders tood
as foundational and pervasive to the higher levels of organiz ation
of the human organism that are of interest to both neuroscien ce
as well as psychoanalysis.
The implication of adopting this hierarchical, recursive
description of organization of the human organism is twofold.
First, it implies that all levels of organization recursivel y
superordinate to the level of biological self-organization (in this
case the brain and the mind) must be constrained by the FEP. Th e
second implication is that those recursively superordinate l evels
of the organism which are the brain and the mind, must also be
subject to further principles of organization not fully explained
by the FEP. Historically, the theoretical ﬁeld of psychoanaly sis
reﬂected an eﬀort to generate such superordinate principles of
organization that obtain at the level of psychic organizatio n.
However, the ﬁeld developed independently of neuroscience an d
biology, which meant that psychoanalytic theories were neve r
adequately integrated within a hierarchical model of level s of
organization of the human organism.
In this manner, it will be suggested that core constructs in
psychoanalytic theory should be restated, in order to be loca ted
in their proper place within a hierarchical recursive organiza tion
of the (situated) organism. Further it is argued that a corre ct
understanding of the place of the FEP in organizing the psyche
in turn necessitates a restatement of the core Freudian conc epts
within a systems theory framework that can successfully inte grate
biological levels of organization with psychological ones.
This paper will ﬁrst introduce systems theory and the
notion of hierarchical recursive organization, and descri be
how ﬁndings in diﬀerent sciences support such a notion of
recursive levels of organization in nature. Next, the paper
highlights a problem within the psychoanalytic literature, i n
which organizing principles such as the pleasure principle, have
never been adequately connected to organizing principles in
the nervous system or the body in general. Following this it is
suggested that psychoanalytic principles of organization nee d
to be restated within a recursive description of organizatio n
within the human organism which demonstrates its dependence
on biological self-organization. The FEP is then described
as a key regulatory principle of self-organization which
recursively underlies psychoanalytic regulatory principles .
The FEP is described here as a formalization of
Maturana
and Varela’s (1980) concepts of autopoiesis (or self-making)
and the structural coupling of the organism with its
environment.
The importance of the FEP in bridging the physical material
of the body and the nervous system with the level of organizat ion
of information and (Bayesian) beliefs—within the psycholog ical
domain—is clariﬁed. This concept is then used to restate
the question as to how the brain realizes the psychoanalytic
mind as one of the evolution of diﬀerent levels of systemic
organization in which the concepts of psychoanalysis are viewe d
as describing a level of hierarchical recursive organizati on
superordinate to that of biological self-organization and t he
FEP. The implication of this formulation is presented, which i s
that while “psychoanalytic” mental processes are fundamenta lly
subject to the FEP , they nonetheless also add their own principl es
of process over and above that of the FEP.
The paper then presents an example of how psychoanalytic
regulatory principles can be founded on biological self-
organization through the model presented in
Grobbelaar
(1989) which oﬀers a recursive bottom-up description of
the organization of the “psychoanalytic” consciousness as
dependent on the organization of language (and aﬀect), which
is itself founded upon the tendency toward autopoiesis within
the organism. Meaningful consilience between Grobbelaar’s
model and the hierarchical recursive description available in
Friston’s (2010a) theory is described. The paper concludes that
the valuable contribution of Friston’s FEP to psychoanalysis
underscores the necessity of reengagement with the core con cepts
of psychoanalytic theory, and the usefulness that a systems th eory
epistemology—particularly recursive description—can have f or
this goal.
GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY AND THE
SELF-ORGANIZATION OF SYSTEMS
When the ﬁeld of general systems theory came to the fore toward
the middle of the Twentieth century, the key purpose of this
ﬁeld was to oﬀer an explanatory paradigm for how systems of
various kinds came to regulate themselves, and generate the ir
own principles of organization. While this question of self-
regulation spanned a number of diﬀerent ﬁelds, a very exemplary
question was that of biological systems, and how biological
systems appeared to regulate themselves, since their behavio r
is not directly regulated by their environment. This questi on
can also be stated in terms of “bottom-up” or “top-down”
forms of organization in a system, or how a system comes to
develop top-down principles of self-regulation, that order th e
activity of lower-order levels of the system. The ﬁeld of gen eral
systems theory was from the start also associated with the ﬁel d
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
of cybernetics, which is the science of regulation or contro l of
systems, which emerged at roughly the same time as general
systems theory (
Wiener, 1965; Von Bertalanﬀy, 1969/2009 ).
The answer that began to emerge from general systems
theory is that those self-regulatory or top-down principles of
organization of systems emerged from the activity of the low er-
order elements themselves (in other words from bottom-up
activity). This principle was proposed as applying to a wide
variety of phenomena, including inorganic ones such as complex
weather patterns that emerge from the interactions of vast
numbers of air and water molecules in the atmosphere (
Wiener,
1965), or patterns of convection that emerge in heated liquids
(Prigogine and Stengers, 1984 ).
This same principle was applied to the regulation of biological
systems, including complex social behavior: an example of the
emergence of a patterned hierarchy of social dominance among
chickens, is found in
Wiener and Schadé (1965) restated vividly
here in Grobbelaar (1989):
“. . . the pecking order [of chickens] which is generated throug h
the interactions of the chickens is spontaneously generated o ut of
the activity of pecking. So that the activity of pecking determi nes
the pattern of dominance, which in turn determines who will peck
who.” (p. 137).
Grobbelaar goes on to say that there are other factors that
inﬂuence the pecking order, which is correct. However, the poi nt
being made is that the operation of the elements of a system
and the interactions between them will generate a new form
of organization which in turn comes to determine the activit y
of those constituent elements. We will see below that exactl y
the same circular causality emerged subsequently in physics;
speciﬁcally in the context of synergetics where slow macrosc opic
(superordinate) modes of behavior enslave fast microscopic
(subordinate) levels (
Haken, 1983; Tschacher and Haken, 2007 ).
In physics, this is known as the enslaving principle and emerges
in things like the Center Manifold Theorem in dynamical syst ems
theory (
Carr, 1981).
What’s important about this perspective is to note that though
von Bertalanﬀy (together with others) sought to describe the
self-regulation of systems based on bottom up processes, he a lso
stressed the signiﬁcance of aspects of holism and integratio n in
the emergence of self-regulatory tendencies:
“It was the aim of classical physics eventually to resolve natural
phenomena into a play of elementary units governed by ‘blind’
laws of nature. This was expressed in the ideal of the Laplacian
spirit which, from the position and momentum of particles, can
predict the state of the universe at any point in time. . . . In
contrast to this mechanistic view, however, problems of whole ness,
dynamic interaction and organization have appeared in the various
branches of modern physics. . . . It is necessary to study not only
parts and processes in isolation, but also to solve the decisive
problems found in the organization and order unifying them,
. . . Again, similar trends appeared in Psychology. While classi cal
association psychology attempted to resolve mental phenomen a
into elementary units—psychological atoms as it were—such as
elementary sensations and the like, gestalt psychology showed the
existence and primacy of psychological wholes which are not a
summation of elementary units and governed by dynamic laws.”
(
Von Bertalanﬀy, 1969/2009 , p. 31).
This paragraph articulates what has become a core tenet of
systems theory which is that, from the interaction of the low er
order constituent elements of a system, an entirely new form of
organization emerges, one which cannot be fully explained by the
basic principles of interaction of the constituent elements, e ven
though it emerges from their interaction (
Haken and Levi, 2012 ).
This process of emergent self-regulation is most fully descr ibed
by the concept of recursive organization in systems theory, w hich
is described next.
RECURSIVE EPISTEMOLOGY IN SYSTEMS
THEORY
The concept of recursion is used in number of ﬁelds, and has
slight variations in its meaning across some of these diﬀeren t
ﬁelds. Within mathematics and computer science a recursive
function is one whose term involves calling itself, with each
successive application of the function referred to as an “iter ation”
(
Shoenﬁeld, 2001 ). Within the broad ﬁelds of systems theory
and cybernetics, the term has also been used in diﬀerent but
related ways by
Bateson (1978) , Beer (1972) , Keeney (1983) , and
Maturana and Varela (1980) .
As described by Keeney (1983) , a primary assumption of
recursive organization of systems is that a system may be
described as having diﬀerent levels of organization of its ac tivity.
A second assumption is that the organization at higher-order
levels inﬂuences the activities at lower levels of descripti on.
Keeney gives the example of how one might view a dance between
two partners as recursive levels of organization. For example, the
ﬁrst partner in the dance may step to their right; this basic le vel
of behavior could be considered the lowest level of organiza tion
in the current scheme. However, a higher level of organizati on
refers to the level of interaction: the ﬁrst partner steps to th eir
right, while the second partner steps to their left. The activi ties at
the level of behaviors are subordinated to this level of inte raction.
Yet a higher level of organization is at the level of choreogr aphy
or pattern of interaction: the dance is a waltz. The activitie s at the
level of behavior as well as interaction are subordinated to this
pattern of choreography.
Keeney (1983) uses this formulation to describe a problematic
pattern of marital interaction. The husband says he nags beca use
the wife withdraws, while the wife says she withdraws becaus e
the husband nags. However, we might understand the behavior s
(nagging and withdrawing) as being subordinated to a pattern of
interaction which might be stated as withdraw, nag, withdra w,
nag, withdraw, nag, crisis, reset (the pattern could equally
begin with “nag” instead of “withdraw”). This systems-based
formulation which indicates that behaviors within relatio nships
are organized by stable patterns of interaction has come to ha ve
very strong empirical support over the decades-long work of John
Gottman and colleagues in marital interaction patterns (
Gottman
et al., 2002 )
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
Beyond these ﬁrst two assumptions, a further assumption of
recursive epistemology refers to the idea that the higher lev els
of organization of the system emerge from the activities at
lower levels of organization. Similar to the earlier example o f
the “pecking order” of chickens emerging from the behaviors
of pecking (
Grobbelaar, 1989 ), so the pattern of marital
interaction described above may actually emerge from naggi ng
and withdrawing behaviors to begin with. However, the patter n
becomes self-organizing over time, and begins to organize t he
nagging and withdrawing behaviors, so that they come to have
a predictable pattern.
A ﬁnal proposition of recursive organization is the principle
that though higher levels of organization come to deﬁne the
activities at lower levels, they cannot violate the principle s of
organization of those lower levels. In other words, the patte rn
of marital interaction of nagging and withdrawing that emer ges
between the marriage partners cannot consist of behaviors
or emotions that the partners themselves are not capable
of producing. The pattern of activity that emerges from the
behaviors and interactions of a system’s elements must lie w ithin
the parameters of possible behaviors or states of the system an d
its elements (
Grobbelaar, 1989). In other words, while the higher-
order levels of organization come to dominate the activity o f
lower-order elements, it cannot violate the lower-order pri nciples
of organization of those elements, nor exceed the range of
potential actions of those elements.
Such a notion of emergent self-organization has received
tangible support from a range of research trajectories. Herma nn
Haken developed a model of self-organization of coherent las er
light, and how this self-organizing shift distinguishes it from
non-coherent light. Haken’s model, and the theoretical ﬁeld
it has given rise to (Synergetics) has become an established
research trajectory across several disciplines, including biology
(the “swarm” intelligence), computer engineering (AI studi es)
and molecular robotics (
Haken and Levi, 2012 ).
In his book entitled “Reality is not what it seems, ” Rovelli
(2016) of the Centre de Physique Theorique in Marseille,
points toward the long-standing problem in physics which is
the apparent fact that principles of physics which hold true at
the macroscopic level of general relativity, do not hold at th e
microscopic level described by quantum mechanics, and vice
versa. Though substantial eﬀorts in the ﬁeld of physics have
attempted to bridge these two levels, no satisfying solution s
have yet been found. Rovelli shows how research into loop
quantum gravity has suggested that when basic subatomic
quanta of gravitational ﬁelds cluster together in complex
relationships, these aggregates start to interact with one a nother
and develop novel behaviors that are unique to that level of
aggregation. Rovelli shows how such aggregates can be descri bed
as occupying diﬀerent levels of organization, and argues that
quite profound changes occur once quanta aggregate up to the
level of curving spacetime, meaning that activities at that l evel
simply cannot be predicted by principles obtaining at subatomic
levels alone, though they do emerge from activities at those levels
(
Rovelli, 2016).
The key implication that this view of recursive organization
has for systems, is that a complex system may be understood as
consisting of a number of levels of organization, each of whi ch
organizes the structure and therefore behavior tendencies of the
system. These layers are hierarchical, in that the highest l evel has
the greatest inﬂuence over the behavior of the system though
it remains constrained by the lower levels, and all the level s
are always operative, and not in competition with one another.
A last point is that the developmental history of the system
indicates that each successive layer of organization emerg es from
the layer below (which is why it cannot violate the principle
of organization at the lower layer), and then entrains that
subordinate level such that the subordinate regulatory prin ciples
now come to serve the superordinate ones, which now have
a greater inﬂuence over the system’s further behavior (
Keeney,
1983; Grobbelaar, 1989 ).
For example if we adopt a two-level scheme which consists
of the principle of natural selection (or survival of the
ﬁttest) and a second principle which is that culture exerts an
organizational inﬂuence on the structural development of th e
person (especially the brain), we could think of the cultural
organization as superordinate and the inﬂuence of natural
selection as subordinate. In other words, we could understan d
the rise of cultural organization as emergent from organiza tion
through natural selection, due to the survival advantages
bestowed by group membership and communication. However,
over time and development, the inﬂuence of culture becomes
self-organizing such that its inﬂuence is not fully explaine d by
the principle of natural selection, and (as the superordinate
emergent principle) it comes to have a greater inﬂuence over
the regulation of the system: while our daily behaviors may
(hopefully) mostly have the tendency of enhancing our surviva l,
they are more speciﬁcally shaped by cultural information and
norms. However, the principle of natural selection continues
to operate: as long as there is any pattern to who survives
and reproduces, evolution continues to take place. Further,
we could say that the principle of natural selection becomes
entrained by the inﬂuence of culture, such that our evolutio n
comes to be inﬂuenced more and more in the direction of
adaptation toward a cultural environment (a study of the cult ural
inﬂuence on evolution can be found in
Richerson and Boyd’s,
2006 work “Not by Genes Alone”). Armed with this concept
of hierarchical recursive organization (referred to as HRO f or
the remainder of the text), we now move toward exploring a
central diﬃculty in the historical development of psychoanal ytic
theory.
FREUD’S “PROJECT” AND THE
SELF-REGULATION OF THE NERVOUS
SYSTEM
Though Freud was not inﬂuenced by the growth of systems
theory, in his posthumously published work “The Project for
a Scientiﬁc Psychology” (1950), he set himself a task that was
very similar to that prescribed by von Bertalanﬀy. In “the
Project” his stated task was to demonstrate that all principles of
human behavior, aﬀect and psychical activity were determined
by the interaction of neurons (the “constituent elements” o f the
psychical system, in his view), and the inﬂuence they exerted on
one another through an energy he termed “Qn”:
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
“The intention is to furnish a psychology that shall be a natural
science: that is, to represent psychical processes as quantita tively
determinate states of speciﬁable material particles, thus maki ng
those processes perspicuous and free from contradiction. Two
principal ideas are involved: (1) What distinguishes activity from
rest is to be regarded as Q [referring to the term ‘quantity’ describe d
below], subject to the general laws of motion. (2) The neurones are
to be taken as the material particles.” (
Freud, 1950, p. 295)
He then proposed that the nervous system is regulated by a single
organizing principle (he called it the primary principle), which is
to divest itself of this energy (Qn), which he called a principl e of
inertia, though elsewhere referred to it as a principle of constancy.
He tried to explain instances of the nervous system refrainin g
from discharging energy as the result of the inﬂuence of a
secondary principle, serving the interests of behaving adapti vely
with regard to the environment.
The important consideration here about “the Project” is the
fact that he very clearly wanted to generate an entirely “bot tom-
up” description of the self-regulatory activity of the nervou s
system. Through deﬁning diﬀerent types of neurones and the
types of inﬂuence (and barriers to inﬂuence) they exerted on o ne
another, he hoped to explain the entirety of operation of psychic al
processes as complex as consciousness, memory and attention
purely through these basic energic interactions of diﬀerent t ypes
of neurons. He expressly avoided describing any process that
could not be traced back to this basic interaction of diﬀerent types
of neurons (
Connolly, 2016).
The similarity between the aims of “the Project” and the
principles of the growing systems theory ﬁeld of cybernetics (s elf-
regulation) were remarked upon by Strachey in his translator ’s
introduction to the text:
“It has been plausibly pointed out that in the complexities of
the ‘neuronal’ events described here by Freud, and the principle s
governing them, we may see more than a hint or two at
the hypotheses of information theory and cybernetics in their
application to the nervous system. To take a few instances of thi s
similarity of approach, we may note ﬁrst Freud’s insistence on t he
prime necessity for providing the machine with a ‘memory’; aga in,
there is his system of ‘contact-barriers, ’ which enables the m achine
to make a suitable ‘choice, ’ based on the memory of previous
events, between alternative lines of response to an external sti mulus;
and, once more, there is, in Freud’s account of the mechanism of
perception, the introduction of the fundamental notion of feed-bac k
as a means of correcting errors in the machine’s own dealings with
the environment.” (Strachey in
Freud, 1950, p. 292–293)
However, Freud failed in this endeavor. Once he discovered t hat
he could not overcome a number of internal contradictions in
the system he had designed, he abandoned the project, and trie d
to have it suppressed, later stating:
“I can no longer understand the state of mind in which I hatched
out the ‘Project”’ (
Freud, 1950, p. 285)
This failure appears to have been signiﬁcant, in that from this
point on, Freud appeared to begin to accept the use of top-down
principles of regulation of the psyche for which he had not been
able to generate a “bottom-up” explanation. This is really the start
of his distinction of the “psychological” theory from neurol ogy,
in which he sought to describe principles that organized psychi c
life, even though he could not oﬀer a description on how those
principles emerged from its organic base:
“I have no inclination at all to keep the domain of the psycholog ical
ﬂoating, as it were, in the air, without any organic foundation.
But I have no knowledge, neither theoretically nor therapeut ically,
beyond that conviction, so I have to conduct myself as if I had onl y
the psychological before me” (
Freud, 1898/1985, p. 26)
A good example of this appears in his next major text which
was “The Interpretation of Dreams” (1900/1991). In it, Freud
introduces the concept of a preconscious gate, which limits ac cess
to consciousness of psychic material on the basis of whether
the discharge of their energy causes pleasure or unpleasure,
though no adequate physiological description of that pleasure or
unpleasure is articulated in the text (
Grobbelaar, 1989; Connolly,
2016).
Freud’s eﬀort in “the Project” sought to describe bottom-up
processes that generated the self-regulation of the psyche an d
behavior, and in this respect bears similarity with the aims o f
general systems theory. However, Grobbelaar (1989) has argued
that the failure of Freud’s theorizing in this regard was not due
to a lack of eﬀort or diligence, but due to the lack of an adequat e
systems-based epistemology.
Referring back to the earlier quote by Von Bertalanﬀy
(1969/2009) regarding the need to study emergent principles of
holism and organization, not just elementary units moved by
“blind” or mechanical laws of nature, this same point can be ma de
with regard to Freud’s project. If we agree with von Bertalanﬀy ,
we might suggest that the primary reason Freud’s “project” fai led
was because he tried to explain the operation of the system base d
entirely on the basic principles of operation of the base elemen ts
(his description of speciﬁc types of neurons and the energy
transfer between them). Essentially, we might say that he fai led
because he did not recognize the core insight of systems theo ry
and HRO, which is that the basic energic interactions between
types of neurons that he described in “the Project” should giv e
rise to an entirely new form of (superordinate) organization , not
fully explained by the basic energic interactions he describe d. We
might agree with Freud’s idea in “the Project” that the princi ples
that organize the psyche and behavior might emerge from the
more basic principles of energic interaction of neurons, but ra ther
we should not agree that they can be fully explained by the
principles governing that basic interaction.
THE EXAMPLE OF THE PLEASURE
PRINCIPLE AND PSYCHIC ENERGY
To illustrate the importance of this distinction, a good example
might be that of the pleasure principle in psychoanalysis,
which is the tendency of the psyche to maximize pleasure and
minimize unpleasure (
Freud, 1911/1963 ). It is important to note
that the pleasure principle appears to operate as a relatively
fundamental principle ordering human behavior and psychic lif e,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
and so we might think of it as an important “top-down” or
superordinate form of regulatory principle. However, from the
beginning of his theorizing about the pleasure principle, Freu d
attempted to generate a bottom-up explanation for it through
basic processes of energic interactions of neurons, with his theory
of psychic energy. In “the Project” (1950), he initially stat ed that
a discharge of energy from the neurons was pleasurable, while
an “accumulation” of energy was unpleasurable. However, aft er
the diﬃculties met in “the Project, ” this link between pleasu re
and energic principles already began to fray in chapter 7 of “The
Interpretation of Dreams” (1900/1991) where Freud suggeste d
that discharges of energy could sometimes also be unpleasura ble
to the psyche and the preconscious gate somehow became the
decisive process that allowed pleasurable discharge but oppose d
unpleasurable discharge, though as stated above, Freud coul d
not oﬀer a bottom-up physiological description in that text for
how the preconscious gate might make that distinction.
Freud
(1920/1955) returned to this problem in “Beyond the Pleasure
Principle” where he deﬁned bound and unbound states of energy
(cathexis) but in the same paper he questioned whether pleasure
and unpleasure could be deﬁned in terms of bound or unbound
energy. In that paper he then made an interesting suggestion
that pleasure may be linked to the rate of change of discharge,
but never developed that idea further in his work (though the
reader is referred to an exploration of this topic from the FEP
perspective, where the intensity of emotion as well as its posit ive
or negative valence, is linked to the rate of change of free en ergy,
found in
Joﬃly and Coricelli, 2013 ).
Thus, the failure of adequately linking the pleasure principle
with energic processes may be an example of the problem deﬁned
above, in that the pleasure principle may emerge from basic
energic interactions between neurons but can’t be fully desc ribed
by these. The same can be said for the energic theory itself. F reud
had high hopes for his energic theory: in “the Project” (1950) he
claimed that the tendency toward discharge was the fundamen tal
motivation of all thought, emotion and behavior, and energi c
principles are recognized as a core metapsychological foundat ion
of psychoanalysis (
Rapaport and Gill, 1959 ). However, after
his diﬃculties in describing energy as a neuronal physiologi cal
quantity in the project, he no longer attempted to describe it
in terms of cathexis of Qn in neurons, despite continuing to
use concepts of cathexis, binding and discharge for much of
his career. Like the pleasure principle, energic concepts becam e
described as “top-down” organizing principles of the nervous
system that were not adequately described in terms of how
they emerged from the basic interactions of the nervous syst em
elements.
A central purpose of this paper is to demonstrate how
useful the concept of HRO can be in linking these bottom-
up and top-down levels, and indeed, this concept can address
this problem of the emergence of organizing principles such as
the pleasure principle. We could reformulate our deﬁnition of
psychoanalytic principles of regulation of the psyche such as th e
pleasure principle (or another like it) as a recursively higher level
of organization of the nervous system, that must nonetheles s
emerge from the basic interactions of the nerves themselves .
While we might say that the pleasure principle (as formulated
by
Freud, 1911/1963 ) cannot violate the basic principles of
organization of the nerves and their interaction, it also can not
be adequately modeled by those basic principles of interaction .
This diﬀerence of organizational levels is proposed as the key
reason for the failure of “the Project” (
Freud, 1950 ), as well
as the diﬃculty faced by Freud throughout his career (and by
many subsequent psychoanalytic writers) to link the principle s
of organization of the psyche with those of the basic interact ions
of the nervous system. Had Freud been armed with a recursive
epistemology, he would probably not have tried to write “the
Project” or rather, may have taken a diﬀerent approach to the
material.
RECURSIVE EPISTEMOLOGY AND THE
PROBLEM OF DIFFERENT PRINCIPLES OF
ORGANIZATION AT PHYSICAL AND
MENTAL LEVELS
Beyond this example of the pleasure principle and basic
interactions of neurons, it can be stated that the underlyin g
problem is really a deeper one which is the relationship betwee n
the principles which organize the structure of the body (inclu ding
the nervous system) with those that appear to regulate the mind ,
and subjective experience. We could restate this particular as pect
of the mind-body problem as a statement that the mind occupies
a higher (superordinate) level of recursive organization in the
person than the body does. However, this statement by itself
doesn’t add much to our understanding, beyond implying certa in
assumptions about the superordinate/subordinate relations hips
between the levels. What is needed is a more speciﬁc analysis o f
the principles of organization occurring at these diﬀerent lev els
and deﬁning a process whereby the emergence of the recursivel y
higher level is explained.
The idea that mind and body, or mind and nervous system,
occupy diﬀerent levels of organization of the same system is no t a
new idea in psychoanalysis; a number of authors have not only
expressed such a viewpoint but also attempted to reformulate
some core psychoanalytic concepts from this viewpoint, notabl y
including work by
Grossman (1992) , Seligman (2005) as well
as Rosenblatt and Thickstun (1970, 1977, 1984) . However,
despite these eﬀorts, systems theory epistemology, and recursi ve
organization in particular, has never gained meaningful vis ibility
in the mainstream of psychoanalytic (or neuropsychoanalytic )
thinking.
However, the rapidly growing interest in the FEP may indeed
demand a better understanding of these systems concepts from
those members of the psychoanalytic community interested in
the FEP. Friston’s FEP is so important to psychoanalysis becaus e
it reﬂects a critical step forward to solving the problem of
diﬀering principles of organization at neural and psychologica l
levels. It is the purpose of the present paper to demonstrate
how this is so, as well as the necessity of a concept of
recursive organization in order to make sense of the level of
organization that Dr. Friston’s work belongs to, and a corre ct
understanding of its relationship to the level of constructs central
to psychoanalysis. This is necessary not only to recognize th e
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
powerful potential that the FEP has as a core metapsychological
principle within psychoanalysis, but also to avoid overstatin g
its role, and recognize the limitations the principle has for
application within psychoanalysis as well. In order lay the
groundwork to clarify this role of the FEP in the psychoanalyt ic
scheme, we will clarify what is meant by a recursive descripti on of
the psyche, by following the indications expressed by
Grobbelaar
(1989).
RECURSIVE LEVELS OF ORGANIZATION
IN PSYCHOANALYSIS
Grobbelaar (1989) stated that:
“... the view which is currently maintained by convention can be
seen to constitute some sort of hierarchy with at its lowest le vel the
inorganic domain, at the next level the organic, and ﬁnally at the
highest level, the informational domain (
Stoker, 1969 ). Although
the components and their properties diﬀer from one level to the
next, the person as a system is constituted by the relations whi ch
obtain between the components at the same level as well as betwee n
components on diﬀerent levels which deﬁnes the person as a unit y.
Furthermore it is clear that the organization at the lowest lev el sets
the parameters for the recursive ordering of components/element s
at the next level, so that the organization at the inorganic leve l
will be reﬂected in a general way at the organic level, and in
an even more indirect way at the informational level... Freudian
theory is an attempt to identify the common human patterns at
the inorganic and organic levels which determine the information al
(psychological). . . . Freudian theory furthermore hypothesize d that,
at the inorganic level, the principles of organization which e merge
from the energic interactions are the tendencies towards tension
reduction and homeostasis, which are reﬂected at the organic level
as the pleasure principle, and at the psychological level as the
hallucinatory wish-fulﬁlment and the process Freud described as
censorship.” (p. 134–136)
What Grobbelaar is attempting to do in this quotation is show
how the processes at the psychological level are founded upon
processes at work on the organic level of organization which
are themselves founded upon processes at the inorganic level. It
should be noted that it is not inevitable that these three lev els
should be used to describe the human as a system.
Bateson (1978)
suggests an inﬁnite regress of levels, and that the observer selects
the levels of description. However, besides selecting these for
the purposes of convention, these three levels are signiﬁcant ,
precisely because they appear so diﬀerent in their organization :
organic life appears to be so diﬀerent from the inorganic matter
we observe around us, and human consciousness in turn seems
so markedly diﬀerent from the self-regulation of most biologi cal
organisms, though that diﬀerence might be less marked than we
believe in many cases.
What such a recursive description of the organization of the
human organism necessitates, is a theoretical perspective th at
shows how regulatory principles of the psychoanalytic mind are
related to the regulatory principles of biological self-orga nization
at the organic level, which themselves should be related to
regulatory principles at an inorganic level. The key propositio n of
this paper is that Friston’s FEP (working in concert with evolu tion
through natural selection which is discussed later) represe nts
a fundamental principle of biological self-organization whi ch
has not only been shown to have consilience with fundamental
propositions of psychoanalysis (
Hopkins, 2012; Connolly, 2016 ),
but which is shown to be founded upon regulatory principles at
the inorganic level as well (
Friston and Stephan, 2007; Friston,
2013).
Figure 1 presents a three-level recursive description of
psychoanalytic regulatory principles that is inﬂuenced by
Grobbelaar’s (1989) description (and a similar model found
in Connolly, 2016 ), which demonstrates this hierarchical
relationship. A brief narrative description of the diagram wo uld
start from the bottom, and run as follows: inorganic element s
(atoms and molecules), interact with one another (within th e
constraints of thermodynamic principles), and come to genera te
a new form of organization which is organic, or biological
self-organization (which operates within the constraints of the
FEP , itself constrained by natural selection, described la ter). The
predictions encoded within the organization of the body (and
after an evolutionary step, the nervous system) eventually c ome
to be “aggregated” in the sense of a self-organizing generati ve
model, understood here to be the ego, which is regulated in tur n
by its own principles, such as the pleasure principle or following
Connolly (2016), a tendency to maintain its own organization.
The bi-directional arrows are to indicate that the inﬂuence
then becomes top-down as well, so that the behavior of body
(including its inorganic components) come to be regulated by
psychological level components, though in a way which does not
violate the principles of FE and thermodynamics which regulat e
the lower levels.
The place of Friston’s FEP in this scheme is to formalize
biological self-organization, which means it provides a const raint
within which all informational exchange processes within an
organism take place (
Friston, 2012 ). As a result, the level above
(which is psychological) cannot violate the FEP. However, as will
be discussed next, new organizational principles emerge at th is
level, so that it is not fully explained by the FEP. These principl es
are elaborated upon in the next few sections.
FIGURE 1 |Three levels of recursive description of organization of ps ychical
phenomena.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
FROM INORGANIC FOUNDATIONS TO
BIOLOGICAL SELF-ORGANIZATION
While an engagement with levels of organization within
the inorganic realm is beyond the scope of this paper,
thermodynamic principles are nonetheless signiﬁcant at the
level of matter at which organic life occurs, and a discussio n
of their relationship with biological self-organization c an be
found in
Friston and Stephan (2007) . Their text states that
biological systems are special in the natural universe becau se they
appear to violate the second law of thermodynamics which is
the tendency toward entropy: biological systems seem to show
increasing levels of organization in their development rath er than
a tendency toward entropy. However, this apparent violation
is just apparent—biological systems do not violate the second
law but rather display a form of organization (the FEP) that
is akin to the ﬂuctuation theorems that underlie stochastic
thermodynamics. These generalize the second law. As we will s ee
later, the FEP is eﬀectively an example of Hamilton’s principle
of least action. In order to develop an understanding of Fris ton’s
FEP of biological self-organization, a related verbal mode l (from
Maturana and Varela, 1980 ) is oﬀered next.
Humberto Maturana, a Chilean biologist was once asked by
a student : “‘What began three thousand eight hundred million
years ago so that you can say now that living systems began
then?”’(
Maturana, 2002 , p. 6). He realized that to answer it,
he would have to identify what a living system is, and what
makes it a living system. In trying to answer the question, he
ﬁrst made the assumption that living systems were “closed”
in the sense of having an operational boundary (though being
thermodynamically “open”). He then focused on the circulari ty
of the basic metabolic reactions:
“. . . nucleic acids participate with proteins in the synthesis of
proteins, and that proteins participate as enzymes with nuclei c
acids in the synthesis of nucleic acids, all together constitut ing
a discrete circular dynamics. . . . As I was drawing a diagram
of this circularity, I exclaimed ‘This is it! This is the minimal
expression of the circular closed dynamics of molecular productio ns
that makes living systems discrete autonomous molecular syste ms.”’
(
Maturana, 2002, p. 7)
From this insight, together with Varela, he coined the term
“autopoiesis, ” which means “self-making.” In other words, w hat
constitutes a living system is two conditions. First, a boun dary
that creates a closed autonomous molecular structure (despi te
being thermodynamically open to ﬂow of molecules in the
environment). Second, a process of self-making, where a dyna mic
circular process takes place in which the components of the
process build or maintain a structure which in turn generates
the components. While this autopoietic system is closed in
the sense of its organization, it is nonetheless open to the
ﬂow of molecules in the environment which participate in
this self-making, and without which it would cease (
Maturana
and Varela, 1980; Maturana, 2002 ). This dependence of the
autopoietic organization on the conditions in the environme nt
led him to coin the term structural coupling.
Maturana deﬁned living systems as structure-determined
systems, in that their behavior is determined by their struc ture.
However, that structure is occurring within a medium (or
environment) and is recursively constituted from moment to
moment by interactions with that medium, such that a change
in one must imply a change in the other (
Maturana and Varela,
1980; Maturana, 2002 ).
It could be said of the FEP that what it formalizes is the
structural coupling of autopoietic systems. In the following
section, the FEP is brieﬂy introduced in a manner to highligh t
its similarity to a concept of structural coupling as a principle of
biological self-organization.
FRISTON’S FEP AS STRUCTURAL
COUPLING
The FEP describes how a range of biological phenomena
unfolding over time can be described as the minimization of t he
error between the predictions aﬀorded by a generative model
of the causes of a living system’s inputs and the inputs being
predicted. To state it in another way, the organism’s structu re
encodes a model of its environment (the generative model),
and over time, this generative model should become a better
and better predictor of the system’s inputs (instigated by the
environment). The minimization of this error term can be
accomplished through two routes, one being the “Bayesian”
updating of the generative model (to provide better error
resolving predictions), the other being through the system t aking
an action to alter the inputs, and thereby bringing the system’ s
sensory samples in line with predictions. While the bulk of
the research that Friston and colleagues have done with the
FEP have focused on describing neurophysiological processes,
the principle is understood as having applications well beyond
neurophysiology, and applicable to a broader biological scien ce,
including being applicable to organisms without nervous syst ems
(
Friston, 2010b, 2012 ).
From the above deﬁnition, a strong consilience can be
seen between the FEP , and Maturana’s formulation regarding
structural coupling, where the structure of the organism is
continuously constituted through recursive interactions with the
environment. Further, Friston’s FEP has shown to provide a
basis for modeling Maturana’s concept of autopoiesis itself. In a
paper entitled “Life as we know it, ”
Friston (2013) shows how
the formation of living systems (including a simple form of
autopoiesis) can be modeled using free energy minimization wit h
only two assumptions.
The ﬁrst assumption is ergodicity, which is that, over a
suﬃciently long time-period, the average amount of time a
system spends within an accessible state is proportionate to th e
probability of ﬁnding the system in the state. In the language
of random dynamical systems, this is equivalent to saying tha t
the system has a random dynamical attractor; namely, a set of
states that the system frequents with a high probability. The
second assumption is the existence of a “Markov blanket, ” whic h
corresponds to the boundary described above:
Friston (2013)
states that should a boundary exist where relations on one sid e are
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
conditionally independent on inﬂuences outside the boundar y,
this boundary will come to constitute a Markov blanket throu gh
which the internal states of a system exchange with external
(environmental) states. This exchange can be formulated as an
inﬂuence of the environment (external states) on the system
(internal states) that is mediated by sensory components of
the Markov blanket. Conversely, the inﬂuence of the system
(internal states) on the environment (external states) is m ediated
by the active components of the Markov blanket. Note again the
emergence of circular causality that has all the hallmarks o f a
perception and action cycle.
The existence of the Markov blanket (that separates the
system from the environment in which it is immersed) implies
ergodicity of the entire partition (into external states, in ternal
states and their Markov blanket). In turn, this requires the
internal states to minimize free energy as a necessary condi tion
for the preservation of the Markov blanket. The particular aspe ct
of free energy minimization, from the perspective of psycholog y
and psychoanalysis, is that free energy is not just a function
of states, it is a function of the probability distributions o f
Bayesian beliefs that are entailed (i.e., encoded) by inter nal
states. Technically, this means the free energy is a functio n of a
function or a functional. The key issue here is that the impera tives
for self-organization are now framed in terms of probabilist ic
inference and beliefs. This follows from the fact that the fr ee
energy provides a proxy or bound approximation for Bayesian
model evidence. Put simply, minimizing free energy necessar ily
maximizes the evidence for a system’s (generative) model of
environmental (external) states 1. Given the circular causality
above (e.g., action perception cycles), this means any system with
a Markov blanket will appear to gather evidence for its own
existence; which has been called self-evidencing (
Hohwy, 2016)—
and is closely related to early theories of self-organizati on such as
the good regulator theorem ( Conant and Ashby, 1970 ).
It is evident that this notion of a Markov blanket is, formally ,
very similar to Maturana’s assumption of a closed boundary
condition for the formation of a living system. From this,
Friston concludes that the formation of living systems is al most
inevitable in a universe that provides ergodicity and the exi stence
of Markov blankets. Such blankets (surrounding open self-
organizing processes) may be ubiquitous in the universe but
the Markov blankets associated with living systems may have a
particular form of hierarchical self-assembly that correspo nds to
the self-making referred to by
Maturana (2002) , rather than just
self-organization which occurs throughout the natural universe.
The claims made by Maturana are not precisely the same as
that made by the FEP , and are a verbal principle rather than
the precise mathematical principle that is the FEP. However,
Friston et al. (2015) have suggested that active inference can be
viewed as a formalization of autopoiesis. The present purpose
of drawing parallels between Maturana’s theory and the FEP
is to present an accessible verbal principle related to the FEP
which allows its place within a recursive description of the mi nd
to be perceived. From this section, it is hoped that the reader
can see that what is most precisely described by the FEP is a
1My thanks to Dr Karl Friston for his helpful remarks in clarifying ergod icity,
Markov blankets and free energy.
process of biological self-organization, rather than being a purely
“neurocentric” principle ( Friston, 2010b ), and for this reason
it is presented as a fundamental constraint organizing organi c
systems in the current description.
THE ROLE OF EVOLUTION THROUGH
NATURAL SELECTION
A key question that might be raised at this point is the role
of evolution through natural selection (NS is used hencefort h).
Thus far, the paper has presented the FEP as the key principle of
organization of biological systems, despite a wealth of eviden ce
suggesting that the structure of organisms including the ne rvous
system and human behavioral tendencies have been shaped by
evolution through natural selection (
Cartwright, 2016 ). For this
reason, care is taken to try to explain the relationship betwe en the
FEP and NS adopted by this paper and the useful role that HRO
can have in clarifying this relationship as well.
Within the biological realm, where the FEP is operative,
HRO of biological systems becomes constrained by the FEP ,
such that the FEP may be described as a superordinate
organizational principle which entrains (and constrains) HRO,
resulting in further hierarchical organization being reﬂe cted
in the structure of the organism, and most relevantly, the
hierarchical organization of the structure of the brain, su ch
as the layers of the mammalian cortex. The role of NS can
be considered superordinate to the FEP in a similar way. In
essence, once organisms are characterized by a cycle of life ,
reproduction and death—and provided there is some measure
of environmental order inﬂuencing selection of survival an d
reproduction—survival of the ﬁttest comes to act as a recursi ve
feedback loop slowly operating at a population level, through
each generational iteration. This results in a new organiza tional
principle entraining the operation of the FEP (and thereby HRO
as well), such that the organic phenotypes that exist now reﬂect
this inﬂuence by NS. At the same time, the NS principle cannot
violate the FEP , and as suggested by
Hobson and Friston (2016) ,
evolution can be understood as minimizing the free energy of
speciﬁc phenotypes. As such, the diﬀerent organizing principles
of FE and NS are understood here as not in competition with
one another, and though hierarchically arranged, all operat e in
organizing the organism and its behavioral tendencies 2.
Regarding the relationship of NS with the regulatory
principles of psychoanalysis, connections have been made
between the level of organization in psychoanalysis with that
of natural selection (
Hopkins, 2003, 2004, 2015 ; Hopkins,
“Group conﬂict and group violence: a perspective from Freud
and Darwin, ” forthcoming). A good example is found in
Hopkins (2004; Hopkins, “Group conﬂict and group violence:
a perspective from Freud and Darwin, ” forthcoming), where
he describes an organizational principle emerging from natur al
selection, which is the tendency toward outgroup aggressio n,
which shows how the survival advantage granted by group
identiﬁcation (and outgroup aggression) may underlie the
2My thanks to reviewer Professor Jim Hopkins for helping with the dev elopment of
this reading of the relationship between the FEP and NS, by pressin g my thoughts
of the role of HRO and the FEP in this direction.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
evolution of mechanisms of projection and introjection desc ribed
by psychoanalysis.
This description of the relationship between the FEP and
NS requires much more detailed discussion than is given here .
However, this paper focuses on the speciﬁc role played by
the FEP in the hierarchical self-organization of the organi sm,
and particularly its relevance as a foundation of psychoanaly tic
principles of self-regulation. This speciﬁc and unique importa nce
of the FEP lies in how it constrains HRO in a scale-free manner
within a recursive hierarchy of levels of organization in th e
brain, and the nature of message passing between them, which
is addressed later.
THE SCALE-FREE NATURE OF THE FEP IN
THE BEHAVIOR OF BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
The concept of a scale-free principle is one that applies to all
possible levels of scale of a phenomenon at hand (
Mitchell,
2009). In other words, we would say that the principle holds
no matter the scale at which you observe a phenomenon. What
this means for the FEP , is that no matter at what scale you
observe biological systems, the FEP should not be violated. In
other words, the FEP can be observed at the level of single cell s, or
any components they are made of (e.g., mitochondria, dendrit es),
at the level of organs, systems and whole organisms (Friston ,
personal communication, 13th July 2015). At a neural level alo ne,
the FEP may apply over a short time span to the activity of
neurons, and over a longer time span to the reorganization of
neural connections (
Friston et al., 2006 ).
A large number of empirical ﬁndings have begun to show
the variety of phenomena that can be described using the
FEP formulation. These include the hierarchical deployment
of cortical areas, neuromodulatory gain control and associ ative
plasticity, receptive ﬁeld eﬀects, components of evoked cortic al
responses, and on a cognitive level, perceptual categorizatio n,
temporal sequencing and attention (
Friston, 2010b ). Such
research is ongoing, and it is likely that this is just the beg inning,
and that there will be a substantial increase in phenomena
described by the FEP , over the next years.
This apparent scale free perspective supports the notion of
HRO adopted in this text, as it suggests that any hierarchicall y
superordinate forms of organization that may develop within
biological organisms, should nonetheless not violate the b asic
organizing principle of this organic level which is the FEP. Jus t
as there is no action a human system can take which violates
the principles of thermodynamics, so there is no action a human
system can take which (viewed over a suﬃciently long period) c an
violate the FEP. If you knew exactly what to measure and how
to measure it, you could show that a person’s action or thought
always minimizes FE, at least when averaged over an adequate
time period (technically, the average of an energy is known as
a Hamiltonian action; this means that the free energy principl e
is a statement of Hamilton’s principle of least action). Thoug h
it may be that a human system does something that appears to
raise the overall level of FE in their system in the short term , the
eﬀect may be compared to dropping a ball and the principle of
gravity: when it bounces and travels upwards it appears to viola te
the gravity principle, but over time, it will obey the principle ( a
similar comparison for the principle of psychic energy was found
in
Galatzer-Levy, 1983).
CAN ALL HUMAN BEHAVIOR BE
MODELED BY THE FEP?
The above section would seem to imply that all the behavior
comprising a human living system is subject to the FEP , which i s
indeed correct. However, while it could be claimed that the FEP
as a working principle is not violated at any levels of organiza tion
of the human system (above the inorganic), this does not mean
that all phenomena in a human living system are appropriately
modeled using the FEP. This distinction can be displayed with an
analogy.
Newton’s second law of motion, force equal mass times
acceleration (F = ma), should apply to the movement of all
physical bodies in space, within particular limits in terms of m ass,
gravity and so on. However, if an engineer was supposed to model
the complex operation of forces moving through the structure
of a jet airplane as it ﬂies through atmosphere, armed only with
the model F = ma, it would prove to be a wildly impractical
task. This would require a complete knowledge of every vector of
force at work on and within the structure of the airplane at eve ry
moment, as well as perfect theoretical knowledge of how those
vectors will operate from moment to moment. In other words,
our engineer would need additional principles, in the form of
models of “aggregate” processes such as lift, drag, stress dyn amics,
turbulence and others. These aggregate models involve diﬀer ent
equations than that of F = ma, though none of them can violate
this foundational model.
For human behaviors at the level of interest of psychoanalysis
(for example actions, speech, thoughts, dreams and so on), the
situation is comparable. While the previous section has descr ibed
how human behavior and psychological processes at all levels
cannot violate the FEP , if one were expected to model the
complexity of human behavior and thought armed only with the
FEP equation, it would be an equally wildly impractical task.
One would need to know to know the exact state of activity of
the entire nervous system (and indeed the entire body), as we ll
as a comprehensive range of precise theoretical principles for
how this state will progress from moment to moment (including
how these states relate to thoughts, emotions and behaviors a t
the observable level). Just as in the analogy of the jet aircra ft
above, one would need to have a range of additional principles
that model such aggregates of activity that hold at the level
of interest.
The view of this paper is that the propositions of
psychoanalytic theory (such as transference, repression or
splitting) reﬂect such models at this higher level of organiza tion,
similar to lift, drag and turbulence in the engineering analo gy. In
the long term, the challenge is to demonstrate the relationsh ip
of these models to the foundational organization of the FEP
through a recursive description of the levels of organizatio n
superordinate to the FEP , up to and beyond consciousness. This
task is returned to later in this paper.
However, a question the reader might have at this point would
be to ask how levels of organization of the human system that
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
are superordinate to the FEP , can be subject to the FEP without
being suﬃciently modeled by the FEP. It is hoped that these
two sections have shown that it is no contradiction at all. Wh ile
there is nothing a human can do that can violate the second
law of thermodynamics, that law is hardly enough to model
human behavior. While the organizational principle of the FEP
is much closer to the level of interest that is psychoanalysis ,
the same limitation applies. The FEP does nonetheless retain
some inﬂuence over superordinate levels through feedback lo ops,
throughout the levels of recursion.
FRISTON’S FEP AS A MODEL OF
RECURSIVE ORGANIZATION OF
HIERARCHY IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
The diagram in Figure 2 below demonstrates a hierarchical
and recursive description of organization in the nervous
system found in predictive coding formulations of Friston’s
FEP , whereby surprise or prediction error messages progress
“upwards” through the hierarchical generative model to
successively higher levels of abstraction, which respond wi th
“downwards” predictions.
As stated earlier,
Friston (2010a) has suggested that higher
level predictions refer to increasing levels of abstraction . As
suggested in Hobson et al. (2014) :
“Many of the interesting insights oﬀered by equating conscio usness
with the process of inference rest on the hierarchical nature
FIGURE 2 |Hierarchical organization of message passing in the brain, from
Seth and Friston (2016) . This illustrates the recursive message passing it
implied by predictive coding formulations of free energy mi nimization; where in
prediction errors are passed up the hierarchy and predict io ns are sent down
to cancel prediction errors. The blue circles and arrows den ote precision that
controls the inﬂuence of ascending predict ion errors. Here, precision
corresponds to the inverse variability or conﬁdence assigne d to prediction
errors.
of generative or virtual reality models. In hierarchical models,
inference can be decomposed into multiple levels, with progres sively
higher or deeper levels of representational abstraction or
explanation. This leads to the distinction between inferences a t
low levels of sensory hierarchies—that can be associated with
unconscious inference in the sense of
Helmholtz (1866/1962)—and
at higher levels that could be associated with conscious perc epts
and concepts. Consider now a further hierarchical level that
predicts (and selects) the particular trajectory that is enacted.
This level may generate top-down predictions of propriocepti ve
trajectories and their visual consequences. In other words, we
have moved beyond simple motor representations to a hierarch ical
level where expectations (neuronal activity and their associated
beliefs) are quintessentially sensorimotor in nature. At thi s level,
the multimodal nature of descending predictions (aka corollary
discharge) renders the expectations amodal. Would these constit ute
conscious experience? One could argue that these high-level,
dynamically structured beliefs are much closer to phenomenal
consciousness. Furthermore, if we now equip our hierarchical
model with models that distinguish between the consequences
of self-made acts and the acts of others, we start to get closer to
conceptual expectations of the sort that may underlie subjectiv e
consciousness.”
This account suggests that the predictive model is organized at
multiple nested layers, all of which are inﬂuenced by the FEP
through this recursive feedback process. As suggested earli er in
this paper, the FEP comes to constrain HRO in the development
of the structure of the human organism, and in the nervous
system in particular, such that each recursively higher leve l of
organization found in the body and especially in the brain, com es
to have Markov characteristics, which implies that each leve l has
self-organizing characteristics, and tries to minimize it s own free
energy. Note that this hierarchical nature of the generativ e model
induces Markov blankets between diﬀerent hierarchical leve ls,
which mediate a circular causality through recurrent messa ge
passing between levels. The existence of a Markov blankets wit hin
the brain aﬀords the opportunity for higher levels in the brain
to make inferences about lower levels (c.f., metacognition , self-
modeling and consciousness). However, while all these levels are
inﬂuenced by the FEP through these recursive feedback loops, it
is an error to suggest that the processes at all of these levels of
recursion are fully explained by the FEP. A helpful example here
would be natural selection. Although the principles of natura l
selection can be applied to all processes of biological evoluti on,
simply knowing these principles does not help explain the
emergence of particular phenotypic traits or constructs such as
convergent evolution, speciation and other emergent properti es
such as selection for selectability (
Kauﬀman and Johnsen, 1991;
Kauﬀman, 1993; Knobloch, 2001; Frank, 2012; Campbell, 2016 ).
THE LIMITS OF THE FEP IN MODELING
CONSCIOUSNESS AND PSYCHIC
EXPERIENCE
Friston (2008) has suggested that the multitude of nested levels
of organization within the nervous system each have Markov
properties, which implies that each level has some degree of
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
self-organization. This also implies that each level would r equire
additional principles of organization (beyond the FEP) in ord er
to be adequately described. As consciousness occupies one of the
highest levels of recursion within the organization of the b rain
(Hobson et al., 2014 ), all of these subsidiary nested levels (with
their own unique organizing principles) would in turn inﬂuenc e
the organization of consciousness. As such, the very high le vel of
complexity involved in the organization of conscious experie nce
is practically not able to be modeled by Friston’s FEP equatio n.
This qualiﬁcation seems important, as psychologists
(including psychoanalysts) are often opposed to reductionist
models of conscious experience, partly because they are so
abstracted from the experience itself, but often more becaus e
reductionist models often simply cannot explain the complexity
of their clients’ experience. In this regard, they are entire ly
correct, as the previous paragraph has attempted to clarify.
At the same time, however, it might be said that a therapist’s
perception of the complexity of their client and their lived
experience should not be reduced by the acceptance that the
client’s psychic processes cannot violate the FEP , just as it s hould
also not be reduced by accepting that client’s body cannot vio late
thermodynamic laws. Extraordinary levels of complexity are
possible within the broader constraints of thermodynamics a s
well as the FEP , which in turn require detailed analysis at the
level of interest as well as the proximal inﬂuences of sub- and
super-ordinate levels of description.
The generations of work in psychoanalysis to document the
principles which seem to inﬂuence people’s conscious experience
and behavior, as well as the insights gained through clinica l
examination and self-reﬂection, are understood here as att empts
to generate models of the organization of the phenomena of
conscious and unconscious processes. These insights (and th e
models they represent) cannot be abandoned in favor of a far
more foundational principle which is the FEP , for much the same
reason as we should not abandon the use of the abstractions of
integral calculus in favor of using the simpler language of li near
algebra, to follow an analogy found in
Rosenblatt and Thickstun
(1984).
However, like Freud (1898/1985) , we cannot aﬀord to leave
these insights “ﬂoating in the air” in a completely abstract
theoretical space unconnected with any organic foundation.
Following a call by
Grobbelaar (1989), these models of experience
and behavior at the psychoanalytic level of interest need to
be reformulated within a new language that demonstrates the
foundations of their organization within a recursive descr iption,
which has its foundations at the biological level.
The complexity of diﬀerentiation within the physical structur e
of the human body is huge, and there are also already a
large number of models within the biological ﬁeld that predict
processes within this diﬀerentiated structure. Likewise, th e
diﬀerentiation within the brain is also highly complex. Follow ing
Bateson (1978) , there are potentially inﬁnite levels of regress in
such descriptions, and it is neither possible nor even desirab le to
build a complete picture of every possible level of organic and
neural organization superordinate to the basic level of biolo gical
organization which is the FEP , up to the level of interest whi ch
is here psychoanalysis. Rather, it is desirable to identify s ome of
the most signiﬁcant forms of organization that are foundati onal
to psychoanalysis, but superordinate to the FEP , which can bui ld
an intelligible bridge between the two. The description provi ded
by
Grobbelaar (1989) provides a useful example of a recursive
description of this kind which may illustrate a way forward.
A RECURSIVE DESCRIPTION OF THE
REPRESENTATIONAL ORGANIZATION OF
CONSCIOUS EXPERIENCE
Grobbelaar (1989) oﬀered a critique of Freud’s account of the
organization of consciousness (in terms of how psychic mater ial
does or does not become conscious), in that it did not oﬀer a
bottom-up recursive description:
“As it stands now, Freud’s formulation of the process of censor ship
deﬁnes it as an ad hoc defensive manoeuvre by one system, the
ego, against another system, the unconscious, to stop dangero us
elements (dangerous to the organization of the ego) from enterin g
the ego. One should rather formulate from the bottom to the top,
that is, in a theoretical sense. One should begin by deﬁning the
inherent qualities in the lower-order elements which . . . make i t
impossible for them to be taken up in a higher order system . . . .”
(p. 142)
He also states:
“ . . . the principles determining the perception of thoughts w ill
be inherent in the thoughts themselves. Stated diﬀerently, if the
organization of the ideational domain does not allow for the
representation of certain ideas, thoughts or memories, then t hey
cannot become conscious.” (pp. 139–140)
In describing the principles inherent in thoughts which allow (or
don’t allow) them access to conscious,
Grobbelaar (1989) refers to
a comment made by Breuer in “Studies on hysteria” which refer s
to the notion that the quantity of aﬀect attached to the though ts,
and the pleasure or unpleasure that that quantity of aﬀect forms
part of, determines their capacity to enter consciousness (
Freud
and Breuer, 1895/2004 ). This is related to Freud’s notions that
only suﬃciently cathected thoughts or perceptions can enter
consciousness (
Freud, 1900/1991, 1950 ).
It can be noted at this stage that this determinant of the
level of aﬀect (or perhaps cathexis rather) has good consilience
with
Friston’s (2010a) hierarchical description, which suggests
that only information that is suﬃciently surprising (or rath er
with suﬃcient gain, due to weighted precisions of surprise)
can activate the predictions at the highest level of organiza tion,
which may be consciousness. Information that is insuﬃcient ly
surprising is “automated” in the sense that it is suﬃciently
explained by predictions at lower hierarchical levels of the m odel,
and does not elicit these higher-level predictions of consci ousness
(
Hobson et al., 2014 ).
However, besides this requirement of the quantity of aﬀect,
Grobbelaar (1989) also points toward a comment made by Freud
(1915/1957) in “The unconscious” where unconscious elements
can only become pre-conscious through being connected with
words:
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
“The system unconscious contains the thing-cathexes of the
objects, the ﬁrst and true object-cathexes; the system Pcs com es
about by this thing presentation being hypercathected thro ugh being
linked with the word presentations corresponding to it.” ( Freud,
1915/1957, pp. 200–201)
Grobbelaar (1989) suggests that this formulation found in
Freud (1915/1957) “The unconscious” is based on a much
earlier paper on aphasia ( Freud, 1891/1953 ) in which Freud
suggests that a word-presentation is built up of a sound-imag e
(auditory), the letter-image (visual), the motor-speech im age
(kinaesthetic) and the visual- and motor-writing image (vi sual
and kinaesthetic) which become associated with one another
through experience. Freud then states that the object present ation
is built up in a similar way from kinaesthetic, visual and aud itory
experiences, and becomes linked to word presentation through
associative learning, allowing for the object to reach cons cious
representation. The heart of Grobbelaar’s argument is that t his
process can be described as a recursive one:
“This process constitutes a recursive ordering of discrete e lements of
experience through successive acts of integration with new el ements
which progressively constitute the raw sense data at higher l evels of
psychological functioning.” (
Grobbelaar, 1989, p. 147)
Grobelaar’s account of hierarchical levels of representati on
separated by boundaries here bears very strong similarity to a
later paper by Grossman (1992) who also utilized Freud’s paper
on aphasia to build a similar argument. What Grossman (1992)
argued is that Freud’s theorizing suggests just such an unde rlying
hierarchical model which involves discrete hierarchicall y deﬁned
systems with their own boundaries, where information at one
level moves across boundaries as “representation” in anothe r
bounded system. At this point, it is hoped that the reader
can observe the special and unique role that the FEP can
play in such a description of the Freudian mind proposed by
Grobbelaar (1989) and Grossman (1992) . The FEP is useful
here because it speciﬁes just such a regulatory principle of
the emergence of HRO within the nervous system, where
hierarchically superordinate layers that emerge in the nerv ous
system obtain self-organizing or Markov characteristics, and
where message passing between layers is represented “upwards”
as prediction error in progressively higher levels, and downw ards
as predictions (and the precisions of those predictions) to
progressively lower levels. However, while the FEP provides
a basis for formulating a HRO model of organization in the
nervous system, it does not explain the speciﬁc operation of
each of those levels and what they contribute toward the over all
functioning of the system. What would be needed would be
a description of the most relevant and proximal layers that
most closely inﬂuence the level of interest which is that of
psychoanalytic regulatory principles.
Grobbelaar does indeed go further in terms of oﬀering such
an example of a recursive description of the kind he calls for,
represented diagrammatically in Figure 3 below.
In this diagram,
Grobbelaar (1989) is presenting a recursive
description of the organization of conscious experience whic h
FIGURE 3 |A recursive description of consciousness organized by lang uage,
after Grobbelaar (1989) .
suggests that psychic material can only become conscious whe n
it can be represented at successively higher levels of organi zation.
Conversely, any psychic material which is not integrated int o
the (recursive and hierarchical) organization cannot beco me
conscious. Following the dependence of consciousness on
language in his recursive description here, we might say that
whatever experience has not yet been integrated into the
linguistic organization of our brains cannot become consci ous,
and that (to some extent) the ego could be deﬁned as that part of
our psyche which is organized by language.
However,
Grobbelaar (1989) suggests a broader
understanding of what is meant by representation:
“The exclusivity of word-representation in allowing thoughts into
consciousness should not be over-emphasized. Language should
be seen as one of the most important organizing principles of
experience, which acts as an entrance for experience to enter
into consciousness. Its importance is linked partly to its inh erent
functional qualities but far more important is its quality of being
used as an organizing principle. The important concept here is th at
experience has to be organized to have psychological meaning. It i s
obvious that language does not have a monopoly on this function.
In the perception of music it is one’s ability to perceive the rhythm
and melodious organization which seems to be (a) independent
of language (b) improved with repeated exposure (c) dependent
on a diﬀerent symbolic notation. The perception of visual pat tern
seems also to be dependent on an organizing principle other than
language. It does, however, rely on language to an unknown extent
where the visual pattern is an object which is also represented i n
our language . . . all these principles act as determinants of patter n
discrimination. Without discriminating the pattern . . . th ere can be
no awareness of the object.” (pp. 148–149)
A last comment is made here about the lowest level of the
recursive description found in Figure 3 above. It is important
to note that this level of ordering refers to the maintenance of
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
organization of the nervous system. In his thesis, Grobbelaar
(1989) argued that this organizing tendency of language was itself
recursively constituted from the tendency toward autopoies is, or
self-making in the organism. In this way he hoped to demonstra te
how the psychological ordering of conscious experience was it self
founded upon the autopoietic ordering of the organism. By thes e
means, he sought to describe the ego as self-organizing. Tho ugh
Grobbelaar did not have access to Friston’s (2010a)FEP , there is
nonetheless good consilience between his view and a formula tion
of the recursive ordering of information within hierarchic al
layers such as that found in the FEP.
This last point is also important to understanding the
powerful role that interoceptive inﬂuence plays on the activit y
of the mind, throughout the feedback loops described here.
It assumed here that interoceptive information must enter th e
hierarchical organization of the brain at a relatively lowe r
level of organization than that described by
Grobbelaar (1989)
above. However, a central proposition of psychoanalysis is tha t
the homeostatic requirements of the body in the form of
interoceptive information are a fundamental driver of aﬀect a nd
motivation. Due to the genetic endowment of the brain, as wel l
as the primary place of interoceptive information in the early
life of the organism (
Hobson et al., 2014 )—especially in utero —
and the narrow parameters within which internal organs usual ly
remain, the precisions associated with interoceptive inform ation
are very high. Therefore, a large proportion of the surprise
present in the nervous system emerges from interoceptive input ,
particularly when activating prototype emotions, and so, when
high enough, can progress through successive feedback loops u p
every layer structure that reﬂects the organizational hier archy
described here, so that even a conscious stream of logically
ordered thoughts can be constrained by nagging perceptions
of hunger and thoughts about what to do about it. However,
it is acknowledged that this important topic of the role of
interoceptive input in HRO and the FEP requires additional
attention beyond that given here.
Grobbelaar’s (1989)work has identiﬁed two subordinate levels
or organization that are critical to conscious experience. H e
has chosen the organization of entry to preconsciousness as t he
level of interest, and generated a recursive description of t he
dependence of conscious organization on that of language (or
patterned representation more broadly), though he also signa led
the importance of aﬀect without developing it much further in
his text. The organization of aﬀect as a foundational principle for
consciousness is not explored in this article, though the rea der
is referred to a paper by
Hopkins (2016) , entitled “Free energy
and virtual reality in neuroscience and neuropsychoanalysi s:
a complexity theory of dreaming and mental disorder, ” where
he demonstrates how the interaction between mental states
organized by conﬂicting emotions—attempting to minimize
their respective free energy—underlie a process of conscious
experience that is strongly consilient with that described by
psychoanalytic theory.
The preceding sections have hopefully lain the groundwork
for a key conclusion expressed here, which is that the ego must
be understood as self-organizing (
Grobbelaar, 1989), and that the
speciﬁc nature of that self-organizing process is itself emerg ent
from the FEP ( Connolly, 2016). The ego is understood here as an
associative structure occupying the higher levels of organi zation
of the generative model, that comes to inﬂuence lower levels o f
the hierarchy. As such, it develops Markov characteristics t hat
mean it (the ego) must be viewed as eﬀectively self-organizin g—
and potentially self-evidencing as described by Hohwy (2016) .
Psychoanalysis is proposed here as being essentially that scie nce
of the self-organization of the ego that describes its relat ive
inertia and resistance to change, while also describing the un ique
principles of organization that operate at this level.
CONCLUSION
The aim of
Grobbelaar’s (1989) argument was to challenge
the notion of a top down ordering process of organizing
consciousness (such as the preconscious gate in
Freud,
1900/1991), that could not be shown to emerge from a bottom
up process, and to call for a reformulation of Freudian concept s
that makes use of systemic principles such as HRO. In turn,
the thrust of the present paper is to show how such a recursive
description is precisely what is needed to correctly recognize
the inﬂuence of biological self-organization (in the form of
the FEP) on processes related to conscious experience that
are of central interest to psychoanalysis. Equally, the paper
has also tried to demonstrate the limitations of the FEP
in fully explaining higher levels of organization within the
person, and that the self-organizing nature of the ego demand s
distinct models, which are what psychoanalytic concepts can
be understood as oﬀering. It is hoped that the paper oﬀers a
compelling argument in this regard. Future work should re-
examine the key theoretical constructs of psychoanalysis in or der
to oﬀer a recursive description of their dependence on lower
levels of organization in the brain, within the constraints o f
Friston’s FEP.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
PC provided the key theoretical ideas and wrote the paper,
and is responsible for submission. The paper would be the ﬁrst
related publication of a Ph.D. thesis completed in 2016. VvD wa s
supervisor of the Ph.D. thesis.
REFERENCES
Bateson, G. (1978). “The birth of a double bind, ” in Beyond the Double
Bind: Communication and Family Systems, Theories and Techni ques with
Schizophrenics, ed M. M. Berger (New York, NY: Brunner Mazel), 53.
Beer, S. (1972). Brain of the Firm . Allen Lane: The Penguin Press.
Campbell, J. O. (2016). Universal darwinism as a process of Bayesian
inference. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 10:49. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2016.
00049
Carr, J. (1981). Applications of Centre Manifold Theory . Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Cartwright, J. (2016). Evolution and Human Behavior: Darwinian Perspectives on
the Human Condition, 3rd Edn . London: Palgrave.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
Conant, R. C., and Ashby, W. R. (1970). “Every Good Regulator of a
system must be a model of that system.” Int. J. Syst. Sci. 1, 89–97.
doi: 10.1080/00207727008920220
Connolly, J. P. (2016). Principles of Organization of Psychic Energy Within
Psychoanalysis: a Systems Theory Perspective . Unpublished doctoral thesis.
University of South Africa, Pretoria.
Frank, S. A. (2012). Natural selection. V. How to read the fundament al equations of
evolutionary change in terms of information theory. J. Evol. Biol. 25, 2377–2396.
doi: 10.1111/jeb.12010
Freud, S. (1950). “The project for a scientiﬁc psychology, ” in The Standard Edition
of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 1 (1886-1899): Pre-
Psycho-Analytic Publications and Unpublished Drafts, ed J. Strachey (London:
Hogarth Press), 281–399.
Freud, S. (1891/1953). On Aphasia: A Critical Study . ed E. Stengel, New York, NY:
International Universities Press. (Original work published 1891) .
Freud, S. (1920/1955). Beyond the Pleasure principle. The Standard Edition of the
Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud , Vol. 18 (1920-1922): Beyond
the Pleasure Principle, Group Psychology and Other Works, London: Hogarth
Press (Original work published in 1920), 1–64.
Freud, S. (1915/1957). “The unconscious, ” in The Standard Edition of the Complete
Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 14 (1914-1916): On the History of the Psycho-
Analytic Movement, Papers on Metapsychology and Other Works, ed J. Strachey
(London: Hogarth), 159–215. (Original work published 1898).
Freud, S. (1911/1963). “Formulations regarding the two principles of me ntal
functioning, ” in The Collected papers of Sigmund Freud , Vol. 6: General
Psychological Theory: Papers on Metapsychology, ed P. Rieﬀ (New York, NY:
Collier Books), 21–28. (Original work published in 1911).
Freud, S. (1898/1985). “Letter to Fliess, September 22, 1898, ” i n The Complete
Letters of Sigmund Freud to Wilhelm Fliess 1887-1904, ed J. M. Masson
(Cambridge: Belknap Press), 326–327. (Original work published 1898 ).
Freud, S. (1900/1991). The Interpretation of Dreams . Harmondsworth: Penguin.
(Original work published in 1900).
Freud, S., and Breuer, J. (1895/2004). Studies in Hysteria . New York, NY: Penguin
Books. (Original work published in 1895).
Friston, K. J. (2008). Hierarchical models in the brain. PLoS Comput. Biol.
4:e1000211. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000211
Friston, K. J. (2010a). A free energy principle for the brain . Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11,
127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. J. (2010b). Is the free energy principle neurocentric? Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
11:605. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787-c2
Friston, K. J. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems . Entropy 14,
2100–2121. doi: 10.3390/e14112100
Friston, K. J. (2013). Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Int. 10:20130475.
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K. J., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy pri nciple of the brain.
J. Physiol. 100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001
Friston, K. J., Levin, M., Sengupta, B., and Pezzulo, G. (2015). Knowing one’s
place: a free-energy approach to pattern regulation. J. R. Soc. Int. 12:20141383.
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.1383
Friston, K. J., and Stephan, K. E. (2007). Free-energy and the bra in. Synthese 159,
417–458. doi: 10.1007/s11229-007-9237-y
Galatzer-Levy, R. M. (1983). Perspective on the regulatory principle s of mental
functioning. Psychoanal. Contemp. Thought 6, 255–289.
Gottman, J. M., Murray, J. D., Swanson, C. C., Tyson, R., and Swan son, K. R.
(2002). The Mathematics of Marriage: Dynamic Nonlinear Models. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Grobbelaar, P. W. (1989). Freud and Systems Theory: an Exploratory Sta tement.
Johannesburg: Rand Afrikaans University. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation).
Grossman, W. I. (1992). Hierarchies, boundaries and representation in a
Freudian model of mental organization. J. Am. Psychoanal. Assoc. 40, 27–62.
doi: 10.1177/000306519204000102
Haken, H. (1983). Synergetics: An Introduction . Non-Equilibrium Phase Transition
and Self-Selforganization in Physics, Chemistry and Biology. Berlin: Springer
Verlag.
Haken, H., and Levi, P. (2012). Synergetic Agents: from Multi-Robot Systems to
Molecular Robotics. Weinheim: Wiley.
Hobson, J. A., and Friston, K. J. (2016). A response to our theatre c ritics.
J. Conscious. Stud. 23, 245–254.
Helmholtz, H. (1866/1962). “Concerning the perceptions in general, ” in Treatise on
Physiological Optics, 3rd Edn (New York, NY: Dover).
Hobson, J. A., Hong, C. C., and Friston, K. J. (2014). Virtual realit y and
consciousness inference in dreaming. Front. Psychol. Cogn. Sci. 5:1133.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01133
Hohwy, J. (2016). The Self-Evidencing Brain. Noûs 50, 259–285.
doi: 10.1111/nous.12062
Hopkins, J. (2003). “Emotion, evolution and conﬂict, ” inPsychoanalytic Knowledge,
eds M. C. Chung and C. Feltham (London: Palgrave), 132–156.
Hopkins, J. (2004). “Conscience and conﬂict: Darwin, Freud, and the origins of
human aggression, ” inEmotion, Evolution and Rationality, eds D. Evans and P.
Cruse (New York, NY: Oxford University Press), 225–248.
Hopkins, J. (2012). “Psychoanalysis, representation and neurosci ence: the Freudian
unconscious and the Bayesian brain, ” in From the Couch to the La:
Psychoanalysis, Neuroscience and Cognitive Psychology in Dia logue, eds A.
Fotopoulu, D. Pfaﬀ, and M. Conway (Oxford: Oxford University Press ),
230–265.
Hopkins, J. (2015). “The signiﬁcance of consilience: psychoana lysis, attachment,
neuroscience and evolution, ” in Psychoanalysis and Philosophy of Mind:
Unconscious Mentality in the 21st Century , eds S. Boag, L. A. W. Brakel, and
V. Talvitie (London: Karnac), 47–137.
Hopkins, J. (2016). Free energy and virtual reality in neuroscience and
neuropsychoanalysis: a complexity theory of dreaming and mental disord er.
Front. Psychol. Cogn. Sci. 7:922. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00922
Joﬃly, M., and Coricelli, G. (2013). Emotional valence and the free- energy
principle. PLoS Comput. Biol. 9:e1003094. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003094
Kauﬀman, S. (1993). The Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in
Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kauﬀman, S. A., and Johnsen, S. (1991). Coevolution to the edge of chaos: coupled
ﬁtness landscapes, poised states, and coevolutionary avalanches . J. Theor. Biol.
149, 467–505. doi: 10.1016/S0022-5193(05)80094-3
Keeney, B. (1983). Aesthetics of Change. New York, NY: Guilford
Knobloch, F. (2001). Altruism and the hypothesis of meta-selectio n
in human evolution. J. Am. Acad. Psychoanal. 29, 339–354.
doi: 10.1521/jaap.29.2.339.17264
Maturana, H. R. (2002). Autopoiesis, structural coupling and cogni tion: a history
of these and other notions in the biology of cognition. Cybern. Hum. Knowing .
9, 5–34.
Maturana, H. R., and Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition . London: D
Reidel.
Mitchell, M. (2009). Complexity: A Guided Tour . New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Prigogine, I., and Stengers, I. (1984). Order Out of Chaos . New York, NY: Bantam.
Rapaport, D., and Gill, M. M. (1959). The points of view and assumption s of
metapsychology. Int. J. Psychoanal. 40, 153–162.
Richerson, P. J., and Boyd, R. (2006). Not by Genes Alone: How Culture
Transformed Human Evolution . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Rosenblatt, A. D., and Thickstun, J. T. (1970). A study of the c oncept of psychic
energy. Int. J. Psychoanal. 51, 265–278.
Rosenblatt, A. D., and Thickstun, J. T. (1977). Energy, informa tion, and
motivation: a revision of psychoanalytic theory. J. Am. Psychoanal. Assoc. 25,
537–558. doi: 10.1177/000306517702500302
Rosenblatt, A. D., and Thickstun, J. T. (1984). The psychoanaly tic process:
a systems and information processing model. Psychoanal. Enq. 4, 59–86.
doi: 10.1080/07351698409533531
Rovelli, C. (2016). Reality Is Not What It Seems: The Journey to Quantum Gravity .
London: Allen Lane.
Seligman, S. (2005). Dynamic systems theories as a metaframework
for psychoanalysis. Psychoanal. Dialogues 15, 285–319.
doi: 10.1080/10481881509348832
Seth, A. K., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inf erence
and the emotional brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 371:20160007.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0007
Shoenﬁeld, J. R. (2001). Recursion Theory: Lecture Notes in Logic I . Natick: A.K.
Peters.
Stoker, M. G. P. (1969). “Regulating systems in cell culture, ” in Ciba Foundation
Symposium-Homeostatic Regulators, eds G. E. W. Wolstenholme and J. Knight
(London: J & A Churchill), 264–275. doi: 10.1002/97804707196 95.ch16
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695
Connolly and van Deventer Hierarchical Recursive Organization and the FEP
Tschacher, W., and Haken, H. (2007). Intentionality in non-eq uilibrium systems?
The functional aspects of self-organized pattern formation. New Ideas Psychol.
25, 1–15. doi: 10.1016/j.newideapsych.2006.09.002
Von Bertalanﬀy, L. (1969/2009). General Systems Theory: Foundations,
Development, Applications . New York, NY: George Braziller. (Original
work published in 1969).
Wiener, N. (1965). Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and
the Machine, 2nd Edn . Cambridge: MIT Press.
Wiener, N., and Schadé, J. P. (eds.). (1965). Progress in Biocybernetics , Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Publishing Company.
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Connolly and van Deventer. This is an open-acces s article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribu tion License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is perm itted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the ori ginal publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic prac tice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with thes e terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 16 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1695