fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 1
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 07 January 2022
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.784295
Edited by:
Jorge Eduardo Esteves,
COME Collaboration, Italy
Reviewed by:
Karl Friston,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Valery Krupnik,
Naval Hospital Camp Pendleton,
United States
*Correspondence:
Patrick Connolly
patrickconnolly@live.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Health Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 27 September 2021
Accepted: 06 December 2021
Published: 07 January 2022
Citation:
Connolly P (2022) Instability and
Uncertainty Are Critical for
Psychotherapy: How the Therapeutic
Alliance Opens Us Up.
Front. Psychol. 12:784295.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.784295
Instability and Uncertainty Are
Critical for Psychotherapy: How the
Therapeutic Alliance Opens Us Up
Patrick Connolly*
Counselling and Psychology Department, Hong Kong Shue Yan University, North Point, Hong Kong SAR, China
Tschacher and Haken have recently applied a systems-based approach to modeling
psychotherapy process in terms of potentially beneﬁcial tendencies toward deterministic
as well as chaotic forms of change in the client’s behavioral, cognitive and affective
experience during the course of therapy. A chaotic change process refers to a greater
exploration of the states that a client can be in, and it may have a potential positive role
to play in their development. A distinction is made between on the one hand, speciﬁc
instances of instability which are due to techniques employed by the therapist, and
on the other, a more general instability which is due to the therapeutic relationship,
and a key, necessary result of a successful therapeutic alliance. Drawing on Friston’s
systems-based model of free energy minimization and predictive coding, it is proposed
here that the increase in the instability of a client’s functioning due to therapy can be
conceptualized as a reduction in the precisions (certainty) with which the client’s prior
beliefs about themselves and their world, are held. It is shown how a good therapeutic
alliance (characterized by successful interpersonal synchrony of the sort described by
Friston and Frith) results in the emergence of a new hierarchical level in the client’s
generative model of themselves and their relationship with the world. The emergence of
this new level of functioning permits the reduction of the precisions of the client’s priors,
which allows the client to ‘open up’: to experience thoughts, emotions and experiences
they did not have before. It is proposed that this process is a necessary precursor to
change due to psychotherapy. A good consilience can be found between this approach
to understanding the role of the therapeutic alliance, and the role of epistemic trust in
psychotherapy as described by Fonagy and Allison. It is suggested that beneﬁcial forms
of instability in clients are an underappreciated inﬂuence on psychotherapy process,
and thoughts about the implications, as well as situations in which instability may not be
beneﬁcial (or potentially harmful) for therapy, are considered.
Keywords: psychotherapy process, therapeutic alliance, interpersonal synchrony, stochastic and deterministic
stability, chaotic itinerancy, free energy principle and active inference (FEP-AI) framework
INTRODUCTION
Recent work by Tschacher and Haken (2019) reported in their book ‘The Process of Psychotherapy:
Causation and Chance, ’ oﬀers an interesting perspective on a core healing mechanism of
psychotherapy. Rooted within a perspective of systems science, the main idea communicated
by their book is that change in psychotherapy can be described in terms of two processes, one
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295
fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 2
Connolly Instability and Uncertainty Are Critical for Psychotherapy
deterministic, the other chaotic. A deterministic change process
refers to a shift in a client’s behavior or experience in a
particular (desirable) direction – for example, the client starts to
experience generally more positive emotions. A chaotic change
process refers to a greater exploration of the states the client
can be in – in other words, during the course of therapy,
the client may experience a wider range of thoughts, behaviors
and intensities of feeling. In the model Tschacher and Haken
(2019) provide, the ‘chaotic’ process is a necessary ﬁrst step for
therapeutic change. In the process they describe, the client ﬁrst
experiences a broadening of thoughts, emotions and behaviors,
beyond their typical pattern or range (a chaotic process). Then
the client’s states move toward a more desirable range of
experiences (deterministic process), which in the ﬁnal step,
stabilizes into a new normal.
This idea of chaotic process is found in the science of complex
systems, where it may also be referred to as a stochastic process
(or sometimes, ‘disorder, ’ ‘instability, ’ ‘ﬂuctuations, ’ ‘itinerancy, ’ or
‘noise, ’ depending on context). In this ﬁeld, the evolution and
development of a wide variety of types of systems is determined
both by deterministic tendencies toward order or stability, as
well as tendencies toward disorder or instability. For systems
that are living systems, stochastic processes can potentially be
‘beneﬁcial’ (perhaps counterintuitively) for achieving their core
aim, which, roughly, is to go on being living systems. This
is because stochastic processes help facilitate adaptation (Ao,
2005). An example might be a new genetic mutation of a
species, which tends to explore its environment more widely
than earlier variants, may discover a new, much richly resourced
environment, in the context of geographically distributed
resources. The exploratory variant is more likely to broaden
the geographical range around its resource center, or leave it
altogether, which is formally analogous to escaping an ‘attractor’
state1. This role of chaotic processes causing a system to escape
attractor states and ﬁnd new ones is true of most systems that
human beings study. Chaotic processes are also relevant to
psychotherapy, not just in the sense that people can beneﬁt from
a wider range of behavior, but also in how our attention or
conscious experience can similarly start to explore a wider range
of possible perceptions of our environment, as well as a wider
range of inner psychological experience, and escape being ‘stuck’
in a particular range of perception and experience.
While Tschacher and Haken (2019) oﬀer some ideas about
how psychotherapy facilitates beneﬁcial stochastic processes in
clients, this is not much developed in this work, which has more
to say about the deterministic ones. In this article, the focus is on
chaotic process, and a distinction will be oﬀered here between a
general state of increased (desirable) disorderrelated to the quality
of the therapeutic alliance or relationship 2, and a speciﬁc state of
increased disorder triggered either by a particular technique used
by the therapist, or by circumstances encountered by the client.
Though some ideas are mentioned regarding speciﬁc states of
disorder, the focus of this paper will be on developing a theory of
1In this case, the attractor state is the behavior of maintaining distance from a
resource center, within a a bounded geographical range.
2Following Bordin (1979) ‘therapeutic alliance.’
how the therapeutic alliance results in ageneral state of instability,
as a key element of a good therapeutic outcome.
To do this, the article will draw on Friston’s (2010) description
of a hierarchical generative model as a way to understand the
client’s self. While the workings of a hierarchical generative
model will be explained later in this paper, the salient feature
of the way such a model works is that control is exerted over
how the system functions by ‘predictions’: messages that are
passed down the hierarchy that also establish the ‘precision’ 3
(or certainty) applied to the environmental information passing
upwards through the hierarchy. It will be proposed that the
beneﬁcial general state of disorder of the sort described earlier
must rely on a broad relaxation (reducing) of the precisions
passed downwards through the hierarchy, which has the eﬀect of
‘opening the person up’ to information, which is now more able
to change the hierarchical model. This will be explained in more
detail later in the paper.
To understand how the therapeutic relationship may have this
general eﬀect on the precisions in the hierarchical generative
model that is the client’s self, this article draws on theories
about interpersonal synchrony and how it may entrain the
client’s psychological, emotional and behavioral functioning
(Koole and Tschacher, 2016; Tschacher and Haken, 2019). Friston
and Frith (2015a) have developed a model that provides a
consistent explanation of how interpersonal synchrony could
result in such reduced downward precisions that are the
focus of this paper. This will lead to a claim that a good
therapeutic alliance or relationship (described in terms of
eﬀective interpersonal synchrony here) achieves a beneﬁcial
general disorder in the client, which is the starting point of
meaningful therapeutic change.
It is suggested that Fonagy and Allison’s (2014) idea of
mentalizing and epistemic trust in psychotherapy has a good
consilience with the theory that is outlined here; speciﬁcally it
will be highlighted that the operation of epistemic trust implies
a destabilizing eﬀect on the client’s self (though it may have a
stabilizing eﬀect later). This should oﬀer clinicians some clear
ideas about how the therapeutic relationship may facilitate a
useful kind of disorder in clients. After pointing toward some
limitations on the usefulness of instability in psychotherapy,
it will be concluded that chaotic or stochastic processes are
underappreciated in mainstream thinking in psychotherapy and
in psychology more broadly.
WHAT IS ORDER AND DISORDER IN
COMPLEX SYSTEMS?
The equations used by Tschacher and Haken (2019) to model
psychotherapy are referred to as Fokker–Planck equations, and
their purpose is to model both deterministic as well as stochastic
processes in a system. This relationship of determinism and
disorder in complex systems can be described by an analogy. If we
3A detailed deﬁnition of generative models, predictions and precisions is oﬀered
later in this paper, in the section ‘Precisions, predictions and errors in hierarchical
information processing.’
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295
fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 3
Connolly Instability and Uncertainty Are Critical for Psychotherapy
FIGURE 1 | A basin of attraction (an inverted normal curve) following
Tschacher and Haken (2019), indicating a distribution of probable states of the
system variable (x) – or P(x), with the most likely state being at the bottom of
the basin.
were to imagine an object on a side of a valley we could describe
the force of gravity as a deterministic force acting on it, always
tending to push in one direction, which is down the slope of the
valley toward the bottom. However, the actual movement of the
object is also inﬂuenced by chaotic factors which could push it in
either direction or let it come to rest4. Many types of systems can
be described as a result of both of these factors, a deterministic
pull in a particular direction (gravity in this example) while
subject to random (or at least chaotic) ‘kicks’ in either direction.
The valley in the analogy above could be described as a basin
of attraction (represented in Figure 1). We could think of it as
a normal distribution curve, turned upside down; the deepest
point of the valley refers to the point that the system is most
likely to inhabit, or spend the greatest amount of time. This basin
of attraction then models the tendency of the system toward
a particular stable state over time (the object tending to move
toward the bottom of the valley), as well as indicating a range
within which the system state tends to vary. The further the object
from the bottom of the valley, the greater the likelihood that it
will go down instead of further up; at the bottom of the valley,
ﬂuctuations can only ever push it upwards.
In this way of thinking about a system, the degree of chaos
or disorder in the system may refer to how wide and shallow the
basin is, as opposed to narrow and deep.Figure 2 shows a system
that has a greater level of chaos, where the solid line refers to
a system with higher disorder and lower stability (shallow and
wide), and the dotted line refers to a system with lower disorder
and higher stability (deep and narrow).
To use the analogy of the object in a real-world valley, a
system of higher disorder means that there are a lot of diﬀerent
4We should note that chaotic processes are not necessarily actually random –
various deterministic inﬂuences can act on the object (we could also say there is
structure in the noise). Besides being mediated by randomness, chaotic processes
may be also be mediated by deterministic (but conservative) ﬂows in a system.
FIGURE 2 | The solid line shows a shallow and wide basin of attraction,
representing a system with more pronounced chaotic process (and reduced
deterministic process) while the dotted line represents a system with less
chaotic process and a more pronounced deterministic basin of attraction.
things going on in this valley that could push the object either
up or down – or the valley is much shallower, meaning that the
deterministic push of gravity toward the bottom of the valley
has less inﬂuence relative to the more random ﬂuctuations. In
such a situation, we could imagine that the object could escape
the valley, or even end up in another valley – which is really a
description of one important way that systems change: through
‘chaotic itinerancy, ’ or moving easily between multiple weakly
attracting sets (very shallow basins of attraction, or valleys), and
potentially ending in a new, stable attractor (Ao, 2005; Tyukin
et al., 2009).
Chaotic itinerancy has been explored as a concept in a variety
of phenomena related to neuroscience, cognitive science, robotics
and artiﬁcial intelligence, where it has been connected to learning,
adaptability and ﬂexible information processing (Sadaghiani
et al., 2010; Park et al., 2017; Northoﬀ, 2018). An example is
mind-wandering, which has shown to have potential beneﬁts for
creativity, problem-solving and future planning (Smallwood and
Schooler, 2015; Zedelius and Schooler, 2015; Leszczynski et al.,
2017; Metzinger, 2017).
APPLYING THE FOKKER–PLANCK
MODEL TO PSYCHOTHERAPEUTIC
CHANGE
Tschacher and Haken (2019) have applied the Fokker–Planck
model to psychotherapy clients’ behavior in the following way.
One could say that a client’s mental state, such as the level of
positivity or negativity of their emotions, could be compared to
the object on the slopes of the valley. This reﬂects a systems-based
understanding of people’s emotions, which is useful in that it
helps us understand how we may tend toward a particular pattern
in our emotional life, such as how stably positive or negative our
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295
fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 4
Connolly Instability and Uncertainty Are Critical for Psychotherapy
FIGURE 3 | Idealized graph showing a typical attractor state of the level of
negative emotion related to depression following Tschacher and Haken
(2019). The goal of therapy would be to shift the mean of this function to the
left toward more positive emotions.
emotions tend to be over time. In this way, our emotions might
vary in how positive or negative they are (the chaotic process),
but they will tend toward a particular pattern or stable state
(deterministic process).
This could be seen in the situation of a client with depression,
which we can understand as a tendency to remain within a
relatively narrow range of mostly negative emotions (represented
in Figure 3).
The systems approach also oﬀers a theoretical understanding
of why and how people’s behavior does not change very easily,
and the challenge facing psychotherapists (or psychiatrists) who
would like to help facilitate such change.
However, through their application of the Fokker–Planck
equation to states of the human system, Tschacher and Haken
(2019) reveal an interesting theoretical implication for change
in such systems that is very valuable for understanding
psychotherapy process. This useful insight is to show how change
in psychotherapy process can itself be understood as consisting
of both determinist and chaotic processes. Deterministic change
processes in therapy refer to factors (such as an intervention) that
have the goal of shifting the basin of attraction in a more desired
direction, or toward more stably positive emotion in the current
example. Examples described by Tschacher and Haken (2019)
in their book include cognitive interventions such as modifying
cognitions to promote more positive emotions, or skills training
in behavioral approaches, and others.
For stochastic change processes in psychotherapy, Tschacher
and Haken have suggested that techniques such as mindfulness,
or free association in psychoanalysis, may be examples of
interventions that do not push the system state in particular
direction, but may have the eﬀect of making a wider range of
experience or behavior possible, as shown in Figure 4.
Further, they have indicated that the change process in
psychotherapy is likely to move forward in a particular order
FIGURE 4 | The stochastic change process (Tschacher and Haken, 2019),
which involves a shift from a narrower, deeper basin of attraction to a wider
distribution of system states, such as a wider range of emotional states, in
either positive or negative directions.
FIGURE 5 | A model of stages of therapeutic change presented in Tschacher
and Haken (2019). (A) Prior to change, a deep basin of attraction, reﬂecting
here a relatively stable depressive state. (B) A ﬁrst stage of change, being a
stochastic (chaotic) process involving a wider range of system states. (C) A
deterministic change in system states in a particular (desired) direction, here
toward a more positive range of emotions. (D) A reduction in stochastic
processes where the system settles into a new (more desired) stable state,
here reﬂecting a stable range of more positive emotions.
(indicated in Figure 5 ): ﬁrst, the chaotic elements of change
widen the basin of attraction of the system states, then
deterministic elements of change move the basin toward a
(hopefully) more desired direction, before it deepens again to
become a new stable point of the system (through the self-
organization processes of the system, or changes in contextual
factors). In the example above, it may mean a depressed
person starting to have a wider range of emotions, before
starting to have a reduced level of depression, and this then
becoming a new normal.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295
fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 5
Connolly Instability and Uncertainty Are Critical for Psychotherapy
This theoretical work by Tschacher and Haken (2019) oﬀers
an important idea for therapists, which is that the ﬁrst step
of successful psychotherapy may be to facilitate beneﬁcial
‘chaos’: a wider range of behavior (and experience) in the
client, that is not necessarily only in the direction of desirable
change, but genuinely wider, as a precondition for further
change to take place.
This work also uses the same theoretical base as recent
claims made for both brain stimulation, as well as microdosing
psychedelics, for the treatment of depression. While the evidence
for the eﬀectiveness of microdosing psychedelics is not yet
adequate (Kuypers et al., 2019; Polito and Stevenson, 2019),
Carhart-Harris (2018) has proposed that the eﬀectiveness of
microdosing psychedelics as a route to reducing symptoms of
depression, works through facilitating an increase in chaotic
itinerancy in the nervous system (Carhart-Harris and Friston,
2019). Similarly, the eﬀectiveness of brain stimulation on
depression (Bermpohl et al., 2006) and other disorders has
been explained through the concept of increases in spontaneous
ﬂuctuations of the brain as well (Northoﬀ, 2018).
Where chaotic itinerancy is mediated through randomness, its
positive eﬀect on the functioning of the system has been formally
described as simulated annealing, which is itself analogous to
the process of annealing in metallurgy, where a metal is heated
up over several occasions, becoming stronger in the process. By
the heating process (either real or simulated such as by neural
excitability5), the system reaches a state of greater plasticity,
allowing it to settle again, this time in a new, potentially more
optimal attractor state (Mehrabian and Lucas, 2006; Carhart-
Harris and Friston, 2019).
While these proposed mechanisms for the eﬃcacy of brain
stimulation and microdosing psychedelics are broadly the same
as that presented here, a diﬀerence might be in the hierarchical
level of brain organization in which change is instigated;
if brain stimulation or psychedelics succeed in increasing
chaotic itinerancy, they likely do so in a bottom-up way in a
hierarchical generative model, changing activities happening at
lower, physiological levels (upregulation of 5-HT2AR serotonin
functioning in the case of psychedelics) which then disrupt and
shift control activities at a higher level (greater spontaneous
cortical activity) (Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2019). In contrast,
psychotherapy may have a more top–down inﬂuence, intervening
as at a higher order of organization (instigated in the social
interaction) which then results in increased ﬂuctuations at a
lower level of organization (including at physiological levels such
as through body awareness in mindfulness). It is the purpose
of the following sections to explain this concept of hierarchical
brain organization, and how these various ways of instigating
greater chaotic itinerancy in brain activity nonetheless have
an equiﬁnal endpoint which describes this ﬂuctuation-inducing
eﬀect in the person, though there may be diﬀerent roads to get
there. This begins with a potential description of the stochastic
process based on theoretical systems neuroscience, in the form
of the free energy principle and the organization of hierarchical
5Or by the metaphoric ‘warming’ due to the relationship, as described later in this
paper.
generative models in the brain, relevant aspects of which are
introduced next.
PRECISIONS, PREDICTIONS, AND
ERRORS IN HIERARCHICAL
INFORMATION PROCESSING
Over the past decade-and-half, the free energy principle has
become a very inﬂuential foundation for understanding brain
and cognitive processes. It proposes that the organization of the
brain entails a generative predictive model of the sensory inputs
it receives, whether from outside the person, or somatosensory
or interoceptive information from their bodies. In response
to sensory inputs, the model actively generates inferences of
the causes of those inputs, which inform a prediction of what
information is expected next. The free energy principle then
proposes that, as a system, the brain tends to minimize the
diﬀerence between the sensory inputs that are predicted by
the generative model based on its inference of causes, and
what the received sensory inputs actually are; in other words
it minimizes the prediction error. This tendency to minimize
prediction error either takes the route of a Bayesian updating
of the predictive generative model to be closer to the inputs
it receives, or the system taking an action which brings the
sensory inputs closer in line with what is expected (Friston
et al., 2006; Friston, 2010). An example might be seeing an
unexpected blemish on one’s skin: the error produced by
this unexpected stimulus might be reduced by updating my
expectation of how my skin appears, or rubbing the blemish
with my hand in the expectation that the blemish might come
oﬀ, thus preserving my prior expectation of how my skin
appears (blemish-free).
What is most important for the purpose of the current paper is
the idea of a hierarchy in the generative model. The architecture
of the brain can be described as a hierarchy of information
processing (see Figure 6 ), where the sensory inputs enter at
the lowest level (Friston, 2010). The information that is passed
FIGURE 6 | A hierarchical generative model which passes prediction error up
the hierarchy while passing predictions (and precisions) downwards.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295
fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 6
Connolly Instability and Uncertainty Are Critical for Psychotherapy
upward to the next level is the prediction error at that level,
and so prediction error from each level passes information up
the hierarchy. What is passed downwards, from the highest level
down through each successive level down, are predictions: the
generative model at each level essentially models the prediction
error of the level below, and acts to minimize it, either through
updating itself, or through an action which brings the input from
the level below back to what is expected.
The value of this hierarchical arrangement is that it is capable
of sustaining very complex (multi-level) generative models of the
information that the brain takes in. The human brain contains
numerically vast levels of hierarchy in its organization, with
feedback processes within and between levels: this means that
the above description is a highly simpliﬁed description of a
complex reality, but that nonetheless allows one to make eﬀective
statements about broad tendencies within the brain’s workings.
The key importance that this hierarchical organization of the
brain has for the current paper, lies in the way that the each of
the levels of the hierarchy sets the ‘precisions’ of the predictions
at the level beneath.
The statistical concept of ‘precision’ in this context refers to
the level of conﬁdence associated with a prediction. An example
(similar to one found in Peterfreund and Schwartz, 1971) may
that of the setting of a thermostat in an air conditioner. Such a
thermostat works through maintaining a selected temperature.
For example, if it is currently cooling a room, and a desired
temperature of 26 ◦C has been selected, it will allow a certain
margin of variation around that selected temperature before
taking action. If the margin is set to 1 ◦C, then once the
temperature goes above 27 ◦, the air conditioner will turn on;
should it drop below 25◦, the air conditioner will turn oﬀ. A wider
margin of 2◦, will mean it turns on at 27◦ and oﬀ at 24, and so on.
We could compare precision to this margin: high precision would
be akin to a very small margin, reﬂecting a high conﬁdence that
the temperature will remain within a narrow range. This situation
also leads to greater prediction errors with only minor variation
in the state of the thermostat. In contrast, low precisions could
be compared to a wider allowable margin of variation around
the temperature, or a low conﬁdence that the temperature will be
26◦ – larger variations won’t produce so much prediction error.
Within a hierarchical free-energy principle framework, the
precision associated with the predictions of a particular level
of the hierarchy are determined in part by the precision with
which prior beliefs at a higher level are held (Parr et al.,
2018). To use an example (shown in Figure 7 ), if I have a
very certain (high precision) higher-level prior belief that sea
water always looks blue, then when I am looking at the sea
right now, my prediction (empirical prior) that the color I
am seeing is blue will be held with high precision too – and
small variances from this prediction will generate error (and
hence action or updating). Whereas, if my higher-level prior
belief that sea water is blue is held with less certainty (lower
precision), then my current prediction that the color of water
I am looking at will be blue is also made with less precision,
and generates less error – in this case the precision of the
sensory input will be relatively higher, and what I will perceive
is closer to the sensory information. This can still lead to
updating, though to lesser degree, or to action though with
lower probability.
The above section has described the role played in perception
by the precision of higher-level prior beliefs; however, the
selection and implementation ofaction can similarly be described
in a hierarchy of precisions. Pezzulo et al. (2018) propose
that the motivation aspect of action, which indicates our prior
preferences for outcomes of our behavior, is also hierarchical,
consisting of lower-level predictions of interoceptive signals (e.g.,
‘I’m hungry’) and higher-level goals (e.g., ‘I should continue
dieting’) founded upon episodic information, social incentives
or higher-level prior beliefs about one’s self-image (these latter
being quite important for the current paper). These motivations
themselves set precisions for predictions in a control hierarchy
which establishes policies of action that are associated with
desired outcomes. For example, my prediction that the action
I will take – that I won’t eat an unhealthy food – is likely to
help me reach my desired state of being healthy (motivation) is
likely to make me select that policy of action. These precisions,
regarding the predictions that policies of action will produce
desired outcomes, are themselves inﬂuenced by (the precision of)
higher-level prior beliefs of the outcomes of policies.
This discussion of hierarchical processing (and particularly
precisions) can now be connected back to the present discussion
of psychotherapy process.
CHAOTIC CHANGE PROCESSES AS
REDUCED PRECISIONS OF
HIGHER-ORDER PRIOR BELIEFS
The discussion above suggests that the higher-order prior beliefs
encoded within a client’s generative model, which give rise to
predictions of its inputs (with active inference of its causes) as
well as action selection and control and modeling the self, are
held with particular levels of precision. This means, as a client,
my higher-order prior beliefs that encode predictions about my
environment, my body, my typical behavior, and particularly my
personality, my values, my capabilities as a person, who I am and
what I am doing, are held with a particular level of conﬁdence.
The key suggestion of this paper is that the chaotic process
of change as described in Tschacher and Haken’s (2019) work
may depend on a broad (or possibly even global) reduction of
the precisions of higher-level prior beliefs in the hierarchy of the
client’s generative model6. A reduction in the precisions amongst
these highest-level prior beliefs can be reached by various routes
(top–down through a relationship, or bottom-up from within the
person’s own nervous system), and such a reduction in precisions
could result in meaningful changes in perception and behavior,
and particularly, the possibility of a wider range of perceptions
of behavior that might characterize the wider range of states
associated with the chaotic (stochastic) process of change.
A conceptual example could illustrate how this would work.
We could assume a high-level prior belief ‘I don’t really
communicate much in groups’ held with high precision would
6The question of which priors are so altered is addressed later in this paper.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295
fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 7
Connolly Instability and Uncertainty Are Critical for Psychotherapy
FIGURE 7 | An idealized scheme showing a hierarchical generative model at three conceptual layers, a higher-order prior belief about visual scenes, and empirical
prior applied to sensory information, and a sensory layer passing data upward. Where the higher-order prior is held with high precision, the empirical prior is also held
with high precision, which can potentially take action to attenuate lower-level data from inﬂuencing higher levels. In contrast, where the higher-order belief is held with
lower precision, the empirical prior is also held with lower precision, allowing low-level information to have a greater inﬂuence on higher levels (and thereby on overall
system state).
inﬂuence (directly or through some intervening layers) the
precision associated with my experience of my own behavior
in group settings, and be connected with relatively consistent
behavior of not communicating in groups. If the precision of
this high-level prior belief were to become reduced, we would
expect that the probability of selecting an action policy of not
communicating in groups would also be reduced. This in turn
would result in more inconsistency in the resulting behaviors:
depending on other inﬂuences (interoceptive motivational
inﬂuence, or contextual inﬂuences on control), the behavior
selected would at times be not communicating, and at others
choosing to express oneself. This widening in the range of
behaviors (and in a similar way, perception) would appear like
the shallower, wider basin of attraction in the chaotic process of
change, and expresses the idea in Tschacher and Haken (2019)
that chaotic processes are related to the permeability of boundary
conditions of the system, and the extent to which it is aﬀected by
external factors.
In this way, we might expect that a client whose higher-level
prior beliefs are held with reduced precision may subjectively
perceive things they normally don’t, take actions they normally
wouldn’t, have thoughts and emotions and express aﬀect at
times or in ways that are not typical for them, and experience
an uncertainty about themselves and their identity that might
hopefully feel good (or at least neutral) rather than distressing 7.
This would seem like an ‘opening up’ of the possible states
of the client, and following Tschacher and Haken (2019), may
precede a more deterministic shift of the system in a particular
direction, and the formation of a new basin of attraction, in a
more desirable state.
7The reason it may not be experienced as distressing is discussed a little later in
this paper.
Certainly, this reduction in precision of higher-order beliefs
in the generative model of the client may well be a necessary
precursor to meaningful changes in it, and to allow for
meaningful new learning to take place.
HOW REDUCED PRECISION OF PRIOR
BELIEF RESULTS IN PERSONAL
CHANGE
Within a free energy principle framework, a generative model
forms through recursive interaction with information from
outside – its fair to say that it is a model of its environment, in a
sense (Friston, 2010). This structural coupling of the generative
model with its environment means that it is at the mercy of
the environment to some extent. A generative model can only
maintain a stable pattern to the extent that its environment allows
for it8. In the case of a hierarchical generative model, we expect
that the lower levels update more quickly, while higher levels may
update more slowly – following the ‘slaving principle’ in Haken’s
(1983/2004) ‘Synergetics.’ In fact, we might say that prior beliefs
right at the top of such a hierarchy may remain relatively stable
for signiﬁcant phases of a person’s life; for example, a person’s
personality (typical behaviors, for example) may seem relatively
stable if their environment does not ﬂuctuate too much.
The relative precisions in a hierarchical generative model may
also play a role in maintaining the stability of higher-order prior
beliefs. Parr et al. (2018) show how higher-order prior beliefs
that are quite demonstrably false, can be maintained with a
high degree of conﬁdence (precision) through a reduction of the
precision ascribed to sensory information (or information from
8This is related to the concept of aﬀordance, that our environment allows
particular patterns of behavior.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295
fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 8
Connolly Instability and Uncertainty Are Critical for Psychotherapy
lower levels of the hierarchy). In other words, we may ignore (or
take other actions that ward oﬀ) information that will change our
highest-level beliefs9 – in order to go on being the same person.
Returning to an earlier example, sometimes we are committed
(metaphorically speaking) to believing the sea is always blue,
despite the evidence, and ﬁnd any number of ways to avoid
information that contradicts this.
This understanding of the stability of a hierarchical generative
model also points toward how it can change. Essentially, the
model is changed by new information. Sometimes that new
information occurs when our environment changes – people
often seek psychotherapy or counseling support when conditions
in their life have changed, and it has become impossible to go
forward being the person they are now – in this way crises bring
change, often unwillingly.
However, psychotherapy attempts to facilitate change even
when there is no major change in our environmental conditions.
A reduction of the precision of high-level prior beliefs also creates
the possibility for new information to be propagated within
the hierarchy; in this way a person can have new experiences
even in the absence of particularly novel information from
one’s environment. Parr et al. (2018) show that if higher-order
priors are held with low precision, then our current prediction
(empirical prior) is more inﬂuenced by information from our
senses – or from lower orders in the hierarchy. This new
information does begin to update the generative model, although
it may do so slowly (Parr et al., 2018). As described earlier,
the relaxing of these high-order beliefs is likely to result in a
wider range of perceptions and behaviors – which then provide a
wealth of new information that can reshape and grow new beliefs
at higher levels.
Friston (personal communication, 12 September 2020)
suggests that basins of attraction of the sort shown in Figure 1
earlier in this paper, can also be considered free energy
landscapes: deeper valleys refer to system states with high overall
free energy, and wider shallower valleys depict systems with low
overall free energy. A system that has high free energy is a system
that is in an unlikely state (based on its prior expectations).
A ﬁsh out of water is such a system. In such a case there is
a strong deterministic inﬂuence on its behavior: the most likely
state dynamic10 the system is likely to have are actions that are
predicted to bring it back into water, and other behaviors are
not very likely. This state dynamic could be shown as a basin
of attraction as well, where the state dynamic toward being back
in water is the bottom of the basin. In contrast, a system with
low overall free energy, is in a relatively likely state based on
prior expectations. A ﬁsh in water, not particularly hungry, or
without any meaningful demands on its behavior is an example.
In this case, there may be no particular behavior that is very
likely (besides respiration, which is expected), and so we may see
greater chaotic itinerance (or exploration) in its behavior. This
situation is analogous to a much shallower basin of attraction (as
9Hopkins (2016), has proposed a mechanism like this to explain the emergence and
maintenance of an unconscious in a person. It may similarly describe maintenance
of unsymbolized incongruent experience in line with Rogers (1959) theory of
personality, or Beck et al. (1979) cognitive errors that maintain distorted schemas.
10The trajectory of the system over time.
shown in Figure 2 above), where no particular system state (or
state dynamic) is much more like than others.
Systems with low overall free energy (shallower basins) are in
a state that lends itself to development and adaptation (a state
referred to as self-organized criticality, Friston et al., 2012). He
states:
“In this shallow valley, one can . . . meander and explore with
impunity – leading to long-term correlations of the sort seen in self-
organized criticality (c.f., the diﬀerence between a mountain stream
following a V-shaped valley and the meandering course of an
estuary over a ﬂat landscape).” (Friston, personal communication,
12 September 2020).
He suggests that the tendency of biological systems to reduce
free energy eﬀectively means that there is an innate drive to
ﬁnd shallower landscapes, and therefore develop and adapt (self-
organize).
A more human example might be a state of extreme
psychological dependence in a relationship. If a person expects
the near-constant presence and reassurance of a romantic
partner, this is likely to be a high free energy system, that
produces a strong deterministic inﬂuence on their thoughts,
aﬀect and behavior, which will all likely be directed toward
securing and maintaining the presence of the other person, while
other exploratory behaviors are much less. In contrast a person
who is much less dependent on their relationship would be in a
lower free energy state, and have a much weaker deterministic
inﬂuence on their behavior, which would make exploratory
behaviors (unrelated to the relationship) much more likely. They
may be more likely to have varied activities, develop hobbies and
friendships, or possibly leave the relationship.
A range of psychiatric conditions have also been viewed as
a problem of such adaptation, cast in computational psychiatry
literature as the result of overly precise prior beliefs (Van de
Cruys et al., 2014) which result in high free energy states, with
strongly attracting state dynamics. Abberant prior precisions,
and beliefs about prior precisions have been proposed as key to
explaining features of depression and mood (Seth and Friston,
2016; Badcock et al., 2017; Clark et al., 2018), schizophrenia
and delusion (Tschacher et al., 2017) and aspects of obsessive
compulsive disorder (Kiverstein et al., 2019), amongst others.
The question of how psychotherapy achieves a reduction in
precision of higher-level priors, and allow adaptive development
in the person, is addressed next.
HOW PSYCHOTHERAPY REDUCES THE
PRECISION OF HIGH-LEVEL PRIOR
BELIEFS
Psychotherapy is not the only route to meaningful personal
change. Signiﬁcant changes in our environmental circumstances
(or our anatomy) have the potential to radically alter the
information that shapes us, though the full extent of
change may take some time to unfold. Tschacher and
Haken (2019) describe these as changes in contextual
inﬂuences or aﬀordances. A change in circumstances, such
as a crisis or an opportunity for a meaningful reward (e.g.,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295
fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 9
Connolly Instability and Uncertainty Are Critical for Psychotherapy
employment and a living wage to someone who has been
struggling), can have signiﬁcant transformative capacity on
self-understanding and behavior.
In the psychotherapy situation, various techniques can
deliberately facilitate stochastic inﬂuences on change. These
techniques were referred to as facilitating speciﬁc states of
disorder earlier in this paper. Tschacher and Haken (2019) have
mentioned free association in psychoanalysis, or mindfulness
training, as techniques of this kind. Holmes and Nolte (2019)
have speciﬁcally explored this inﬂuence of free association in
terms of a hierarchical generative model in a free energy principle
framework:
“In free association, thoughts, interoceptive bodily sensations
and aﬀects, impulses and images enter the mind ‘from below’.
As analysand and therapist collaboratively enter states of free-
ﬂoating attention and negative capability, top-down constructions
are temporarily set aside.” (p.19)
In this way, free association seems to rather directly request
the client to reduce the inﬂuence of higher levels of the
hierarchical generative model (while the therapist does likewise),
allowing more information to emerge from below, allowing new
experiences and change.
Likewise, mindfulness techniques emphasize an acceptance
of stimuli and mental states while reducing action taken to
alter that information, similarly allowing an increase in the
permeability of boundary conditions at the highest levels of the
hierarchy. As Tschacher and Haken (2019) point out, there may
be quite a number of techniques that explicitly produce chaotic
change processes, while many techniques in psychotherapy
may inﬂuence both deterministic and chaotic change processes
at the same time.
The central focus of the remainder of this paper is not
on these routes toward therapeutic uncertainty, but is rather
on the role of the relationship itself as the most fundamental
driver of chaotic or stochastic process, which I have referred
to as a general state of disorder to distinguish its inﬂuence
from that created by speciﬁc techniques. While Tschacher
and Haken (2019) imply that the relationship may have
inﬂuences on both stochastic and determinist change, their
book discusses the role of the psychotherapy relationship
more in terms of indirect or contextual determinist inﬂuences.
The use of a hierarchical generative model approach within
a free energy principle framework, has oﬀered a conceptual
bridge to make sense of the contribution of the relationship
to stochastic change, and how it may indeed be a ﬁrst
and necessary step toward change. A description of the way
in which the relationship can facilitate this general state of
disorder is next.
Relational Synchrony, Entrainment, and
High-Order Priors
It is a long-standing idea in systems theory in psychology
(Bateson, 1972; Keeney, 1983) that social interaction generates
a recursively new step in the organization of the human
psyche and behavior: in short, a relationship between two
people (a system consisting of two interacting components)
comes to pattern the emergence of the next higher layer
of organization in the person’s mind and behavior. Haken’s
(1983/2004) development of the study of Synergetics placed
these ideas of the emergence of self-organization in systems
on a clear formal footing, and his work fundamentally informs
Tschacher and Haken’s (2019) approach in their book. A central
idea here is the slaving principle, which is a form of self-
organization in systems where slower ‘macro-processes’ in a
system tend to entrain faster ‘micro-processes.’ While this was
originally applied to problems in physics, it has subsequently
been applied to problems in a wide variety of sciences,
including several in psychology, and most relevantly here,
psychotherapy (Schiepek et al., 2016). Key to the process of
self-organization is the role of synchrony within systems –
as fast-microprocesses synchronize with each other, a new,
slower, macroprocess emerges which henceforth entrains those
microprocesses (Haken, 1983/2004).
The importance of the emergence of interpersonal synchrony
has informed a growth of research in psychotherapy process
(as well as interpersonal interactions in general) that observes
that synchrony does spontaneously emerge in interactions,
that it is associated with more positive reports of the
quality of interactions and the outcome of therapy and
that it may operate on diverse levels, such as physiological
(e.g., heart rate variability and skin conductance), cognitive,
and aﬀective, and that there may be a progression from
more basic physiological levels toward cognitive and then
emotion-complex levels of synchrony in successful therapy
(Koole and Tschacher, 2016).
Tschacher and Haken (2019) model psychotherapy process
in a way that suggests that it is the stability of the therapist’s
states (such as their degree of mindfulness and calmness) that
entrains the client’s states through synchronization, providing a
deterministic shift in the client states (such as anxiety) which
therapy seeks to change.
However, one perspective from a free energy principle
framework oﬀers a slightly more nuanced understanding, which
suggests that it is not so much the therapist’s states that
directly entrain the client’s states, but rather the relational
system that forms between the two that entrains the client’s
(and indeed therapist’s) states, though the therapist’s states
clearly inﬂuence that relational system. Friston and Frith (2015a;
2015b) show how generalized synchrony in the form of an
attractor manifold emerges when two agents (in their example,
synthetic birds learning to sing in tandem) attempt to minimize
their own free energy through bringing their own model of
the birdsong closer to the model of the other, until they are
‘singing from the same hymn sheet, ’ as the authors suggested.
The emergence of this synchrony involves a dissolution of
boundaries between the two participants where the sensory
input from one becomes the prior of the other, as if it
emerged from within.
The development of the therapy relationship can be
approached in the same way, as the development of a synchrony
(and dissolution of boundaries) between therapist and client,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295
fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 10
Connolly Instability and Uncertainty Are Critical for Psychotherapy
which comes to organize the experience and behavior of both of
them. This situation supports ideas from intersubjective theories
of the therapy relationship (Stolorow et al., 1994), which view the
relationship as its own entity which is nonetheless constructed by
both client and therapist. In other words, successful synchrony
in therapy must entrain both client and therapist, though the
therapist should hopefully have a meaningfully strong positive
inﬂuence on the relationship.
Friston (personal communication, 12 September 2020) then
clariﬁes how this emergence of interpersonal synchrony entails
chaotic or stochastic processes in a general hierarchical model:
“The role of precision is perhaps most clearly evinced – in
the setting of dyadic synchronization – in the simulations of
Friston and Frith (2015b). In these simulations of active inference
(under the free energy principle) two birds sing and listen to
each other under distinct internal or generative models of their
shared song or narrative. It had been previously shown that when
two members of a dyad share a generative model, generalized
synchrony or synchronization of chaos is a necessary and emergent
phenomena (Friston and Frith, 2015a). However, when the dyadic
pair have diﬀerent generative models, they can learn from each
other and converge upon a (generalized) synchronization manifold.
Crucially, the rate at which each member approaches this manifold
depends upon the precision or conﬁdence placed in their high-level
(prior) beliefs. The numerical analysis in Friston and Frith (2015b)
shows that the bird with the higher precision – or conviction
in her model of the world – eﬀectively teaches the other bird,
such that their generative models converge. At this point, there is
mutual inference and predictability, such that they are both ‘singing
from the same hymn sheet.’ This was a proposal for resolving the
hermeneutic problem; namely inferring the intentional stance of
another. Mathematically, it is simply a manifestation of generalized
synchrony, under the free energy principle.”
While Friston and Frith’s (2015b) work here focuses on
how interpersonal synchrony entrains fast scale interpersonal
processes (that pattern perceptual inference), the important
conclusion here is that through the development of the person
over time, the person’s generative model is organized by
signiﬁcant relationships over longer timescales, through new
structural learning. Support for this perspective has come from
work by Feldman (2012) on biobehavioral synchrony in parent-
infant interaction, which has demonstrated that interpersonal
synchrony observed in parent–child interactions has been linked
with better attachment and parent–child bonds, as well as
general socio-emotional development, as well as self- and co-
regulation of aﬀect.
This hierarchical nature of our generative models is critical
to the current discussion, because it allows us to consider the
apparent paradox where the seeming stability oﬀered by the
relationship nonetheless increases stochastic processes in the
client to facilitate chaotic processes of change. This is because,
during the development of a person, new layers are added to a
hierarchical generative model through recursive self-organization
in the hierarchical generative model, which are in turn organized
by the relationships. Essentially, as the new highest level of the
generative model emerges and gains stability (patterned by a
relationship, for example), so the overall complexity of the self
(and other) that can be modeled by the system increases as
well. Since this increased capacity of the client to model their
states lowers the overall free energy of the client as a system,
so the imperative to maintain a particular system state should
be reduced as well, and with it, the precisions associated with
the priors at lower levels in the hierarchy as well. In this way,
stability at the highest level can create or facilitate instability
at lower ones 11. This follows a principle in organization of a
hierarchical generative model in that the precisions at one level
are determined by the level of complexity at the level above.
Returning to the example from earlier in the paper, if the higher-
order prior beliefs regarding the color of sea-water in visual
scenes become more complex (i.e., that water can be darker or
lighter blue, or green, or gray or various shades) it means that the
downward precision associated with the empirical prior below
is lower, allowing a greater inﬂuence from sensory information
below. If the higher-level prior was simpler (i.e., sea water is
always blue), the downward precision would tend to be higher.
This is relevant to the present discussion as follows. Before
any change process is initiated by the person before they come
to therapy (or experience major changes in their environment
or body), we would expect that the highest-level priors (for
example, ‘who I am’) reﬂect the limits of the organization present
in the person’s generative model. The addition of a new higher
layer (in this case the formation of the stable relationship which
entrains the client’s states and starts organizing the emergence of
further higher levels) should have an eﬀect similar to making that
new higher level more complex – provided it allows for some
complexity in modeling the client’s generative model. It should
allow those previously highest-level priors to be held with less
precision, and therefore to allow lower-level information greater
inﬂuence over system states – which is the chaotic or stochastic
process described above. In this way, the relationship12 may open
the client to information, leading to a widening range of behavior
and experience we might expect from the chaotic or stochastic
elements of change.
Consilience With Fonagy and Allison’s
Concepts of Mentalizing and Epistemic
Trust
There is a good consilience in the process described in this
paper, with the work of Fonagy and Allison (2014) on the
mentalization function in the therapy, and epistemic trust in
11A common idea in levels analysis that has been oﬀered as an explanation for a
variety of phenomena, such as the stability–instability paradox (Rauchhaus, 2009)
that suggests that the high-level peace between nuclear capable countries is related
to an increase in lower-level conﬂict and instability. As an example of how this
could work in the current discussion, consider how the securely attached child
nonetheless exhibits a wider range of behaviors and exploration than the insecurely
attached one in the strange situation experiments (Ainsworth and Bell, 1970) – the
stability of the relationship is related to greater variance in behavior.
12Besides the relationship, the process of self-reﬂection, whether in the context of a
relationship or not, may be conceptualized as similarly adding a new layer to the
generative model, with precisely the same stochastic eﬀect that is described here,
though the stochastic inﬂuence of the relationship should make it more eﬀective,
and supported by the mentalizing action of the therapist – see Fonagy and Allison
(2014) -which is discussed later in this paper – for a description of mentalizing in
therapy.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295
fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 11
Connolly Instability and Uncertainty Are Critical for Psychotherapy
the relationship. In their work, mentalizing refers to the activity
where the therapist experiences the mental states of the client and
reﬂects this experience to the client (or a caregiver to a child),
providing the client an organizing experience of their inner
life which is critical to development and therapeutic progress.
Epistemic trust (of a client, for example) can be described as
the relaxation of epistemic vigilance and an openness to learning
from another person, that occurs in the context of a relationship
whether, for example, a child in an attachment relationship
with a caregiver, or a client in a relationship with a therapist.
Fonagy and Allison suggest that epistemic trust is more likely
to develop toward another person, when both the verbal and
non-verbal communication from that person is experienced as
relevant to oneself.
There may be many aspects of a client’s experience of a
therapist that makes their communications seem relevant to us,
such as racial and cultural similarity (Ward, 2005), attractiveness
and personal similarity (Nerison and Claiborn, 1990) and other
characteristics. However, regarding the trainable conduct of the
therapist, Fonagy and Allison’s paper implies that a therapist’s
communication is most likely to be relevant to a client when
the therapist is accurately mentalizing the inner states of the
client, which is a precondition for higher-level synchronization
in therapy, or two minds doing the same thing at the same
time, as described in Friston and Frith (2015b) or similar to
what Mergenthaler (2008) called the Resonating Minds theory
of psychotherapy, or Koole and Tschacher’s (2016) integrative
framework for the therapeutic alliance.
Fonagy and Allison (2014) suggest that the trust that forms
relaxes the ‘epistemic vigilance’ of the client, in doing so making
them more open to learning and to a wider range of experience.
This may counteract a process of epistemic freezing (described
by Kruglanski, 1989) where a person maintains or defends their
existing knowledge structures, even when they create adaptive
problems for the person.
Closer to the systems perspective taken in this paper, Schoeller
et al. (2021) have formalized trust within a predictive coding
framework. In their study they have formally described trust as
an agent’s best explanation for reliable sensory exchange with a
partner, or where our prediction of the outcomes of our behaviors
toward a partner are held with high certainty. In plain words, we
might say that trust in this context is a situation where people
respond to us the way we hope they will. In the case of therapy,
this may often refer to the client’s hope that a therapist will listen
to and understand them, not judge them and feel positively about
them, or possibly guide them in some sense. While the deﬁnition
of trust developed by Schoeller et al. (2021) veers closer to control
than that in psychotherapy literature (their study is focused on
human-robot collaboration), the key foundation is the same, that
the client trusts a person whose behavior seems to reliably support
the clients goals or aims (or is relevant to them, in Fonagy and
Allison’s sense).
Within the approach taken by the current paper, the client’s
‘opening up’ to knowing, experiencing and learning as a result
of trust in the relationship (in the form of synchronized states
described in Friston and Frith, 2015a), and its capacity to organize
the emergence of a new level of organization of the person’s
generative model, and the resulting broadening of the client’s
system states, is formally similar to and compatible with the
systems-based description being oﬀered in this paper.
Chaotic Process as a Necessary
Condition of Therapeutic Change
Tschacher and Haken (2019) have modeled chaotic processes
as a necessary ﬁrst step in psychotherapeutic change 13. The
implication here is that a reduction in precisions of high-level
prior beliefs may be a necessary condition of meaningful change
in psychotherapeutic relationships. While Parr et al. (2018) show
that higher-order sensory priors held with high precision can
update quickly when conﬂicting with sensory information, this
cannot be true of the prior beliefs at the highest levels of the
hierarchy, since by deﬁnition, these are the ones that change
slowest – they are most likely those that predict or model the self
(Palacios et al., 2020), which are often the target of therapeutic
focus14. They have formed and are maintained because the
relative plasticity or aﬀordance in the environment permits their
maintenance, and in the absence of major environmental change
or signiﬁcant development, are diﬃcult to alter, due to the
generative model’s tendency to maintain its own organization as
far as possible (Connolly, 2016; Hohwy, 2016), even to the extent
of repressing meaningful levels of information to do so (Hopkins,
2016; Connolly, 2018). In this context, unless there is signiﬁcant
change in the person’s environment (or anatomical processes,
or meaningful structure learning) which makes it impossible to
continue maintaining these beliefs 15 (as mentioned above this
is often the source of crisis which make people seek help in
psychotherapy), a weakening of the precisions associated with
them, and the subsequent increase in available information is the
only way that meaningful (permanent) therapeutic change may
take place16. In the absence of major contextual (or anatomical)
change, a reduction of precisions of highest-order beliefs is a
necessary condition of meaningful personal change.
This necessary condition may underlie the most fundamental
ﬁnding from process-outcome research into psychotherapy over
most of the last century, which is the centrality of the therapeutic
relationship in facilitating change in psychotherapy. This has
been largely conceptualized as the therapeutic alliance (or related
terms) in literature, and has been supported by hundreds of
studies in psychotherapy as well as a number of major reviews
13My thanks to Dr. Fabio Tha, who has suggested that the chaotic process is likely
to be recursive, and that the new organization continues to update throughout the
therapy process.
14This holds true at higher orders of organization as well. Lakatos (1970) proposed
philosophy of the history of science, which suggested that the most peripheral
beliefs of a theory are relatively easy to change, but the core of the theory is not,
and it changes much more slowly. Certainly, from the perspective of hierarchical
recursive organization, social and cultural practice of science represent even
slower, higher-order processes, presumably even less changeable than individual
generative models.
15An example may be a traumatic event that ‘shatters the assumptions’ of safety and
predictability of the world (Janoﬀ-Bulman, 1989) or the loss of a very signiﬁcant
other, or sudden poverty and loss of income (though the resulting change in the
higher-order beliefs in the form of adaptation or grief also takes a long, painful
time to unfold in these cases as well).
16Mathys et al. (2011) demonstrate that learning is related to the level of precision-
weighted uncertainty in a hierarchical generative model.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295
fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 12
Connolly Instability and Uncertainty Are Critical for Psychotherapy
of this literature (Llewelyn et al., 2016). Given the perspective
being outlined in the current paper, should the relationship
fail to establish the necessary synchrony (that can entrain the
client’s states), the instability at lower levels (through reduced
precision associated with higher-order priors) never emerges
either, leading to limited or failed outcomes in psychotherapy.
Some support for this comes from the Vanderbilt studies of
behavior in psychotherapy conducted by Strupp (1993) which
identiﬁed the problem where clients who had negative or hostile
views toward the therapist from the start, simply never had a
positive outcome from therapy, and often ended up triggering
negative or hostile responses from therapists themselves, typically
by the third session 17. Similar to Fonagy and Allison (2014) we
might say that if a client does not trust the therapist enough
(or more formally, achieve meaningful interpersonal synchrony
with them) to step away from the certainty of their self-beliefs, or
their conviction about how to approach life, the ‘opening up’ of
stochastic change processes may never happen.
Speciﬁc Instabilities in Psychotherapy
So far, this paper has focused on a very fundamental (general)
form of instability in the service of change, one that is linked with
the forming of a special form of relationship. It is one that can
last through weeks or even months of psychotherapy, or longer.
While it may be decisive in terms of whether psychotherapy can
progress or not, it is likely also on a continuum of intensity (just
as the relationship can have a degree of stability or synchronicity).
However, there are certainly ﬂuctuations in the level of
intensity of instability during the course of therapy, just as
there are (perhaps related) shifts in synchronicity or cohesion.
The idea of instability as a precursor to change is already well-
established in psychotherapy, though often it is viewed in terms
of faster, intra-session processes (or even microprocesses), that
are much more short-lived, and possibly more intense. It is
based on an established idea in systems studies, that systems
may go through periods of critical instability ahead of phase
change before reaching a new stable state (Haken, 1993; Schiepek
et al., 2016). This critical instability has also been proposed as
a crucial element in psychotherapy process, that has acquired
empirical support in analysis of time series from behavioral,
physiological, and neurological data (see Schiepek et al., 2016, for
an overview), as well as in linguistic analysis of psychotherapy
transcripts (Mergenthaler, 2008; Walter et al., 2010).
While such critical change periods in psychotherapy may
arise spontaneously in interaction, they are not inevitable even
within the context of a good therapeutic alliance, and may
often be related to processes within sessions. Research on the
precursors or causes of such states has not yet given any clear
answer (Schiepek et al., 2016). Certainly, several techniques in
psychotherapy may intentionally try to create these states, such
as confrontations – whether they are in the service of setting up
interpretations (Greenson, 1967), or challenging core beliefs or
17This is not to contradict the idea that overcoming hostility is very valuable for the
client (such as interpreting negative transference), but rather that where the client
has never had any positive feelings (transference) toward the therapist, therapeutic
progress may be extremely diﬃcult, or take a diﬀerent form to the key processes
described in this paper.
evidence (Beck et al., 1979) – or gestalt techniques that escalate
current sensory experience at the expense of established patterns
of behavior (Perls, 1969), or the initial stages of the focusing
(Gendlin, 1996), or many others. Despite their diﬀerence from
the longer-term instability described in this paper, in terms of the
current formulation their therapeutic value may well be the same
in the sense of acutely weakening prior beliefs in order to allow
a new and transformative experience, thought or behavior at that
moment in the session.
When Instability Is Desirable or
Undesirable in Therapy
Up until this point, the focus has been on the positive role that
chaotic or stochastic change processes can play in psychotherapy.
Clearly, such therapeutically induced uncertainty or instability
is helpful in situations where stability is the problem, in terms
of perceptions, behaviors or beliefs that are diﬃcult or slow
to change (e.g., certain forms of depression). However, there
are clearly situations where instability is either undesirable or
potentially harmful, in which therapeutic activities that activate
chaotic processes should be avoided or at least mitigated or
compensated for.
A clear example is in the case of psychotic disorders or
a general weakness in reality testing. Tschacher and Haken
(2019) highlight this treatment concern in their description
that psychiatric facilities that treat patients with schizophrenia
and psychosis actively try to maintain stability and reduce
chaotic process by limiting disturbance and information from
the environment. For this reason, very challenging techniques,
or those that deliberately try to disrupt thought processes such
as gestalt techniques may be harmful in work with clients with
chronic psychotic symptoms18.
Another limitation applies to cases where the person’s
inner states are already unstable, and their current need is
toward reestablishing stability. Clients in the midst of crisis,
or facing overwhelming environmental pressures, or having
recently experienced trauma, are already experiencing chaotic
change processes instigated by profound disruptions in the
environmental context and their experiences, and the highest
levels of organization of their self are already destabilized and
under threat. As stated earlier in the paper, these disruptive
situations have the potential for change in a positive direction
(the phenomenon of post-traumatic growth), though this is not
a certainty. Regardless, such clients are already in a condition
of high instability, and are usually more in need of support
than even greater instability. Some studies have in fact found
potential harmful outcomes of therapy in the period shortly after
a traumatic event such as Critical Incident Stress Debrieﬁng
(Carlier et al., 2000; McNally et al., 2003).
Finally, an ethical consideration applies as well. The theory
developed in this paper oﬀers an explanation for the vulnerability
18A helpful distinction may be Kernberg (2004) description of neurotic vs.
psychotic personality organization: disorders related to neurotic organization
(such as depression) characterized by excessive ego defense (for which instability
may be therapeutically helpful) and disorders of psychotic organization reﬂecting
poor ego strength and development (for which instability is more likely to be
destructive).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295
fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 13
Connolly Instability and Uncertainty Are Critical for Psychotherapy
of clients who have opened up to the therapeutic relationship, and
that it may work through the relative loss of precisions of their
own beliefs. It also explains how clients can be taken advantage
of by unethical therapists who hope to keep clients in therapy by
facilitating the client’s uncertainty in their own beliefs.
While Tschacher and Haken’s (2019) insights regarding
chaotic change processes could be applied to understanding
psychotherapy in various ways, one that seems immediately
relevant is in terms of assessing a client’s need in terms of stability
or instability, which may diﬀer not only from client to client, but
also from session to session and moment to moment in therapy.
Implications for Therapeutic Practice
and Research
The key implication for psychotherapists from Tschacher and
Haken’s (2019) work that is relevant to this paper, is that
instability and uncertainty may be critical and helpful for
psychotherapeutic change, whether it emerges spontaneously
such as through the relationship, or through directive techniques
of the therapist to induce instability. It may be important for
therapists to recognize stochastic process when they see it, with
an understanding of its potential beneﬁts and risks.
Regarding techniques, while it may be that new techniques
may be described in future work that speciﬁcally induce
stochastic processes, it is perhaps more immediately relevant for
practitioners to recognize the stochastic eﬀects of techniques that
are already well established in psychotherapy literature (a number
have already been described in this paper and in Tschacher and
Haken’s) and to be more intentional in using them with this eﬀect
in mind. This includes learning to how to manage instability
when it appears, how to capitalize on it for the best eﬀect, and
selecting when to facilitate it and let it run, and when (and how)
to try restore stability if one can.
While processes of instability are already well-observed in
psychotherapy (Schiepek et al., 2016), Tschacher and Haken
(2019) suggest that advances in understanding of chaotic
processes is needed and is at an early stage. Certainly, the
present paper points toward whether the establishment of
the relationship itself may be linked to greater beneﬁcial
instability in client states (independent of deliberate techniques
that facilitate instability), and considerations for evaluating
instability responses following deliberate techniques that attempt
to facilitate it. Work on stochastic process may also play a role in
examining harmful outcomes in psychotherapy, where a client’s
priors may be scrambled by destabilizing therapy practice, with
no move toward rebuilding stability in the client.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author conﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work and
has approved it for publication.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
My thanks to the reviewers for their constructive contributions
to the manuscript, as well as to other colleagues who read and
commented on earlier versions of this manuscript, including
Jeremy Holmes, Fabio Tha, and Patrice Duquette.
REFERENCES
Ainsworth, M. D. S., and Bell, S. M. (1970). Attachment, exploration, and
separation: illustrated by the behavior of one-year-olds in a strange situation.
Child Dev. 41, 49–67. doi: 10.2307/1127388
Ao, P. (2005). Laws in Darwinian evolutionary theory. Phys. Life Rev. 2, 117–156.
doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2005.03.002
Badcock, P. B., Davey, C. G., Whittle, S., Allen, N. B., and Friston, K. J. (2017). The
depressed brain: an evolutionary systems theory.Trends Cogn. Sci. 21, 182–194.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2017.01.005
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in Anthropology,
Psychiatry, Evolution, and Epistemology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., and Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive Therapy of
Depression. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Bermpohl, F., Fregni, F., Boggio, P. S., Thut, G., Northoﬀ, G., Otachi, P. T.,
et al. (2006). Eﬀect of low-frequency transcranial magnetic stimulation on an
aﬀective go/no-go task in patients with major depression: role of stimulation
site and depression severity. Psychiatry Res. 141, 1–13. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.
2005.07.018
Bordin, E. S. (1979). The generalizability of the psychoanalytic concept of the
working alliance. Psychother. Theory Res. Pract. 16, 252-260. doi: 10.1037/
h0085885
Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2018). The entropic brain – revisited. Neuropharmacology
142, 167–178. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.03.010
Carhart-Harris, R. L., and Friston, K. J. (2019). REBUS and the anarchic brain:
toward a uniﬁed model of the brain action of psychedelics. Pharmacol. Rev. 71,
316–344. doi: 10.1124/pr.118.017160
Carlier, I. V. E., Voerman, A. E., and Gersons, B. P. R. (2000). The inﬂuence
of occupational debrieﬁng on post-traumatic stress symptomatology in
traumatized police oﬃcers. Br. J. Med. Psychol. 73, 87–98. doi: 10.1348/
000711200160327
Clark, J. E., Watson, S., and Friston, K. J. (2018). What is mood? A computational
perspective. Psychol. Med. 48, 2277–2284. doi: 10.1017/S003329171800
0430
Connolly, J. P. (2016). Principles of Organization of Psychic Energy Within
Psychoanalysis: a Systems Theory Perspective . thesis, Pretoria: University of
South Africa. Unpublished doctoral thesis.
Connolly, P. (2018). Expected free energy formalizes conﬂict underlying defense
in freudian psychoanalysis. Front. Psychol. 9:1264. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.
01264
Feldman, R. (2012). Parent-infant synchrony: a biobehavioral model of mutual
inﬂuences in the formation of aﬃliative bonds. Monogr. Soc. Res. Child Dev.
77, 42–51. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-5834.2011.00660.x
Fonagy, P., and Allison, E. (2014). The role of mentalizing and epistemic trust in
the therapeutic relationship. Psychotherapy 51, 372–380. doi: 10.1037/a0036505
Friston, K. J. (2010). A free energy principle for the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11,
127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K., and Frith, C. (2015a). A duet for one. Conscious Cogn. 36, 390–405.
doi: 10.1016/j.cogn.2014.12.003
Friston, K. J., and Frith, C. D. (2015b). Active inference, communication
and hermeneutics. Cortex 68, 129–143. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2015.
03.025
Friston, K., Breakspear, M., and Deco, G. (2012). Perception and self-organized
instability. Front. Computational Neurosci. 6:44. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2012.
00044
Friston, K., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle
of the brain. J. Physiol. 100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.
001
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295
fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 14
Connolly Instability and Uncertainty Are Critical for Psychotherapy
Gendlin, E. T. (1996). Focusing-oriented Psychotherapy: a Manual of the
Experiential Method. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Greenson, R. R. (1967). The Technique and Practice of Psychoanalysis. Milton Park:
Routledge.
Haken, H. (1983/2004). Synergetics: Introduction and Advanced Topics . Berlin:
Springer-Verlag. Original work published in 1983.
Haken, H. (1993). Advanced Synergetics: Instability Hierarchies of Self-Organizing
Systems and Devices. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 50, 259–285. doi: 10.1111/nous.
12062
Holmes, J., and Nolte, T. (2019). Surprise and the bayesian brain:
implications for psychotherapy theory and practice. Front. Psychol.
Psychoanalysis Neuropsychoanalysis 10:592. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.
00592
Hopkins, J. (2016). Free energy and virtual reality in neuroscience and
neuropsychoanalysis: a complexity theory of dreaming and mental
disorder. Front. Psychol. Cogn. Sci. 7:922. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.
00922
Janoﬀ-Bulman, R. (1989). Assumptive worlds and the stress of traumatic events:
applications of the schema construct. Soc. Cogn. 7:117. doi: 10.1521/soco.1989.
7.2.113
Keeney, B. (1983). Aesthetics of Change. New York, NY: Guilford.
Kernberg, O. F. (2004). “Borderline personality disorder and borderline personality
organization: psychopathology and psychotherapy, ” inHandbook of Personality
Disorders: Theory and Practice, ed. J. J. Magnavita (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &
Sons Inc), 92–119.
Kiverstein, J., Rietveld, E., Slagter, H. A., and Denys, D. (2019). Obsessive
compulsive disorder: a pathology of self-conﬁdence? Trends Cogn. Sci. 23,
369–372. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2019.02.005
Koole, S. L., and Tschacher, W. (2016). Synchrony in psychotherapy: a review and
an integrative framework for the therapeutic alliance. Front. Psychol. 7:862.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00862
Kruglanski, A. W. (1989). Lay Epistemics and Human Knowledge: Cognitive and
Motivational Bases. New York, NY: Plenum Press. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4899-
0924-4
Kuypers, K. P., Ng, L., Erritzoe, D., Knudsen, G. M., Nichols, C. D., Nichols,
D. E., et al. (2019). Microdosing psychedelics: more questions than answers?
an overview and suggestions for future research. J. Psychopharmacol. 33, 1039–
1057. doi: 10.1177/0269881119857204
Lakatos, I. (1970). “Falsiﬁcation and the methodology of scientiﬁc research
programmes, ” inCriticism and the Growth of Knowledge , eds I. Lakatos and
A. Musgrave (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 91–196. doi: 10.1017/
cbo9781139171434.009
Leszczynski, M., Chaieb, L., Reber, T. P., Derner, M., Axmacher, N., and
Fell, J. (2017). Mind wandering simultaneously prolongs reactions and
promotes creative incubation. Sci. Rep. 7:10197. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-10
616-3
Llewelyn, S., Macdonald, J., and Aafjes-van Doorn, K. (2016). “Process-
Outcome studies, ” in APA Handbook of Clinical Psychology: Theory and
Research, eds J. C. Norcross, G. R. VandenBos, and D. K. Freedheim
(Washington, DC: American Psychological Association), doi: 10.1037/1477
3-020
Mathys, C., Daunizeau, J., Friston, K. J., and Stephan, K. E. (2011). A Bayesian
foundation for individual learning under uncertainty. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
5:39. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2011.00039
McNally, R., Bryant, R., and Ehlers, A. (2003). Does early psychological
intervention promote recovery from posttraumatic stress? Psychol. Sci. Public
Interest 4, 45–79. doi: 10.1111/1529-1006.01421
Mehrabian, A. R., and Lucas, C. (2006). A novel numerical optimization algorithm
inspired from weed colonization.Ecol. Inform. 1, 355–366. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoinf.
2006.07.003
Mergenthaler, E. (2008). Resonating minds: a school-independent
theoretical conception and its empirical application to psychotherapeutic
processes. Psychotherapy Res. 18, 109–126. doi: 10.1080/105033007018
83741
Metzinger, T. (2017). “Why is mind wandering interesting for philosophers?, ” in
The Oxford Handbook of Spontaneous Thought: Mind-wandering, Creativity,
Dreaming, and Clinical Conditions, eds K. C. R. Fox and K. Christoﬀ (New York,
NY: Oxford University Press), 97–112. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00746
Nerison, R. M., and Claiborn, C. D. (1990). “Counselor attractiveness, similarity,
and session impact: a ﬁeld study, ” inPaper Presentated at the Annual Convention
of the American Psychological Association (Boston, MA).
Northoﬀ, G. (2018). The Spontaneous Brain: from the Mind-Body to the World-
Brain Problem. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Palacios, E. R., Razi, A., Parr, T., Kirchhoﬀ, M., and Friston, K. J. (2020). On Markov
blankets and hierarchical self-organisation. J. Theoretical Biol. 486:110089. doi:
10.1016/j.jtbi.2019.110089
Park, J., Mori, H., Okuyama, Y., and Asada, M. (2017). Chaotic itinerancy within
the coupled dynamics between a physical body and neural oscillator networks.
PLoS One 12:e0182518. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182518
Parr, T., Benrimoh, D. A., Vincent, P., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Precision and
false perceptual inference. Front. Integr. Neurosci. 12:39. doi: 10.3389/fnint.
2018.00039
Perls, F. (1969). Gestalt Therapy Verbatim. Gouldsboro, ME: Gestalt Journal Press.
Peterfreund, E., and Schwartz, J. T. (1971). Information, systems, and
psychoanalysis: an evolutionary biological approach to psychoanalytic theory.
Psychol. Issues Monograph 7, 1–397.
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Hierarchical active inference: a
theory of motivated control. Trends Cogn. Sci. 22, 294–306. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.
2018.01.009
Polito, V., and Stevenson, R. J. (2019). A systematic study of microdosing
psychedelics. PLoS One 14:e0211023. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.021
1023
Rauchhaus, R. (2009). Evaluating the nuclear peace hypothesis: a quantitative
approach. J. Conﬂict Resolution 53, 258–277. doi: 10.1177/002200270833
0387
Rogers, C. (1959). “A theory of therapy, personality and interpersonal relationships
as developed in the client-centered framework, ” in Psychology: A Study of
a Science: Formulations of the Person and the Social Context , ed. S. Koch
(New York, NY: McGraw Hill).
Sadaghiani, S., Hesselmann, G., Friston, K. J., and Kleinschmidt, A. (2010). The
relation of ongoing brain activity, evoked neural responses, and cognition.
Front. Systems Neurosci. 4:20. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2010.00020
Schiepek, G., Heinzel, S., Karch, S., Ploderl, M., and Strunk, G. (2016). “Synergetics
in psychology: patterns and pattern transitions in human change processes, ”
in Self-organization in Complex Systems: The Past, Present, and Future of
Synergetics, Understanding Complex Systems , eds A. Pelster and G. Wunner
(Cham: Springer), doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-27635-9_12
Schoeller, F., Miller, M., Salomon, R., and Friston, K. J. (2021). Trust as
extended control: human-machine interactions as active inference. Front.
Systems Neurosci. 15:93. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2021.669810
Seth, A., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the
emotional brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 371:20160007. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.
0007
Smallwood, J., and Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind wandering:
empirically navigating the stream of consciousness. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 66,
487–518. doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-015331
Stolorow, R., Atwood, G., and Brandchaft, B. (eds) (1994). The Intersubjective
Perspective. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.
Strupp, H. H. (1993). The vanderbilt psychotherapy studies: synopsis. J. Consult.
Clin. Psychol. 61, 431–433. doi: 10.1037/0022-006X.61.3.431
Tschacher, W., Giersch, A., and Friston, K. (2017). Embodiment and schizophrenia:
a review of implications and applications. Schizophr. Bull. 43, 745–753. doi:
10.1093/schbul/sbw220
Tschacher, W., and Haken, H. (2019).The Process of Psychotherapy: Causation and
Chance. Cham: Springer.
Tyukin, I., Tyukina, T., and Leeuwen, C. (2009). Invariant template matching in
systems with spatiotemporal coding: a matter of instability. Neural Networks
22, 425–449. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2009.01.014
Van de Cruys, S., Evers, K., Van der Hallen, R., Van Eylen, L., Boets, B., de-Wit,
L., et al. (2014). Precise minds in uncertain worlds: predictive coding in autism.
Psychol. Rev. 121, 649–675. doi: 10.1037/a0037665
Walter, S., Schiepek, G. K., Schneider, S., Strunk, G., Kaimer, P., and Mergenthaler,
E. (2010). The synchronization of plan activations and emotion-abstraction
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295
fpsyg-12-784295 January 3, 2022 Time: 13:16 # 15
Connolly Instability and Uncertainty Are Critical for Psychotherapy
patterns in the psychotherapeutic process: a single-case study. Psychotherapy
Res. 20, 214–223. doi: 0.1080/10503300903277437
Ward, E. C. (2005). Keeping it real: a grounded theory study of African American
clients engaging in counseling at a community mental health agency. J. Couns.
Psychol. 52, 471–481. doi: 10.1037/0022-0167.52.4.471
Zedelius, C. M., and Schooler, J. W. (2015). Mind wandering “Ahas” versus mindful
reasoning: alternative routes to creative solutions. Front. Psychol. 6:834. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00834
Conﬂict of Interest: The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note:All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Connolly. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 784295