Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 21 November 2019
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02599
Edited by: 
Jim Hopkins,  
University College London,  
United Kingdom
Reviewed by: 
Daniela Flores Mosri,  
Universidad Intercontinental, Mexico
Karl Friston,  
University College London,  
United Kingdom
*Correspondence: 
Patrick Connolly  
patrickconnolly@live.com
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to  
Psychoanalysis and 
Neuropsychoanalysis,  
a section of the journal  
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 30 July 2019
Accepted: 01 November 2019
Published: 21 November 2019
Citation:
Connolly P (2019) The Gravity of 
Objects: How Affectively Organized 
Generative Models Influence 
Perception and Social Behavior.
Front. Psychol. 10:2599.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02599
The Gravity of Objects: How 
Affectively Organized Generative 
Models Influence Perception and 
Social Behavior
Patrick Connolly*
Counselling and Psychology Department, Hong Kong Shue Yan University, North Point, Hong Kong
Friston’s (2010) free energy principle (FEP) offers an opportunity to rethink what is meant 
by the psychoanalytic concept of an object or discrete mental representation ( Ogden, 
1992). The significance of such objects in psychoanalysis is that they may be superimposed 
on current experience so that perceptions are partly composed of projected fantasy and 
partly of more realistic perception. From a free energy perspective, the psychoanalytic 
(person) object may be understood as a bounded set of prior beliefs about a “platonic” 
sort of person that provides a free energy minimizing, evidence maximizing, hypothesis 
to explain inference about – or dyadic interactions with – another. The degree to which 
realistic perception supervenes – relative to a platonic person object – will depend upon 
the precision assigned to the sensory evidence (concerning the person) relative to the 
prior beliefs about a platonic form. This provides a basis for not only explaining projection 
and transference phenomena but also conceptualizing a central assumption within the 
object relations psychoanalysis. As an example, the paper examines the Kleinian theory 
of split good or bad part objects as affectively organized generative models (or platonic 
part-object models) formed in early infancy. This also provides a basis for building on work 
by Kernberg (1984, 1996) by conceptualizing the role of the part object(s) in a continuum 
of reality testing, from mild errors in perception that are relatively easily corrected, through 
borderline affective instability and frequent shifts between part-object experience, to 
psychotic failures of reality testing, where Friston et al. (2016)  proposed that aberrant 
precisions bias perception to high precision false beliefs (here cast as platonic part objects), 
such as stable perceptions of others (and possibly oneself) as persecutory agents of some 
sort. The paper demonstrates the value that the history of clinical insights into psychoanalysis 
(including object relations) and a system-based approach to the brain (including the free 
energy principle) can have for one another. This is offered as a demonstration of the 
potential value of an “Integrative Clinical Systems Psychology” proposed by Tretter and 
Lo ¨ ffler-Stastka (2018), which has the potential to integrate the major theoretical frameworks 
in the field today.
Keywords: object relations, free energy principle, integrative clinical systems psychology, systems theory,  
social perception, psychoanalysis, development
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
INTRODUCTION
A broad field of study in psychoanalysis focuses on objects, 
referring to a “mental” object and was described by Ogden 
(1992) as a discrete mental representation. In theory, objects 
could refer to mental representations of anything in our lived 
experience, but the field is primarily concerned with our 
mental representations of people, whether there are people 
around us, people who have been important to us in our 
past, or even ideal or prototypical people who exist only in 
our imagination.
There are a couple of key reasons that our mental 
representations of people are worth studying. One reason is 
that our social behavior may be  very influenced by those 
representations. The way we see people (either people in general, 
or specific types of people like authority figures, or specific 
individuals) may strongly influence our behavior toward them. 
Of course, many factors play a role in any given (social) 
behavior, including our aims toward others, strategic goals 
we are trying to achieve, our emotions, and a host of contextual 
factors. But, a key assumption of object relations psychology 
suggests that those representations do play quite a foundational 
role in our behavior, our aims toward people to some extent, 
and the emotions we  feel about them.
Another key reason for interest in mental representations 
of people is because such representations may be quite different 
from the reality of the people that they are supposed to 
represent. Object relations psychologists suggest that a lot of 
our apparently irrational, self-destructive, or maladaptive 
behaviors – particularly in social contexts – may make perfect 
sense when we  can see that people are acting consistently 
with their (often inaccurate) inner representations of people.
Following Kernberg (1965, 1987), a person’s reaction to another 
person’s behavior is potentially the result of two different components 
(Kernberg’s idea was primarily applied to counter transference, 
or how therapists perceive clients, but logically applies to any 
interaction). The first of these is a “realistic” response to the 
person’s behavior toward us, including their attitude and emotions 
toward us. In other words, someone’s behavior might make me 
feel angry because it typically produces anger in others too, for 
example, where the other person insults me. We  might think of 
my angry response toward them as a compatible or “rational” 
response to the other person’s behavior in such a case.
However, my response may also be driven primarily by “fantasy” 
or the influence of my own mental representations rather than 
by a realistic perception of the stimulus 1. In other words, I  may 
have a response to the other person’s behavior that few other 
people would have, or my response would be  much more (or 
less) intense than other people’s, beyond a level of what could 
be  described as culturally or statistically normal. An example 
here would be  an angry response to another person whose 
behavior would not ordinarily cause others to behave angrily: 
1 Strictly, this is incorrect – all perception must be  in terms of mental 
representations, and there is no direct perception of reality. Rather, what is 
implied are poles of a dimension, that is apparently more reality driven versus 
representation driven.
another person makes an inoffensive joke that does not really 
make any reference to me (or my social identity) in any way.
Object relations psychoanalysts (such as Klein, 1946 ; 
Kernberg, 1965 ; Ogden, 1992 ) tend to suggest that this kind 
of error in perception is ubiquitous. In other words, at all 
times, our perception of people may reflect a combination 
of both the realistic perceiving and some amount of 
“representation-driven” perceiving. All that vary are the relative 
extent (or ratio) of the realistic versus representation-driven 
perceiving. For most people, the relative influence of realistic 
versus representational perceiving varies from one situation 
to another. However, there are a number of conditions in 
which we may think that some people regularly have a much 
stronger influence of representation-driven perception. One 
instance may be  personality disorders, such as borderline 
personality disorder or paranoid personality disorder, where 
perceptions of other people are mostly negative. An even 
more extreme example may be schizophrenia, where a person 
may remain entirely convinced of seriously hostile intentions 
of almost everyone around them, despite being exposed to 
a large amount of information that might appear to contradict 
such a perception. In each of these cases, the perception 
driven by the internal mental representation appears less 
responsive to the information available.
However, regardless of whether we  are focusing on typical 
or atypical social perception, an important question raised by 
the above account is how such a “quantitative” description (in 
other words “more” or “less” based on available information) 
is formalized, and in a neuronally plausible way, which also 
fits the phenomenology we  observe. This is computational in 
the sense that it describes an outcome (the perception of a 
person) as the result of two processes (realistic versus 
representation-driven perception) that appear to operate in 
opposition to one another, such that the result reflects some 
relative ratio of both. A computational account would require 
that the processes be  specifically defined as quantifiable terms 
in an equation that precisely specifies the relation between them.
Friston’s (2010) free energy principle (FEP) as a regulatory 
principle of biological organisms, including brain processes, 
offers precisely such a computational expression of the relative 
influence of informational inputs to the brain and how they 
are acted upon by the existing mental representations of persons 
encoded in its neural networks. This paper will outline a free 
energy principle account of person perception, showing how 
it is computationally efficient for the brain to encode a prototypical 
model of what a person is. This prototypical model then exerts 
a theoretically quantifiable influence on conscious perception. 
The focus then shifts toward showing how object relations 
theory in psychoanalysis can make use of this FEP account 
to demonstrate the unique contribution it can bring to formalizing 
social perception. The paper uses the example of good and 
bad part objects found by Klein’s (1946)  foundational work 
in object relations and suggests that these could be understood 
as distinct affectively organized generative models that play a 
role in social perception and that come to the fore in emotionally 
intense experiences. Next, this account of affectively organized 
part-object models is applied to both borderline personality 
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
disorder and schizophrenia to show how this reformulated 
object relations approach might provide additional explanatory 
power to current computational FEP-based approaches to these 
psychiatric conditions. Finally, it is suggested that the formulation 
in the paper attempts to demonstrate the potential value of 
Tretter and Löffler-Stastka’s (2018)  call for an “Integrative 
Clinical Systems Psychology” that has the potential to integrate 
existing major theories of psychology with system-based 
approaches. We  begin with laying out a formal free-energy 
principle account of person perception.
A PLATONIC PERSON MODEL 
APPROACH TO FREE-ENERGY 
PRINCIPLE-BASED SOCIAL 
PERCEPTION
A FEP account of information processing proposes that the 
physical structure of the brain constitutes a generative model 
of its environment that actively infers the causes of its sensory 
inputs and specifies a prior prediction of inputs. The organism 
(and the brain) acts according to a regulatory principle, which 
minimizes the differences (more correctly the Kullback-Leibler 
divergence, or “free energy”) between the prior prediction of 
the generative model and the posterior likelihood of the inputs 2. 
This minimization is achieved either through the Bayesian 
updating of the generative model or by an action, which alters 
the inputs in line with the predictions of the generative model. 
In this way, the free energy in the perceiving system drives 
both behavior and learning (i.e., belief updating).
A more complete account of free energy minimization rests 
on mathematically decomposing free energy in a number of 
ways. First, free energy can be  decomposed into expected 
energy minus entropy. This means that minimizing free energy 
conforms to (Jaynes) principle of maximum entropy ( Banavar 
et  al., 2010). A more intuitive decomposition splits free energy 
into complexity minus accuracy. This means that minimizing 
free energy is equivalent to providing an accurate explanation 
for the sensorium in a minimally complex way – in accordance 
with Occam’s principle (Maisto et al., 2015 ). Finally, free energy 
can be  expressed as an evidence lower bound minus the log 
evidence for the generative model. This decomposition means 
that minimizing free energy reduces the bound (to ensure 
that model evidence is maximized). This is sometimes referred 
to as self-evidencing ( Hohwy, 2016). These decompositions are 
mathematically equivalent; however, the decomposition into 
accuracy and complexity will figure prominently in the present 
discussion and is explained next.
The learning (belief updating) process described above always 
moves in the direction of greater accuracy of the model while 
minimizing complexity; namely, an oversensitivity to typical 
changes in inputs. In other words, my generative model of 
the world grows in accuracy with experience, but once it 
2 This formulation and the equation specifying the free energy principle can 
be  found by Friston (2010) .
becomes too accurate (in a sense over-fitted to the data), it 
is becomes sub-optimal in that relatively small shifts in the 
state of the environment can now generate larger amounts of 
free energy (or prediction error). Therefore, it is computationally 
efficient for our generative models to be  abstracted from our 
sensory experienced to some extent, so that they maximize 
accuracy while minimizing oversensitivity in typical changes 
in inputs ( Friston, 2010 ; Hobson et  al., 2014 ). Friston (2017, 
personal communication) suggests that this would be  enough 
to explain the emergence of a mental representation (generative 
model) of a “platonic” person 3 encoded within the structure 
of the body and nervous system:
“ … a prior belief about a … ‘platonic’ sort of person 
provides a free energy minimising, evidence 
maximising, hypothesis to explain inference about – or 
dyadic interactions with – another. In other words, 
having a particular hypothesis or platonic person in 
mind allows you to immediately explain prosocial cues 
in an accurate and parsimonious fashion. The parsimony 
afforded by the object minimises complexity and 
thereby free energy. ”
This computationally efficient set of expectations cohering 
around an abstracted “platonic” model of a person informs 
our expectations regarding what people do and how they 
think and behave. In terms of how this generative model 
of a platonic person is encoded in the brain, this must of 
necessity refer to distributed networks of neural relationships 
within a multi-level hierarchy of organization, consisting of 
faster sensory-level priors and increasingly slower, more 
abstract integrative priors extending through the highest 
levels of cortical organization 4.
A FREE ENERGY FORMULATION OF 
REALITY VERSUS REPRESENTATION-
DRIVEN PERCEPTION
The FE formulation of the platonic object as described above 
now allows for a formal statement of the relationship of reality 
versus representation-driven perception. Friston (2017, personal 
communication) describes how this distinction might 
be  formulated in a free energy perspective:
3 This refers to Plato’s notion of an ideal form of a thing. For example, one 
might consider all the persons you  have encountered in reality as reflections 
of a prototypical form of a person, which we  might call a “platonic” person. 
The author thanks Dr Jeremy Holmes, who commented on an earlier version 
of this paper, and suggested the terms “schematic” or “stereotypical” as alternatives 
to “platonic” here.
4 Diaconescu et al. (2017, submitted) presented evidence for a temporal sequence 
of activation of a proposed hierarchy of levels of cortical function for a social 
perception task that required different levels of processing of social information. 
The findings suggested that all areas typically associated with “theory of mind” 
tasks were activated during the sequence, such as the middle cingulate gyrus, 
medial prefrontal cortex, and temporo-parietal junction.
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
“The degree to which realistic perception, relative to 
a platonic person object supervenes will depend upon 
the precision (usually cast as attention) assigned to 
the sensory evidence (concerning the person) and 
the prior beliefs about a platonic form. In other 
words, your posterior beliefs – following an encounter 
with another – will be a mixture of the object prior 
and the likelihood that the object is behaving in 
a  way  consistent with that hypothesis – or an 
alternative object. ”
In other words, this quantitative relation between reality 
and representation-driven perception is described in terms of 
probability. The posterior belief, which reflects our experience 
of a person, is partly determined by the information we receive, 
and the relative extent to which it matches (or does not) our 
existing prior. However, it is not just the information itself 
that determines this relative probability; as indicated above, it 
is also the precision afforded to the prior prediction. What 
precision means here, is the confidence assigned to the higher-
level predictions of our generative model – if its high relative 
to the precision afforded to the sensory evidence, discrepancies 
with the sensory evidence will be  attenuated to some degree, 
and vice versa.
This description can be  thought of intuitively in terms 
of a formal similarity with gravity. In other words, our prior 
predictions exert a kind of influence on the perceived 
information, where it is stronger we  tend to perceive our 
“representation” (object prior) and where it is weaker, we may 
perceive more of the reality, in so far as it is different 
from  our inner representation. Friston (2017, personal 
communication) suggests:
“The ‘gravitational pull’ of the object is, exactly the 
relative precision afforded to the prior hypothesis of the 
object, relative to the sensory evidence. In fact, 
mathematically, the equations that govern the posterior 
expectation have exactly the form used in Newtonian 
mechanics and gravitation. ”
The implication of this perspective is that our perception 
of people will always tend to some extent toward our platonic 
model of the person.
If we  assume a hierarchical recursive development of the 
platonic model of the person ( Connolly and van Deventer, 
2017), we  understand each new level of organization of this 
model to be constrained to some extent by what came before. 
In other words, our earliest experiences of people in a 
sense  lay the foundation for the future development of 
the model.
The account of errors in perception offered thus far is 
not formally similar only to psychoanalytic theory. It is an 
established idea in cognitive theory that our social perception 
is shaped by schematic representations of people, which may 
lead to inaccurate information processing and maladaptive 
behavior. It may well be  that an integrative clinical systems 
theory ( Tretter and Löffler-Stastka, 2018 ), which is potentially 
able to incorporate a system paradigm such as Dr. Friston’s 
work, may well be  able to integrate these different theoretical 
perspectives, and more is said on this toward the end of the 
paper. However, the value of the field of psychoanalysis to 
the future growth of an integrative clinical systems paradigm 
lies in its sizeable literature of clinical insights that offers 
the possibility of better models, or descriptions, in this case 
of our person perception. In this regard, one of the most 
immediate contributions that psychoanalytic theory can make 
to the current FEP formulation of person perception is the 
observation that most minds contain more than one such 
platonic person object.
MULTIPLE OBJECTS
While the body of object relations theory may describe many 
different taxonomies of person objects, for the sake of clarity, 
this article will focus in detail on just one in order to unpack 
how a formal description might work and to examine its 
potential implications. In Klein’s (1946)  seminal text “Notes 
on some schizoid mechanisms, ” she proposed that in the 
earliest months of an infant’s life, the child did not yet have 
an integrated (platonic) person object with which to perceive 
people as unitary, complex objects. Rather, we perceived only 
“part” objects, which are incomplete and fragmented 
representations of people, such that we  might perceive a 
particular person at times as one part object, and at other 
times, a different one. She focused on part objects defined 
by good and bad experiences. Primarily, she focused on the 
child’s experience of the mother’s breast, defining the “good 
breast” as a founded upon a good experience of the breast 
as satisfying and pleasurable. By contrast, the “bad” breast 
was founded upon unsatisfying, frustrating, or withholding 
experience, into which the child projected their hostile 
emotions, borne of those experiences. She then described 
how, beginning from roughly 6  months of age, the child 
began to integrate those part objects into a whole object 
representation and perceives the mother as a whole person 
(Klein, 1946 ).
While Klein focused on the breast as a part object, it is 
broadly understood that these representations, fragmented as 
they are, are nonetheless part representations of different aspects 
of persons, though they are not yet perceived as belonging 
to the same object, the whole person. In other words, my 
experience of the bad mother part object is not yet integrated 
with my experience of the good mother part object. These 
must reflect different prototypes of platonic persons that are 
encoded as distinct generative models at this early stage 
of development.
The idea that an organism can encode distinct generative 
models for different “others” has been described by Isomura 
et  al. (2018, unpublished). In their paper, they describe a 
theoretically and neurobiologically plausible model whereby a 
bird may fit sensory inputs from other birds under distinct 
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
generative models. In this way, they may “know who they are 
communicating with, ” which allows for appropriate inferences 
within complex social environments.
While the formulation of Isomura et al. (2018, unpublished) 
might support the idea that we have different generative models 
for different “people, ” it should be  made clear that Klein’s 
theory of the good and bad object is not referring to different 
individuals (though it may initially), so much as it refers to 
different types of person or rather different platonic persons. 
In this case, these distinct platonic objects are founded upon 
different emotional experiences (pleasure and satisfaction versus 
dissatisfaction and frustration).
An indication of how such models may build upon a base 
of emotions, Panksepp’s (1998)  work on affective systems of 
mammalian brains is useful here. Panksepp described seven 
affective (command) systems common to mammalian brains, 
activation of which was associated with observable affective 
states and related behaviors. He  presented these as in terms 
of core affective descriptions such as RAGE, LUST, or SEEKING 
and described the neural systems that appeared related to 
each of these. While Panksepp (1998 , 2010) has offered a 
lot of evidence for his claims, there have nonetheless been 
criticisms, including some regarding the complex expression 
of human affect ( Barrett et  al., 2007 ). However, Panksepp 
(1998) did express the hope that 1 day the role of the affective 
systems would be  understood within a broader system-
based understanding:
“The basic emotional systems may act as ‘strange 
attractors’ within widespread neural networks that exert 
a certain type of ‘neurogravitational force’ on many 
ongoing activities of the brain” (p. 3).
Here we  see that affective systems may have their own 
“gravitational force” that entrains 5 the activities of the brain 
within their ambit, that is, at first (if Klein is correct), a 
stronger attractor than a platonic person object (which does 
not yet fully exist in the infant’s brain). Fitting this description 
within a hierarchically recursive scheme of the nervous system, 
we  could say that the seven affective command systems 
described by Panksepp have a tremendous influence on 
higher-order functioning of the brain, acting as constraints 
on superordinate levels of processing, such that our earliest 
experiences of people may be  updating generative models 
that were originally distinguished by affect, just as 
Klein suggests.
5 The slaving principle in physics ( Haken, 1983/2004 ) proposes that slower 
“macro” processes entrain faster microprocesses. This concept has been applied 
to levels of neural architecture ( Badcock et al., 2019 ) and levels of organization 
of the mind in psychoanalysis ( Connolly and van Deventer, 2017 ; Connolly, 
2019). The dominant platonic person model, as a much more complex (and 
accurate) model involving more complex functional connectivity, must also 
be  a slower, “bigger” process than part-models and can entrain them. The 
present description obviously parallels Kahneman’s (2011)  “fast and slow 
thinking” processes.
THE EMERGENCE OF A DOMINANT 
PLATONIC PERSON
Around 6 months of age, Klein (1946) suggested that the child 
began to integrate these affectively defined good and bad objects 
within a “whole-object” representation in which the mother 
is perceived as a unitary person. She also proposed that there 
began a meaningful shift in the affective relationship with the 
whole-mother object that tended to move away from extremes 
of persecutory anxiety, rage, and intense idealization, toward 
a more ambivalent relationship characterized by guilt and 
reparation. This also marks the beginning of our capacity for 
more realistic object relating. We might say that the gravitational 
pull of the generative model that is organized by experiences 
of the whole object slowly begins to exceed that of the part 
objects that were organized by the affective command systems. 
However, this is better described in the sense of a recursive 
hierarchy (Connolly and van Deventer, 2017), where perception 
is originally entrained by the affective systems but later both 
perception and the affective systems come to be  entrained by 
the increasingly stable object organization, which has emerged 
as a superordinate level of organization to that determined by 
the affective systems, though is still constrained by them.
This state of affairs is represented in the hierarchical matrix 
in Figure 1, which is adapted from one found by Tretter and 
Löffler-Stastka (2018), which displayed the core concept of object 
relations theory (Kernberg, 1976) as a matrix, though their figure 
included a description of the emergence of self from the environment, 
while the present figure focuses on describing the emergence of 
an object representation from a background of other experiences 
(including of the self), through a recursive development 6.
The view being given in this paper is that prior to the 
emergence of a dominant platonic person object, there are some 
number of distinct generative models (that predict sensory inputs), 
which are largely organized by the affective systems (depicted 
in Figure 1 by the second layer from the bottom). The question 
here is how a dominant platonic person object comes to emerge.
Here, we  can borrow terminology from systems theory by 
describing the emergence of distinct generative models for 
person perception as a progressive segmentation occurring 
within the broader generative model, where one of the parts 
6 This paper has not focused explicitly on the link between one’s self-representation 
and our object-representations of others. Clearly this is of some importance 
as there may be some basis for suggesting that self- and other-representations 
overlap to some extent; for example, Singer et al. (2004)  found that activations 
while apparently observing significant others receiving a pain stimulus overlap 
with activations when experiencing that same stimulus, though there may 
be  distinct mechanisms for perceiving self and other ( Lamm et  al., 2016 ). 
Even potentially distinct self- and other-representations may influence one 
another in person perception. Moutoussis et  al. (2014a ,b) have offered an 
active inference model of person perception using a simplified Trust game 
task, which showed that self-representations in the form of preferences of 
the sort of person I  am  influence my goals in interaction as well as how 
I  see the other. In the same way, I  may infer what sort of person I  am  (or 
will be) from how the interaction progresses. This interaction between self- 
and other-representation requires further development than given in the 
present paper.
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
comes to lead, through a feedback loop with the sensory data, 
until it is dominant, a state of affairs depicted in Figure 2 .
It is important to note that what is being proposed is that 
dominant platonic person representation has been built upon “part 
objects” that were previously affectively organized. It might 
be tempting to suggest that it is a model built upon one particular 
affective system that comes to dominate. For example, since 
we think that maturation involves an increasing ability to perceive 
people without much apparent emotion, we  might suggest that 
models built upon the SEEKING system steadily come to dominate.
However, it is very unlikely that the dominant platonic person 
object is founded on the activity one particular affective system. 
Rather, given the phenomenology we  observe in people, it must 
be a more complex mixture of the pre-existing generative models 
(the part objects).
From the formal perspective of minimizing free energy – 
or maximizing model evidence, the hierarchical assembly 
of parsimonious models of the (prosocial) world through 
our development can be  considered in the light of Bayesian 
model selection or what is called “structure learning” 
FIGURE 1 | The emergence of person object representation differentiated from other representations, from a lower level of affectively organized part objects 
(adapted from Tretter and Lo ¨ ffler-Stastka, 2018, p. 11, with permission from the copyright holder).
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
(Gershman and Niv, 2010 ; Tervo et  al., 2016 ; Isomura and 
Friston, 2018 ). In other words, one can build more 
comprehensive (deep) generative models that have greater 
evidence (i.e., accuracy minus complexity) by adding layers 
or rearranging part objects into more complex (or deeper) 
wholes. These operations of hierarchical assembly, for example, 
“split” and “merge” operators, figure prominently in machine 
learning and statistics – and may provide a nice metaphor 
for the merging of part objects into more complex (or more 
dominant) objects or, as will be  shown later, the “splitting 
off ” phenomena seen in psychoanalysis.
This tendency toward hierarchical assembly of existing part 
objects may also imply that the emotions that we  tend to 
experience often during early development tend to have a 
greater organizational influence (in the form of constraints) 
on the dominant platonic person model. For example, frequent 
experiences of PLAY affects in our early development are likely 
to influence the platonic person object toward perceiving people 
as fun, while frequent experiences of FEAR are likely to influence 
it toward perceiving people as dangerous. Each new experience 
characterized by these emotions increases the influence they 
have over our social perception. Over time, where the 
environment permits, these are likely to become stable, self-
organizing perceptions of people7. This description also suggests 
how our dominant person model may form templates of different 
types of persons, partly constructed from different combinations 
of pre-existing part objects.
THE PERSISTENCE OF PRIMAL 
OBJECTS
The section above has offered a theoretical formalization of 
Klein’s (1946)  assertion that we  come to perceive people as 
7 My thanks to Dr. Pieter Grobbelaar, who suggested that at an early age, the 
self becomes constituted around either predominantly positive emotions or 
predominantly negative emotions, which tend to persist through the lifespan. 
This fits the view being expressed in this paper, in which affective experience 
is organizing experiences of both the self and the others. Given the adaptive 
value of positive affect in child development and adaptation, caregivers of very 
young children who wish to facilitate future positive affect in children should 
aim to maximize the child’s experiences of pleasure and minimize negative 
emotional experiences in the earliest stages, as far as that is possible.
whole objects, so that (to some extent at least) we  perceive 
that a person is the same person regardless of the emotions 
we  have toward them. However, the capacity to “split” our 
perceptions of people around us into good and bad objects 
appears to be  an ongoing phenomenon well into adult life, 
especially in particular situations, in which it is understood 
as a “splitting” defense. We  may perceive a competitor in 
an intense rivalry as “all bad, ” or a new lover as “all good, ” 
or split the representation between people, for example, two 
teachers at school, one all good, and one all bad. These 
states supposedly reflect the persistence of the good and 
bad part objects as “latent” objects in the organization of 
the psyche that may nonetheless come to the fore in situations 
that activate them.
We might say that the dominant platonic person object 
gains profoundly greater influence over perception relative to 
the generative models of the affective (e.g., good and bad) 
part objects, and it is plausible that those part objects remain 
present as an influence in the nervous system provided that 
the connections that encode them experience reconsolidation 
at least occasionally.
The influence such “primal” generative models have on 
conscious perception 8 may vary from extreme to fairly subtle. 
At the extreme end are experiences of the most intense 
emotions, where we  seem to experience almost nothing else 
but that emotion, with little higher thought process. An 
example is a man going through an acrimonious divorce 
process who encounters his ex-partner at a shopping center, 
accompanied by a new lover. He  later describes himself as 
overwhelmed and rooted to the spot, at that moment feeling 
as if the universe had just shattered in some way, as everything 
else faded into the background and he  only saw her laugh, 
her hand on her new partner’s arm, and experienced her 
only as a terrible beautiful thing that was tearing his body 
apart from the inside. Shortly afterward, a more normal 
thought process resumes though he  feels shaken and 
very distressed.
We can suggest that a part object has pulled perception 
entirely within its event horizon, and the dominant platonic 
8 The view of consciousness taken in this paper follows the description by 
Hobson et  al. (2014)  of the highest level of a hierarchy of organization, which 
is founded upon counterfactual simulation of future consequences of actions 
of sufficient depth ( Friston, 2018 ).
FIGURE 2 | The emergence of a dominant platonic person model (integrating positive and negative affects) as a leading part from a layer of part-object models 
organized by affect.
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
generative model seems to have lost all influences on perception 
during this experience. At that moment, the man does not 
perceive his ex-partner as a “person” at all, but only as some 
surface sensory characteristics, distressing interoceptive sensations 
and an inarticulate sense of persecution.
The key point being made here is that there may already 
be a pre-existing generative (part-object) model, which represents 
the best prediction of the combination of sensory and 
interoceptive input at this present moment. The most typical 
hypothesis among object relations thinkers is usually that there 
are experiences of early childhood that were of similar emotional 
valence, which are activated by the contemporary experience. 
For example, feelings of abandonment (likely related to activation 
of PANIC/GRIEF affective functioning, as described by Panksepp, 
2010) connected to several early experiences of the man’s 
mother regularly going to work in the morning after only a 
few months of maternity leave, chatting with his father as she 
walked out the door, and other similar early experiences that 
organized around those emotions.
The reason for why ordinary person perception seems 
to be  suspended may be  partly due to the fact that the 
thought processes are state dependent to some extent, and 
most people have very limited experiences (and generative 
models) at such intense emotional valences 9. These state-
dependent thought processes, emotions, and body feelings 
may also compete with more ordinary person perception 
for activation of shared networks, such as described by 
Oosterwijk et  al. (2012) .
A further consideration relates to Freud’s concept of conflict, 
where aspects of our psyche no longer undergo normal 
development due to their generating too much conflict during 
development and remaining repressed ( Freud, 1912/1963 , 
1915/1963). This has been formally described by Hopkins 
(2016) and elaborated by Connolly (2018), as a situation where 
alternative plans of action generate similar high levels of 
expected free energy. Through development, the “loser” of 
this contest becomes progressively less able to determine high-
level conscious experience. In this way, the child’s distressing 
experiences related to feelings of abandonment (PANIC/GRIEF 
affects) when their mother left for work may likely lead to 
policies of action (such as rejecting the abandoner) that also 
generate high expected levels of free energy. To resolve the 
conflict, the superordinate levels of the person’s generative 
model alter the precisions afforded prior beliefs about policies 
of action, where these prior beliefs are based on the expected 
free energy following a particular action. Should the distressing 
feelings related to PANIC/GRIEF lose the competition, they 
become less and less likely to be  activated in the normal 
course of affairs, and the dominant platonic person model 
that emerges through further development is likely to encode 
this constraint. In this way, the part model becomes a “split-off ” 
remnant that is not integrated into the dominant platonic 
person model and does not undergo the significant further 
updating that the dominant model does, though it may come 
9 Eryilmaz et  al. (2011)  found changes in functional connectivity impacting on 
resting states following transient emotion.
into association with experiences of similar emotional valence 
(Freud, 1915/1963), which seems to be  what happens to the 
man in the example 10.
The rubber hand illusion provides a nice metaphor for this 
sort of process from a free energy perspective 11. In the rubber 
hand illusion, concomitant visual and tactile information is supplied 
via stroking a rubber hand, inducing the illusion that the hand 
is part of one’s body. The most common explanation – for this 
illusory body ownership – is that the proprioceptive (position) 
sensory information that is attenuated (i.e., ignored) by reducing 
its precision ( Paton et  al., 2012; Seth, 2013; Zeller et  al., 2015). 
This enables a low free energy explanation for the coherent visual 
and tactile information under the belief that “I only have one 
right hand. ” In short, the high level prior beliefs about the part 
objects that comprise my body can have a profound effect on 
the way in which evidence is accumulated for those beliefs, under 
active inference. In this way, the attenuated proprioceptive sensory 
information is akin to the split off remnant described in the 
paragraph above, in which it is no longer consciously experienced 
in the ordinary state of affairs. Rather, similar to the high-level 
beliefs about one’s hand, beliefs about a dominant platonic person 
model come to have greater precision and begin to shift the 
accumulation of evidence in line with this prior.
This description of the early formation (and splitting off) 
of the generative part-object model might also offer a hypothesis 
to explain the dissociated or “de-realized” characteristics of 
the experience, where the surrounding reality, sense of self, 
and ordinary thoughts are somehow not perceived consciously. 
These earliest part-object models formed in early stages of 
development where functional connectivity is far less developed. 
For example, in research that later led to a Nobel prize, Hafting 
et  al. (2005)  reported the activity of grid cells that provided 
a sense of place throughout all experience. More recently, Tsao 
et  al. (2018)  have shown that cells in the lateral entorhinal 
cortex encode a perception of time in experience. While we are 
born with these structures, their successful integration with 
conscious perception is surely a developmental achievement. 
It seems possible that the seemingly “derealized” nature of 
these experiences may result because these part-object models 
formed before such complex integration has fully taken place. 
Of course, it may simply be  explained rather by the intense 
emotional valence and demand for network resources meaning 
10 In a related way, horror movies depicting demonic characters who are only 
motivated by extreme sadistic empathy may well be  so frightening to people 
because they activate such early part objects organized around emotions of 
persecutory anxiety or fear. Freud (1919/1955)  offered an idea like this in 
“The Uncanny, ” which refers to “ … that class of the frightening which leads 
back to what is known of old and long familiar. ” (p.  220). This description 
of affectively organized generative part-object models may also offer some new 
life for Jung’s concept of archetypal figures  in psychology. It would seem 
interesting to explore how figures such as the great mother, the child, the 
devil, and the trickster may be  related to early experience organized by 
corresponding (mixtures of) activation of affective command systems. The 
unique imagery or thematic nature of our personal part objects is a result of 
our ongoing experiences (some of which are culturally shared) that have updated 
these models to a small extent.
11 My thanks to reviewer, Dr. Karl Friston with constructive assistance with 
this and other points in the paper.
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
that the activity of these orienting systems is temporarily not 
integrated with conscious perception. However, the present 
formulation offers an alternative hypothesis, and, of course, 
both may simultaneously be  true.
The above descriptions have referred to situations where 
primal part models influence conscious perception in an extreme 
sort of way. However, their influence may run on a continuum 
down to more subtle influences. This refers to situations where 
our dominant platonic person generative model is largely 
engaged in active inference of a social situation, but platonic 
part models still “drag” the perception in their direction to 
some extent.
As an example, we  could refer to the same man as in the 
example above, though at an earlier point in his marriage, 
before the divorce. During dinner, his wife answers a phone 
call, says it is a work colleague, and steps outside and has a 
long laughing chat on the phone, leaving the husband to eat 
alone with their children. The man feels irritated by this, but 
thinks no more of it. However, he  finds he  is irritable with 
a number of his wife’s behaviors for the rest of the evening, 
perceiving a lack of care or consideration in several behaviors. 
Only after some reflection does he  realize that it began with 
the phone call.
In this instance, it may be  that the platonic part model is 
activated, but unable to have the same dramatic influence on 
conscious perception. Instead, its influence on conscious 
perception can be  thought of in terms of the binocular rivalry 
paradigm as presented by Hopkins (2012)  where competing 
predictions about different stimuli presented to each eye (e.g., 
whether it is a house or a face) seem to dominate in cycles. 
Following that example, one can think of the dominant platonic 
person model as being in competition with the platonic part 
model to explain the current stimuli (in this case, the wife 
stepping out of dinner to chat with a colleague). The part 
model may not be dominant enough to come to define conscious 
perception as it did in the more extreme example above (or 
in the binocular rivalry example) but may still generate some 
lower level free energy within the psyche, which may not 
be  adequately explained by the model dominating perception. 
This activation of the part model and its accompanying affect 
sets up a feedback loop where it becomes sustained over the 
rest of the evening, where the man’s continuing experiences 
of his wife throughout the evening trigger inferences to explain 
the negative affect (inferences related to perceiving her behavior 
as “abandoning” him or not considering him), which reactivates 
the part model, and so on.
This feedback loop seems to explain how, once we  dislike 
a person, we  may often struggle to shift into liking them, 
particularly when we  do not really know why we  dislike them. 
The negative affect emerging from whatever negative part models 
activated by our experience of that person seems to result in 
an ongoing process of negative inferences about the person’s 
behavior that feed back into the reactivation of the underlying 
part models (if they are involved in the dislike), even though 
we  may never have a conscious perception of what we  really 
feel about the person, and why. Having said this, we  do 
nonetheless have experiences of being able to escape a more 
transient affectively influenced perception of a person, which 
is addressed next.
DOMINANT VERSUS PART MODELS, 
NOT COGNITION VERSUS EMOTION
We do have experiences where we  have a strong emotional 
reaction to a person (and an attendant set of inferences), and 
then seem to have an insight or a new thought about it that 
seems to reinstate an apparently more objective perception. 
An example might be  encountering a cashier in a supermarket 
who seems to be surly and unpleasant in handling our transaction 
and rolls his eyeballs when we  drop an item by mistake. 
We may have a strong negative reaction and make an irrational 
inference that he  dislikes us personally and is attacking us. 
Then, we  suddenly think that it is likely that he  has a bad 
mood (and perhaps often does) or treats almost everyone like 
that. We  may even wonder about what troubles he  may have 
in his life that makes him unhappy. This can seem to make 
our intense emotional response (and personalized inferences) 
evaporate fairly immediately.
It is this form of “reality-testing” process that is one of many 
observations that seem to support the idea that cognition is in 
competition with emotion to determine our perception, and 
the potential that higher cognitive process has to influence 
emotion-driven thought processes. However, it may be  that 
“emotion versus cognition” is not the best distinction to draw 
in this situation. Rather, we  can describe a competition between 
a highly developed dominant platonic person model and a more 
archaic, underdeveloped part-object model, to regulate free energy.
The more extreme activation of the part model in the earlier 
example of the cashier is distinct precisely because the more 
complex dominant model fails to entrain the activation of the 
part model (for a brief period at least) because this part model 
has never been integrated within the dominant model for the 
reasons described earlier in the paper. However, the much 
greater pull of the dominant model soon reasserts itself. It 
seems clear that through development, as our platonic person 
model (and the functional connectivity that underwrites it) 
ascends in complexity and ever more accurately “recognizes” 
these states, it entrains our affectively organized experiences 
more effectively as well and reduces their free energy. Besides 
this influence of general development of the dominant platonic 
model, the tendency toward reducing psychological conflict 
through altering the precisions regarding prior beliefs of expected 
free energy ascribed to policies of action ( Hopkins, 2016 ; 
Connolly, 2018) related to part-object models means that they 
are increasingly avoided as the superordinate levels of the brain 
hierarchy that encode those precisions also develop. This may 
underlie a tendency toward reduction of the frequency and 
duration of intense part-object experiences in life, though it 
is a journey that may never entirely be  complete.
However, in contrast to this tendency, a trend in research 
into psychopathology has focused on more severe deficits in 
functional connectivity underlying problems of active inference 
(rather than the more typical phenomena described above). 
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
Disorders such as autism, schizophrenia, and personality 
disorders have been cast as problems of social inference. The 
next sections of this paper seek to apply the formulation 
that has been developed this far to briefly outline the potential 
it can have to contribute to our understanding to this approach 
to both borderline personality disorder (BPD) and 
schizophrenia. In doing so, the author attempts to place these 
phenomena on a continuum in terms of the relative stability 
of the dominant platonic person model in perception (or 
oppositely, the relative influence of part-object perception) 
and by implication, the level of effective functional connectivity 
that supports the dominant model. The subtle problems of 
reality testing described above refer to relatively higher dominant 
model, low part-object model perception (and relatively more 
normal connectivity), while BPD (examined next) is cast as 
more severe problems in maintaining the dominant model 
that entrains our perception, and schizophrenia representing 
the most severe problems in entraining part models in 
perception (and the most severe problems of connectivity) 12,13. 
The distinction between BPD and schizophrenia is given here 
in terms of functional differences in terms of the level and 
stability of part-object object perception, and by implication, 
the level of functional connectivity, though these disorders 
may have discrete patterns of neurophysiological presentation 
and aberrant connectivity as well.
This presentation of disturbances in object perception on 
a continuum of levels of dominant versus part-object perception 
12 While the difference between BPD and schizophrenia here is given as involving 
different levels of functional connectivity, the specific patterns of connectivity 
implicated in both may be  distinct. This distinction may be  an important area 
for future research.
13 Though not addressed in this paper, states of reduced consciousness (e.g. 
sleep, intoxication, fatigue and others) must also reduce the functioning of 
the dominant platonic model, thereby increasing part-object influence on 
consciousness.
is both consilient with and inspired by a formulation by 
Kernberg (1984 , 1996, 2004). In his work, Kernberg describes 
three levels of personality organization on a continuum of 
reality testing. The most intact reality testing is reflected in 
merely “neurotic” personality organization, while personality 
disorders such as BPD and schizophrenia represent more serious 
and most serious problems of integration and reality testing, 
respectively. The purpose of the following two sections is to 
highlight how this continuum of reality testing could be expressed 
in terms of a free energy formulation focused on the relative 
influence of dominant versus part-object models.
BORDERLINE PERSONALITY DISORDER
A hallmark of the experience of people diagnosed with 
borderline personality disorder (BPD) is the instability in 
their perception of self (identity) and others. In psychotherapy, 
clients diagnosed as BPD may move easily between extremes 
of idealization and aggression or persecution (these negative 
responses are often frequent) in their transference responses 
to psychotherapists, as well as to perceptions of other people 
in general ( Y eomans et  al., 2015 ).
Figure 3  is again adapted from a figure found by Tretter 
and Löffler-Stastka (2018). It presents a development of affectively 
organized object representation in both typical developed 
configurations and BPD configuration. In the first infant stage, 
the system’s current state (represented by the ball) can more 
easily move between extreme positive and negative basins of 
attraction, formalizing a state of instability within this “semi-
quantitative” model. The deepening of these basins during 
development reflects the tendency toward greater affective stability 
(not intensity), with a reduced tendency to move toward opposite 
poles. The growth of the central barrier through development 
(marked with vertical lines) could be  described as formalizing 
AB
C
FIGURE 3 | Borderline dynamics of affectively organized object representation (OR), modified from Tretter and Lo ¨ ffler-Stastka, 2018, p. 11, with permission from 
the original author and copyright holder, Thieme Publishing. These figures show basins of attraction for positive and negative affect for typical early development (A), 
typical mature development (B), and dynamics of Borderline structure (C).
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
the increasing influence of dominant generative models of self 
(Tretter and L öffler-Stastka focus on self-representation with 
regard to BPD) and of others – the dominant platonic person 
models described here. As these dominant models begin to 
grow in influence over the system state, there is a reduction 
in the tendency to move toward extremes of positive and 
negative affectively organized states, or between them. Tretter 
and L öffler-Stastka described BPD as an intermediate position 
where the boundary between states is less developed (and 
negative states are a stronger attractor than positive ones).
Their model focuses on “object-related” self-presentation, and 
while the present paper has not addressed the dynamics of 
self-representation, the theoretical account that has been put 
forward in this paper is compatible with the formal account 
found in their article. Whether it may be due to a predisposition 
toward subtle problems of functional connectivity that limit 
the development of highly complex person models 14, or due 
to an excess of negative affective experience during early 
development that similarly places constraints on the functional 
connectivity underwriting the potential complexity of our platonic 
person model 15 (or both), we  may suggest that the dominant 
platonic person model is less well developed, and less complex, 
and ultimately less able to entrain (predominantly negative) 
part-object models in conscious perception of other people.
SCHIZOPHRENIA
Impairment in reality testing of perception or beliefs is the 
key defining characteristic of psychotic disorders such as 
schizophrenia. This often manifests in delusional thought content, 
which appears relatively impervious to any contradictory 
information, particularly persecutory delusion ( American 
Psychiatric Association, 2013 ). While people diagnosed with 
schizophrenia may have a variety of delusional thoughts over 
their lifespan, there is often a core (typically persecutory) 
delusion that never shifts, even among those who successfully 
maintain a residual phase following some number of breakdowns, 
though it may reduce in importance to the thought process 
of those who are relatively well. These core persecutory delusions 
may often be  bizarre, such as perceptions that other people 
are demons or witches, or similar. These symptoms may occur 
against a backdrop of a relative poverty of thought, particularly 
in chronic cases with a history of frequent hospitalizations.
14 Witt et  al. (2017)  have shown how BPD has some genetic overlap with 
Bipolar Disorder, Major Depressive Disorder, and Schizophrenia, including 
genes implicated in cell adhesion and myelination: “The gene-set analyses 
yielded significant results for exocytosis. In neuronal synapses, exocytosis is 
triggered by an influx of calcium and critically underlies synaptic signaling. 
Dysregulated neuronal signaling and exocytosis are core features of 
neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders such as the autism spectrum disorders 
and intellectual disability” (p. 5). It seems possible that these genetic differences 
all contribute to limits on functional connectivity in various ways that in 
turn place limits  on  the  potential complexity of generative models that may 
regulate affective functioning.
15 Duque-Alarcón et  al. (2019)  reported finding atypical brain functional 
connectivity in BPD patients who have experienced childhood maltreatment.
Computational approaches to neuropsychiatry such as those 
using a free energy principle framework have approached 
schizophrenic symptoms as rooted in a deficit of functional 
connectivity and hence of complex generative models (Montague 
et  al., 2012 ) and have approached persecutory delusion (PD) 
as aberrant social perception related to impairment of generative 
models of others ( Diaconescu et  al., 2019 ). These accounts 
may offer a satisfying account of the failure of more realistic 
perception, and Friston et  al. (2016) suggested that the relative 
persistence of false beliefs (delusion) in schizophrenia reflects 
an increased precision given to prior (false) beliefs in response 
to failures of attenuation of sensory information. However, 
what their account does not clarify is what sorts of inferences 
are like to come to the fore in PDs, or rather what the reason 
is for the specific affective or thematic nature of those false 
beliefs. Certainly, the schizophrenic person’s inferences that 
external influences are controlling their experience and behavior 
as described in their paper are likely to give rise to negative 
affect and inferences of persecution, which is of course possible. 
However, the present paper offers an alternative suggestion in 
which the specific affective and thematic characteristics of the 
delusional experience are the consequence of pre-existing models, 
which offer the best active inference for the abnormal conditions 
present in the brain.
An established idea in psychoanalysis is that psychotic 
experiences of PD may in some sense be  founded on split-off  
persecutory bad objects in the Kleinian sense ( Klein, 1946 ; 
Segal, 1964). Within the current formulation, we might suggest 
that the failure to maintain a highly developed platonic person 
model that regulates free energy in daily encounters, the system 
falls back on less well developed, but meaningfully established 
part-object models (such as a persecutory bad object) that 
require far less effective connectivity to operate.
Though these part models are far less able to reduce the 
free energy of the system (they integrate far less sensory input 
than typical dominant models do), in a sense they become 
“the only game in town” as the only regulatory generative 
model available that can explain away the person’s social 
experience. This may go some way to explaining the relative 
intransigence of such core PDs (formally described as increased 
precisions of these deep priors), as they become the central 
foundation of the person’s social perception 16 and even start 
to undergo some development and updating themselves (e.g. 
the patient forms detailed verbal structures around them), 
though this is clearly limited by the general constraints offered 
by the problems in connectivity.
This also goes some way to explaining their persecutory 
character. We  might explain this in a narrative way. First, 
16 The author worked for several years in a community-based residence for 
people suffering from psychotic disorders and gained the impression that the 
patients’ relationship to their core delusion seemed formally similar to an 
attachment, due to the great importance given to the delusional content, how 
it was often invoked when dealing with stressors, the distress experienced when 
it was threatened by information or insensitive interaction in some way, and 
the efforts to reject or avoid situations or people who threatened these perceptions. 
The reason being given in this paper is that that delusional content has become 
the central foundation of the conscious self in many of these patients.
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
during the long, distressing prodromal period, the inability of 
the dominant platonic model (and perhaps self- and various 
other models as well) to integrate experience17 leads to increasing 
free energy. This progressive failure of the dominant model 
and escalation of free energy and negative affect likely activates 
negative affective part objects (which form in similar 
circumstances early in our development) in a feedback loop, 
and they begin to gain dominance in our conscious perception 
as they increasingly become the best (or only) available inference 
about our (social) experience. As the person reaches the more 
acute phase, the increasing failure of dominant models and 
ascendance of part-object perception drives the magnitude of 
the derealization described earlier in the paper (in the “extreme” 
example of the man who sees his ex-partner with a new lover), 
an overall situation which is all the more fundamentally traumatic 
as it does not go away after a short time.
The present formulation of psychotic phenomena supports 
the psychoanalytic perspective of the compensatory or defensive 
nature of the positive symptoms of psychosis, first articulated 
by Freud in “The Neuro-Psychoses of Defence” (Freud, 1894/1962) 
and now supported by the description by Friston et  al. (2016).
The remainder of this paper is given over to a discussion 
of the implications and contributions of the current paper, as 
well as the problem of evidence of the current formulation 
as well as possibilities for future research.
CONTRIBUTION AND IMPLICATIONS
In order to make sense of any implications of the current 
paper, it is necessary to clarify what the specific unique 
contribution it aims to make to existing literature. The present 
paper is offered as theory. In doing so, it builds on existing 
theory. The theory put forward in this paper is built on ideas 
within object relations psychoanalysis, specifically on Klein’s 
(1946) theory of splitting, good and bad part objects and whole 
object integration. It is also built on Kernberg’s (1965, 1987) 
description of realistic and fantasy components of object 
representations and makes use of his ( Kernberg, 1984 , 1996, 
2004) work on a continuum of levels of reality testing through 
neurotic, personality disordered and schizophrenic personality 
organization. What is uniquely offered here is an attempt to 
state these theories in such a way that they fit within a newer 
theoretical paradigm, which could broadly be subsumed under 
the free energy principle. In this way, it is built on Friston’s 
(2010) theory of the free energy principle as well. So, the 
uniqueness lies in the attempt to marry these theories.
The value of this union from the perspective of psychoanalysis 
could be  said to be  twofold. First, the value of stating the 
17 This may be  due to some form of progressive deterioration of the dominant 
model(s) or perhaps to an increase in demands on the person that exposes 
an existing fragility of the dominant models. Discussions with male patients 
often revealed that their first acute episodes happened together with an increased 
demand for autonomy and reduction of parental care, such as entering the 
army or going away to study. However, this idea seems more difficult to apply 
to the typically older onset for female patients.
psychoanalytic theory in terms of Friston’s free energy principle 
(FEP) theory lies in the value of the FEP theory itself and 
the contribution it brings to psychoanalytic thinking. Second, 
the value of stating the psychoanalytic theory in this way also 
lies in connecting it to a broader system-theory perspective 
of the world, within which the FEP theory could be  said to 
reside as well.
First, the value that comes from the FEP is that it articulates 
a neuronally plausible process theory regarding regulation and 
message passing within the nervous system ( Friston et  al., 
2017) that offers anatomical constraints on those processes, 
which can and have been assessed empirically ( Parr and Friston, 
2018). This allows a stronger explanation of the phenomena 
described by psychoanalytic theories than the psychoanalytic 
theories themselves, which have historically not been adequately 
connected to neurophysiological processes, nor even to other 
psychoanalytic ideas. This lack of a functional psychoanalytic 
metapsychology can be  demonstrated by asking the question: 
why do objects form in the psyche? If we follow Freud’s partially 
failed energic explanation (Connolly, 2016, unpublished) 
we  could say objects form because they bind free-floating 
energy, but we  would be  unable to adequately link Freud’s 
energy with neurophysiological process. If we take Klein’s (1946) 
suggestion that the formation of objects manages anxiety, then 
we  link it to an abstract emotional construct, but not to 
neurophysiological process. But if we  follow a free energy 
explanation, we  say that objects form because they minimize 
free energy, through maximizing accuracy of generative models 
as parsimoniously as possible. We  are then on firmer ground, 
as this explanation is rooted on the neuronal foundation 
described by Friston’s (2010) work.
The field that is expanding around the free energy principle 
is itself embedded within a broader framework that is well 
described as systems theory, which is the second benefit of 
the union of theories offered in this paper. A fuller description 
of systems theory and its potential value to psychoanalysis 
can be  found by Connolly and van Deventer (2017)  but can 
be  heavily summarized here as saying that a system view of 
the world is a hierarchical one, where system is superimposed 
on system and so on.
This hierarchical perspective can be seen in the view expressed 
by Tretter and Löffler-Stastka (2018)  when they call for an 
integrative clinical systems psychology:
“ … The crucial term ‘system’ is defined as a set of 
elements and a set of relations (structure and 
connectivity), … In line with this definition, a system 
can be characterized simply by the term ‘structure’ or 
by the popular expression ‘network’ (nodes and edges) 
as it is a network with boundaries. Or, with other words: 
a living system is a network (or structure) with 
boundaries. Properties of systems are states (e.g., 
equilibrium, non-equilibrium) and processes, some of 
them have goal-directed functions as a subset of 
activities. … Systemic exploratory methodology 
basically implies to zoom into the micro-level of the 
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
subject of study, not forgetting the context and also to 
zoom out to the macro-level without forgetting the 
details. If we zoom out of the detailed consideration of 
elementary functions of the mind to a more holistic view 
we  will refer to several holistic models that also will 
provide a diversified understanding of mental processes 
in context of clinical issues” (p. 7).
Their work suggests that we  might define a system as a 
set of elements and relations between them, where if we “zoom 
in” to higher resolution we  see that each of those elements 
is itself composed of a system of elements and relations, and 
so on. The key point they make is that most major theories 
of psychology might be represented in an abstract description 
of this form, where theories are not “floating” in an abstract 
space where they merely have a heuristic or ad hoc  role in 
explaining research findings but rather are embedded in a 
larger superstructure. In this way, different theories (including 
at different levels of organization in the person) can 
be  integrated with one another. This offers the hope of 
convergence in our theoretical work, rather than the seemingly 
endless divergence of theory that has taken place in the field 
of psychology.
The free energy principle and the body of theory that are 
growing under its ambit fit the bill of a system-based theory 
that offers clear system principles and a basis for hierarchical 
organization of systems and sub-systems. The FEP paradigm 
can  “zoom down” to show how the FEP-based organization 
of living systems is founded upon inorganic processes (Friston, 
2019, submitted) and equally, zoom up to social, cultural, 
and environmental systems that entrain living systems 
(Connolly  and  van Deventer, 2017; Badcock  et  al., 2019).
Specifically, in this paper, this hierarchical embeddedness 
of the processes described lies in the foundation of the affective 
systems described by Panksepp (1998)  and how their cortical 
influence in the form of part objects steadily becomes entrained 
by a history of social interaction, which comes to form the 
dominant platonic object.
This integration of the theory of objects and part objects 
with a system-based FEP perspective now also allows integration 
with the psychoanalytic principle of conflict, which was integrated 
with a FEP perspective in the work by Hopkins (2016)  and 
Connolly (2018) . This has allowed the current paper to offer 
a conceptual account of how conflict can lead to the splitting 
off of part objects and thereby integrating these different 
psychoanalytic theories rather than leaving them separated 
across the gulf of their respective Freudian and Kleinian 
paradigms. Through a steady work of application of system-
based ideas in this way, a new psychoanalytic model of the 
mind may eventually emerge.
Beyond these very broad implications, the integration with 
a free energy principle account has more specific implications 
for how we conceive of objects. Some of these are highlighted next:
 1. A part object is here described as a generative model. This 
means that it reflects a distinct anatomical expression with 
a Markov blanket. This itself has a number of implications. 
One key one here is that it “tries” to maintain its own 
existence and avoid destruction (phase change). In other 
words, one could state it intuitively as saying that the object 
has a “life of its own. ” This also means seeking to accumulate 
evidence for its own existence. This supports Freud’s 
(1912/1963) idea that we  appear to seek transferences out 
(try to apply them to each new person we  meet).
 2. Part objects must have some success in predicting situations, 
or people’s behavior, or they could never be  sustained. This 
might explain the common preference for entertainment 
that portrays people in “archetypal” ways. In this way, part 
objects can accumulate evidence. This would also be  true 
for a common preference to “want” to see others in distorted 
ways, for example, seeming to “relish” describing someone 
as a villainous person.
 3. While part objects may be “starved” somewhat, in the sense 
of being prevented from accumulating evidence in some 
way, they are difficult to get rid of, for the reasons indicated 
in the previous points. However, they may be  entrained, 
which essentially means being increasingly merged with a 
more dominant, integrated model. Practically, this could 
mean the further development of the dominant model (such 
as through mentalization), as well as recognition, insight, 
and perhaps also acceptance of these relevant qualities in 
oneself and others.
 4. Recently, Ramstead et  al. (2019, submitted) argued that 
hierarchical generative models do not so much have the 
characteristics of representation as they do of control. 
That means that part objects, as well as dominant objects, 
are not just representations but rather realize the function 
of control in the psyche and integrate relevant actions 
in a sense as well. As Ramstead et  al. (2019, submitted) 
suggested: “ … ‘perceptual inference’ is just one moment 
of the policy selection process in active inference under 
the FEP , namely, state estimation. The issue we  want to 
press here is that the active inference framework implies 
that perception is a form of action, that is, action and 
perception cannot be  pulled apart … ” (p.  2). This means 
that part objects are perhaps best not thought of just as 
representations of perceptual memories, unless we 
think  of  memories as control mechanisms in the same 
way as well.
These potential implications are just a beginning, and further 
implications may be  uncovered with further progress.
While the integration of these psychoanalytic theories with 
the free energy paradigm has many tangible benefits for the 
body of psychoanalytic theory, the question might well 
be  asked what they offer to the growing field within the 
active inference and the free energy. As stated earlier in 
this paper, the central value of the psychoanalytic literature 
is a long history of observations and clinical insights that 
can help direct research. In this case, it may generate interest 
in research into the role of part objects of the kind described 
here, in perception.
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
EVIDENCE AND FUTURE RESEARCH
A critical problem with the current paper is the lack of empirical 
evidence for its central claims. The central claims are as follows:
 1. Part-object models organized by affect typically exist in 
human nervous systems since early childhood.
 2. They may sometimes not be entrained by a dominant model 
(perhaps due to conflict), and a competitive relationship 
may exist between such split off part-object models and 
dominant ones in order to determine the process of 
active inference.
 3. Increasing levels of influence of part objects (and corresponding 
decreases of influence of dominant models) on a continuum 
from transient emotions, to personality disorder (e.g., BPD) 
and to schizophrenia, in order, probably due to problems in 
connectivity which underlie dominant models.
As such, none of the research referred to in this paper 
directly proves these core hypotheses.
Rather, the present paper has taken the form of an argument 
and has used research findings along the way to support specific 
points and assumptions being made during its course. For 
example, the claim that affect may play a foundational role 
to object formation is supported by making reference to 
Panksepp’s (1998) work on affective command systems. Claims 
regarding the role of connectivity in reality testing were supported 
with empirical findings regarding connectivity in transient 
emotional experiences ( Eryilmaz et  al., 2011 ), borderline 
personality disorder in terms of genetic predisposition ( Witt 
et  al., 2017 ) as well as early experiences of distress ( Duque-
Alarcón et  al., 2019 ), and in schizophrenia ( Friston et  al., 
2016). Evidence for hierarchical layers of processing in social 
inference and theory of mind was offered from the work of 
Diaconescu et  al. (2017, submitted).
This kind of “amalgamation” of different sources of 
contributory evidence does not constitute proof of a theory 
but may be  a critical for development as well as refinement 
of theory ( Fletcher et  al., 2019 ; Kao, 2019 ). This form of 
evidence can suggest that a theory is plausible rather than 
confirm it. In turn, plausibility is an important guide to 
which theories should be  investigated further, and which 
not ( Bertolaso and Sterpetti, 2019 ).
This form of amalgamation of evidence may be unavoidable 
when faced with theories that are difficult to prove:
“When access to phenomena of interest is incomplete, 
piecemeal, indirect, or mediated by substantial auxiliary 
assumptions, it is not always obvious in what manner 
scientists can justifiably decide how their total evidence 
comparatively supports hypotheses and informs future 
research” (Fletcher et al., 2019, p. 3164).
In this case, the challenge is presented by the likelihood that 
both part objects and objects are encoded in complex multiple 
areas of the cortex and involve multi-level processes that unfold 
over time. This makes it more than challenging to isolate specific 
objects in brain-imaging research. This challenge can be  seen 
more clearly when one tries to locate the part- and dominant-
object models in Panksepp’s scheme of emotions, the primary, 
secondary, and tertiary emotions. At their outset, when part 
objects (and the beginnings of the dominant model) form, they 
fit most closely with the secondary layer described by Panksepp 
(2010), in which they are shaped by basic learning processes 
not dependent on any tertiary-level processes in the beginning. 
However, if we  try find some consilience between the tertiary-
level processes described by Panksepp on the one hand, and 
the consideration of alternative policies of action that have 
reached sufficient “temporal thickness” or “counterfactual depth” 
(which Friston, 2018, described as foundational to consciousness) 
on the other, we  could say that both part-object models and 
dominant models are reflected in tertiary level processes as well 
(though the dominant ones usually much more so). Clearly, 
both must involve some encoding at a cortical level, though 
with dominant models probably reflected by more connections 
and distribution than part-object ones.
In this way, cortical representation of long-term memory 
must play a role in the formation of platonic models. While 
it has been suggested above that part-object models are more 
than just memory representations of perceptual experiences, 
action selection is an inherent aspect of working memory, which 
activates those representations. In his paper “Cortex and Memory: 
Emergence of a New Paradigm, ” Fuster (2009)  describes a 
situation demonstrating this difficulty with regard to long-term 
memory networks, which become activated in working memory:
“ … [A] memory or an item of knowledge consists of a 
widespread cortical network of connections, formed by 
experience, that joins dispersed cell populations. … A 
complex memory network, … is largely interregional, 
linking neuron assemblies and smaller networks in 
separate and noncontiguous areas of the cortex” (p. 2048).
These challenges do not mean that proof is impossible. 
However, the requirement in this case would require brain 
imaging data that compare transient states such as in intense 
emotions conceptually related to part objects, with longitudinally 
obtained data of brain states in early childhood, to say if they 
are similar. This is of course made difficult due to the changes 
that occur in maturation.
In the absence of such evidence, system models of this 
kind often make use of different strategy that involves simulation 
and application of mathematical modeling.
“ … [W]e start with verbal models that explicate 
interactions and that in some cases are presented in 
graphs. Usually the next step should be a mathematical 
formalization of this hypothetical causal model but 
we don’t think this will really increase evidence here and 
therefore it should be  reserved for a later step of 
discussions of modeling the mind. After the formalization, 
empirical data should be integrated and now it is possible 
to transform the model to a computer algebra system 
(e.g., Maple R, Matlab R, Mathematica R) for running 
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
simulations in order to explore the functional structure 
of the model by process analysis. This stepwise procedure 
was developed basically in the context of systems 
dynamics …. ” (Tretter and Löffler-Stastka, 2018).
The study by Moutoussis et  al. (2014b)  is an example of 
such application of a mathematical model applied to a simulation, 
and the results compared with what is expected. It is hoped 
that the present work might stimulate further research of a 
similar kind, which may model the relative influence of part 
object and dominant models of people.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author confirms being the sole contributor of this work 
and has approved it for publication.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author thanks the reviewers for their helpful remarks and 
additions and the author is especially grateful to Dr Jeremy Holmes, 
who read and commented on an earlier version of this paper.
 
REFERENCES
American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of 
mental disorders. 5th Edn. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Badcock, P . B., Friston, K. J., and Ramstead, M. J. D. (2019). The hierarchically 
mechanistic mind: a free-energy formulation of the human psyche. Phys. 
Life  Rev. pii: S1571-0645(19)30002-8. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2018.10.002 [Epub 
ahead of print].
Banavar, J. R., Maritan, A., and Volkov, I. (2010). Applications of the principle 
of maximum entropy: from physics to ecology. J. Phys. Condens. Matter  
22:063101. doi: 10.1088/0953-8984/22/6/063101
Barrett, L. F ., Lindquist, K. A., Bliss-Moreau, E., Duncan, S., Gendron, M., 
Mize, J., et al. (2007). Of mice and men: natural kinds of emotions in the 
mammalian brain? A response to Panksepp and Izard. Perspect. Psychol. 
Sci. 2, 297–312. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-6916.2007.00046.x
Bertolaso, M., and  Sterpetti, F . (2019). Evidence amalgamation, plausibility, and 
cancer research. Synthese 196, 3279–3317.  doi: 10.1007/s11229-017-1591-9
Connolly, P . (2018). Expected free energy formalizes conflict underlying defense 
in Freudian psychoanalysis. Front. Psychol. 9:1624. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01264
Connolly, P . (2019). “Reality is hierarchically organized: the recursive foundations 
of living systems and beyond” in Focus on systems theory research. eds. M. F . 
Casanova and I. Opris (New Y ork: Nova Science Publishers).
Connolly, P ., and van Deventer, V . (2017). Hierarchical recursive organization 
and the free energy principle: from biological self-organization to the 
psychoanalytic mind. Front. Psychol. 8:1695. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01695
Diaconescu, A. O., Wellstein, K. V ., Kasper, L., Mathys, C., and Stephan, K. E. 
(2019). Hierarchical Bayesian models of social inference for probing persecutory 
delusional ideation. Poster session presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Organization for Human Brain Mapping, Rome, Italy.
Duque-Alarcón, X., Alcalá-Lozano, R., González-Olvera, J. J., Garza-Villarreal, 
E. A., and Pellicer, F . (2019). Effects of childhood maltreatment on social 
cognition and brain functional connectivity in borderline personality disorder 
patients. Front. Psych. 10:156. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00156
Eryilmaz, H., Van De Ville, D., Schwartz, S., and Vuilleumier, P . (2011). Impact 
of transient emotions on functional connectivity during subsequent resting 
state: a wavelet correlation approach. NeuroImage 54, 2481–2491. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2010.10.021
Fletcher, S., Landes, J., and Poellinger, R. (2019). Evidence amalgamation in 
the sciences: an introduction. Synthese 196, 3163–3188. doi: 10.1007/
s11229-018-1840-6
Freud, S. (1894/1962). “The neuro-psychoses of defence” in The standard edition 
of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud, volume III (1893–1899): 
Early psycho-analytic publications. ed. J. Strachey (London: Hogarth Press), 
41–61.
Freud, S. (1912/1963). “The dynamics of the transference” in The collected 
papers of Sigmund Freud: Therapy and technique . ed. P . Rieff (New Y ork: 
Collier Books), 105–115.
Freud, S. (1915/1963). “Repression” in The collected papers of Sigmund Freud 
volume 6: General psychological theory: Papers on metapsychology . ed.  
P . Rieff (New Y ork: Collier Books), 104–115.
Freud, S. (1919/1955). “The ‘uncanny’” in The standard edition of the complete 
psychological works of Sigmund Freud, volume XVII (1917–1919): An infantile 
neurosis and other works . ed. J. Strachey (London: Hogarth Press), 217–256.
Friston, K. J. (2010). A free energy principle for the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.  
11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. J. (2018). Am I  self-conscious? (or does self-organization entail 
self-consciousness?). Front. Psychol. 9:579. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00579
Friston, K. J., Brown, H. R., Siemerkus, J., and Stephan, K. E. (2016). The 
dysconnection hypothesis. Schizophr. Res.  176, 83–94. doi: 10.1016/j.
schres.2016.07.014
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F ., Schwartenbeck, P ., and Pezzulo, G. (2017). 
Active inference: a process theory. Neural Comput. 29, 1–49. doi: 10.1162/
NECO_a_00912
Fuster, J. M. (2009). Cortex and memory: emergence of a new paradigm.  
J. Cogn. Neurosci.  21, 2047–2072. doi: 10.1162/jocn.2009.21280
Gershman, S. J., a nd Niv, Y . (2010). Learning latent structure: carving nature 
at its joints. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 20, 251–256. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2010.02.008
Hafting, T., Fyhn, M., Molden, S., Moser, M. B., and Moser, E. I. (2005). 
Microstructure of a spatial map in the entorhinal cortex. Nature 436, 
801–806. doi: 10.1038/nature03721
Haken, H. (1983/2004). Synergetics: Introduction and advanced topics . Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag. Original work published in 1983.
Hobson, J. A., Hong, C. C., and Friston, K. J. (2014). Virtual reality and 
consciousness inference in dreaming. Front. Psychol.  5:1133. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2014.01133
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 50, 259–285. doi: 10.1111/
nous.12062
Hopkins, J. (2012). “Psychoanalysis, representation and neuroscience: the Freudian 
unconscious and the Bayesian brain” in From the couch to the lab: Psychoanalysis, 
neuroscience and cognitive psychology in dialogue . eds. A. Fotopoulu, D. Pfaff, 
and M. Conway (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 230–265.
Hopkins, J. (2016). Free energy and virtual reality in neuroscience and 
neuropsychoanalysis: a complexity theory of dreaming and mental disorder. 
Front. Psychol. 7:922. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00922
Isomura, T., and Friston, K. (2018). In vitro neural networks minimise variational 
free energy. Sci. Rep.  8:16926. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-35221-w
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking fast and slow. New Y ork: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Kao, M. (2019). Unification beyond justification: a strategy for theory development. 
Synthese 196, 3263–3278. doi: 10.1007/s11229-017-1515-8
Kernberg, O. (1965). Notes on countertransference. J. Am. Psychoanal. Assoc.  
13, 38–56.
Kernberg, O. F . (1976). Object relations theory and clinical psychoanalysis. Lanham, 
MD: Jason Aronson.
Kernberg, O. F . (1984). Severe personality disorders: Psychotherapeutic strategies . 
New Haven: Y ale University Press.
Kernberg, O. F . (1987). Projection and projective identification: developmental 
and clinical aspects. J. Am. Psychoanal. Assoc.  35, 795–819.
Kernberg, O. F . (1996). “ A psychoanalytic theory of personality disorders” in 
Major theories of personality disorder. eds. J. F . Clarkin and M. F . Lenzenweger 
(New Y ork: Guilford Press).
Kernberg, O. F . (2004). “Borderline personality disorder and borderline personality 
organization: psychopathology and psychotherapy” in Handbook of personality 
disorders. Theory and practice. ed. J. J. Magnavita (New Y ork: Wiley), 92–119.
Klein, M. (1946). Notes on some schizoid mechanisms. Int. J. Psychoanal.  27, 
99–110.
Lamm, C., Bukowski, H., and Silani, G. (2016). From shared to distinct self-
other representations in empathy: evidence from neurotypical function and 
Connolly The Gravity of Objects
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 16 November 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2599
socio-cognitive disorders. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 371:20150083. 
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2015.0083
Maisto, D., Donnarumma, F ., and Pezzulo, G. (2015). Divide et impera: subgoaling 
reduces the complexity of probabilistic inference and problem solving.  
J. R. Soc. Interface  12:20141335. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.1335
Montague, P . R., Dolan, R. J., Friston, K. J., and Dayan, P . (2012). Computational 
psychiatry. Trends Cogn. Sci.  16, 72–80. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2011.11.018
Moutoussis, M., Fearon, P ., El-Deredy, W ., Dolan, R. J., and Friston, K. J. 
(2014a). Bayesian inferences about the self (and others): a review. Conscious. 
Cogn. 25C, 67–76. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2014.01.009
Moutoussis, M., Trujillo-Barreto, N. J., El-Deredy, W ., Dolan, R. J., and 
Friston, K. J. (2014b). A formal model of interpersonal inference. Front. 
Hum. Neurosci.  8:160. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00160
Ogden, T. H. (1992). The dialectically constituted/decentred subject of 
psychoanalysis. II. The contributions of Klein and Winnicott. Int. J. Psychoanal. 
73, 613–626.
Oosterwijk, S., Lindquist, K. A., Anderson, E., Dautoff, R., Moriguchi, Y ., and 
Barrett, L. F . (2012). States of mind: emotions, body feelings, and thoughts 
share distributed neural networks. NeuroImage 62, 2110–2128. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2012.05.079
Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective neuroscience. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Panksepp, J. (2010). Affective neuroscience of the emotional BrainMind: 
evolutionary perspectives and implications for understanding depression. 
Dialogues Clin. Neurosci.  12, 533–545.
Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2018). The anatomy of inference: generative models 
and brain structure. Front. Comput. Neurosci.  12:90. doi: 10.3389/
fncom.2018.00090
Paton, B., Hohwy, J., and Enticott, P . G. (2012). The rubber hand illusion 
reveals proprioceptive and sensorimotor differences in autism spectrum 
disorders. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 42, 1870–1883. doi: 10.1007/s10803-011-1430-7
Segal, H. (1964). Introduction to the work of Melanie Klein. New Y ork: Basic Books.
Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. 
Trends Cogn. Sci.  17, 565–573. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.007
Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J., Kaube, H., Dolan, R. J., and Frith, C. D. 
(2004). Empathy for pain involves the affective but not the sensory components 
of pain. Science 303, 1157–1161. doi: 10.1126/science.1093535
Tervo, D. G., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Gershman, S. J. (2016). Toward the neural 
implementation of structure learning. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.  37, 99–105. 
doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2016.01.014
Tretter, F ., and L öffler-Stastka, H. (2018). Steps toward an integrative clinical 
systems psychology. Front. Psychol. 9:1616. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01616
Tsao, A., Sugar, J., Lu, L., Wang, C., Knierim, J. J., Moser, M. B., et al. (2018). 
Integrating time from experience in the lateral entorhinal cortex. Nature 
561, 57–62. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0459-6
Witt, S. H., Streit, F ., Jungkunz, M., Frank, J., Awasthi, S., Reinbold, C. S., 
et  al. (2017). Genome-wide association study of borderline personality 
disorder reveals genetic overlap with bipolar disorder, major depression and 
schizophrenia. Transl. Psychiatry 7:e1155. doi: 10.1038/tp.2017.115
Y eomans, F . E., Clarkin, J. F ., and Kernberg, O. F . (2015). Transference-focused 
psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder: A clinical guide . Arlington, 
V A, US: American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc.
Zeller, D., Litvak, V ., Friston, K. J., and Classen, J. (2015). Sensory processing 
and the rubber hand illusion--an evoked potentials study. J. Cogn. Neurosci.  
27, 573–582. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_00705
Conflict of Interest:  The author declares that the research was conducted in 
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be  construed 
as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Connolly. This is an open-access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY) . The use, 
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original 
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication 
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No 
use,  distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with 
these  terms.