ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 05 October 2021
doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2021.729665
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 1 October 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 729665
Edited by:
Jun Tani,
Okinawa Institute of Science and
Technology Graduate
University, Japan
Reviewed by:
Alejandra Ciria,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Mexico
Shingo Murata,
Keio University, Japan
*Correspondence:
Axel Constant
axel.constant.pruvost@gmail.com
Received: 23 June 2021
Accepted: 02 September 2021
Published: 05 October 2021
Citation:
Constant A, Tschantz ADD, Millidge B,
Criado-Boado F, Martinez LM,
Müeller J and Clark A (2021) The
Acquisition of Culturally Patterned
Attention Styles Under Active
Inference.
Front. Neurorobot. 15:729665.
doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2021.729665
The Acquisition of Culturally
Patterned Attention Styles Under
Active Inference
Axel Constant1*, Alexander Daniel Dunsmoir Tschantz2,3 , Beren Millidge2,4 ,
Felipe Criado-Boado5, Luis M Martinez6, Johannes Müeller7 and Andy Clark2,8,9
1 Theory and Method in Biosciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia,2 Department of Informatics, The
University of Sussex, Sussex, United Kingdom,3 Sackler Centre for Consciousness Science, University of Sussex, Brighton,
United Kingdom,4 School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,United Kingdom,5 Institute of Heritage
Sciences, Spanish National Research Council, Santiago de Compostela, Spain,6 Institute of Neurosciences, Spanish
National Research Council, Universidad Miguel Hernández,Alicante, Spain,7 Institute of Prehistoric and Protoshistoric
Archaeology, Kiel University, Kiel, Germany,8 Department of Philosophy, The University of Sussex, Sussex, United Kingdom,
9 Department of Philosophy, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia
This paper presents an active inference based simulation st udy of visual foraging. The
goal of the simulation is to show the effect of the acquisitio n of culturally patterned
attention styles on cognitive task performance, under acti ve inference. We show
how cultural artefacts like antique vase decorations drive cognitive functions such
as perception, action and learning, as well as task performa nce in a simple visual
discrimination task. We thus describe a new active inferenc e based research pipeline that
future work may employ to inquire on deep guiding principles determining the manner
in which material culture drives human thought, by building and rebuilding our patterns
of attention.
Keywords: perception, culture, archaeology, active inference, eye tracking, simulation
INTRODUCTION
Do the worlds we build alter our own minds and the ways we process i nformation? In one sense, it
is obvious that they do—we read books, we listen to our teache rs, and learn new ways of thinking
and reasoning as a result. Thanks to lifelong learning, we ma y become experts in a domain such
as forestry and become able to attend to, and diﬀerentiate, ne w things as a result. But we are also
immersed in a sea of material structures and artefacts such a s pottery, ceramics, clothing, buildings,
tools, and more. As we encounter and explore these artefacts a nd structures, they too inﬂuence our
patterns of visual and embodied exploration, and thus our lear ning. But the nature and potential
cognitive importance of these interactions with material st ructure remains ill-understood.
Iterated encounters with non-linguistic aspects of material culture, we believe, do not simply
reﬂect human thinking and reasoning—rather, they shape and a lter it. Our minds are as much the
products of these materialities as the cause. This is a bold cl aim, yet one that is quite often found in
the sciences of mind and culture (
Dennett, 1991, 1996; Clark, 1997; Sutton, 2002; Knappett, 2005 ;
Renfrew and Malafouris, 2010 ). To our knowledge, it is a claim that has not been experimenta lly
demonstrated or subjected to rigorous analysis and testing. The simulations we report below are
meant as a ﬁrst step towards building a pipeline to explore and tes t this claim—that encounters
with non-linguistic artefacts can alter patterns of thought a nd attention in cognitively interesting
and beneﬁcial ways.
With this goal in mind, our paper presents a proof of principle for mo delling visual foraging and
sensory learning of artefacts using active inference for Ma rkovian inference models. Markovian
models are used to perform predictive statistical inference o ver some states of interest, given
the outcomes those states are known to generate. For instanc e, Markovian model can be used
Constant et al. Culturally Patterned Attention Styles
to perform weather forecasting over some unknown states (a.k .a.
hidden states, or unknown variables) which would represent t he
weather for each day of the week (e.g., rainy; sunny), and whe re
the outcomes would be some observable property of the possible
states (e.g., cloud shapes). After observing these properties ,
inference proceeds by combining known prior probabilities
of transitioning from one state to the next (e.g., history of
transitions between rainy to sunny days, or sunny days to sun ny
days, etc.) with the known likelihood of observables under e ach
state. The resulting posterior speciﬁes the Bayesian probabil ity
the hidden variables at the next time step (e.g., tomorrow’s
weather). In this paper, we utilise the theory of active infere nce
to perform the requisite inference, action-selection, and l earning
for our model.
Crucially, active inference straddles multiple levels of Ma rr’s
hierarchy, from deep computational considerations in stati stical
inference and thermodynamics, all the way down to being able to
build biologically plausible models of psychophysical tasks w hich
accord with known neurophysiology. This theoretical breadt h
licences us to create an active inference model of the intera ction
between inference and learning systems and material cultur e
which can demonstrate, through psychophysical observables, the
importance of the material world for shaping mental attention
styles and ultimately cognitive capacities.
We present two experiments. In experiment 1, we provide a
pilot simulation of visual foraging that showcases the potent ial
of our method for modelling empirical data on foraging
over diﬀerentially complex cultural artefacts. Experiment 1 c an
be viewed as a training experiment, where artiﬁcial agents
learn about the hierarchical structure of artefacts, and wh ere
this acquired knowledge is later applied to a categorisation
task (experiment 2). Our simulation focuses on implementing
artiﬁcial behaviour that could mimic in vivo participants scan
paths over antique vases such as observed in
Criado-Boado et al.
(2019). Criado-Boado and colleagues studied the inﬂuence of
decoration patterns on scan paths employed by visual foragers.
They use a vertical index (Vi) to measure the inﬂuence of vari ous
patterns on visual saccades, relative to the size of the visua l
display presenting the diﬀerentially decorated vases (e.g., m ore
or less complex decoration painted horizontally or verticall y).
We show that an increase in decoration complexity, when
modelled as patterns of hidden states, entails characterist ically
diﬀerent scan paths, and hence Vi; We call these scanpaths
“Culturally Patterned Attention STyles” (C-PAST). These s can
paths are the result of the agent attempting to predict the
next decoration based on observed pigments and learning the
probability transitions between the visual motifs forming t he
decorations. These scanpaths should be viewed as heuristics
of culturally shaped patterns of attention. Future work shoul d
attempt to ﬁt the model generating those scanpaths with real
participant data. The motivation for calling the scanpaths
“cultural” is that vase decorations have been shown to be a
good indicator of cultural complexity. Hence, we call “cultu ral, ”
or rather “culturally patterned” the scanpaths that result fr om
learning based on the exposure to such decorations; the
patterning here being synonym of learning.
In experiment 2, we provide a modelling method to transfer
the learning of priors across simulations under active infer ence,
which, to our knowledge, has never been done before in the
literature. Transfer learning here refers simply to the tran sfer of
knowledge across tasks (e.g., employing knowledge acquired in
task X to perform the actions required in task Y). The challeng e
with the transfer of learning in active inference modelling is
that the model parameters (e.g., transition probabilities be tween
hidden states) are normally task speciﬁc, which means that
they correspond to the environment of the task at hand (e.g.,
motifs as hidden states being speciﬁc to the vase perceived by
the agent). The novel modelling strategy we propose in this
paper allows transfer learning by breaking down the environme nt
of a task into units that are general purpose hidden states.
These units are locations in a discrete 2-dimensional map,
which we call the remapping likelihood matrix (see method for
details). The remapping matrix allows us to local representati ons
of the immediate environment, and, crucially, to reuse thes e
units or groups of units, when learned, across tasks. While
it unlocks the possibility to accomplish our simulation, we
recognise that the present method of likelihood remapping
is trivial. Based on the learning of the structure of vases’
decorations in experiment 1, in experiment 2 we simulate a
pattern categorisation task that involves reusing learned m odel
parameters in experiment 1. In the categorisation task, the ag ent
has to match a series of motif cut-outs with their correspondi ng
motif. We show how performance (hits vs. non-hits) changes
depending on learned parameters under the diﬀerent levels
of cultural complexity aﬀorded by vases transferred from
experiment 1.
In summary, with experiment 1 and 2, we show the potential
of active inference to study (i) exposure to artefactual comple xity
leading to the acquisition of the knowledge underwriting
diﬀerent Culturally Patterned Attention STyles (C-PAST)—he re
knowledge about transition probabilities among hidden stat es, or
representations of the structure of the world; (ii) the repurpo sing
of C-PAST in novel cognitive tasks, and the manner in which
diﬀerent C-PAST inﬂuence performance in novel cognitive task s.
We are aware that the task that we use may be considered too
simple to demonstrate the eﬀect of C-PAST on cognitive task
performance, and that our task is limited to non-natural scen es.
However, the goal of our simulation, beyond reproducing the
results of
Criado-Boado et al. (2019) is to provide a simple
example of a scalable modelling strategy for future research on
related issues in the ﬁeld of cognitive archaeology.
VERTICAL INDEX, SOCIAL COMPLEXITY,
CULTURAL COMPLEXITY AND ATTENTION
The vertical index (Vi) is a measure that compares the proportio n
of horizontal to vertical saccades made when viewing an imag e
(
Criado-Boado et al., 2019; Millán-Pascual et al., 2021 ). This
measure, which is closely related to the density of informati on
presented in vertical dimensions, has been shown to vary
considerably across items ranging from pots to monuments,
drawn from diﬀerent archaeological epochs (
Prieto-Martínez
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 2 October 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 729665
Constant et al. Culturally Patterned Attention Styles
et al., 2003 ). The archaeological record shows that decoration
patterns of complex prehistoric societies generally followed hi gh
Vi patterns, whereas low Vi patterns are found in simpler
societies.
Criado-Boado et al. (2019) note that archaeologists
accept that the evolution of pottery decorations parallels, in the
particular chronological sequence on study, changes in the l evel
of complexity of social organisation [see Prieto-Martínez et al.
(2003) for a detailed characterisation of the social complexity
embedded in the pottery sequence analysed in Criado-Boado
et al. (2019) and see Criado-Boado (2014)] for a more general and
theoretical account of the interactions between materiali ty and
social processes] and propose that a virtual index of decoratio n
may be a measure or reﬂection of such a social complexity
[
Müller et al. (2015) also illustrates similar conclusions for a
diﬀerent pottery style]. Criado-Boado et al. (2019) found that
the verticality of decoration correlated with the chronolog ical
evolution of the decorations on ceramics displayed in their
study; these being associated with diﬀerence cultural period s
and associated levels of social complexity. They showed that
eye movements of participants followed the same evolutionary
trend reported by the Vi index when presented with the vases’
decorations characteristic of each successive social perio ds.
Here, what we refer to as social complexity diﬀers from what
is sometimes described as cultural complexity (
Sterelny, 2020 ).
Social complexity denotes the overall level of organisation of
a society, whereas cultural complexity denotes the complexity
of artefacts found in a given population. Cultural complexity
is sometimes viewed as a proxy to social complexity, as it
would reﬂect the level of skills and expertise of the tool and
artefacts makers and users, which in turn would reﬂect the
level of social complexity. Cultural complexity can be viewed as
either repertoire complexity, or peak complexity (
Sterelny, 2020).
Repertoire complexity corresponds to the number of distinct
tools that were used in each society, whereas peak complexity
corresponds to the level of complexity of a given tool, which ca n
be measured in terms of parts and functions of the tool; these
being called technounits
Oswalt (1973). The correlation observed
by Criado-Boado et al. (2019) was between social complexity and
the Vi of decorations on vases. The correlation was not betwe en
social complexity and cultural complexity.
A challenge with studying the relation between social
complexity and cultural complexity is that repertoire complexit y
and peak complexity may vary independently ( Sterelny, 2020 ),
and depending on the sort of artefact one considers, peak
complexity may even be inversely proportional to the true
level of skills of artefacts makers reporting social complexit y.
Moreover, the locus of peak complexity may change over
time in a same society. These problems are especially salient
when considering the complexity of aesthetic objects like va se
patterns. For instance, it is common to observe disparity
within the artefactual repertoire, with simpler societies ha ving
poorer decorative vase patterns but highly complex body
ornamentations like tattoo motifs or plumes arrangements. T he
same applies to more advanced societies and pottery decoration s,
whose peak complexity can correlate at ﬁrst with the level of
social complexity, but then decrease with time as the society
discovers new material and media for artistic expression (e. g.,
jewellery, metallurgy, architecture, etc.). For instance, pottery
was important to express social styles and social identities i n
the Atlantic façade between 6,000 and 2,000 BP , while in other
cultures and times other sort of material were used to mainly
express social identity (e.g., jewellery, metallurgy, monu ments, or
tattoos, personal ornaments, or plumes).
Despite the intrinsic interest of these issues and their
importance for understanding the historical record, it is
important to note that our target in the simulation studies is
something rather diﬀerent. Our goal is to explore the potential
role of cognition (attention, perception and learning) as a va riable
operating within these complex regimes. Speciﬁcally, we are
asking whether, and in what ways, interactions with artefact s
might alter patterns of attending, which in turn alter ways of
thinking and reasoning about the world (e.g., in a cognitive
task). Thus, we introduce cognition (attention, perception a nd
learning) as a third variable to the complex relation between
social complexity and cultural complexity. The hope is that styl es
of cognition may function as an explanatory bridge between
cultural and social complexity. Accordingly, our simulation
explores the synthetic relationship between task performanc e
and the acquisition or learning of attention styles based on the
exposure to vase decorations. The motivation for this simula tion
is to explore the ways interactions with artefacts might alte r
patterns of attending, which in turn alter ways of thinking an d
reasoning about the world (e.g., in a cognitive task). If such eﬀects
are real, then there may be a good reason to believe that there
exists a link between the structure of the human-made world
and the ways we think and reason after cultural immersion in
diﬀerent such worlds. Because artefacts aﬀording greater vert ical
index correlate with social complexity, and because vertica l
indices illicit characteristically diﬀerent visual foragin g patterns
(
Criado-Boado et al., 2019 ), one could hypothesise that there
is a ratchetting loop between the acquisition of attention s tyles,
features of the artefacts that illicit such an acquisition ( e.g., Vi),
and cultural complexity.
Note that novel patterns of attending do not necessarily
witness of a neurobiological change in the human evolutiona ry
history (e.g., encephalization). The hypothesis on the cogni tion-
culture loop is not primarily a gene-culture co-evolutionar y
hypothesis on the evolution of social complexity and cultural
complexity (e.g.,
Henrich, 2015). Rather, such a hypothesis refers
to dynamics at the level of cognition and culture. Attention
styles are acquired over developments; they are akin to cogni tive
“gadgets” (
Heyes and Frith, 2014 ) that support the scaf-folding
of more complex abilities such as language and mind reading.
One of these abilities may be that of reproducing complex human
social ensembles; an ability scaf-folded through artefact ually
mediated acquisition of attention styles. The current simu lation
is a ﬁrst step towards studying such cognition-culture loop under
the theory of active inference.
Finally, note that our project diﬀers from related research
in the ﬁeld of active inference, culture and cognition. Here,
our goal is not to account for the formation and function of
human culture, but rather, to inquire on the manner in which
culture shapes perception and inﬂuences task performance. That
is, we are not here attempting to deﬁne what culture is and
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 3 October 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 729665
Constant et al. Culturally Patterned Attention Styles
how it works, but rather we are here attempting to describe
the way humans may respond to its products and how those
inﬂuence cognitive task performance. While this latter probl em
is certainly part of the more general project of accounting for
the formation and function of culture, this problem remains o ne
that can be approached independently of the larger discussion
on the ontology of culture. Under active inference, the ontol ogy
of culture is deﬁned as patterns of attention, or “regimes” of
attention shaped by local practises (e.g.,
Kaufmann and Clément,
2007; Ramstead et al., 2016; Constant et al., 2019, 2020; Vei ssière
et al., 2020). Despite the diﬀerences in research orientations noted
above, our simulation may be viewed as providing one possible
illustration of the manner in which the acquisition of regim es of
attention (here C-PAST) inﬂuences task performance.
METHOD: ACTIVE INFERENCE
Active inference is a theory arising from theoretical neuro science,
which posits that perception, action, and learning can be
fundamentally united since they can be cast as performing a
form of approximate Bayesian inference (known as variational
inference) on the same information—theoretic objective (
Friston,
2010). Although anchored in abstract conceptions of inference,
active inference possesses a neurobiologically plausible pro cess
theory ( Friston et al., 2017 ), and has been applied to explaining
and building models of diverse aspects of neural and cognitiv e
function such as planning and navigation under uncertainty
(
Kaplan and Friston, 2018 ), saccade generation and reading ( Parr
and Friston, 2017 ), sequential decision making tasks ( Friston
et al., 2013, 2016 ), up to complex continuous control tasks
(Pio-Lopez et al., 2016; Fountas et al., 2020; Millidge, 2020;
Tschantz et al., 2020 ), as well as psychophysical observables such
as modelling evidence accumulation ( FitzGerald et al., 2015 ).
Moreover, through the expected free energy functional, activ e
inference also entails a natural epistemic drive which has be en
exploited before in previous active-inference studies of vis ual
foraging ( Friston et al., 2015; Mirza et al., 2016 ). Here, we
present a high-level description of active inference. For a de tailed
overview of active inference in discrete state-spaces and fo r the
purpose of economy of space, we refer the technically minded
reader to the dedicated method papers of
Friston et al. (2015,
2017), and Da Costa et al. (2020) .
An Overview of Variational Inference
Active inference posits that action, learning and perception c an
all be described as a process of variational inference. Varia tional
inference is an approximation to exact Bayesian inference whi ch
postulates the existence of a variational recognition densi ty,
which is matched to the true posterior via an optimisation
process. Variational inference thus converts a diﬃcult and
intractable inference procedure into a potentially tractabl e
optimisation process, for which good approximate solutions
exist. Variational inference obtains its solution by minim ising the
variational free energy functional, and this is used in our m odel
for perception—i.e., the inference of hidden states from obse rved
outcomes. Active inference extends this theory to include a ction,
which is inferred from preferences over sequences of potentia l
future states. This requires the use of a subtly diﬀerent objec tive
functional—the expected free energy—which is a functional
over expected future states and observations. The expected
free energy naturally includes an epistemic exploration-indu cing
information gain term which encourages active inference ag ent’s
to seek out novel outcomes, which thus can mimic key behaviou rs
in visual foraging which is all about information gathering .
Variational inference depends on two mathematical objects—
the variational recognition distribution (hereafter refer red to
as the variational distribution) and the generative model. The
variational distribution is a distribution over all hidden v ariables
in the model and represents the agent’s beliefs about the
state of the world. The generative model is the agent’s model
of how the observables in the world are “generated” by the
hidden variables which must be inferred. During inference, the
variational distribution (the agent’s beliefs) are optimise d to best
conform to the outcomes or data observable by the agent. Thus ,
in inference, the generative model is “inverted” —in that we look
to recover the mapping from observations to hidden states, giv en
a mapping from hidden states to observations.
An Overview of the Variational Distribution
Formally, let x refer to hidden variables, where xn refers to the
hidden state at level n, and π refer to a policy (ﬁxed sequence
of actions). The variational distribution can then be factor ised
as follows:
Q(x1
0 : T, x2
0 : T, π ) = Q(x1
0)Q(x2
0)Q(π )
T∏
t=1
Q(x1
t |π )Q(x2
t |π ) (1)
Moreover, the agent’s generative model can be factorised as:
p(o0 : T, x1
0 : T, x2
0 : T, π ) = p(π )p(x1
0)p(x2
0)p(o0)
T∏
t=1
p(ot|x1
t )p(x1
t |x1
t−1, x2
t , π )p(x2
t |x2
t−1, π ) (2)
Given these distributions, inference is achieved by optimisi ng the
variational distribution in order to minimise free energy:
Q∗(x1
0 : T, x2
0 : T) = argminF(Q0 : T, o0 : T)
F = DKL(Q(x1
0 : T, x2
0 : T; φ )||p(o0 : T, x1
0 : T, x2
0 : T)) (3)
In a similar fashion, action selection is achieved by optimisi ng the
variational distribution to minimise expected free energy, w hich
we compute at each step:
π ∼ Q∗(π ) = arg minπ ς (Q, π )
ς (Q, π ) = EQ(ot : T ,x1
t : T ,x2
t : T |π )
[
DKLQ(x1
t : T, x2
t : T|π )
||p(ot : T, x1
t : T, x2
t : T)
]
An Overview of the Generative Model
In the current work, the active inference agent utilises a two -
level hierarchical generative model parametrised by four ma trices
“A1, ” “A2” and “B 1′′
and “B 2′′
(for a deeper description of
hierarchical models in active inference see,
Friston et al., 2017 ).
Here we present the role these matrices play in the variational
inference over states, future states and outcomes in genera l. In the
result section, we describe the semantic of these matrices, which
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 4 October 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 729665
Constant et al. Culturally Patterned Attention Styles
will be speciﬁc to the tasks we seek to accomplish in experiments
1 and 2.
The “A ” matrices represent the parameters of a likelihood
distribution which maps from the hidden states at a hierarchi cal
layer to the outcomes associated with the layer (the outcome s of
all hierarchical layers other than the lowest layer correspo nd to
the hidden states of the hierarchical layer below). These ma trices
denote the instantaneous probabilistic mappings between the
hidden states and outcomes.
The “B” matrices represent the (policy- dependent) transition s
between the hidden states over multiple time-steps. The
parameters of the “B” matrices were learnt through experience .
This learning can be cast as inference on the parameters of a
dirichlet hyperparameter over the entries of the “B” matrix. F or
more details see
Da Costa et al. (2020) . Crucially, the parameters
of the “B 2′′
matrix are inferred over the course of a trial and
provide the representation of the C-PAST.
Given such a generative model and an initial state distribut ion,
sequences of potential future outcomes and hidden states can
be generated and compared for diﬀerent potential policies
(sequences of action) which could be enacted. These sequenc es
of future outcomes and hidden states are scored by the expecte d
free energy functional (denoted “G”). Policies are selecte d
which minimise “G.”. In our experiments, look-ahead was only
performed for a single time step into the future and actions we re
selected which greedily minimised “G.”
Another important aspect is the encoding of an agent’s
preferences into the generative model. This is encoded throu gh
the matrix “C” which speciﬁes a desired probability distribut ion
over outcomes. In our experiments the agent strongly desired to
observe pigments and will be averse to observing non-pigments .
This simple constraint on agent behaviour is suﬃcient to gene rate
complex visual-foraging behaviour.
We specify a prior the entries of the “A ” matrices. Crucially,
to ensure that the active inference agent only was in possessi on
of local knowledge (i.e., the content of its foveated region and
not the entire image), we utilised the novel likelihood rema pping
trick by which the “A ” matrices were represented in a state-
dependent fashion so that the agent was only aware for a given
hidden state (location), the presence or absence of the pigmen t in
a 3 x 3 square around the agents location. Likelihood remapping
allows the agent to perform state inference and navigation by
bypassing the full representation of the generative process (i .e.,
environment). This is in contrast to standard active infere nce
approaches which typically require the agent to be given a corre ct
global understanding of the scene. To achieve this locality , the
“A ” matrix becomes state-dependent so that it only provides
information about outcomes in the proximity of the state the
agent is in. A further description of this likelihood remapping
method can be seen below in Figure 1.
RESULTS
Experiment 1
The goal of experiment 1 was to exemplify the relation between
artefactual complexity and scan path cultural speciﬁcity unde r
active inference. We showed how variations in artefactual
complexity leads to the acquisition of diﬀerent “Culturally
Patterned Attention STyles” (C-PAST). Scan paths are artiﬁci al
visual saccades enacted by the agent during the visual forag ing
task. The goal of the visual foraging task was simply for the ag ent
to explore the visual scene, which consists of a vase decorated
with motifs made of pigments. The agent’s simulated gaze star ts
at the centre of the vase and is free to explore the vase for 100
timesteps. We presented the simulated agent with vases that ha d
diﬀerent levels of complexity—that is, that were made up of more
or less visually rich patterns. The richness of the patterns ca me
from the inclusion of more or less vertical features, or moti fs,
from horizontal (0 degree angle), to oblique ( −45 and +45 degree
angle), to vertical (90 degree angle). We measured the inﬂue nce
of pattern complexity on visual foraging with a version of the
virtual index (Vi) used in
Criado-Boado et al. (2019) . Vi is a
measure of visual saccades relative to the size of the display u pon
which the vase is presented. The empirical results of Criado-
Boado et al. (2019) suggest that vase complexity aﬀects change in
scan paths’ Vi. The purpose of simulation 1 was to reproduce this
eﬀect in silico and based on the parameters needed to simulate t he
eﬀect, phenotype the diﬀerent attention style or C-PAST acquire d
through exposure to vases with four levels of complexity (0 to 3 )
(see Figure 2).
The Model for Experiment 1
To perform the task in experiment 1, the simulated agent
applies our inference algorithm to a simple two level Markovian
generative model. The generative model allows the agent to in fer
two things: (i) the hidden states at level 1 or 2, and (ii) an
action policy, which optimises the desired sequence of hidden
states enacted by the agent. In experiment 1, the level 1 hidde n
states are locations on the visual display where pigments can
be found. The presence or absence of a pigment functions as
the sensory outcome. Level 2 hidden states represent the moti fs
which consist of repeating patterns of pigments, for instance,
crosses, diagonal and horizontal lines (see Figure 2). Using a two-
level hierarchical generative model allows us to simulate a n agent
that can infer the presence of more abstract hidden states (i. e.,
level 2 motifs) based on its inference of simpler hidden state s
(i.e., level 1 pigments). For each cycle of inference at level 2,
four cycles of inference are performed at level 1, that is, fou r
pigments are inferred. The heatmap we present below is the resu lt
of having inferred those diﬀerent hidden states. The second t hing
the agent can infer based on its generative model is an action
policy, which here stands for a (sequence of) visual saccades .
Action policies are simply sequences of control states that ar e
inferred over multiple time steps based on preferences the agen t
has for certain outcomes.
The generative model represents and performs inference over
four sets of parameters. The ﬁrst is a likelihood parameter
A1, which exists at level 1, and is a probabilistic mapping
between sensory outcomes (pigments) and level 1 hidden states
(locations on the visual display). At level 1, we keep the like lihood
deterministic (all [0 1]), which speaks to the fact that the
agent can clearly perceive the pigments. The second likelihood
parameter A 2, represents the probabilistic mapping between the
motifs and the locations perceivable by the agent. This likeli hood
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 5 October 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 729665
Constant et al. Culturally Patterned Attention Styles
FIGURE 1 |Likelihood remapping. For illustrative purposes, this ﬁgur e presents a generative process (A hat) made of 36 locations, or states. Each state is associated
with an outcome, either black or white. (1) The initial likel ihood is deﬁned for an agent that would start in location 8. The likelihood of the generative model is speciﬁed
based on the 8 locations, or hidden states surrounding the cu rrent location, as well as the current location. (2) Based on the inferred policy (e.g., 8 → 15), we move
the agent in the generative process, here, to location 15. (3 ) Indexing the novel surrounding and current location from th e generative process, we remap the likelihood
that will be used at t + 1 to infer the state and the policy.
is also deterministic, which speaks to the fact that the agent knows
how a given motif (for instance a cross) can be represented by
a sequence of pigments. The second set of parameters are the
transition probability mappings between level 1 hidden states
B1 or the level 2 hidden states B 2. In experiment 1, the agent
learns the transitions between hidden states (motifs) at le vel 2.
Transitions are deterministic at level 1 and depend entirely on
the action policy. A two-level model, with uncertainty in lev el
2 transitions (motifs transitions) will scan diﬀerently. Inc reases
in vase complexity drive the learning of motifs transition (i .e.,
patterns). We refer the reader to the method section for the
details of the manner in which our inference algorithm perfor ms
the inferences, formulates action policies, and learns B 2.
Vertical Index
The Vertical index (Vi) is deﬁned as the height “h” of the regi on
upon which the agent gazed times the number of vertical saccad es
(number of steps taken vertically given the inferred policies ),
minus the width “w” of the region gazed upon time the number of
horizontal saccades, all that divided by the sum of the produc t of
the height “h” and number of vertical saccades, and the produc t
of the width “w” and the number of vertical saccades:
VirticalIndex(Vi) = h∗nb.vert.saccades − w∗nb.horiz.saccades
h∗nb.vert.saccades + w∗nb.vert.saccades (4)
The change in Vi relative to the four levels of complexity are
presented in Figure 3, with their associated level of decoration
complexity. GIF representations of the simulation as well as t he
source code for all experiments can be found at https://github.
com/BerenMillidge/MaterialCulture. The results show that Vi
correlates positively with the levels of complexity, as expect ed,
and empirically observed in
Criado-Boado et al. (2019) . We
present the scanpaths in Figure 4.
C-PAST
We deﬁne the “Culturally Patterned Attention STyles” (C-PA ST)
as sets of motif-transition parameters learned when the agen t is
presented with decorations during exploration. Our simulati on
shows that diﬀerence in pattern complexity naturally entails
diﬀerences in C-PAST, leading to systematic diﬀerences in Vi
(Figure 3). To measure the C-PASTs, we use the entropy, in
information theoretic terms, of the sets of motif-transitio n
parameters B2. Formally, we deﬁne our measure of C-PAST as
C − PAST = H[B2] = −
N∑
i
B2
: i logB2
: i (5)
where H is the Shannon entropy and N is the number of
motifs. We use entropy because it allows us to describe intrin sic
features of the distributions, without having to commit to a
normative assessment of those distributions (e.g., compared to
an ideal, extrinsic criterion of goodness). Indeed, the purpo se of
measuring C-PASTs is simply to phenotype the various attention
styles that obtain from the exposure to various levels of cultu ral
complexity. Note that we only allowed for learning of transiti on
probabilities (B2 parameters), but in principle, nothing preven ts
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 6 October 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 729665
Constant et al. Culturally Patterned Attention Styles
FIGURE 2 | (A)Vi is a measure of visual saccades relative to the size of the v isual area gazed upon. This area increases with decoration c omplexity. (B) States and
outcomes for the generative model. At level 1, the outcomes a re the absence or presence of a pigment. The states are the loc ations (1/900) of which we
(Continued)
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 7 October 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 729665
Constant et al. Culturally Patterned Attention Styles
FIGURE 2 |take a sample of nine currently available locations to deﬁne t he focal area (updated based on the navigation matrix for eve ry trial, see method). Level 2
states are motifs (sets of locations) and their associated o utcomes are the location at level 1 [e.g., “P(location|motif )]. The focal area corresponds to the outcome
likelihood at level 1. The important thing to remember is tha t we are respecifying the likelihood after each eye movement , using the remapping likelihood matrix (see
method section). (C) 900 locations grid over which the active inference agent sca ns. The agent can decide to move from the central location of t he 3 x 3 focal area
(grid) to any location of the grid. The four levels of decorat ion complexity build on one another. Level 0 is a straight lin e, and level 1 adds verticality by adding oblique
shapes below the line. Level 2 adds oblic motifs on the top of t he straight line as well, and level 4 adds vertical lines belo w the oblique shapes at the bottom.
FIGURE 3 | (A)The effect of artefact complexity on the vertical index (Vi) measure of scan paths. Consistent with the empirical ﬁndings of Criado-Boado et al. (2019) ,
we ﬁnd that artefactual complexity positively correlates wi th Vi (B). The effect of artefact complexity on the C-PAST measure of l earned generative models. As
described in the main text, this measure quantiﬁes the entrop y of the motif-transition parameters “B2,” which are learne d over the course of the 100 trials. These
results demonstrate that artefact complexity correlates p ositively with C-PAST, highlighting the symmetry between e nvironmental complexity and model complexity.
one from allowing learning in other parameters so as to get a
richer measure of C-PAST (e.g., entropy of A and B parameters).
Results Experiment 2
The goal of experiment 2 was to explore the impact of diﬀerent
C-PASTs on cognitive task performance in a novel cognitive ta sk.
Note that the learning only happens in experiment 1. This means
that we simply import the trained or learned parameters into the
experiment two without letting the model further learn withi n
the context of experiment 2. Accordingly, experiment 2 is not
a typical transfer learning experiment. However, the proposed
setup is ready for bone ﬁde transfer learning simulations as
future work could allow for learning, and thus study the eﬀect
of transferred learning on learning and task performance. He re,
we only focused on the eﬀect of prior learning on novel
task performance. Experiment 1, which could be viewed as a
“training, ” or learning experiment was a visual foraging tas k.
Experiment 2 is a simple visual classiﬁcation task where the age nt
is presented with a predetermined series of cut-outs of certai n
shapes and must select the shape that matches the cut-out (see
Figure 5). We simulated the task under the four diﬀerent C-
PASTs acquired in experiment 1. These were acquired through
the exposure to the four diﬀerent levels of decoration complexi ty
on the vase. We presented the same predetermined series of cut-
outs to all agents. We then recorded hits and non-hits over 10 0
trials, or series of 100 cut-outs. The agent received no feed back
on its answer, meaning that no further learning took place in
experiment 2.
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 8 October 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 729665
Constant et al. Culturally Patterned Attention Styles
FIGURE 4 |For each panel [ (A–D), or complexity 0 to 3], the upper left quadrant represents th e heatmap and the ﬁnal location (red dot), with the motifs supe rimposed
at the end of the 99 trials; the lower left quadrant represent s the heatmap alone at the end of the 99 trials; and the lower ri ght quadrant represents the scan path over
99 trials; the upper right quadrant represents the ﬁnal motif perceived. The heatmap represents the paths and the number o f times the agent moved over a location.
The more often a location was gazed upon, the yellower it beca me (gradient from blue to yellow). MP4 versions of the experi ment can be found at https://github.com/
BerenMillidge/MaterialCulture.
The Model for Experiment 2
We use the same model as in experiment 1, but with a
single level of parametrisation. Hidden states correspond to
the shapes that made up the motifs in experiment 1, and the
sensory outcomes are the cut-outs. Accordingly, the transi tion
matrices (B parameters) are the transition probability mapping s
between shapes, and the likelihood parameter (A parameter) is a
likelihood mapping between cut-outs and shapes. The likelihoo d
mapping is deterministic, meaning that our agent can perfectly
sense the shapes and their associated cut-outs (i.e., the age nt
has a non-noisy sensory access to cut-outs). The mappings for
the transition parameters are those that have been learned in
experiment 1 (i.e., as level 2 transition probability mappings,
or level 2 B parameters B2), and so may contain uncertainty.
Crucially, and distinct in this work is that we use a novel met hod
of “likelihood remapping” to ensure that the agent at any point
only perceives its local environment—i.e., the central fove ated
region of the visual.
Performance
The stimuli we employed in experiment 2 was a series of cut-outs .
The task was to select the matching cut-out. We recorded the
number of hits and non-hits over 100 trials. Figure 6 presents the
results for the agents having been trained under the four diﬀe rent
levels of decoration complexity in experiment 1. Our results sh ow
that C-PAST trained under higher levels of cultural complexi ty
leads to increased performance.
DISCUSSION
This paper presents two computational experiments using active
inference. The ﬁrst was a training simulation wherein an
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 9 October 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 729665
Constant et al. Culturally Patterned Attention Styles
FIGURE 5 | (A)States and outcomes are the shapes and the cut-outs respecti vely. There are no preferences for speciﬁc cut-outs; only ave rsion for the outcome that
corresponds to the “ +”. This is to make sure that the simulated agent always makes a decision across the 100 trials. (B) The task wherein the agent is presented with
a series of cut-outs (outcomes) and has to infer what shape sh ould ﬁt in. We ran 100 trials where the agent is presented with a blank display followed by a cut-out. A
single trial has three moments: (i) the agent is presented wi th a target (ﬁrst slide); (ii) the agent receives the sensory e ntry, or cue that corresponds to the cut-out
(second slide); (iii) the agent infers and selects the motif that matches the cut-out (slide 3).
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 10 October 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 729665
Constant et al. Culturally Patterned Attention Styles
FIGURE 6 |From left to right: Hits (1.0) vs. non-hits (0.0) over 100 tri als for agent’s exposed to different levels of artefact comp lexity. We ﬁnd that the accuracy of
agent’s guesses (percentage of hit-rate) correlates with t he level of artefact complexity.
agent could freely explore the decorations on four diﬀerent
vases aﬀording four diﬀerent levels of decoration complexity.
Decoration complexity was deﬁned in terms of the amount
of verticality in motifs as well as the number of motifs. We
used the decoration complexity to train diﬀerent culturally
patterned attention styles (C-PASTs), which we phenotyped in
terms of the entropy of the distribution of their associated
parameters. We observed that the diﬀerent C-PASTs correlated
with diﬀerent virtual indices (Vi). The overall observation was
that the increase in complexity correlated with increase in V i, as
observed empirically by
Criado-Boado et al. (2019) . Complexity
and Vi also correlated positively with C-PASTs’ entropy. The
goal of our simulation study was simply to reproduce the result s
of Criado-Boado and colleagues using active inference. Bec ause
active inference is known as a good computational candidate
to account for human behaviour, the main contribution of our
simulation is to have provided the beginning of a behavioural ly
plausible explanation for the computation that may underwrite
the results of Criado-Boado and colleagues. The explanation
for the correlation we simulated is simple: the more complex
the stimuli, the more exploration there is, and the more
exploration there is, the more transitions are observed and
therefore the more dispersion there is in the B2 parameters (i. e.,
the mappings are less deterministic). Cultural complexity thus
has the consequence of “loosening” the learning of transiti ons
among cultural motifs, and so renders learning more ﬂexible
(i.e., opens the agent to exploring novel shapes), which is a
phenomenon discussed in relation to creativity (
Van de Cruys
and Wagemans, 2011; Veissière et al., 2020 ). There is more
complexity and variety in the experienced transitions amongs t
hidden states, or more elaborate hierarchical structure, w hich
in turn facilitates learning more complex and varied models
of the world. In experiment 2, we simulated a simple visual
classiﬁcation task in which we reused the C-PAST trained in
experiment 1. Here again, increased ﬂexibility in learning pr ove
useful. We measured success rate (hits non-hits) in a simple
visual discrimination task under each C-PAST. The overall
observation was that C-PASTs acquired during the exploratio n
of more complex artefacts lead to better performance in the
discrimination task.
Crucially, our results on the relation between cultural
complexity and the “loosening” of the learning of transitions
among cultural motifs are consistent with archaeological
observations. For instance, in neolithic contexts, it has b een
observed that relatively uniform ceramic decorations incr ease
the diversity of the decoration over time. For example, we
can structurally identify Neolithic societies in Central Eu rope
for which oldest phase uniform decorations are in use over
a large area. In the following phase, this uniformity dissolve s,
which correlates with increase in decorations variability . In
the case of Linear Pottery, this is associated with spin-oﬀs
of individual farmsteads from the central settlement aroun d
5100 B.C. and increased generational independence (
Shennan
and Wilkinson, 2001 ). A similar phenomenon can be seen
for the large-scale Globular Amphora phenomenon with a
broadening of ritual activities around 3,000 BC (
Müller, 1996 ).
From 2500 B.C. onwards, cyclical increases and decreases in
motif variation are observed for the Bell Beakers, which can
be linked to an intentional renewed restriction of cultural
diversity usually occurring every 150 years or so. Since
comparable changes in diversity are also probable in the Bronze
Age (cp.
Staniuk, 2020 ), we should be able to identify a
fundamental phenomenon for illiterate societies. The learn ing
changes observed in the simulations oﬀer at least one of
several explanatory patterns for the archaeological observat ions
described in the example.
The purpose of experiment 1 and 2 was to demonstrate
the feasibility of an active inference based archaeological study
of the eﬀect of material culture on cognition. In future work,
we plan on using the computational paradigm developed
here to test empirically the correlations observed in our
simulated experiment. Even though we used very simple tasks in
experiments 1 and 2 for illustrative purposes, nothing prevents us
from designing more complex simulation scenarios that can be
used to model participant’s performance in richer environment s.
Indeed, the likelihood remapping strategy we employed in this
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 11 October 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 729665
Constant et al. Culturally Patterned Attention Styles
paper, because it builds environments based on a single type of
hidden states, makes it possible to design complex 2D or 3D
training environments and to transfer the learning of the mo del
across diﬀerent such environments.
Projected iterations of this new experimental paradigm could
address at least four important and interlocking issues. The
ﬁrst, and most obvious, is to explore the eﬀects of diﬀerent
material structures and practises on learning and attention .
This could be done with contemporary artefacts characterist ic
of diﬀerent culture, which we could use to test cross-cultural
variations in visual attention styles. Such future studies should
be informed by studies on cultural diﬀerences in physical
objects perception (e.g.,
Masuda and Nisbett, 2001, 2006 ;
Kitayama et al., 2003; Ishii et al., 2014 ). The second is to
explore learning and transmission in whole populations of
active inference agents. The third is to look at how learning
that is achieved in one such generation and passed on to
another inﬂuences the design of the environment itself—the so-
called “trans-generational bottleneck” whose importance i n the
domain of language change has been the subject of much recent
experimentation (for a review, see
Smith and Kirby, 2008 ). Here,
there is an opportunity to confront the real historical record with
predictions made on the basis of the simulations. The fourth—
and potentially the most revealing—would be to explore the
principal dimensions along which variations in material cult ure
and patterned practises impact learning and attention, using t his
to drive new (more functionally revealing) ways of grouping a nd
taxonomising the real socio-historical record. For example , we
predict that important variations will ﬂow from the way diﬀeren t
material designs manipulate sensory surprise at diﬀerent leve ls of
abstraction and processing.
Summing up, we have described a new experimental pipeline
for exploring links between active inference and changing
cultural complexity. These links are, we hypothesise, mediat ed
by changing patterns of attention—patterns that can be traine d
and enforced by the structural and decorative complexity of
the objects we encounter. In future work using this pipeline,
we hope to discover more of the hidden variables and deep
guiding principles linking material culture to changing patte rns
of thought and reason.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are includ ed
in the article/ Supplementary Material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors contributed to the redaction of the manuscript. A T,
BM and AC contributed to the development and writing of
the code.
FUNDING
Researchers on this article were supported by an Australian
Laureate Fellowship project A Philosophy of Medicine
for the 21st Century (Ref: FL170100160) and by a Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council doctoral fellowsh ip
(Ref: 752-2019-0065) (AC), by a PhD studentship from
the Sackler Foundation and the School of Engineering
and Informatics at the University of Sussex (AT); by an
EPSRC PhD Studentship (BM), by a GAIN-Xunta de Galiza
Groups of Excellence 2020 (FC-B), and by Horizon 2020
European Union ERC Advanced Grant XSPECT - DLV-
692739 (AC). AT is grateful to the Mortimer and Theresa
Sackler Foundation, which supports the Sackler Centre for
Consciousness Science.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.338 9/fnbot.
2021.729665/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body and World Together Again.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. doi: 10.7551/mitpress/1552.001.0001
Constant, A., Clark, A., Kirchhoﬀ, M., and Friston, K. J. (2020) . Extended active
inference: constructing predictive cognition beyond skulls. Mind Lang. 1–22.
doi: 10.1111/mila.12330
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J., Veissière, S. P., and Friston, K. (2019). Regimes
of expectations: an active inference model of social conformity a nd human
decision making. Front. Psychol. 10:679. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00679
Criado-Boado, F. (2014): “Archaeologies of space: an inquiry in to modes
of existence of Xscapes, ” in Paradigm Found: Archaeological Theory –
Present, Past and Future. Essays in Honour of EvŽen Neustupný, eds
K. Krisitansen, L. Smejda, and J. Turek (Oxford: Oxbow Books), 61 –83.
doi: 10.2307/j.ctvh1dpc1.9
Criado-Boado, F., Alonso-Pablos, D., Blanco, M. J., Porto, Y., Ro dríguez-Paz, A.,
Cabrejas, E., et al. (2019). Coevolution of visual behaviour, t he material world
and social complexity, depicted by the eye-tracking of archaeolog ical objects in
humans. Sci. Rep. 9:3985. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-39661-w
Da Costa, L., Parr, T., Sajid, N., Veselic, S., Neacsu, V., and F riston, K.
(2020). Active inference on discrete state-spaces: a synthesi s. J. Math. Psychol.
99:102447. doi: 10.1016/j.jmp.2020.102447
Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little Brown.
Dennett, D. (1996). Kinds of Minds. New York, NY: Basic Books.
FitzGerald, T. H. B., Schwartenbeck, P., Moutoussis, M., Dolan, R . J., and Friston,
K. (2015). Active inference, evidence accumulation, and the urn task. Neural
Comput. 27, 306–328. doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00699
Fountas, Z., Sajid, N., Mediano, P. A. M., and Friston, K. (202 0).
Deep active inference agents using Monte-Carlo methods. arxiv
[q-bio.NC].arxiv:2006.04176.
Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P., Fitzgerald, T., Moutoussis, M. , Behrens, T., and
Dolan, R. J. (2013). The anatomy of choice: active inference and agency. Front.
Hum. Neurosci. 7:598. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00598
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain the ory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. J., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., an d Pezzulo,
G. (2017). Active inference: a process theory. Neural Comput . 29 1–49.
doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00912
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 12 October 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 729665
Constant et al. Culturally Patterned Attention Styles
Friston, K. J., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P. O., Doherty, J., and
Pezzulo, G. (2016). Active inference and learning. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev . 68,
862–879. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.06.022
Friston, K. J., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald , T., and Pezzulo,
G. (2015). Active inference and epistemic value. Cogn. Neurosci . 6, 187–214.
doi: 10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053
Henrich, J. (2015). The Secret of Our Success: How Culture is Driving Human
Evolution, Domesticating Our Species, and Making us Smarte r. Oxford:
Princeton University Press. doi: 10.2307/j.ctvc77f0d
Heyes, C. M., and Frith, C. D. (2014). The cultural evolution of mind reading.
Science 344:1243091. doi: 10.1126/science.1243091
Ishii, K., Miyamoto, Y., Rule, N. O., and Toriyama, R. (2014). Phy sical objects
as vehicles of cultural transmission: maintaining harmony and uniqu eness
through colored geometric patterns. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull . 40, 175–188.
doi: 10.1177/0146167213508151
Kaplan, R., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Planning and navigation as active inference.
Biol. Cybern. 112, 323–343. doi: 10.1007/s00422-018-0753-2
Kaufmann, L., and Clément, F. (2007). How culture comes to mind:
from social aﬀordances to cultural analogies. Intellectica 46, 221–250.
doi: 10.3406/intel.2007.1286
Kitayama, S., Duﬀy, S., Kawamura, T., and Larsen, J. T. (2003). P erceiving an object
and its context in diﬀerent cultures: a cultural look at new look. Psychol. Sci. 14
201–206. doi: 10.1111/1467-9280.02432
Knappett, C. (2005). Thinking Through Material Culture: An Interdisciplinary
Perspective. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
doi: 10.9783/9780812202496
Masuda, T., and Nisbett, R. E. (2001). Attending holistically v ersus analytically:
comparing the context sensitivity of Japanese and Americans. J. Pers. Soc.
Psychol. 81:922. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.81.5.922
Masuda, T., and Nisbett, R. E. (2006). Culture and change blindn ess. Cogn. Sci. 30,
381–399. doi: 10.1207/s15516709cog0000_63
Millán-Pascual, R., Martínez, L. M., Alonso-Pablos, D., Blanco, M. J., and Criado-
Boado, F. (2021). Materialidades, espacio, pensamiento: arqueolo gía de la
cognición visual. Trabajos De Prehistoria 78, 7–25. doi: 10.3989/tp.2021.
12262
Millidge, B. (2020). Deep active inference as variational policy
gradients. J. Math. Psychol . 96:102348. doi: 10.1016/j.jmp.2020.1
02348
Mirza, M. B., Adams, R. A., Mathys, C. D., and Friston, K. J. (2016 ). Scene
construction, visual foraging, and active inference. Front. Comput. Neurosci .
10:56. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2016.00056
Müller, J. (1996). The use of correspondence analysis for diﬀerent k inds of data
categories: domestic and ritual Globular Amphorae sites in Central Ge rmany.
Analecta Praehistorica Leidensia 28, 217–222.
Müller, J., Hinz, M., and, Ullrich, M. (2015): “Bell beakers: chronolog y, innovation
and memory: a multivariate approach, ” in The Bell Beaker transition in Europe.
Mobility and Local Evolution During the 3rd Millennium BC , eds M. P. Prieto-
Martínez and L. Salanova (Oxford: Oxbow Books), 57–68.
Oswalt, W. H. (1973). Habitat and technology: The evolution of hunting . New York,
NY: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2017). Uncertainty, epistemics and ac tive
inference. J. R. Soc. Interface 14:20170376. doi: 10.1098/rsif.201
7.0376
Pio-Lopez, L., Nizard, A., Friston, K., and Pezzulo, G. (2016). A ctive
inference and robot control: a case study. J. R. Soc. Interface 13:20160616.
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2016.0616
Prieto-Martínez, P., Cobas-Fernández, I., and Criado-Boado, F . (2003). “Patterns
of spatial regularity in late prehistoric material culture styles of the NW Iberian
Peninsula, ” in Prehistoric Pottery: People, Pattern and Purpose 1156 , ed A.
Gibson (Oxford: British Archaeological Reports), 147–188.
Ramstead, M. J., Veissière, S. P., and Kirmayer, L. J. (2016). Cult ural aﬀordances:
scaﬀolding local worlds through shared intentionality and regimes of attention.
Front. Psychol. 7:1090. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01090
Renfrew, C., and Malafouris, L. (eds.). (2010). The Cognitive Life of Things:
Recasting the Boundaries of the Mind. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for
Archaelogical Research.
Shennan, S., and Wilkinson, J. R. (2001). Ceramic style change an d neutral
evolution: a case study from Neolithic Europe. Am. Antiquity 66, 577–593.
doi: 10.2307/2694174
Smith, K., and Kirby, S. (2008). Cultural evolution: implications f or understanding
the human language faculty and its evolution. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B.
Biol. Sci. 363, 3591–3603. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0145
Staniuk, R. (2020). Kakucs-Turjan. Tradition and Practice. Study on Pottery,
Chronology and Social Dynamic of the Hungarian Bronze Age . Bonn: Habelt.
Sterelny, K. (2020). Demography and cultural complexity. Synthese.
doi: 10.1007/s11229-020-02587-2
Sutton, J. (2002). “Porous memory and the cognitive life of things , ” inPreﬁguring
Cyberculture: An Intellectual History , eds D. Tofts, A. Jonson, and A. Cavallaro
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 130–141.
Tschantz, A., Millidge, B., Seth, A. K., and Buckley, C. L. (2020 ). Reinforcement
learning through active inference. arxiv [cs.LG].arXiv:2002.12 636.
Van de Cruys, S., and Wagemans, J. (2011). Putting reward in art: a
tentative prediction error account of visual art. I-Perception 2, 1035–1062.
doi: 10.1068/i0466aap
Veissière, S. P. L., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K . J., and Kirmayer,
L. J. (2020). Thinking through other minds: a variational approach to cognition
and culture. Behav. Brain Sci. 43:E90. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X19001213
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be c onstrued as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note:All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizat ions, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may b e evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not gua ranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2021 Constant, Tschantz, Millidge, Criado-Boado, Ma rtinez, Müeller
and Clark. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in
other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) a nd the copyright owner(s)
are credited and that the original publication in this journ al is cited, in accordance
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or re production is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 13 October 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 729665