https://doi.org/10.1177/17456916231185343
ASSOCIATION FOR
PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE
Perspectives on Psychological Science
2025, Vol. 20(1) 45 –75
© The Author(s) 2023
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/17456916231185343
www.psychologicalscience.org/PPS
Paradigm shifts occur with remarkable frequency in the 
behavioral and cognitive sciences. In the early 20th 
century, the nascent field of experimental psychology 
was revolutionized by a behaviorist program that confined 
itself to the investigation of observable activity (Lashley, 
1923; Watson, 1919). Within a generation, behaviorism 
was itself the target of a counter-revolution—one that 
sought to rehabilitate the scientific propriety of mentalistic 
explanations through formal notions of computation and 
information processing (Aspray, 1985; Figdor, 2019). The 
early successes of this “information-processing paradigm” 
presaged the widespread institutionalization of cognitive 
science in the decades that followed (Bechtel et al., 1998; 
Miller, 2003). However, as the century drew toward its 
close, yet another revolutionary movement was in the 
offing. This radical new enterprise, which sought to 
ground cognition in the agent’s physical constitution and 
bodily activity, set the agenda for an embodied cognitive 
science (A. Clark, 1999).
Unlike its predecessors, the success of this “embodied 
revolution” is difficult to gauge. Although the concept 
of embodiment has influenced a wide variety of research 
programs (e.g., Adolph & Hoch, 2019; Casasanto, 2011; 
Engel et al., 2013; Lara et al., 2018; Longo et al., 2008; 
Pulvermüller, 2013; L. Smith & Gasser, 2005; Vallet et al., 
1185343 PPSXXX10.1177/17456916231185343Corcoran et al.Perspectives on Psychological Science
research-article2023
Corresponding Author:
Andrew W. Corcoran, Monash Centre for Consciousness and 
Contemplative Studies, Monash University 
Email: andrew.corcoran@monash.edu
Body as First Teacher: The Role  
of Rhythmic Visceral Dynamics  
in Early Cognitive Development
Andrew W. Corcoran1,2 , Kelsey Perrykkad2 ,  
Daniel Feuerriegel3, and Jonathan E. Robinson2
1Monash Centre for Consciousness and Contemplative Studies, Monash University; 2Cognition and Philosophy  
Laboratory, School of Philosophical, Historical, and International Studies, Monash University; and  
3Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, University of Melbourne
Abstract
Embodied cognition—the idea that mental states and processes should be understood in relation to one’s bodily 
constitution and interactions with the world—remains a controversial topic within cognitive science. Recently, however, 
increasing interest in predictive processing theories among proponents and critics of embodiment alike has raised 
hopes of a reconciliation. This article sets out to appraise the unificatory potential of predictive processing, focusing 
in particular on embodied formulations of active inference. Our analysis suggests that most active-inference accounts 
invoke weak, potentially trivial conceptions of embodiment; those making stronger claims do so independently 
of the theoretical commitments of the active-inference framework. We argue that a more compelling version of 
embodied active inference can be motivated by adopting a diachronic perspective on the way rhythmic physiological 
activity shapes neural development in utero. According to this visceral afferent training hypothesis, early-emerging 
physiological processes are essential not only for supporting the biophysical development of neural structures but also 
for configuring the cognitive architecture those structures entail. Focusing in particular on the cardiovascular system, 
we propose three candidate mechanisms through which visceral afferent training might operate: (a) activity-dependent 
neuronal development, (b) periodic signal modeling, and (c) oscillatory network coordination.
Keywords
active inference, brain-body communication, cardiac cycle, cognitivism, embodied cognition, foetal development, 
foetal heart rate, interoception, prediction error, predictive processing
46 Corcoran et al.
2016), many cognitive scientists continue to conceive of 
cognition in terms of brain-bound representations and 
computational processes. However, optimism that the 
transformative potential of the embodied view may yet 
be realized has been reinvigorated of late by the latest 
revolutionary movement to sweep through the cognitive 
sciences. This new paradigm, which has been heralded 
for its capacity to resolve seemingly intractable differences 
between embodied and more orthodox species of cogni-
tive science (e.g., Allen & Friston, 2018; A. Clark, 2016), 
is known most generally as predictive processing.
This article sets out to critically evaluate the pros-
pects of an embodied cognitive science under the pre-
dictive processing paradigm. We begin by surveying 
the variety of ways in which the concept of embodi-
ment has been interpreted in the cognitive sciences 
(Getting a Grip on Embodied Cognition) before exam-
ining how these various conceptions align with influ-
ential treatments of embodiment under predictive 
processing (Predictive Processing and [Embodied] 
Active Inference). In particular, we focus our discussion 
on embodied formulations of active inference, one of 
the most ambitious and formally developed frameworks 
within the predictive processing literature. Our analysis 
suggests there is little evidence such accounts motivate 
anything more than a weak (perhaps even trivial) inter -
pretation of embodiment. This interpretation is consis-
tent with deflationary arguments that conceive of 
embodied theories of cognition as being easily assimi-
lated within more orthodox accounts of neural repre-
sentation and information processing.
We then go on to consider how recent active-  
inference models of interoceptive processing and auto-
nomic regulation may point toward a novel, substantive 
understanding of embodied cognition. To this end, we 
introduce the visceral afferent training hypothesis, 
which posits that the rhythmic physiological dynamics 
generated by visceral organs, such as the heart, play 
an instrumental role in early cognitive development (A 
Diachronic Perspective on Embodiment). More specifi-
cally, we propose that rhythmic visceral activity pro-
duces temporally structured patterns of stimulation that 
sculpt the structural and functional organization of 
emergent brain networks. We evaluate the strength of 
this hypothesis in light of influential arguments that 
seek to deflate or deny the role of embodiment in cog-
nition (Causation Versus Constitution Redux). Finally, 
we offer some reflections on the broader unificatory 
potential of embodied active inference (Prospects for 
a Unified Philosophy and Science of Embodiment) 
before closing with some brief comments on the scope 
and future development of our hypothesis (Concluding 
Remarks).
Getting a Grip on Embodied Cognition
The notion that cognition is “embodied” has gained 
widespread currency among cognitive scientists; how-
ever, the precise meaning of this claim remains surpris-
ingly elusive (Aizawa, 2015). In the philosophy of mind, 
“embodied cognition” has come to stand for a diverse 
assortment of views, some of which appear to be mutu-
ally exclusive. This section provides a brief orientation 
to this variegated theoretical landscape.
To a first approximation, advocates of embodied cog-
nition are committed to some version of the embodi-
ment thesis. Roughly (and minimally) expressed, this is 
the idea that the cognitive agent’s bodily constitution 
“intrinsically constrains, regulates, and shapes the 
nature of [its] mental activity” (Foglia & Wilson, 2013, 
p. 319).
1 A corollary of this thesis is that mental phe-
nomena cannot be properly understood without taking 
account of the mind’s physical realization in a particular 
kind of body and the way that body interacts with its 
local environment. Proponents of embodied cognition 
often position themselves in opposition to the informa -
tion-processing paradigm at the heart of orthodox cog-
nitive scientific inquiry—a paradigm that has 
traditionally been applied to study cognitive systems in 
abstraction from their materiality and situatedness.
Four doctrines of cognitivism
In order to appreciate the motivation behind certain influ-
ential versions of the embodiment thesis, it will be useful 
to characterize the core philosophical commitments typi-
cally associated with the information-processing para-
digm. These commitments are succinctly captured by the 
view that “cognition is computation over meaningful 
representations in the brain”—a conception that remains 
prevalent among cognitive scientists today (see, e.g., 
Barack & Krakauer, 2021). This proposition can be 
decomposed into three basic claims: that (a) cognition 
involves content-bearing states that refer to (carry infor -
mation about) some distal state of affairs (representation-
alism), (b) cognition involves rule-governed operations 
that manipulate or transform cognitive states (computa-
tionalism), and (c) cognition is realized within the con-
fines of the brain (internalism).
Traditionally, cognitive scientists have supplemented 
this package of claims with an additional commitment 
to functionalism, which conceives of cognitive states 
as determined by the causal or functional roles they 
play in the cognitive system at large. Under functional-
ism, what individuates state X  as a particular mental 
state (e.g., being in pain) is the fact that state X  (a) is 
reliably occasioned by an appropriate chain of events 
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 47
(e.g., stubbing one’s toe, nociceptive input to brain 
stem nuclei, etc.) and (b) reliably elicits an appropriate 
set of mental and/or behavioral outputs (e.g., toe rub-
bing, profanity).
Functionalism implies that cognitive phenomena may 
be instantiated in any suitably configured architecture, 
irrespective of the material composition of that archi-
tecture. This entails that identical cognitive states and 
processes could be implemented in radically different 
substrates (multiple realizability; Putnam, 1967). Con-
versely, identical physical substrates could be (re)orga-
nized such that they instantiate radically different 
mental states (Fodor, 1975). The main point here is that 
functionalism essentially sunders cognitive phenomena 
from the physical systems that realize them, thereby 
providing an impetus for studying cognitive processes 
in abstraction from their implementational details—the 
details of their physical embodiment.
Much more could be said about each of the claims 
enumerated in this section (for some classic expositions 
and objections, see Fodor, 1975, 1981; Haugeland, 1978; 
Newell, 1980; Pylyshyn, 1980, 1984; Searle, 1980). For 
present purposes, it suffices to say that representational-
ism, computationalism, internalism, and functionalism—
the core doctrines of cognitivism—laid the philosophical 
foundations on which the edifice of modern cognitive 
science was raised. It is some version of these doctrines 
on which most proponents of embodied cognition have 
their sights set.
Varieties of embodiment
Although a thoroughgoing examination of the various 
ways in which the embodiment thesis has been elabo-
rated lies well beyond the scope of this article, it will 
be useful to sketch out a broad spectrum of views 
according to the strength of their anticognitivist convic-
tions (for further discussion, see Alsmith & de Vignemont, 
2012; Goldman & de Vignemont, 2009; Miłkowski, 2019; 
Shapiro, 2019a; M. Wilson, 2002).
Embodied cognition is perhaps most commonly 
associated with a provocative set of ideas that took root 
in the early 1990s. Seminal work by Varela et al. (1991) 
and Brooks (1991) set the agenda for “strong” (or “radi -
cal”) interpretations of the embodiment thesis, which 
characteristically advocate the thoroughgoing rejection 
of (at least some of) the philosophical commitments 
underpinning mainstream cognitive science. Strong 
forms of embodied cognition champion the radical dis-
solution of the boundaries that are conventionally 
assumed to separate brain, body, and world, ushering 
in a fundamental decentralization and redistribution of 
the processes through which consciousness and cogni-
tion are produced (Anderson et al., 2012; Chemero, 
2009; Favela, 2014; Gallagher, 2017; Haugeland, 1998; 
Thompson & Varela, 2001).
Although strong varieties of embodied cognition do 
not necessarily deny the brain’s involvement in the 
emergence of cognitive activity, the significance of its 
role is dramatically reduced in comparison to standard, 
“neurocentric” views. Just as Brooks’s subsumption 
architecture engendered robots capable of autono -
mously navigating their environment without recourse 
to complex algorithms or central representations (see 
also Braitenberg, 2004), cognitive systems are said to 
be coupled with their environments in ways that obvi-
ate the need for intensive computation over internal 
mental states (Beer, 2003; van Gelder, 1995). Rather, 
adaptive behavior emerges in virtue of sensorimotor 
feedback loops that exploit the structured relations 
brought forth via agent–environment interactions 
(Barrett, 2011; Hutto & Myin, 2013; Thelen & Smith, 
1994; A. D. Wilson & Golonka, 2013). To the extent that 
cognitivism lacks the conceptual resources to ade-
quately capture such phenomena, proponents of strong 
embodiment consider it incapable of delivering a com-
plete cognitive science.
Not all subscribers to the embodiment thesis are so 
pessimistic, however. Those who endorse a more mod-
erate position do not see embodied cognition as being 
intrinsically at odds with orthodox cognitivism but con-
sider them eminently compatible with one another. 
Moderates claim that embodiment makes an important 
(and perhaps unique) contribution to the cognitive 
economy at least some of the time (A. Clark, 1997, 
2008b). They sympathize with the radical’s analysis of 
the complex interplay between the agent’s physical 
constitution and its external milieu but do not take this 
as warrant for abandoning explanations that appeal (for 
instance) to representationally rich internal computa-
tions. The move to a moderately embodied cognitive 
science is thus more of a reorientation than a revolu-
tion, one that augments the orthodox cognitivist picture 
without substantially undermining its core theoretical 
commitments (Goldman, 2012; Kiverstein, 2012).
Moderates are occasionally accused of purveying a 
rather “weak” or impoverished account of embodiment 
(see, e.g., Chemero, 2013; Di Paolo, 2018; Gallagher, 
2017). Standard-bearers for embodied cognition do not 
generally aspire to weak versions of the embodiment 
thesis. In the extreme, weak embodiment amounts to 
a mere truism: Minds are implemented in physical sys-
tems, the precise nature of which plays some role in 
determining the kinds of states they can occupy. The 
range of color sensations a particular organism might 
experience depends in part on the composition and 
organization of photoreceptor cells in its retinae. Simi-
larly, an individual’s competence in various cognitive 
48 Corcoran et al.
tasks will typically degrade as their blood alcohol con-
centration increases. Adherents of classical cognitivism 
need not deny that bodily states and structures can 
constrain or impact mental states and conscious phe-
nomenology; they may simply dismiss such observa-
tions as incidental to the core project of understanding 
the essential workings of the mind.
Causation versus constitution
One way of delineating weaker from more substantive 
notions of embodiment is to appeal to the distinction 
between causal and constitutive dependency relations 
(e.g., Aizawa, 2007; Block, 2005; Prinz, 2009; see also 
McDowell, 1994). To continue the previous example, 
neurocognitive functioning is causally dependent on 
blood chemistry: The composition of circulating blood 
must be kept within certain homeostatic bounds for 
normal brain activity to occur. The fact that deviations 
beyond such bounds lead to predictable impairments 
of cognitive function may be of interest in certain spe-
cialized domains; however, observations of this sort do 
little to advance the case for a substantive interpretation 
of the embodiment thesis. Blood chemistry is relevant 
to cognitive function only inasmuch as having a func-
tional heart (lungs, kidneys, etc.) is relevant—it forms 
part of the background causal matrix that generates the 
necessary biophysical conditions for brain activity to 
occur.
2 Exogenous causal factors that support, perturb, 
or modulate cognitive dynamics are thus to be differ -
entiated from the dynamics themselves—the cognitive 
operations or processes that are the central object of 
cognitive scientific inquiry.
Constitutive (rather than causal) accounts of embodi-
ment, on the other hand, argue that certain extraneural 
structures are part and parcel of the representational 
currency and computational processes that make up 
the mind. A. Clark (2008a, 2008b) offers one such 
account, whereby he “weaponizes” the substrate neu-
trality of functionalism to argue that mental states and 
cognitive operations may supervene on physical struc-
tures that extend into the body and external world (cf. 
Menary, 2010a; R. A. Wilson, 1994). Likewise, Noë’s 
(2004) enactive account of visual perception eschews 
the trivial remark that what one sees depends on where 
one looks (i.e., a merely causal explanation), arguing 
instead that one’s implicit knowledge or “mastery” of 
such sensorimotor contingencies is constitutive of per -
ceptual experience (cf. Gibson, 1979; Hurley, 1998; 
O’Regan & Noë, 2001; see also Seth, 2014). Although 
the details of such accounts vary considerably, the 
broader point here is that embodiment is being  
construed as playing an important and distinctive role 
in the way cognition is realized—a role that is not 
susceptible to the sort of deflationary attitude with 
which orthodox cognitivism dismisses weak concep-
tions of embodiment as accidental or trivial conse-
quences of physical implementation.
Nevertheless, not all proponents of embodied cogni-
tion are committed to a strictly constitutive reading of 
the embodiment thesis. Goldman and de Vignemont 
(2009) endorse an explicitly causal account of embodied 
representation in the domain of social cognition (but 
see Goldman, 2016). Influential theories of grounded 
cognition (Barsalou, 2008) and embodied simulation 
(Gallese & Sinigaglia, 2011) might likewise be construed 
as offering causal accounts of the way bodies determine 
(or constrain) cognitive phenomena.
3 For present pur -
poses, it suffices to say that embodiment may be 
couched as playing a nontrivial causal role within the 
broader cognitive economy, although views of this sort 
tend to be more modest and conservative (i.e., more 
readily assimilated into mainstream cognitive science) 
than most other species of embodied cognition.
This concludes our brief tour of embodied theories 
of cognition. Although we shall return to debates about 
causation and constitution in Causation Versus Constitu-
tion Redux, what has been presented thus far should 
be sufficient to contextualize and evaluate recent 
attempts to marry the embodiment thesis with predic-
tive processing theories of cognition. The next section 
briefly introduces the active-inference formulation of 
predictive processing before going on to examine the 
strength of its embodied cognitive credentials.
Predictive Processing and (Embodied) 
Active Inference
Predictive processing theories have come to dominate 
the philosophical and scientific landscape over the past 
decade. Much like embodied cognition, “predictive pro-
cessing” is something of an umbrella term capturing a 
range of positions that vary in their scope and ambition 
(for helpful overviews, see Hohwy, 2020; Piekarski, 
2021; Wiese & Metzinger, 2017). We focus our attention 
here on active inference (Parr et al., 2022), a computa-
tional framework developed under the free-energy prin-
ciple (Friston et al., 2006; Friston & Stephan, 2007). 
Given the abundance of contemporary literature deal-
ing with this framework, we limit ourselves here to a 
minimal exposition of its key concepts.
Broadly speaking, active inference seeks to provide 
a formal explanation for the emergence of adaptive 
processes (e.g., action, perception, learning, and deci-
sion-making) in complex biological systems, such as 
ourselves. Under this scheme, adaptive dynamics are 
construed as emergent properties of self-organizing 
systems that conform to a variational principle of least 
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 49
free energy, which states that biological systems must 
change in ways that decrease their free energy in order 
to survive (Friston, 2010; Friston et al., 2006). “Free 
energy” is an information-theoretic quantity that places 
an upper bound on the negative log probability (i.e., 
surprise or self-information) of an observation, given a 
(generative) model encoding beliefs about the way 
observations are generated.
4 In the predictive process-
ing literature, this quantity is often equated with predic-
tion error (cf. predictive coding; Huang & Rao, 2011; 
Rao & Ballard, 1999).
Two important corollaries of the free-energy principle 
are that (a) free-energy-minimizing systems infer the 
causes of their sensory inputs in an approximately 
Bayes-optimal fashion (cf. the Bayesian brain hypoth-
esis; Knill & Pouget, 2004), such that hidden states in 
the environment come to be internally represented in 
the form of probabilistic model parameters, and (b) such 
systems select those actions most likely to realize their 
expected sensory states (Friston, 2012). This means that 
adaptive biological systems must use sensory informa-
tion to optimize an internal model of external conditions 
and deploy this model to guide actions that change the 
environment—thereby harvesting new sensory inputs 
that stimulate further belief updating (Corcoran et al., 
2020). A formal description of the update rules under -
writing these dynamics is provided by the process the-
ory implementation of active inference (Friston, 
FitzGerald, et al., 2017; R. Smith et al., 2022).
On first blush, notions of internal modeling, repre-
sentation, and Bayesian inference would seem to situate 
active inference firmly within the cognitivist tradition. 
However, this observation notwithstanding, active infer -
ence clearly departs from classical cognitivist theorizing 
on a number of fronts. One notable example is the shift 
in emphasis from “bottom-up” explanations of feature 
detection and scene (re)construction (e.g., Marr, 1982) 
to “top-down” inferences on sensory evidence. In this 
way, active inference casts perception as fundamentally 
pragmatic and action oriented in nature—a subjective 
interpretation of the world conditioned on the agent’s 
beliefs, feelings, and desires (A. Clark, 2013, 2016; 
Ramstead et al., 2020; Williams, 2018a, 2018b).
It is not our intention to exhaustively survey the 
various points of contact between active inference and 
influential theoretical perspectives on either side of the 
embodiment debate, or to make any definitive claims 
about the proper situation of the active-inference frame-
work with respect to cognitivist versus embodied phi-
losophies of mind (but see Allen & Friston, 2018; Nave 
et al., 2020, for recent discussion). Neither do we dis-
pute claims to the effect that active inference is in some 
sense “fundamentally embodied” (e.g., Allen & Friston, 
2018, p. 2460)—in part due to apparent widespread 
agreement on this point (even those who defend pur -
portedly cognitivist interpretations of predictive pro -
cessing grant some version of the embodiment thesis; 
see, e.g., Hohwy, 2016, 2018) but mainly due to the fact 
that, as was hopefully brought into relief in the previ-
ous section, such claims are essentially vacuous in the 
absence of further qualification. Our goals here, rather, 
are the following: (a) to examine how the concept of 
embodiment is commonly deployed under active infer -
ence, (b) to ask whether this concept fulfills any special 
function within the broader scheme of the framework, 
and (c) to consider whether active inference discloses 
any substantive new insights into the nature of embodi-
ment (and its attendant controversies).
Embodied models
An obvious place to begin is Friston’s extensive work 
on the free-energy principle. The notion of embodiment 
is frequently invoked by Friston, most notably in con-
nection with the concept of the generative model. Mod-
els are said to be embodied in cortical hierarchies, 
brains, and entire organisms (or more abstractly, their 
phenotypes; e.g., Friston & Stephan, 2007). Biological 
systems, for instance, are supposed to “distil structural 
regularities from environmental fluctuations .  . . and 
embody them in their form and internal dynamics,” 
such that they “become models of causal structure in 
their local environment” (Friston, 2012, p. 2101). In an 
intriguing twist, environments are also said to embody 
their agents “in the sense that the physical states of  
the agent are part of the environment” (Friston, 2011, 
p. 89). This formulation leads Friston to some interest-
ing conclusions about the recursive implications of 
modeling (and being a model of) one’s environment 
and the deeply existential ramifications of active infer -
ence more generally (cf. Hohwy, 2016, 2021).
Whether brains, organisms, and other biological sys-
tems really do embody models of their environments, 
or whether they merely lend themselves to being 
described in such terms, is a matter of contemporary 
debate (see, e.g., Andrews, 2021; Baltieri et al., 2020; 
van Es, 2020). Setting this question aside, the dual 
implication that constituents of the agent’s (literal or 
fictive) generative model (a) extend beyond the brain 
and (b) are intimately bound up with (or “attuned” to) 
environmental dynamics would seem to comport well 
with certain strong varieties of embodied cognition (see, 
e.g., Bruineberg et al., 2018; Bruineberg & Rietveld, 
2014; Kirchhoff & Kiverstein, 2020).
Nonetheless, the extent to which the embodiment of 
generative models speaks to the embodiment of mind  
is an open question. For instance, one might apply pres-
sure on the implicit assumption that the “organism-level” 
50 Corcoran et al.
generative model is the appropriate target for cognitive 
scientific inquiry: If some partition of this model were 
found that delimited cognitive processes within the con-
fines of the brain, the relevance of non-neural model 
components for explanations of cognitive phenomena 
would require independent motivation. Importantly, 
however, active inference does not appear to offer any 
principled means for arbitrating such boundary disputes 
(cf. Bruineberg et al., 2021; A. Clark, 2017a; Facchin, 
2021; Kirchhoff & Kiverstein, 2021; Ramstead et al., 
2021). Rather, the framework permits the individuation 
of multiple nested models ranging from the cellular to 
the societal scale and beyond. Model definition is thus 
predicated on prior assumptions (choices) about the 
nature (and bounds) of the system in question (i.e., the 
object of study; Parr, 2020).
Generalizing this point: Although it may be true that 
the active-inference framework permits one to cast 
biological systems in terms that are consistent with (or 
at least, reminiscent of) stronger flavors of embodiment 
(e.g., the view that embodied agents enjoy direct per -
ceptual access to the world and its affordances; for 
discussion, see Anderson, 2017; Linson et al., 2018; 
Orlandi, 2016), this fact alone does nothing to compel  
such views—additional philosophical work is required 
to demonstrate why such interpretations ought to be 
favored over more conservative, deflationary alterna-
tives.
5 This raises the very real possibility that, rather 
than delivering some sort of resolution to the 30 years’ 
war that proponents of embodied cognition have waged 
on cognitivism, appeals to active inference have merely 
shifted the conflict into a new theater (we shall return 
to this theme in Prospects for a Unified Philosophy and 
Science of Embodiment).
Embodied feelings
Whereas the formal models posited under active infer -
ence might not be sufficient to arbitrate disputes about 
cognitive embodiment, the biological consequences of 
their physical instantiation could prove more decisive. 
The basic idea here is that cognition is embodied in 
the sense of being fundamentally geared toward the 
maintenance of homeostasis (Barrett, 2017; Damasio, 
2018; Seth, 2015)—the delimited set of physiological 
states that define the conditions of the organism’s bio-
logical viability (Corcoran & Hohwy, 2018). The 
expected (homeostatic) states entailed by the agent’s 
phenotype thus constitute the normative criteria against 
which the agent’s current and future sensory states are 
evaluated, a notion that resonates with certain enactivist 
conceptions of embodiment (see, e.g., Colombetti, 
2014; Di Paolo, 2005; Kirchhoff & Froese, 2017; Thomp-
son, 2007). This idea sets the stage for a deeply affective 
conception of mind, whereby bodily and emotional 
feeling states play a key role in guiding adaptive action 
(cf. Damasio, 1994, 2010; Panksepp & Northoff, 2009).
Several embodied interpretations of active inference 
have been developed on the premise that affective 
experience is rooted in the body’s physiological condi-
tion. The first wave of such work provided a predictive 
coding style treatment of interoception, the (conscious 
or unconscious) sensory processing of internal bodily 
states (Pezzulo, 2014; Seth, 2013; for precursors with 
less explicit emphasis on embodiment, see Gu et al., 
2013; Seth et al., 2012). Subsequent elaborations of 
these interoceptive-inference accounts have sought to 
explain how aberrant interoceptive processing and 
autonomic regulation might engender various psycho-
pathologies (Owens et al., 2018; Paulus et al., 2019; 
Quadt et al., 2018; R. Smith et al., 2020), including 
depression (Arnaldo et al., 2022; Badcock et al., 2017; 
Barrett et al., 2016; Seth & Friston, 2016; Stephan et al., 
2016) and anxiety-related disorders (J. E. Clark et al., 
2018; Gerrans & Murray, 2020; Linson et al., 2020; Peters 
et al., 2017).
The purported inseparability of cognitive and affec-
tive processing (Kiverstein & Miller, 2015; Pessoa, 2008), 
coupled with the deep linkage between physiological 
and emotional feeling states (Critchley & Garfinkel, 
2017; Gu et al., 2019), makes affect a prime target for 
embodied theories of active inference. It is noteworthy, 
then, that some active-inference models of affective 
experience do not appear to ascribe any special role 
to the body—rather, affective states are characterized 
in terms of domain-general computational mechanisms 
that track the evolution of prediction error dynamics 
over time (Hesp et al., 2021; Joffily & Coricelli, 2013; 
Van de Cruys, 2017). Although such models might  
ultimately prove compatible with their interoceptive-
inference counterparts (see Fernandez Velasco & Loev, 
2021), their existence would seem to imply that active 
inference is not necessarily committed to an explicitly 
embodied account of affective experience.
Embodied selves
Perhaps the most significant development of active 
inference with respect to embodied cognition is not the 
putative impact of interoceptive states on affective 
experience but rather the means by which interoceptive 
information is incorporated within the cognitive econ-
omy at large. Under active inference, interoceptive 
streams converge with exteroceptive (e.g., visual, audi-
tory) and proprioceptive (motor) modalities at integra-
tive regions of the cortical hierarchy (Gu et al., 2013; 
Owens et al., 2018; Pezzulo et al., 2015). Such multi- or 
cross-modal dynamics open the door for interoceptive 
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 51
information to influence a wide variety of cognitive 
domains, offering a principled explanation of the way 
internal bodily states may bias or condition perceptual 
decision-making (see, e.g., Allen et al., 2016; Pezzulo, 
2014; Pezzulo et al., 2018; cf. Barrett & Bar, 2009).
Evidential support for the multimodal integration of 
bodily signals has accrued from studies investigating 
bodily self-consciousness, a fundamental constituent of 
self-awareness (Blanke & Metzinger, 2009; Gallagher, 
2000, 2005). In experimental paradigms that produce 
the rubber-hand (Botvinick & Cohen, 1998) and full-
body illusions (Ehrsson, 2007; Lenggenhager et al., 
2007; Mizumoto & Ishikawa, 2005), simultaneous visuo-
tactile stimulation induces the uncanny experience of 
tactile sensations that seemingly arise from an artificial 
limb or body avatar (for discussion, see Apps & Tsakiris, 
2014; Aspell et al., 2012; Blanke, 2012; Blanke et al., 
2015; Limanowski & Blankenburg, 2013). This effect is 
so compelling that subjects often report a sense of 
ownership over the alien limb or virtual body, as if it 
had been incorporated as part of (or in place of) their 
own body (Tsakiris, 2010; cf. de Vignemont, 2011; for 
related discussion of disordered bodily processing, see 
Fotopoulou, 2015).
Variants of these paradigms in which visual stimula-
tion occurs in conjunction with rhythmic interoceptive 
events, such as heartbeats (Aspell et al., 2013; Heydrich 
et al., 2018; Suzuki et al., 2013; see also Sel et al., 2017) 
or breathing cycles (Adler et al., 2014; Allard et al., 
2017; Betka et al., 2020; Monti et al., 2020), reveal that 
alterations in bodily self-consciousness can be induced 
via the integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive 
signals. That is, simply augmenting the visual represen-
tation of a virtual body (part) with cardiac- or respira-
tory-synchronized pulsations is sufficient to modulate 
experiences of bodily ownership in the absence of 
concomitant tactile stimulation.
These findings lend credence to the notion that the 
brain integrates multiple sources of sensory informa-
tion to infer which parts of the environment are a part 
of its body (and more abstractly, a part of its self). 
However, whether such inferences qualify as instances 
of embodied cognition is debatable; those of a cogni-
tivist persuasion might be inclined to argue that the 
mere representation of an object as part of oneself (or 
not) fails to motivate any claims about the embodiment 
of cognition per se. Indeed, the directionality of these 
effects would seem to be precisely backward from an 
embodied cognitive perspective: These illusions show-
case the fragility or susceptibility of body-related phe-
nomenology to exteroceptive information (e.g., via the 
attenuation of somatosensory precision; Zeller et al., 
2015, 2016); most proponents of embodied cognition, 
on the other hand, typically want to argue for the 
body’s role in shaping or determining one’s perception 
of the world.
6
Embodied rhythms
Happily, we can eschew this concern by turning our 
attention to a complementary line of research investi-
gating the cross-modal effects of bodily rhythms on 
cognition. Rather than presenting exteroceptive stimuli 
in synchrony with a series of rhythmic interoceptive 
events, such as the heartbeat (as in interoceptive vari-
ants of the rubber-hand and full-body illusions), cycle-
timing paradigms investigate how sensorimotor and 
cognitive processing varies as a function of time within 
each physiological cycle. Of interest here are a subset 
of cycle-timing studies that involve emotionally neutral, 
non-body-related stimuli, which are therefore immune 
to the worry that these phenomena may be domain-
specific quirks of bodily or affective processing (for 
broader overviews of this literature, see Azzalini et al., 
2019; Critchley & Garfinkel, 2018; Skora et al., 2022).
Most cardiac cycle-timing studies compare the dif-
ference between stimuli that are presented during a 
heartbeat (more precisely, during the systolic time win-
dow, in which the brain is receiving a burst of intero-
ceptive input caused by the contraction of the heart) 
and stimuli presented between successive beats (i.e., 
during the diastolic period, in which the heart is relax-
ing and refilling with blood). Early reports that senso-
rimotor processing is facilitated during diastole relative 
to systole (Birren et al., 1963; Callaway & Layne, 1964; 
Saari & Pappas, 1976; Sandman et al., 1977; Walker & 
Sandman, 1982) have been replicated and elaborated 
in more recent years (Edwards et al., 2007; McIntyre 
et al., 2007; Quelhas Martins et al., 2014; Stewart et al., 
2006; Yang et al., 2017). Furthermore, evidence that 
certain cognitive functions are enhanced (Fiacconi 
et al., 2016; Pramme et al., 2014, 2016; Rae et al., 2018), 
and certain forms of spontaneous action preferentially 
initiated (Galvez-Pol et al., 2020; Kunzendorf et al., 
2019), during systole has also begun to accrue.
How do these findings (and analogous results from 
respiratory cycle-timing studies; Flexman, 1974; Kluger 
et al., 2021; Nakamura et al., 2018; Park et al., 2020; 
Perl et al., 2019; Waselius et al., 2019; Zelano et al., 
2016) contribute to debates about embodied cognition? 
From one perspective, such data might seem to furnish 
incontrovertible evidence of the mind’s embodiment. 
After all, this literature attests to the pervasive influence 
of rhythmic internal dynamics on mental states, insofar 
as momentary fluctuations in afferent feedback deter -
mine whether or not an object enters into conscious 
awareness (in the case of near-threshold stimulation), 
when it is perceived (in the case of spontaneous 
52 Corcoran et al.
sampling), and the extent to which it is subsequently 
processed and acted upon. And although the magnitude 
of such effects is admittedly modest, such fine details 
may prove highly consequential under certain ecologi-
cally valid conditions (Azevedo et al., 2017; see also 
Fridman et al., 2019).
As with our earlier treatment of multisensory integra -
tion in Embodied Selves, however, the implications of 
such findings are not clear-cut. The cognitivist might 
be intrigued to learn that visceral organs exert subtle 
influences over exteroceptive decision-making but need 
not concede that these effects are any more compelling 
than (say) the soporific consequences of a heavy  
lunch. This rebuttal might seem too glib, but phasic 
fluctuations in perceptual acuity, alertness, reaction 
speed, and so on are well-established correlates of bio -
logical rhythms spanning multiple time scales (see, e.g.,  
Jennings, 1986; Okawa et al., 1984); and yet, such 
observations are not generally adduced in support of 
embodied cognition. Instead, these phenomena belong 
to that class of factors whose influence upon cognitive 
processing and conscious experience is widely regarded 
as “merely” causal.
What matters here, then, is not so much evidence 
that the heartbeat (breathing cycle, gut rhythm, etc.) 
modulates cognitive function but rather the nature of 
the mechanism(s) underwriting such effects. These 
mechanisms are not fully understood, but converging 
evidence suggests that afferent discharge caused by 
ventricular contraction exerts a transient inhibitory 
effect on cortical activity. As such, each incoming volley 
of cardio-afferent feedback induces a momentary per -
turbation of the brain’s ongoing dynamics, hindering 
its capacity to process information from other modali-
ties. An alternative (but not mutually exclusive) expla-
nation cites the physical distention of blood vessels 
caused by the pulse wave as responsible for disturbing 
the sites where sensory information is registered, such 
as the retinae (Allen et al., 2019; see also Macefield, 
2003). External stimuli are simply more difficult to 
detect when they coincide with (and are obscured by) 
pulsatile motion (but see Grund et al., 2022).
Seen in this light, the cardio-afferent feedback 
thought to underlie differences in sensorimotor and 
cognitive performance observed across different phases 
of the cardiac cycle appears to be a source of noise, a 
nuisance variable that impedes the brain’s capacity to 
go about its information-processing business. Although 
some research findings suggest the afferent signals 
associated with systolic contraction might benefit neu-
ral processing in certain contexts (e.g., Garfinkel & 
Critchley, 2016; Pramme et al., 2016), the tendency 
among active-inference-inspired explanations of cycle-
timing effects is to view the mechanical consequences 
of the heartbeat as a form of interference that lowers 
the precision of exteroceptive sensory input (where 
precision refers to the brain’s estimate of the reliability 
or “signal-to-noise ratio” of sensory data). In principle, 
one could envisage an agent whose cognitive capacities 
remain perfectly intact—indeed, are perhaps even 
improved on average—having eliminated the pulsatile 
“artifacts” caused by the heartbeat (e.g., by replacing 
the heart with a continuous-flow device). Not only does 
the role of cardiac interceptive feedback in conscious-
ness and cognition appear to be more causal than con-
stitutive in nature, but its contribution seems more of 
a “bug” than a “feature.”
To sum up: Active inference provides a powerful 
framework for explaining how the brain integrates mul-
tiple streams of sensory information to construct per -
ceptual experience and regulate activity. Insofar as  
such schemes admit internal bodily states as important 
sources of interoceptive sensory input, they would 
seem to open the door to a more embodied understand-
ing of the mind. But as we have highlighted, embodi-
ment means different things to different people; 
although active inference might be hospitable to certain 
varieties of embodied cognition, the explicitly embod-
ied versions of active inference analyzed here do not 
compel strong interpretations of the embodiment thesis. 
Brains constantly track the evolving dynamics of their 
bodily states and sometimes use this information to 
inform perception and action in other domains. Yet, on 
these accounts at least, it is the brain (and only the 
brain) that does the essential work of modeling the 
state of the body and the world. Visceral signals  
are accorded no special role within this inferential hier -
archy and appear to be treated no differently than other 
forms of sensory input (see also Hohwy, 2016; Hohwy 
& Michael, 2017). Indeed, what appears on first blush 
to be some of the most promising evidence favoring 
the pervasive influence of interoceptive feedback on 
the mind turns out on closer inspection to be just 
another “noise trajectory” (Allen et al., 2019) that the 
brain must learn to live with.
A Diachronic Perspective on Embodiment
Thus far, we have evaluated the nature of embodiment 
under active inference from a broadly “synchronic” per -
spective; that is, we have analyzed how the active-
inference framework might explain particular phenomena 
that occur over relatively brief time frames within 
mature cognitive agents. By contrast, relatively few 
researchers within this field have adopted an explicitly 
“diachronic” (or developmental) perspective (although 
this situation is beginning to change; see Atzil et al., 
2018; Ciaunica, Constant, et  al., 2021; Ciaunica &  
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 53
Crucianelli, 2019; Fabry, 2017, 2018; Fotopoulou & Tsa -
kiris, 2017; Köster et al., 2020; Montirosso & McGlone, 
2020; Wozniak, 2019). The key idea we wish to explore 
in the remainder of this article is that the most novel 
and interesting insights active inference has to offer 
the embodied cognition debate derive not from its 
account of how the adult brain balances converging 
streams of interoceptive and exteroceptive information 
but from the story it has to tell about the formative 
influence of visceral signals on the nascent mind. This 
idea highlights the critical role of embodiment in early 
cognitive development—a role that may be obscured 
from view when analyzing the behavior of mature cog-
nitive systems.
The synchronic perspective encourages one to con-
ceive of the cognitive agent as a fully formed, pregiven 
entity and attempts to systematically analyze the struc-
ture of its behavior in order to discover its internal logic. 
From this vantage, it is perfectly natural to view the 
brain as the central controller responsible for governing 
and coordinating various sorts of bodily activity—a view 
active inference inherits from mid-20th-century cyber -
netics (Seth, 2015). Although this perspective is charac-
teristic of traditional cognitivism, it is by no means 
unique to it—proponents of the embodiment thesis 
might likewise adopt a synchronic perspective when 
entering into disputes about the bounds of cognition, 
the aptness of representational and computational 
explanations of mental phenomena, and so on.
7
By contrast, the diachronic perspective seeks to exam-
ine how cognitive systems emerge and develop over 
time. Although not necessarily undermining or contra-
dicting conclusions derived from synchronic analysis, 
this approach may help to reframe or disrupt conven-
tional assumptions about the nature of cognitive systems 
in ways that bring new insights into view. Recent focus 
on the embodied interactions between infants and care-
givers, for instance, has highlighted how bodily and 
social exchanges during the early phases of childhood 
development play a fundamental role in realizing homeo-
static regulation, laying the foundations for higher cogni-
tive functions (Fotopoulou et al., 2022; Fotopoulou & 
Tsakiris, 2017; Seth & Tsakiris, 2018). Analyses of this 
sort remind us that the brain undertakes a long and 
circuitous journey on its way to assuming its sovereign 
status and that the sensory experiences encountered 
along this trajectory may have profound ramifications 
for the maturation of the cognitive system at large.
In what follows, we bring a diachronic perspective 
to bear on the emergence of so-called interoceptive 
noise trajectories and their regulation under active 
inference. The basic hypothesis we propose is that the 
seemingly trivial (or perhaps mildly detrimental) fluc-
tuations in neural activity associated with periodic 
physiological events such as the heartbeat (Embodied 
Rhythms) are the residuum of a more fundamental 
developmental process. More specifically, rhythmic vis -
ceral dynamics are posited to play an instrumental role 
in carving out the basic inferential architecture that 
enables the mature brain to successfully model and 
modulate its sensory flows. This idea, which we refer 
to as the visceral afferent training hypothesis, invites 
a more substantive interpretation of the contribution of 
internal bodily activity in the emergence of biological 
cognition. A key implication of this hypothesis is that 
the rhythmic visceral dynamics instantiated during the 
first weeks and months of development lay the founda-
tions for a nested hierarchy of neural models, thereby 
enabling the brain to encode and predict the ubiquitous 
spatiotemporal regularities of the environment in which 
it is embedded.
Learning from within
Granting that the brain modulates its activity in accor -
dance with inferences about unfolding visceral dynamics 
(see, e.g., Allen et al., 2019; Corcoran et al., 2021; Seth 
& Tsakiris, 2018), the question arises as to how the brain 
comes to model such processes in the first instance. One 
possibility is that the neurophysiological apparatus 
responsible for monitoring and controlling physiological 
variables is “hardwired” by natural selection. The notion 
that brains come prepackaged with certain homeostatic 
prior expectations is fairly widespread within the active-
inference literature (e.g., Allen & Friston, 2018; Allen & 
Tsakiris, 2018; Burr & Jones, 2016; Sims, 2017), although 
the details concerning such innate programming are gen-
erally left unspecified. However, even if the fetal brain 
is “initialized” with genetically encoded prior expecta-
tions, the developmental and adaptive changes that (at 
least some) physiological parameters undergo over the 
life span suggests such priors can be modified or over -
written in response to prevailing environmental condi-
tions (cf. Yon et al., 2019).
Generalizing this point, it seems plausible that the 
basic structure of neurally encoded generative models 
may be inherited in the form of genetically specified 
“wiring diagrams,” whereas the parameterization of 
such models may depend on the patterns of stimulation 
to which their underlying constituents are exposed (cf. 
Singer, 1986). In statistical parlance, this translates to 
the process of model fitting; under active inference, the 
optimization of model parameters corresponds to learn-
ing (Friston et al., 2016). We conjecture that prenatal 
development encompasses both the formation of ana-
tomical structures that support the hierarchical genera-
tive modeling of sensory states and the tuning of model 
parameters in response to the “training data” availed 
54 Corcoran et al.
by the internal (fetal) and external (intrauterine and 
more distal) environments. Although both of these pro-
cesses clearly persist well beyond birth, we posit that 
the late embryonic–early fetal stage of prenatal devel-
opment constitutes a critical period for establishing 
basic forms of structure learning and predictive regula-
tion that ground more sophisticated forms of model 
updating in life outside the womb (cf. Friston, 2017).
Our treatment here concentrates on the interoceptive 
data afforded by the cardiovascular system. This focus 
accords with the prominent theme of heart–brain inter -
action in both the recent interoceptive inference litera-
ture (surveyed in Predictive Processing and (Embodied) 
Active Inference) and the broader tradition of psycho-
physiological research (e.g., Lacey & Lacey, 1978; 
Obrist, 1981; Porges, 1995). This focus is also motivated 
by the empirical fact that the heart is the first organ to 
form and begin functioning within the vertebrate 
embryo (Yutzey & Kirby, 2002). Even before the embry-
onic heart tube has acquired its familiar four-chambered 
morphology, it generates coordinated, rhythmic con-
tractions resulting in electrical signals reminiscent of 
the adult electrocardiogram (Boullin & Morgan, 2005). 
Blood circulation is established by the 4th week of 
embryogenesis (Tan & Lewandowski, 2020), while the 
neural tube is still closing (Stiles & Jernigan, 2010). The 
circulatory system is thus fully operational before the 
nervous system has even begun to acquire its basic 
organizational structure (see Fig. 1 for a comparative 
illustration of neural and cardiac development in the 
human embryo).
Contrary to the standard (synchronic) picture in 
which the mature brain orchestrates various autonomic 
activities to manage multiple systemic demands, the 
embryonic brain must develop the capacity to track 
(and adaptively regulate) physiological activity within 
the body. The first step of this journey likely occurs 
with the self-organization of brain stem nuclei respon-
sible for detecting physiological fluctuations arising 
from cardiovascular and other organ systems. Once 
receptive to perturbations generated by the body’s 
physiological processes, the task then is to infer the 
likely causes of such sensory inputs. Structurally, this 
situation is akin to standard predictive-coding and 
active-inference accounts of exteroceptive perception, 
whereby the brain is said to invert a generative model 
in order to infer the hidden causes of its sensory states.
8
It is not easy to pinpoint the precise stage at which 
the developing nervous system becomes receptive to 
information about the state of its environment. None-
theless, it seems reasonable to posit the rhythmic pulsa-
tions of the circulatory system as being among the first 
sensations registered by the nascent brain. Within the 
lower portion of the brain stem, the subnuclei of the 
nucleus tracti solitarii (NTS; a major viscerosensory 
relay center for cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointes-
tinal, and gustatory input; Saper, 2002) undergo an 
intensive period of cytoarchitectonic development dur -
ing the final few weeks of the first trimester (Cheng 
et al., 2006). Vagal nerve fibers linking this region to 
the heart and major blood vessels are already estab-
lished by the time this period of cellular differentiation 
gets underway (Cheng et al., 2004; Kirby, 2007), with 
more widespread networks of innervation unfolding 
over the course of the second trimester (Gordon et al., 
1993; Pappano, 1977).
Presumably, the kinds of inferences supported by 
neuronal populations at the brain stem level are rela-
tively simple; neurons within the mature NTS may, for 
example, register whether blood pressure is increasing 
or decreasing on the basis of baroreceptor activity and 
likely do so without entertaining more complex beliefs 
about the distal states of affairs driving such fluctua-
tions. Even at this level, however, some rudimentary 
form of learning (belief updating) may be necessary in 
order to calibrate prior expectations over cardiovascular 
parameters. Fetal blood pressure increases linearly over 
the second half of pregnancy (Struijk et al., 2008); pre-
vailing heart rate decreases most steeply between the 
16th and 20th weeks of gestation and more gradually 
thereafter (Pillai & James, 1990). If neuronal activity 
within the NTS encodes priors over these parameters, 
it is plausible that these neurons gradually adapt their 
response functions in line with accumulating sensory 
evidence of a sustained shift in their values (see Segar, 
1997, for discussion of such “chronic resetting” during 
pre- and postnatal development).
The potential for more sophisticated modeling of 
cardio-afferent signals increases at higher levels of the 
interoceptive neural hierarchy, where longer epochs of 
cardiac activity can be extracted and integrated with 
other streams of sensory information. In the mature 
brain, NTS efferents project beyond the brain stem to a 
variety of higher neural centers (Benarroch, 1993; Loewy, 
1981; Saper, 2002; R. Smith et al., 2017; see Fig. 2). Neu-
roanatomical studies indicate that key limbic compo -
nents of this network emerge early in human ontogeny; 
the embryonic hypothalamus is discernible 5 weeks 
post-fertilization, and the amygdaloid nuclei begin to 
differentiate between Weeks 6 and 8 (Müller & O’Rahilly, 
2006). If subcortical regions such as these are capable 
of receiving information from barosensitive brain stem 
circuits during the early postembryonic period, the peri-
odic fluctuations of the cardiac rhythm could represent 
the first form of sensory patterning extracted by integra-
tive centers within the prenatal brain.
In sum, the early establishment of autonomous car -
diovascular activity in the developing embryo, coupled 
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 55
with the emergence of brain stem and limbic nuclei 
(and their accompanying white matter tracts; Huang 
et al., 2009) toward the end of the first trimester, fur -
nishes the necessary substrates for basic interoceptive 
processing to occur. The propagation of cardio-afferent 
information through brain stem structures to limbic 
regions marks the genesis of the brain’s capacity to 
“model its own dynamic noise trajectories” (Allen et al., 
2019, p. 24), although at this early stage, the visceral 
inputs that inscribe such trajectories are very much 
signals to be processed rather than noise to be sup-
pressed. This leads us to the hypothesis that rhythmic 
fluctuations in visceral afferent feedback constitute a 
salient “training signal” that drives the adaptation of 
early brain networks and the generative models they 
entail. The most interesting upshot of this visceral 
afferent training hypothesis is the possibility that these 
adaptive processes extend beyond the interoceptive 
domain, playing a foundational role in the formation 
and structuring of the cognitive architecture at large. 
The next three sections develop this idea in relation to 
three candidate mechanisms through which visceral 
afferent training might operate: (a) activity-dependent 
neuronal development, (b) periodic signal modeling, 
and (c) oscillatory network coordination (Fig. 3).
Visceral afferent training drives activity-
dependent neuronal development
Sensory stimulation has long been known to play a 
crucial role in the structural and functional develop-
ment of the immature brain (Wiesel & Hubel, 1963a, 
Fig. 1. Key milestones during the embryonic development of the human cardiovascular and central 
nervous systems. Top row illustrates the emergence of precursory brain structures, beginning with 
the formation of the neural tube 20 embryonic days postconception (i.e., E20). Neural tube closure 
occurs over the course of the 4th week (E22–27). Following closure, the neural tube expands ante-
riorly, and the primary vesicles (i.e., the prosencephalon, mesencephalon, and rhombencephalon) 
become discernible. The secondary vesicles (telencephalon and diencephalon deriving from the 
prosencephalon; metencephalon and myelencephalon deriving from the rhombencephalon) are 
established by the end of Week 7 (E49). See Stiles and Jernigan (2010) for further details. Middle 
row depicts the gross morphological development of the human embryo. An illustration of the term 
fetus and placenta (which forms the interface between the fetal and maternal circulatory systems) is 
included for comparison. Bottom row highlights key structural and functional milestones in embry-
onic heart development. The heart tube is formed by the fusion of the endocardial tubes on E21, 
swiftly followed by the first signs of peristaltic pumping activity (E21–22). Blood begins to flow 
through the heart tube on E24; active circulation is established by E28. The division of the heart 
into four chambers and the appearance of the cardiac pacemaker (sinoatrial node) are realized by 
E35. Cardiac morphology approximates that of the term fetus by Week 7. See Kirby (2007) and Tan 
and Lewandowski (2020) for further details. Note, diagrams are schematic and not drawn to scale. 
Brain diagrams adapted from Kolb and Fantie (2009) and Stiles and Jernigan (2010); heart diagrams 
adapted from Doyle and colleagues (2015) and Srivastava (2006).
56 Corcoran et al.
1963b). Even before visual and auditory pathways gain 
access to external stimuli, spontaneous bursts of neu-
ronal activity are responsible for carving out precise 
patterns of network connectivity (Friauf & Lohmann, 
1999; Hanganu-Opatz, 2010; Kandler et al., 2009; Katz 
& Shatz, 1996; Mooney et al., 1996; Penn & Shatz, 1999). 
Spontaneous network activity has also been observed 
within various other regions of the central nervous 
system, including the spinal cord, brain stem, cerebel-
lum, hippocampus, and neocortex (see Blankenship & 
Feller, 2010; Feller, 1999; Yuste, 1997).
The visceral afferent training hypothesis posits that 
interoceptive input generated by the spontaneous activ-
ity of peripheral organ systems plays a similarly instru-
mental role in fine-tuning the organization of neural 
circuitry within nascent brain stem structures (Fig. 3A). 
What is particularly interesting about this idea beyond 
the domain of interoceptive processing per se is the 
potential for correlated, temporally structured patterns 
of evoked neural activity to influence the development 
of integrative centers beyond the brain stem. Given the 
extensive connectivity among hubs within the central 
autonomic network (Palma & Benarroch, 2014), and 
the various interfaces these hubs share with other key 
brain regions (see, e.g., Kleckner et al., 2017), early 
exposure to periodic interoceptive stimulation could 
have profound effects on the way core brain networks 
are refined and remodeled—and, by extension, on the 
way information is routed through these structures.
From an active-inference perspective, this notion 
suggests that the genetic specification of generative 
models might be relatively sparse, concentrating on the 
mechanisms governing cellular differentiation and pat-
tern formation (phenomena that have also been 
explained in terms of self-organization via free-energy 
minimization; see Friston et al., 2015; Kuchling et al., 
2020; Wright & Bourke, 2021). The imprecise, stereo-
typical circuitry laid down during these early stages of 
neurogenesis are subsequently refined and elaborated 
in accordance with Hebbian (and possibly other) learn-
ing principles (Goodman & Shatz, 1993; Kirkby et al., 
2013; Leighton & Lohmann, 2016). The capacity for such 
remodeling (both in the physical sense of synaptic sta-
bilization and pruning and in the more abstract sense 
of model parameterization and reduction) essentially 
relieves the genome of the burden of mapping out the 
precise developmental trajectory of specialized neural 
circuitry—a responsibility borne instead by domain-
general learning mechanisms that remain operative 
throughout the life span (Singer, 1986).
Delegating the fate of neuronal wiring to activity-
dependent adaptive processes is an efficient and flexible 
strategy for fine-tuning network connectivity. However, 
such an approach is only likely to succeed if the right 
kind of activity is reliably instantiated at the right stage 
of development. In the case of visual and auditory path-
ways, this problem is solved by the induction of spon-
taneous activity on the basis of genetically programmed 
priors (Katz & Shatz, 1996). Such an arrangement may 
not be necessary within interoceptive pathways (or may 
be superseded much earlier by experience-dependent 
adaptation), on account of the early availability of vis-
cerosensory input. As outlined previously, the early 
development of the cardiovascular system in particular 
means that a continuous source of periodic afferent 
stimulation is already available by the time the brain 
stem and higher centers become receptive to such stim -
uli. Because this input is essentially guaranteed in virtue 
of the fact that healthy brain development cannot pro-
ceed in the absence of a functional circulatory system, 
it constitutes a highly dependable stimulus for driving 
activity-dependent neuronal remodeling.
Hypothalamus
Amygdala
PAG
PBN
ACC
vmPFC
NAInsula
NTS
Baroreceptors in
Aortic Arch 
SA Node
AV Node
Ventricular
Myocardium
Fig. 2. The anatomy of heart–brain communication. Schematic over -
view of major brain centers involved in cardiovascular interoception 
and regulation. Baroreceptor afferents embedded in the aortic arch 
and carotid sinuses convey cardio-afferent feedback (red arrows) to 
the brain stem. This information is integrated in the nucleus tracti 
solitarii (NTS), triggering rapid alterations in autonomic outflow 
(blue arrows) to the sinoatrial (SA) node, atrioventricular (AV) 
node, and myocardium via the nucleus ambiguus (NA) and para-
vertebral (sympathetic) ganglia to maintain blood pressure stability 
(Benarroch, 2008). Cardio-afferent signals are also relayed from 
the NTS to higher regions within the central autonomic network, 
including the periaqueductal grey (PAG), parabrachial nuclei (PBN), 
hypothalamus, amygdalae, insulae, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), 
and ventro-medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC). Please note, arrows 
are intended to provide a heuristic representation of ascending 
neural pathways; top-down brain connections have been omitted 
for clarity. Adapted from Palma and Benarroch (2014), Sizarov and 
colleagues (2013), and Végh and colleagues (2016).
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 57
Visceral afferent training inculcates a 
model of periodic fluctuation
In the healthy human fetus, average heart rate usually 
increases to a peak of ~170 beats per minute at approxi-
mately 9 to 10 weeks (i.e., around the same time  
NTS nuclei are undergoing an intensive period of 
maturation; Cheng et al., 2006), gradually decreasing 
thereafter (Hornberger & Sahn, 2007; Pillai & James, 
1990). This translates to a heartbeat every ~350 ms. 
Leaving aside the potential import of this recurrent form 
of (self-generated) stimulation as a driver of brain stem 
network development (Visceral Afferent Training Drives 
Activity-Dependent Neuronal Development), this signal 
Fig. 3. (continued on next page)
58 Corcoran et al.
presents perhaps the first opportunity for higher brain 
centers to model rhythmic activity originating from 
beyond the central nervous system (Fig. 3B). Hypotha-
lamic and amygdaloid nuclei may, for instance, adapt to 
periodic activity conveyed via the brain stem by estab-
lishing oscillatory network dynamics that synchronize to 
this input. Such phase-locked neural oscillations encode 
predictions about the timing of afferent stimuli, constitut-
ing the first step toward the development of more 
sophisticated neural models of external periodic events 
(including those necessary to quell physiological noise 
trajectories of the sort posited by Allen et al., 2019).
In the adult brain, the amygdalae have been impli-
cated (along with other interoceptive hubs, such as the 
insulae) in the generation of the heartbeat-evoked 
potential (Park et al., 2018), an electrophysiological 
response that may constitute a neural correlate of car -
diac interoceptive prediction error (Ainley et al., 2016; 
Petzschner et  al., 2019). Recent evidence that this 
response is sensitive to auditory stimuli presented in 
synchrony with the heartbeat (Banellis & Cruse, 2020; 
Pfeiffer & De Lucia, 2017) suggests these networks 
encode expectations about the timing of recurrent sen-
sory events. From a more general perspective, the per -
petual reverberation of baroreceptor feedback through 
deep subcortical regions may be crucial for establishing 
the first neural representations of a stable pattern of 
variation—a generative process or hidden cause—in its 
distal (bodily) environment. Although it is surely the 
case that all developing neuronal populations are sub-
ject to some form of “external” stimulation (even if the 
source of such stimulation originates from elsewhere 
within the nervous system), the crucial point here is 
that there exists some series of events that can be 
resolved as a recurrent pattern against the background 
hum of neural noise and metabolic activity. In carving 
out periodic cardiac activity as a stable, coherent signal 
amid the tumult of sensory fluctuations, the brain takes 
its first step on a lifelong journey of “sensemaking.”
Although the basic concept of repetition need not 
entail periodicity, the additional quality of regularity 
conferred by the heartbeat’s periodic nature is also 
notable. From a modeling perspective, the regularity of 
the cardiac cycle renders the timing of each afferent 
impulse highly predictable and thus easier to “tag” as 
a recurring signal rather than a random sequence of 
unrelated events.
9 Periodicity essentially confines the 
signal to a single, narrowband frequency channel to 
which a receptive neural population can “tune in,” 
thereby enabling the hidden source of this input to be 
decorrelated from competing activity (cf. blind source 
separation; Bell & Sejnowski, 1995; Isomura et al., 2015; 
Isomura & Friston, 2018). A way of characterizing this 
scenario in the language of active inference is to say 
that periodic signals express higher precision (i.e., 
signal-to-noise ratio) than their more irregular counter -
parts. As such, periodic stimuli generate salient sensory 
data that compel model updates in line with sensory 
evidence. Once a model of the periodic process has 
been established, evidence in favor of its parameteriza-
tion is rapidly accrued in virtue of its capacity to gener -
ate highly accurate predictions about the timing of 
successive sensory inputs.
Assuming the general shape of this story is on the 
right track, it is worth pausing to consider why heartbeat-
related afferent input ought to play such an important 
Fig. 3.  Overview of proposed visceral afferent training mechanisms. (A) Stimulation of neuronal development 
and circuit organization. Following the principle of activity-dependent neuronal development, we posit that 
periodic visceral afferent signals provide patterned input into undifferentiated populations of brain stem nuclei 
(i), thereby driving the development of functionally organized neural circuits (ii). We further propose that these 
inputs propagate up the neural hierarchy to carve out channels of communication between integrative nodes 
within the central autonomic network (iii). In this way, visceral afferent training signals play a key role in sculpt-
ing how information is processed and exchanged between network hubs. (B) Modeling of periodic fluctuations 
as recurrent events. The maturation of hierarchically organized neuronal populations (i) affords the opportunity 
to integrate the transient sensory responses evoked at lower (e.g., brain stem) levels of the hierarchy (discrete 
electrocardiogram [ECG] signals; bottom layer) into temporally extended representations (continuous ECG signal; 
middle layer). We construe the formation of such representations in terms of model building, whereby a series 
of events in the environment are not only tracked and grouped together as part of a single periodic process but 
also predicted (forecast) to recur with some degree of temporal precision (hatched ECG; top layer). Once models 
of rhythmic visceral afferent inputs are established, they may be generalized or adapted to fit other sources of 
rhythmic sensory input (e.g., vibro-acoustic stimulation). In this way, models of recurrent visceral perturbations may 
facilitate the decomposition of complex inputs into their constituent components (ii), thereby separating internal 
(e.g., cardiac) from external (e.g., acoustic) signals and random noise. (C) Organization of large-scale network 
dynamics. Independent of their role in driving neuronal development and model formation, low-frequency physi-
ological rhythms may also contribute to the coordination of network activity. Specifically, the cardiac rhythm is 
suggested to serve as a pacemaker that helps to organize communication between disparate networks through the 
temporal alignment of their oscillatory dynamics (i). This notion provides a compelling developmental perspective 
on Klimesch’s (2013, 2018) observation that the canonical neural frequency bands (e.g., delta, theta, alpha, beta) 
may be derived from a binary hierarchy that takes the cardiac rhythm (HR) as its scaling factor (ii).
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 59
role in the training (or fitting) of basic generative models. 
It is certainly plausible that other physiological processes 
give rise to periodic neural stimulation, especially if sub-
cortical receptivity to interoceptive signals occurs later 
than we have assumed (e.g., during the second half of 
pregnancy). However, cardiovascular feedback seems 
like a good candidate to focus on for two reasons: first, 
as mentioned already, the early development of the cir -
culatory system guarantees such feedback is available 
as soon as the brain is sufficiently mature to detect it 
(which, moreover, raises the possibility of its active par -
ticipation in the maturational process itself; see Visceral 
Afferent Training Drives Activity-Dependent Neuronal 
Development); second, the frequent and perpetual 
nature of such feedback renders it a more tractable learn-
ing signal than many other potential candidates that 
occur less regularly and/or over slower time scales (e.g., 
changes in the chemical composition of the amniotic 
fluid or circulating blood due to maternal feeding).
Whether or not other sources of recurrent stimulation 
are easier to resolve and predict once cardio-afferent 
fluctuations have been captured within a subcortical 
generative model is unclear. Once in possession of a 
model of cardiovascular interoceptive dynamics, other 
kinds of periodic input might become more tractable—
easier for the brain to “tap in” or “lock on” to (cf. cardio-
auditory synchronization in mature brains; Banellis & 
Cruse, 2020; Pfeiffer & De Lucia, 2017). This is to say 
that brain networks may exploit (repurpose or general-
ize) an established model of rhythmic cardio-afferent 
dynamics to bootstrap the modeling of other periodic 
signals emanating from elsewhere within the fetal (or 
maternal) body. Relatedly, once a model characterizing 
the periodic nature of heartbeat-evoked neural activity 
has been established, the brain may begin to discern 
other patterns of sensory input in relation (or contrast) 
to this signature (cf. fetal sensitivity to “oddball” devia-
tions in rhythmic sequences; Draganova et al., 2005, 
2007; Huotilainen et al., 2005). In this way, the heart-
beat might be said to inculcate an ur-concept of repeti-
tion or recurrence, in which the basic distinction 
between discrete states or phases is elevated to the 
recognition of a certain kind of patterned continuity—a 
(generative) process—unfolding over time.
Visceral afferent training signals 
promote coordinated network dynamics
From a dynamical systems perspective, the periodic 
nature of the heartbeat might also serve a more mecha-
nistic function as a pacemaker for oscillatory neural 
activity and information processing (Fig. 3C). The idea 
that the cardiac rhythm acts as a pacemaker for central 
and peripheral dynamics is not new (see, e.g., Coleman, 
1921) and has recently been revived in work linking 
the spectral architecture of neural and visceral organ 
systems (Klimesch, 2018; see also Baş ar, 2008; Corcoran 
et al., 2018; Kluger & Gross, 2021; Tort et al., 2018). 
Without digressing into these ideas too deeply, there is 
an obvious congeniality between such views and the 
empirical facts of early fetal development as sketched 
out earlier. For instance, Klimesch (2013, 2018) has 
proposed that many characteristic oscillatory dynamics 
observed in the brain and the body can be unified as 
part of a binary hierarchy that takes the heartbeat as 
its scaling factor (cf. Rassi et al., 2019). Ascribing the 
heartbeat as the fundamental rhythm from which all 
other members of the frequency hierarchy are derived 
makes perfect sense when one considers the early func-
tional emergence of the cardiac system and its physical 
influence on early brain development.
To be clear, we are not claiming that neural popula-
tions oscillate solely in response to cardiac or other 
sources of rhythmic visceral activity. Neuronal oscilla-
tions are often described as “intrinsic” and “spontane-
ous” in character (Buzsáki & Draguhn, 2004; Llinás, 
1988; Wang, 2010) and may be conceived of as an 
emergent property of free-energy-minimizing neuronal 
ensembles (Palacios et al., 2019). Developing neuronal 
networks should therefore begin to evince coherent 
network dynamics as random or intermittent bursts of 
neural activity converge toward attractor basins of syn-
chrony (Luhmann et al., 2016; Rulkov, 2001; Wright, 
2011). The novel idea on offer here is that these emer -
gent, self-organizing dynamics may be guided or driven 
toward particular regions of phase-space by extrinsic 
physiological rhythms, such as those generated by the 
cardiovascular system.
By analogy to the way the infant brain is equipped 
with the necessary neural machinery to acquire any 
natural language but requires immersion within a par -
ticular linguistic environment in order to realize this 
potential (Gopnik et al., 2001; Kuhl, 2004), the basic 
thought here is that periodic visceral stimulation may 
entrain a particular regime of oscillatory patterning 
(first in the brain stem and then higher centers) amid 
a largely disorganized agglomeration of spontaneous 
neural activity. Such patterning might be crucial for 
opening up coherent lines of communication between 
disparate brain networks (Fries, 2005, 2015; Palva & 
Palva, 2018), paving the way for hierarchical message 
passing and model updating (Bastos et al., 2020; Chao 
et al., 2018; Friston, 2008; Friston, Parr, et al., 2017; 
Michalareas et al., 2016). Although it might be possible 
for maturing brain regions to settle into oscillatory 
regimes by dint of the intrinsic properties of their cel-
lular constituents, and perhaps even to cycle through 
a repertoire of regimes as a consequence of 
60 Corcoran et al.
interregional coupling relations that wax and wane over 
time (Downes et al., 2012; Wright, 2011), rhythmic input 
from the heart might establish a kind of scaffold around 
which early (sub)cortical network activity stabilizes and 
organizes itself.
The potential involvement of the cardiac rhythm as 
a pacemaker (or “control parameter”; see Haken, 1983) 
in the self-organization of neuronal oscillations is inter -
esting from an embodied cognitive perspective because 
it shows yet another way in which visceral activity may 
shape emergent brain dynamics (cf. Van Orden et al., 
2012). This notion is also relevant for active-inference 
accounts that conceive of neuronal oscillations as a 
means by which predictions and prediction errors are 
conveyed between neuronal populations (see, e.g.,  
Friston, 2019). Specifically, the temporal structuring of 
neuronal oscillatory dynamics imposed by the heartbeat 
may help to organize network communication such that 
the transmission of information between different brain 
regions is facilitated or optimized (e.g., via the align-
ment of disparate oscillatory regimes in relation to a 
common fundamental frequency). If cardio-afferent 
feedback does play a role in enabling the emergence 
of large-scale oscillatory brain dynamics—or in deter -
mining the functional profile of such dynamics—it 
would follow that the cardiovascular system makes an 
important contribution to cognitive development.
But therein lies the rub: If any of the putative visceral 
afferent training mechanisms proposed in this section 
are to have any significant bearing on the embodiment 
debate, we need to show that these mechanisms are 
not “merely” part of the background causal matrix on 
which brain development unfolds but play a decisive 
role in defining this trajectory. This returns us to the 
distinction between causal and constitutive dependency 
relations raised in Causation Versus Constitution. Even 
if one is suspicious of the view that embodied accounts 
must be constitutive accounts on pain of triviality, the 
provision of just another weakly embodied causal 
account is unlikely to progress existing debates very 
far. Hence, if active inference is to shed new light on 
the question of embodiment, it needs to motivate theo-
retical positions that are not susceptible to such defla-
tionary rebuttals. We address this concern next.
Causation Versus Constitution Redux
Let us be clear on the issue at stake. According to critics 
like Adams and Aizawa (2008; Aizawa, 2010), there has 
been widespread conflation within the embodied cog-
nition literature of things that affect  cognitive processes 
and things that are (part of) cognitive processes. Failure 
to respect this distinction results in what they label the 
coupling-constitution fallacy, whereby components of 
the causal chain linking to (i.e., coupled with) some 
cognitive process are mistakenly classed as constituents 
(or realizers) of that process.
10 As such, the burden is 
on the embodiment theorist to (a) show that the cogni-
tive process in question is indeed constitutively depen-
dent on some bodily process, (b) argue that certain 
species of causal dependency are sufficient for (non-
trivial) embodiment, or (c) explain why the causal-
constitutive distinction is unfit to adjudicate between 
cognitive and noncognitive processes.
Prima facie, the visceral afferent training hypothesis 
would seem to fall short of the constitutive standard 
stipulated by Adams and Aizawa (2008). We have not 
claimed that the activity of developing visceral organ 
systems is intrinsically cognitive in any sense (indeed, 
we have not even asserted if, when, or what kind of 
fetal brain activity suffices for cognition); neither have 
we argued that visceral organ systems constitute an 
extension of the fetus’s developing cognitive apparatus. 
By process of elimination, then, our hypothesis must 
turn on an essentially causal story, whereby visceral 
signals exert their influence on the brain by virtue of 
coupling relations. This being the case, our hypothesis 
would seem unlikely to furnish any substantive 
advances beyond existing accounts of embodied active 
inference—it simply speculates that cross-modal inter -
actions between interoceptive and exteroceptive pro-
cessing streams may be rooted in fetal development.
Constitution through causation?
This conclusion is too hasty, however. One reason for 
caution is that Adams and Aizawa’s (2008) coupling-
constitution fallacy is predicated on an essentially syn-
chronic view of cognition (Menary, 2010b) and may as 
such be ill suited to the diachronic perspective on offer 
here (see also Kirchhoff, 2015). Moreover, hard-and-fast 
distinctions between causation and constitution become 
challenging in the context of temporally extended pro-
cesses (Shapiro, 2019a, 2019b), especially when those 
processes are recursive and/or embedded within com-
plex dynamical systems, such as biological organisms 
(A. Clark, 2008b; Gallagher, 2017; Kirchhoff, 2015;  
Leuridan & Lodewyckx, 2021). For example, at least 
some causal factors appear to be “proper constituents” 
of the processes they interact with, such that those 
processes simply could not exist (and perhaps could 
not be conceived) without them.
11
Proper treatment of these metaphysical issues lies 
well beyond the scope of this article; however, we take 
such objections as provisional justification for the 
notion that some cases of causal dependency may be 
deeply and irrevocably enmeshed with the emergence 
of cognition—at least (or perhaps especially) when 
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 61
dealing with complex, nonstationary processes of the 
sort encountered in ontogenesis (Mc Manus, 2012). 
From this perspective, visceral afferent training signals 
might be viewed as playing an instrumental role in 
driving the development of a particular kind of cogni-
tive architecture, “configuring” or “formatting” the 
brain’s generative model such that it supports a particu-
lar range of inferences (e.g., about periodic structure 
embedded in sensory flows) and cognitive operations 
(e.g., the ability to distinguish internally from externally 
generated sensations). If this is right, and the causal 
“inscriptions” of interoceptive inputs help organize the 
neural dynamics that ultimately constitute cognitive 
processing, such signals represent a crucial factor in 
determining the kinds of minds instantiated in animal 
brains.
12
A strong reading of the visceral afferent training 
hypothesis implies that the foundations of mind are laid 
down and molded in accordance with multidimensional 
vectors of sensory information availed by the internal 
bodily environment. Put another way, bodies like 
ours—or more specifically, the temporally structured 
physiological dynamics they entail—are necessary con-
ditions for the emergence of minds like ours. This inter -
pretation is reminiscent of (and perhaps continuous 
with) an early strain of thought in embodied cognition, 
whereby specific features of one’s morphology shape 
and constrain the sorts of concepts one can access or 
form (e.g., Barsalou, 1999; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980, 
1999; cf. Shapiro, 2019b). The idea that one’s entire 
conceptual apparatus might derive from a base set of 
concepts grounded in one’s physical interactions with 
the world shares a certain resemblance to the idea that 
the brain’s transactions with its visceral states cause 
proximal changes (i.e., in the format of the generative 
model) that propagate through to more distal, abstract 
mental representations (e.g., the elaboration of a model 
of oneself qua agent in the world).
This point of contact with embodied theories of con-
ceptual grounding is useful insofar as it reminds us that, 
as mentioned in Causation Versus Constitution, such 
theories can be read as rather weak interpretations of 
the embodiment thesis. Indeed, the indirect causal link 
we posit between visceral and cognitive processes 
might render the visceral afferent training hypothesis 
susceptible to a similar charge. Moreover, the mediated 
nature of this causal link belies another subtle depar -
ture from these earlier views: What really matters for 
our hypothesis is not so much the nature of one’s body 
but rather that of the afferent signals conveyed to the 
brain—signals that could in principle be instantiated in 
various organisms consisting of very different physio-
logical and morphological features. Although manipu-
lating the temporal characteristics of fetal heartbeat 
dynamics might be expected to have profound ramifica-
tions for the development of brain dynamics under our 
hypothesis, we have provided no reason to think that 
substituting the heart with a device that periodically 
stimulates the arterial baroreceptors according to age-
matched parameters should make any notable differ -
ence to the trajectory of cognitive development.
Embodied mind or envatted brain?
Hypothetical considerations of this sort almost inevita-
bly lead one to the perennial question of envatment, 
perhaps the acme of anti-embodiment thought experi-
ments. In the classic “brain in a vat” scenario, the dis-
embodied brain floats in a vat of life-sustaining nutrients 
while communicating with a sophisticated computer by 
means of wires or transceivers affixed to various nerve 
endings. The intuition—at least for the cognitivist—is 
that this setup would be sufficient to replicate the cog-
nitive processes and conscious experiences instantiated 
in an embodied brain, thus demonstrating that the mind 
is only contingently (i.e., causally) related to its non-
neural body (e.g., Metzinger, 2003). Embodiment theo-
rists might counter that this scenario surreptitiously 
reintroduces a body and a world via the vat and com-
puter simulation (e.g., Hurley, 2010; Thompson &  
Cosmelli, 2011; see also Hohwy, 2017); however, unless 
a strong argument for the body’s unique involvement 
in the “preprocessing” or “formatting” of afferent input 
prior to central processing can be successfully mounted, 
it remains difficult to see how this position could sup-
port anything beyond a weak interpretation of the 
embodiment thesis.
We do not pursue the possibility of peripheral infor -
mation processing and/or formatting here because  
we are unaware of any resources within the active-
inference framework that would help arbitrate this 
question. Neither do we believe that a diachronic rei-
magining of envatment can help defeat the argument; 
while establishing brain-computer interfaces that keep 
up with neurogenesis might prove technically challeng-
ing, we see no reason in principle why a “developmen-
tal” program of stimulation should not run just as well 
as its “mature” counterpart. Indeed, it might even be 
the case that a diachronic variant of the brain in a vat 
would be capable of producing an even more convinc-
ing simulation of phenomenal experience, because 
there would be no room for an uncanny disconnect 
between one’s intended actions and their expected con-
sequences (consider how laggy or jittery mouse cursor 
movement disrupts the fluency of one’s actions and 
degrades one’s sense of agency in the virtual domain). 
More specifically, there would be no opportunity for any 
such slippage to occur because the developing brain is 
62 Corcoran et al.
calibrated to the temporal structure of the computer-
mediated action-perception loop from the get-go.
There is perhaps one unique possibility introduced 
by the visceral afferent training hypothesis that might 
argue against the perfect emulation of experience 
through envatment. This is the possibility that normal 
cognitive development and functioning is influenced 
not only by the sensory information generated by 
peripheral oscillators such as the heart but also by the 
mechanical influence such oscillatory systems exert 
over neural tissue (cf. Kim et al., 2016; Mosher et al., 
2020). If this were the case, the envatted brain would 
require special apparatus designed to mimic the peri-
odic physical forces that would ordinarily be generated 
by a beating heart. Although this arrangement does not 
entail the necessity of a cardiovascular system per se 
for normal cognition to arise, the necessity of some 
additional mechanism designed to emulate the func-
tional profile of such bodily rhythms begins to seriously 
undermine the supposedly disembodied status of the 
envatted brain (cf. Thompson & Cosmelli, 2011).
Setting this possibility aside, should the (nomo)logi-
cal possibility of a brain-in-a-vat scenario under the 
visceral afferent training hypothesis raise a red flag to 
defenders or advocates of embodied cognition (to 
whom the very concept of envatment is anathema)? 
Our view is that anyone who endorses active inference 
must be prepared to entertain such possibilities; as an 
essentially functionalist framework (Colombo & Wright, 
2021; Hohwy, 2016), active inference accommodates 
envatted brains as a possible solution to the problem 
of free-energy minimization.
13 As such, the brain in a 
vat occupies one end of a spectrum of embodied active-
inference schemes, and cognitive systems extending 
beyond the body (or, indeed, incorporating multiple 
bodies) populate the other—such is the versatility of 
the active-inference formalism.
Prospects for a Unified Philosophy and 
Science of Embodiment
Philosophers and cognitive scientists on both sides of 
the embodiment debate continue to claim active infer -
ence as a vindication of their views, in spite of their 
(supposedly fundamental) disagreements about the 
nature of cognition. We have suggested that the formal 
framework availed by active inference may accommo-
date a wide variety of philosophical positions on the 
question of embodiment without necessarily helping 
to arbitrate the merits and shortcomings of these alter -
natives. Perhaps active inference is silent on many of 
the details on which such arguments turn; perhaps the 
framework will eventually reach a level of maturity 
enabling it to rule out (or severely undermine) many 
of them. Presently, however, the promise of any unifica-
tion, fusion, or synthesis of these divergent strands of 
thought remains largely unfulfilled; indeed, many theo-
rists seem more interested in demonstrating that their 
favored brand of embodied cognition can be cloaked 
in the formal garb of active inference, rather than seek-
ing any genuine dialectical engagement with propo-
nents of rival views.
But perhaps this conclusion presents an unduly pes-
simistic appraisal of the literature. A more optimistic 
interpretation might appeal to the following line of rea-
soning: By drawing together a large range of (embodied 
and cognitivist) theories under a single framework, 
active inference has helped bring previously unseen (or 
at least neglected) points of contact between suppos-
edly divergent views to the fore. For example, the ability 
to reformulate seemingly internalist, inferential, and 
representation-laden notions of generative modeling 
and prediction error minimization in the language of 
“optimal grip” and “attunement” (e.g., Bruineberg & 
Rietveld, 2014; Kiverstein et al., 2019) shows how the 
active-inference framework avails both a common 
ground and a shared vocabulary—the foundations of 
any productive dialogue. Perhaps, then, there is reason 
to be hopeful that the active-inference perspective might 
yet resolve (or dissolve) long-standing disputes between 
competing factions. Or, if it does not help theorists to 
work out their differences, it might at least help them 
to work out which differences really matter.
As foreshadowed at the beginning of Predictive Pro-
cessing and (Embodied) Active Inference, we did not 
set out to resolve disagreements about the proper inter -
pretation of embodiment under active inference or to 
convince the broader philosophical and scientific com-
munity that active inference somehow bridges or tran-
scends the schism between cognitivism and embodiment. 
What we have tried to do, rather, is bring some of these 
deep-rooted tensions to the fore. On our analysis, much 
of the conceptual and empirical work conducted under 
the rubric of embodied active inference lends itself to 
a fairly deflationary interpretation; indeed, proponents 
of a more “radically” embodied cognitive science would 
likely consider it entirely in keeping with mainstream 
cognitivism (cf. Di Paolo, 2018). This is not to say that 
embodied active inference is incompatible with the 
more radical wing of the embodiment spectrum; it is 
simply to point out that much of the contemporary 
work in this area has little in common with the strong 
aspirations and provocative rhetoric historically lever -
aged in the name of embodied cognition.
How does the visceral afferent training hypothesis 
fit into this picture? What we have attempted to do here 
is demonstrate how the adoption of a diachronic per -
spective on active inference enables one to recast a 
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 63
seemingly deflationary interpretation of embodiment 
(i.e., visceral feedback as noise trajectory) as part of a 
more substantive account of the relation between body 
and mind. Although this hypothesis does not purport 
to radically overturn cognitivist-friendly interpretations 
of active inference, it goes beyond existing accounts of 
the way cognitive processing incorporates inferences 
about physiological states (interoceptive inference) and 
their temporal evolution (cycle-timing phenomena). We 
have argued that these accounts are vulnerable to the 
charge of being “merely” causal in nature, thus under -
mining their capacity to shed philosophically interesting 
light on the question of embodiment. By contrast, our 
diachronic account highlights the foundational role of 
interoceptive dynamics in guiding (or driving) the early 
development of neural structures and the cognitive 
architectures they implement.
Concluding Remarks
Active inference (and predictive processing more gener -
ally) represents one of the most exciting and fertile 
theoretical frameworks to have emerged since the dawn 
of the cognitive revolution. Much like the information-
processing paradigm before it, active inference supplies 
a versatile suite of formal tools that can be applied to 
a remarkable diversity of problems and scenarios. Such 
scope and versatility explain the widespread appeal of 
the framework—and in particular, its ability to attract 
adherents of markedly divergent theoretical views. 
Although we consider this a virtue of active inference, 
it remains incumbent on those working within the 
framework to remain cognizant of its limits. Active 
inference alone neither settles nor eliminates the dif-
ficult philosophical issues at the heart of the embodi-
ment debate.
This is not to say that active inference cannot be 
leveraged to develop interesting models of embodi-
ment, as we have attempted to do here. Neither is it to 
denigrate the work on embodied active inference that 
was surveyed in Predictive Processing and (Embodied) 
Active Inference. To the contrary, we consider such 
models theoretically interesting and useful accounts of 
their various target phenomena. Our intention, rather, 
was to challenge the claim that these models provide 
compelling accounts of embodied cognition as the lat-
ter has been conceptualized in the philosophy of mind. 
More positively, we hope the visceral afferent training 
hypothesis inspires fresh debate about the ways in 
which the concept of embodiment has been understood 
under active inference—and about the ways in which 
it might yet be understood.
Whether the visceral afferent training hypothesis ulti-
mately succeeds in delivering a genuinely embodied 
account of cognitive development will depend on its 
ability to mature beyond its current (somewhat embry-
onic) form. To preempt some potential objections, let 
us briefly raise a few caveats before closing.
First, the mechanisms we have sketched as putative 
mediators of visceral afferent training are intended as 
biologically plausible examples of the ways early-emerg-
ing rhythmic visceral dynamics might sculpt cognitive 
architectures—they do not exhaust the visceral afferent 
training hypothesis. An important objective for future 
work will be the incorporation of active regulatory 
dynamics that emerge in cardiovascular and other periph-
eral systems as the brain begins to exert control over its 
autonomic (and humoral) outflows (see Corcoran et al., 
2023). Similarly, the contribution of other interoceptive 
modalities (e.g., signals arising from the gastrointestinal 
tract; see Décarie-Spain et al., 2023; Rebollo et al., 2021; 
Shine et al., 2022; R. Smith et al., 2021), the coordinated 
integration of cross-modal sensorimotor channels, and 
the consolidation of fetal behavioral states into slowly 
evolving sleep-wake cycles constitute exciting avenues 
for future development.
Second, we do not mean to imply that our hypothesis 
affords a complete account of the way bodily structures 
and processes may contribute to cognition—visceral 
afferent training does not exhaust embodied active 
inference. Indeed, some training mechanisms may go 
hand in hand with other putatively embodied pro-
cesses, such as (for instance) the establishment of sen-
sorimotor loops in the tactile and proprioceptive 
domains (Ciaunica, Safron, et al., 2021; Fagard et al., 
2018; Martínez Quintero & De Jaegher, 2020). Our argu-
ment that interoceptive rhythms may provide a scaffold 
or reference frame for other sensory flows clearly 
depends on the capacity to organize such flows in rela-
tion to these rhythms; we do not suggest that interocep-
tive dynamics alone are sufficient.
Finally, although our account has focused on the 
role of heart–brain communication during early cogni-
tive development, it represents only a small piece of a 
much larger ontogenetic and phylogenetic puzzle 
(Fields & Levin, 2020; Ramstead et al., 2018). Ulti-
mately, our account must be integrated within a much 
grander narrative about the way self-organizing cellular 
and embryonic processes lay the foundations for the 
sorts of systems-level interactions we have articulated 
here and how these interactions impact individual and 
interpersonal cognitive dynamics over the course of 
the life span. And in a beautifully circular twist that is 
especially befitting of active inference, the personal, 
social, and environmental dynamics that structure life 
outside the womb must also be understood in terms 
of their own influence over cellular and embryonic 
processes, as propagated through successive genera-
tions via genetic, epigenetic, and cultural modes of 
information transmission.
64 Corcoran et al.
This final remark returns us to the theme of repro-
duction and inheritance, reminding us of an influential 
motif in recent work at the nexus of human develop-
ment and embodied active inference: that of the “first 
prior” (Allen & Tsakiris, 2018; Ciaunica, Constant, et al., 
2021; Fotopoulou et al., 2022). This notion might be 
understood in terms of the phenotypic information 
bound up in the organism’s genetic endowment—or, 
more abstractly, as a primal form of belief about one’s 
own existence and the priority accorded to states that 
are conducive to that existence. The visceral afferent 
training hypothesis complements this idea with a more 
explicitly adaptive twist: The body constitutes not only 
the agent’s first prior but also its first teacher—one that 
provides reliable interoceptive instruction to guide the 
elaboration of generative models throughout the pre-
natal period and beyond. And just like any good 
teacher, the body equips its student with precisely the 
right foundations to go out into the world, apply its 
knowledge to new problems, and acquire deeper levels 
of understanding along the way—thus becoming a mas-
ter in its own right.
Transparency
Action Editor: Tina M. Lowrey
Editor: Interim Editorial Panel
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared that there were no conflicts of 
interest with respect to the authorship or the publication 
of this article.
Funding
This research was supported by the Australian government 
through the Australian Research Council’s Discovery Proj-
ects funding scheme (Project DP190101805; J. E. Robinson; 
Project DE220101508; D. Feuerriegel) and two Research 
Training Program scholarships (A. W. Corcoran and K. 
Perrykkad) in addition to seed funding from Melbourne 
Monash Consciousness Research. A. W. Corcoran also 
acknowledges the support of the Three Springs Founda-
tion and a Monash University Postgraduate Publication 
Award. None of these funding sources were involved in 
the preparation of this manuscript.
ORCID iDs
Andrew W. Corcoran  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0449-  
4883
Kelsey Perrykkad 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5876-9136
Jonathan E. Robinson  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4886-  
8234
Acknowledgments
We thank Youjia Lu, Tessel Blom, and Mitch Catterall for their 
collaboration on the Action-Guided Conscious Experience 
project. We also thank Jakob Hohwy, Sahib Khalsa, Matthieu 
Koroma, Michael Levin, members of the Cognition and 
Philosophy Lab (especially Kevin Berryman, Tom Darling, 
Manja Engel, Stephen Gadsby, and Niccolò Negro), and two 
anonymous reviewers for valuable feedback on previous ver-
sions of this manuscript.
Notes
 1. As is common in this literature, our discussion of embodied 
states, processes, and so on pertains to bodily structures and 
activity beyond the central nervous system (or equivalent cen-
tral processing architectures in the case of artificial or aneural 
systems—although our main focus here is human cognition). 
The assumption that mental states depend on neural substrates 
(roughly, that human cognition is “embrained”) is taken for 
granted.
 2. Enactivists like Gallagher (2017) counter that blood-borne 
molecules do indeed play a significant role in cognition by vir-
tue of their contribution to affective experience, whereas others 
like Noë (2004) would seem satisfied to accept a more defla-
tionary interpretation (see Block, 2005). We shall address some 
of the more controversial aspects of the causal-constitutive dis-
tinction in Causation Versus Constitution Redux.
 3. However, as Shapiro (2019b) points out, the distinction 
between causal antecedents and constitutive elements may be 
murky (more on this in Causation Versus Constitution Redux).
 4. More technically, the generative model combines the likeli-
hood of observing some data, given their causes (i.e., model 
parameters), and prior beliefs about those causes (specified as 
a probability distribution or density function on model param-
eters; Friston, 2009).
 5. Indeed, Friston’s (2011, 2012) own characterization of the 
agent’s attunement with (or recapitulation of) environmental 
properties would seem equally at home within more classical 
(computational-representational) interpretations of animal cog-
nition (see, e.g., Gallistel, 1989).
 6. To adapt a more general argument from A. Clark (2008a), 
although the experience of bodily self-consciousness might 
require that some body is inserted within the sensorimotor 
loops mediating interactions between my brain and my envi-
ronment, these studies seem to indicate that it need not be my 
body in particular—nor indeed one very much like it.
 7. Note that our use of the term “synchronic” is not meant to 
imply a static view of cognition. Cognitive dynamics clearly 
unfold over multiple time scales, thereby generating complex, 
nonlinear patterns of interaction. Rather, the thought here is 
that of a system consisting of a relatively stable set of functional 
relations that evince predictable responses to different sorts of 
(external or self-generated) perturbation. More abstractly, one 
might think of a system that repeatedly visits a relatively small 
set of states rather than one that periodically transitions to a 
new configuration that precludes the return to former states.
 8. It is precisely this symmetry between interoceptive and 
exteroceptive modes of perceptual inference that prompts 
Hohwy and Michael (2017) to remark that there is “nothing 
special” about the way bodily states affect sensory processing—
such states simply constitute another set of hidden causes for 
the brain to infer. Although this may be true from a purely syn-
chronic perspective, our diachronic analysis suggests there may 
well be something special about the rhythmic sensory stimuli 
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 65
generated by the body, namely, their role in establishing the 
cognitive architecture underwriting perceptual inference.
 9. Although the fetal heartbeat does evince variability, this 
characteristic feature of the cardiac time series emerges gradu-
ally over the latter half of gestation (DiPietro et al., 2015; Visser 
et al., 1981; Wheeler & Murrills, 1978). The increasing volatil-
ity of cardio-afferent dynamics raises the interesting possibility 
that baroreceptor feedback continues to play an instrumental 
role in cognitive development as the fetus approaches term, 
whereby the increasing variability of afferent feedback—per -
haps in conjunction with correlated patterns of stimulation from 
other channels—entrains the elaboration of more complex gen-
erative models. Mastery of these more complex training signals 
may constitute a vital developmental step in anticipation of the 
volatile conditions that will be encountered outside the womb 
(see Corcoran et al., 2023).
10. Adams and Aizawa (2008) insist this distinction holds irre-
spective of whether the coupled processes in question form 
part of an integrated system (such as a biological organism).
11. A helpful example from Shapiro (2019a, 2019b): Sunlight 
is both a cause and a “proper constituent” of photosynthesis, 
whereas frost is an incidental factor that might causally impinge 
on the leaf’s capacity to photosynthesize. The key idea here is 
that some causal antecedents appear to be ineliminable parts of 
the process at hand—not mere supports, adjuncts, or modulators.
12. It seems plausible that one could conceive of such causal 
inscriptions in (diachronic) constitutive terms (see Leuridan 
& Lodewyckx, 2021); however, our argument is not commit-
ted to this view. Rather, we consider visceral afferent training 
mechanisms to be sufficiently important determinants of cogni-
tive organization irrespective of whether such mechanisms are 
deemed constitutive or not.
13. On reflection, this realization should perhaps come as little 
surprise. Proponents of embodied active inference are rather 
fond of characterizing perception as a kind of “controlled hal-
lucination” (A. Clark, 2016; Seth, 2021), a slogan that seems 
entirely in keeping with the Cartesian skepticism animating 
the brain-in-a-vat scenario (see, e.g., Putnam, 1981; see also 
Hohwy, 2016, 2017). Clark for his part is prepared to admit the 
possibility of such skepticism under embodied active inference 
but dismisses it as “a mere distraction (a red herring)” (A. Clark, 
2017b, p. 735).
References
Adams, F., & Aizawa, K. (2008). The bounds of cognition. 
Blackwell.
Adler, D., Herbelin, B., Similowski, T., & Blanke, O. (2014). 
Breathing and sense of self: Visuo-respiratory conflicts 
alter body self-consciousness. Respiratory Physiology & 
Neurobiology, 203, 68–74.
Adolph, K. E., & Hoch, J. E. (2019). Motor development: 
Embodied, embedded, enculturated, and enabling. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 70(1), 141–164. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010418-102836
Ainley, V., Apps, M. A. J., Fotopoulou, A., & Tsakiris, M. (2016). 
‘Bodily precision’: A predictive coding account of indi-
vidual differences in interoceptive accuracy. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
371(20160003), 1–9.
Aizawa, K. (2007). Understanding the embodiment of percep-
tion. Journal of Philosophy, 104(1), 5–25.
Aizawa, K. (2010). The coupling-constitution fallacy revisited. 
Cognitive Systems Research, 11, 332–342.
Aizawa, K. (2015). What is this cognition that is supposed to 
be embodied? Philosophical Psychology, 28(6), 755–775.
Allard, E., Canzoneri, E., Adler, D., Morélot-Panzini, C., Bello-
Ruiz, J., Herbelin, B., Blanke, O., & Similowski, T. (2017). 
Interferences between breathing, experimental dyspnoea 
and bodily self-consciousness. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 
Article 9990.
Allen, M., Frank, D., Schwarzkopf, D. S., Fardo, F., Winston, J. S.,  
Hauser, T. U., & Rees, G. (2016). Unexpected arousal 
modulates the influence of sensory noise on confidence. 
eLife, 5, e18103.
Allen, M., & Friston, K. J. (2018). From cognitivism to autopoi-
esis: Towards a computational framework for the embod-
ied mind. Synthese, 195(6), 2459–2482.
Allen, M., Levy, A., Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2019). In the 
body’s eye: The computational anatomy of interoceptive 
inference. BioRxiv.
Allen, M., & Tsakiris, M. (2018). The body as first prior: 
Interoceptive predictive processing and the primacy of 
self-models. In M. Tsakiris & H. De Preester (Eds.), The 
interoceptive mind: From homeostasis to awareness (pp. 
27–45). Oxford University Press.
Alsmith, A. J. T., & de Vignemont, F. (2012). Embodying the 
mind and representing the body. Review of Philosophy & 
Psychology, 3, 1–13.
Anderson, M. L. (2017). Of Bayes and bullets: An embodied, 
situated, targeting-based account of predictive processing. 
Philosophy and Predictive Processing (pp. 1–14). https://doi 
.org/10.15502/9783958573055
Anderson, M. L., Richardson, M. J., & Chemero, A. (2012). 
Eroding the boundaries of cognition: Implications of 
embodiment. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4, 717–730.
Andrews, M. (2021). The math is not the territory: Navigating 
the free energy principle. Biology & Philosophy , 36(3), 
Article 30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-021-09807-0
Apps, M. A. J., & Tsakiris, M. (2014). The free-energy 
self: A predictive coding account of self-recognition. 
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 41, 85–97.
Arnaldo, I., Corcoran, A. W., Friston, K. J., & Ramstead, M. J. D. 
(2022). Stress and its sequelae: An active inference account 
of the etiological pathway from allostatic overload to 
depression. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, Article 
104590. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104590
Aspell, J. E., Heydrich, L., Marillier, G., Lavanchy, T., Herbelin, B.,  
& Blanke, O. (2013). Turning body and self inside out: 
Visualized heartbeats alter bodily self-consciousness and 
tactile perception. Psychological Science, 24(12), 2445–2453.
Aspell, J. E., Lenggenhager, B., & Blanke, O. (2012). 
Multisensory perception and bodily self-consciousness: 
From out-of-body to inside-body experience. In M. M. 
Murray & M. T. Wallace (Eds.), The neural bases of mul-
tisensory processes. CRC Press. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih  
.gov/books/NBK92870/
Aspray, W. F. (1985). The scientific conceptualization of infor-
mation: A survey. IEEE Annals of the History of Computing, 
7(2), 117–140. https://doi.org/10.1109/MAHC.1985.10018
66 Corcoran et al.
Atzil, S., Gao, W., Fradkin, I., & Barrett, L. F. (2018). Growing 
a social brain. Nature Human Behaviour, 2(9), 624–636.
Azevedo, R. T., Garfinkel, S. N., Critchley, H. D., & Tsakiris, M.  
(2017). Cardiac afferent activity modulates the expres-
sion of racial stereotypes. Nature Communications, 8, 
Article 13854.
Azzalini, D., Rebollo, I., & Tallon-Baudry, C. (2019). Visceral 
signals shape brain dynamics and cognition. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 23(6), 488–509.
Badcock, P. B., Davey, C. G., Whittle, S., Allen, N. B., & 
Friston, K. J. (2017). The depressed brain: An evolution-
ary systems theory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 21(3), 
182–194.
Baltieri, M., Buckley, C. L., & Bruineberg, J. (2020). Predictions 
in the eye of the beholder: An active inference account 
of Watt governors. In J. Bongard, J. Lovato, L. Hebert-
Dufrésne, R. Dasari, & L. Soros (Eds.), ALIFE 2020: The 
2020 conference on artificial life (Vol. 32, pp. 121–129). 
MIT Press.
Banellis, L., & Cruse, D. (2020). Skipping a beat: Heartbeat-
evoked potentials reflect predictions during interoceptive-
exteroceptive integration. Cerebral Cortex Com munications, 
1(1), Article tgaa060. https://doi.org/10.1093/texcom/
tgaa060
Barack, D. L., & Krakauer, J. W. (2021). Two views on the 
cognitive brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 22(6), 359–
371. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-021-00448-6
Barrett, L. (2011). Beyond the brain: How body and envi -
ronment shape animal and human minds. Princeton 
University Press.
Barrett, L. F. (2017). The theory of constructed emotion: An 
active inference account of interoception and categori-
zation. Social Cognitive & Affective Neuroscience, 12(1), 
1–23.
Barrett, L. F., & Bar, M. (2009). See it with feeling: Affective 
predictions during object perception. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
364(1521), 1325–1334.
Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., & Hamilton, P. (2016). An active 
inference theory of allostasis and interoception in depres-
sion. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 371(20160011), 1–17.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral 
& Brain Sciences, 22(4), 577–609.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review 
of Psychology, 59, 617–645.
Başar, E. (2008). Oscillations in “brain–body–mind”: A holistic 
view including the autonomous system. Brain Research, 
1235, 2–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2008.06.102
Bastos, A. M., Lundqvist, M., Waite, A. S., Kopell, N., & Miller, 
E. K. (2020). Layer and rhythm specificity for predic-
tive routing. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 117(49), 31459–31469. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.2014868117
Bechtel, W., Abrahamsen, A., & Graham, G. (1998). The life 
of cognitive science. In W. Bechtel & G. Graham (Eds.), 
A companion to cognitive science (pp. 1–104). Basil 
Blackwell.
Beer, R. D. (2003). The dynamics of active categorical per-
ception in an evolved model agent. Adaptive Behavior, 
11(4), 209–243.
Bell, A. J., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1995). An information-maximi-
zation approach to blind separation and blind deconvolu-
tion. Neural Computation, 7(6), 1129–1159.
Benarroch, E. E. (1993). The central autonomic network: 
Functional organization, dysfunction, and perspective. 
Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 68(10), 988–1001.
Benarroch, E. E. (2008). The arterial baroreflex: Functional 
organization and involvement in neurologic disease. 
Neurology, 71(21), 1733–1738. https://doi.org/10.1212/01  
.wnl.0000335246.93495.92
Betka, S., Canzoneri, E., Adler, D., Herbelin, B., Bello-Ruiz, J.,  
Kannape, O. A., Similowski, T., & Blanke, O. (2020). 
Mechanisms of the breathing contribution to bodily 
self-consciousness in healthy humans: Lessons from 
machine-assisted breathing? Psychophysiology , 57(8), 
Article e13564.
Birren, J. E., Cardon, P. V., Jr., & Phillips, S. L. (1963). Reaction 
time as a function of the cardiac cycle in young adults. 
Science, 140(3563), 195–196.
Blanke, O. (2012). Multisensory brain mechanisms of bodily 
self-consciousness. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 13(8), 
556–571.
Blanke, O., & Metzinger, T. (2009). Full-body illusions and 
minimal phenomenal selfhood. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 13(1), 7–13.
Blanke, O., Slater, M., & Serino, A. (2015). Behavioral, neural, 
and computational principles of bodily self-conscious-
ness. Neuron, 88(1), 145–166.
Blankenship, A. G., & Feller, M. B. (2010). Mechanisms under-
lying spontaneous patterned activity in developing neural 
circuits. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(1), 18–29.
Block, N. (2005). Review of Alva Noë: Action in perception. 
Journal of Philosophy, 102(5), 259–272.
Botvinick, M., & Cohen, J. (1998). Rubber hands ‘feel’ touch 
that eyes see. Nature, 391(6669), 756.
Boullin, J., & Morgan, J. M. (2005). The development of car-
diac rhythm. Heart, 91(7), 874–875.
Braitenberg, V. (2004). Vehicles: Experiments in synthetic psy-
chology. MIT Press.
Brooks, R. A. (1991). Intelligence without representation. 
Artificial Intelligence, 47(1–3), 139–159.
Bruineberg, J., Dolega, K., Dewhurst, J., & Baltieri, M. (2021). 
The emperor’s new Markov blankets. Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences. Advance online publication. https://doi  
.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The antici-
pating brain is not a scientist: The free-energy principle 
from an ecological-enactive perspective. Synthese, 195(6), 
2417–2444.
Bruineberg, J., & Rietveld, E. (2014). Self-organization, free 
energy minimization, and optimal grip on a field of affor-
dances. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, Article 599.
Burr, C., & Jones, M. (2016). The body as laboratory: 
Prediction-error minimization, embodiment, and repre-
sentation. Philosophical Psychology, 29(4), 586–600.
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 67
Buzsáki, G., & Draguhn, A. (2004). Neuronal oscillations in 
cortical networks. Science, 304(5679), 1926–1929.
Callaway, E., 3rd, & Layne, R. S. (1964). Interaction between 
the visual evoked response and two spontaneous biological 
rhythms: The EEG alpha cycle and the cardiac arousal cycle. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 112, 421–431.
Casasanto, D. (2011). Different bodies, different minds: 
The body specificity of language and thought. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 20(6), 378–383.
Chao, Z. C., Takaura, K., Wang, L., Fujii, N., & Dehaene, S.  
(2018). Large-scale cortical networks for hierarchical 
prediction and prediction error in the primate brain. 
Neuron, 100(5), 1252–1266.e3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j  
.neuron.2018.10.004
Chemero, A. (2009). Radical embodied cognitive science. MIT 
Press.
Chemero, A. (2013). Radical embodied cognitive science. 
Review of General Psychology, 17(2), 145–150.
Cheng, G., Zhou, X., Qu, J., Ashwell, K. W. S., & Paxinos, G.  
(2004). Central vagal sensory and motor connections: 
Human embryonic and fetal development. Autonomic 
Neuroscience: Basic & Clinical, 114(1–2), 83–96.
Cheng, G., Zhu, H., Zhou, X., Qu, J., Ashwell, K. W. S., & 
Paxinos, G. (2006). Development of the human nucleus 
of the solitary tract: A cyto- and chemoarchitectural study. 
Autonomic Neuroscience: Basic & Clinical, 128(1–2), 
76–95.
Ciaunica, A., Constant, A., Preissl, H., & Fotopoulou, K. (2021). 
The first prior: From co-embodiment to co-homeostasis in 
early life. Consciousness & Cognition, 91, Article 103117. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2021.103117
Ciaunica, A., & Crucianelli, L. (2019). Minimal self-aware-
ness: From within a developmental perspective. Journal 
of Consciousness Studies, 26(3–4), 207–226.
Ciaunica, A., Safron, A., & Delafield-Butt, J. (2021). Back to 
square one: The bodily roots of conscious experiences in 
early life. Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021(2), Article 
niab037.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting brain, body, and world 
together again. MIT Press.
Clark, A. (1999). An embodied cognitive science? Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 3(9), 345–351.
Clark, A. (2008a). Pressing the flesh: A tension in the 
study of the embodied, embedded mind? Philosophy & 
Phenomenological Research, 76(1), 37–59.
Clark, A. (2008b). Supersizing the mind: Embodiment, action, 
and cognitive extension. Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated 
agents, and the future of cognitive science. Behavioral 
Brain Sciences, 36(3), 181–253.
Clark, A. (2016). Surfing uncertainty: Prediction, action, and 
the embodied mind. Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2017a). How to knit your own Markov blanket: 
Resisting the second law with metamorphic minds. In  
T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy and predictive 
processing (pp. 1–19). MIND Group.
Clark, A. (2017b). Busting out: Predictive brains, embodied 
minds, and the puzzle of the evidentiary veil. Noûs, 51(4), 
727–753.
Clark, J. E., Watson, S., & Friston, K. J. (2018). What is mood? 
A computational perspective. Psychological Medicine , 
48(14), 2277–2284.
Coleman, W. M. (1921). The psychological significance of 
bodily rhythms. Journal of Comparative & Physiological 
Psychology, 1, 213–220.
Colombetti, G. (2014). The feeling body: Affective science meets 
the enactive mind. MIT Press.
Colombo, M., & Wright, C. (2021). First principles in the 
life sciences: The free-energy principle, organicism, and 
mechanism. Synthese, 198, 3463–3488. https://doi.org/  
10.1007/s11229-018-01932-w
Corcoran, A. W., Feuerriegel, D., Robinson, J. E., & Perrykkad, K.  
(2023). Visceral afferent training in action: The origins of 
agency in early cognitive development. PsyArXiv. https://
doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/nvj45
Corcoran, A. W., & Hohwy, J. (2018). Allostasis, interoception, 
and the free energy principle: Feeling our way forward. 
In M. Tsakiris & H. De Preester (Eds.), The interocep-
tive mind: From homeostasis to awareness (pp. 272–292). 
Oxford University Press.
Corcoran, A. W., Macefield, V. G., & Hohwy, J. (2021). Be 
still my heart: Cardiac regulation as a mode of uncertainty 
reduction. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 28, 1211–1223.
Corcoran, A. W., Pezzulo, G., & Hohwy, J. (2018). Commentary: 
Respiration-entrained brain rhythms are global but  
often overlooked. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 12, 
Article 25.
Corcoran, A. W., Pezzulo, G., & Hohwy, J. (2020). From allo-
static agents to counterfactual cognisers: Active inference, 
biological regulation, and the origins of cognition. Biology 
& Philosophy, 35(32), 1–45.
Critchley, H. D., & Garfinkel, S. N. (2017). Interoception and 
emotion. Current Opinion in Psychology, 17, 7–14.
Critchley, H. D., & Garfinkel, S. N. (2018). The influence of 
physiological signals on cognition. Current Opinion in 
Behavioral Sciences, 19, 13–18.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason and the 
human brain. G. P. Putnam’s Sons.
Damasio, A. (2010). Self comes to mind: Constructing the con-
scious brain. Random House.
Damasio, A. (2018). The strange order of things: Life, feeling, 
and the making of cultures. Pantheon Books.
Décarie-Spain, L., Hayes, A. M. R., Lauer, L. T., & Kanoski, S. E.  
(2023). The gut-brain axis and cognitive control: A role 
for the vagus nerve. Seminars in Cell & Developmental 
Biology. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2023.02.004
de Vignemont, F. (2011). Embodiment, ownership and dis-
ownership. Consciousness & Cognition, 20(1), 82–93.
Di Paolo, E. A. (2005). Autopoiesis, adaptivity, teleology, agency. 
Phenomenology & the Cognitive Sciences, 4(4), 429–452.
Di Paolo, E. A. (2018). The enactive conception of life. In A. 
Newen, L. de Bruin, & S. Gallagher (Eds.), The Oxford 
handbook of 4E cognition (pp. 71–94). Oxford University 
Press.
DiPietro, J. A., Costigan, K. A., & Voegtline, K. M. (2015). 
Studies in fetal behavior: Revisited, renewed, and rei-
magined. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child 
Development, 80(3), vii–94.
68 Corcoran et al.
Downes, J. H., Hammond, M. W., Xydas, D., Spencer, M. C., 
Becerra, V. M., Warwick, K., Whalley, B. J., & Nasuto, S. J.  
(2012). Emergence of a small-world functional network 
in cultured neurons. PLOS Computational Biology, 8(5), 
Article e1002522. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi  
.1002522
Doyle, M. J., Lohr, J. L., Chapman, C. S., Koyano-Nakagawa, N.,  
Garry, M. G., & Garry, D. J. (2015). Human induced plu-
ripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes as a model for 
heart development and congenital heart disease. Stem 
Cell Reviews and Reports, 11(5), 710–727. https://doi  
.org/10.1007/s12015-015-9596-6
Draganova, R., Eswaran, H., Murphy, P., Huotilainen, M., 
Lowery, C., & Preissl, H. (2005). Sound frequency change 
detection in fetuses and newborns, a magnetoencepha-
lographic study. NeuroImage, 28(2), 354–361. https://doi  
.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.06.011
Draganova, R., Eswaran, H., Murphy, P., Lowery, C., & Preissl, H.  
(2007). Serial magnetoencephalographic study of fetal 
and newborn auditory discriminative evoked responses. 
Early Human Development, 83(3), 199–207. https://doi  
.org/10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2006.05.018
Edwards, L., Ring, C., McIntyre, D., Carroll, D., & Martin, U. 
(2007). Psychomotor speed in hypertension: Effects of 
reaction time components, stimulus modality, and phase 
of the cardiac cycle. Psychophysiology, 44(3), 459–468.
Ehrsson, H. H. (2007). The experimental induction of out-of-
body experiences. Science, 317(5841), 1048.
Engel, A. K., Maye, A., Kurthen, M., & König, P. (2013). 
Where’s the action? The pragmatic turn in cognitive sci-
ence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(5), 202–209.
Fabry, R. E. (2017). Predictive processing and cognitive devel-
opment. In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy 
and predictive processing (pp. 1–18). MIND Group.
Fabry, R. E. (2018). Betwixt and between: The enculturated 
predictive processing approach to cognition. Synthese, 
195(6), 2483–2518. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-017-
1334-y
Facchin, M. (2021). Extended predictive minds: Do Markov 
blankets matter? Review of Philosophy & Psychology. 
Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13164-021-00607-9
Fagard, J., Esseily, R., Jacquey, L., O’Regan, K., & Somogyi, E.  
(2018). Fetal origin of sensorimotor behavior. Frontiers 
in Neurorobotics, 12, Article 23. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnbot.2018.00023
Favela, L. H. (2014). Radical embodied cognitive neurosci-
ence: Addressing “grand challenges” of the mind sciences. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, Article 796.
Feller, M. B. (1999). Spontaneous correlated activity in devel-
oping neural circuits. Neuron, 22(4), 653–656.
Fernandez Velasco, P., & Loev, S. (2021). Affective experi-
ence in the predictive mind: A review and new integra-
tive account. Synthese, 198(11), 10847–10882. https://doi  
.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02755-4
Fiacconi, C. M., Peter, E. L., Owais, S., & Köhler, S. (2016). 
Knowing by heart: Visceral feedback shapes recognition 
memory judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
General, 145(5), 559–572.
Fields, C., & Levin, M. (2020). Scale-free biology: Integrating 
evolutionary and developmental thinking. BioEssays, 42(8), 
Article 1900228. https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.201900228
Figdor, C. (2019). The rise of cognitive science in the 20th 
century. In A. Kind (Ed.), Philosophy of mind in the twen-
tieth and twenty-first centuries (pp. 280–302). Taylor & 
Francis.
Flexman, J. E. (1974). Respiratory phase and visual signal 
detection. Perception & Psychophysics, 16(2), 337–339.
Fodor, J. A. (1975). The language of thought. Harvard 
University Press.
Fodor, J. A. (1981). Representations: Philosophical essays on 
the foundations of cognitive science. Harvester Press.
Foglia, L., & Wilson, R. A. (2013). Embodied cognition. Wiley 
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 4(3), 319–325.
Fotopoulou, A. (2015). The virtual bodily self: Mentalisation 
of the body as revealed in anosognosia for hemiplegia. 
Consciousness & Cognition, 33, 500–510. https://doi  
.org/10.1016/j.concog.2014.09.018
Fotopoulou, A., & Tsakiris, M. (2017). Mentalizing homeo-
stasis: The social origins of interoceptive inference. 
Neuropsychoanalysis, 19(1), 3–28. https://doi.org/10.10
80/15294145.2017.1294031
Fotopoulou, A., von Mohr, M., & Krahé, C. (2022). Affective 
regulation through touch: Homeostatic and allostatic 
mechanisms. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 
43, 80–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2021.08.008
Friauf, E., & Lohmann, C. (1999). Development of auditory 
brainstem circuitry: Activity-dependent and activity-
independent processes. Cell & Tissue Research, 297(2), 
187–195.
Fridman, J., Barrett, L. F., Wormwood, J. B., & Quigley, K. S. 
(2019). Applying the theory of constructed emotion to police 
decision making. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, Article 1946.
Fries, P. (2005). A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: 
Neuronal communication through neuronal coherence. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(10), 474–480.
Fries, P. (2015). Rhythms for cognition: Communication 
through coherence. Neuron, 88(1), 220–235.
Friston, K. J. (2008). Hierarchical models in the brain. PLOS 
Computational Biology, 4(11), Article e1000211.
Friston, K. J. (2009). The free-energy principle: A rough guide 
to the brain? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(7), 293–301.
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain 
theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138.
Friston, K. J. (2011). Embodied inference: Or “I think therefore 
I am, if I am what I think.” In W. Tschacher & C. Bergomi 
(Eds.), The implications of embodiment: Cognition and 
communication (pp. 89–125). Imprint Academic.
Friston, K. J. (2012). A free energy principle for biological 
systems. Entropy, 14(11), 2100–2121.
Friston, K. J. (2017). Self-evidencing babies: Commentary 
on “Mentalizing Homeostasis: The Social Origins of 
Interoceptive Inference” by Fotopoulou & Tsakiris. 
Neuropsychoanalysis, 19(1), 43–47.
Friston, K. J. (2019). Waves of prediction. PLOS Biology , 
17(10), Article e3000426.
Friston, K. J., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., 
O’Doherty, J., & Pezzulo, G. (2016). Active inference 
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 69
and learning. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 68, 
862–879.
Friston, K. J., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & 
Pezzulo, G. (2017). Active inference: A process theory. 
Neural Computation, 29(1), 1–49.
Friston, K. J., Kilner, J., & Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy 
principle for the brain. Journal of Physiology, 100(1–3), 
70–87.
Friston, K. J., Levin, M., Sengupta, B., & Pezzulo, G. (2015). 
Knowing one’s place: A free-energy approach to pat -
tern regulation. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 
12(20141383), 1–12.
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., & de Vries, B. (2017). The graphical 
brain: Belief propagation and active inference. Network 
Neuroscience, 1(4), 381–414.
Friston, K. J., & Stephan, K. E. (2007). Free-energy and the 
brain. Synthese, 159(3), 417–458.
Gallagher, S. (2000). Philosophical conceptions of the self: 
Implications for cognitive science. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 4(1), 14–21.
Gallagher, S. (2005). How the body shapes the mind. Oxford 
University Press.
Gallagher, S. (2017). Enactivist interventions: Rethinking the 
mind. Oxford University Press.
Gallese, V., & Sinigaglia, C. (2011). What is so special about 
embodied simulation? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
15(11), 512–519.
Gallistel, C. R. (1989). Animal cognition: The representation 
of space, time and number. Annual Review of Psychology, 
40, 155–189.
Galvez-Pol, A., McConnell, R., & Kilner, J. M. (2020). Active 
sampling in visual search is coupled to the cardiac cycle. 
Cognition, 196, Article 104149.
Garfinkel, S. N., & Critchley, H. D. (2016). Threat and the 
body: How the heart supports fear processing. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 20(1), 34–46.
Gerrans, P., & Murray, R. J. (2020). Interoceptive active infer -
ence and self-representation in social anxiety disorder 
(SAD): Exploring the neurocognitive traits of the SAD self. 
Neuroscience of Consciousness.  https://doi.org/10.1093/
nc/niaa026
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual percep-
tion. Houghton Mifflin.
Goldman, A. I. (2012). A moderate approach to embodied cogni-
tive science. Review of Philosophy & Psychology, 3(1), 71–88.
Goldman, A. I. (2016). Reply to Firestone. In B. P. McLaughlin 
& H. Kornblith (Eds.), Goldman and his critics (pp. 335–
336). Wiley.
Goldman, A. I., & de Vignemont, F. (2009). Is social cognition 
embodied? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(4), 154–159.
Goodman, C. S., & Shatz, C. J. (1993). Developmental mecha-
nisms that generate precise patterns of neuronal connec-
tivity. Cell, 72(Suppl.), 77–98.
Gopnik, A., Meltzoff, A. N., & Kuhl, P. K. (2001). The scientist in 
the crib: What early learning tells us about the mind. Harper.
Gordon, L., Polak, J. M., Moscoso, G. J., Smith, A., Kuhn, D. 
M., & Wharton, J. (1993). Development of the peptidergic 
innervation of human heart. Journal of Anatomy, 183(Pt. 
1), 131–140.
Grund, M., Al, E., Pabst, M., Dabbagh, A., Stephani, T., 
Nierhaus, T., Gaebler, M., & Villringer, A. (2022). 
Respiration, heartbeat, and conscious tactile perception. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 42(4), 643–656. https://doi  
.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0592-21.2021
Gu, X., FitzGerald, T. H. B., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Modeling 
subjective belief states in computational psychiatry: 
Interoceptive inference as a candidate framework. Psycho -
pharmacology, 236(8), 2405–2412.
Gu, X., Hof, P. R., Friston, K. J., & Fan, J. (2013). Anterior 
insular cortex and emotional awareness. Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 521(15), 3371–3388.
Haken, H. (1983). Synergetics, an introduction: Nonequilibrium 
phase transitions and self-organization in physics, chem-
istry, and biology. Springer-Verlag.
Hanganu-Opatz, I. L. (2010). Between molecules and experi-
ence: Role of early patterns of coordinated activity for 
the development of cortical maps and sensory abilities. 
Brain Research Reviews, 64(1), 160–176.
Haugeland, J. (1978). The nature and plausibility of cog-
nitivism. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1(2), 215–226. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00074148
Haugeland, J. (1998). Mind embodied and embedded. In J. 
Haugeland (Ed.), Having thought: Essays in the metaphys-
ics of mind (pp. 207–237). Harvard University Press.
Hesp, C., Smith, R., Parr, T., Allen, M., Friston, K. J., & Ramstead, 
M. J. D. (2021). Deeply felt affect: The emergence of 
valence in deep active inference. Neural Computa tion, 
33(2), 398–446.
Heydrich, L., Aspell, J. E., Marillier, G., Lavanchy, T., Herbelin, B.,  
& Blanke, O. (2018). Cardio-visual full body illusion 
alters bodily self-consciousness and tactile processing in 
somatosensory cortex. Scientific Reports, 8(1), Article 9230.
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs , 50(2), 
259–285.
Hohwy, J. (2017). How to entrain your evil demon. In T. 
Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy and predictive 
processing (pp. 1–15). MIND Group.
Hohwy, J. (2018). The predictive processing hypothesis. 
In A. Newen, L. de Bruin, & S. Gallagher (Eds.), The 
Oxford handbook of 4E cognition (pp. 129–145). Oxford 
University Press.
Hohwy, J. (2020). New directions in predictive processing. 
Mind & Language, 35(2), 209–223.
Hohwy, J. (2021). Self-supervision, normativity and the 
free energy principle. Synthese, 199, 29–53. https://doi  
.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02622-2
Hohwy, J., & Michael, J. (2017). Why should any body have 
a self? In F. de Vignemont & A. J. T. Alsmith (Eds.), 
The subject’s matter: Self-consciousness and the body (pp. 
363–391). MIT Press.
Hornberger, L. K., & Sahn, D. J. (2007). Rhythm abnormalities 
of the fetus. Heart, 93(10), 1294–1300.
Huang, H., Xue, R., Zhang, J., Ren, T., Richards, L. J., 
Yarowsky, P., Miller, M. I., & Mori, S. (2009). Anatomical 
characterization of human fetal brain development with 
diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 29(13), 4263–4273. https://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.2769-08.2009
70 Corcoran et al.
Huang, Y., & Rao, R. P. N. (2011). Predictive coding. Wiley 
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 2(5), 580–593.
Huotilainen, M., Kujala, A., Hotakainen, M., Parkkonen, L.,  
Taulu, S., Simola, J., Nenonen, J., Karjalainen, M., & 
Näätänen, R. (2005). Short-term memory functions of 
the human fetus recorded with magnetoencephalog-
raphy. NeuroReport, 16(1), 81–84. https://doi.org/10  
.1097/00001756-200501190-00019
Hurley, S. (1998). Consciousness in action. Harvard University 
Press.
Hurley, S. (2010). The varieties of externalism. In R. Menary 
(Ed.), The extended mind (pp. 101–153). MIT Press.
Hutto, D. D., & Myin, E. (2013). Neural representations not 
needed—No more pleas, please. Phenomenology & the 
Cognitive Sciences, 13(2), 241–256.
Isomura, T., & Friston, K. (2018). In vitro neural networks 
minimise variational free energy. Scientific Reports, 
8(1), Article 16926. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-
35221-w
Isomura, T., Kotani, K., & Jimbo, Y. (2015). Cultured cortical 
neurons can perform blind source separation according 
to the free-energy principle. PLOS Computational Biology , 
11(12), Article e1004643. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal  
.pcbi.1004643
Jennings, J. R. (1986). Bodily changes during attention. 
In M. G. H. Coles, E. Donchin, & S. W. Porges (Eds.), 
Psychophysiology: Systems, processes, and applications  
(pp. 268–289). Guilford Press.
Joffily, M., & Coricelli, G. (2013). Emotional valence and the 
free-energy principle. PLOS Computational Biology, 9(6), 
Article e1003094.
Kandler, K., Clause, A., & Noh, J. (2009). Tonotopic reorgani-
zation of developing auditory brainstem circuits. Nature 
Neuroscience, 12(6), 711–717.
Katz, L. C., & Shatz, C. J. (1996). Synaptic activity and the 
construction of cortical circuits. Science, 274(5290), 
1133–1138.
Kim, K. J., Ramiro Diaz, J., Iddings, J. A., & Filosa, J. A. 
(2016). Vasculo-neuronal coupling: Retrograde vascular 
communication to brain neurons. Journal of Neuroscience, 
36(50), 12624–12639. https://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.1300-16.2016
Kirby, M. L. (2007). Cardiac development. Oxford University 
Press.
Kirchhoff, M. D. (2015). Extended cognition and the causal-
constitutive fallacy: In search for a diachronic and 
dynamical conception of constitution. Philosophy & 
Phenomenological Research, 90(2), 320–360.
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Froese, T. (2017). Where there is life there 
is mind: In support of a strong life-mind continuity thesis. 
Entropy, 19(4), Article 169.
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Kiverstein, J. (2020). Attuning to the 
world: The diachronic constitution of the extended con-
scious mind. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, Article 1966. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01966
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Kiverstein, J. (2021). How to determine 
the boundaries of the mind: A Markov blanket proposal. 
Synthese, 198(5), 4791–4810. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11229-019-02370-y
Kirkby, L. A., Sack, G. S., Firl, A., & Feller, M. B. (2013). A 
role for correlated spontaneous activity in the assembly 
of neural circuits. Neuron, 80(5), 1129–1144.
Kiverstein, J. (2012). The meaning of embodiment. Topics in 
Cognitive Science, 4(4), 740–758.
Kiverstein, J., & Miller, M. (2015). The embodied brain: 
Towards a radical embodied cognitive neuroscience. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9, Article 237.
Kiverstein, J., Miller, M., & Rietveld, E. (2019). The feel-
ing of grip: Novelty, error dynamics, and the predictive 
brain. Synthese, 196, 2847–2869. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11229-017-1583-9
Kleckner, I. R., Zhang, J., Touroutoglou, A., Chanes, L., Xia, C.,  
Simmons, W. K., Quigley, K. S., Dickerson, B. C., & 
Barrett, L. F. (2017). Evidence for a large-scale brain sys-
tem supporting allostasis and interoception in humans. 
Nature Human Behaviour, 1, Article 0069.
Klimesch, W. (2013). An algorithm for the EEG frequency 
architecture of consciousness and brain body coupling. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, Article 766.
Klimesch, W. (2018). The frequency architecture of brain and 
brain body oscillations: An analysis. European Journal of 
Neuroscience, 48(7), 2431–2453.
Kluger, D. S., Balestrieri, E., Busch, N. A., & Gross, J. (2021). 
Respiration aligns perception with neural excitabil-
ity. eLife , 10, Article e70907. https://doi.org/10.7554/
eLife.70907
Kluger, D. S., & Gross, J. (2021). Respiration modulates 
oscillatory neural network activity at rest. PLOS Biology, 
19(11), Article e3001457. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal  
.pbio.3001457
Knill, D. C., & Pouget, A. (2004). The Bayesian brain: The role 
of uncertainty in neural coding and computation. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 27(12), 712–719.
Kolb, B., & Fantie, B. D. (2009). Development of the child’s 
brain and behavior. In C. R. Reynolds & E. Fletcher-
Janzen (Eds.), Handbook of clinical child neuropsychology  
(pp. 19–46). Springer US. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-
387-78867-8_2
Köster, M., Kayhan, E., Langeloh, M., & Hoehl, S. (2020). 
Making sense of the world: Infant learning from a predic-
tive processing perspective. Perspectives on Psychological 
Science, 15(3), 562–571.
Kuchling, F., Friston, K., Georgiev, G., & Levin, M. (2020). 
Morphogenesis as Bayesian inference: A variational 
approach to pattern formation and control in complex 
biological systems. Physics of Life Reviews , 33, 88–108. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2019.06.001
Kuhl, P. K. (2004). Early language acquisition: Cracking the 
speech code. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5(11), 831–
843. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1533
Kunzendorf, S., Klotzsche, F., Akbal, M., Villringer, A., Ohl, S.,  
& Gaebler, M. (2019). Active information sampling varies 
across the cardiac cycle. Psychophysiology, 56(5), Article 
e13322.
Lacey, B. C., & Lacey, J. I. (1978). Two-way communication 
between the heart and the brain: Significance of time 
within the cardiac cycle. American Psychologist, 33(2), 
99–113.
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 71
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. 
University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh: 
The embodied mind and its challenge to Western thought. 
Basic Books.
Lara, B., Astorga, D., Mendoza-Bock, E., Pardo, M., 
Escobar, E., & Ciria, A. (2018). Embodied cognitive 
robotics and the learning of sensorimotor schemes. 
Adaptive Behavior, 26(5), 225–238. https://doi.org/10  
.1177/1059712318780679
Lashley, K. S. (1923). The behavioristic interpretation of con-
sciousness. Psychological Bulletin, 30, 237–272, 329–353.
Leighton, A. H., & Lohmann, C. (2016). The wiring of devel-
oping sensory circuits: From patterned spontaneous activ-
ity to synaptic plasticity mechanisms. Frontiers in Neural 
Circuits, 10, Article 71.
Lenggenhager, B., Tadi, T., Metzinger, T., & Blanke, O. (2007). 
Video ergo sum: Manipulating bodily self-consciousness. 
Science, 317(5841), 1096–1099.
Leuridan, B., & Lodewyckx, T. (2021). Diachronic causal con-
stitutive relations. Synthese, 198(9), 9035–9065. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02616-0
Limanowski, J., & Blankenburg, F. (2013). Minimal self-  
models and the free energy principle. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 7, Article 547.
Linson, A., Clark, A., Ramamoorthy, S., & Friston, K. J. (2018). 
The active inference approach to ecological perception: 
General information dynamics for natural and artificial 
embodied cognition. Frontiers in Robotics & AI, 5, Article 21.
Linson, A., Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2020). Active inference, 
stressors, and psychological trauma: A neuroethological 
model of (mal)adaptive explore-exploit dynamics in eco-
logical context. Behavioural Brain Research, 380, Article 
112421.
Llinás, R. R. (1988). The intrinsic electrophysiological proper-
ties of mammalian neurons: Insights into central nervous 
system function. Science, 242(4886), 1654–1664. https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.3059497
Loewy, A. D. (1981). Descending pathways to sympathetic 
and parasympathetic preganglionic neurons. Journal of 
the Autonomic Nervous System, 3(2–4), 265–275.
Longo, M. R., Schüür, F., Kammers, M. P. M., Tsakiris, M., & 
Haggard, P. (2008). What is embodiment? A psychometric 
approach. Cognition, 107(3), 978–998.
Luhmann, H. J., Sinning, A., Yang, J.-W., Reyes-Puerta, V.,  
Stüttgen, M. C., Kirischuk, S., & Kilb, W. (2016). 
Spontaneous neuronal activity in developing neocortical 
networks: From single cells to large-scale interactions. 
Frontiers in Neural Circuits, 10, Article 40.
Macefield, V. G. (2003). Cardiovascular and respiratory 
modulation of tactile afferents in the human finger pad. 
Experimental Physiology, 88(5), 617–625.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A computational investigation into 
the human representation and processing of visual infor-
mation. Freeman.
Martínez Quintero, A., & De Jaegher, H. (2020). Pregnant 
agencies: Movement and participation in maternal-fetal 
interactions. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, Article 1977.
McDowell, J. (1994). The content of perceptual experience. 
Philosophical Quarterly, 44(175), 190–205.
McIntyre, D., Ring, C., Hamer, M., & Carroll, D. (2007). Effects 
of arterial and cardiopulmonary baroreceptor activation 
on simple and choice reaction times. Psychophysiology, 
44(6), 874–879.
Mc Manus, F. (2012). Development and mechanistic expla-
nation. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological 
and Biomedical Sciences , 43(2), 532–541. https://doi  
.org/10.1016/j.shpsc.2011.12.001
Menary, R. (Ed.). (2010a). The extended mind. MIT Press.
Menary, R. (2010b). The holy grail of cognitivism: A response 
to Adams and Aizawa. Phenomenology & the Cognitive 
Sciences, 9, 605–618.
Metzinger, T. (2003). Being no one: The self-model theory of 
subjectivity. MIT Press.
Miłkowski, M. (2019). Embodied cognition. In M. Sprevak & 
M. Colombo (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of the com-
putational mind (pp. 323–338). Routledge.
Michalareas, G., Vezoli, J., van Pelt, S., Schoffelen, J.-M., 
Kennedy, H., & Fries, P. (2016). Alpha-beta and gamma 
rhythms subserve feedback and feedforward Influences 
among human visual cortical areas. Neuron, 89(2), 384–397.
Miller, G. A. (2003). The cognitive revolution: A historical 
perspective. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(3), 141–144. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(03)00029-9
Mizumoto, M., & Ishikawa, M. (2005). Immunity to error 
through misidentification and the bodily illusion experi-
ment. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 12(7), 3–19.
Monti, A., Porciello, G., Tieri, G., & Aglioti, S. M. (2020). The 
“embreathment” illusion highlights the role of breath-
ing in corporeal awareness. Journal of Neurophysiology, 
123(1), 420–427.
Montirosso, R., & McGlone, F. (2020). The body comes first: 
Embodied reparation and the co-creation of infant bodily-
self. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 113, 77–87.
Mooney, R., Penn, A. A., Gallego, R., & Shatz, C. J. (1996). 
Thalamic relay of spontaneous retinal activity prior to 
vision. Neuron, 17(5), 863–874.
Mosher, C. P., Wei, Y., Kamiński, J., Nandi, A., Mamelak, A. N.,  
Anastassiou, C. A., & Rutishauser, U. (2020). Cellular 
classes in the human brain revealed in vivo by heartbeat-
related modulation of the extracellular action potential 
waveform. Cell Reports, 30(10), 3536–3551.e6. https://doi  
.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.02.027
Müller, F., & O’Rahilly, R. (2006). The amygdaloid complex 
and the medial and lateral ventricular eminences in staged 
human embryos. Journal of Anatomy, 208(5), 547–564.
Nakamura, N. H., Fukunaga, M., & Oku, Y. (2018). Respiratory 
modulation of cognitive performance during the retrieval 
process. PLOS ONE, 13(9), Article e0204021.
Nave, K., Deane, G., Miller, M., & Clark, A. (2020). Wilding 
the predictive brain. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: 
Cognitive Science, 11(6), Article e1542.
Newell, A. (1980). Physical symbol systems. Cognitive 
Science, 4(2), 135–183. https://doi.org/10.1207/s1551  
6709cog0402_2
72 Corcoran et al.
Noë, A. (2004). Action in perception. MIT Press.
Obrist, P. A. (1981). Cardiovascular psychophysiology: A per-
spective. Plenum Press.
Okawa, M., Matousek, M., & Petersén, I. (1984). Spontaneous 
vigilance fluctuations in the daytime. Psychophysiology, 
21(2), 207–211. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.1984.
tb00206.x
O’Regan, J. K., & Noë, A. (2001). A sensorimotor account 
of vision and visual consciousness. Behavioral & Brain 
Sciences, 24(5), 939–1031.
Orlandi, N. (2016). Bayesian perception Is ecological per-
ception. Philosophical Topics , 44(2), 327–351. https://doi  
.org/10.5840/philtopics201644226
Owens, A. P., Allen, M., Ondobaka, S., & Friston, K. J. (2018). 
Interoceptive inference: From computational neurosci-
ence to clinic. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 90, 
174–183.
Palacios, E. R., Isomura, T., Parr, T., & Friston, K. (2019). The 
emergence of synchrony in networks of mutually inferring 
neurons. Scientific Reports, 9(1), Article 6412. https://doi  
.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42821-7
Palma, J.-A., & Benarroch, E. E. (2014). Neural control of 
the heart: Recent concepts and clinical correlations. 
Neurology, 83(3), 261–271. https://doi.org/10.1212/
WNL.0000000000000605
Palva, J. M., & Palva, S. (2018). Functional integration across 
oscillation frequencies by cross-frequency phase syn-
chronization. European Journal of Neuroscience, 48(7), 
2399–2406. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejn.13767
Panksepp, J., & Northoff, G. (2009). The trans-species core 
SELF: The emergence of active cultural and neuro-eco-
logical agents through self-related processing within 
subcortical-cortical midline networks. Consciousness & 
Cognition, 18, 193–215.
Pappano, A. J. (1977). Ontogenetic development of auto-
nomic neuroeffector transmission and transmitter reac-
tivity in embryonic and fetal hearts. Pharmacological 
Reviews, 29(1), Article 3.
Park, H.-D., Barnoud, C., Trang, H., Kannape, O. A., Schaller, 
K., & Blanke, O. (2020). Breathing is coupled with vol-
untary action and the cortical readiness potential. Nature 
Communications, 11(1), Article 289. https://doi.org/10  
.1038/s41467-019-13967-9
Park, H.-D., Bernasconi, F., Salomon, R., Tallon-Baudry, C., 
Spinelli, L., Seeck, M., Schaller, K., & Blanke, O. (2018). 
Neural sources and underlying mechanisms of neural 
responses to heartbeats, and their role in bodily self-con-
sciousness: An intracranial EEG study. Cerebral Cortex, 
28(7), 2351–2364.
Parr, T. (2020). Choosing a Markov blanket. Behavioral & 
Brain Sciences, 43, Article e112. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0140525X19002632
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., & Friston, K. J. (2022). Active inference: 
The free energy principle in mind, brain, and behavior. 
MIT Press.
Paulus, M. P., Feinstein, J. S., & Khalsa, S. S. (2019). An 
active inference approach to interoceptive psychopathol-
ogy. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 15, 97–122.
Penn, A. A., & Shatz, C. J. (1999). Brain waves and brain wir-
ing: The role of endogenous and sensory-driven neural 
activity in development. Pediatric Research, 45(4, Pt. 1), 
447–458.
Perl, O., Ravia, A., Rubinson, M., Eisen, A., Soroka, T., Mor, N.,  
Secundo, L., & Sobel, N. (2019). Human non-olfactory 
cognition phase-locked with inhalation. Nature Human 
Behaviour, 3(5), 501–512.
Pessoa, L. (2008). On the relationship between emotion and 
cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9(2), 148–158.
Peters, A., McEwen, B. S., & Friston, K. J. (2017). Uncertainty 
and stress: Why it causes diseases and how it is mastered 
by the brain. Progress in Neurobiology, 156, 164–188.
Petzschner, F. H., Weber, L. A., Wellstein, K. V., Paolini, G., 
Do, C. T., & Stephan, K. E. (2019). Focus of attention 
modulates the heartbeat evoked potential. NeuroImage, 
186, 595–606.
Pezzulo, G. (2014). Why do you fear the bogeyman? An 
embodied predictive coding model of perceptual infer-
ence. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 
14(3), 902–911.
Pezzulo, G., Iodice, P., Barca, L., Chausse, P., Monceau, S., 
& Mermillod, M. (2018). Increased heart rate after exer-
cise facilitates the processing of fearful but not disgusted 
faces. Scientific Reports, 8(1), Article 398.
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. J. (2015). Active infer-
ence, homeostatic regulation and adaptive behavioural 
control. Progress in Neurobiology, 134, 17–35.
Pfeiffer, C., & De Lucia, M. (2017). Cardio-audio synchroniza-
tion drives neural surprise response. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 
Article 14842. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-13861-8
Piekarski, M. (2021). Understanding predictive processing. 
A review. AVANT, 12(1), 1–48. https://doi.org/10.26913/
avant.2021.01.04
Pillai, M., & James, D. (1990). The development of fetal 
heart rate patterns during normal pregnancy. Obstetrics 
& Gynecology, 76(5, Pt. 1), 812–816.
Porges, S. W. (1995). Orienting in a defensive world: 
Mammalian modifications of our evolutionary heritage. 
A Polyvagal theory. Psychophysiology, 32(4), 301–318.
Pramme, L., Larra, M. F., Schächinger, H., & Frings, C. (2014). 
Cardiac cycle time effects on mask inhibition. Biological 
Psychology, 100, 115–121.
Pramme, L., Larra, M. F., Schächinger, H., & Frings, C. (2016). 
Cardiac cycle time effects on selection efficiency in vision. 
Psychophysiology, 53(11), 1702–1711.
Prinz, J. (2009). Is consciousness embodied? In P. Robbins & M.  
Aydede (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of situated cog-
nition (pp. 419–436). Cambridge University Press.
Pulvermüller, F. (2013). How neurons make meaning: Brain 
mechanisms for embodied and abstract-symbolic seman-
tics. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 17(9), 458–470. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.06.004
Putnam, H. (1967). Psychological predicates. In W. H. Capitan 
& D. D. Merrill (Eds.), Art, mind, and religion (pp. 37–48). 
University of Pittsburgh Press.
Putnam, H. (1981). Reason, truth and history. Cambridge 
University Press.
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 73
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1980). Computation and cognition: Issues 
in the foundations of cognitive science. Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, 3(1), 111–132. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0140525X00002053
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1984). Computation and cognition: Toward 
a foundation for cognitive science. MIT Press.
Quadt, L., Critchley, H. D., & Garfinkel, S. N. (2018). The neu-
robiology of interoception in health and disease. Annals 
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1428(1), 112–128.
Quelhas Martins, A., McIntyre, D., & Ring, C. (2014). Effects of 
baroreceptor stimulation on performance of the Sternberg 
short-term memory task: A cardiac cycle time study. 
Biological Psychology, 103, 262–266.
Rae, C. L., Botan, V. E., Gould van Praag, C. D., Herman, 
A. M., Nyyssönen, J. A. K., Watson, D. R., Duka, T., 
Garfinkel, S. N., & Critchley, H. D. (2018). Response inhi-
bition on the stop signal task improves during cardiac 
contraction. Scientific Reports, 8(1), Article 9136.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2018). 
Answering Schrödinger’s question: A free-energy formula -
tion. Physics of Life Reviews, 24, 1–16.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Kirchhoff, M. D., Constant, A., & Friston, 
K. J. (2021). Multiscale integration: Beyond internal -
ism and externalism. Synthese, 198, 41–70. https://doi  
.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02115-x
Ramstead, M. J. D., Kirchhoff, M. D., & Friston, K. J. (2020). 
A tale of two densities: Active inference is enactive infer-
ence. Adaptive Behavior, 28(4), 225–239.
Rao, R. P. N., & Ballard, D. H. (1999). Predictive coding in the 
visual cortex: A functional interpretation of some extra-
classical receptive-field effects. Nature Neuroscience, 2(1), 
79–87.
Rassi, E., Dorffner, G., Gruber, W., Schabus, M., & Klimesch, W.  
(2019). Coupling and decoupling between brain and body 
oscillations. Neuroscience Letters, 711, Article 134401.
Rebollo, I., Wolpert, N., & Tallon-Baudry, C. (2021). Brain-
stomach coupling: Anatomy, functions, and future 
avenues of research. Current Opinion in Biomedical 
Engineering, 18, Article 100270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j  
.cobme.2021.100270
Rulkov, N. F. (2001). Regularization of synchronized chaotic 
bursts. Physical Review Letters, 86(1), 183–186. https://
doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.86.183
Saari, M. J., & Pappas, B. A. (1976). Cardiac cycle phase and 
movement and reaction times. Perceptual & Motor Skills, 
42(3), 767–770.
Sandman, C. A., McCanne, T. R., Kaiser, D. N., & Diamond, B.  
(1977). Heart rate and cardiac phase influences on visual 
perception. Journal of Comparative & Physiological 
Psychology, 91(1), 189–202.
Saper, C. B. (2002). The central autonomic nervous system: 
Conscious visceral perception and autonomic pattern 
generation. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 25, 433–469.
Searle, J. R. (1980). Minds, brains, and programs. Behavioral 
& Brain Sciences, 3, 417–457.
Segar, J. L. (1997). Ontogeny of the arterial and cardiopulmo-
nary baroreflex during fetal and postnatal life. American 
Journal of Physiology, 273(2, Pt. 2), R457–R471.
Sel, A., Azevedo, R. T., & Tsakiris, M. (2017). Heartfelt self: 
Cardio-visual integration affects self-face recognition and 
interoceptive cortical processing. Cerebral Cortex, 27(11), 
5144–5155.
Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and 
the embodied self. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(11), 
565–573.
Seth, A. K. (2014). A predictive processing theory of senso-
rimotor contingencies: Explaining the puzzle of percep-
tual presence and its absence in synesthesia. Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 5(2), 97–118.
Seth, A. K. (2015). The cybernetic Bayesian brain: From 
interoceptive inference to sensorimotor contingencies. 
In T. Metzinger & J. M. Windt (Eds.), Open MIND (pp. 
1–24). MIND Group.
Seth, A. K. (2021). Being you: A new science of consciousness. 
Faber & Faber.
Seth, A. K., & Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive infer-
ence and the emotional brain. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 371(1708), 
1–10.
Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K., & Critchley, H. D. (2012). An intero-
ceptive predictive coding model of conscious presence. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 2, Article 395.
Seth, A. K., & Tsakiris, M. (2018). Being a beast machine: The 
somatic basis of selfhood. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
22(11), 969–981.
Shapiro, L. A. (2019a). Embodied cognition (2nd ed.). 
Routledge.
Shapiro, L. A. (2019b). Flesh matters: The body in cognition. 
Mind & Language, 34, 3–20.
Shine, J. M., O’Callaghan, C., Walpola, I. C., Wainstein, G., 
Taylor, N., Aru, J., Huebner, B., & John, Y. J. (2022). 
Understanding the effects of serotonin in the brain 
through its role in the gastrointestinal tract. Brain, 149(9), 
2967–2981. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awac256
Sims, A. (2017). The problems with prediction: The dark room 
problem and the scope dispute. In T. Metzinger & W. 
Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy and predictive processing (pp. 
1–18). MIND Group.
Singer, W. (1986). The brain as a self-organizing system. 
European Archives of Psychiatry and Neurological 
Sciences, 236(1), 4–9. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00641050
Sizarov, A., Moorman, A. F. M., & Pickoff, A. S. (2013). 
Development and functional maturation of the car-
diac conduction system. In H. D. Allen (Ed.), Moss and 
Adams heart disease in infants, children, and adolescents: 
Including the fetus and young adult (8th ed., pp. 523–545). 
Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Skora, L. I., Livermore, J. J. A., & Roelofs, K. (2022). The 
functional role of cardiac activity in perception and 
action. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 137, Article 
104655. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104655
Smith, L., & Gasser, M. (2005). The development of embodied 
cognition: Six lessons from babies. Artificial Life , 11(1–2), 
13–29. https://doi.org/10.1162/1064546053278973
Smith, R., Friston, K. J., & Whyte, C. J. (2022). A step-by-step 
tutorial on active inference and its application to empirical  
74 Corcoran et al.
data. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 107, Article 
102632. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2021.102632
Smith, R., Kuplicki, R., Feinstein, J., Forthman, K. L., Stewart, 
J. L., & Paulus, M. P., Tulsa 1000 Investigators, & Khalsa, 
S. S. (2020). A Bayesian computational model reveals a 
failure to adapt interoceptive precision estimates across 
depression, anxiety, eating, and substance use disorders. 
PLOS Computational Biology, 16(12), Article e1008484.
Smith, R., Mayeli, A., Taylor, S., Al Zoubi, O., Naegele, J., 
& Khalsa, S. S. (2021). Gut inference: A computational 
modelling approach. Biological Psychology, 164, Article 
108152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2021.108152
Smith, R., Thayer, J. F., Khalsa, S. S., & Lane, R. D. (2017). 
The hierarchical basis of neurovisceral integration. 
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 75, 274–296.
Srivastava, D. (2006). Making or breaking the heart: From 
lineage determination to morphogenesis. Cell, 126(6), 
1037–1048. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.003
Stephan, K. E., Manjaly, Z. M., Mathys, C. D., Weber, L. A. 
E., Paliwal, S., Gard, T., Tittgemeyer, M., Fleming, S. 
M., Haker, H., Seth, A. K., & Petzschner, F. H. (2016). 
Allostatic self-efficacy: A metacognitive theory of dysho-
meostasis-induced fatigue and depression. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience, 10, Article 550.
Stewart, J. C., France, C. R., & Suhr, J. A. (2006). The effect of 
cardiac cycle phase on reaction time among individuals at 
varying risk for hypertension. Journal of Psychophysiology, 
20(1), 1–8.
Stiles, J., & Jernigan, T. L. (2010). The basics of brain develop-
ment. Neuropsychology Review, 20(4), 327–348.
Struijk, P. C., Mathews, V. J., Loupas, T., Stewart, P. A., Clark, 
E. B., Steegers, E. A. P., & Wladimiroff, J. W. (2008). Blood 
pressure estimation in the human fetal descending aorta. 
Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology, 32(5), 673–681.
Suzuki, K., Garfinkel, S. N., Critchley, H. D., & Seth, A. K. 
(2013). Multisensory integration across exteroceptive and 
interoceptive domains modulates self-experience in the 
rubber-hand illusion. Neuropsychologia, 51(13), 2909–2917.
Tan, C. M. J., & Lewandowski, A. J. (2020). The transitional 
heart: From early embryonic and fetal development to 
neonatal life. Fetal Diagnosis and Therapy, 47(5), 373–
386. https://doi.org/10.1159/000501906
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems approach 
to the development of cognition and action. MIT Press.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in life: Biology, phenomenology 
and the sciences of mind. Harvard University Press.
Thompson, E., & Cosmelli, D. (2011). Brain in a vat or body 
in a world? Brainbound versus enactive views of experi-
ence. Philosophical Topics, 39(1), 163–180.
Thompson, E., & Varela, F. J. (2001). Radical embodiment: 
Neural dynamics and consciousness. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 5(10), 418–425.
Tort, A. B. L., Brankačk, J., & Draguhn, A. (2018). Respiration-
entrained brain rhythms are global but often overlooked. 
Trends in Neurosciences, 41(4), 186–197.
Tsakiris, M. (2010). My body in the brain: A neurocogni -
tive model of body-ownership. Neuropsychologia, 48(3), 
703–712.
Vallet, G. T., Brunel, L., Riou, B., & Vermeulen, N. (2016). 
Editorial: Dynamics of sensorimotor interactions in 
embodied cognition. Frontiers in Psychology, 6. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01929
Van de Cruys, S. (2017). Affective value in the predictive 
mind. In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy and 
predictive processing (pp. 1–21). MIND Group.
van Es, T. (2020). Living models or life modelled? On the use 
of models in the free energy principle. Adaptive Behavior, 
29(3), 315–329.
van Gelder, T. (1995). What might cognition be, if not com-
putation? Journal of Philosophy, 92(7), 345–381.
Van Orden, G., Hollis, G., & Wallot, S. (2012). The blue-collar 
brain. Frontiers in Physiology, 3, Article 207.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embod-
ied mind: Cognitive science and human experience. MIT 
Press.
Végh, A., Duim, S., Smits, A., Poelmann, R., ten Harkel, A., 
DeRuiter, M., Goumans, M., & Jongbloed, M. (2016). 
Part and parcel of the cardiac autonomic nerve system: 
Unravelling its cellular building blocks during develop-
ment. Journal of Cardiovascular Development and Disease, 
3(3), Article 28. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcdd3030028
Visser, G. H., Dawes, G. S., & Redman, C. W. (1981). 
Numerical analysis of the normal human antenatal fetal 
heart rate. British Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, 
88(8), 792–802.
Walker, B. B., & Sandman, C. A. (1982). Visual evoked poten-
tials change as heart rate and carotid pressure change. 
Psychophysiology, 19(5), 520–527.
Wang, X.-J. (2010). Neurophysiological and computational 
principles of cortical rhythms in cognition. Physiological 
Reviews, 90(3), 1195–1268.
Waselius, T., Wikgren, J., Penttonen, M., & Nokia, M. S. 
(2019). Breathe out and learn: Expiration-contingent 
stimulus presentation facilitates associative learning in 
trace eyeblink conditioning. Psychophysiology, 56(9), 
Article e13387.
Watson, J. B. (1919). Psychology from the standpoint of a 
behaviorist. J. B. Lippincott Co.
Wheeler, T., & Murrills, A. (1978). Patterns of fetal heart rate 
during normal pregnancy. British Journal of Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology, 85(1), 18–27.
Wiese, W., & Metzinger, T. (2017). Vanilla PP for philoso-
phers: A primer on predictive processing. In T. Metzinger 
& W. Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy and predictive processing  
(pp. 1–18). MIND Group.
Wiesel, T. N., & Hubel, D. H. (1963a). Effects of visual depri-
vation on morphology and physiology of cells in the cat’s 
lateral geniculate body. Journal of Neurophysiology, 26, 
978–993.
Wiesel, T. N., & Hubel, D. H. (1963b). Single-cell responses 
in striate cortex of kittens deprived of vision in one eye. 
Journal of Neurophysiology, 26, 1003–1017.
Williams, D. (2018a). Pragmatism and the predictive mind. 
Phenomenology & the Cognitive Sciences, 17, 835–859.
Williams, D. (2018b). Predictive processing and the represen-
tation wars. Minds & Machines, 28(1), 141–172.
Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1) 75
Wilson, A. D., & Golonka, S. (2013). Embodied cognition 
is not what you think it is. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 
Article 58.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(4), 625–636.
Wilson, R. A. (1994). Wide computationalism. Mind, 103(411), 
351–372.
Wozniak, M. (2019). How to grow a self: Development of the 
self in a Bayesian brain. Preprint.
Wright, J. J. (2011). Attractor dynamics and thermodynamic 
analogies in the cerebral cortex: Synchronous oscillation, 
the background EEG, and the regulation of attention. 
Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, 73(2), 436–457. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11538-010-9562-z
Wright, J. J., & Bourke, P. D. (2021). The growth of cogni-
tion: Free energy minimization and the embryogenesis of 
cortical computation. Physics of Life Reviews, 36, 83–99. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2020.05.004
Yang, X., Jennings, J. R., & Friedman, B. H. (2017). 
Exteroceptive stimuli override interoceptive state in reac-
tion time control. Psychophysiology, 54(12), 1940–1950.
Yon, D., de Lange, F. P., & Press, C. (2019). The predictive 
brain as a stubborn scientist. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
23(1), 6–8.
Yuste, R. (1997). Introduction: Spontaneous activity in the 
developing central nervous system. Seminars in Cell & 
Developmental Biology, 8(1), 1–4.
Yutzey, K. E., & Kirby, M. L. (2002). Wherefore heart 
thou? Embryonic origins of cardiogenic mesoderm. 
Developmental Dynamics, 223(3), 307–320.
Zelano, C., Jiang, H., Zhou, G., Arora, N., Schuele, S., Rosenow, 
J., & Gottfried, J. A. (2016). Nasal respiration entrains 
human limbic oscillations and modulates cognitive func-
tion. Journal of Neuroscience, 36(49), 12448–12467.
Zeller, D., Friston, K. J., & Classen, J. (2016). Dynamic 
causal modeling of touch-evoked potentials in the rub-
ber hand illusion. NeuroImage, 138, 266–273. https://doi  
.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.05.065
Zeller, D., Litvak, V., Friston, K. J., & Classen, J. (2015). Sensory 
processing and the rubber hand illusion – An evoked 
potentials study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 27(3), 
573–582. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00705