Art and Value
1. What is the value of contemporary art?
What is the point of asking this question?
– To justify the existence of art institutions.
– To critique the character of the institutions we have.
It’s important to understand that any account of the value of contemporary art that’s indexed to the  
interests  of  these  institutions  can’t  play  this critical  role,  and  so  can’t  be  expected  to  play a 
justificatory role either.
Any account of what contemporary art  is that indexes it to institutional validation precludes a  
satisfactory account of its value. This means that, in order to ask about the value of contemporary  
art, we have no choice but to ask about its essence.
The problem here is not simply that contemporary art is difficult to define, but that this difficulty  
concerns its fraught relationship with its essence. Contemporary art is haunted by the question of  
what it is, sometimes obsessed by it and sometimes outright hostile to it, but never truly free from it. 
‘Contemporary art’ is less a name for a genre of  works than for the corresponding practices of  
creating and appreciating such works . It is the terminus of a historical process of self-definition,  
through which these practices liberated themselves from the confines of  craft – as propaganda,  
decoration, or entertainment – and differentiated themselves from the broader range of arts – such 
as literature, music, and theatre. It is what is left after the era of modern art, after the collapse of the 
barriers between mediums, and after the exhaustion of purely conceptual art.
However,  these  determinations –  post-modern,  post-medium, and  post-conceptual – are  almost  
entirely negative. They distinguish, but they don’t define. They nevertheless point to the impasse  
reached by the process of self-definition: in the process of freeing artists from the constraints  
imposed by existing mediums, conceptual art transmuted the modernist tendency to explore these  
constraints within the mediums themselves, into the contemporary tendency to explore the nature of 
art through art itself. 
The  problem with this is its own essential premise:  art is not a medium . It’s not possible to  
experimentally explore the constitutive constraints of those practices named ‘contemporary art’ in  
the same way one can within a given medium, because there aren’t any constraints that can’t be  
transgressed in the name of ‘art’. The constant threat of performative transgression thus reduces the 
historical process of self-definition to the perpetual affirmation of autonomy. This is the impasse of  
contemporary art.
It’s not entirely surprising that some mistake this impasse for a positive definition. For such people,  
contemporary art is defined by its freedom to experiment and to insist on anything else is to curtail 
this freedom. To quote Joseph Kosuth: “Art’s only claim is for art. Art is the definition of art.” 
However, if contemporary art is nothing but the enactment of its own autonomy, then it can’t but be  
indexed to its institutions and their history, in such a way that these can’t be criticised or justified.  
The problem is that there seems to be no competing definition that does not simply provide a further 
opportunity  for  transgression.  The  qualifier  ‘contemporary’ does  not  give  us  purchase  on  any 
concrete temporality that could define art works or practices, it simply announces the perpetual  
present of the impasse.
If we are to have any hope of answering our original question, we must abandon the qualifier, and  
ask about art as such: what is it and what is its value? My aim in the rest of this talk is to show how  
intimately entwined these questions of essence and value are.
2. What is art?
What does an account of art have to do?
If nothing else, it has to articulate the continuity and discontinuity between art and:
– Nature  : sublime vistas, awesome skies, and the many wonders of plants, animals, and 
human life.
– Craft  : elegant decoration, forceful rhetoric, and the many pleasures of fashion, gastronomy, 
and similar practices.
History
The earliest accounts of art in the Western tradition identify it as the peculiar craft of mimesis, or the 
imitation of nature. This makes what distinguishes art works from other artifacts precisely what  
they share with the natural things they represent. This account faced two problems:
– It does not actually explain what is shared by art and nature, or why it is valuable.
– It becomes increasingly irrelevant as the non-representational elements of art come to be  
appreciated on their own terms.
Its most obvious successor is the idea of art as the craft of expression. On this account art reflects  
the  internal life  of the artist rather than the  external state  of the world, understood in terms of  
feelings, character, and sometimes simply will. This creates a strict discontinuity between art and  
nature, but in doing so it gives art its own distinctive value: the cultivation of self-understanding. 
This essentially  humanist account of art and its value is largely responsible for the continuity  
between ‘fine art’ (e.g., painting and sculpture) and the broader range of ‘arts’ (including literature,  
music, theatre and cinema). However, it faces its own problems:
– It ignores previous examples of obviously mimetic art.
– It becomes increasingly irrelevant as non-expressive forms of art are deliberately cultivated.
Aesthetics and Semantics
Following the dominance of mimesis and expression, our understanding of the essence of art has  
been split between two competing pictures:  I’ll call these the  aesthetic model  and the  semantic 
model. The central difference between these two models concerns the nature of appreciation: in the  
aesthetic model, the work is supposed to stimulate a sensory or emotional response, whereas in the  
semantic model, the work is supposed to communicate a message of some kind. The consequence of 
this is a difference on the side of creation: in the aesthetic model, the artist aims to  design an  
effective form, whereas in the semantic model, the artist aims to articulate a significant content.
This distinction hides a great deal of variation, with many otherwise opposed theories falling on the  
same side of the divide. The aesthetic model includes the perennial view of aesthetic taste as an  
immediate source of sensory pleasure, alongside the formalist concern with the technicalities of  
aesthetic composition, and the myriad champions of intensities of feeling beyond mere pleasure,  
from sublime awe to visceral disgust. The semantic model includes the traditional view of artistic  
value as an immediate source of religious, moral, or even political understanding, alongside anti-
formalist revivals of subjective expression, and the originators, defenders, and inheritors of the  
tradition of conceptual art.
The crucial problem with the aesthetic model is that it ultimately fails to distinguish art from craft,  
differentiating  it  from  decoration,  entertainment,  and  propaganda  only  by  means  of  the  types 
sensation and emotion it aims to induce, but for which it has no principled criterion. As articulated  
by figures such as Joseph Kosuth and Arthur Danto, it fails precisely insofar as it’s unable to  
incorporate those cases of nakedly conceptual art that effectively enacted art’s secession from craft,  
most famously Duchamp’s Fountain. Whatever minimal aesthetic character these possess is entirely 
insufficient to distinguish them as works of art, and their acceptance as art thus demands that we  
recognise a dimension of art orthogonal to sensation and feeling, namely, meaning.
The corresponding problem with the semantic model is that it ultimately fails to distinguish art from  
other forms of communication, not just from poetry and literature, but equally from journalism and  
philosophy. Art refuses any constraints on the types of message it can convey, and this makes it  
impossible to distinguish art from other forms of communication on the basis of its content alone.  
As explained by figures such as Susan Sontag and Gilles Deleuze, what comes to define art in the  
absence of aesthetic forms is not so much the meaning communicated by the work but the practices  
of interpretation through which it is retrieved, practices which, for all their theoretical armaments,  
are essentially distinguished by the particular historical community to which they belong.
It’s the critical deadlock between these models that produces the  institutional approaches  with  
which  we  began.  It  dissolves  the  problems  of  the  previous  models  by  asserting  a  radical  
discontinuity between art and everything else. The idea that art is autonomous becomes the idea that 
art is sui generis.
Nominalism
Let’s  consider  one  of  the  most  influential  institutional  theories  of  art:  Thierry  de  Duve’s  
nominalism. Du Duve introduces this theory by taking the perspective of an alien anthropologist  
trying to interpret the meaning of the word ‘art’.
He upholds Duchamp’s Fountain as representative of the impossibility of any such interpretation,  
insofar as it constitutively refuses any classificatory grouping with other examples from the history  
of art. On this basis he proposes a nominalist theory, in which the word ‘art’ has no meaning over  
and above the gesture through which we choose to name things as art. 
What this means is that the meaning of the word is determined by the role it plays in an ongoing  
cultural conversation in which we dispute its applicability, articulating the possibilities of artistic  
practice by producing, analysing, and integrating novel examples. It is this conversation that is  
conserved and curated by the artworld and its institutions.
I propose to invert du Duve’s perspective and use it against itself. I’m going to take a specific  
example: consider the signs of a possible alien megastructure surrounding KIC 8462852, also  
known as Tabby’s star. We might propose several reasons why an alien civilisation would build such 
a thing, including for energy, for habitation, to signal their existence to other such civilisations, or  
all of the above.
But what if it is a work of art, either in addition to these other reasons, or entirely on its own terms? 
It  seems  that  we  can  make  sense  of  such  a  suggestion  without  knowing  anything  about  this 
civilisation, its sensory and intellectual capacities, its history, or its institutions. The important  
question is: why does this make sense? I think that this has something to do with the nature of value  
itself.
In suggesting that this epic structure is a work of art, we imply that it was in some sense a work  
performed for its own sake. There is something about the actual performance of the act that exceeds  
the content of its idea. In this we see a fundamental connection between art and value that cannot be  
effaced. 
On the one hand, there are always more possibilities than we can realize, and the choice to realize  
some rather than others, even conceived as an experimental process of chance and refinement,  
implicitly commits itself to the value of those that are chosen. 
On the other, the form of value this performance commits itself to can’t be reduced to use value, 
exchange value, nor any notion of economic value. This excess is precisely what is indicated by the  
phrase ‘for its own sake’.
Du Duve’s mistake is opposing  nomination to  classification, when the use of the word ‘art’ is at  
heart a matter of evaluation. What is required is a description of the specific kind of value that it is  
concerned with.
3. What is value?
In trying to identify the form of value specific to art we need to distinguish it from other forms of  
value in the vicinity:
– From economic values such as utility and price.
– From epistemic values such as truth and ethical values such as goodness.
– From subjective values such as personal preference.
Nevertheless, we need to understand what all of these have in common. We need to describe the  
genus of value as such if we are to describe the species of value that distinguishes art. The key idea  
is this: value is what provides reasons for action.
If you are stuck in a burning gallery and can only save one work, all else being equal , you should  
save the most valuable. 
The question is whether we can make sense of reasons why a work could be most valuable that  
would have such consequences for action, independently of other concerns. These reasons must be:
– Formally  : non-instrumental and intersubjective.
– Substantively  : motivations for both the creation and appreciation of art works.
The traditional name for this sort of value, in contrast to truth and goodness, is beauty.
4. What is beauty?
History
There are two sides to the traditional concept of beauty: beauty as value and beauty as quality. The 
former can still be seen in expressions like ‘what a beautiful goal’ or ‘that is a beautiful instrument’,  
and the latter in the use of ‘attractive’, ‘pretty’, and ‘pleasant’ as synonyms for ‘beautiful’.
These two senses have been intertwined at least since the origin of aesthetics as a discipline, when  
the concept of taste combined traditional Greek concerns regarding the nature of excellence with 
early modern concerns regarding the character of experience.
However, when artists began to reject the aesthetics of the beautiful in the early 20 th century,  
rediscovering the aesthetics of the sublime, and exploring a wider range of experiential qualities  
such as the uncanny, the shocking, and even the disgusting, the language of beauty as a distinct  
form of value was rejected along with it.
This is in part responsible for the additional weight that the term ‘art’ has acquired, as distinct from  
the ‘arts’ and the ‘crafts’ they had already split from, insofar as it is increasingly needed not just to  
name a range of specific practices and objects but to evaluate their worth, independently of whether 
they exemplify classical traits such as symmetry, harmony, or pleasantness. 
This is in turn responsible  for reframing  the idea that  art  is ‘for its own sake’, replacing the  
disinterestedness of beauty qua value with the autonomy of art qua practice. This obsession with  
practical autonomy then fuels the idea that art is sui generis.
Essence
It’s  worth  addressing  another  prominent  objection  to  the  notion  of  beauty,  namely,  the  anti-
essentialist complaint that it is inherently parochial, for instance, upholding the attractiveness of  
naked European women above all else. It’s useful to pursue the parallel between goodness and  
beauty in responding to this objection. 
It’s obvious that different cultures have different ideas about which actions are good, but this  
presupposes that there is something about which they disagree, namely, goodness. Similarly, we  
might have different ideas about which things are beautiful, but there are still things that can be said  
about what we’re disagreeing about, namely, beauty.
Definition
I think that it is possible to provide a definition of beauty as a genus of value within which we can  
distinguish several distinct, but compatible species. This will enable us to distinguish art from craft  
and nature while acknowledging its continuity with both, by describing the particular species of  
beauty that art exemplifies in contrast with them.
This definition has a formal and a substantive component.
– Formally  : beauty can be understood as  unconditional value . This means that it provides  
reasons for action that are in some sense independent of other motivations such as personal  
desires or common purposes. This defines beauty as what is valued for its own sake.
– Substantively  : beauty can be understood as the enhancement of freedom. This means that  
these reasons derive from the expansion of our possibilities for action and satisfaction,  
enabling new desires and purposes, rather than satisfying existing ones.
To see how this works, its useful to break beauty down into its principal species. 
There is a philosophical disagreement about whether beauty is essentially interested or disinterested 
running back at least as far as Plato, but more famously represented by Hume and Kant’s opposing  
theories of aesthetic judgment. I think that the two sides in this debate are in fact talking about  
distinct kinds of beauty: the beauty of craft and the beauty of art, or  relatively and  absolutely 
unconditional value.
Craft
Relatively unconditional value encapsulates the range of concerns which I earlier called excellence. 
It is value that exceeds some given range of desires or purposes, but which is nevertheless relative  
to them. It occurs when something is better than it needs to be according to some existing practices.  
This can be understood as the enhancement of concrete forms of freedom.  What I mean by this is  
that the beauty of craft consists in its ability to generate new practical possibilities that transcend its 
initial aims.
This includes everything from the simple provision of unexpected sensuous satisfaction (e.g., a  
meal  that  is  creatively  seasoned),  through  the  extension  of  existing  practices  (e.g.,  a  musical 
instrument with a greater range or precision of play), to the constitution of entirely original modes  
of living (e.g., the design of a new medium for social interaction). This is demonstrated nowhere  
better than in the contemporary craft of computer programming. Talk to any programmer for long  
enough about their code and they’ll inevitably bring up questions of beauty, freely contrasting  
‘elegant solutions’ and ‘ugly hacks’, and deploying a homegrown aesthetic language of surprising  
subtlety.  However,  what  is  most  apposite  about  this  aesthetics  is  the  central  role  played  by 
extensibility, or the ability of code to be expanded upon or transposed into new contexts for novel  
purposes. In essence, its beauty lies in the as yet unexplored opportunities it enables.
Art
What is unique about the beauty of art is precisely that it is not relative to an existing set of  
practices and their associated desires and purposes. The question is how to understand this absolute  
unconditionality in terms of the enhancement of freedom. To make sense of this we need to return  
to the deadlock between aesthetics and semantics.
The truth in the aesthetic model lies in its fidelity to stimulation, and the truth in the semantic model 
lies in its fidelity to cognition. The error of the aesthetic model is its focus on the non-cognitive 
dimension of stimulation, and the error of the semantic model is its focus on the  communicative 
dimension of cognition. The simple truth about the purpose of art that has been revealed by the  
history of art’s struggle to define itself is the minimal condition of contemporary art: that it make us  
think.
If craft concerns itself with excellence, then art concerns itself with inspiration. It does not aim to  
satisfy existing desires and communicate existing ideas, but to stimulate the production of new  
desires and ideas. It aims to expand our horizons of possibility in a way that cannot be anticipated in 
advance, and thus cannot be restricted to a given domain of theory or practice. Art is less about the  
freedom to experiment than it is about experimentation with freedom.
If craft aims at the  local enhancement of freedom, then art aims at the  global enhancement of  
freedom. However,  because  the  structure of our collective horizon of possibility  is essentially  
social, the task of expanding it in a global manner demands its own social infrastructure. This is  
why art has emerged as a distinctive practice tied to absolutely unconditional value. The purpose of  
the  institutional  framework  of  contemporary  art  is  to  constitute  and  maintain  the  social 
imagination. It is on this basis that these institutions must be critically assessed.
Infrastructure
Finally, it is worth showing that this notion of infrastructure can account for the value of cultivating 
self-understanding emphasised by expressionism and the value of articulating the possibilities  of 
artistic practice emphasised by the institutional approach. 
On the one hand, if we are to engage with the global horizon of freedom we must understand  
ourselves and each  other  as free.  Expression  maintains  the  mutual  recognition that the  social  
imagination requires. 
On the other hand, if we are to preserve and build upon our understanding of what it possible, then  
we must record, analyse, and appreciate those exemplary works that trace the contours of the  
possibility space. Articulation maintains the cultural and historical consciousness that the social  
imagination requires.
To close then, the critical question our institutions face is whether this infrastructural dimension of  
contemporary art has begun to overshadow the true source of its value, the undefined work of  
freedom.