Citation: Dodig-Crnkovic, G.
Cognition as Morphological/
Morphogenetic Embodied
Computation In Vivo. Entropy 2022,
24, 1576. https://doi.org/10.3390/
e24111576
Academic Editor: Kevin H. Knuth
Received: 9 October 2022
Accepted: 26 October 2022
Published: 31 October 2022
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
entropy
Perspective
Cognition as Morphological/Morphogenetic Embodied
Computation In Vivo
Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic 1,2
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology,
41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; gordana.dodig-crnkovic@chalmers.se
2 Division of Computer Science and Software Engineering, School of Innovation, Design and Engineering,
Mälardalen University, 722 20 Västerås, Sweden
Abstract: Cognition, historically considered uniquely human capacity, has been recently found to be
the ability of all living organisms, from single cells and up. This study approaches cognition from
an info-computational stance, in which structures in nature are seen as information, and processes
(information dynamics) are seen as computation, from the perspective of a cognizing agent. Cognition
is understood as a network of concurrent morphological/morphogenetic computations unfolding
as a result of self-assembly, self-organization, and autopoiesis of physical, chemical, and biological
agents. The present-day human-centric view of cognition still prevailing in major encyclopedias has
a variety of open problems. This article considers recent research about morphological computation,
morphogenesis, agency, basal cognition, extended evolutionary synthesis, free energy principle,
cognition as Bayesian learning, active inference, and related topics, offering new theoretical and
practical perspectives on problems inherent to the old computationalist cognitive models which were
based on abstract symbol processing, and unaware of actual physical constraints and affordances of
the embodiment of cognizing agents. A better understanding of cognition is centrally important for
future artiﬁcial intelligence, robotics, medicine, and related ﬁelds.
Keywords: embodied cognition; evolution; agency; autonomy; intelligence; morphological computing;
morphogenesis; natural computing; computation; information
1. Introduction
Currently, cognitive science is a ﬁeld in transition, as a result of accumulated knowl-
edge from a variety of constituent and closely related research ﬁelds. From the theory of
science point of view, this process of paradigm shift can be understood in terms of shifting
relationships between networks of theories, rather than the battle in which one theory will
win. Contemporary understanding of science involves clusters of theories used as a toolbox
for approaching the given research ﬁeld [ 1]. Thus, we do not have one single theory of
cognition, as we do not have one single theory of life. Even in sciences studying far simpler
objects, we have clusters (networks) of theories—such as in physics, information theory
(with not only Shannon’s theory of communication but a variety of semantic information
theories), or theories of computation (apart from the Turing machine model, which is
applicable to symbolic, sequential information processing, there are distributed concurrent
and resource-sensitive computational models suitable for modeling complex systems).
Yet, there is an implicit idea about the necessity of the existence of one theory of
cognition, even though by now we know that cognition is a complex process that in
living beings unfolds on several levels of an organization, from cells up. A problem
in many philosophical debates, including those in the philosophy of cognitive science,
the philosophy of cognition, the philosophy of mind, the philosophy of information, the
philosophy and theory of computation, etc., is that different theories start from different
assumptions and look at different aspects of cognition. The only way to reconcile competing
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576. https://doi.org/10.3390/e24111576 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576 2 of 15
approaches is by looking at controversies from a higher level of abstraction, explicating
their underlying assumptions. That is how we proceed in this article and propose info-
computation as a possible unifying approach, without the intention to claim that it is the
only correct, right, or only appropriate perspective. We link together seemingly unrelated
or even apparently contradicting research results and show how they make sense in a
broader context. The current state of the art is like a kaleidoscope conﬁguration—rotate
the whole (change the perspective, framing, or focus) and you may ﬁnd interesting new
connections, patterns, meanings, and applications.
This article consists of the following sections:
1. The established view of cognition and its open problems;
2. New developments in cognitive science and contributing ﬁelds;
3. Foundations of cognition: self-organization and autopoiesis;
4. Cognition as a driver of evolution and evolution as a driver of cognition in living
organisms and their relation to the extended evolutionary synthesis;
5. Morphological/morphogenetic computation:
5.1. Morphogenesis as morphological computation generating an organism from
active matter (embryogenesis, development, evolution);
5.2. Cells as information-processing agents. Morphogenesis as Bayesian inference.
Free energy principle, agency;
6. Conclusions.
2. The Established View of Cognition and its Open Problems
In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Thagard deﬁnes cognitive science in the
following way:
”In its weakest form, cognitive science is just the sum of the ﬁelds mentioned: psy-
chology, artiﬁcial intelligence, linguistics, neuroscience, anthropology, and philosophy.
Interdisciplinary work becomes much more interesting when there is theoretical and experi-
mental convergence on conclusions about the nature of the mind. For example, psychology
and artiﬁcial intelligence can be combined through computational models of how people
behave in experiments. The best way to grasp the complexity of human thinking is to use
multiple methods, especially psychological and neurological experiments, and computa-
tional models. Theoretically, the most fertile approach has been to understand the mind in
terms of representation and computation” [2].
The same author proposes a wider deﬁnition in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, extend-
ing “thinking” to include emotional experience: “The term cognition, as used by cognitive
scientists, refers to many kinds of thinking, including those involved in perception, prob-
lem solving, learning, decision making, language use, and emotional experience” [3]. This
extension bridges some of the distance between cognition as thinking and its underlying
processes. Yet, this view of cognition is still human-centric, descriptive, and lacking genera-
tive mechanisms that can dynamically overarch the chasm between matter and mind from
abiogenesis through the development and evolution of more and more complex cognitive
systems. Thagard’s deﬁnitions of cognitive science do not mention biology, chemistry,
(quantum, nano, etc.) physics or chaos theory, self-assembly/self-organization, artiﬁcial
life or computing/computability and information processing, extended mind, distributed
cognition studied with help of network science, sociology, or ecology and most importantly,
evolution and development. All those research ﬁelds actively contribute to the current
understanding of cognition. Thagard’s deﬁnition of cognition is abouthigh-level processes
remote from the physical–chemical–biological substrate [ 4]. It is modeled by classical
sequential computation, that is symbol manipulation (traditional computationalism).
Historically, behaviorism offered an alternative view of cognition with a focus on the
observable behavior of a subject. According to [5], theoretical behaviorism comes close to the
view of embodied cognition, in that it stresses the importance of behavior in contrast to
the emphasis on high-level cognition typical of old cognitivism. This divide is mirrored
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576 3 of 15
in the present-day schism between cognitivism/computationalism and EEEE (embodied,
embedded, enactive, extended) cognition.
There have been numerous attempts to bridge this gap made by Clark, Scheutz,
Pfeifer, and others [6–12], offering connections between sub-symbolic (signal processing)
basic-level and symbolic processing, higher-level notions of cognition.
As a result of a current narrow deﬁnition of cognition there is a long list of un-
solved/unsolvable problems of cognitive science, identiﬁed by [3]:
1. The emotion challenge: cognitive science neglects the important role of emotions in
human thinking;
2. The consciousness challenge: cognitive science ignores the importance of consciousness
in human thinking;
3. The world challenge: cognitive science disregards the signiﬁcant role of physical envi-
ronments in human thinking, which is embedded in and extended into the world;
4. The body challenge : cognitive science neglects the contribution of embodiment to
human thought and action;
5. The dynamical systems challenge: the mind is a dynamic system, not a computational system;
6. The social challenge: human thought is inherently social in ways that cognitive science ignores;
7. The mathematics challenge: mathematical results show that human thinking cannot be
computational in the standard sense.
3. New Developments in Cognitive Science and its Contributing Fields
Among the new developments in cognitive science, the most prominent is the broad-
ening of the idea of cognition to include not only human cognition but also cognition in
other living organisms.
Early research by Lyon [13], van Duijn et al. [ 14], Ben Jacob et al. [ 15] Baluška and
Levin [16], and others, is moving from an anthropocentric to a biocentric view of cognition
in the search for the answer to the question “what is cognition?” One noteworthy insight is
that living cells possess remarkable information-processing competencies [13–15,17] and
that the head (brain) is not necessary for cognition [16]. In the biogenic approach, cognition
is the ability of an organism to register information, interact with the environment to
provide what is needed for survival, eliminate what is not needed, memorize signiﬁcant
experiences from the past, and act purposefully so as to increase the chances of survival of
the organism, all of which can be found in a single cell.
The fundamental mechanisms of biological cognition for an organism on the border
between unicellular and multicellular have been studied by Vallverdú et al. [18] for the
case of slime mold, in a bottom-up approach, starting from the biological and biophysical
features of the slime mold and its regulatory systems. The study builds on the Lyon’s
biogenic cognition, centered on two main frameworks for understanding biology: self-
organizing complex systems and autopoiesis; Muller, di Primio-Lengeler’s account of
contributions of minimal cognition to the ﬂexibility of biological agents (in comparison to
the rigidity of automation technology); Bateson’s “patterns that connect” systemic view,
Maturana’s autopoiesis; and Morgan’s Canon (“In no case is an animal activity to be
interpreted in terms of higher psychological processes if it can be fairly interpreted in terms
of processes which stand lower in the scale of psychological evolution and development.”).
The authors refer to Kull’s appeal for a reformulation of the concept of cognitive process
and intelligence that “requires a deeper understanding of the behavior of living systems,
where cognition does not depend on the existence of a nervous system that channels it, but
on functional circuits which allow the minimal perception of the surrounding environment
and its biosemiotics processing in vivo [19].” An analogous claim has been made by [20],
from the perspective of modeling life/cognition in terms of cognitive info-computation.
In the context of unicellular organisms with basal cognition, interesting recent attempts
have been made to understand their “selfhood” as the basis of their agency. Levin studied
the computational boundary of a “self” and found that developmental bioelectricity is the
driver of multicellularity and scale-free cognition [21].
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576 4 of 15
Based on accumulated evidence about the cognitive behaviors of unicellular organ-
isms as well as multicellular organisms such as slime molds, far simpler than humans and
other organisms with nervous systems, Fields and Levin proposed scale-free biology by
integrating evolutionary and developmental thinking [22]. In a similar vein, Lyon and coau-
thors characterized this transition from an anthropocentric to a biocentric understanding
of cognition, as “reframing cognition” and “getting down to biological basics” [23]. One
of the consequences of recognizing basal cognition is the increased interest in the diverse
cognitive capacities of single cells and their inﬂuence on the macroscopic cognition of an
organism, such as, e.g., Verny’s study of the mechanisms of cellular memory [24].
A signiﬁcant contribution to the establishment of the ﬁeld of basal cognition was
made in a Special Issue of Philosophical Transactions B, titled “Basal cognition: multicellu-
larity, neurons and the cognitive lens”, presenting this major novel direction of research
on cognition [25]. An important link between traditional neural and newly recognized
basal cognition is made through morphological coordination of information processing
which was found to be a common inherited function connecting neural and non-neural
signaling [26].
The controversy about computational (high-level, symbol-based) vs. embodied (low-
level, signal-based) cognition, has already been addressed in the book Computationalism
new directions [9] and is still highly relevant. The main message of the book was that not all
kinds of computations are symbol manipulation and that new computationalism is capable
of considering embodiment, signal processing, and interactions of the cognizing agent with
the environment.
The recent symposium “Rethinking Computational Approaches to the Mind. Funda-
mental Challenges and Future Perspectives” addressed problems with old computational-
ism and introduced new computationalist approaches [27]. Linzier and Polany confronted
the issue of supposed contradiction between computational and dynamic models and presented
an information–theoretic toolkit for studying the dynamics of complex systems. [28]. Brette
offered a critique of the approaches to computation in the brain seen as computation over neural
representations, where neural representations are supposed to correspond to neurophysio-
logical states, which are then assumed to be governed by computational processes, arguing
that neural representations are not states of the brain [ 29]. Varoquaux pointed out the
current difﬁcult position of brain sciences because of the abundance of theories, and data on the
brain and behavior, and the lack of a framework to connect and interpret them. His advice
is to “focus on models that generalize across many experimental settings and criticize
models more on their predictions than on their ingredients.”. Flack presented the view of
collective computation in nature with distributed concurrent information processing in biological
systems, shaping the foundations of computation and micro–macro relations in nature.
Finally, Mitchell suggested that the historical succession of “AI springs” and “AI winters”
is a result of our insufﬁcient understanding of the nature and complexity of intelligence . In a
nutshell, the symposium adds novel research insights and contributes to a more nuanced
and interdisciplinary science-based understanding of cognition than what was the case in
the time of symbol-based disembodied old computationalism.
4. Foundations of Cognition: Self-Organization and Autopoiesis
Recognizing the cognitive capacities of every living cell has already been established
by Maturana and Varela [30] and Stewart [ 31], who argued that cognition should be seen
as a realization of life , thus as biocentric. In Stewart’s formulation, cognition = life, so
consequently, it must be seen in the light of evolution, as “nothing in biology makes sense
except in the light of evolution” Dobzhansky [32], the topic is addressed by Miller, Torday,
and Baluška [33].
Therefore, if we want to understand cognition, we must search for its roots and answer
the question: how did life start?
Life is characterized by the process of autopoiesis, and self-(re)creation [30]. However,
simpler capacities of self-assembly and self-organization exist also in inanimate matter.
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576 5 of 15
Already Haken in 1985 [ 34] studied self-organization in physics, while Tiezzi in
his book Towards an Evolutionary Physics described the evolution on the level of physics,
explaining that the self-organization of a physical system is made possible by the presence of
a boundary of a system. Boundary serves as an interface that allows the control of exchanges
between the system and the environment. This process conditions its evolution, [35].
The next level of self-organization, chemistry, was described by Orlik in his “Introduc-
tion to self-organization in chemical and electrochemical systems” [36].
In a further step, chemical evolution is leading to the emergence of life. It was a topic
of the Special Issue of the journal Chemical Reviews exploring the chemical origins of life,
and thus cognition [37]. In search of a chemical basis for minimal cognition Hanczyc and
Ikegami studied a simple chemical system consisting of an oil droplet in an aqueous envi-
ronment and found that: “a chemical reaction within the oil droplet induces an instability,
the symmetry of the oil droplet breaks, and the droplet begins to move through the aqueous
phase.” Authors found indications of the presence of feedback cycles capable of forming
the basis for self-regulation, homeostasis, and perhaps also autopoiesis. They discuss the
result that “simple chemical systems are capable of sensory-motor coupling and possess a
homeodynamic state from which cognitive processes may emerge”, [38].
Crucial steps to life, from chemical reactions to code-using agents, have been analyzed
by Witzany who addressed the question: “How did prebiotic chemistry start life?”, [39].
Further on, following abiogenesis, newly formed pre-biotic agents started to evolve.
In the book Self-organization as a New Paradigm in Evolutionary Biology: From Theory to Applied
Cases in the Tree of Life” [40], the author draws together contributions of diverse strings of
self-organization to evolutionary biology.
In the hierarchy of complexity, the next level above individual organisms are commu-
nicating groups, which have been examined by Heylighen, who observed the emergence
of coordination, shared references, and collective intelligence in such groups [ 41]. On
the level of distributed cognition, the work of Magnani adds a new perspective of eco-
cognitive computationalism, following the development; from the mimetic minds to the
morphology-based enhancement of mimetic bodies [42].
In sum, the emergence of new increasingly complex cognitive organisms from the
simpler ones progresses through the processes of self-assembly and self-organization as a
new paradigm in evolutionary biology [40], and autopoiesis [30,43], by way of continual
interactions of constituent parts with each other and with the environment. This view has
been supported by the evidence in the recent research literature. From those empirical,
experimental, and theoretical results it follows that understanding cognition requires an
updated generalized model of evolution from physics to chemistry, biology, and cognition.
5. Cognition as a Driver of Evolution and Evolution as a Driver of Cognition in Living
Organisms. Relation to the Extended Evolutionary Synthesis
A new, more general view of cognition that recognizes not only humans as cognitive
agents but includes all living beings, casts a completely new light on the process of evolution.
Evolution has been described as a cognition-based process driven by non-random genome
editing and natural cellular engineering [44]. Torday and Miller elaborated on the view of
cognition-based evolution in the context of epigenetic evolutionary biology [45].
”Cognition-Based Evolution argues that all of the biological and evolutionary devel-
opment represents the perpetual auto-poietic defense of self-referential basal cellular states
of homeostatic preference. The means by which these states are attained and maintained is
through self-referential measurement of information and its communication” [44].
Cellular and evolutionary perspectives on organismal cognition, from unicellular
to multicellular have been studied by Baluška, Miller, and Reber [ 46] who have been
following the evolutionary origins of cells as unicellular organisms and their evolution
to multicellularity, based on two fundamental self-identities (also found in humans): the
immunological and the neuronal.
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576 6 of 15
Arguments for biological evolution as a defense of “self” are presented by [33] who
found that ”As self-referential cognition is demonstrated by all living organisms, life can
be equated with the sustenance of cellular homeostasis in the continuous defense of “self”.
The connectionist approach to the evolutionary transitions in individuality is the
subject of study of the recent EVO-EGO project [47].
Accumulated newly acquired research results, among others about the role of self-
organization, the role of interactions with the environment and cellular evolution, lead
Laland, Uller, and Feldman et al. to ask the question: “Does evolutionary theory need a
rethink?” [48]. The authors provide evidence for an afﬁrmative answer. In the years to
come, we can expect further developments in the new evolutionary synthesis, incorporating
a growing body of research results on the evolution on the micro-level.
Apart from the proposal for an update of evolutionary theory motivated by new
empirical data about the behavior of microorganisms, there was already a proposal in 2014
to view evolution in four dimensions: genetic, epigenetic, behavioral, and symbolic [49],
based on models of cognitive learning. The recent related work of Ginsburg and Jablonka
studies speciﬁcally the evolution of the “sensitive soul” [ 50], a concept borrowed from
Aristotle. In Aristotle’s view, plants have a nutritive soul, animals have a sensitive soul,
and human beings have a rational soul. A soul, as elaborated in Aristotle’sDe anima is “the
actuality of a body that has life,” where life is the capacity for self-sustenance, growth, and
reproduction. Aristotle’s formulation is close to Maturana and Varela’s notion of cognition
as autopoiesis, i.e., ”realization of the living” [30]. Of central importance for Ginsburg and
Jablonka is the interaction and the communication between an agent and its environment,
which changes both. They point out the central role of the interplay between the genetic
code and the environment, through material embodiment, as fundamental for evolution.
Evolution can be understood as a learning process, in which living agents learn through
interactions with their environment. Watson, Richard, and Szathmary [51] pose the question:
how can evolution learn? and propose the answer: “Specifically , connectionist models
of memory and learning demonstrate how simple incremental mechanisms, adjusting the
relationships between individually simple components, can produce organizations that exhibit
complex system-level behaviors and improve the adaptive capabilities of the system. We use
the term “evolutionary connectionism” to recognize that, by functionally equivalent processes,
natural selection acting on the relationships within and between evolutionary entities can
result in organizations that produce complex system-level behaviors in evolutionary systems
and modify the adaptive capabilities of natural selection over time” [52].
This process of learning can be expressed in computational form. In terms of rela-
tionships between living agents and their environment, morphological/natural/physical
computation presents a basic mechanism for the process of learning as argued in [53].
6. Morphological/Morphogenetic Computation
Novel developments in computational approaches to cognition and intelligence [54], as
well as robotic implementations [11,55], show that the body is an integral part of cognitive
processes, connecting data to the agency. Computation is not only symbol manipulation
but also physical processes in the body of the cognizing agent known as morphological
computation/natural computation/unconventional computation/physical computation,
and similar, [56].
In the framework of computing nature/info-computationalism, information is always
embodied in the physical substrate, and represents the world for an agent, while physi-
cal/embodied/morphological computation stands for the dynamics processes unfolding
in informational structures. Life and thus cognition is a necessary consequence of the
properties of physical matter that has self-organized, starting with physical and chemical
abiogenesis that has led to the emergence of living creatures. They continued evolving
driven by their own internal agency.
Morphology is deﬁned by the shape/structure and material properties of an agent
(a living organism or a machine in the case of robotics) that enables and constrains its
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576 7 of 15
possible interactions with the environment as well as its development, including its growth
and reconﬁguration. The evolution of living organisms explained info-computationally is
different from the classical view of evolution based on random mutations + selection. An
info-computational approach based on the information and (morphological) computation
models goal-directed sub-organismic (physical and chemical) and organismic (biological)
agency at a variety of levels of an organization. Mutations are governed not only by chance
but also by self-organizing properties of active matter, the morphology, and the intrinsic
agency of a living organism as a thermodynamical system far from equilibrium. This
view of evolution is compatible with the modern extended evolutionary synthesis [ 48],
with its constructive development and reciprocal causation which is a consequence of the
interaction of a biological agent with the environment.
In the article ”Information, Computation, Cognition. Agency-based Hierarchies of
Levels” [57] the author provides arguments for the new kind of understanding, in the
sense of Wolfram [58], of lawfulness in the organization of nature and especially living
systems, emergent from generative computational laws of self-organization based on the
concept of agency. In order to understand the world, the organization of the parts in
the whole and interactions between them are central, and generative processes such as
the self-organization [59] (which acts in all physical systems), along with autopoiesis [30]
(that acts in the living cell as a whole). Morphological computation is presented as the
self-organization mechanism of a cognizing agent [60].
From the computational-theoretic point of view, self-organization and autopoiesis can
be described by agent-based models, such as the actor model of computation [61] which
is suitable for modeling concurrent physical processes. The actor model of computation
builds on the exchange of information (messages) between agents (actors). It is directly
related and can be expressed in terms of signal communication between agents, which is
elaborated by Skyrms in his book Signals: Evolution, Learning, and Information, [62].
6.1. Morphogenesis as Morphological Computation Generating an Organism from Active Matter
(Embryogenesis, Development, Evolution)
The recent trend of “a reattachment of form to matter ” emphasizes an understanding
of “information” as inherently embodied. It was analyzed by Keller, who noticed that
in chemistry, cognitive science, molecular computation, and robotics one is turning to
biological processes for an establishment of a new epistemology, [63]. Lehn observed the
same trend in chemistry, claiming that the vision of supramolecular chemistry is a “general
science of informed matter”, promoting in chemistry the third component (information) in
the basic triplet of matter-energy-information, [64].
Roots and promises of chemical-based computing (i.e., pseudo biological informa-
tion processing) based on general principles of information processing by chemical-based
biomolecular systems able to solve effectively problems of high computational complexity,
have been characterized by Rambidi as including: “very large-scale parallelism of informa-
tion processing, high behavioral complexity, the complementarity of information features,
self-organization, and multilevel architecture” [65].
Taking into account that cognitive bio-centric systems can be viewed at a succession
of levels of abstraction, from molecular to organismic and social/collective, Hogeweg
observed “the importance of interactions between processes at diverse space and time
scales in biological information processing”, also presents as a recurrent theme in the work
of Michael Conrad [66].
More details on the current state of research on mechanisms of processes of morpho-
genesis, the genesis of forms, may be found in Pismen’s bookMorphogenesis Deconstructed.
An Integrated View of the Generation of Forms, where the study of connections between mor-
phogenetic processes in inorganic, biological, and social systems has been presented [67].
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576 8 of 15
6.2. Cell Seen as an Information Processing Agent—Morphogenesis as Bayesian Inference: Free
Energy Principle, Agency
Starting from the insight that ”morphogenesis could be understood in terms of cel-
lular information processing and the ability of cell groups to model shape” [ 68] offers a
proof of principle that self-assembly is an emergent property of cells that share a common
(genetic and epigenetic) model of organismal form. This allows the authors to interpret a
system as “inferring the causes of its inputs—and acting to resolve uncertainty about those
causes.” This novel perspective balances strategies with a focus on molecular pathways
and bottom-up causation, with top–down constraints found in cybernetics and neuro-
science. The driving force in this process is the minimization of surprise/prediction error.
Friston et al. [68] ﬁnd that by using a variational free energy approach to pattern formation
and control in complex biological systems, the process of morphogenesis can be interpreted as
Bayesian inference.
Kuchling et al. specify “in neuroscience, a variational free energy principle has been
used, with a formulation of self-organization in terms of active Bayesian inference. The
free energy principle has also been applied to biological self-organization in somatic cells,
for processes of development or regeneration. The Bayesian inference framework treats
cells as information processing agents, where the driving force behind morphogenesis is
the maximization of a cell’s model evidence” [69].
Fields, Friston, Glazebrook, Levin, and Marciano [70] focused on the neuromorphic
development understood as a result of the free energy principle. They argue that “any
system with morphological degrees of freedom and locally limited free energy will, under
the constraints of the free energy principle, evolve toward a neuromorphic morphology that
supports hierarchical computations in which each “level” of the hierarchy enacts a coarse-
graining of its inputs, and dually a ﬁne-graining of its outputs. Such hierarchies occur
throughout biology, from the architectures of intracellular signal transduction pathways to
the large-scale organization of perception and action cycles in the mammalian brain” [70].
Consequently , the free energy principle in pattern formation and morphogenesis pro-
vides a quantitative formalism for understanding cellular decision-making in the context of
embryogenesis, regeneration, and cancer suppression. Fields et al. [70] illustrate this ‘first prin-
ciple’ approach to morphogenesis in the case of planarian regeneration showing that simple
modifications of the inference process can affect patterning in developmental and regenerative
processes without changing the DNA. This approach to understanding the self-organized
behaviors of embodied agents as satisfying basic constraints of sustained interactions with the
environment enables new models of developmental change in evolution.
As life-like behaviors emerge in coupled dynamical systems, Friston used simple
simulations to study this process unfolding through perception and action. The conclusion
is that for an agent to exist in a changing world, it has to model that world and infer the
causes of its sensations, which is achieved by active inference [71]. Isomura explains how
Friston’s free-energy principle accounts for biological organisms’ perception, learning, and
action. The dynamics of neural networks minimize cost functions and can be modeled in
terms of the free-energy principle. This equivalence allows us to explain network dynamics
and predict subsequent learning [72].
Badcock, Friston, and Ramstead proposed a unifying theory of the embodied, situated
human brain across different spatiotemporal scales, called the Hierarchically Mechanistic
Mind (HMM) as the hierarchically mechanistic mind with a free-energy formulation of
human cognition. HMM combines the free-energy principle in neuroscience with an
evolutionary systems theory of the brain, cognition, and behavior relating to Tinbergen’s
four questions: function/adaptation, evolution/phylogeny, development/ontogeny, and
causation/mechanism [73].
Pio-Lopez, Kuchling, Tung, Pezzulo, and Levin applied active inference and morpho-
genesis, to computational psychiatry. Active inference as a leading theory in neuroscience
provides a simple and biologically plausible account of how action and perception are
coupled in leading to Bayesian optimal behavior. Morphogenesis has been described as the
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576 9 of 15
behavior of cellular collective cognition/intelligence. The authors found a link between
cell biology and neuroscience, identifying developmental defects in morphogenesis as dis-
orders of active inference, i.e., disorders of information processing. The authors concluded
that: “The use of conceptual and empirical tools from neuroscience to understand the morphogenetic
behavior of pre-neural agents offers the possibility of new approaches in regenerative medicine and
evolutionary developmental biology” [74].
Moving in the same direction “a primer on conceptual tools for analyzing information
processing in developmental and regenerative morphogenesis” gives a perspective seen
through “the cognitive lens” [75].
In the context of human cognition, closely related to the Bayesian brain framework
is the predictive coding theory which offers a potentially unifying account of cortical
function—“ postulating that the core function of the brain is to minimize prediction errors with
respect to a generative model of the world”. In his take on the issue, Clark connects predictive
brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science [ 76]. For a theoretical and
experimental review of predictive coding of the brain, see [77].
7. Conclusions
In the Introduction section of this article, we pointed out that there is a long list of
unsolved/unsolvable open problems in cognitive science, which are the result of a currently
prevailing narrow deﬁnition of cognition, identiﬁed by Thagard [3]. New research results
support a broader understanding of cognition as the capacity of all living organisms, which
can be modeled as information processing (morphological/morphogenetic computation)
enabling new solutions to the existing challenges. In what follows, we revisit the key
challenges and some additional challenges that result from the current synthesis:
1. The emotion challenge : Currently, cognitive science neglects the important role of
emotions in human thinking. This challenge is being met on various fronts. Recent
research shows how emotions, feelings, and sensations are a result of embodied
information processing and are inseparably related to other computational cognitive
processes, see [78–81]. In the Bayesian perspective, with a focus on human cognition,
and based on the free energy principle, the emotional inference is an active area of
research from two key directions. First, as interoceptive inference [82–85]. Second, the
emotional valences of various belief states are viewed through the lens of resolving
uncertainty as the mathematical image of angst and anxiety, [86,87].
2. The consciousness challenge : Currently, cognitive science ignores the importance of
consciousness in human thinking. Several information–theoretic approaches are
being developed to address consciousness. For example, the information integration
solution, see [88–91]. The information geometry approach that builds on a formal
speciﬁcation of the boundary between a living system and its external environment
(a Markov blanket) [ 92] has been introduced. Within a framework of dual-aspect
monism, intrinsic and extrinsic information geometry are providing the link between
the brain and mind [93,94].
3. The world challenge : Currently, cognitive science disregards the signiﬁcant role of
physical environments in human thinking, which is embedded in and extended
into the world. This represents the main motivation for the pragmatic turn and an
activist or situated approach to cognition. The circular causality between a bounded
cognition itself and the world is central for active inference and learning; in which
the agent is observing sensations from her world. In machine learning, the role of a
generative model has been introduced through the notion of a world model [95]. See
also [96] for an elaboration of the path to physics from computing [97] on the process
from information to behavior [98] on computation in neuroscience, and [54,60] with
arguments for mechanisms of morphological computing as reality construction for a
cognizing agent. As the development of artiﬁcial intelligent cognitive computational
systems progresses, a framework that can connect the natural with the artiﬁcial is used
for learning in both directions—from the natural system to the artiﬁcial and back, [ 99].
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576 10 of 15
For example, we can mention the impact of deep learning research on understanding
cognition. The recent work [100] discusses the necessity of embodiment in the case of
LLM (Large Language Models).
4. The body challenge: Currently, cognitive science neglects the contribution of embod-
iment to human thought and action. See previous paragraphs on the fundamental
importance of embodiment to the processes of cognition, as argued by [4,6,101–103].
This challenge has also inspired much of the work on interoception (the perception of
sensations from inside the body) noted in [104], and the close relationship between ac-
tion and perception resulting from the embodied brain with active vision and sensing,
which is also a current focus in artiﬁcial intelligence research.
5. The dynamical systems challenge: Currently, there is a supposed contradiction between
dynamics systems and (old) computationalism, between the mind conceived as a
dynamical system, and a computational system. A broader understanding of com-
putation that includes dynamical systems solves this apparent contradiction. For the
arguments from the theory of computation, see [105,106]. The free energy principle
addresses this challenge by developing a physics of sentience combining dynamical
systems theory with the boundary separating self from nonself. Coupling of the
dynamics of the particular partition of states external and internal to a system to the
corresponding information geometry of belief updating and inference is carried out
by Bruineberg et al. [107]
6. The social challenge: Human thought is inherently social in ways that cognitive science
ignores. Info-computational studies of social cognitive systems already exist that ex-
tend cognition to groups of cognizing agents, [22,41,46,108,109]. In a Bayesian setting,
social cognition is addressed through interpersonal inference and niche construction
as enactive and distributed inference. These lines of inquiry range from the nature of
dyadic interactions to the spread of ideas over communities, [110,111].
7. The mathematics challenge: Mathematical results show that human thinking cannot
be computational in the standard sense, as shown by Cooper [6–9,54,76,112,113]. In
addition, a move from inductive and deductive logic to the perspective of active
inference brings forward abductive reasoning [114], which is making the best guess
about the external states of affairs [93,115]. The key question here is the distinction
between dynamics and belief updating on continuous states as opposed to discrete
state space models used for a symbolic representation. This has emerged in the
distinction between predictive processing (under continuous state space models) such
as predictive coding [116,117], relative to the use of belief propagation and variational
message passing (under discrete state space models).
To this list of open problems with the current view of cognition made by references [3,4],
we can add the following based on the recent research results on embodied cognition and
new computationalism:
8. The computational architecture challenge: Cognition is not only the result of the activity
of the brain, not even the activity of neurons alone. It is the capacity of all somatic cells,
that are interacting with each other, and with the environment, [23,25]. This challenge
arises in many guises in different ﬁelds. For example, in radical constructivism, it is
known as structure learning [118,119]. In Bayesian formulations of active inference, it
is reduced to Bayesian model selection, which may be the mathematical image of nat-
ural selection [120]. In other words, evolution itself may be a belief-updating process
in which the likelihood of various phenotypes reﬂects their ﬁt to the environment as
scored by things such as variational free energy [121].
9. The generative mechanisms challenge: Mechanistic models of cognition provide generation
of cognition through the processes of (morphological/morphogenetic) computation, un-
folding in networks of agents from molecules to biological organisms. Cognition is first
understood when we know its generative mechanisms (constructive approach), [24,31,71].
This is an active field of research that in Bayesian learning, focuses on the structure and
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576 11 of 15
form of generative models that underwrite active inference and learning—and the nature
of message passing that is realized in terms of biophysics.
10. The information processing (Bayesian learning) challenge: How is evolution learning? A
variational free energy principle can be used, to formulate self-organization (morpho-
genesis) in terms of active Bayesian inference. In the Bayesian inference framework,
cells are information processing agents, and the driving force behind morphogenesis
is the maximization of a cell’s model evidence, [69,72,122–124].
In brief, in this paper, we compared the current view of cognition as presented in the
leading encyclopedia with the perspective of the newest results of research on cognition
in nature. Special attention was paid to basal cellular cognition and its connection to
morphogenesis and evolution. This new approach to cognition has the potential to impact,
among others, the following features:
1. Our fundamental understanding of cognition in nature;
2. An understanding of mechanisms of evolution and development;
3. The design and engineering of cognitive computational artifacts;
4. Medical applications.
In perspective, an emerging, broader cognitive science with new computationalism as
a basis, promises to contribute to important future advances in both fundamental sciences
and applications.
Funding: This research was funded by the Swedish Research Council grant MORCOM@COGS.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The author acknowledges the Swedish Research Council funding which made it
possible to perform this research. I would like to thank the reviewers for their informed, thoughtful,
and constructive comments.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or
in the decision to publish the results.
References
1. Dodig-Crnkovic, G. Laws of Science and Laws of Nature in an Evolutionary Knowledge Ecology. In Understanding the Nature of
Science; Lindholm, P ., Ed.; Nova Scientiﬁc Publishers: New York, NY, USA, 2019. ISBN 978-1-53616-016-1.
2. Thagard, P . Cognitive Science. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Edward, N.Z., Ed.; 2020. Available online: https:
//plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2020/entries/cognitive-science/ (accessed on 25 October 2022).
3. Thagard, P . Cognitive science. InEncyclopædia Britannica; Encyclopedia Britannica, Inc.: Chicago, IL, USA, 2013; Available online:
https://www.britannica.com/science/cognitive-science (accessed on 25 October 2022).
4. Dodig-Crnkovic, G. Cognition as Embodied Morphological Computation. In Philosophy and Theory of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 2017.
Studies in Applied Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics; Müller, V .C., Ed.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2017; pp. 19–23.
ISBN 978-3-030-07194-3.
5. Keijzer, F. Theoretical behaviorism meets embodied cognition: Two theoretical analyses of behavior. Philos. Psychol. 2005, 18,
123–143. [CrossRef]
6. Clark, A. Supersizing the Mind Embodiment, Action, and Cognitive Extension; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2008.
7. Clark, A. Microcognition: Philosophy, Cognitive Science, and Parallel Distributed Processing; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1989.
8. Clark, A. Surﬁng Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2016.
9. Scheutz, M. Computationalism New Directions; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2002. ISBN 9780262283106.
10. Pfeifer, R.; Iida, F.; Lungarella, M. Cognition from the bottom up: On biological inspiration, body morphology, and soft materials.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 2014, 18, 404–413. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Pfeifer, R.; Iida, F. Morphological computation: Connecting body, brain and environment. Japanese Sci. Mon. 2005, 58, 48–54.
12. Pfeifer, R.; Bongard, J. How the Body Shapes the Way We Think—A New View of Intelligence ; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2006.
13. Lyon, P . The biogenic approach to cognition. Cogn. Process. 2005, 7, 11–29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. van Duijn, M.; Keijzer, F.; Franken, D. Principles of Minimal Cognition: Casting Cognition as Sensorimotor Coordination. Adapt.
Behav. 2006, 14, 157–170. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576 12 of 15
15. Ben-Jacob, E.; Shapira, Y.; Tauber, A.I. Seeking the Foundations of Cognition in Bacteria.Physica A 2006, 359, 495–524. [CrossRef]
16. Baluška, F.; Levin, M. On having no head: Cognition throughout biological systems. Front. Psychol. 2016, 7, 902. [CrossRef]
17. Waters, C.M.; Bassler, B.L. Quorum Sensing: Cell-to-Cell Communication in Bacteria. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2005, 21, 319–346.
[CrossRef]
18. Vallverdú, J.; Castroa, O.; Mayne, R.; Talanov, M.; Levin, M.; Baluska, F.; Gunji, Y.; Dussutour, A.; Zenil, H.; Adamatzky, A.; et al.
Slime mould: The fundamental mechanisms of biological cognition. Biosystems 2018, 165, 57–70. [CrossRef]
19. Kull, K.; Deacon, T.; Emmeche, C.; Hoffmeyer, J.; Stjernfelt, F. Theses on biosemiotics: Prolegomena to a theoretical biology.Biol.
Theory 2009, 4, 167–173. [CrossRef]
20. Dodig-Crnkovic, G. Knowledge as Computation in vivo: Semantics vs. Pragmatics as Truth vs. Meaning. In In Proceedings of the
Proceedings from Computers & Philosophy, an international Conference i-C&P , Laval, France, 3–5 May 2006; Schmidt, C., Ed.;
Le Mans University: Laval, France, 2006; pp. 202–216.
21. Levin, M. The Computational Boundary of a “Self”: Developmental Bioelectricity Drives Multicellularity and Scale-Free Cognition.
Front. Psychol. 2019, 10, 2688. [CrossRef]
22. Fields, C.; Levin, M. Scale-Free Biology: Integrating Evolutionary and Developmental Thinking. BioEssays 2020, 42, e1900228.
[CrossRef]
23. Lyon, P .; Keijzer, F.; Arendt, D.; Levin, M. Reframing cognition: Getting down to biological basics.Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 2021,
376, 20190750. [CrossRef]
24. Verny, T.R.The Embodied Mind. Understanding the Mysteries of Cellular Memory, Consciousness, and Our Bodies; Pegasus Books: New
York, NY, USA, 2021; ISBN 9781643137995.
25. Levin, M.; Keijzer, F.; Lyon, P .; Arendt, D. Basal cognition: Multicellularity, neurons and the cognitive lens, Special issue, Part 2.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 2021, 376.
26. Fields, C.; Bischof, J.; Levin, M. Morphological Coordination: A Common Ancestral Function Unifying Neural and Non-Neural
Signaling. Physiology 2020, 35, 16–30. [CrossRef]
27. Lizier, J.T. Rethinking Computational Approaches to the Mind. Fundamental Challenges and Future Perspectives Symposium.
2022. Available online: https://computationalmind.github.io/#joseph-lizier-hehim (accessed on 25 October 2022).
28. Lizier, J.T.; Polani, D. JIDT: An information-theoretic toolkit for studying the dynamics of complex systems. Front. Robot. AI 2014,
5, 60. [CrossRef]
29. Brette, R. Is coding a relevant metaphor for the brain? Behav. Brain Sci. 2019, 42, E215V . [CrossRef]
30. Maturana, H.; Varela, F.Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of the Living; D. Reidel Pub. Co.: Dordrecht, The Netherlands,
1980; ISBN 9789027710154.
31. Stewart, J. Cognition = life: Implications for higher-level cognition. Behav. Process. 1996, 35, 311–326. [CrossRef]
32. Dobzhansky, T. Nothing in Biology Makes Sense Except in the Light of Evolution. Am. Biol. Teach. 1973, 35, 125–129. [CrossRef]
33. Miller, W.; Torday, J.S.; Baluška, F. Biological evolution as defense of ‘self’ (2019).Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 2019, 142, 54–74.
[CrossRef]
34. Haken, H. Self-Organization in Physics. In Proceedings of the Nonlinear Dynamics of Transcritical Flows. Lecture Notes in Engineering;
Jordan, H.L., Oertel, H., Robert, K., Eds.; Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany, 1985; Volume 13, pp. 37–50.
35. Tiezzi, E. Steps Towards An Evolutionary Physics; WIT Press: Ashurst, UK, 2006; ISBN 9781845640354.
36. Orlik, M. Introduction to self-organization in chemical and electrochemical systems. J. Solid State Electrochem. 2015, 19, 3203–3206.
[CrossRef]
37. Krishnamurthy, R.; Hud, N.V . Chemical Evolution and the Origins of Life. Chem. Rev. 2020, 120, 4613–4615. [CrossRef]
38. Hanczyc, M.M.; Ikegami, T. Chemical Basis for Minimal Cognition. Artif. Life 2010, 16, 233–243. [CrossRef]
39. Witzany, G. Crucial steps to life: From chemical reactions to code using agents. BioSystems 2016, 140, 49–57. [CrossRef]
40. Malassé, A. Self-Organization as a New Paradigm in Evolutionary Biology. From Theory to Applied Cases in the Tree of Life; Malassé,
A.D., Ed.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2022; ISBN 978-3-031-04783-1.
41. Heylighen, F. Self-organization in Communicating Groups: The Emergence of Coordination, Shared References and Collective
Intelligence. In Complexity Perspectives on Language, Communication and Society. Understanding Complex Systems; Massip-Bonet, À.,
Bastardas-Boada, A., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2013; pp. 117–149. ISBN 978-3-642-32817-6.
42. Magnani, L. Eco-Cognitive Computationalism: From Mimetic Minds to Morphology-Based Enhancement of Mimetic Bodies.
Entropy 2018, 20, 430. [CrossRef]
43. Villalobos, M. Living beings as autopoietic bodies. Adapt. Behav. 2020, 28, 51–58. [CrossRef]
44. Miller, W.B.; Enguita, F.J.; Leitão, A.L. Non-Random Genome Editing and Natural Cellular Engineering in Cognition-Based
Evolution. Cells 2021, 10, 1125. [CrossRef]
45. Torday, J.; Miller, W.Four Domains: Cognition-Based Evolution BT-Cellular-Molecular Mechanisms in Epigenetic Evolutionary Biology;
Torday, J., Miller, W., Jr., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2020; pp. 103–112. ISBN 978-3-030-38133-2.
46. Baluška, F.; Miller, W.B.; Reber, A.S. Cellular and evolutionary perspectives on organismal cognition: From unicellular to
multicellular organisms. Biol. J. Linn. Soc. 2022, blac005. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576 13 of 15
47. Watson, R.; Buckley, C.The Scaling-up of Purpose in Evolution (evo-ego): Connectionist Approaches to the Evolutionary Transitions in
Individuality-Research Project; John Templeton Foundation: Philadelphia, PA, USA. Available online: https://www.templeton.
org/grant/the-scaling-up-of-purpose-in-evolution-evo-ego-connectionist-approaches-to-the-evolutionary-transitions-in-
individuality (accessed on 25 October 2022).
48. Laland, K.; Uller, T.; Feldman, M.; Sterelny, K.; Müller, G.B.; Moczek, A.; Jablonka, E.; Odling-Smee, J.; Wray, G.A.;
Hoekstra, H.E.; et al. Does evolutionary theory need a rethink? Nature 2014, 514, 161–164. [CrossRef]
49. Jablonka, E.; Lamb, M. Evolution in Four Dimensions: Genetic, Epigenetic, Behavioral, and Symbolic Variation in the History of Life.
In Revised Edition. Life and Mind: Philosophical Issues in Biology and Psychology, A Bradford Book; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2014.
50. Ginsburg, S.; Jablonka, E. The Evolution of the Sensitive Soul; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2019; ISBN 9780-2620-39307.
51. Watson, R.; Szathmary, E. How can evolution learn? Trends Ecol. Evol. 2016, 31, 147–157. [CrossRef]
52. Watson, R.A.; Mills, R.; Buckley, C.L.; Kouvaris, K.; Jackson, A.; Powers, S.T.; Cox, C.; Tudge, S.; Davies, A.; Kounios, L.; et al.
Evolutionary Connectionism: Algorithmic Principles Underlying the Evolution of Biological Organisation in Evo-Devo, Evo-Eco
and Evolutionary Transitions. Evol. Biol. 2016, 43, 553–581. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Dodig-Crnkovic, G. Natural Morphological Computation as Foundation of Learning to Learn in Humans, Other Living Organisms,
and Intelligent Machines. Philosophies 2020, 5, 17. [CrossRef]
54. Dodig-Crnkovic, G. Nature as a Network of Morphological Infocomputational Processes for Cognitive Agents. Eur. Phys. J. 2017,
226, 181–195. [CrossRef]
55. Pfeifer, R.; Gomez, G. Morphological computation - connecting brain, body, and environment. InCreating Brain-like Intelligence:
From Basic Principles to Complex Intelligent Systems ; Sendhoff, B., Sporns, O., Körner, E., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2009; pp. 66–83.
56. Dodig-Crnkovic, G. Morphological Computing in Cognitive Systems, Connecting Data to Intelligent Agency .Proceedings2020, 47, 41.
57. Dodig-Crnkovic, G. Information, Computation, Cognition. Agency-Based Hierarchies of Levels. In Fundamental Issues of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence. Synthese Library 377; Muüller, V ., Ed.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2016; pp. 139–159.
58. Wolfram, S. A New Kind of Science; Wolfram Media: Champaign, IL, USA, 2002.
59. Kauffman, S. Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 1993.
60. Dodig-Crnkovic, G. Morphological computing as reality construction for a cognizing agent. In Proceedings of the 12th Swedish
cognitive science society conference, Gothenburg, Sweden, 6 October 2016; Billing, E., Almér, A., Lowe, R., Eds.; Swedish Society
for Cognitive Science: Gothenburg, Sweden, 2016.
61. Hewitt, C. What is computation? Actor Model versus Turing’s Model. InA Computable Universe, Understanding Computation &
Exploring Nature As Computation; Zenil, H., Ed.; World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company/Imperial College Press: Singapore, 2012;
pp. 159–187.
62. Skyrms, B. Signals: Evolution, Learning and Information; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2010.
63. Keller, E.F. Towards a science of informed matter. Stud. Hist. Philos. Sci. Part C Stud. Hist. Philos. Biol. Biomed. Sci. 2011, 42,
174–179. [CrossRef]
64. Lehn, J.-M. From matter to life: Chemistry? Resonance 1996, 1, 39–53. [CrossRef]
65. Rambidi, N. Roots and promises of chemical-based computing. Biosystems 2002, 64, 169–178. [CrossRef]
66. Hogeweg, P . Computing an organism: On the interface between informatic and dynamic processes.Biosystems 2002, 64, 97–109.
[CrossRef]
67. Pismen, L. Morphogenesis Deconstructed: An Integrated View of the Generation of Forms ; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2020.
ISBN 978-3-030-36814-2.
68. Friston, K.; Levin, M.; Sengupta, B.; Pezzulo, G. Knowing one’s place: A free-energy approach to pattern regulation.J. R. Soc.
Interface 2015, 12, 1383. [CrossRef]
69. Kuchling, F.; Friston, K.; Georgiev, G.; Levin, M. Morphogenesis as Bayesian inference: A variational approach to pattern
formation and control in complex biological systems. Phys. Life Rev. 2020, 33, 88–108. [CrossRef]
70. Fields, C.; Friston, K.; Glazebrook, J.F.; Levin, M.; Marciano, A. The Free Energy Principle drives neuromorphic development.
arXiv 2022, arXiv:2207.09734v1.
71. Friston, K. Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 2013, 10, 475. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. Isomura, T. Active inference leads to Bayesian neurophysiology. Neurosci. Res. 2022, 175, 38–45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Badcock, P .; Friston, K.; Ramstead, M. The hierarchically mechanistic mind: A free-energy formulation of the human psyche.
Phys. Life Rev. 2019, 31, 104–121. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74. Pio-Lopez, L.; Kuchling, F.; Tung, A.; Pezzulo, G.; Levin, M. Active Inference, Morphogenesis, and Computational Psychiatry.
PsyArXiv. 2022. [CrossRef]
75. Manicka, S.; Levin, M. The Cognitive Lens: A primer on conceptual tools for analysing information processing in developmental
and regenerative morphogenesis. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 2019, 374. [CrossRef]
76. Clark, A. Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science. Behav. Brain Sci. 2013, 36, 181–204.
[CrossRef]
77. Millidge, B.; Seth, A.K.; Buckley, C.L. Predictive coding: A theoretical and experimental review.arXiv 2022, arXiv:2107.12979v4.
[CrossRef]
78. Damasio, A.R. Feeling & knowing: Making minds conscious. Cogn. Neurosci. 2021, 12, 65–66.
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576 14 of 15
79. Duncan, S.; Barrett, L.F. Affect is a form of cognition: A neurobiological analysis. Cogn. Emot. 2007, 21, 1184–1211. [CrossRef]
80. Schroeder, M.J.; Vallverdú, J. Situated phenomenology and biological systems: Eastern and Western synthesis. Prog. Biophys. Mol.
Biol. 2015, 119, 530–537. [CrossRef]
81. Boehner, K.; DePaula, R.; Dourish, P .; Sengers, P . Affect: From information to interaction. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of
Critical Computing Fourth Decennial Aarhus Conference, Aarhus, Denmark, 20–24 August 2005; pp. 59–68.
82. Seth, A.K. Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2013, 17, 565–573. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Fotopoulou, A.; Tsakiris, M. Mentalizing homeostasis: The social origins of interoceptive inference. Neuropsychoanalysis 2017, 19,
3–28. [CrossRef]
84. Smith, R.; Kuplicki, R.; Feinstein, J.; Forthman, K.L.; Stewart, J.L.; Paulus, M.P .; Khalsa, S. A Bayesian computational model
reveals a failure to adapt interoceptive precision estimates across depression, anxiety, eating, and substance use disorders. PLoS
Comput. Biol. 2020, 16, e1008484. [CrossRef]
85. Tschantz, A.; Barca, L.; Maisto, D.; Buckley, C.L.; Seth, A.K.; Pezzulo, G. Simulating homeostatic, allostatic and goal-directed
forms of interoceptive control using active inference. Biol. Psychol. 2022, 169, 108266. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Jofﬁly, M.; Coricelli, G. Emotional Valence and the Free-Energy Principle. PLoS Comput Biol 2013, 9, e1003094. [CrossRef]
87. Hesp, C.; Smith, R.; Parr, T.; Allen, M.; Friston, K.; Ramstead, M.J. Deeply Felt Affect: The Emergence of Valence in Deep Active
Inference. PsyArXiv. 2019. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88. Tononi, G. An information integration theory of consciousness. BMC Neurosci. 2004, 5, 1–22. [CrossRef]
89. Tononi, G. The Integrated Information Theory of Consciousness: An Updated Account. Arch. Ital. Biol. 2012, 150, 290–326.
90. Tononi, G. Consciousness as Integrated Information: A Provisional Manifesto. Biol. Bull. 2008, 215, 216–242. [CrossRef]
91. Bołtu´ c, P . Metacomputable.Entropy 2017, 19, 630. [CrossRef]
92. Sakthivadivel, D.A.R. Weak Markov Blankets in High-Dimensional, Sparsely-Coupled Random Dynamical Systems. arXiv 2022,
arXiv:2207.07620.
93. Seth, A.K. Inference to the Best Prediction. In Open MIND Collection; Metzinger, T.K., Windt, J.M., Eds.; MIND Group: Bangalore,
India, 2015.
94. Friston, K.J.; Wiese, W.; Hobson, J.A. Sentience and the Origins of Consciousness: From Cartesian Duality to Markovian Monism.
Entropy 2020, 22, 516. [CrossRef]
95. Ha, D.; Schmidhuber, J. World Models. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1803.10122v4.
96. Abramsky, S.; Coecke, B. Physics from Computer Science. Int. J. Unconv. Comput. 2007, 3, 179–197.
97. Sloman, A. What’s information, for an organism or intelligent machine? How can a machine or organism mean? InInformation
and Computation; Dodig-Crnkovic, G., Burgin, M., Eds.; World Scientiﬁc Publishing: Singapore, 2011.
98. Piccinini, G.; Shagrir, O. Foundations of computational neuroscience. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2014, 25, 25–30. [CrossRef]
99. Rozenberg, G.; Kari, L. The many facets of natural computing. Commun. ACM 2008, 51, 72–83.
100. y Arcas, B.A. Do Large Language Models Understand Us? Daedalus 2022, 151, 183–197. [CrossRef]
101. Properzi, M. Bodily Processing: What Progress Has Been Made in Understanding the Embodiment of Computing Systems?
Stud. Univ. Babes, -Bolyai Philos. 2021, 66, 181–190. [CrossRef]
102. Van Dijk, J.; Kerkhofs, R.; Van Rooij, I.; Haselager, P . Special Section: Can There Be Such a Thing as Embodied Embedded
Cognitive Neuroscience? Theory Psychol. 2008, 18, 297–316. [CrossRef]
103. Fresco, N. Physical Computation and Cognitive Science; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2014.
104. Barrett, L.F.; Simmons, W.K. Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2015, 16, 419–429. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. van Leeuwen, J.; Wiederman, J. Knowledge, Representation and the Dynamics of Computation. In Representation and Reality
in Humans, Other Living Organisms and Intelligent Machines ; Dodig-Crnkovic, G., Giovagnoli, R., Eds.; Springer International
Publishing Switzerland: Cham, Switzerland, 2017.
106. Burgin, M.; Dodig-Crnkovic, G. A Taxonomy of Computation and Information Architecture. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of
the 2015 European Conference on Software Architecture Workshops (ECSAW ’15), Cavtat, Croatia, 7–11 September 2015; Galster,
M., Ed.; ACM Press: New York, NY, USA, 2015.
107. Bruineberg, J.; Doł˛ ega, K.; Dewhurst, J.; Baltieri, M. The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets.Behav. Brain Sci. 2022, 45, e183.
[CrossRef]
108. Barabasi, A.-L. Bursts: The Hidden Pattern behind Everything We Do; Dutton: London, UK, 2010.
109. Epstein, J.M. Generative Social Science: Studies in Agent-Based Computational Modeling; Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ,
USA, 2007.
110. Veissière, S.P .L.; Constant, A.; Ramstead, M.J.D.; Friston, K.J.; Kirmayer, L.J. Thinking through other minds: A variational
approach to cognition and culture. Behav. Brain Sci. 2020, 43, e90. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Albarracin, M.; Demekas, D.; Ramstead, M.J.D.; Heins, C. Epistemic Communities under Active Inference. Entropy 2022, 24, 476.
[CrossRef]
112. Cooper, S.B. The Mathematician’s Bias - and the Return to Embodied Computation. InA Computable Universe: Understanding and
Exploring Nature as Computation; Zenil, H., Ed.; World Scientiﬁc Pub Co Inc.: Singapore, 2012. ISBN 9789-8143-742-93.
113. Zenil, H. A Computable Universe. Understanding Computation & Exploring Nature As Computation; Zenil, H., Ed.; World Scientiﬁc
Publishing Company/Imperial College Press: Singapore, 2012.
114. Douven, I. The Art of Abduction; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2022.
Entropy 2022, 24, 1576 15 of 15
115. Seth, A.K. The cybernetic brain: From interoceptive inference to sensorimotor contingencies. In MINDS project. Open MIND
Collection; Metzinger, T.K., Windt, J.M., Eds.; MIND Group: Bangalore, India, 2014.
116. Mumford, D. On the computational architecture of the neocortex. II. The role of cortico-cortical loops. Biol. Cybern 1992, 66,
241–251. [CrossRef]
117. Lee, T.S.; Mumford, D. Hierarchical Bayesian inference in the visual cortex. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 2003, 20, 1434–1448. [CrossRef]
118. Gershman, S.J.; Niv, Y. Learning latent structure: Carving nature at its joints.Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2010, 20, 251–256. [CrossRef]
119. Tervo, D.G.R.; Tenenbaum, J.B.; Gershman, S.J. Toward the neural implementation of structure learning.Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
2016, 37, 99–105. [CrossRef]
120. Vanchurin, V .; Wolf, Y.I.; Katsnelson, M.I.; Koonin, E. V Toward a theory of evolution as multilevel learning.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 2022, 119, e2120037119. [CrossRef]
121. Campbell, J.O. Universal Darwinism as a process of Bayesian inference. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 2016, 10, 49. [CrossRef]
122. Kirchhoff, M.; Parr, T.; Palacios, E.; Friston, K.; Kiverstein, J. The Markov blankets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free
energy principle. J. R. Soc. Interface 2017, 15, 0792. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Nakajima, T. Biologically inspired information theory: Adaptation through construction of external reality models by living
systems. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 2015, 119, 634–648. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Friston, K.; FitzGerald, T.; Rigoli, F.; Schwartenbeck, P .; Pezzulo, G. Active inference: A process theory.Neural Comput. 2017, 29,
1–49. [CrossRef] [PubMed]