fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 1
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 26 September 2019
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02173
Edited by:
Christoph Mathys,
International School for Advanced
Studies (SISSA), Italy
Reviewed by:
Karl Friston,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Michael Moutoussis,
University College London,
United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
Patrice Duquette
patrice@pmdmd.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Psychoanalysis
and Neuropsychoanalysis,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 12 March 2019
Accepted: 09 September 2019
Published: 26 September 2019
Citation:
Duquette P and Ainley V (2019)
Working With the Predictable Life
of Patients: The Importance
of “Mentalizing Interoception”
to Meaningful Change
in Psychotherapy.
Front. Psychol. 10:2173.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02173
Working With the Predictable Life of
Patients: The Importance of
“Mentalizing Interoception” to
Meaningful Change in Psychotherapy
Patrice Duquette1* and Vivien Ainley2
1 Private Practice, Birmingham, MI, United States,2 Lab of Action and Body, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham,
United Kingdom
To understand our patients and optimize their treatment, psychotherapists of all
theoretical orientations may beneﬁt from considering current scientiﬁc evidence
alongside psychodynamic constructs. There is recent neuroscientiﬁc evidence that
subjective awareness, feelings and emotions depend upon “interoception,” deﬁned
as the neural signaling to the brain from all tissues of the body. Interoception is the
obvious basis of homeostasis (in the brainstem) but some interoceptive signals rise
above this level and contribute to inferential processes that substantiate intrapersonal
and interpersonal experience. The focus of this paper is on the essential role that their
“interoception” plays in our patients’ emotional experience and subjective awareness,
and how the process referred to as “mentalizing interoception” may be harnessed
in therapy. This can best be understood in terms of “predictive processing,” which
describes how subjective states, and particularly emotion, are inferred from sensory
inputs – both interoceptive and exteroceptive. Predictive processing assumes that the
brain infers (probabilistically) the likely cause of sensation experienced through the sense
organs, by testing this sensory data against its innate and learned “priors.” This implies
that any effort at changing heavily over-learned prior beliefs will require action upon the
system that has generated that set of prior beliefs. This involves, quite literally, acting
upon the world to alter inferential processes, or in the case of interoceptive priors,
acting on the patient’s body to alter habitual autonomic nervous system (ANS) reﬂexes.
Focused attention to bodily sensations/reactions, in the safety of the therapeutic
relationship, provides a route to “mentalizing interoception,” by means of the bodily cues
that may be the only conscious element of deeply hidden priors and thus the clearest
way to access them. This can: update patients’ characteristic, dysfunctional responses
to emotion and feelings; increase emotional insight; decrease cognitive distortions; and
engender a more acute awareness of the present moment. These important ideas are
outlined below from the perspective of psychodynamic psychotherapeutic practice,
in order to discuss how relevant information from neuroscientiﬁc theory and current
research can best be applied in clinical treatment. A clinical case will be presented to
illustrate how this argument or treatment relates directly to clinical practice.
Keywords: interoception, mentalization of interoception, emotion, predictive processing, free energy principle,
psychotherapy, psychotherapeutic change
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 2
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
INTRODUCTION
Patients undergoing psychotherapeutic work, in any theoretical
orientation, often struggle to identify and verbalize their
emotional experiences and to explain their subjective views of the
world, in the face of the confusing messages arising from within
their physical bodies, which are accompanied by their persistent,
strongly-held beliefs about themselves and the world. A common
experience brings individuals to our oﬃce:
“It seems that people spend most of their time with the delusion
that they have an accurate representation of the world. Actually,
evidence suggests that we are all rather poor at letting our sensory
experience update our beliefs, and that we are susceptible to prior
beliefs and social constraints that greatly limit our ability to deal
with evidence rationally. For most of us, this may be manifest. . .. as
vulnerability to biases as we try to model the world ” (Fletcher and
Frith, 2009, p. 52).
At any given moment, physical sensations can lead the way
into a distorted view of ourselves and of reality. Emotions,
especially of fear, can dominate subjective experience; biasing our
assessment of what is truly emotive in our bodies and what actual
meaning this may have in the current moment. Prior beliefs
or expectations stimulate reactive processes, quickly deﬁning
subjective experience, allowing little room for any testing of these
potentially distorted beliefs against reality. For example: if the
patient’s heart races, they tend to believe they must be scared
and that they face real danger; if they have tears in their eyes
they claim this is the result of some hurt and another person
is responsible. Whether they are trying to: describe emotional
states; parse out elements of experience; or ascertain the reality of
events and interactions versus those they imagine, patients often
struggle to constrain the habitual inﬂuence that their body has on
these processes.
Such rapid knee jerk reactions to stimuli are learned
in early infancy, where all sensation feels forever and is
mostly a surprise. We are “ born too early ” (Bar-Levav, 1988),
such that the processes of bodily experiences that shape
emotional processes are initiated before the world can be
comprehended or tested against reality. Crucially, as the body
changes and adapts, the brain is simultaneously establishing
expectations about relationships and the environment, within
and without. These early embodied patterns persist throughout
life, strongly inﬂuencing how individuals understand, behave
and experience the world, intra- and inter-subjectively. What
our patients know of themselves and the world is “in their
bones” – acquired in childhood from experience comprised of
motoric, humoral, neural, sensory and autonomic responses to
salient stimuli.
Neuroscience has recently increased our knowledge of
the vital processes that send neural information from the
body to the brain – regulating life processes at basic levels,
while also modulating emotional experience and subjective
awareness at the most complex mental levels. This process is
termed “interoception, ” which refers to the constant ﬂow of
signals passing between the body and the brain that are the
“foundation for the sequential integration of your homeostatic
condition with your sensory environment, with your motivational
condition, and with your social condition ” (Craig, 2008,
p. 281). 1 At an elemental level, interoception instantiates
physiologic homeostatic regulation of the body and is part of
the neural infrastructure that determines emotional experience
and subjective awareness, ultimately inﬂuencing cognition
and behavior. When theorists claim that the processing of
interoceptive information from the body underpins the processes
of emotion generation, feelings and aﬀect, they are talking
literally about gut feelings.
It is now recognized that interoceptive signals, combined
with information from other exteroceptive sensory modalities
(like vision and touch) are integrated with top-down learned
expectations in the brain, thus contributing not only to
homeostasis but crucially to emotion – thus ultimately
inﬂuencing cognition and behavior (Critchley and Harrison,
2013). The rubric of “predictive processing” is a valuable model
within which to consider current research and possible therapy.
The basic premise in predictive processing is that humans do not
have direct access to the truth about our internal and external
environment but that our brains must make inferences about
these, on the basis of the sensory evidence that we have (Friston,
2010, 2013; Pezzulo, 2014; Clark, 2016). This approach stresses
that the brain’s task is to minimize the diﬀerence between the
actual incoming sensory data and what the brain expects or
infers (i.e., “predicts” from experience) as the most likely cause of
whatever the sensory organs are currently registering (Edwards
et al., 2012; Barrett et al., 2016; Seth and Friston, 2016; Critchley
and Garﬁnkel, 2017).
At the leading edge of research, the over-arching principle
of “free energy” accounts for how inferential processes
support humans’ inherent drive toward homeostasis and
self-organization, by minimizing uncertainty, which is deﬁned
as the diﬀerence between the actual states of the body and the
states the brain infers are optimal for its Darwinian success
(Friston, 2010). The insights that these new ideas oﬀer about how
individuals experience themselves, other people and the world in
general adds meaningful dimensions to therapeutic practice that
were unavailable even two decades ago.
“Interoceptive inference” is the speciﬁc aspect of predictive
processing which refers to how we interpret internal sensations
(Gu and FitzGerald, 2014; Ondobaka et al., 2017; Owens et al.,
2018; Allen et al., 2019). Much of interoceptive signaling is
unconscious, or at the very borders of awareness (Adam,
2010), involving the pre-reﬂective, sub-personal assimilation of
interoceptive bodily cues. However, implicit contextualization
of autonomic reﬂexes, and reactions to emotionally salient
cues, occurs in the body all the time. These processes are
generally not available to awareness but they nevertheless have
powerful impact on emotions and feelings states and also on
behavior – potentially leading to persistent diﬃculty in our
patient’s lives.
1Researchers in neuroscience have studied interoception from a variety of vantage
points which has resulted in a range of deﬁnitions and perspectives. Discussion of
diﬀerent facets of interoception are beyond the scope of this paper but see Ceunen
et al. (2016), Khalsa and Lapidus (2016), and Duquette (2017) for overviews of how
the study of interoception has changed over the last century.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 3
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
In this paper, we propose that the “mentalization” of
interoceptive sensations is elemental in making these pre-
reﬂective processes available for self-reﬂection. The verbalization
or expression of what the patient ﬁnds on self-reﬂection is
the important starting point between patient and therapist –
providing language for feeling states and bringing emotion to the
level of subjective experience – which is an important goal for any
psychological school of thought.
We refer to this process as “mentalizing interoception.” While
the term “mentalizing” is commonly used to denote inferring or
understanding the mental states of others it also refers crucially to
mental states of the self (e.g., Fonagy and Target, 2006). We use
the term “mentalizing” here with the ultimate goal that the patient
will have an “intentional mental state” (Fonagy and Target, 2006;
Allen et al., 2008; Bateman and Fonagy, 2012), our usage diﬀers
in that we are assuming that the term “mentalization” speciﬁcally
includes inferring the imagined causes and implications of
sensation that impact on the individual (Besharati et al., 2015;
Fotopoulou, 2015; Fotopoulou and Tsakiris, 2017).
Following Fotopoulou and Tsakiris (2017), we assume that
the backdrop to mentalizing interoception (which they also
call “embodied mentalization”) is the “on-going, dynamic process
of maintaining and updating generative models of the likely
cause of sensory data from inside the body itself and the
external world ” (Fotopoulou and Tsakiris, 2017). However,
while Fotopoulou and Tsakiris (2017) are principally concerned
with how the infant’s development of the experience of
the self requires mentalization of interoception, we focus
here on the mentalization of interoception as the ongoing
process of intentional, self-reﬂective evaluation of interoceptive
sensation that can occur in the immediate present for
the adult patient.
The crux of our argument is the proposal that attention
to interoceptive sensation can be harnessed in therapy to
support change, given the essential role that interoception
plays in our patients’ emotional experience and their subjective
awareness. Speciﬁcally, our purpose is to show how the
patients’ mentalization of interoception can lead to the
generation of newly imagined possibilities regarding current
interoceptive sensations, thus bringing ongoing interoceptive
inferences into awareness at a self-reﬂective level. Within
relational interactions with the therapist, the patient can
then test their sub-optimal but habitual prior beliefs, about
themselves and the world (and their consequent emotions and
behaviors) and create alternative, more ﬂexible opportunities for
experience and action.
Within any clinical approach, a great deal can be gained
if psychotherapists comprehend: the full signiﬁcance of
interoception and physiological regulatory processes for
subjective experience; the power of inferential processes
in how we all make meaning of our sensory world; and
our reliance on habitual reactions as we try to limit the
uncertainty that is inherent in human experience. Understanding
processes that are constantly active but often only evidenced
in bodily signatures can inform and anchor the therapeutic
interaction, as the patient engages in the task of generating
new hypotheses (and corresponding language) and thereby
creating alternative perspectives to loosen the bounds of
long-held, over-determined ways of seeing, relating, and
behaving in their world. We will bring to the fore current
theory and research that is most relevant for practicing
clinicians and will consider how these ideas can add
to their practice.
Firstly, we brieﬂy describe the neurobiology of interoception
and its place in homeostatic and allostatic regulation and thus in
physiologic stability, together with an outline of the embodied
(interoceptive) nature of emotion and subjective experience.
All-important to our argument is the manner in which an
individual’s model of the world is shaped by the interaction
of their interoceptive signals with higher order inferences, in
the form of early (unconscious) “prior beliefs” that may be
partly innate but are also learned. Crucially, these inferential
processes depend on the minimization of uncertainty through
prediction. Such prior beliefs have great potential for distortion
and we suggest means by which therapists can identify the state
of the patient’s interoceptive inferential processes and hence
gain insight into their health and psychopathology. Possible
interventions are suggested whereby clinicians may encourage
meaningful introspection and emotional openness in patients,
while relationally supporting their eﬀorts to alter long-held
perspectives about their embodied experience and its eﬀect on
their view of themselves and the world.
It is hoped that applying the lessons from predictive
processing and free energy to the therapeutic process
will encourage conversations across theoretical lines,
while increasing collaboration between researchers in
neuroscience and psychology.
INTEROCEPTION AND PHYSIOLOGIC
REGULATION
We learn in childhood that we have ﬁve senses with which
to experience the world (and ourselves within it) but this
classic account neglects that we also perceive the world through
sensations generated from within our own body, where every
cell contributes to our experience, i.e., through interoception.
Memories and learned associations contribute to this process
(Craig, 2002, 2008; Critchley and Harrison, 2013; Ceunen et al.,
2016; Khalsa and Lapidus, 2016). The interoceptive pathway
originates in cells in all types of tissues of the body – including
muscles, joints, teeth, skin and all the viscera (Craig, 2002) and
these interoceptive signals ﬂow to the brain through designated
neural ﬁbers (Critchley and Harrison, 2013) (see Box 1).
Interoception is functionally fundamental to homeostasis,
which is largely determined unconsciously, countering
the inherent instability of the organism and maintaining
internal physiologic order amidst the stressor of the ever-
changing external environment (Cannon, 1932). Importantly,
interoceptive signals produce sensations which are experienced
as pleasant or unpleasant, creating motivation within the
individual (consciously or not) to move toward or away from the
sensation (Craig, 2008, 2010; Duquette, 2017). The eﬀect of this is
that the ﬂow of interoceptive signals motivates the behavior that
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 4
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
BOX 1 |Neuroanatomy of interoception.
The neural pathway of interoception originates in the various tissues of the body in small diameter ﬁbers (A and C-delta type) which transmit neural signals regarding
pain, temperature, blood osmolality, and metabolic needs. These include nociceptors, thermoreceptors, osmoreceptors, and metaboreceptors. The afferent ﬁbers
collecting neuronal signals from receptors within the body transmit neural signals to lamina I – a layer of tissue that extends up through the spinal cord to the brain
(“Afferent” = from the body to the brain, “efferent” = from the brain to the body). Within the brainstem, ﬁbers carrying interoceptive information interact extensively
with both branches of the autonomic nervous system (ANS), allowing a nearly instantaneous response to interoceptive neural information and thus heightening
homeostatic autonomic control (Craig, 2008). Spreading into the brain, small diameter ﬁbers project to multiple neuroanatomic areas including: nuclei within the
periaqueductal gray (PAG); the parabrachial nucleus (PBN); the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS); the thalamus (notably the Ventromedial Nucleus); and
insular cortex (IC).
The IC is a cortical area that is deeply folded and set within the large sulcus, or groove, of between the frontal and temporal lobes (seeFigure 1). Neuronal signals
progress through the different sections which have different cellular architecture and functional purposes; these are the posterior, middle and anterior insular cortices.
For greater detail on the functional purposes of the different insular cortical sections see Box 2.
The insula is an important brain hub with wide interconnections. As well as integrating interoceptive signals, the insula receives direct input from the exteroceptive
sensory cortex (for sensation from external organs, e.g., hearing, vision etc.) (Northoff, 2016). There are bidirectional connections from the insula to several areas, the
prefrontal cortex, parietal and temporal cortex, basal ganglia, with the connections to the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) heavily studied and elucidated.
The ACC plays an important complementary role to the anterior insula cortex (AIC). Most researchers agree that the AIC and ACC serve as interdependent arms
of a coordinated system, which has been described as “limbic sensory” (AIC) and “limbic motor” (ACC) cortices (Craig, 2009b). While the anterior insula is assumed
to underpin all feelings and awareness, the anterior cingulate is related more to motivation and behavior (Medford and Critchley, 2010; Craig, 2011). The coordinated
function of the AIC and the ACC creates integrated awareness of our cognitive, affective and physical state, which then serves as the basis for the selection of, and
preparation for, our responses to internal and external events (Medford and Critchley, 2010).
FIGURE 1 |Detail of brain architecture. Reprinted with permission from Quadt et al. (2018) Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences.
is necessary to maintain homeostatic equilibrium – hence the
essential role of interoception in motivated action (Craig, 2002,
2009b; Strigo and Craig, 2016; Critchley and Garﬁnkel, 2017).
While homeostasis has previously been characterized as primarily
reactive control of physiologic states, the concept of “allostatic”
regulation is more relevant over any extended time period, as
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 5
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
this invokes prospective control, to avoid problematic deviations
from homeostatic set-points (Sterling, 2012, 2014; Stephan et al.,
2016; Petzschner et al., 2017).
Allostasis, deﬁned as “stability through change, ” (Sterling, 2014,
p. 1192) utilizes interoceptive information to implement control
of bodily states in order to anticipate energy demands in advance
of perturbations which would otherwise be dangerous (Sterling,
2012, 2014; Barrett et al., 2016; Stephan et al., 2016). Allostatic
mechanisms are implemented either within the internal bodily
milieu, by ANS reaction, or brought about by the organism’s
motor behavior enacted within the environment. It is crucial
for the brain to infer (i.e., to anticipate) allostatic needs, in
order to engage in eﬀective action selection and thus avoid harm
(Stephan et al., 2016). For our purposes it is important to note that
perturbations to allostasis can occur not only from the physical
but also from the social environment of the individual.
BOX 2 |The subjective experience of emotion.
Drawing on a wide range of research, Craig concludes that the convergent evidence “implies directly that the AIC supports awareness of the immediate moment
with a coherent representation of ‘my feelings’ about ‘that thing’” (Craig, 2009b, p. 65).
It has further been argued that homeostatic processes and interoceptive signals underpin the experience of self. The posterior to anterior re-representation of
interoceptive sensation within the insula allows for the integration of the body’s homeostatic condition with exteroceptive sensory input, as well as information about
the individual’s motivational and social context from other brain regions such as the ACC, hypothalamus, amygdala, ventral medial and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
and the ventral striatum (Craig, 2009a) (Figure 2). Such a perspective is supported by Critchley and Seth’s conclusion that the “insular cortex supports a neural
representation of changes in internal arousal states, and, within anterior insular cortex the re-representation of this information is proposed to underlie subjective
emotional feelings and their abstraction to both the encoding of future risk and the experience of empathic feeling for others.” (Critchley and Seth, 2012, p. 424).
Damasio (2010) similarly proposed that interoception plays a crucial role in generating a subjective sense of self. However, while Craig places the self ﬁrmly in the
insula, Damasio cited a patient whose anterior insula was destroyed by a brain lesion but continued to exhibit all signs associated with feelings and awareness of self
(Damasio et al., 2013). A possible reconciliation of these opposing views is that the neural substrate of feeling states is to be found ﬁrst subcortically and then
secondarily elaborated at a cortical level (e.g., in AIC and ACC) (Damasio et al., 2013; Solms, 2019).
Building on all this, an overarching model of how interoceptive processes produce subjective awareness has been presented by Craig. The foundation of this
model is in the perception of neural interoceptive signals as sensations (Craig, 2010). These signals generate pain, temperature, itch, hunger, thirst, muscle burn or
ache, joint ache, sensual touch, ﬂush, visceral urgency, nausea, among other sensations (Craig, 2008). At any given moment, the pleasant or unpleasant quality of
such interoceptive sensations imbues them with motivation for the individual to move toward or away from the source of the sensation, consciously or not, while
causing reactive responses in the ANS (Craig, 2008, 2010). Craig deﬁnes this functional combination of interoceptive feelings and motivation, with autonomic
sequelae, as “homeostatic emotions,” and likens them to Damasio’s “background emotions,” which Barrett calls “core affect” (Craig, 2008 citing Damasio, 1994;
Russell and Barrett, 1999; Barrett et al., 2004).
Background emotions may be discerned through body posture, movement of the limbs, speed of motions, and animation of the face. One might use words such
as “tense,” “edgy,” “discouraged” or “enthusiastic” as signiﬁers of such experience (Damasio, 1994). A similar approach is taken by Barrett, who contends that there
is likely to be a core affective system which has the basic function of integrating sensation from the external world with interoceptive information. This integration
generates “a mental state that can be used to safely navigate the world, by predicting reward and threat, friend and foe” (Barrett, 2011, p. 364).
Craig, Damasio and Barrett thus all propose that the underlying emotional experience within an individual is determined by the homeostatic management of their
body’s physiology, inﬂuenced by the motivational state of the body with respect to these interoceptive sensations. The whole process is constantly engaged in
reconciling the past with the present moment, on a physiological level within the individual’s body.
FIGURE 2 |A cartoon illustrating how the hypothesized integration of salient activity progresses from the posterior insula (left) through the mid-insula to the anterior
insula (right). The primary interoceptive representations of the distinct feelings from the body in the dorsal posterior insula provide a somatotopic foundation and a
template for the construction of all feelings. It is anchored by the homeostatic effects of each feeling on cardiorespiratory function, as indicated by the focus of the
colors in the chest. The salient homeostatic, environmental, hedonic, motivational, social and cognitive factors are progressively integrated by the indicated inputs.
VMPFC, ventromedial prefrontal cortex; DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Reprinted with permission from Craig (2009a), Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1525), 1933–1942.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 6
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
INTEROCEPTION, EMOTION, AND
SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE
Current theories generally accept that emotion is embodied
(Frijda, 1986, 2007; Damasio, 1994, 2010; Panskepp, 1998; Barrett
et al., 2004; Wiens, 2005) and that interoceptive sensation
is directly related to the functional purpose of emotion.
Emotion can thus be said to be: motivation which maps the
rewarding/punishing aspects of stimuli to the action system
for approach/withdrawal (Rolls, 1999); necessary to compute
what a stimulus means to the individual (LeDoux, 2002);
and “ change in action readiness to maintain or change one’s
relationship to an object or event ” (Frijda, 2007, p. 158).
It is interoceptive sensation itself that comprises the signal,
from the body to the brain, of motivational state, with
ANS sequelae as an ultimate eﬀector arm of this processing
(Craig, 2015).
What is involved in the subjective experience of embodied
emotional states continues to be a subject of intense theoretical
debate and this has high relevance for therapy. Two prominent
early theories – the James-Lange theory (James, 1890) and that of
Schachter and Singer (1962) – have claimed that we experience
emotion as a result of cognitions that evaluate the changes
that we perceive in the state of our body. Notably, Schachter
and Singer (1962) argued that emotion involves the top-down
contextualization of bodily experience by past expectations or
current environment. “Bodily experience” in both these theories
is what is now referred to as interoception.
In support of this, there is now substantial neuroscientiﬁc
evidence that the subjective experience of emotion is generated
from the integration of interoceptive signals with other sensory
input, as well as top-down inﬂuences (Paulus and Stein, 2006;
Harrison et al., 2010; Zaki et al., 2012; Gu et al., 2013a; Adolﬁ
et al., 2017). Moreover, the subjective awareness of emotion is
similarly based on interoception (Cameron, 2001; Critchley et al.,
2004; Craig, 2009b; Singer et al., 2009; Damasio, 2010; Paulus and
Stein, 2010; Berntson et al., 2011; Seth et al., 2011; Critchley and
Nagai, 2012; Gu et al., 2012, 2013a; Herbert and Pollatos, 2012;
Jones et al., 2015) (see Box 2).
Interoception is, similarly, vitally involved in: self-awareness
(Critchley et al., 2004; Craig, 2009b); feelings of conscious
presence (Seth et al., 2011); the integration of cognition with
emotion (Berntson et al., 2011; Gu et al., 2013b); and empathy
(Singer et al., 2009; Gu et al., 2012, 2013a). Abnormalities in the
perception of interoception have been linked to: anxiety (Paulus
and Stein, 2010; Duquette, 2017); depression (Harshaw, 2015;
Duquette, 2017); alexithymia (Herbert and Pollatos, 2012); eating
disorders (Eshkevari et al., 2014); and depersonalization (Sedeno
et al., 2014; Owens et al., 2015).
PREDICTIVE PROCESSING, INFERENCE
AND BAYES’ THEOREM
If we assume that the integration of interoceptive sensations with
exteroception and top-down information underpins subjective
experience, the all-important question for therapists is how
does this process produce and maintain our patients’ views
of themselves and the world? This question is best answered
within predictive processing (Clark, 2016) where subjective
experience is assumed to ﬂow from top-down inferences that
contextualize bottom up (bodily/interoceptive) sensations, while
not assuming any sharp distinction between cognitive or non-
cognitive processing (Seth and Friston, 2016).
As the brain does not have direct access to the world, it
can only make sense of the individual’s internal and external
environment (or world), by inferring the causes of sensation. 2
The most interesting aspect of predictive processing theories
is that they stress that our experience is largely dependent on
what our brains “predict” or “expect” is happening, at any given
moment, based (at least in part) on previous experience (Gu
et al., 2013a; Seth, 2013; Barrett and Simmons, 2015; Seth and
Friston, 2016; Ondobaka et al., 2017; Miller and Clark, 2018).
Such expectations or beliefs are not necessarily conscious, nor
available to awareness, for example, the “beliefs” we formed in
infancy about comforting or fearful stimuli.
The predictive process that the brain uses to infer the causes
of its sensory states can be described statistically by Bayes’
Theorem, which provides a principled way of describing how
we test and update our hypotheses (also sometimes referred
to as our implicit “priors, ” “predictions, ” “expectations” or
“beliefs”) against the evidence supplied by our (interoceptive
and exteroceptive) sensory organs, learning (and continually
updating) the mostly likely cause for some particular incoming
(set of) sensory information.3 As a “Bayesian observer, ” the brain
attempts to “know” about inner and outer experience by calling
up a previously determined prediction (A) (also “prior”) that
seems most likely to explain the current sensory evidence and
then comparing that prediction with the actual incoming ﬂow
of interoceptive information (the observation X). If they don’t
match, a “prediction error” occurs that may then be used to
update the prior belief, creating a new (“posterior”) belief.3
This process of evaluating incoming sensation against prior
belief is hypothesized to occur throughout the brain, in a
hierarchical manner, i.e., through a step-wise process of activity,
within neuroanatomic (hierarchical) levels of the brain. For ease
of understanding, the terminology used: “lower” vs. “higher” in
reference to this hierarchy, refers to areas that are more sensory
bound as “lower, ” while those that are more bound to prior beliefs
or associative processes are labeled “higher.”
Predictive processing is well understood in vision (Rao and
Ballard, 1999). For example, I am walking in the street and see
a shape in my peripheral vision. The sensory input to my retina
quickly matches a pattern that generates a hypothesis (belief) that
it is a tiger. This is my “prior.” I look more carefully and see
2Predictive processing describes how this inferential activity may be organized
within the hierarchical systems in the brain to produce generative models that are
then used to infer (to generate) the causes of incoming sensory data (i.e., to explain
it), whatever the form that data takes – whether interoceptive or exteroceptive
Friston (2010).
3Frith (2007) neatly describes Bayes’ Theorem as: “ Given some phenomenon (A)
that we want to know about, and an observation (X) that is evidence relating to A,
Bayes’ Theorem tells how much we should update our knowledge of A, given the new
evidence X.”
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 7
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
either that yes, indeed it is a tiger (hence no prediction error). Or
perhaps I see that it is a large cat! This evidence (very diﬀerent
from my initial prediction) results in a large prediction error
and a considerable revision of my original (mistaken) prior belief
about a tiger – into the posterior belief that provides a much
better, error minimizing, explanation for my sensations – namely,
that what I am seeing is a cat.
FREE ENERGY AND ENTROPY
As a prominent advocate and extender of predictive processing,
Karl Friston’s innovative thinking culminates in the “free energy
principle” (Friston et al., 2006; Friston, 2010, 2013) which
asserts that in order to maintain homeostasis and survive all
living organisms must avoid surprising states (i.e., free energy).
Clearly, when applied to interoception, minimizing surprise
is just another way of describing homeostasis (i.e., keeping
interoceptive signals within a comfortable and familiar range).
At a more general level, human beings don’t like surprise –
or its mathematical average – namely, uncertainty (Edwards
et al., 2012), which is equivalent to summed prediction error,
i.e., the diﬀerence between what our brains predict and what
our actual sensations are at any given point. Minimizing free
energy is equivalent to resisting entropy (the tendency for a
system to become disordered, dissipate decay and ultimately
die). The beauty of the free energy principle is that it accounts
mathematically for the inherent drives that biological organisms
have toward allostasis and self-organization.
In eﬀect, free energy can be thought of as the diﬀerence
between the actual states of an organism and the states it
“believes” (generally unconsciously) that it needs to be in
for its adaptation, survival and reproductive success. When a
prior belief doesn’t match the incoming sensory data, there
is prediction error (i.e., uncertainty or free energy), which
we can reduce by updating our beliefs (from a prior to an
improved posterior belief) about the state of aﬀairs in the world.
In other words, updating our priors makes our predictions
better explanations for sensation and thus minimizes prediction
error. This process of updating priors is “perceptual inference.”
Assuming that priors are generally encoded in higher levels of
the brain’s hierarchies, this implies that prediction errors ascend
the brain’s hierarchy to do the updating. However, all animals can
instead act to change the world (and their own body) to make
the sensations that they receive ﬁt with their predictions. For this
to happen, at the very bottom of the hierarchy (i.e., at the most
sensory bound level) prediction errors descend to activate the
eﬀector organs to elicit motor reﬂexes. This is known as “active
inference.” In our example of the supposed tiger in the street, the
original belief that there is a tiger immediately invoked a higher
level (learned) cognitive prior that tigers are not generally seen in
suburbia. To resolve uncertainty about what is actually causing
visual impressions, the brain predicts that it will foveate the
supposed “Tiger.” These predictions about the (proprioceptive
and exteroceptive) consequences of “looking over there” are then
issued to the oculomotor system. In turn, the oculomotor system
resolves proprioceptive prediction errors by using them to drive
motor reﬂexes that point the eye to the predicted (i.e., intended)
location. In essence, this is active inference, where prediction
errors drive bodily changes to eliminate themselves and – in so
doing – fulﬁll top-down predictions.
Predictions or beliefs can be straightforward, e.g., about how
far our hand must move to reach a pen, or they may be
highly abstract and refer to the social intentions of another
human being. Some predictions will be innate and not subject
to updating (such as homeostatic set points) but others are
at least partly learned – many in infancy. Updateable priors
include priors about policies/actions (e.g., priors about using
a habit); priors about models of the world, and priors about
beliefs within a generative model of the world. Importantly, some
priors must govern the supposed reliability and salience of any
given incoming sensation (these are priors about “precision” –
discussed below).
If there is discordance between sensations and the expected
cause of those sensations, surprise, uncertainty and free energy
are ostensibly increased. Minimizing prediction error/free energy
from moment to moment ensures that human organisms adapt
and survive. In a perfect world, free energy minimization thus
results in healthy, optimal functioning. However, the world isn’t
perfect – it is predictably unpredictable.
Combining the biological imperative that humans are at
equilibrium with their environment (internal and external)
when free energy is minimized, together with the psychological
assertion that human beings avoid pain and approach pleasure,
Joﬃly and Coricelli elegantly link free energy, or uncertainty, to
the valence of the emotional state. They suggest that if there is a
rise in free energy, due to a mismatch between expectations and
sensory input, there will be more inherent surprise or uncertainty,
producing an emotion with negative valence. Examples are fear,
disappointment and unhappiness. If there are prediction errors
but the opposite is true and free energy is falling, then the valence
of the resulting emotion is positive, such as for happiness or hope.
Intriguingly, Joﬃly and Coricelli go further and suggest that fear
can be distinguished from unhappiness because fear involves
not only rising free energy (the organism is moving away from
desired set points) but also includes the expectation that this rate
of change will accelerate. Unhappiness, by contrast, involves only
that free energy has risen but with no expectation that this change
will get worse. For happiness the expectation is that the fall in free
energy will accelerate, while for hope there is no such expectation
(Joﬃly and Coricelli, 2013).
ACTIVE INFERENCE IN THE
INTEROCEPTIVE DOMAIN
As outlined above, prediction errors may update perceptual
priors (this is a case of changing the brain’s inner model to better
ﬁt the world). Alternatively, they may be resolved by descending
to the brain stem and driving motor reﬂexes so that the animal
acts on the world, which may serve to make the world a better ﬁt
for the prediction.
In the case of interoceptive prediction errors, descending
prediction errors can enslave ANS reﬂexes (e.g., by raising heart
rate in response to the perceived threat). Thus, in our tiger
example, a high-level cognitive prior (learned or partly innate)
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 8
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
is also immediately invoked that the viewer is in danger. This
prior sets up prediction errors between the currently relaxed
state of the body and the state it needs to be in to evade
a predator. These descend to activate ANS reﬂexes and are
eliminated by invoking high arousal. Prediction error is thus
minimized by changing the body to better ﬁt the world (Critchley
and Seth, 2012; Gu et al., 2013a; Seth, 2013; Hyett et al., 2015;
Seth and Friston, 2016; Critchley and Garﬁnkel, 2017). This
process, known as “active inference, ” is a special case of prediction
error (or free energy) minimizing in the interoceptive domain;
where action corresponds to autonomic regulation (Critchley
and Seth, 2012; Seth, 2013; Pezzulo, 2014; Barrett and Simmons,
2015; Seth and Friston, 2016; Quadt et al., 2018). This circular
signaling between body and brain, causing autonomic reactions,
can serve as an important entry point into therapeutic change, as
we discuss below.
The literature on reinforcement learning and the formation
of “habits” is relevant here. It is proposed that reinforcement
learning takes place in two ways. Model-based (goal-directed)
earning is essentially Bayesian, whereby the learner has a model
(e.g., a prior belief) that updates in the light of available
evidence. In model-free (habitual) learning, on the other hand,
“through the process of sequence learning, action control becomes
increasingly dependent on the history of previous actions and
independent of environmental stimuli, to the point that, given
some triggering event, the whole sequence of actions is expressed
as an integrated unit ” or habit (Dezfouli and Balleine, 2012,
p. 1038). Many empirical studies (in rodents and humans) show
that, during reinforcement learning, behavior is initially goal-
directed but then becomes habit-based. Importantly, it has been
shown empirically that habits are insensitive to both changes in
the context and changes in reinforcement (Dolan and Dayan,
2013). In other words, they persist inappropriately. In Friston’s
words “after the habit has been acquired, there is no opportunity
for pragmatic policies. This means that although the behaviour
is eﬃcient in terms of reaction times, the habit has precluded
exploitative behaviour” (Friston et al., 2016, p. 874). In this way
our patients’ emotional states can reinforce a style of interacting
with the world (habits) on the basis of active inference processes
gone awry and not in their best interest.
As a keen observer of the patient’s experience, the therapist
is poised to support the patient in aﬀecting change in the role
that dysfunctional priors (all too often from model-free/habitual
learning) play in their feeling experience, bodily reactivity,
behavior and thinking processes. The therapist, alert to when the
patient’s bodily reaction may be patterned along beliefs other than
those realistically related to the present moment, can be the initial
observer of these and invite the patient to actively attend to the
sensory experiences of their body. Attention invokes the crucial
role of “precision” in predictive processes.
INTEROCEPTIVE INFERENCE AND
SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE – THE ROLE
OF “PRECISION”
Within predictive processing theories it is well-understood that
“prediction, ” “prior” or “belief ” do not denote a consciously
held belief, but refer to activity occurring in the brain, which
is assumed to encode probability distributions (i.e., subpersonal
Bayesian beliefs). These distributions reﬂect the likelihood that
a particular prior is a good explanation for the current sensory
input that the brain is receiving (e.g., that “tiger” best explains the
sensory pattern on my retina). There is uncertainty (variance),
associated with any probability distribution. The inverse of this
variance – known as “precision” – is the salience, conﬁdence
or reliability attached to a particular prior or prediction error
(Friston, 2009). Within the brain, at any given moment, the
attached precision (i.e., the relative reliability/salience) of the
bottom-up sensation vs. the top-down prior belief is modulated
by many factors (such as attention and motivation). The relative
weight, i.e., the precision of the prior belief vs. the incoming
sensory information is the determining factor in whether
updating of a prior occurs. Prediction errors stemming from
sensation that is precise (reliable) will update an imprecise prior.
However, a highly precise prior (e.g., a historical prior or habit
that has preverbal roots from infancy) may resist updating.
For example, the prediction errors for danger invoked by the
possibility of a tiger are highly precise and drive ANS as well as
motor reﬂexes. Nevertheless, the prior for a tiger loose in a city is
very imprecise (unlikely) and is easily updated to “cat.”
Attention is a key driver (or psychological homolog) of
precision (e.g., Feldman and Friston, 2010; Edwards et al., 2012).
Pezzulo (2014) uses an engaging story about a dark night,
a creaking shutter and fears of an intruder (the imaginary
bogeyman), to illustrate this. He notes that interoceptive
sensory information is often aﬀorded more attention than
exteroception because it is commonly experienced as more
certain by the individual, thus maintaining higher precision
relative to other sources of sensation and consequently asserting
a disproportionate eﬀect in the inference process. Pezzulo
describes how the resulting aﬀective experience and the resulting
physiological reactions might create a belief of immediate
danger (from a bogeyman) in the middle of the night.
Importantly for our purposes, he describes how shifts in
precision due to unrecognized attentional imperatives can
result in experiences and behavior that seem to reﬂect the
reality of the moment, yet are actually the result of signiﬁcant
distortions (Pezzulo, 2014).
In our patients’ models of the world, precision dictates how
strongly they hold to their priors, in spite of evidence to the
contrary. Patients suﬀer where they rely on highly over-learned
and thus very precise priors which do not reﬂect the truth but
are diﬃcult to update, as they have gained relative strength
with repetition over time and have become habits that are
insensitive to changes in context or reinforcement. For example,
for an anxious person at times of fearful distress instigated by
perceived threat, the default prior “danger” will be aﬀorded
higher precision. As a result, prediction errors signaling that they
are actually safe don’t update this prior, as the individual fails
to attend to, and thus increase the precision of, disconﬁrming
evidence in the here and now. Crucially, these prediction errors
can be resolved instead by changing the body so that it ﬁts the
habitual prior (e.g., by raising heart rate to ﬁt the prior for threat).
In other words, interoceptive prediction errors instigate the
very autonomic reactions that drive the ANS into inappropriate
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 9
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
arousal (freeze, ﬂight, ﬁght) in order to conﬁrm the habitual
prior. This high bodily arousal will be experienced as fear, as
the emotional state updates to ﬁt the incoming information of
arousal. From the perspective of the patient’s emotions, this
illustrates the classic James-Lange contention that we feel fear
when we receive peripheral information from the body.
What is striking here, for psychotherapeutic treatment, is
that the expected interoceptive arousal state that corresponds
to fear – such as muscle tension, heart rate increases, or
hormonal response – is actually being produced within the
body in response to the initial highly precise prior of perceived
threat, although such a threat does not actually exist at that
moment. Such conceptualizations explain the observations at
the beginning in this paper that a patient will be certain that
she is scared only because her heart is beating faster. This
contention can now be seen as circular causality between the
brain and the body, provoked by active inference. Interoceptive
prediction errors have descended to activate ANS reﬂexes that
aﬀect the body by raising heart rate. Sensation that has been
created by ANS activity then returns up the hierarchy to the
brain and veriﬁes fear as the person’s “ value-based choice about
the internal state of [their] body ” (Gu and FitzGerald, 2014,
p. 269). In other words, the high precision of the habitual/default
prior for danger unfortunately speciﬁes that fear is indeed
a predicted and familiar state for the individual to be in,
which itself reinforces the precision of the prior rather than
there being any attention to disconﬁrming evidence. Sadly, the
brain returns the body to a state of fearful arousal, simply
because this is the expected state, ostensibly with free energy
lower overall as there is less uncertainty (Friston, 2010; Clark,
2016; Ondobaka et al., 2017). Such moments – when precise
prior expectation cause ANS reaction and thus bring about
the perceived conﬁrmation of the original expectation – are
important points of therapeutic access, which we will address
in detail below.
Some priors are obviously more resistant to updating from
sensory evidence than others. Yon and colleagues point out
that if the brain were actually an “ ideal scientist , ” as predictive
processing explanations imply, then a hypothesis about the causes
of sensation would simply be compared to the evidence and the
brain would update this hypothesis accordingly. But in real life
priors are often resistant to disconﬁrmation, either as a result of
evolutionary pressures (as in the case of homeostatic set points)
or through developmental processes, creating a situation where
the brain acts more like a “ stubborn scientist” (Yon et al., 2019,
citing Bruineberg et al., 2018). This characterization highlights
how important it is to investigate and address possible sources
of resistant prior beliefs or habits. All psychological treatments
have some process orientation that supports the instigation and
testing of hypotheses by their patients.
For the purposes of this paper, we focus on infancy as
a vital time for the inferential processing of experience into
beliefs about self and others, habits, as well as the linking of
emotion and interoceptive processes and experience, within the
caretaking relationship. The psychological literature centers on
the importance of attachment in how an individual will react to
strong emotions (e.g., Stern, 1985; Bowlby, 1988; Siegel, 1999).
For example, the phrase “ implicit relational knowing , ” used
by Lyons-Ruth et al. (1998), Morgan et al. (1998), and
Stern et al. (1998), places the development of procedural
knowledge concerning both interactive processes and aﬀective
experience within the relational interactions between caretaker
and infant. Such caregiver-child interactions are especially
important with respect to periods of strong arousal, which is
considered to be the burgeoning experiential element of early
emotions (Schore, 2003).
It has been proposed that physical contact with caretakers in
infancy acts as an early homeostatic regulator, supporting the
development of the immature nervous system (Fotopoulou and
Tsakiris, 2017). Furthermore, it is argued that through the quality
of caregivers’ understanding of our body’s needs, coincident with
our nascent inferential processing of interactions with them and
with our inner and outer environments, our brains develop
early (unconscious) “prior beliefs” about the causes of our
sensory states. A child’s brain, for example, forms beliefs about
what situations are comforting or fearful through caregivers’
eﬀective (or ineﬀective) provision of necessary resources. Such
preverbal experiences (with subcortical representations that
may be more salient – i.e., have higher precision – than any
later cortical elaboration) strongly inﬂuence our physiological
regulatory processes and become imbued with motivational
signiﬁcance, thus forming the basis of our subjective emotional
experience and our interactions in the world. Activities within
an attachment relationship that settle the infant’s nervous system
occur following successful interactions between the infant and the
primary caretaker. In this case, interoceptive signals facilitating
homeostatic balance within the emerging predictive system of the
infant then support a sense of physiologic stability and overall
well-being (Fotopoulou and Tsakiris, 2017).
While addressing the importance of physical contact and
interpersonal interactions with caregivers on the development
of the self, Fotopoulou and Tsakiris (2017) link such bodily
based interactions with the development of early “ mentalization
of interoception .” Importantly they note that it is the direct
proximity, style of contact and care of the infant’s homeostatic
needs which are important progenitors of experience. As such
interactions become more complex, the growing child can “build
increasingly more sophisticated models of their own interoceptive
states, as well as strategies for minimizing free energy in the
interoceptive system” (Fotopoulou and Tsakiris, 2017, p. 17).
Commenting on the originally subcortical nature of emotion
(which is subsequently elaborated in the cortex), Solms (2019,
p. 13) makes the important point that “subcortical memory traces
cannot be retrieved in the form of images for the simple reason
that they do not consist in cortical mappings of the sensory-motor
surface organs .” This has the crucial implication that feelings
states (emotions) that have been acquired as habit sequences
in infancy may lack cortical expression. It is our contention
that these may, therefore, only be accessible through the bodily
(interoceptive) representations that accompany them. Daw has
suggested that “ hierarchical reinforcement learning decompose
a multistep decision problem into a nested set of choices at
diﬀerent levels of temporal abstraction .” He proposes that lower-
level choices are essentially “ model-free: stereotyped behavioral
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 10
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
sequences, like a tennis serve or a dance move ” (Daw, 2015,
p. 13750). If this is so, then our patients’ precise priors (that
appear unavailable to updating) may be characterized as low-level
habits or routines to which the patient has little conscious access,
other than that they create interoceptive (ANS) sensations. It is
therefore by attending to these interoceptive sensations, in the
safety of the therapeutic relationship, and by challenging their
relevance to the here and now, that we can increase the precision
of disconﬁrming evidence and hopefully move the patient from a
model-free reaction to one that is model-based, in which current
evidence can be evaluated and can update the model.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PSYCHOTHERAPY
As discussed above, it is generally accepted that emotion is always
accompanied by interoceptive sensations within the body that
signal what is motivationally salient to the individual. These
sensations can become conscious “feelings, ” which we deﬁne
here as emotions that are known and/or verbalized. While not
all emotion reaches awareness in the form of feeling, each
psychological school of thought has cogent theoretical reasons
for why it is therapeutic for the patient to bring emotions into
subjective awareness. Our focus here is to propose that attending
to interoception is crucial in this context.
Emotion, deﬁned as sensation with coincident motivation
and resulting autonomic sequelae (Strigo and Craig, 2016,
citing Rolls, 1999) can be described through the processing
of incoming interoceptive sensation that is integrated with
concurrent exteroceptive sensation (Seth and Friston, 2016). The
process by which this occurs, i.e., the “generative model” that is
used in the current moment (with its priors and precisions at
every level of the hierarchy), will tend to follow a pattern (i.e.,
a habit), that often represents a view of the world and the self that
was experienced within the early caretaking relationship. Such
reactions are not consciously remembered per se, but exist as a
set of bodily felt sensations that persist due to the salience (the
precision) that was aﬀorded to the various sensations in these
early relationships. For example, if the infant was not responded
to with consistent signaling of safety/certainty by caregivers –
communicated at the bodily level – the prior for threat will be
highly precise. That adult individual will tend to stay in a state of
increasing uncertainty about how others will respond and may be
unable to take account of disconﬁrming evidence. There follows
the crucial insight that this uncertainty/anxiety may actually be a
highly familiar state to the individual. The pernicious potential
eﬀect is that the brain will tend to accept this state as that to
which it should seek to return the body, in order to minimize free
energy, despite the fact that this state is represented by the patient
as distressing. For psychotherapeutic treatment, the implications
of interoceptive inference are thus profound. Our task is to revise
such familiar, but dysfunctional, priors (habits) to which the
patient tends to return. However, the power (i.e., precision) of
such priors highlights the early experiences of the body, which
may not have an explicit conceptual component although they
have bodily/emotional precisions that are very important for
determining the individual’s current state. Our proposal is that
acknowledging the inﬂuence of bodily sensation on the processes
of mind, and creating a window into the inﬂuence of the body
and sensory experience on emotional states and cognitions,
allows therapists a much wider range of interventions based on
the body than when engaging relationally with our patients in
“just” talk therapy.
To illustrate this, it is important to remember that within
a predictive processing view emotions and feelings are always
hypotheses that provide the best explanation for the many
interoceptive and exteroceptive cues which have to be explained.
For example, the (high-level, conscious) hypothesis “I am
anxious” may be the best available explanation for a breadth
of visual, auditory, somatosensory and (crucially) autonomic
sensations that are currently in play. Therapists can recognize
(rather readily) that there may be several other possible
explanations, yet patients are likely to reference a habitual
explanation for the stimuli that are commonly salient to them,
often creating a “story” regarding their meaning, even if such
responses are sub-optimal or create dysfunction. In determining
the point at which an intervention can be implemented
therapeutically, we make an important distinction between: (i)
“active interoceptive inference” in terms of a pre-reﬂective,
subpersonal assimilation of interoceptive cues that contextualizes
our autonomic reﬂexes and reactions to emotionally salient
cues; and (ii) the personal, reﬂective or propositional inference
involved in “mentalizing interoception, ” that raises emotions
into subjective awareness (as feelings) and thus involves
explicating the content of active (interoceptive) inference that
is available to conscious awareness (Fotopoulou and Tsakiris,
2017; Ondobaka et al., 2017).
To reiterate, bodily-based experiences will often over-
determine current perceptual content (i.e., emotional priors).
There may be a habitual and sub-optimal prior (generally
unconscious) that connects some harmless stimulus to a sub-
personal interoceptive inference, such that the body responds
as if there is a threat, with ANS sequelae. At this juncture,
however, if the patient is to engage in the selection of the
emotional state that is a better explanation for the sensory
evidence at hand, and reality in the present moment, s/he has
to have more than one hypothesis (prior) available. In other
words, s/he has to be able to select one emotional hypothesis
over another, particularly in times of emotional distress, in
order, for example, to distinguish “I am just excited” from
“I am anxious.” The therapist cannot draw attention to the
low-level prior that set the bodily/emotional reaction into play
(because this is subpersonal, or unconscious). However, by
drawing attention to the patient’s physical reaction (the ANS
sequelae) – which is available to awareness – they can heighten
the precision of the interoceptive evidence, thereby potentially
allowing the inferential process to aﬀect the habitual prior. This
creates an opportunity to explore new priors, i.e., alternative
explanations for these (now attended) bodily sensations, thus
enabling interoception to be consciously mentalized. Achieving
this desirable “mentalizing of interoception” necessarily requires
elevating (low-level) subpersonal emotional experience to a
higher, reﬂective level that, in turn, requires attending to
pre-reﬂective interoceptive inference i.e., attending to current
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 11
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
interoceptive sensations (Barrett et al., 2016; Hoemann et al.,
2017). This mentalizing ability can, however, only emerge
if we ﬁrst attend to (and thus increase the precision of)
interoceptive sensations.
Given that predictive processing theories indicate that to
alter habitual ANS reﬂexes requires a change in the precision
of the sensory evidence, to achieve this within the therapeutic
interaction, requires the patient’s active attention to current
bodily sensations, for example, the sensations associated with
their body in the chair and the feeling of the ground beneath
their feet. The mentalizing of interoception ostensibly starts as
an “imaginative” process of exploring bodily sensation. While,
strictly speaking, this also involves somatosensation, if the patient
attends and tries to receive, assess, and appraise the embodied
nature of all the sensation perceived, the result will necessarily
involve interoceptive appraisal (Farb et al., 2015).
Focused attention increases the precision of current bodily
sensations (thus generating ascending interoceptive prediction
errors). There is now increasing uncertainty. This at ﬁrst leads
to an increase in the intensity of the experienced feeling, which
the patient will ﬁnd unpleasant and to which the therapist must
consequently respond. The therapists’ persistent observation and
enquiry into the patient’s experienced state of their body is vital at
this juncture. Observing physical expressions such as eye contact,
facial and body movements, prosody of speech, muscle tension,
will facilitate a qualitative assessment of changes in the state of
the ANS (Schore, 2012).
Furthermore, the therapist must remain alert to many other
variables in the therapeutic process which aﬀect emotional
valence and which can cause change from positive to negative
valence (representing dynamic changes in free energy), without
the patient necessarily being aware. For example, sudden changes
in the manner in which patients express feelings verbally (less
spontaneous verbalizations, word choice, prosody), or alterations
in the patient’s physical response (more body tension, sitting
forward/back, folding up their legs and arms) could indicate
changing emotional valence within the patient and rising or
falling free energy. Pointing out bodily changes to the patient,
and encouraging them to reﬂect on what the therapist observes,
can bring to the fore contextual aspects of the present moment
that are stimulating increasing uncertainty in the patient but were
unrecognized by her. We propose that these physical expressions
are linked, ultimately, to early beliefs and relational expectations,
which are not recognized cognitively but are being expressed
bodily. It is our contention that when these come to awareness
in the patient, this provides an important element that supports
change, in any therapeutic process.
Uncertainty is constantly being evaluated across multiple
hierarchical levels in the brain at any moment, inﬂuencing
experience and behavior. As the therapist models recognition
of bodily changes to the patient and enquires about emotional
valence, and the change of valence in either direction, the patient
can better take a reﬂective position regarding their bodily-based
responses to their internal and external environment and the
attached uncertainty. This is a functional beneﬁt of mentalizing
interoception. A unique blend of possible insight is available to
the patient at such times – into aﬀective experience, cognitions
and current moment perspective – which also invite a process of
change which the patient can implement when they are no longer
in therapeutic session.
As the patient tries to discern the inherent faults of their
models of the world, the therapeutic relationship should oﬀer a
“safe haven, ” otherwise, a sense of threat may irreparably impact
the freedom the patient requires to explore. The safety of the
therapeutic relationship is paramount and must be attended
to, explicitly and implicitly, between therapist and patient. The
therapeutic attachment relationship in widely thought to be
important in supporting not only the perception of safety but
also to facilitate change (e.g., Cozolino, 2002; Wallin, 2007; Siegel,
2010). While a detailed discussion is beyond the scope of this
paper, we will focus on an element of the therapeutic relationship,
“the real relationship, ” which has speciﬁc aspects that can
be operationalized regarding the therapeutic relationship, the
treatment environment, and the predictive process aspects
of the mentalizing of interoception. The real relationship, is
deﬁned as the non-transference part of the relationship (Gelso,
2009), concerning the authentic, genuine and realistic aspects
of the relationship between therapist and patient (Duquette,
2010). We brieﬂy outline below what the real relationship
brings to the process.
The consistent presence of the therapist, experienced
repeatedly in times of uncertainty creates a history of moving
together within the therapist/patient dyad. And hopefully, such
times resolve for the patient with an increasing sense of veriﬁable
safety amidst open vulnerability. Such history “ encourages
the patient to move ‘deeper’ into the chaos experienced at any
given moment ” (Duquette, 2010, p. 141). The experienced
authentic, reality based, qualities of the relationship also
presents a space that is distinctly diﬀerent, and not laden with
the expectancies that occur with people the patient knows
(Morgan et al., 1998). Ultimately, as such elements of the
relationship lessen uncertainty in the therapeutic process, thus
decreasing prediction error, persistently supporting a gradient of
decreasing free energy.
All schools of psychotherapeutic treatment must address their
patients’ persistent prior beliefs, that are manifested in the form
of cognitions or behaviors that stem from inaccurate priors that
persist in the face of a diﬀerent current reality. Therapists use
every available resource to encourage the patient to become a
ﬂexible scientist and test their strongly held hypotheses against
a diﬀerent current reality. How the therapist will choose to
support the shifting of priors, using the direction of attention,
will depend upon the form of relational interaction delineated
by their particular protocol. For example, in Acceptance and
Commitment Therapy (ACT) the identiﬁcation of old beliefs
about the self will be paramount, together with means to
direct attention away from these toward disconﬁrming evidence.
In cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) the identiﬁcation of
cognitions is key, with attention being directed to unlinking
the associated reactive behaviors. The common experience
of transference can also be interpreted within a predictive
framework – as a process that molds the patient’s past priors
onto the present relationship – while counter-transference is the
functional equivalent for the therapist. The various therapeutic
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 12
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
schools will view the outcome of predictive processes (including
transference reactions) through the lens of their own philosophy
but all therapists will be better equipped if they recognize the
inherent diﬃculty that the patient has in trying to be an impartial
Bayesian scientist with respect to the sensory data of their inner
and outer world.
DISCUSSION OF CLINICAL VIGNETTE
The material and concepts outlined above inform the case study
contained in Box 3 . [Written informed consent was obtained
from all mentioned individuals for the publication of this case
report/case description, no identiﬁable information is included
and pseudonyms were used]. Elements of Molly’s clinical
interactions with the therapist illustrate how the neuroscientiﬁc
ideas described above are useful in psychotherapeutic treatment.
Within Molly’s history there are important clues from her
early life that foreshadow her diﬃculties with physiologic and
emotional regulation. Her mother is a highly inconsistent
presence during her ﬁrst year and likely longer, as Molly describes
that her family viewed her as independent from an early age.
There is evidence of homeostatic disruption: her sense that
“something bad was going to happen” as she awoke; her body
either over-reactive (moving all the time) or under-reactive
(sudden bursts of tears); and her strong sense of discomfort
in her body; and that her needs will be seen as an imposition
on others. Such symptoms echo the premise that homeostatic
processes are “ dependent on embodied interactions with other
bodies” (Fotopoulou and Tsakiris, 2017, p. 13).
The initial statement made by Molly, “ Things just had to
be diﬀerent, life shouldn’t be this hard , ” is pertinent. Habitual
behaviors are leading to poor outcomes as she enters adulthood,
and she can’t generate alternative hypotheses. She recognizes
that she can’t successfully problem-solve even the minor issues
in her life and reports her view of herself as “ inadequate
and needy , ” which causes problems in interactions with others.
Such persistent negative expectations create a snowball eﬀect
within Bayesian processing for patients with depressive disorders
(Barrett et al., 2016). Such patients are not able to appraise
disconﬁrming evidence adequately, either by discounting its
credibility, or by seeing it as the exception rather than the rule,
Molly’s ruminations presenting evidence of only her original
hypotheses and beliefs (Rief et al., 2015; Kube et al., 2017, 2019).
Considering mentalization from the perspective of intentional
mental states (Bateman and Fonagy, 2012), Molly’s initial
inability to use language to express her emotions – only being
able to know that life “ should” be diﬀerent, and her fear or
despair is “ something bad ” that might happen – is indicative
of mentalization in that form. The possible importance of
her mother’s absence due to hospitalization and depressive
symptoms, is indicated by Fotopoulou and Tsakiris (2017, p. 17)
claim that “ the origins of all mentalization processes are not
only embodied but also by necessity involve other people’s bodies,
their physical presence, proximity, contact and most importantly,
their homeostatically relevant actions .” It appears that Molly’s
temperament, physicality and the actions of other caretakers may
have helped her push through such early deprivation. However,
ultimately the eﬀect of the impaired regulatory processes that she
would have experienced with her mother’s long absences in her
infancy are evidenced in her symptoms in each domain.
Early in the session, as the therapist enquires about Molly’s
constant physical movement. She is initially unable to be still
or to respond in a reﬂective manner and she expresses a strong
sense of threat. Stillness would only leave her in “an empty place, ”
“painfully uncomfortable for me.” The interceptive sensation from
her body simply reinforces Molly’s prior beliefs and fearful state.
She cannot intentionally pursue any deliberation. At this juncture
the therapist oﬀers an alternative view. She encourages Molly to
imagine whether she feels the pain inside or outside her body.
When Molly begins to take part in this cooperative narrative
about her discomfort, the therapist puts herself forward as a safe
space in which to try out something new by inviting Molly to test
her negative expectation “here with me.” The therapist encourages
her to look for new evidence by making eye contact with her,
while stressing “ the obvious elements of safety of the moment .”
In several ways the therapist thus scaﬀolds Molly’s eﬀorts to
mentalize her interoceptive experience, ultimately resulting in
a noticeable diﬀerence in the activation of Molly’s body, with
deeper breathing and tears.
Molly’s reactions to the therapist’s interventions relate
directly to how the body can be supported within relational
interactions, allocating resources more eﬀectively allostatically,
thus eﬀectively altering the ANS reactivity that stems from
suboptimal habitual priors. The physical changes observed – the
slowing of her breathing, increased eye contact and lessened
bodily tension, evidence a shift in Molly’s autonomic state from
a high sympathetically driven state toward a state with more
parasympathetic control (Zautra et al., 2010: Vlemincx et al.,
2015; Strigo and Craig, 2016) and indicate an updating of priors.
Attending to sensory experience from a position of
observation, without judgment, allows the individual’s higher-
order cognitive processes to shift into state of more open
consideration and observation (Farb et al., 2015). This permits
a new ﬂexibility, which can facilitate awareness of interoceptive
sensations, to which the patient may not habitually attend,
and which may promote positive experiences and lessen the
individual’s automatic return to cognitive elaboration or “stories”
(Fogel, 2009; Farb et al., 2015). Ultimately, there will be a decrease
in the general energy output (i.e., free energy) that a person may
typically spend on self-regulation, especially if they employ active
inferential processes (i.e., ﬁring up ANS reactivity), in which
they are eﬀectively trying to change their own bodies to ﬁt the
dysfunctional habitual prior to which the brain continually seeks
to return them. This can be seen in Molly’s original assertion
that “I have to keep moving to be safe ” which ﬁnally shifts to less
tension. Deliberate intention is required to move into such a
more observational mode with respect to experience. Initially
such a relaxation of energy may feel diﬃcult for the patient, due
to the automatic nature of the habitual prior. However, with
practice, the sense of relief that can follow a change from lower
to higher free energy (Joﬃly and Coricelli, 2013) can positively
encourage the patient. Notably, Molly’s activity level did not
increase again throughout the remained of her ﬁrst session.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 13
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
BOX 3 |Clinical case study.
[Written informed consent for the publication of this case study was obtained from all the individuals mentioned. No identiﬁable information is included. Pseudonyms
are used throughout.]
Molly was 20 years old when she entered long term individual and group therapy. She made an appointment because her sibling who was in treatment suggested
she do so, “If you need someone to talk to.” Molly could only express a sense that somehow “things just had to be different, life shouldn’t be this hard.” When Molly
was a year old, her mother was psychiatrically hospitalized for major depression for several weeks and was thereafter often debilitated. Molly was considered bright
and independent by her family, which was important to her sense of herself, an example she remembered was that by the age of seven she would travel miles away
from their suburban home on her bicycle, only returning in the evening. At presentation she could describe that she was readily upset by small problems, had
difﬁculty in relationships as she now saw herself as “inadequate and needy,” feeling constant self-criticism about her interactions with others. She complained of
often not falling asleep due to ruminative thinking and having the sense “like something bad was going to happen” as she awoke each morning.
She rarely sat still, a leg jiggling, shifting in her seat, moving her hands. If asked what she felt in her body, she looked perplexed and said, “Nothing.” Although she
expressed little insight into her emotional or physical state, she was quick to tears when touched by strong feelings, and would tense her facial muscles and throat to
limit their expression. Her answers were often content-based and lacked contextual depth. However, with a clear sense of empathy for other’s experiences, Molly
rarely was critical of others, but of herself in most instances.
In an individual session early in her therapy, Molly’s constant motion was addressed by her therapist. “You seem to be constantly on the move, any feelings that
you are aware of?” She recognized she did “move a bit but if I don’t I will be bored.” When asked what “bored” meant, she could only say it was like, “an empty
place, that just isn’t good to be in.” Her therapist then asked Molly if she could sit entirely still and Molly immediately ﬂatly insisted, “No that would just be too
uncomfortable.” Quizzically the therapist asked, “Uncomfortable? Sitting still is more uncomfortable than moving your legs, hands, and shifting in your chair so
often?” “Sitting still is just uncomfortable, like painful uncomfortable for me, maybe not you, but for me it is.” Does it feel as if the painful sense is in your body
somewhere, or does it feel as if something painful will come from outside your body if you sit still?” Molly paused for a minute, “Hmmm, well now that you put it that
way. . .I know I do feel uncomfortable in my body, I don’t know but maybe it’s that thing you call feelings? I just never sit still with people and it is just safer all around.”
Her therapist offered, “How about you give it a try here, with me. How about you put your feet on the ﬂoor and your hands in your lap, just for 30 seconds now?”
Molly resisted through a few rounds of interaction, then skeptically placed her feet on the ground, and put her hands in her lap. She didn’t make eye contact and she
held her body rigidly in place, but her breathing slowed gradually as her eyes softened and began to well with tears. “Any idea of what your tears are about?” her
therapist asked. After a pause, Molly said, “It just feels like in the world there is too much that will hurt me, and I have to keep away and keep moving to be safe.” Her
therapist invited her to make eye contact, take a deeper breath, while also talking about the obvious elements of safety of the moment and how she, the therapist,
was alert to any possible dangers for Molly. Slowly Molly raised her eyes, took a slightly deeper breath as tears fell more readily from her eyes. She said slowly, “It just
feels like I have this pressure in my head, like at my forehead, like all my feelings are bound up there.” Her body had become less tense, her voice softening. Her
activity level didn’t increase again throughout the remainder of the session, exhibiting a deepening emotional involvement with her therapist.
Molly drove an old car and she could make any necessary repairs, which were frequent. One day she repaired her car alone on a city street in a dangerous area,
rather than asking anyone to help her ﬁx it or get it towed to a safer place. She came to group directly after that repair, with dark grease on her hands and her clothes
disheveled. A group member, visibly upset, said “How could you just start working on your car in such a dangerous part of the city, and alone, too!” Molly answered
caustically, “And what was I supposed to do? I had no choice, I had to get here, I don’t need to ask anyone for help, that’s how I could work on it on the street. I
don’t care where the street is!” The other patient asked, “Did you even think about asking anyone for help when your car broke down?” “No, I’ve never asked anyone
for help when I can take care of the problem.” With a softer voice, the other patient said, “But you were on a street in the city alone, you could have been in a lot of
danger, just having someone nearby would have been a help, wouldn’t it?” Molly became more physically agitated at that interchange. “I don’t care that I was alone,
I can take care of myself just ﬁne, that’s just the way you do things, no one is there to help with problems, they just add to them, you just don’t understand.” With
that Molly sat back in her chair, arms and legs crossed with a deep scowl on her face and looked at the carpet.
Her therapist spoke to her next, saying softly “Any idea of what you feel?”
“They’re an idiot, that’s what I feel!”
“Well, Molly, “They’re an idiot” is not a feeling—any emotional feeling, hurt, scared, angry?”
“No, well, maybe pissed!”
“Hmmm, your voice has tears in it, does that ﬁt with pissed?”
“I don’t know, they can be as critical as they want, I take care of what I have to. However, I have to take care of it, and I don’t need anyone’s help.”
“Right now you appear to need some kind of help, you have tears in your eyes and your voice, and a frown on your face, your body is folded up tight.”
“I’m just pissed.” Molly said this with tears welling in her eyes, her eyes focused on the rug in the room, and her body tensing more.
Molly continued to frown, while tears spilling down her face, which she wiped away with force. She was invited to unfold her arms, and to set her feet on the ﬂoor.
She did this, reluctantly, her eyes remaining focused on the rug in the center of the room. The other patients looked concerned and at a loss as to how to approach
Molly as she interpreted their compassion as judgment regarding her choices.
The therapist believed that Molly felt not only threatened by the other’s opinion but also by the compassion inherently expressed in the group’s stated concerns,
which was disorienting as it was unfamiliar to her. To manage this feeling of threat, Molly had withdrawn from emotional contact with others and her body was
shoring up her defensive position, both against interaction with others and self-experience. She believed the other misunderstood her independence, essentially
belittling it when Molly wore it somewhat as a badge of honor. She could not access any sensation in her body, and was unable to think through any other possible
explanations regarding her experience or actions and others’ intentions. Her therapist recognized that Molly had implemented the only action plan she had known
throughout her life, while repairing her car, and was continuing to do so in the therapy session, addressing only the content of the issue in front of her. As her
therapist recognized Molly’s body was highly reactive with fear, she understood that questioning Molly directly regarding her emotional state would only draw Molly’s
bright brain into the answer, forcing Molly to create a “story” to explain her beliefs about her choice to repair the car, other’s intentions, and insist that she needed no
further help from any others.
Her therapist asked, “What do you feel in your body right now?”
“Nothing. . .maybe some tightness”
“Can you say where the tightness is most?”
“All I know is I can feel that ball of tightness up in my head, here, near the front of my forehead.” Molly ducked her head further into her chest, eyes downcast.
“So, there is tightness. Does it feel like this tightness is trying to keep something inside, or keep it outside?”
Molly considered the question for a while and then answered hesitantly, “Inside?”
“Why would you need to keep something inside?”
“I often have this feeling in my head, like there is something physically bound up in there. Maybe it is feelings but it sure seems physical to me. I’ve always felt like
this if there was upset anywhere, it just takes me into myself, where I know I’m safe.” Molly’s voice softened a little.
(Continued)
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 14
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
BOX 3 |Continued
“You say it may be feelings bound up in there. So, if those feelings moved, or were felt, it wouldn’t be safe for you? What could be the danger?”
“If the feelings moved others would be able to see them. And if they see them, they would react in a way that wouldn’t be good. It never has been good.” Molly’s
voice sounded less tense and reactive with this answer.
“You would be vulnerable if they saw your feelings, eh? Your voice is changing now, can you feel any other sensation now?”
“I can feel my shoulders are tight and my legs want to run.”
As the therapist was interacting with Molly, she noted that not only had her voice changed but the pressure in her speech was less. She would glance at the
therapist, and she appeared almost curious about the questions. At other points in Molly’s therapy, in the group, she had used an intervention which she considered
at this juncture, always with Molly’s explicit agreement. The therapist would offer some words that Molly might say about her experience, and some simple physical
actions to make with the words that ampliﬁed their meaning. And with the other patients’ agreement, Molly would express herself in the other patients’ direction, to
facilitate a sense of relational interaction, and evidence the other holds no malice. Such interventions had helped Molly decrease her habitual response, by increasing
her felt sense of her body, supporting her increased awareness of what emotion she was feeling in the moment.
The therapist asked Molly if she was willing to “try something to help her continue moving out of that bound up place,” to which Molly said “yes.” She invited Molly
to sit out further in her chair and look at the patient who had addressed her earlier in the session.
“How about you say to her: “You don’t know what it is to not have help!” As loudly as you can.”
Molly began hesitantly, barely able to keep eye contact, but gamely trying to do so. With encouragement Molly’s voice became louder with each attempt. Soon
she was saying the phrase very loudly, assertively and with direct eye contact. She then became quiet and tears began to ﬂow readily down her face, the frown gone
and her eyes much more expressive. All the members of her group were looking at her with encouragement, even the person at whom she was yelling. The tension
in Molly’s body lessened visibly.
“Can you feel any more sensations now?” Molly replied with a wry chuckle as she motioned across the room, “My eyes feel less tight, and she doesn’t look like
she did a while ago. I don’t know why but my head doesn’t have that bound up feeling, my legs feel really tingly, and my chest – it feels like there is something
moving in it. And I feel a deep pain there.” She sat back with her eyes softening more, appearing to consider something carefully inside herself. “Well, the feeling that
there isn’t any help has lessened, and I don’t feel so alone, but that tightness in my forehead is a lot less and some sort of feeling in my chest is really strong now. I
think it feels like my heart has a place in my chest now? Which is good I know, but wow, does it hurt, too.”
During the subsequent interaction with another group
member, Molly’s habitual prior is voiced that others cannot
be counted on, and must be critical of her. She became very
agitated and after dismissing the other as “ an idiot , ” she said
she was “pissed.” However, her tears and physical agitation were
physical signals that she was not likely to be referencing the
current interoceptive processes that were instigating feelings.
When asked, why she was feeling what she claimed she felt,
Molly further elaborated on the ruminative material (“ pissed”),
as the precision aﬀorded to such beliefs severely limited any
possible awareness of other options. As the therapist inquired
into her bodily state, she helped Molly place her attention on
her reported “tightness” and decrease her habitual ruminations.
She understood that Molly couldn’t, at that moment, question the
content of what the other (compassionate) patient had said to her.
Instead, the therapist began drawing attention to the sequelae of
her (overdetermined) sympathetic nervous system reaction of the
moment, noted as tension by Molly, asking “ What do you feel in
your body right now?”
The therapist began with Molly’s word choice (“ tightness”
and “bound up”) but increasingly expanded the ﬁeld of options
(“vulnerable” and “danger| ”). As she again helped Molly to direct
her attention to diﬀerent aspects of the experience, this supported
Molly in gaining control of her attentional resources. This is
crucial in making her interoceptive sensations more precise (e.g.,
“Can you say where the tightness is most ?”). While this initially
increased the strength of the aﬀective feeling (as evidenced by
Molly ducking her head and insisting that she has to withdraw
into herself, “ where I know I’m safe ”), disconﬁrming evidence
can gain precision by this path and new alternative priors can
be considered. At this point the real relationship between the
therapist and Molly is an anchoring element. The manner in
which the therapist readily accepts Molly’s description at ﬁrst
but continues to question, as well as the inﬂection of her voice
(“You would be vulnerable if they saw your feelings, eh ?”), reﬂect
that she and Molly have been through such moments before.
Molly’s decreasing tension implies a change in the experienced
emotional valence to a more positive level (even though she is
uncertain of the outcome), implying increasing conﬁdence that
they have made it through together before to where the therapist
is leading, without encountering the dangers she is habitually
expecting at that moment.
As Molly continued to engage, her voice became less reactive,
and she even expressed curiosity. As the therapist observed
Molly’s increasing self-reﬂective stance, she decided it would be
clinically helpful to invite Molly to express her experience to
others in ways that lessened her sense of aloneness, speaking
directly to the other patients, who verbalized their willingness.
The intervention with the other patient in the group
encouraged Molly to address her prior beliefs that she was
unsafe in interaction with others. She was helped to shift from
the position of a “stubborn scientist” to that of a Bayesian
observer. The physical changes in her body, as well as the increase
in her verbal deliberations about the possible implications of
such experience in the moment, is evidence of changes in the
precisions of sensations throughout the hierarchy which activated
her body and had previously prevented the evaluation of new
evidence. Ultimately, at that point she could recognize others’
presence with her and allow such presence to be helpful. While
there would have to be many more episodes of such experimental
trials, as precisions develop a life of their own, Molly was
able to acknowledge aloud a sense of vulnerability and “ deep
pain.” Her feelings could be witnessed by others, which she
recognized as safe and necessary, indicating a more emotionally
open and deliberative stance. Molly was then able to make a
profound statement about the embodied experience of her own
emotion – as if her heart had gained space in her chest, which
was experienced as both somewhat painful yet also soothing.
Molly’s response to the therapist’s recommendation to engage
with the other patients also highlights various ﬁndings in
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 15
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
neuroscience research. Molly’s voice became more assertive
with each attempt and she was able to direct her eye contact
purposefully. Eye contact has been found to support attention
to subjective experience and increase the accuracy of emotional
report about interoceptive experience (Baltazar et al., 2014).
Molly used more expressive language (“ I don’t feel so alone ”)
to describe her feeling state (i.e., increasing the precision of
interoceptive sensation and prediction errors, to counter over-
precise priors). Allowing others to witness her tears is indicative
of lessening fear in Molly, reﬂecting a changing emotional
valence for her, and likely falling free energy. Making eye
contact, breathing deeper and crying openly is proof that she
was experiencing a change in emotional valence, suggestive of
an increasing positive valence, as she became more hopeful.
Such behavior and the resulting interactions between Molly
and her therapist became possible, as free energy decreased,
lessening the need for the highly defensive behavior exhibited
before. Changes in her aﬀective experience as Molly sat up
straighter in her seat reﬂect Ceunen et al. (2014) ﬁnding that
an upright posture is associated with more positive aﬀect than
slouching, possibly because an upright stance expresses pride
or power. During the intervention in the group, there was an
obvious shift in Molly’s ANS reactivity, as evidenced by her
chuckle and less bodily tension (Ceunen et al., 2014). Payne et al.
(2015) assert that diverting the patient’s attention temporarily
to a physical experience that gives them a sense of safety can
mitigate extremes in autonomic reactivity in the body (Payne
et al., 2015). Then – a little at a time – the patient can turn their
attention again to the disturbance and slowly regain ANS balance.
For Molly this intervention ostensibly created the physiologic
equivalent of emotional “space” from which she could more
deliberately address her experience in the present moment.
She can consider alternatives to her prior beliefs of danger
in the world, even ultimately allowing the open expression of
vulnerability, with tears.
CONCLUSION
Our patients come to therapy when habitual responses, which
are embedded within their physiology, fail to produce expected
or desired outcomes. Predictive processing theories of the brain
as an inference machine cast valuable light on how such
dysfunctional patterns of responding can come about in infancy
and be highly resistant to change. In order to change a prior it
is necessary to act on the interoceptive system that created that
prior in the ﬁrst place.
Increasing attention to interoceptive sensation changes the
balance of precision between the current interoceptive sensation
and the “stubborn prior.” This change in precision can update
a resistant prior and in doing so increase the patient’s ability
to “mentalize interoception, ” allowing alternative hypotheses
to be generated about subjective experience. Intervening to
inﬂuence precision similarly supports the patient’s eﬀorts to
bring emotion into awareness, which increases opportunities
for their verbal expression – an important outcome of any
therapeutic encounter.
We propose that the crucial point of access, within the
therapeutic relationship is for the patient to focus attention onto
their current internal bodily sensations (their interoception).
Attention to the body, and the feelings that accompany
this, sets in train a series of responses that may permit
updating of default/habitual beliefs and the expectations that
cause the patient distress in their current relationship to
themselves, others and the world. We describe how this can re-
calibrate the patient’s interoceptive responses, increase emotional
awareness, strengthen evaluative thought patterns and allow the
patient the ﬂexibility to discern what is real and present in
any given moment.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
PD initiated the manuscript. Both authors contributed equally to
the composition of the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the reviewers (KF and MM) and
Jim Hopkins, for their help in delineating the above ideas; and
Cynthia Duquette for editorial support.
REFERENCES
Adam, G. (2010).Visceral Perception: Understanding Internal Cognition. New York,
NY: Plenum Press.
Adolﬁ, F., Couto, B., Richter, F., Decety, J., Lopez, J., Sigman, M., et al. (2017).
Convergence of interoception, emotion, and social cognition: a twofold fMRI
meta-analysis and lesion approach. Cortex 88, 124–142. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.
2016.12.019
Allen, J. G., Fonagy, P., and Bateman, A. W. (2008).Mentalizing in Clinical Practice.
Washington, D.C: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Allen, M., Levy, A., Parr, T., and Friston, K. (2019). In the body’s eye: the
computational anatomy of interoceptive inference. Biorxiv 10, doi: 10.1101/
603928
Baltazar, M., Hazem, N., Vilarem, E., Beaucousin, V., Picq, J. L.,
and Conty, L. (2014). Eye contact elicits bodily self-awareness in
human adults. Cognition 133, 120–127. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2014.
06.009
Bar-Levav, R. (1988). Thinking in the Shadow of Feelings: A New Understanding of
the Hidden Forces That Shape Individuals and Societies . New York, NY: Simon
and Schuster.
Barrett, L. F. (2011). Constructing emotion. Psychol. Top. 20, 359–380.
Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K., Bliss-Moreau, E., and Aronson, K. (2004). Interoceptive
sensitivity and self-reports of emotional experience.J. Personal. Soc. Psychol.87,
684–697. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.87.5.684
Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., and Hamilton, P. (2016). An active inference theory of
allostasis and interoception in depression.Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B371:20160011.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0011
Barrett, L. F., and Simmons, W. K. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in the brain.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 16, 419–429. doi: 10.1038/nrn3950
Bateman, A. W., and Fonagy, P. (2012).Handbook of Mentalizing in Mental Health
Practice. Washington, D.C: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Berntson, G. G., Norman, G. J., Bechara, A., Bruss, J., Tranel, D., and Cacioppo,
J. T. (2011). The insula and evaluative processes. Psychol. Sci. 22, 80–86. doi:
10.1177/0956797610391097
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 16
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
Besharati, S., Forkel, S. J., Kopelman, M., Solms, M., Jenkinson, P. M., and
Fotopoulou, A. (2015). Mentalising the body: spatial and social cognition in
anosognosia for hemiplegia. Brain 139(Pt 3), 971–985. doi: 10.1093/brain/
awv390
Bowlby, J. (1988). A Secure Base: Parent Child Attachment and Healthy Human
Development. London: Routledge.
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., and Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not
a scientist: the free-energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective.
Synthese 195, 2417–2444. doi: 10.1007/s11229-016-1239-1231
Cameron, O. G. (2001). Interoception: the inside story–a model for psychosomatic
processes. Psychosom. Med. 63, 697–710. doi: 10.1097/00006842-200109000-
00001
Cannon, W. B. (1932). The Wisdom of the Body . New York, NY: W.W. Norton &
Company.
Ceunen, E., Vlaeyen, J. W., and Van Diest, I. (2016). On the Origin of Interoception.
Front. Psychol. 23:743. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00743
Ceunen, E., Zaman, J., Vlaeyen, J. W., Dankaerts, W., and Van Diest, I. (2014).
Eﬀect of seated trunk posture on eye blink startle and subjective experience:
comparing ﬂexion, neutral upright posture, and extension of spine. PLoS One
9:e88482. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088482
Clark, A. (2016). Surﬁng Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind .
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cozolino, L. (2002). The Neuroscience of Psychotherapy: Building and Rebuilding
the Human Brain. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company.
Craig, A. D. (2002). ). How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiological
condition of the body. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 655–666. doi: 10.1038/
nrn894
Craig, A. D. (2008). “Interoception and emotion: a neuroanatomical perspective, ”
Handbook of Emotions,3 Edn, eds Lewis, M, Haviland-Jones, J, Feldman Barrett,
L (New York, NY: Guilford Press), 272-290.
Craig, A. D. (2009a). Emotional moments across time: a possible neural basis for
time perception in the anterior insula. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 364,
1933–1942. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2009.0008
Craig, A. D. (2009b). How do you feel — now? The anterior insula and human
awareness. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 59–70. doi: 10.1038/nrn2555
Craig, A. D. (2010). The sentient self. Brain Struct. Funct. 6, 563–577. doi: 10.1007/
s00429-010-0248-y
Craig, A. D. (2011). Signiﬁcance of the insula for the evolution of human awareness
of feelings from the body.Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.1225, 72–82. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-
6632.2011.05990.x
Craig, A. D. (2015). How Do You Feel? An Interoceptive Moment with Your
Neurobiological Self. Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Critchley, H. D., and Garﬁnkel, S. N. (2017). Interoception and emotion. Cur.r
Opin. Psychol. 17, 7–14. doi: 10.1016/j.copsyc.2017.04.020
Critchley, H. D., and Harrison, N. A. (2013). Visceral Inﬂuences on
Brain and Behavior. Neuron 77, 624–638. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.
02.008
Critchley, H. D., and Nagai, Y. (2012). How emotions are shaped by bodily states.
Emot. Rev. 4, 163–168. doi: 10.1177/1754073911430132
Critchley, H. D., and Seth, A. (2012). Will studies of macaque insula reveal the
neural mechanisms of self-awareness? Neuron 74, 423–426. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuron.2012.04.012
Critchley, H. D., Wiens, S., Rotshtein, P., Öhman, A., and Dolan, R. J. (2004).
Neural systems supporting interoceptive awareness. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 189–195.
doi: 10.1038/nn1176
Damasio, A., Damasio, H., and Tranel, D. (2013). Persistence of feelings and
sentience after bilateral damage of the insula. Cereb. Cortex 23, 833–846.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs077
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason and the Human Brain .
New York, NY: Picador.
Damasio, A. R. (2010). Self Comes to Mind: Constructing the Conscious Brain .
New York, NY: Pantheon Books.
Daw, N. (2015). Of goals and habits.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.112, 13749–13750.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1518488112
Dezfouli, A., and Balleine, B. W. (2012). Habits, action sequences and
reinforcement learning. Eur. J. Neurosci. 35, 1036–1051. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-
9568.2012.08050.x
Dolan, R. J., and Dayan, P. (2013). Goals and habits in the brain. Neuron 80,
312–325. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.09.007
Duquette, P. (2010). Reality matters: attachment, the real relationship, and
change in psychotherapy. Am. J. Psychother. 64, 127–151. doi: 10.1176/appi.
psychotherapy.2010.64.2.127
Duquette, P. (2017). Increasing our insular world view: interoception and
psychopathology for psychotherapists. Front. Neurosci. 21:135. doi: 10.3389/
fnins.2017.00135
Edwards, M. J., Adams, R. A., Brown, H., Parees, I., and Friston, K. J. (2012).
A Bayesian account of ‘hysteria’. Brain 135, 3495–3512. doi: 10.1093/brain/
aws129
Eshkevari, E., Rieger, E., Musiat, P., and Treasure, J. (2014). An investigation of
interoceptive sensitivity in eating disorders using a heartbeat detection task and
a self-report measure. Eur. Eat. Disord. Rev. 22, 383–388. doi: 10.1002/erv.2305
Farb, N., Daubenmier, J., Price, C. J., Gard, T., Kerr, C., Dunn, B. D., et al.
(2015). Interoception, contemplative practice, and health. Front. Psychol. 9:763.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00763
Feldman, H., and Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2:215. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215
Fletcher, P. C., and Frith, C. D. (2009). Perceiving Is Believing: a Bayesian Approach
to Explaining the Positive Symptoms of Schizophrenia. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10,
48–58. doi: 10.1038/nrn2536
Fogel, A. (2009). The Psychophysiology of Self-Awareness: Rediscovering the Lost Art
of Body Sense. New York, NY: W.W. Norton.
Fonagy, P., and Target, M. (2006). The mentalization-focused approach to self
pathology. J. Pers. Disord. 20, 544–576. doi: 10.1521/pedi.2006.20.6.544
Fotopoulou, A. (2015). The virtual bodily self: mentalization of the body as revealed
in anosognosia for hemiplegia. Conscious. Cogn. 33, 500–510. doi: 10.1016/j.
concog.2014.09.018
Fotopoulou, A., and Tsakiris, M. (2017). Mentalizing homeostasis: the social
origins of interoceptive inference. Neuropsychoanalysis 19, 3–28. doi: 10.1080/
15294145.2017.1294031
Frijda, N. H. (1986). The Emotions. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Frijda, N. H. (2007). The Laws of Emotion . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associate.
Friston, K. J. (2009). The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain? Trends
Cogn. Sci. 13, 293–301. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. J. (2013). Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 10:20130475.
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K. J., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., O’Doherty, J., and
Pezzulo, G. (2016). Active inference and learning. Neuro. Biobehav. Rev. 68,
862–879. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.06.022
Friston, K. J., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle for the
brain. J. Physiol. 100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001
Frith, C. (2007). Making up the Mind: How the Brain Creates Our Mental World .
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & Sons, 2007.
Gelso, C. J. (2009). The real relationship in a postmodern world: theoretical
and empirical explorations. Psychother. Res. 19, 253–264. doi: 10.1080/
10503300802389242
Gu, X., and FitzGerald, T. (2014). Interoceptive Inference: homeostasis and
Decision-making. Trends Cogn. Sci.18, 269–270. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2014.02.001
Gu, X., Gao, Z., Wang, X., Liu, X., Knight, R. T., Hof, P. R., et al. (2012).
Anterior insular cortex is necessary for empathetic pain perception. Brain 135,
2726–2735. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws199
Gu, X., Hof, P. R., Friston, K., and Fan, J. (2013a). Anterior insular cortex and
emotional awareness. J. Comp. Neurol. 521, 3371–3388. doi: 10.1002/cne.23368
Gu, X., Liu, X., Van Dam, N. T., Hof, P. R., and Fan, J. (2013b). Cognition-
emotion integration in the anterior insular cortex. Cereb. Cortex 23, 20–27.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr367
Harrison, N. A., Gray, M. A., Gianaros, P. J., and Critchley, H. D. (2010). The
embodiment of emotional feelings in the brain. J. Neurosci. 38, 12878–12884.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1725-10.2010
Harshaw, C. (2015). Interoceptive dysfunction: toward an integrated framework for
understanding somatic and aﬀective disturbance in depression. Psychol. Bull.
141, 311–363. doi: 10.1037/a0038101
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 16 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 17
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
Herbert, B. M., and Pollatos, O. (2012). The body in the mind: on the relationship
between interoception and embodiment. Top. Cogn. Sci. 4, 692–704. doi: 10.
1111/j.1756-8765.2012.01189
Hoemann, K., Gendron, M., and Barett, L. (2017). Mixed emotions in the predictive
brain. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 15, 51–57. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2017.05.013
Hyett, M., Parker, G. B., Guo, C., Zalesky, A., Nguyen, V. T., Yuen, T., et al. (2015).
Scene unseen: disrupted neuronal adaptation in melancholia during emotional
ﬁlm viewing. Neuroimage Clinical. 9, 660–667. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2015.10.011
James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology. New York, NY: Holt.
Joﬃly, M., and Coricelli, G. (2013). Emotional valence and the free-energy
principle. PLoS Comput. Biol. 9:e1003094. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003094
Jones, C. L., Minati, L., Nagai, Y., Medford, N., Harrison, N. A., Gray, M., et al.
(2015). Neuroanatomical substrates for the volitional regulation of heart rate.
Front. Psychol. 6:300. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00300
Khalsa, S., and Lapidus, R. (2016). Can interoception improve the pragmatic search
for biomarkers in psychiatry? Front. Psychiatry 7:121. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2016.
00121
Kube, T., Rief, W., and Glombiewski, J. A. (2017). On the maintenance of
expectations in major depression – Investigating a neglected phenomenon.
Front. Psychol. 8:9. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00009
Kube, T., Schwarting, R., Rozenkrantz, L., Glombiewski, J. A., and Rief, W. (2019).
Distorted cognitive processes in major depression – A predictive processing
perspective. Biol. Psychiatry (in press). doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2019.07.017
LeDoux, J. (2002). Synaptic Self: How Our Brains Become Who We Are. New York,
NY: Viking.
Lyons-Ruth, K., Brunshweiler-Stern, N., Harrison, A. M., Morgan, A. M., Nahum,
J. P., Sander, L., et al. (1998). Implicit relational knowing: Its role in
development and psychoanalytic treatment. Infant Ment. Health J. 19, 282–289.
doi: 10.1002/(sici)1097-0355(199823)19:3<282::aid-imhj3>3.3.co;2-f
Medford, N., and Critchley, H. D. (2010). Conjoint activity of anterior insular
and anterior cingulate cortex: awareness and response. Brain Struct. Funct. 214,
535–549. doi: 10.1007/s00429-010-0265
Miller, M., and Clark, A. (2018). Happily entangled: prediction, emotion, and the
embodied mind. Synthese 195, 2559–2575. doi: 10.1007/s11229-017-1399-1397
Morgan, A. C., Brunshweiler-Stern, N., Harrison, A. M., Lyons-Ruth, K., Nahum,
J. P., Sander, L., et al. (1998). Moving along to things left undone. Infant
Ment. Health J. 19, 324–332. doi: 10.1002/(sici)1097-0355(199823)19:3<324::
aid-imhj9>3.0.co;2-l
Northoﬀ, G. (2016). Neuro-Philosophy and the Healthy Mind: Learning from the
Unwell Brain, 1 Edn. New York, NY: Norton.
Ondobaka, S., Kilner, J., and Friston, K. J. (2017). The role of interoceptive
inference in theory of mind. Brain Cogn. 112, 64–68. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2015.
08.002
Owens, A. P., Allen, M., Ondobaka, S., and Friston, K. (2018). Interoceptive
inference: from computational neuroscience to clinic. Neurosci. Biobehav. 90,
174–183. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.04.017
Owens, A. P., David, A. S., Low, D. A., Mathias, C. J., and Sierra-Siegert, M.
(2015). Abnormal cardiovascular sympathetic and parasympathetic responses
to physical and emotional stimuli in depersonalization disorder. Front.
Neurosci. 9:89. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00089
Panskepp, J. (1998).Aﬀective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human and Animal
Emotions (Series in Aﬀective Science), 1st Edn. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Paulus, M. P., and Stein, M. B. (2006). An insular view of anxiety. Biological.
Psychiatry 60, 383–387. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.03.042
Paulus, M. P., and Stein, M. B. (2010). Interoception in anxiety and depression.
Brain Struct. Funct. 214, 451–462. doi: 10.1007/s00429-010-0258-259
Payne, P., Levine, P. A., and Crane-Godreau, M. A. (2015). Somatic experiencing:
using interoception and proprioception as core elements of trauma therapy.
Front. Psychol. 6:93. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00093
Petzschner, H., Weber, L., Gard, T., and Stephan, K. E. (2017). Computational
psychosomatics and computational psychiatry: toward a joint framework for
diﬀerential diagnosis. Biol. Psychiatry 82, 421–430. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.
2017.05.012
Pezzulo, G. (2014). Why do you fear the bogeyman? An embodied predictive
coding model of perceptual inference. Cogn. Aﬀect. Behav. Neurosci. 14,
902–911. doi: 10.3758/s13415-013-0227
Quadt, L., Critchley, H. D., and Garﬁnkel, S. (2018). The neurobiology
of interoception in health and disease. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1428,
112–126.
Rao, R. P., and Ballard, D. H. (1999). Predictive coding in the visual cortex:
a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-ﬁeld eﬀects. Nat.
Neurosci. 2, 79–87. doi: 10.1038/4580
Rief, W., Glombiewski, J. A., Gollwitzer, M., Schubo, A., Schwarting, R., and
Torwart, A. (2015). Expectancies are core feature of mental disorders.
Curr. Opin. Psychiatry 28, 378–385. doi: 10.1097/yco.00000000000
00184
Rolls, E. T. (1999). The Brain and Emotion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Russell, J. A., and Barrett, L. F. (1999). Core aﬀect, prototypical emotional episodes,
and other things called emotion: dissecting the elephant. J. Pers Soc. Psych. 76,
805–819. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.76.5.805
Schachter, S., and Singer, J. E. (1962). Cognitive, social, and physiological
determinants of emotional state. Psychol. Rev. 69, 379–399. doi: 10.1037/
h0046234
Schore, A. N. (2003). Aﬀect Regulation and the Repair of the Self . New York, NY:
W.W. Norton & Company.
Schore, A. N. (2012). The Science of the Art of Psychotherapy. Norton Series on
Interpersonal Neurobiology. New York, N.Y: W.W. Norton.
Sedeno, L., Couto, B., Melloni, M., Canales-Johnson, A., Yoris, A., and Baez,
S. (2014). How do you feel when you can’t feel your body? Interoception,
functional connectivity and emotional processing depersonalization-
derealization disorder. PLoS One 9:e98769. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0098769
Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied
self. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17, 565–573. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.
09.007
Seth, A. K., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the
emotional brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 371:20160007. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.
0007
Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2011). An interoceptive predictive
coding model of conscious presence. Front. Psychol. 2:395 doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2011.00395
Siegel, D. J. (1999). The Developing Mind: Toward a Neurobiology of Interpersonal
Experience. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Siegel, D. J. (2010). The Mindful Therapist . New York, NY: W.W. Norton &
Company.
Singer, T., Critchley, H. D., and Preuschoﬀ, K. (2009). A common role of insula in
feelings, empathy and uncertainty. Trends Cogn. Sci. 13, 334–340. doi: 10.1016/
j.tics.2009.05.001
Solms, M. (2019). The hard problem of consciousness and the free energy principle.
Front. Psychol. 9:2714. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02714
Stephan, K. E., Manjaly, Z., Mathys, C., Weber, L., Paliwal, S., Gard, T., et al.
(2016). Alostatic self-eﬃcacy: a metacognitive theory of dyshomeostasis-
induced fatigue and depression. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10:550. doi: 10.3389/
fnhuman.2016.00550
Sterling, P. (2012). Allostasis: a model of predictive regulation. Physiol. Behav. 106,
5–15. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2011.06.004
Sterling, P. (2014). Homeostasis vs allostasis: implications for brain function and
mental disorders. JAMA Psychiatry 71, 1192–1193.
Stern, D. (1985). The Interpersonal World of the Infant: A View From
Psychoanalysis and Developmental Psychology . New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Stern, D., Bruschweiler-Stern, N., Harrison, A. M., Lyons-Ruth, K., Morgan,
A. C., Nahum, J. P., et al. (1998). The process of therapeutic change involving
implicit knowledge: some implications of developmental observations for adult
psychotherapy. Infant Ment. Health J. 19, 300–308. doi: 10.1002/(sici)1097-
0355(199823)19:3<300::aid-imhj5>3.0.co;2-p
Strigo, I. A., and Craig, A. D. (2016). Interoception, homeostatic emotions and
sympathovagal balance.”. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 371:20160010.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0010
Vlemincx, E., van Diest, I., and van den Bergh, O. (2015). Emotion, sighing, and
respiratory variability. Psychophysiology 52, 657–666. doi: 10.1111/psyp.12396
Wallin, D. J. (2007). Attachment in Psychotherapy. New York, NY: The Guilford
Press.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 17 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173
fpsyg-10-02173 September 25, 2019 Time: 16:32 # 18
Duquette and Ainley Mentalization of Interoception and Psychotherapeutic Change
Wiens, S. (2005). Interoception in emotional experience. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 18,
442–447. doi: 10.1097/01.wco.0000168079.92106.99
Yon, D., de Lange, F. P., and Press, C. (2019). The predictive brain as a stubborn
scientist. Trends Cogn. Sci. 23, 6–8. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2018.10.003
Zaki, J., Davis, J., and Ochsner, K. (2012). Overlapping activity in anterior insula
during interoception and emotional experience. NeuroImage 62, 493–499. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.05.012
Zautra, A. J., Fasman, R., Davis, M. C., and Craig, A. D. (2010). The eﬀects of slow
breathing on aﬀective responses to pain stimuli: an experimental study. Pain
149, 12–18. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2009.10.001
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Duquette and Ainley. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 18 September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2173