Citation: Déli, É.; Peters, J.F.;
Kisvárday, Z. How the Brain Becomes
the Mind: Can Thermodynamics
Explain the Emergence and Nature of
Emotions?. Entropy 2022, 24, 1498.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e24101498
Academic Editor: Roberto Zivieri
Received: 27 July 2022
Accepted: 11 October 2022
Published: 20 October 2022
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
entropy
Article
How the Brain Becomes the Mind: Can Thermodynamics
Explain the Emergence and Nature of Emotions?
Éva Déli 1, *
 , James F. Peters 2,3 and Zoltán Kisvárday 1,4
1 Department of Anatomy, Histology, and Embryology, University of Debrecen, 4032 Debrecen, Hungary
2 Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R3T 2N2, Canada
3 Department of Mathematics, Adiyaman University, Adiyaman 02040, Turkey
4 ELKH Neuroscience Research Group, University of Debrecen, 4032 Debrecen, Hungary
* Correspondence: eva.kdeli@gmail.com
Abstract: The neural systems’ electric activities are fundamental for the phenomenology of conscious-
ness. Sensory perception triggers an information/energy exchange with the environment, but the
brain’s recurrent activations maintain a resting state with constant parameters. Therefore, perception
forms a closed thermodynamic cycle. In physics, the Carnot engine is an ideal thermodynamic cycle
that converts heat from a hot reservoir into work, or inversely, requires work to transfer heat from a
low- to a high-temperature reservoir (the reversed Carnot cycle). We analyze the high entropy brain
by the endothermic reversed Carnot cycle. Its irreversible activations provide temporal directionality
for future orientation. A ﬂexible transfer between neural states inspires openness and creativity.
In contrast, the low entropy resting state parallels reversible activations, which impose past focus
via repetitive thinking, remorse, and regret. The exothermic Carnot cycle degrades mental energy.
Therefore, the brain’s energy/information balance formulates motivation, sensed as position or
negative emotions. Our work provides an analytical perspective of positive and negative emotions
and spontaneous behavior from the free energy principle. Furthermore, electrical activities, thoughts,
and beliefs lend themselves to a temporal organization, an orthogonal condition to physical systems.
Here, we suggest that an experimental validation of the thermodynamic origin of emotions might
inspire better treatment options for mental diseases.
Keywords: brain state; Carnot cycle; emotions; consciousness; resting entropy
1. Introduction
“The laws of nature are written in the workings of our brains”—Thomas L. Saaty.
Experimental and computational neuroscience aims to better understand the brain
from the molecular to the system levels [ 1–3]—but the higher-order functions such as
consciousness persistently resisted conventional approaches [4]. Although the scientiﬁc
understanding of emotions has been challenging, their nature is of utmost importance in
psychology, education and AI research.
Life relies on energy, connecting sensory input to consumption at the most basic
level. This simple relationship evolved into the unfathomable complexity of the human
brain. For example, image representation in a digital camera is a series of 1 ′s and 0′s on
a memory card, but it is impossible to uncover such causal relationships in perception.
Instead, the brain’s equilibrium processes show analogies to the overarching principles of
the physical world. Feelings and rumors spread like heat in liquids. Sentiment contagion is
the social spreading of sentiments according to a decay function [5,6], based on credibility,
self-assertiveness, and other qualities. The physical sciences have provided a dramatic new
set of mathematical and physical tools for studying intelligence and agency [7,8].
The dramatically unique qualities of the mind have produced signiﬁcant debates.
Intimately linked with the self, the mind is considered qualia in philosophy [ 9]. Mental
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498. https://doi.org/10.3390/e24101498 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 2 of 17
contents, such as ideas, beliefs, and emotions, have temporal existence without familiar
physical qualities. Connecting the physiological manifestations of consciousness to the
brain’s electric activities might explain how the brain gives rise to a rich inner life, the
introspectively accessible and ephemeral inner cosmos, which is at the heart of the mind-
body problem.
How much information do we gain when we learn something? The surprising answer
might be that learning introduces potential (in the form of complexity and organization),
which determines behavior and response. Mental energy is the conﬁdence to set meaningful
goals and the steady, optimistic focus to reach for them. The essence of learning might be
the counterintuitive process of increasing the degrees of freedom via information erasing.
Therefore, Landauer’s principle might explain intelligent computation.
For example, the anatomical layout and the synaptic weights of recurrent synaptic
connections store memories [10]. Therefore, spontaneous activities reﬂect the priors residing
in the network architecture, which is susceptible to experience and learning-dependent
modiﬁcations throughout life. Such an intelligent computation can be viewed as imperfect
copying and selecting neural informational patterns according to the Darwinian process. It
is thus conjectured that the Bayesian update and replicator dynamics of the above process
is an ideal operation for record-keeping optimization and shaping activations [11–13].
Intelligent responses, in general, depend on a precise mental model [ 10]. In other
words, we ﬁnd that “every good regulator of a system must be a model of that system” [14].
The sensory system projects the physical environment into the brain by an active, energy-
requiring process often independent of conscious intention. For example, environmental
noise, disturbing light, or noxious fumes can intrude on current activity and even sleep [15].
Thus, the brain adapts to its environment by adopting the laws of physics.
A fundamental feature of these cognitive phenomena is temporal dependence [16,17],
which represents an orthogonal projection [18]. As material systems observe the principle
of least action when moving in space, biological systems optimize their action repertoire
between the past and the future. For example, adjusting muscle strength throughout move-
ment execution requires anticipating and coordinating a precise sequence. Recent ﬁndings
showing the irreversibility of resting brain activations permitted a meaningful comparison
of entropy with physical systems. In short, we may consider the mind’s predictive pro-
cessing as the temporal equivalent of stationary action in physics. Consciousness, often
synonymous with the mind, is adaptive, self-regulating, and homeostatic [19]. Similarly to
a gravitational imbalance, threats to personal security or ego trigger conscious protective
measures. For example, post-traumatic stress disorder (PSTD) keeps a total grip on the
mind. Shame, particularly chronic shame, produces high frequency and mentally taxing
mind-wandering [20]. Therefore, transgressions can cause remorse, shame, and regret,
dominating random thoughts.
In sum, emotions or mental states represent internal drives based on a deviation of
vital bodily parameters from equilibrium [21]. Therefore, emotions, the ultimate source of
actions, are context-driven motivations, the fundamental forces of the mind. In this view,
free will is a graded ability eroded by exothermic processes, such as depression and anxiety.
The following discussion will deduce emotions and the thermodynamic consequences of
awareness. In this, we follow earlier insightful work on the free energy principle and the
thermodynamic analysis of cognition [22–26].
In the Section 1, we describe the temporal brain, the Section 2 discusses entropy, and
Section 3 focuses on the thermodynamic analysis of the neural system with particular
emphasis on the thermodynamics of emotions. The Section 4 focuses on spontaneous
processes. We end with conclusions.
2. The Temporal Mind
Consciousness is part of the physical environment [27–29] and must be physical and
explained by physical principles [ 27,30]. Let us start with perception, a highly involun-
tary [31] sensory inﬂux [32,33], and comprehension [34]. The synchronization of millions
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 3 of 17
of neurons and functional interaction between speciﬁc microstates [35] give rise to charac-
teristic and measurable frequencies. Recent analyses of brain activities have proven that
electric activities correlate with the neuropsychology of consciousness. The brain waves
report on behavior, emotions, and thoughts.
(1) Frequency dependence
The brain waves have been grouped according to their frequencies. Higher frequencies
have higher energy needs and larger information-carrying capacity, leading to a power-law
relationship of electromagnetic activities [36]. Wave-like cortical ﬂuctuations can anticipate
events and the consequences of actions [37,38], such as the global coordination of muscle
tone by the evoked potential in motor cortices [ 39]. The information ﬂow of synaptic
connections represents momentum, causing thoughts to be spontaneous, unexpected, and
challenging to control or retrace [40,41]. These activations interact with the brain’s internal
oscillation pattern, a highly ﬂuid and malleable mental background, turning sensory
perception subjective.
(2) Temporal organization
Identiﬁcation with the body is the basis of homeostatic self-regulation [42]. The highly
autonomous regulation, an apparent consciousness requirement, supports a temporal
integration. The biological dependence on air, water, rest, and food also leads to a temporal
organization. In contrast to the tangible presence of physical objects, mental concepts,
such as ideas, beliefs, and emotions, have temporal existence without weight or other
physical qualities.
Self-sense is an emergent personal perspective connected to the brain’s restingstate [43,44].
As the embodiment of self, it ensures temporal continuity throughout life and enables the
attribution of mental states, beliefs, intents, desires, emotions, and knowledge to other
beings and even objects. Discrete order associations in learning, speech, muscle coordi-
nation [44,45], and neural processing [ 46,47] exist on many time scales. The temporally
nested and discrete mental constructs may include the individual’s retrospective lifetime
(Figure 1).
Entropy 2022, 24, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 17 
 
 
with particular emphasis on the thermodynamics of emotions. The fourth section focuses 
on spontaneous processes. We end with conclusions. 
2. The Temporal Mind 
Consciousness is part of the physical environment [27–29] and must be physical and 
explained by physical principles [27,30].  Let us start with perception, a highly 
involuntary [31] sensory influx [32,33], and comprehension [34]. The synchronization of 
millions of neurons and functional interaction between specific microstates [35] give rise 
to characteristic and measurable frequencies. Recent analyses of brain activities have 
proven
 that electric activities correlate with the neuropsychology of  consciousness. The 
brain waves report on behavior, emotions, and thoughts. 
(1) Frequency dependence 
The brain waves have been grouped according to their frequencies.  Higher 
frequencies have higher energy needs and larger information-carrying capacity, leading 
to a power-law relationship of electromag netic activities [36]. Wave-like cortical 
fluctuations can anticipate events and the consequences of actions [37,38], such as the 
global coordination of muscle tone by the evoked potential in motor cortices [39]. The 
information flow of synaptic connections re presents momentum, causing thoughts to be 
spontaneous, unexpected, and challenging to control or retrace [40,41]. These activations 
interact with the brain’s internal oscillation pattern, a highly fluid and malleable mental 
background, turning sensory perception subjective. 
(2) Temporal organization 
Identification with the body is the basis of homeostatic self-regulation [42]. The 
highly autonomous regulation, an apparent consciousness requirement, supports a 
temporal integration. The biological dependence on air, water, rest, and food also leads to 
a temporal organization. In contrast to the ta ngible presence of physical objects, mental 
concepts, such as ideas, beliefs, and emotions, have temporal existence without weight or 
other physical qualities. 
Self-sense is an emergent personal perspective connected to the brain’s resting state 
[43,44]. As the embodiment of self, it ensu res temporal continuity throughout life and 
enables the
 attribution of mental states, beliefs, intents, desires, emotions, and knowledge 
to other beings and even objects. Discrete or der associations in learning, speech, muscle 
coordination [44,45], and neural processing [46,47] exist on many time scales. The 
temporally nested and discrete mental constructs may includ e the individual’s 
retrospective lifetime (Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1. The orthogonality of perception is a temporal organization. The chair behind the desk is a 
spatial organization, represented by brain freq uencies and expressed by a temporal order of 
speech, thoughts, and actions. 
Figure 1. The orthogonality of perception is a temporal organization. The chair behind the desk is a
spatial organization, represented by brain frequencies and expressed by a temporal order of speech,
thoughts, and actions.
Therefore, cognition is built of substantial periods of continuous unconscious process-
ing followed by discrete conscious percepts and believes [ 48]. The alternation between
unconscious versus conscious, continuous versus discrete, ﬂuid charge ﬂow versus thermo-
dynamic balance represents cognition’s dual nature, which explains some of the hard to
deﬁne qualities of the mind. The above differences might be reminiscent of the classical
and quantum divide in quantum mechanics.
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 4 of 17
(3) Associative model
The integration of separate events generates an associative model. Disjointed sensory
clues coalesce into coherent representations of a first-person, unified perspective [42,49–51].
Intelligent systems’ fundamental unity [27] permits predictive processing [4], the optimiza-
tion of action repertoire between the past and the future [8,52], and between memory and
expectation. The stationary-action principle states that the action for actual trajectories is a
minimum. Likewise, predictive processing charts an optimal or least temporal action [53],
which mitigates the utter reliance on the environment. Therefore, controlling the future
might be a primary objective of cognitive function (Table 1). Robotic studies conﬁrm that
future orientation is an essential requirement of intellect [54].
Table 1. A systematic comparison of the thermodynamics of physical and neural systems. The top
three rows report on the orientation, evolution, and directionality of the system’s microstates. The
lowest four rows report on the consequences of the above differences in the microstates.
Physical Systems Brain Activations
Microstates orientation Oriented in space Information entropy oriented
in time
System evolution Brownian motion Wave-like activations founded
on memories
Entropic force Irreversible macroscopic
behavior Irreversible activations
The consequences of
irreversibility The arrow of time Future orientation, novelty,
curiosity, and creativity
High entropy state Equilibrium Equilibrium
Consequences of high entropy Loss of work potential Intellect, conﬁdence, and a
can-do attitude
Energy input lowers the
entropy
The system moves away from
equilibrium, but irreversibility
remains!
Reversible and repetitive
activations
Consequences of low entropy Increasing work potential Uncertainty, lack of control,
and psychological problems
3. Considerations of Entropy
3.1. Similarities of the Brain and Physical Systems Based on Entropy
Entropy measures the variety of existing possible conﬁgurations within a system.
Since entropy production directs all changes toward equilibrium, it is connected to time’s
arrow [55–57]. Therefore, time can be deﬁned as the entropy generation rate, often associ-
ated with thermal disorder and loss of work capacity [58]. Similarly, entropy production is
a fundamental requirement of the brain’s normal self-organizing energy functioning.
Cortical wave-like ﬂuctuations, the so-called traveling waves [40,41], are the funda-
mental elements of cortical information processing [59]. It is also known that the activity
patterns generated by cortico-cortical circuits actively shape the evoked cycle by modulating
neural and perceptual sensitivity [60]. The neural system’s momentum trajectory reﬂects
forces acting on different time scales. Initially, the activations are low-dimensional. En-
tropic effects slow the ﬂows on the task-speciﬁc activations serving as a principal enabling
a link between neural activity and behavior. The evoked cycle’s state vector represents the
directionality and size of attitude [8,61–68].
The entropy-generating resting activations show apparent irreversibility [69,70]. How-
ever, brain entropy correlates with the number ofaccessible neural states (degrees of freedom)
or surprise potential (Table 1). Rather than loss of work potential, it represents increasing
degrees of freedom, novelty, creativity [71], and intellectual capacity [72] in verbal and per-
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 5 of 17
formance measures [72,73]. The surprise potential or signal variability is a critical feature
of brain function [74].
3.2. Entropic Differences between the Brain and Physical Systems
There are notable differences between physical systems and the brain. For example,
information input generates a memory, changing the brain (Figure 2). Furthermore, the
resting state is a relaxation, which equilibrates the system in preparation for the new cycle.
The brain’s temporal rhythms form discrete processing centering on the resting state [7,8],
forming a closed thermodynamic cycle.
Entropy 2022, 24, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 17 
 
 
as a principal enabling a link between neural activity and behavior. The evoked cycle’s 
state vector represents the directionality and size of attitude [8,61–68]. 
The entropy-generating resting activations show apparent irreversibility [69,70]. 
However, brain entropy correlates with the number of accessible neural states (degrees of 
freedom) or surprise potential (Table 1). Rather than loss of work potential, it represents 
increasing degrees of freedom, novelty, creati vity [71], and intellectual capacity [72] in 
verbal and performance measures [72,73]. The surprise potential or signal variability is a 
critical feature of brain function [74]. 
3.2. Entropic Differences between the Brain and Physical Systems 
There are notable differences between physical systems and the brain. For example, 
information input generates a memory, changi ng the brain (Figure 2). Furthermore, the 
resting state is a relaxation, which equilibrates the system in preparation for the new 
cycle. The brain’s temporal rhythms form di screte processing centering on the resting 
state [7,8], forming a closed thermodynamic cycle. 
 
Figure 2. The analysis of neural activation as a harmonic motion. The system returns to its starting 
position without creating memory ( top). In a symbolic representation  of the neuronal activation, 
red color represents a path between the brain’s modular structures (bottom). The vector path (A–B) 
is determined by the system’s memory and the stimulus’s qualities. 
In physical systems, the free energy initiates work, but the equilibrium position 
lacks work potential. In contrast, motivational thought initiates work in the resting brain. 
Likewise, low entropy physical systems move toward equilibrium via irreversible 
activations. However, reversible activations stabilize the energy-enriched brain, turning 
low entropy into a stable, although precarious position, which can degenerate into 
pathologic conditions, depression, mania, psychosis, and schizophrenia [75,76]. 
Resting entropy measures the thermodynamic free energy and thus regulates 
stimulus response and spontaneous behavior. Only the low entropy brain has free energy 
for aggravation and criticism. The above differences from physical systems have 
challenged the intuitive understanding of neuronal system dynamics. 
  
Figure 2. The analysis of neural activation as a harmonic motion. The system returns to its starting
position without creating memory (top). In a symbolic representation of the neuronal activation, red
color represents a path between the brain’s modular structures (bottom). The vector path (A–B) is
determined by the system’s memory and the stimulus’s qualities.
In physical systems, the free energy initiates work, but the equilibrium position lacks
work potential. In contrast, motivational thought initiates work in the resting brain. Like-
wise, low entropy physical systems move toward equilibrium via irreversible activations.
However, reversible activations stabilize the energy-enriched brain, turning low entropy
into a stable, although precarious position, which can degenerate into pathologic conditions,
depression, mania, psychosis, and schizophrenia [75,76].
Resting entropy measures the thermodynamic free energy and thus regulates stimulus
response and spontaneous behavior. Only the low entropy brain has free energy for
aggravation and criticism. The above differences from physical systems have challenged
the intuitive understanding of neuronal system dynamics.
4. Thermodynamic Regulation of the Neural System
What is an intelligent answer to a stimulus? Intuition is based on the physical world’s
organizational and operational principles [ 53]. Spontaneous resting activations, which
constantly realign with the external world and consequences of action, are at the center of
brain processing [43,44,47]. Thus, the sense of self [44,75,77] is an outgrowth of an internal
world model.
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 6 of 17
The resting state is the basis of the brain and, consequently, the body’s homeostatic
regulation. The recurring constancy of the resting state formulates the sense of self, estab-
lishing it as the ground state of cognition [61]. During energy-information exchange with
the outside environment, the sensory stimulus passes through successive regulatory layers
to the associate areas, forming a closed cycle [7,29,43,78–80].
Therefore, the evoked activations form a thermodynamic cycle. Accordingly:
1. A stimulus triggers activation, which represents momentum and direction.
2. Entropy-maximizing inﬂuences continuously adjust the large-scale spatial synchro-
nization of oscillatory activity.
3. The relaxation that recovers the resting state prepares the system for reactivation.
4. Every cycle changes the brain’s synaptic balance and organization.
The thermodynamic insight of the neural system is an increasingly pursued goal in
consciousness science [7,8,23,24,26,80]. The brain’s intelligent computation is based on the
sensory system’s information gathering. Sensory stimuli project information about the
environment to the cortex via frequency coding. The overall energy availability in the brain
is thought to be constant but can display substantial local differences, which can be used
to measure energy utilization during stressful and positive conditions by simultaneous
EEG-fMRI analysis. Other studies might include broadband near-infrared spectroscopy,
which can measure energy metabolism in brain cells’ mitochondria [81].
Accordingly, brain activation and synaptic changes are proportional to the subjective
information value of incoming input. For example, the written sign “danger” is perceived
differently by toddlers and adults, indicating the observer’s role in the “information” value
of a signal [ 82,83]. Thus, information density determines meaning, preparedness, and
context function [ 84]. Since sensory information’s computational costs depend on the
oscillations’ energy requirement, stimuli incorporate the brain into the environment’s
energy cycle.
The thermodynamic cycle is reversible. Exothermic processes generate energy, but
endothermic processes require energy input. Moreover, the reciprocal accessibility of
functional brain states [85] can produce either endothermic or exothermic loops [8,25,28].
Therefore, endothermic cycles absorb energy from the environment, whereas the exothermic
brain loses energy.
There is a computational equivalence of operational noise levels (information), there-
fore arousal [13], with temperature [26]. For example, irritability is accompanied by in-
creased breath, heart rate, skin conductance, shivers, and hot or cold chills, which exert a
measurable metabolic burden [86]. Moreover, aggravation, anger, and shame can trigger
physical actions. Shouting, pacing, aggression, and other risky behaviors contribute to
negative emotions’ high energy costs [87].
Therefore, nervous states, which instigate competition and struggle between commu-
nity members, represent high social temperatures. Since high-temperature systems are less
stable and more sensitive to change, high social temperature represents social volatility.
4.1. The Thermodynamics of Emotions
It is increasingly clear that emotions are an integral part of the general neural ar-
chitecture of the brain [ 88]. Although it is difﬁcult to distinguish particular emotions,
the difference between happy and negative emotions (such as fear, sadness, anger, and
disgust) is distinct. Frequency-based binary emotion classiﬁcation (positive and negative)
can achieve 96.81% accuracy [89]. Therefore, based on brain activation proﬁles, emotional
valence is positive during lower frequencies, and negative amid information-heavy higher
frequencies [89–91].
The brain’s energy/information ﬂow is also frequency-dependent [ 92,93]. Recent
emotion studies underline the cumulative effects of negative emotion (i.e., fear, sadness,
anger, and disgust) in the frontal lobe, which is entirely missing for neutral and happy
sentiments [89] (Figure 3). For example, remorse and guilt invariably follow mistakes.
Moreover, it takes persistent mental effort to alleviate the cognitive burden of these consum-
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 7 of 17
ing feelings [94–96]. In contrast, conﬁdence and satisfaction inspire pleasure and suitable
allocation of attentional resources [86].
Entropy 2022, 24, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 17 
 
 
can achieve 96.81% accuracy [89]. Therefore, based on brain activation profiles, emotional 
valence is positive during lower frequencies, and negative amid information-heavy 
higher frequencies [89–91]. 
The brain’s energy/information flow is  a l s o  frequency-dependent [92,93]. Recent 
emotion studies underline the cumulative effect s of negative emotion (i.e., fear, sadness, 
anger, and disgust) in the frontal lobe, which is entirely missing for neutral and happy 
sentiments [89] (Figure 3). For example, remorse and guilt invariably follow mistakes. 
Moreover, it takes persistent mental effort to alleviate the cognitive burden of these 
consuming feelings [94–96]. In contrast, confidence and satisfaction inspire pleasure and 
suitable allocation of attentional resources [86]. 
 
Figure 3. The cognitive burden of positive and negative emotions (drawn following [89]). 
The above results confirm emotional dependence on meaning-making and 
psychologically relevant content. Based on  the above findings and the established 
valence-arousal graph used in the literatu re [89,97], we created a thermodynamic 
emotion evaluation graph (Figure 4). In a two-scale valence-arousal graph, the vertical 
axis represents arousal, with zero representing equilibrium and values increasing toward 
positive (upper half) and negative (lower half) arousal. The horizontal axis represents the 
ability for mental action, with a lack of mental capacities, such as apathy and depression 
on the left, with increasing confidence and mental power on the right. The representation 
also explains the close correlations between similar emotions [89]. 
Figure 3. The cognitive burden of positive and negative emotions (drawn following [89]).
The above results conﬁrm emotional dependence on meaning-making and psycholog-
ically relevant content. Based on the above ﬁndings and the established valence-arousal
graph used in the literature [89,97], we created a thermodynamic emotion evaluation graph
(Figure 4). In a two-scale valence-arousal graph, the vertical axis represents arousal, with
zero representing equilibrium and values increasing toward positive (upper half) and
negative (lower half) arousal. The horizontal axis represents the ability for mental action,
with a lack of mental capacities, such as apathy and depression on the left, with increasing
conﬁdence and mental power on the right. The representation also explains the close
correlations between similar emotions [89].
Entropy 2022, 24, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 17 
 
 
 
Figure 4. The characterization of emotions based on en ergy. The horizontal axis represents the 
mental abilities (mental energy), which change from an inability, such as apathy and depression, to 
confidence in mental action on the right. The ve rtical axis shows the environmental influence on 
arousal with a neutral state at the origin. Positi ve arousal generates surp rise (top), and threat 
produces anxiety (bottom). A threat can trigger a fight or flight response. 
Emotions as the Fundamental Forces of Motivation 
Another point to consider is how the evoked cycle’s thermodynamics determine 
motivation. Rapid switching of a high-dimensi onal resting state shrinks the variance as 
activations collapse into lower-dimensional attractor dynamics [10,98,99] based on 
whether experiences represent positive or ne gative charge [100]. The brain devotes an 
essential thalamic mechanism for distinguishing the direction of emotional signals, 
relying on the production and release of neurotensin for rewards, but punishment 
learning comes for free [101]. The above results strongly suggest that positive and 
negative emotions have contrasting energy metabolisms, and correlate to endothermic or 
exothermic cycles, respectively. 
Metastable, low-dimensional substrates reduce temporal dimensionality [102–104] 
and information density [105,106], focusing attention toward self-preservation. For 
example, the amygdala is one of the critical structures regulating personal space 
[107,108]. Violations trigger defensive and alert postures, particularly compelling during 
high-stakes situations, moral dilemmas, and re grets. Conversely, relaxation depends on 
reduced amygdala activity [109]. The brain’s memory storage embeds motivation, a state 
vector, within a multidimensional state or information space [26,88], generating a 
realistic emotional cinema. The cycle’s ener getic consequences arise from the brain’s 
spatio-temporal orientation [43,46]. Notably, rather than changing the velocity of an 
object or the speed of the steam engine, it distorts the subjective experience of the 
moment [110], turning time perception into the force of motivation. 
What is the secret of emotions’ action-p roducing power? Although both positive 
and negative emotions (low and high freque ncies, respectively) slow time perception, 
they generate opposite energy transformati ons and motivations [89]. In the case of 
positive emotions, slow time perception permits relaxation, but high information density 
causes impatience. In addition, the spectral density of focus highlights cognitive stress, 
which narrows attention [89,111]. 
  
Figure 4. The characterization of emotions based on energy. The horizontal axis represents the
mental abilities (mental energy), which change from an inability, such as apathy and depression,
to conﬁdence in mental action on the right. The vertical axis shows the environmental inﬂuence
on arousal with a neutral state at the origin. Positive arousal generates surprise (top), and threat
produces anxiety (bottom). A threat can trigger a ﬁght or ﬂight response.
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 8 of 17
Emotions as the Fundamental Forces of Motivation
Another point to consider is how the evoked cycle’s thermodynamics determine
motivation. Rapid switching of a high-dimensional resting state shrinks the variance as
activations collapse into lower-dimensional attractor dynamics [10,98,99] based on whether
experiences represent positive or negative charge [ 100]. The brain devotes an essential
thalamic mechanism for distinguishing the direction of emotional signals, relying on
the production and release of neurotensin for rewards, but punishment learning comes
for free [ 101]. The above results strongly suggest that positive and negative emotions
have contrasting energy metabolisms, and correlate to endothermic or exothermic cycles,
respectively.
Metastable, low-dimensional substrates reduce temporal dimensionality [ 102–104]
and information density [ 105,106], focusing attention toward self-preservation. For ex-
ample, the amygdala is one of the critical structures regulating personal space [107,108].
Violations trigger defensive and alert postures, particularly compelling during high-stakes
situations, moral dilemmas, and regrets. Conversely, relaxation depends on reduced amyg-
dala activity [109]. The brain’s memory storage embeds motivation, a state vector, within
a multidimensional state or information space [ 26,88], generating a realistic emotional
cinema. The cycle’s energetic consequences arise from the brain’s spatio-temporal ori-
entation [43,46]. Notably, rather than changing the velocity of an object or the speed of
the steam engine, it distorts the subjective experience of the moment [110], turning time
perception into the force of motivation.
What is the secret of emotions’ action-producing power? Although both positive and
negative emotions (low and high frequencies, respectively) slow time perception, they
generate opposite energy transformations and motivations [ 89]. In the case of positive
emotions, slow time perception permits relaxation, but high information density causes
impatience. In addition, the spectral density of focus highlights cognitive stress, which
narrows attention [89,111].
4.2. The Endothermic Cycle
Shannon refers to communication systems as the ﬁrst kind of system, but intelligent
systems [54], which rely on temporal computation [4], can control the future. Wissner-Gross
and Freer [54] have shown a physical connection between adaptive behavior and entropy
maximization. We applied the reversed Carnot (endothermic) cycle to characterize an ideal
energy/information cycle with vanishing net entropy production between two cognitive
states. To this end, we consider a Bayesian process that can capture a wide range of learning
behavior [11,112].
What amount of learning is required from the current knowledgep to reach knowledge
q? When the distribution does not change with the change in the model parameters, the
cost function is the Kullback-Leibler divergence ( DKL ), a type of statistical distance and
represented as a surprise between the current output and the expected output [12,13].
In the endothermic brain, the discrete DKL is deﬁned as follows:
X = discrete random variable in brain signal space X.
p(x) ≥0, q(x) > 0 = probability distribution of x, where
p(x) = probability distribution of observed brain signal x,
q(x) = probability distribution of estimated brain signal x.
DKL ((p(x) ∥q(x)) = ∑
x∈X
p(x) ln p(x)
q(x) ≥0 (1)
where ln p(x)
q(x) is the novelty of the information. Learning depends on DKL ≥0 and when
q = p no learning occurs.
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 9 of 17
Instead of asking the amount of learning taking place between p and q, we can look
for the cognitive updating caused by a stimulus, F (the free energy). S is the entropy, and T
is the social temperature as deﬁned by frequencies, dS = δQ
T , therefore
F = <F> −TS (2)
where <F> is the expected meaning (intellect). High social temperature increases the
stimulus surprise potential; its ability for arousal. The system’s free energy is proportional
to the sensory information’s surprise value relative to expectation. As the system moves
toward equilibrium, the free energy is minimized. In the endothermic case, the resting
entropy increases during stimulus processing, absorbing free energy.
The Boltzmann distribution expresses the probability that a system will be in a state
pi as a function of the intellect (energy) and the social temperature, showing an inverse
relationship between aggravation (T) and intelligent behavior as follows.
pi ∝ exp
(
−kFi
T
)
(3)
where k is the Boltzmann constant.
The system evolves through a Markov process.
F(q) −F(p) = kT DKL (4)
where F(q) is the free energy for q and F(p) is the free energy in p.
The system’s free energy is proportional to the sensory information’s surprise value
relative to expectation. From Equation (2), we can express the energy requirement of learning
dpi
dt = (Fi −< F >) pi (5)
d
dt DKL = −∑
i
(Fi −< F >)qi (6)
where ∑i(Fi −< F >)pi is the average “relevance” of an incoming stimulus, DKL is how
much information is left to learn by going from p to q. Equation (6) shows the relevance
compared to the equilibrium position pi. Information with greater surprise changes the
brain more signiﬁcantly. Language, reading, mathematics, and the arts have exponentially
increased the information density humans can access. It supports the intuitive notion that
we never learn if we are exposed to the same information day in and day out [113,114].
Free energy originates in entropy production by the environment’s exothermic pro-
cesses, representing the time-reversal asymmetry of time’s arrow [55–57]. Surprisingly,
time-reversal asymmetry also characterizes the endothermic resting brain (Table 1). In
contrast to the physical environment’s increasing disorder, in the brain high resting entropy
ensures variability and ﬂexibility [ 72]. Recent work conﬁrms the energy requiring cell
growth in the hippocampus promotes depression resilience [115].
The transience of happy sentiments [89] (Figure 3) does not impose a cognitive burden.
The fleeting nature and irreversibility permit future orientation, generosity , intellect [116–118],
and novelty [69,70], represented by a movement toward the right in Figure 4. Therefore,
learning is a continuous increase in conﬁdence that provides energy for emotions, whether
happiness or anger.
Landauer’s principle explains learning as the counterintuitive process of increasing
the degrees of freedom via information erasing. Learning introduces potential (in the
form of complexity and organization), part of memory. Once stored, information is no
longer susceptible to noise. Thus, information storage is an energy requiring process [115],
analogous to a “phase transition” due to a temperature decrease in a physical system [22].
We have shown that positive memory formation requires energy [115,119] arising from the
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 10 of 17
polar emotional experience processing [101]. Thus, the system can acquire new information
in the following cycle while leaving the stored information accessible for decision-making.
In summary, neurotensin production, synaptic reorganization and neurogenesis con-
tribute to the endothermic cycle’s energy need [101,115]. The endothermic cycle conﬁrms
the physical relationship between intelligence and entropy maximization [54].
4.3. The Exothermic Cycle
Energy generation by exothermic processes is the basis of the second law of thermody-
namics. The exothermic cycle in sensory processing might have emerged to correct mistakes
during action preparation and execution. Nevertheless, a Bayesian process can turn the
exothermic cycle into a mental shift toward anxiety [120], apathy, and depression [76,121],
as shown in Figure 4.
The energy state and the entropy of the exothermic brain are smaller than the en-
dothermic condition. Equation (2) shows that high social temperature can turn the free
energy negative. Therefore, the free energy changes sign in Equations (1) and (2), because
the low entropy state cannot absorb the energy of the stimulus. Although the exothermic
state readily increases social temperature, aggravation disperses energy. In addition, anxi-
ety fuels fear conditioning, a stronger, less ﬂexible connectivity. Extensive psychological
studies on stress and negative emotions support the above conclusion. Even though the
high mental energy brain tends to form an endothermic cycle, high social temperature can
produce an exothermic cycle. Thus, a calm mind is most capable of learning and mental
advancement.
The exothermic equilibrium is not a high entropy state; the brain responds to even
minor difﬁculty by increasing social temperature (excitement or aggravation): TS >> <F>,
which dramatically changes the cycle’s dynamics. Since the high entropy state occurs
early in the cycle, without time for contemplation, the high social temperature fuels en-
ergy loss by urgent, thoughtless actions. According to the thermodynamic principles,
Efﬁciency = W
QH = TH −TC
TH where TC is the social temperature in the resting state, TH is the
social temperature during the ﬁrst phase of the cycle.
Therefore, the exothermic brain converts heat (QH) to work (W): W = TC
TH QH.
How can information accumulation lead to adverse psychological symptoms?
1. Like all exothermic processes [55–57], the low entropy brain loses energy (Table 1). For
example, it dissipates energy to the environment via criticism, destructive behavior,
or violence [7,8].
2. However, in contrast to physical processes, the reversible brain activations stabilize
low entropy, creating long-term adverse emotional and psychological outcomes.
3. Long-term potentiation reduces the degrees of freedom due to the loss of synaptic
complexity, producing repetitious, monotone thinking [122]. The negative thought
pattern becomes more powerful and pessimistic through a Bayesian process, affecting
behavior. For example, the severity of cognitive impairment in depression correlates
with brain entropy reduction [122].
4. Attention to the past degrades optimism for the future [ 123,124]. In addition, the
energy imbalance may misalign hormone regulation with adverse mental and immune
consequences, anxiety, and depression [76,121].
What is the currently available evidence for the above processes? First, negative
emotional states have more signiﬁcant energy requirements than positive emotional or
neutral mental states [125], such as gamma rhythms in the prefrontal lobe [89]. In addition,
negative emotions (e.g., fear, sadness, anger, and disgust) have cumulative effects [ 89],
which exhaust motivation [126]. Furthermore, the cumulative potential can lead to emo-
tional suppression’s explosive ‘boomerang’ effect [127]. Furthermore, impulsivity enhances
the propensity for alcohol, drug, gambling problems, overspending, and overeating [128].
The psychological pressure of information ﬂow causes a sense of time shortage, enhanc-
ing time perception [129], which denies a balanced response. The resulting deterministic
behaviors [130], such as rumination and repetitive negative thinking [88], represent inse-
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 11 of 17
curity, which ultimately may culminate in depression [ 121], immune problems, mental
diseases [131], and adverse health outcomes [132].
In contrast to love, learning, and acceptance, negative emotions project energy out to
the environment (through criticism and aggravation). Therefore, analyzing neurotransmit-
ter action and the related energy changes due to cognitive loads might be fruitful. Taken
together, the energetic study of mental states may explain their long-term cognitive and
health effects [133,134] the understanding of arousal potential [135].
5. Spontaneous Processes
Most cognitive and behavioral actions represent a response to a stimulus, but spon-
taneous actions, although often precipitated by a related stimulus, show no relationship
to the stimulus nature or magnitude. For example, a gunman’s shooting spree can be
triggered by a job loss, but it results from long-term insecurity and hopelessness.
In thermodynamics, a spontaneous process transpires without external input to the
system (Table 2) which can be assessed by the Gibbs free energy equation.
∆G = ∆H −∆TS (7)
where G is the Gibbs free energy and H is enthalpy≈internal or mental energy, the function
of intellect, creativity, and mental ﬂexibility.
Table 2. Analysis of behavior as a function of environmental and personal factors.
Exothermic Reaction
(Mental Energy Loss)
Endothermic Reaction
(Mental Energy Gain)
High entropy
environment (stress) Spontaneous behavior
Spontaneous on low social
temperature, which permits
overcoming the negativity
Low entropy, supportive
environment
Spontaneous on high social
temperature because the
aggravation overcomes the support
Spontaneous behavior
In exothermic changes ∆H < 0 or ∆TS > 0. However, endothermic process (∆H > 0)
can occur in supportive environments.
The free energy principle and active inference can provide a mathematical argument
for spontaneous processes, including emotional ones. The time-evolution of a system moves
to thermodynamically more stable energy state (closer to thermodynamic equilibrium).
The organism releases free energy in an exothermic process, which increases the entropy of
the environment (e.g., criticism, anger, and brutality). Inversely, an endothermic process
absorbs free energy from the environment. Therefore, emotions are part of a thermodynamic
regulation of cognition, a fundamental part of the evolution of intellect.
Commonly, spontaneous behavior is called “free will” since it feels natural and easy.
The exothermic cycle leads to irrational, damaging behavior, which, in extreme cases can
lead to depression, disease, or the individual’s demise.
One may conceive that hemispheric asymmetry could result in uneven thermodynam-
ics between the brain hemispheres [136] but the structural analysis of intra- and inter-lobe
connectivity is beyond the present work.
6. Conclusions
Neuroscience increasingly produces new developments in psychology and social
sciences by using physical principles. The sensory system records the physical world’s
spatial organization via temporal rhythms to form discrete processing centered on the
resting state. Therefore, perception forms a closed thermodynamic cycle and can be
analyzed via the reversible Carnot cycle.
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 12 of 17
We used the free energy principle to analyze emotions and spontaneous behavior.
We show that resting entropy is a measure of the thermodynamic free energy, regulating
stimulus response and spontaneous behavior. Since stimulus supplies energy for endother-
mic processes, healthy mental functioning depends on the reversed Carnot cycle. Love,
learning, and acceptance accumulate mental energy, fueling conﬁdence, creativity, and
future orientation. Indeed, high resting entropy permits synaptic ﬂexibility and complex
behavior.
In contrast, the Carnot cycle radiates energy out via an exothermic process. Although
the evolutionary purpose of negative emotions might have been correcting mistakes,
the Bayesian reinforcement of heat production expels heat via criticism and aggression,
engendering insecurity and regret. Moreover, passive (non-action forming) information
accumulation may compromise hormonal regulation.
The thermodynamic analysis of the brain’s evoked cycle shows that emotions have
action-producing power, forming the fundamental forces of motivation. Furthermore, the
duality represented by the brain continuous information processing and the quantized
nature of intellectual changes and believes might be reminiscent of quantum and classical
discrepancy. Therefore, biological organisms adapt to their environment by adopting the
laws of physics. Generalizing the grand theories of physics to temporal systems might
inspire a better understanding of cognition.
The brain devotes an essential thalamic mechanism for distinguishing the direction
of emotional signals, relying on the production and release of neurotensin for rewards,
but punishment learning comes for free [ 101]. Publications by reputable laboratories
support our working hypothesis on the contrasting metabolisms positive and negative
emotions. Measuring the brain energy utilization during stressful and positive conditions
by simultaneous EEG-fMRI analysis and measuring the energy metabolism in brain cells’
mitochondria by broadband near-infrared spectroscopy can verify our working hypothesis.
We are optimistic that the results can inspire novel treatment options for mental disease
and other problems.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, É.D.; validation, É.D. and Z.K.; investigation, É.D. and
Z.K.; data curation, É.D.; writing—original draft preparation, É.D.; writing—review and editing, É.D.
and Z.K.; visualization, J.F.P .; mathematical treatment, J.F.P .; editing,É.D.; supervision, Z.K.; project
administration, Z.K.; funding acquisition, Z.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the Hungarian Brain Research Program (NAP2.0., 2017-1.2.1-
NKP-2017-00002) to Z.K.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors want to thank Zoltan A. Kiss for his input during the manuscript
preparation.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Michel, M.; Fleming, S.; Lau, H.; Lee, A.; Martinez-Conde, S.; Passingham, R.; Peters, M.; Rahnev, D.; Sergent, C.; Liu, K.
An Informal Internet Survey on the Current State of Consciousness Science. Front. Psychol. 2018, 9, 2134. [CrossRef]
2. Michel, M.; Beck, D.; Block, N.; Blumenfeld, H.; Brown, R.; Carmel, D.; Carrasco, M.; Chirimuuta, M.; Chun, M.; Cleeremans, A.;
et al. Opportunities and challenges for a maturing science of consciousness. Nat. Hum. Behav. 2019, 3, 104–107. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
3. Nobre, A.C.; van Ede, F. Under the Mind’s Hood: What We Have Learned by Watching the Brain at Work.J. Neurosci. 2020, 40,
89–100. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Laeng, B.; Nabil, S.; Kitaoka, A. The Eye Pupil Adjusts to Illusorily Expanding Holes. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2022, 11, 308.
[CrossRef]
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 13 of 17
5. Goldenberg, A.; Garcia, D.; Suri, G.; Halperin, E.; Gross, J. The Psychology of Collective Emotions. In Current Directions in
Psychological Science; SAGE Publications: Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, 2017. [CrossRef]
6. Peters, K.; Kashima, Y. A multimodal theory of affect diffusion. Psychol. Bull. 2015, 141, 966–992. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Deli, E.; Peters, J.; Kisvarday, Z. The thermodynamics of cognition: A Mathematical Treatment. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 2021,
19, 784–793. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Déli, E.; Kisvárday, Z. The thermodynamic brain and the evolution of intellect: The role of mental energy.Cogn. Neurodyn. 2020,
14, 743–756. [CrossRef]
9. Chalmers, D. Facing up to the hard problem of consciousness. J. Conscious. Stud. 1995, 2, 200–219.
10. Singer, W. Recurrent dynamics in the cerebral cortex: Integration of sensory evidence with stored knowledge. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 2021, 118, e2101043118. [CrossRef]
11. Czégel, D.; Giaffar, H.; Csillag, M.; Futó, B.; Szathmáry, E. Novelty and imitation within the brain: A Darwinian neurodynamic
approach to combinatorial problems. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 12513. [CrossRef]
12. Itti, L.; Baldi, P . Bayesian surprise attracts human attention. Vis. Res. 2009, 49, 1295–1306. [CrossRef]
13. Yanagisawa, H.; Kawamata, O.; Ueda, K. Modeling Emotions Associated with Novelty at Variable Uncertainty Levels: A Bayesian
Approach. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 2019, 13, 2. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Conant, R.; Ashby, W. Every Good Regulator of a System Must Be a Model of That System. InFacets of Systems Science; International
Federation for Systems Research; International Series on Systems Science and Engineering 7; Springer: Boston, MA, USA, 1991.
15. Luck, S.; Gaspelin, N.; Folk, C.; Remington, R.; Theeuwes, J. Progress toward Resolving the Attentional Capture Debate. Vis.
Cogn. 2021, 29, 1–21. [CrossRef]
16. Papazacharias, A.; Taurisano, P .; Fazio, L.; Gelao, B.; Di Giorgio, A.; Lo Bianco, L.; Quarto, T.; Mancini, M.; Porcelli, A.; Romano,
R.; et al. Aversive emotional interference impacts behavior and prefrontal-striatal activity during increasing attentional control.
Front. Behav. Neurosci. 2015, 9, 97. [CrossRef]
17. Xu, J.; Schwarz, N. How one thing leads to another: Spillover effects of behavioral mind-sets. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 2018, 27,
51–55. [CrossRef]
18. Flesch, T.; Juechems, K.; Dumbalska, T.; Saxe, A.; Summerﬁeld, C. Orthogonal representations for robust context-dependent task
performance in brains and neural networks. Neuron 2022, 110, 1258–1270. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Allahverdyan, A.; Galstyan, A.; Abbas, A.; Struzik, Z. Adaptive decision making via entropy minimization. Int. J. Approx. Reason.
2018, 103, 270–287. [CrossRef]
20. Sedighimornani, N. Is Shame Managed Through Mind-Wandering? Eur. J. Psychol. 2019, 15, 717–732. [CrossRef]
21. Grossberg, S.; Levine, D.S. Neural dynamics of attentionally modulated Pavlovian conditioning: Blocking, inter-stimulus interval,
and secondary reinforcement. Appl. Opt. 1987, 26, 5015–5030. [CrossRef]
22. Fry, R. Physical Intelligence and Thermodynamic Computing. Entropy 2017, 19, 107. [CrossRef]
23. Street, S. Upper Limit on the Thermodynamic Information Content of an Action Potential. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 2020, 14, 37.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Hylton, T. Thermodynamic Neural Network. Entropy 2020, 22, 256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. D éli, E.; Peters, J.; Tozzi, A. The Thermodynamic Analysis of Neural Computation. J. Neurosci. Clin. Res. 3 2018, 1, 2.
26. O’Neill, J.; Schoth, A. The Mental Maxwell Relations: A Thermodynamic Allegory for Higher Brain Functions.Front. Neurosci.
2022, 16, 827888. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Deli, E. Can the fermionic mind hypothesis (FMH) explain consciousness? The physics of selfhood. Act. Nerv. Super. 2020, 62,
35–47. [CrossRef]
28. Deli, E. The thermodynamic implications of the fermionic mind hypothesis (FMH). Act. Nerv. Super. 2020, 62, 96–103. [CrossRef]
29. Hohwy, J. The Predictive Mind; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2013.
30. Schoeller, F.; Perlovsky, L.; Arseniev, D. Physics of mind: Experimental conﬁrmations of theoretical predictions.Phys. Life Rev.
2018, 25, 45–68. [CrossRef]
31. Parmentier, F.B.R.; Maybery, M.T.; Elsley, J.V . The involuntary capture of attention by novel feature pairings: A study of voice
location integration in auditory sensory memory. Atten. Percept. Psychophys. 2010, 72, 279–284. [CrossRef]
32. Oohashi, T.; Nishina, E.; Honda, M.; Yonekura, Y.; Fuwamoto, Y.; Kawai, N.; Maekawa, T.; Nakamura, S.; Fukuyama, H.; Shibasaki,
H. Inaudible high-frequency sounds affect brain activity: Hypersonic effect. J. Neurophysiol. 2000, 83, 3548–3558. [CrossRef]
33. McCraty, R.; Atkinson, M. Electrophysiology of intuition: Prestimulus responses in group and individual participants using a
roulette paradigm. Glob. Adv. Health Med. 2014, 3, 16–27. [CrossRef]
34. Mohr, C.; Michel, C.; Lantz, G.; Ortigue, S.; Viaud-Delmon, I.; Landis, T. Brain state-dependent functional hemispheric specializa-
tion in men but not in women. Cereb. Cortex 2005, 15, 1451–1458. [CrossRef]
35. Marton, T.; Seiﬁkar, H.; Luongo, F.; Lee, A.T.; Sohal, V . Roles of prefrontal cortex and mediodorsal thalamus in task engagement
and behavioral ﬂexibility. J. Neurosci. 2018, 38, 2569–2578. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Fox, M.; Raichle, M. Spontaneous ﬂuctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 2007, 8, 700–711. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Hughes, G.; Desantis, A.; Waszak, F. Attenuation of auditory N1 results from identity speciﬁc action-effect prediction. Eur. J.
Neurosci. 2013, 37, 1152–1158. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 14 of 17
38. Kok, P .; Lange, M.D. Prior expectations induce prestimulus sensory templates.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2017, 114, 10473–10478.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Uithol, S.; Schurger, A. Reckoning the moment of reckoning in spontaneous voluntary movement. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016,
4, 817–819. [CrossRef]
40. Davis, Z.; Muller, L.; Martinez-Trujillo, J.; Sejnowski, T.; Reynolds, J. Spontaneous travelling cortical waves gate perception in
behaving primates. Nature 2020, 587, 432–436. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41. Muller, L.; Chavane, F.; Reynolds, J.; Sejnowski, T. Cortical travelling waves: Mechanisms and computational principles. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 2018, 19, 255–268. [CrossRef]
42. Guterstam, A.; Abdulkarim, Z.; Ehrsson, H.H. Illusory ownership of an invisible body reduces autonomic and subjective social
anxiety responses. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 9831. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Northoff, G.; Wainio-Theberge, S.; Evers, K. Is temporo-spatial dynamics the “common currency” of brain and mind? In Quest of
Spatiotemporal Neuroscience. Phys. Life Rev. 2020, 33, 34–54. [CrossRef]
44. Wolff, A.; Di Giovanni, D.A.; Gómez-Pilar, J.; Nakao, T.; Huang, Z.; Longtin, A.; Northoff, G. The temporal signature of self:
Temporal measures of resting-state EEG predict self-consciousness. Hum. Brain Mapp. 2019, 40, 789–803. [CrossRef]
45. Ahmed, M.S.; Priestley, J.B.; Castro, A.; Stefanini, F.; Canales, A.S.S.; Balough, E.M.; Lavoie, E.; Mazzucato, L.; Fusi, S.; Losonczy, A.
Hippocampal Network Reorganization Underlies the Formation of a Temporal Association Memory.Neuron 2020, 107, 283–291.e6.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Dörrenbächer, S.; Schütz, C.; Woirgardt, M.; Wu, C.C.; Zimmer, H.D.; Kray, J. Spatio-Temporal Neural Changes after Task-
Switching Training in Old Age. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2019, 11, 267. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Pezzulo, G.; Zorzi, M.; Corbetta, M. The secret life of predictive brains: What’s spontaneous activity for?Trends Cogn. Sci. 2021,
25, 730–743. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Herzog, M.H.; Drissi-Daoudi, L.; Doerig, A. All in Good Time: Long-Lasting Postdictive Effects Reveal Discrete Perception.Trends
Cogn. Sci. 2020, 24, 826–837.
49. Chen, Y.-C.; Spence, C. Assessing the role of the ‘unity assumption’ on multisensory integration: A review.Front. Psychol. 2017,
8, 445. [CrossRef]
50. Mancini, F.; Longo, M.R.; Kammers, M.P .M.; Haggard, P . Visual distortion of body size modulates pain perception.Psychol. Sci.
APS 2011, 22, 325–330. [CrossRef]
51. Prentner, R. Consciousness and topologically structured spaces. Conscious. Cogn. 2019, 70, 25–38. [CrossRef]
52. Biderman, N.; Bakkour, A.; Shohamy, D. What Are Memories For? The Hippocampus Bridges Past Experience with Future
Decisions. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2020, 24, 542–556. [CrossRef]
53. Deli, E. The Science of Consciousness; Nadir-Video: USA, 2015; ISBN 10: 9631226263.
54. Wissner-Gross, D.; Freer, C.E. Causal Entropic Forces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, 168702. [CrossRef]
55. Andrieux, D.; Gaspard, P .; Ciliberto, S.; Garnier, N.; Joubaud, S.; Petrosyan, A. Entropy production and time asymmetry in
nonequilibrium ﬂuctuations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 98, 150601. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Gaspard, P . Brownian motion, dynamical randomness and irreversibility. New J. Phys. 2005, 7, 77. [CrossRef]
57. Roldán, É.; Parrondo, J.M. Estimating dissipation from single stationary trajectories. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 105, 150607. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
58. Kostic, M. The Elusive Nature of Entropy and Its Physical Meaning. Entropy 2014, 16, 953–967. [CrossRef]
59. Halgren, A.; Siegel, Z.; Golden, R.; Bazhenov, M. Multielectrode Cortical Stimulation Selectively Induces Unidirectional Wave
Propagation in Biophysical/Neural Model. bioRxiv 2020. [CrossRef]
60. Roberts, J.A.; Gollo, L.L.; Abeysuriya, R.G.; Roberts, G.; Mitchell, P .B.; Woolrich, M.W.; Breakspear, M. Metastable brain waves.
Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 1056. [CrossRef]
61. Dempsey, W.; Du, Z.; Nadtochiy, A. Regional synapse gain and loss accompany memory formation in larval zebraﬁsh.Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 2022, 119, e2107661119. [CrossRef]
62. Sîrbu, A.; Loreto, V .; Servedio, V .; Tria, F. Opinion dynamics: Models, extensions and external effects. InParticipatory Sensing,
Opinions and Collective Awareness; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2017.
63. Le ón-Medina, F. Endogenous Changes in Public Opinion Dynamics. J. Artif. Soc. Soc. Simul. 2019, 22, 4. [CrossRef]
64. Li, M.; Dankowicz, H. Impact of temporal network structures on the speed of consensus formation in opinion dynamics. Phys. A
2018, 523, 1355–1370. [CrossRef]
65. Ishii, A.; Kawahata, Y. Opinion Dynamics Theory for Analysis of Consensus Formation and Division of Opinion on the Internet.
arXiv 2018, arXiv:1812.11845.
66. Zha, Q.; Kou, G.; Zhang, H.; Liang, H.; Chen, X.; Li, C.-C.; Dong, Y. Opinion dynamics in ﬁnance and business: A literature
review and research opportunities. Financial Innov. 2021, 6, 44. [CrossRef]
67. Vázquez, F.; Saintier, N.; Pinasco, J. Role of voting intention in public opinion polarization. Phys. Rev. E 2020, 101, 012101.
[PubMed]
68. Salehi, S.; Taghiyareh, F. Introspective Agents in Opinion Formation Modeling to Predict Social Market. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Web Research (ICWR), Tehran, Iran, 24–25 April 2019.
69. Chatterjee, A.; Iannacchione, G. Time and Thermodynamics Extended Discussion on “Time & clocks: A thermodynamic
approach”. Results Phys. 2020, 17, 103165.
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 15 of 17
70. Zanin, M.; Güntekin, B.; Aktürk, T.; Hano˘ glu, L.; Papo, D. Time Irreversibility of Resting-State Activity in the Healthy Brain and
Pathology. Front. Physiol. 2020, 10, 16191. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71. Shi, L.; Beaty, R.; Chen, Q.; Sun, J.; Wei, D.; Yang, W.; Qiu, J. Brain Entropy is Associated with Divergent Thinking.Cereb. Cortex
2019, 30, 708–717. [CrossRef]
72. Saxe, G.; Calderone, D.; Morales, L. Brain entropy and human intelligence: A resting-state fMRI study. PLoS ONE 2018,
13, e0191582. [CrossRef]
73. Song, D.; Chang, D.; Zhang, J.; Ge, Q.; Zang, Y.; Wang, Z. Associations of brain entropy (BEN) to cerebral blood ﬂow and fractional
amplitude of low-frequency ﬂuctuations in the resting brain. Brain Imaging Behav. 2018, 13, 1486–1495. [CrossRef]
74. McIntosh, A.R.; Kovacevic, N.; Itier, R. Increased brain signal variability accompanies lower behavioral variability in development.
PLoS Comput. Biol. 2008, 4, e1000106. [CrossRef]
75. Kolvoort, I.R.; Wainio-Theberge, S.; Wolff, A.; Northoff, G. Temporal integration as “common currency” of brain and self-scale-free
activity in resting-state EEG correlates with temporal delay effects on self-relatedness. Hum. Brain Mapp. 2020, 41, 4355–4374.
[CrossRef]
76. Spinhoven, P .; van Hemert, A.; Penninx, B. Repetitive negative thinking as a predictor of depression and anxiety: A longitudinal
cohort study. J. Affect. Disord. 2018, 241, 216–225. [CrossRef]
77. Qin, P .; Northoff, G. How is our self related to midline regions and the default-mode network?NeuroImage 2011, 57, 1221–1233.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
78. Llinás, R.; Paré, D. (Eds.) The brain as a closed system modulated by the senses. In The Churchlands and Their Critics; Blackwell
Publishers: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1996.
79. Northoff, G. Is Our Brain an Open or Closed System? Prediction Model of Brain and World–Brain Relation. In The Spontaneous
Brain; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2018.
80. Deli, E.; Peters, J.; Tozzi, A. Relationships between short and fast brain timescales. Cogn. Neurodynamics 2017, 11, 539–552.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
81. Bale, G.; Mitra, S.; Meek, J.; Robertson, N.; Tachtsidis, I. A new broadband near-infrared spectroscopy system for in-vivo
measurements of cerebral cytochrome-c-oxidase changes in neonatal brain injury. Biomed. Opt. Express 2014, 5, 3450–3466.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Cowen, A.; Sauter, D.; Tracy, J.; Keltner, D. Mapping the Passions: Toward a High-Dimensional Taxonomy of Emotional Experience
and Expression. Psychol. Sci. Public Interest 2019, 20, 69–90. [CrossRef]
83. Keltner, D.; Sauter, D.; Tracy, J.; Cowen, A. Emotional Expression: Advances in Basic Emotion Theory.J. Nonverbal Behav. 2019, 43,
133–160. [CrossRef]
84. Gothard, M. Marmosets conﬁrm that context is king. Neuron 2022, 110, 1273–1274. [CrossRef]
85. Huang, Z.; Zhang, J.; Wu, J.; Mashour, G.A.; Hudetz, A.G. Temporal circuit of macroscale dynamic brain activity supports human
consciousness. Sci. Adv. 2020, 6, eaaz0087. [CrossRef]
86. Schoeller, F.; Perlovsky, L. Aesthetic Chills: Knowledge-Acquisition, Meaning-Making, and Aesthetic Emotions.Front. Psychol.
2016, 7, 1093. [CrossRef]
87. Krause, S.; Bornholdt, S. Opinion formation model for markets with a social temperature and fear. Phys. Rev. E 2012,
86 Pt 2, 056106. [CrossRef]
88. Kao, F.-C.; Wang, S.; Chang, Y. Brainwaves Analysis of Positive and Negative Emotions. ISAA 2015, 12, 1263–1266.
89. Gao, Z.; Cui, X.; Wan, W.; Zheng, W.; Gu, Z. Long-range correlation analysis of high frequency prefrontal electroencephalogram
oscillations for dynamic emotion recognition. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 2022, 72, 103291. [CrossRef]
90. Hesp, C.; Smith, R.; Parr, T.; Allen, M.; Friston, K.J.; Ramstead, M.J.D. Deeply Felt Affect: The Emergence of Valence in Deep
Active Inference. Neural Comput. 2021, 33, 398–446. [CrossRef]
91. Jofﬁly, M.; Coricelli, G. Emotional valence and the free-energy principle. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2013, 9, e1003094. [CrossRef]
92. Buzsaki, N. Logothetis and W. Singer. Scaling brain size, keeping timing: Evolutionary preservation of brain rhythms. Neuron
2013, 80, 751–764. [CrossRef]
93. Esghaei, M.; Treue, S.; Vidyasagar, T. Dynamic coupling of oscillatory neural activity and its roles in visual attention. Trends
Neurosci. 2022, 45, 323–335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94. Bechler, C.J.; Tormala, Z.; Rucker, D. Perceiving attitude change: How qualitative shifts augment change perception.J. Exp. Soc.
Psychol. 2019, 82, 160–175. [CrossRef]
95. Stringer, C.; Pachitariu, M.; Steinmetz, N.; Reddy, C.B.; Carandini, M.; Harris, K.D. Spontaneous behaviors drive multidimensional,
brainwide activity. Science 2019, 364, eaav7893. [CrossRef]
96. Wang, Y.; Dai, Y.L.H.; Song, L. Social Media and Attitude Change: Information Booming Promote or Resist Persuasion?Front.
Psychol. 2021, 12, 2433. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97. Al-Qazzaz, N.; Sabir, M.; Ali, S.; Ahmad, S.; Grammer, K. Electroencephalogram Proﬁles for Emotion Identiﬁcation over the Brain
Regions Using Spectral, Entropy and Temporal Biomarkers. Sensors 2019, 20, 59. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98. Bányai, M.E.A. Stimulus complexity shapes response correlations in primary visual cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2019, 116,
2723–2732. [CrossRef]
99. Moca, V .V .; Nagy-Dabacan, A.; Harzan, H.B.; Muresan, R.C. Superlets: Time-frequency super-resolution using wavelet sets.
bioRxiv 2019, 583732. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 16 of 17
100. Lutas, A.; Kucukdereli, H.; Alturkistani, O.; Carty, C.; Sugden, A.U.; Fernando, K.; Diaz, V .; Flores-Maldonado, V .;
Andermann, M.L. State-speciﬁc gating of salient cues by midbrain dopaminergic input to basal amygdala. Nat. Neurosci. 2019, 22,
1820–1833. [CrossRef]
101. Li, H.; Namburi, P .; Olson, J.M.; Borio, M.; Lemieux, M.E.; Beyeler, A.; Calhoon, G.G.; Hitora-Imamura, N.; Coley, A.A.;
Libster, A.; et al. Neurotensin orchestrates valence assignment in the amygdala. Nature 2022, 608, 586–592. [CrossRef]
102. Tozzi, A.; Peters, J.F. From abstract topology to real thermodynamic brain activity.Cogn. Neurodyn. 2017, 11, 283–292. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
103. Tozzi, A.; Peters, J.F. A topological approach unveils system invariances and broken symmetries in the brain. J. Neurosci. Res.
2016, 94, 351–365. [CrossRef]
104. Don, A.P .H.; Peters, J.; Ramanna, S.; Tozzi, A. Topological view of ﬂows inside the BOLD spontaneous activity of the human
brain. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 2020, 14, 34. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Lubashevsky, I. Psychophysical laws as reﬂection of mental space properties. Phys. Life Rev. 2019, 31, 276–303. [CrossRef]
106. Tsao, A.; Sugar, J.; Lu, L.; Wang, C.; Knierim, J.J.; Moser, M.B.; Moser, E.I. Integrating time from experience in the lateral entorhinal
cortex. Nature 2018, 25, 57–62. [CrossRef]
107. Babaev, O.; Chatain, C.P .; Krueger-Burg, D. Inhibition in the amygdala anxiety circuitry.Exp. Mol. Med. 2018, 50, 1–16. [CrossRef]
108. Vogel, E.; Krabbe, S.; Gründemann, J.; Cusulin, J.; Lüthi, A. Projection-Speciﬁc Dynamic Regulation of Inhibition in Amygdala
Micro-Circuits. Neuron 2016, 91, 644–651. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. Sato, W.; Kochiyama, T.; Uono, S.; Sawada, R.; Yoshikawa, S. Amygdala activity related to perceived social support.Sci. Rep. 2020,
10, 2951. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
110. Fingelkurts, A.A.; Fingelkurts, A.A. Present moment, past, and future: Mental kaleidoscope. Front. Psychol. 2014, 5, 395.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Van Steenbergen, H.; Band, G.; Hommel, B. Threat but not Arousal Narrows Attention: Evidence from Pupil Dilation and Saccade
Control. Front. Psychol. 2011, 2, 281. [CrossRef]
112. Parr, T.; Rees, G.; Friston, K. Computational Neuropsychology and Bayesian Inference. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2018, 12, 61.
[CrossRef]
113. Crawford, L.E.; Knouse, L.; Kent, M.; Vavra, D.; Harding, O.; Leserve, D.; Fox, N.; Hu, X.; Li, P .; Glory, C.; et al. Enriched
environment exposure accelerates rodent driving skills. Behav. Brain Res. 2000, 378, 112309. [CrossRef]
114. Neal, S.; Kent, M.; Bardi, M.; Lambert, K.G. Enriched Environment Exposure Enhances Social Interactions and Oxytocin
Responsiveness in Male Long-Evans Rats. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 2018, 12, 198. [CrossRef]
115. Planchez, B.; Lagunas, N.; Le Guisquet, A.M.; Legrand, M.; Surget, A.; Hen, R.; Belzung, C. Increasing Adult Hippocampal
Neurogenesis Promotes Resilience in a Mouse Model of Depression. Cells 2021, 10, 972. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Huang, Y.; Wu, R.; Wu, J.; Yang, Q.; Zheng, S.; Wu, K. Psychological resilience, self-acceptance, perceived social support and their
associations with mental health of incarcerated offenders in China. Asian J. Psychiatry 2020, 52, 102166. [CrossRef]
117. Jans-Beken, L.; Jacobs, N.; Janssens, M.; Peeters, S.; Reijnders, J.; Lechner, L.; Lataster, J. Gratitude and health: An updated review.
J. Posit. Psychol. 2019, 15, 743–782. [CrossRef]
118. Ng, R.; Allore, H.G.; Levy, B.R. Self-Acceptance and Interdependence Promote Longevity: Evidence From a 20-year Prospective
Cohort Study. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020, 17, 5980. [CrossRef]
119. Roy, D.S.; Park, Y.G.; Kim, M.E.; Zhang, Y.; Ogawa, S.K.; DiNapoli, N.; Gu, X.; Cho, J.H.; Choi, H.; Kamentsky, L.; et al. Brain-wide
mapping reveals that engrams for a single memory are distributed across multiple brain regions. Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 1799.
[CrossRef]
120. Wang, Y.; Wang, X.; Ye, L.; Yang, Q.; Cui, Q.; He, Z.; Li, L.; Yang, X.; Zou, Q.; Yang, P .; et al. Spatial complexity of brain signal is
altered in patients with generalized anxiety disorder. J. Affect. Disord. 2018, 246, 387–393. [CrossRef]
121. Inzlicht, M.; Bartholow, B.D.; Hirsh, J.B. Emotional foundations of cognitive control.Trends Cogn. Sci. 2015, 19, 126–132. [CrossRef]
122. Wang, Z.; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Brain Entropy Mapping in Healthy Aging and Alzheimer’s Disease.
Front. Aging Neurosci. 2020, 12, 596122. [CrossRef]
123. Gustavson, D.E.; du Pont, A.; Whisman, M.A.; Miyake, A. Evidence for Transdiagnostic Repetitive Negative Thinking and Its
Association with Rumination, Worry, and Depression and Anxiety Symptoms: A Commonality Analysis. Collabra Psychol. 2018,
4, 13. [CrossRef]
124. Mohammadkhani, S.; Attar, F.; Akbari, M. The linkage between negative affectivity with emotional distress in college student:
The mediator and moderator role of difﬁculty in emotion regulation, repetitive negative thinking, and emotional invalidation.
Curr Psychol. 2021, 1–13. [CrossRef]
125. Saarimäki, H.; Ejtehadian, L.F.; Glerean, E.; Vuilleumier, P .; Sams, M.; Nummenmaa, L. Distributed affective space represents
multiple emotion categories across the brain. bioRxiv 2017, 123521. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
126. Trevisiol, A.; Saab, A.S.; Winkler, U.; Marx, G.; Imamura, H.; Möbius, W.; Kusch, K.; Nave, K.A.; Hirrlinger, J. Monitoring ATP
dynamics in electrically active white matter tracts. eLife 2017, 6, e24241. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
127. Laws, B. The return of the suppressed: Exploring how emotional suppression reappears as violence and pain among male and
female prisoners. Punishm. Soc. 2019, 21, 560–577. [CrossRef]
128. London, E.D. Impulsivity, stimulant abuse, and dopamine receptor signaling. Adv. Pharmacol. 2016, 76, 67–84.
Entropy 2022, 24, 1498 17 of 17
129. Remmers, C.; Zander, T. Why you don’t see the forest for the trees when you are anxious: Anxiety impairs intuitive decision
making. Clin. Psychol. Sci. 2018, 6, 48–62. [CrossRef]
130. Hollis, F.; van der Kooij, M.A.; Zanoletti, O. Mitochondrial function in the brain links anxiety with social subordination. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2015, 112, 15486–15491. [CrossRef]
131. Gehring, W.J.; Coles, M.G.H.; Meyer, D.E.; Donchin, E. The error-related negativity: An event-related brain potential accompany-
ing errors. Psychophysiology 2018, 27, 534.
132. Ruan, Y.; Reis, H.; Zareba, W.; Lane, R.D. Does suppressing negative emotion impair subsequent emotions? Two experience
sampling studies. Motiv. Emot. 2020, 44, 427–435. [CrossRef]
133. Lupien, S.; Maheu, F.; Tu, M.; Fiocco, A. The effects of stress and stress hormones on human cognition. Implications for the ﬁeld
of brain and cognition. Brain Cogn. 2007, 65, 209–237. [CrossRef]
134. MacInnes, D.L. Self-Esteem and Self-Acceptance: An Examination into Their Relationship and Their Effect on Psychological
Health. J. Psychiatr. Ment. Health Nurs. 2006, 13, 483–489. [CrossRef]
135. Yanagisawa, H. Free-Energy Model of Emotion Potential: Modeling Arousal Potential as Information Content Induced by
Complexity and Novelty. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 2021, 15, 698252. [CrossRef]
136. Jao, C.-W.; Yeh, J.-H.; Wu, Y.-T. Alteration of the Intra- and Inter-Lobe Connectivity of the Brain Structural Network in Normal
Aging. Entropy 2020, 22, 826. [CrossRef] [PubMed]