Frontiers in Psychology 01 frontiersin.org
Functional contextual 
implementation of an 
evolutionary, entropy-based, and 
embodied free energy framework: 
Utilizing Lagrangian mechanics 
and evolutionary game theory’s 
truth vs. fitness test of the 
veridicality of phenomenological 
experience
Darren J. Edwards *
Department of Public Health, Swansea University, Swansea, United Kingdom
The Bayesian approach of cognitive science largely takes the position that 
evolution drives perception to produce precepts that are veridical. However, 
some efforts utilizing evolutionary game theory simulations have shown 
that perception is more likely based on a fitness function, which promotes 
survival rather than promoting perceptual truth about the environment. 
Although these findings do not correspond well with the standard Bayesian 
approach to cognition, they may correspond with a behavioral functional 
contextual approach that is ontologically neutral (a-ontological). This 
approach, formalized through a post-Skinnerian account of behaviorism 
called relational frame theory (RFT), can, in fact, be  shown to correspond 
well with an evolutionary fitness function, whereby contextual functions 
form that corresponds to a fitness function interface of the world. This fitness 
interface approach therefore may help provide a mathematical description 
for a functional contextual interface of phenomenological experience. 
Furthermore, this more broadly fits with a neurological active inference 
approach based on the free-energy principle (FEP) and more broadly with 
Lagrangian mechanics. These assumptions of how fitness beats truth (FBT) and 
FEP correspond to RFT are then discussed within a broader multidimensional 
and evolutionary framework called the extended evolutionary meta-model 
(EEMM) that has emerged out of the functional contextual behavioral science 
literature to incorporate principles of cognition, neurobiology, behaviorism, 
and evolution and are discussed in the context of a novel RFT framework called 
“Neurobiological and Natural Selection Relational Frame Theory” (N-frame). 
This framework mathematically connects RFT to FBT, FEP, and EEMM within 
a single framework that expands into dynamic graph networking. This is then 
discussed for its implications of empirical work at the non-ergodic process-
based idiographic level as applied to individual and societal level dynamic 
modeling and clinical work. This discussion is framed within the context 
of individuals that are described as evolutionary adaptive and conscious 
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Tomer Fekete,  
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev,  
Israel
REVIEWED BY
Drozdstoy Stoyanov Stoyanov,  
Plovdiv Medical University,  
Bulgaria
Birgitta Dresp-Langley,  
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 
(CNRS),  
France
*CORRESPONDENCE
Darren J. Edwards  
 d.j.edwards@swansea.ac.uk
SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to  
Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology,  
a section of the journal  
Frontiers in Psychology
RECEIVED 07 February 2023
ACCEPTED 23 February 2023
PUBLISHED 11 April 2023
CITATION
Edwards DJ (2023) Functional contextual 
implementation of an evolutionary, entropy-
based, and embodied free energy framework: 
Utilizing Lagrangian mechanics and 
evolutionary game theory’s truth vs. fitness test 
of the veridicality of phenomenological 
experience.
Front. Psychol. 14:1150743.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
COPYRIGHT
© 2023 Edwards. This is an open-access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The 
use, distribution or reproduction in other 
forums is permitted, provided the original 
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are 
credited and that the original publication in this 
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted 
academic practice. No use, distribution or 
reproduction is permitted which does not 
comply with these terms.
TYPE Hypothesis and Theory
PUBLISHED 11 April 2023
DOI 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 02 frontiersin.org
(observer-self) agents that minimize entropy and can promote a prosocial 
society through group-level values and psychological flexibility.
KEYWORDS
Evolutionay game theory, entropy, interoception, graph theory, functional 
contextualism, predictive coding
Introduction
One well-established assumption within cognitive science is that 
the cognitive system promotes veridical precepts and that through 
evolution, natural selection drives increasingly veridical perceptions 
about the objective world (Marr, 1982, 2010; Palmer, 1999; Geisler 
and Diehl, 2003; Maloney and Zhang, 2010; Pizlo et al., 2014). There 
is of course some evidence supporting this claim; for example, the 
eye, as complex as it is today, was postulated by Darwin (1859) to 
have emerged from much simpler evolutionary beginnings. Initially, 
a prototype eye was thought to have evolved through purely 
stochastic means, which formed and allowed the organism to detect 
direct light. Given that this light detection would provide the 
organism a substantial survival advantage over organisms that could 
not detect light, this adaptation would then be selected and continue 
to adapt with further evolutionary variation and selection. To support 
Darwin’s postulate, this prototype eye has subsequently been found 
in the planarian species Polycelis auricularia and the trochophore 
planktonic marine larvae (Gehring, 2014). This, according to Darwin 
(1859), has led to the highly evolved eye we have today that not only 
detects light but also shape, color, contrast, movement, etc.
In complex organisms, the tapetum lucidum is a layer in the eye of 
many vertebrates, which sits behind the retina with the sole purpose of 
reflecting light through the retina, thus allowing more available light to 
pass through the eye’s photoreceptors. This increases the amount of 
available light for organisms that have the tapetum lucidum, which 
allows them to see better in the dark and therefore has obvious survival 
advantages, particularly if the organism hunts at night or is hunted at 
night. In fact, organisms that have the tapetum lucidum are typically 
active at night, such as deer, dogs, cats, horses, and ferrets. Humans, 
other primates, squirrels, birds, and pigs do not have this structure in 
their eyes, and this is thought to be because they are diurnal (mainly 
active during the day; Ollivier et al., 2004). It, therefore, seems that the 
tapetum lucidum only evolved through selection in animals that 
directly benefited from it through a direct survival advantage. This gives 
these organisms greater veridical perception at night than organisms 
that do not have it (without the use of technology), as they can see light 
reflect off objects within the world ( Bennett & Cuthill, 1994 ). 
Importantly, this natural selection advantage in perceiving a veridical 
world is not isolated to just visual perception; a bat, for instance, can 
hear ultrasound and uses echolocation to navigate (Jones et al., 2013). 
Likewise, rats have a higher sense of smell than humans, with a higher 
number of olfactory receptor neurons and therefore greater veridical 
olfactory perception (Duchamp-Viret et al., 1999; Keller and Vosshall, 
2008). Thus, it seems that all forms of veridical phenomenology are 
shaped by evolutionary fitness payoffs based on the organism’s context.
However, assuming that any of these perceptions are veridical 
assumes a naïve realist ontology typical in cognitive psychology, 
which assumes perceptual mapping is to be exactly veridical, or at 
least a critical realist ontology, which assumes that at least some 
aspects of the environment the organism experiences through the 
senses are based on a “true” veridical reality. Although much of the 
evolutionary evidence suggests that perception is driven by fitness 
(contextualized given the organism’s survival or reproductive 
needs) and not solely by absolute veridical object reality, many 
cognitive theories have still proposed a naïve realist position (that 
perception should be veridical and computable through Bayesian 
decision theory) ( Marr, 1982, 2010; Palmer, 1999; Geisler and Diehl, 
2003; Pizlo et al., 2014 ). However, certain mathematical models 
have also been proposed in the area of evolutionary game theory 
(Smith and Price, 1973 ; Smith, 1982 ; Nowak, 2006) that show and 
emphasize an entirely non-veridical nature to the perception that 
evolutionary fitness within these game simulations selects 
non-veridical perception in nearly all cases ( Mark et  al., 2010 ; 
Prakash et al., 2021 ).
These findings have broad implications for a philosophy of science 
in the psychology of the “mind” or “behavior” of an organism. It 
rationalizes that the “mind” or “behavior” is shaped at its foundation 
by an evolutionary fitness function rather than specific ontologies 
such as physicalism, mentalism, or naive realism, ultimately giving rise 
to an ontologically neutral (a-ontological) stance on these phenomena. 
This a-ontological position is directly opposed to the naïve (or critical) 
realist position of cognitive psychology. Instead, it is more aligned to 
a behavioral position, for example, a post-Skinner contextual 
behavioral science account based on functional contextualism 
relational frame theory (RFT; Barnes-Holmes et al., 2001; Blackledge, 
2003; Zettle et al., 2016), which is based on behavioral pragmatism 
and also holds an a-ontological position in explaining how complex 
human behavior emerges ( Barnes-Holmes, 2005 ; Codd, 2015 ; 
Monestes and Villatte, 2015).
Given such an a-ontological alignment, and the fact that recent 
developments within clinical psychology are suggesting a move away 
from protocols of syndromes, such as the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5; American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013), and toward a more process-based therapeutic 
(PBT) approach (Hayes and Hofmann, 2018; Hayes et al., 2019, 2020) 
that highlights evolution as central (evolutionary variation, selection, 
retention, and context; Hayes et al., 2020; Hofmann et al., 2022) within 
the therapeutic practice, it seems appropriate to explore how the 
evolutionary game theory ( Smith and Price, 1973 ; Smith, 1982 ; 
Nowak, 2006) can be applied within the context of this study. This 
specifically relates to evidence provided through mathematical 
simulations that show phenological experience (e.g., perception) to 
be non-veridical and instead act through a perceptual interface based 
on evolutionary fitness functions (Mark et al., 2010 ; Hoffman and 
Prakash, 2014; Hoffman et al., 2015; Prakash et al., 2021).
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 03 frontiersin.org
The evolutionary approach of PBT is defined through the extended 
evolutionary meta-model (EEMM; Hayes and Hofmann, 2018; Hayes 
et al., 2019, 2020). This is a multilevel and multidimensional modeling 
approach that emphasizes data modeling to be  driven at the 
non-ergodic ideographic individual level and not a nomothetic 
population-driven approach. The EEMM dimensions include affective, 
cognitive, attentional, self, motivational, and overt behavior and have 
two levels of analysis that are biopsychological and sociocultural. As 
the EEMM is an expanded contextual behavioral approach that has 
traditionally emphasized acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) 
at a middle level (Hayes et al., 1999, 2004, 2011) and RFT at the basic 
level (Barnes-Holmes et al., 2001; Blackledge, 2003; Zettle et al., 2016), 
an exploration of RFT framing will be  performed, as well as the 
psychobiological level of the EEMM in the form of principles of free 
energy and the Markovian blanket typically associated with 
neuroscience (Friston, 2010; Schwartenbeck et al., 2013).
An even deeper contextual analysis is also explored at the level of 
entropy, related to chaotic dynamical self-adaptive behavior, in which 
value-directed behavior and other dimensions of EEMM and 
principles of free energy can lead to a reduction in entropy. This 
includes principles of Lagrangian mechanics and how this interfaces 
with perceptual and phenomenological experience based on an 
evolutionary fitness function. In addition to this, there has been, to 
date, less attempt to define mathematically a formal framework that 
directly and explicitly extends the RFT’s relational frames through the 
EEMM and within an ideographic PBT network approach (an 
ideographic dynamic network analysis, IDNA), that incorporates 
evolution, free energy, expected utility, and entropy. The basic outline 
of one such formal mathematical framework implementation is given 
here and is called the “Neurobiological and Natural Selection 
Relational Frame Theory” (N-frame), which emphasizes RFT 
relational frames projected through the EEMM and free energy that 
define important mathematical structures called Markov blankets, 
which are important for defining an unbounded mathematical space 
for “self ” in RFT (i.e., separating observer self from self as content).
This theory and hypothesis paper explores (1) the standard 
cognitive Bayesian approaches to veridical perception and simulations 
confirming Hoffman and colleagues’ (Mark et al., 2010; Hoffman and 
Prakash, 2014; Hoffman et al., 2015; Prakash et al., 2021) suggestion 
that phenomenological experience such as perception is based on 
fitness and not veridical Bayesian “truth”; (2) logical and set theory 
mathematical interpretations of RFT that may be applicable for time 
series ideographic PBT; this includes how to develop these into graphs 
of graph theory computationally; (3) problems with rare paradoxical 
self-referential strange loops that are introduced in formal atomic 
logical system models and could apply when modeling deictics of RFT 
“self ” in more complex modes; in addition, how Markovian blankets 
and Lagrangian mechanics maybe one solution to this; and (4) the 
broader implications of how entropy reduction and embodied self 
naturally emerge when introducing personal values and 
Lagrangian mechanics.
The standard cognitive Bayesian 
framework for visual perception
A common approach to visual perception in cognitive science 
(which assumes a naïve realist ontology) is to use a Bayesian approach 
and assume that perception is veridical (Marr, 1982, 2010; Palmer, 
1999; Geisler and Diehl, 2003; Pizlo et al., 2014). According to this 
approach, given some image x0, the cognitive-visual system attempts 
to find the most probable interpretation of the world. To do this, it 
compares the posterior probability P of various interpretations of the 
world w given some image of the environment that is being seen x0, 
and this can be  denoted as ( )0P wx . When using Bayes’ rule 
(theorem), the posterior probability f of a cognitive interpretation of 
the world x when given some image w is given by:
 
( ) ( ) ( )
( )
0
0
0
|| Px w PwPwx Px
⋅=
 
(1)
The term P(x0) is the posterior probability of some image that does 
not depend on a cognitive interpretation w. Given this Bayes’ theorem 
interpretation, the posterior probability is determined by the product 
of two terms: (1) the probability of an interpretation given some image 
( )0Px w , and (2) the probability of an interpretation prior to any 
image presented (prior probability) P(w). These are then divided 
by P(x0).
This application of Bayes’ rule yields a probability distribution 
space of possible interpretations called the posterior distribution. It 
can be interpreted as a naïve realist cognitive approach (or veridical 
truth strategy) to perception, whereby it gives the highest posterior 
probability given some image x0, and it is this strategy that is selected 
by the perceptual system when processing perceptual “truth. ” This 
strategy consists of a maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) that selects the 
most probable perception given the posterior distribution, according 
to this Bayes’ theorem approach. Here, a function f can be described, 
whereby a sampling distribution of observations (in this case images)  
x can be made, an unobserved population parameter is given as w,  
and therefore the function ( )f xw  is the probability of x when the 
population parameter (or world) is w. This is given as ( )w f xw , 
and the maximum estimate of w is given as 
( ) ( )arg max |MLE w
w x f xw= . The Bayes’ rule MAP strategy also 
depends on a gain or loss function that describes the consequences of 
making errors. Here, for visual perception, it uses a Dirac-delta loss 
function, which gives no loss consequence for a correct (or near-
correct within a tolerance level) answer and an equal loss consequence 
for all incorrect answers (or interpretations in the case of 
visual perception).
Computational evolutionary 
perception
In the standard Bayesian approach of perceptual vision, the space  
W plays two distinct roles: (1) it corresponds to the space of objective 
world states, and (2) it corresponds to the space of perceptual 
interpretations from which the visual (or more broadly 
phenomenological) cognitive system must choose. One problem with 
this standard Bayesian approach for visual perception is that the 
framework conflates the Bayesian interpretation space with the real 
world by assuming their structures are homomorphic. However, for 
the many reasons already given (e.g., the examples of evolution 
selecting attributes for fitness rather than truth), they are unlikely to 
be entirely homomorphic.
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 04 frontiersin.org
An alternative theory that does not assume any homomorphic 
relation between the Bayesian interpretation space and the objective 
world (i.e., does not assume perception is veridical) is the framework 
of computational evolutionary perception (CEP; see Figure  1; 
Hoffman and Singh, 2012 ; Dickinson et al., 2013 ; Hoffman et  al., 
2015), which instead assumes perception is based on fitness. Here, the 
probabilistic inference that results in perceptual experience takes place 
in a separate observer-specific space of perceptual interpretations X1 
that does not need to be homomorphic to W.W is therefore entirely 
an observer-independent world; X0 and X1 are two perceptual 
interpretation spaces, while P0 and P1 are their respective perceptual 
channels. The fitness map of this evolutionary approach is denoted as 
f, and perceptual inference is given by the Bayesian posterior map 
10 1:BX X →  that takes place in X1 and not W. Here, the relation 
between W and X1 does not need to be  homomorphic or even 
isomorphic, unlike the Bayes’ rule MAP truth strategy.
In the CEP framework, when an image is seen and interpreted as 
having a 3D shape, it is assumed that this is because of the probabilistic 
inference in the perceptual space X1 resulted in such a 3D shape. In 
this framework, the perceptual interpretation is selected by natural 
selection, whereby a perceptual interpretation with the highest 
expected fitness payoff is selected. This means that perceptual 
interpretations are selected when they lead to a higher expected-
fitness payoff (and not those that are most veridical) in the form of 
more effective interactions with the environment that ultimately 
promote survival and reproduction. As a simple example of this, if the 
organism was a hungry lion and the action (behavior) was to eat, then 
the fitness map f may have a high value in a world w where meat is 
highly available (but other forms of food are not). However, if the 
organism was not meat-eating, such as a rabbit, then f may assign a 
low value to the same state of hunger in the same world w. This shows 
how context-dependent and crucially important functional context is 
in these types of frameworks (i.e., fitness is based on the specific 
functional context of the organism, such as meat eating or not, in 
selecting the correct environment to satisfy the functional cue of 
hunger). It is for this reason that functional contextualism as an 
a-ontological approach is highly relevant, particularly when complex 
human behavioral variation and selection are considered. CEP would, 
therefore, need to define itself specifically with functional 
contextualism and integrate itself within a broader EEMM to scale to 
real-world dynamics with complex human behavior.
As an example of this integration, CEP can describe how given 
complex higher-dimensional representational structures, such as a 3D 
representation in X1, are interpreted rather than a simpler 2D 
representation of X0 because it allows a higher expected fitness payoff 
11:PW X→  (as depicted in Figure 1A). However, this 3D image does 
not need to resemble homomorphically or isomorphically the 
veridical objective world and Hoffman and colleagues provide a fitness 
beats truth (FBT) mathematical theorem to demonstrate this 
(Hoffman, 2019; Prakash, 2020; Prakash et al., 2021). Applying CEP 
within a well-defined functional contextualism context and a broader 
EEMM can then allow for greater scalability for real-world complex 
behavior, as functions generally follow similar fitness payoffs rather 
than being of a veridical fixed “truth” nature. If a person, for instance, 
drives their behavior in line with fitness that is functionally 
contextually relevant and sensitive, such as behaving in a way aligned 
to arbitrary functional context rather than fixed notions of truth about 
the world, then the payoff is likely to be larger than if they used a 
simple, fixed veridical strategy. This can be seen, for instance, in the 
attribution, understanding, and use of concepts when using language 
embedded within complex conceptual learning histories, and is 
particularly relevant in artificial intelligence and understanding public 
health messages ( Mulhern et  al., 2018 ; Edwards, 2021 ; Edwards 
et al., 2022).
In evolution theory, fitness refers to the probability of transferring 
genes and associated characteristics from one generation into the 
next (Darwin, 1859; Smith, 1982). However, different decisions and 
behaviors (actions) a of an organism or population can also have a 
fitness value, and this can be represented as a global fitness function 
( ), ,,f wosa  that depends on the state w of the world W in which the 
behavior takes place, the organism type o that is making the behavior 
(e.g., human, lion, and dog) that provides context to the behavioral 
states, and the state s of the organism (hungry, thirsty, fearful, etc.). 
Fitness functions between organisms can vary greatly, sharing less 
correlation with one another (hence the importance of functional 
contextualism, as each organism will have different functional 
needs). For any particular organism, the complexity of the fitness 
function grows rapidly as the number of possible states and 
actions increases.
From the perspective of evolutionary game theory ( Smith and 
Price, 1973; Smith, 1982; Nowak, 2006), the behavior of different 
organism types is competing for fitness points as they interact in some 
shared environment W. In an evolutionary-based competitive game, 
natural selection favors the precepts, decisions, and behaviors of these 
organisms that yield higher fitness points. In a very simple game, 
whereby all the organisms are of the same type o, have the same state  
s, and have a single available behavior (or action) a, this can 
be  modeled as a specific fitness function. The function can 
be described as a nonnegative real-valued function defined on world  
W. The function can be denoted as ): 0,fW →∞  and means that 
W X0
X1
P
A
B
1
P0
ƒ B1
W XP
ƒ
FIGURE 1
(A) The framework of computational evolutionary perception W 
is the observer-independent world, X0 and X1 are two perceptual 
(or representational) spaces, and P0 and P1 their respective 
perceptual channels f is a fitness map. In (B), a framework to 
define the two resource strategies. A fixed perceptual map is 
assumed : →PW X  and a fixed function :. +→fW  The 
organism must select a territory associated with the greatest 
fitness payoff, given a choice of available territories that it 
identifies through sensory states 12 .,,, … nxx x  [Reprinted with 
permission from Springer ( Prakash et al., 2021 )].
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 05 frontiersin.org
only the state w of the world W (and not the state s, organism o, or 
behavior a) can vary between a value of zero and a value below infinity.
Using this approach, the fitness of different perceptual and 
behavioral decision strategies is compared through an evolutionary 
resource game (Mark et al., 2010; Hoffman et al., 2013). In a typical 
game, the game consists of two organisms, utilizing different strategies 
and competing over territory, with a limited number of resources. In 
the first instance, available territories are observed by the first “player, ” 
and the player chooses the territory that they estimate to be  the 
optimal one (the highest expected fitness payoff), then receives a 
fitness payoff for that chosen territory. The second “player” then does 
the same with the remaining territories available and receives a fitness 
payoff for that chosen territory. Then the two players take turns in 
choosing the remaining territories, receiving a fitness payoff for each 
chosen territory, and both trying to maximize their fitness payoffs for 
the territories they choose.
Here, the relevant world attribute w is the number of resources in 
some given territory, and W is depicted as the world of different 
quantities of some resource in different territories. A perceptual map 
can then be considered :PW X→ , whereby X is a set of perceptual 
states (for instance, red, yellow, green, and blue) in the world state W,  
and this, for example, could equal some arbitrary value such as one to 
a hundred different world states, i.e., from W = [1,100], while 
{ },,,X RY G B= . In this approach, perceptual map P, therefore, 
selects the best perceptual element state of the set relevant to the 
strategy being employed.
A fitness function of the world ), : 0,WfW →∞  assigns a 
nonnegative fitness value to each resource quantity for each territory 
between zero and a number below infinity. Some functions can 
be  monotonic (whereby as resources keep increasing, fitness also 
increases), while others can be nonmonotonic (even if resources keep 
increasing, fitness peaks at a certain number of resources). 
Nonmonotonic fitness functions are more likely in the natural world as 
having too many resources may eventually not serve any advanced (e.g., 
too many food resources have no advantage if excess cannot be stored). 
As energy resources are limited, the organism is likely to balance the 
effort made in obtaining resources and the need to obtain resources.
One important assumption of this evolutionary approach is that 
fitness does not need to correlate in any way with a fixed, veridical 
“objective truth” about the world. This is because, though fitness 
depends on the world the organism lives in, it also depends on the 
organism, and crucially the organism’s perceptual states, as well as the 
organism’s behavioral action class being considered. In other words, 
even if the world remains the same, if the action class, perceptual state 
(or functional context), or even the organism changes, then very 
different fitness values can be  formed. Thus, fitness is entirely 
functionally context-dependent based on the functional context of the 
organism and not based on fixed veridical objective truth.
In evolutionary game theory, the organism’s behavior depends 
(see Figure  1B) on the following three elements: (1) the fitness 
function as defined by its states, action class, etc.; (2) its prior 
probabilities of world states; and (3) its perceptual map from a world 
state via sensory states (i.e., resources in territories w estimated via 
different sensory states x). The organism observes a number of 
territories in any given trial (or turn in the game), and these are 
available through its sensory states, 12,,, nxx x … . The goal of the 
organism (in this example) is to select a territory associated with the 
greatest fitness payoff (i.e., the greatest resource fitness payoff). In this 
case, two possible strategies are competing against one another: a 
perceptual truth strategy consistent with a naïve realist cognitive 
approach or a fitness-only strategy that is more consistent with a 
functional contextual approach.
For the standard perceptual truth strategy typical of a cognitive 
science approach (that assumes evolution is driving veridically true 
perceptions), the organism estimates the world state (territory 
resources in this example) for each of the n sensory states 12,,, nxx x … .  
Objective “truth” is given by the Bayesian MAP estimate that gives the 
world state the highest probability of being the true one, given the 
sensory state. The fitness values of the n “true” world states are then 
compared, and finally, a choice of which territory to select is made. 
This choice is ultimately based on the sensory states xi that yield the 
highest fitness values. Crucially, the choice is mediated through the 
MAP estimate of the world that it considers to be absolutely true and 
ignores any information about other possible states of the world other 
than the one being selected as true.
In the fitness-only strategy, the organism does not attempt to 
estimate the “true” world state for each sensory state. Instead, the 
expected fitness payoff that results from each possible choice based on 
sensory states xi is utilized. Given the possible world states, there is a 
posterior probability distribution for each given sensory state xi and a 
fitness value for each given world state. These fitness values are then 
weighted through the posterior probability distribution. This is done 
so that the expected fitness values for a given choice xi can 
be  computed, and the highest expected choice fitness is then 
ultimately chosen.
In an example of an actual evolutionary game between two 
strategies, A and B, the payoff matrix is illustrated in Table 1A. Payoffs 
are denoted by a, b, c, and d for a row player against a column player, 
for example, b is the payoff to A when A plays B. Fitness payoff a is 
defined as “fitness-only when playing against fitness only, ” fitness 
payoff b is defined as “fitness-only when playing against truth, ” fitness 
payoff c is defined as “truth when playing against fitness-only, ” and 
fitness payoff d is defined as “truth when playing against truth. ” There 
are three main theorems from evolutionary game theory that are 
relevant to such an analysis, which are true through mathematical 
proofs (Nowak, 2006):
Theorem 1. In a game with a finite population of two types of 
players, A and B, if b > c, a > c, and b > d, for all N, 0ihi >∀  and 
1
AB BAN>>ρρ , then selection favors A.
Theorem 2. In a game with a large finite population of two types 
of players, A and B, and with weak selection, 
( ) ( ) ( ) ( )22 ac bdac ba N
−−−−+ −> implies that 1
BA N>ρ . 
Therefore, if a > c and b > d for large enough N, then selection favors A.
Theorem 3.  For all possible fitness functions and a priori  
measures, the probability that the fitness-only strategy dominates the 
truth strategy is at least ( ) ( )3/ 1XX−− , where X  is the size of the 
perceptual space.
For a simple example where there are three world states, 
{ }123,,W www=  and two sensory state stimulations { }12,X xx= , 
there is a likelihood value for each sensory stimulation given a world 
state, and this is given by ( )1Pxw  (see Supplementary material 1, 
which uses the example in Table 1B). To summarize, from this “truth” 
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 06 frontiersin.org
observer strategy calculation, for state x1, the truth (i.e., the maximum-
a-posterior) estimate is w2 and for state x2, the truth estimate is w3. The 
truth observer is thus essentially given a choice between selecting the 
resource w2 or w3 (when given sensory state stimulations x1 and x2) 
that contain food, and whereby  w2 has higher quality food and thus 
higher fitness value than w3. Given the natural selection, the food 
(world w) with the highest fitness is then selected, and in this case, it 
will therefore prefer w2 as fitness value ( )2 5fw =  is greater than 
fitness value ( )3 4fw = . When using this fitness payoff, and then 
when offered a choice between x1 and x2, the truth observer will 
choose x1 (corresponding to w2) with an expected fitness utility of 5.85 
(as ( )2fw  yielded the greatest direct payoff in the previous steps 
3 and 4).
In contrast to this, a “fitness-only” observer is not attempting to 
calculate the veridical truth about the environment through a Bayesian 
process. Instead, the “fitness-only” observer is only concerned with 
which sensory experience yields a higher expected fitness (i.e., 
maximizing expected fitness). Thus, for a fitness-only observer, step 4 
gives these fitness values for both x1 and x2. As the expected fitness 
utility for x1 is 5.85 and the expected fitness utility for x2 is 6.17, given 
a choice between sensory states x1 and x2, the organism using a fitness-
only observer will choose the higher value of 6.17, and thus chooses 
the state x2. From this analysis, it is therefore clear that the truth 
observer minimizes expected fitness while the fitness-only observer 
maximizes expected fitness. In this type of evolutionary game theory, 
the fitness-only observers will therefore drive the population of truth 
observers into extinction. Hence, perception, given evolutionary game 
theory, is likely to be  based on fitness and not truth. For other 
examples that account for more complex situations such as sudden 
environmental change, please refer to Supplementary material 2 , 
which uses the example in Table 1C.
However, despite the ability to account for environmental change, the 
games employed are very simple. When dealing with real-world scenarios, 
such as individuals with mental health disorders, modeling these types of 
evolutionary game theory simulations is much more challenging. In these 
types of scenarios, their sensory states are likely to be distorted, such as 
experiencing negative mood states and a lack of motivation, which all 
would need to be  modeled in an evolutionary game in a real-world 
context. Given the fact that these games within evolutionary game theory 
are based on functional contextualism, such that fitness in these games is 
based on a combination of the organism’s sensory state x (such as hunger, 
which is the function of that organism driving its behavior at time point 
t1) and the context of a world w, i.e., whether the world has what the 
organism needs to satisfy its functional state (if it does, then that world w 
has a high fitness value f for the organism’s current functional state x that 
drives its behavior), then these games may benefit from the application of 
a formal operational definition for functional contextualism, and within 
a broader EEMM so that it could potentially be usefully applied to clinical 
settings and PBT research.
Given this assumption, greater modeling efforts that increase the 
dimensionality of the interface could strengthen the interface’s fitness. 
For example, the EEMM, an extension of the functional contextual 
approach, suggests that there are six dimensions (affective, cognitive, 
attentional, self, motivational, and over-behavior) at two levels 
(biopsychological and sociocultural), as the approach is evolutionary 
meta-model; these represent appropriate dimensions for adaptive 
organism behavior. Figure 2 shows a simple example of how a human 
with the states of depression and low self-esteem connects to two 
dimensions of the EEMM. These dimensions that were identified after 
an examination of 55,000 studies, whereby 72 measures that had 
successfully mediated intervention outcomes were replicated, were 
extracted and summarized into the five dimensions and two levels of 
the EEMM (Hayes et al., 2022; as shown in Figure 2).
These dimensions may provide a much richer context for 
modeling relevant clinical processes that could be exploited in such 
games. For example, the affective dimension relates to emotional 
states; thus, a game could be designed that defines a sensory state x as 
having some negative effect and some resource in a world w that 
brings about positive affect. Fitness f would then be determined based 
on wellbeing, whereby worlds that bring about greater positive affect 
are fitter than those that do not. Similarly, the cognitive dimension 
relates to problem-solving, hope, and attitude; attentional dimensions 
TABLE 1 A payoff matrix in evolutionary game theory for two strategies, A and B. 
A Against A Against B
A plays a b
B plays c d
B Likelihood of wj given 
x1, ( )1Px w j
Likelihood of  wj  
given x2, ( )2Px w j
Prior ( )Pw j Fitness ( )fw j
w1 1/4 3/4 1/6 19
w2 3/4 1/4 3/6 5
w3 1/4 3/4 3/6 4
C Likelihood of wj given 
x1, ( )1Px w j
Likelihood of  wj  
given x2, ( )2Px w j
Prior ( )Pw j Fitness ( )fw j
w1 3/4 1/4 1/5 6
w2 1/4 3/4 3/5 5
w3 3/4 1/4 3/5 21
Fitness payoff a is defined as “Fitness-Only when playing against Fitness-Only, ” fitness payoff b is defined as “Fitness-Only when playing against Truth, ” fitness payoff c is defined as “Truth 
when playing against Fitness-Only, ” and fitness payoff d is defined as “Truth when playing against Truth. ” B demonstrates the fitness beats truth in the evolution of perception values. C 
demonstrates the fitness beats truth in the evolution of perception after a major environmental change.
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 07 frontiersin.org
relate to mindfulness and attentional control; motivation relates to 
values commitment; and overt behavior relates to goal-striving 
persistence. These dimensions can therefore be applied as states x, and 
resources within worlds w are chosen based on the dimensions of 
EEMM. Selection level of variation, selection, retention, and context 
are of course relevant in these games as indicated by EEMM, whereby 
if the context changes, e.g., the world changes due to environmental 
shift and can no longer provide a positive effect, then it is no longer 
retained, and selection begins again.
In one concrete example, the self-dimension is selected in the 
Figure 2 example, and this self-dimension can be further illustrated by 
the deictic axis (Figure 3). This breaks this complex dimension of self 
into its subcomponents of perspective-taking relational frames from 
the functional contextual RFT model, in the form of the interpersonal 
(I vs. YOU), the temporal (NOW vs. THEN), and spatial (HERE vs. 
THERE). In an evolutionary game, this may provide rich context that 
can define which sensory states are accessed under what context (such 
as thinking about the future or past) and can potentially increase 
fitness payoff as a result of this context. For example, if resources in a 
game are limited, then having perspective about the other player’s state 
space may help the player avoid direct territorial conflict and select 
the most optimal world. For example, prosocial behavior may 
be explained as individuals tapping into collective perspective-taking 
states about the others’ collective needs, and hence shared goals 
emerge, which increase fitness for the group as well as the individual, 
hence encouraging prosocial selection of behavior ( Atkins et  al., 
2019). Crucially, maximizing fitness payoffs of a much higher 
magnitude would not be possible for the individual to obtain alone.
One current problem is that there has been less effort to 
mathematically define a functional contextual RFT model within the 
context of EEMM and evolutionary game simulations in a way that 
could be visualized within graphs of graph theory and be usefully 
applied in PBT studies. Within graphs, these should represent 
functional analytic variables and more broadly patterns of arbitrary 
FIGURE 3
The deictic axis—a visual representation of an individual who relationally frames themselves in the present moment while mindfully observing their 
painful past. This would be expressed as “I” in the “HERE” and “NOW” as “I” perspective-take about my painful past in the “THERE” and “THEN.”
FIGURE 2
An illustration of how the evolutionary game theory constructs fit and are enhanced by EEMM in “evolutionary game simulations” that involve complex 
mental health outcomes.
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 08 frontiersin.org
applicable responding, that have varying influence over a broader 
relational network. This will then have scope to connect RFT to the 
dimensions of EEMM and within the context of evolutionary games. 
One such approach is to define in detail how relational frames using 
logic and set theory can be encoded into graphs.
Set theory and formal relational frame 
logical axioms represented within 
community network graphs
Within the functional contextual relational frame theory (RFT), 
there are several patterns of arbitrary applicable responding, or types 
of relational frames, which include frames of coordination (stimuli x 
is the same as stimuli y); frames of distinction (stimuli x is not the 
same stimuli y); frames of causation (if x occurs, then y will follow); 
frames of comparison (e.g., x is bigger than y); frames of opposition 
(e.g., left is the opposite of right); frames of hierarchy (e.g., Alsatian is 
a type of dog); and deictic relational frames (perspective-taking), 
which involve some self-reference of the impersonal relational frame 
(I vs. YOU), the spatial relational frame (HERE vs. THERE), and the 
temporal relational frames (NOW vs. THEN).
These relational frames can be formalized in mathematics through 
the derivation or deduction of properties or propositions (formalized 
through logic) with respect to objects or elements belonging to a set 
(general properties of elements and sets can then be  formalized 
through graph theory), and therefore formalized within the set theory 
and mathematical logic (Pereyra, 2020). There is a natural relationship 
between set theory and logic; for example, if A is a set, then proposition 
( )Px x A= ∈  is a logical formula of that set, which states that a 
proposition holds for some value of x in a domain (or set) associated 
with x. The proposition is therefore true for elements of set A and false 
for elements outside of set A.
Within mathematical logic, there are subbranches of propositional 
algebra and predicate logic. A proposition is any statement that can 
be assigned a unique value of either true or false and cannot be both 
true and false (the law of excluded middle). As an example of how to 
apply simple logic (without set theory) to relational frames, AB⇔  
denotes that A and B are equivalent, whereby ⇔  is the mathematical 
operator for equivalence. In RFT, deriving stimulus relations is a 
special generalized form of relational responding ( Gross and Fox, 
2009), and the logic symbol ⇒ can be used to symbolize this as it is 
the operator for “implies” (or “derives”). Thus, if A is bigger than B,  
then it can be derived that B must be smaller than A, and this can 
be expressed as A is bigger than  B ⇒ B is smaller than A.
This can be  taken a step further, by applying equivalence to 
relational frames when applied to set theory. There are three classes 
for this, namely, reflectivity, symmetry, and transitivity. In set theory, 
if A is equivalent to ( )BA B⇔ , then some element x of set A 
( )xA∈  must also be  equivalent in set ( )Bx B∈ , so that 
xA xB∈⇔∈ . A very simple equivalence relation can be given by 
~, and this is the relation between elements of sets or two sets that 
hold three conditions: (1) reflexivity ~aa ; (2) symmetry 
~~ab ba⇔ ; (3) transitivity is expressed as 
( ) ( ) ( )~~ ~ab bc ac∧⇒  whereby if a and b are equivalent, and b 
and c are equivalent, then, therefore, a and c must be equivalent. In 
RFT, transitivity is called combinatorial entailment. The equivalence 
relation ~ also applies to sets, such that set A equivalence can be used 
to partition the set into a series of subsets of A that are equivalent to 
each other. The equivalent elements contained in these subsets are 
equivalent classes. According to categorization theory and RFT work, 
these shared relations of equivalence do not need to be of physical 
shape or size; they could, for instance, depend on some contextually 
dependent function such as the concept of cutlery sharing the 
equivalent function “to eat with” within an equivalence class subset 
(such as fork, knife, and spoon).
Elements here do not need to relate to other elements with just 
equivalence; they can also express other relations, such as “larger 
than” and “faster than, ” through propositional algebra. 
Propositional algebra is a subbranch of mathematical logic relating 
to propositions and logical operators. Any statement that can 
be assigned a unique logical value of “true” ( T) or “false” ( F) can 
be described as a proposition. Logical operators can be used to 
define a new proposition S from one or more given propositions, 
such as propositions A and B. In this type of situation, the logical 
value of the new proposition S depends on the logical values of the 
propositions A and B. All of the possible combinations of logical 
values can be presented in a truth table for the propositions A and 
B that indicates the corresponding logical value for S for each 
combination. A truth table, therefore, determines the value of the 
logical operator. In a simple example of this, the BOTH-FALSE 
operator ⊗ can be used between two propositions, e.g., A and  B, 
such as A ⊗ B and is only true ( T) only if both A and B are both 
false ( F).
The main formal logical operators are NOT, OR, AND, IMPLIES, 
and EQUIV ALENT. Operators such as the NOT operator ℜ can 
be  defined in the following way: ¬≡ ⊗AA A , whereby ≡ means 
something is either identical or similar to another element or set but 
not necessarily equal to it. The relation frame of opposition can 
be  defined as AB=−() , whereby A equals the opposite of itself, 
expressed as AA=− −() , or in another example, the color black is 
equivalent to the opposite of white, expressed as BlackW hite≡− () . 
Going beyond simple logic to define a relation of mutual entailment 
in logic and set theory, whereby including sets is important when 
concepts are considered categories (or sets of elements) of things in 
the world, mutual entailment expresses a relation between two 
variables or statements in which one statement or variable logically 
implies the other and vice versa. This means that if one of these 
variables is false, or assigns some operator, it also applies to the other 
mutually entailed variable. To express a relational frame of mutual 
entailment of two variables A and B, this can be  expressed in set 
theory as AB⊆  and BA⊆ . This means that A is a subset of B and  
B is a subset of A, or more generally, all the elements in A also belong 
to B and all the elements in B also belong to A. For example, the 
mutual entailment between the spoken word “snake” and the concept 
of an actual snake within the real world, can be represented in set 
theory as follows ({} represent the category or set of some elements 
contained inside):
Verbal word "snake" = {x|x is the verbal word "snake"},  
Actual snake = {y|y is an actual snake}, Verbal word "snake" ⊆ 
Actual snake, Actual snake ⊆ Verbal word "snake".
Combinatorial entailment can be given in set theory, as in the 
following example: If a is bigger than b and b is bigger than c, a is, 
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 09 frontiersin.org
therefore, bigger than c. This can be  expressed using logic and set 
theory as follows, with these steps: (1) Define the sets A, B, and C, 
where A represents the set of all elements that are bigger than element 
b, B represents the set of all elements that are bigger than c, and C 
represents the set of all elements that are smaller than b; (2) define the 
logical statement “a is bigger than b and b is bigger than c” and this is 
denoted as ( ) ( )aA bB∈∧∈ ; (3) The definitions of sets A, B, and C, 
can then be  used to rewrite the logical statements as follows: 
{ } { }( ))(a xx b b yy c∈ > ∧∈ > , which can be read as “a is an element 
of the set of all elements that are bigger than b, and b is an element of 
the set of all elements that are bigger than c. ” To simplify the definition, 
the set-theoretic notation can be used to express the statement a is 
bigger than b and b is bigger than c, as follows: abbc>∧> . Finally, 
to express the combinatorial entailment, this requires simply adding 
the implies operator ⇒>ac , so that abbc a c>∧>⇒> .
For the relation of opposition, if there are two variables, A and B, 
this can be expressed in set theory as follows:
 { }       A x x is the property or charactistic that can be true or false=
 { }      B y y is the opposite property or characteristic of x=
This can then be represented as ,AB⊥  which means that A and  
B have opposite properties, such that A could be true and B could 
be false, or vice versa. This can also be represented as ABØ∩= , 
which means that A and B have no elements in common, i.e., there are 
no values that belong to both A and B at the same time. For example, 
this opposite relational frame can be  used between two variables 
“being stronger” and “being weaker” as follows:
{ } Strong x x is a person who is strong= ,   
{ } Weak y y is a person who is weak= , WeakStrong ⊥ ,   
.Strong Weak Ø∩=  (For a more complete list of relational frames 
including the transformation of function (ToF), refer to 
Supplementary material 3).
These can be represented visually in a very simple network graph 
with the following steps: (1) first define a set of nodes where each node 
represents an element in the community (e.g., snake or woods—see 
Supplementary material 4 Python code as an example1). Nodes can also 
represent functions such as ToF and relations in some cases; (2) then 
define a set of edges, where each edge represents a relational frame 
between two nodes. For example, the hierarchical frame of a snake in the 
woods can be  expressed with edges that represent the hierarchical 
relationship between concepts represented by the nodes. The edges can 
be  represented visually by directed lines pointing from a node 
representing a parent to a node representing a child (i.e., the child is a 
sub-element of the parent). Edges can appear differently, representing 
different frames such as shades, colors, and labels. This can be expressed 
mathematically, whereby E is some relationship and n is some node, 
which can be deonted as ( ){ }121 2,  E n n n is a parent of n= ; (3) then 
use graph theory techniques such as traversal algorithms or centrality 
measures to explore the relational frames within the network community 
and identify patterns and trends. This can be made more specific by 
including a node function, T, that transfers (ToF) the set of things 
you are afraid of, F, to the set of woods that you are not afraid of, W. In 
terms of the code, one way of doing this is to create a function (see 
Supplementary material 5) that simply transfers “woods” directly into 
the set of things the individual is afraid of. Notably, within a subgraph, 
one community central node can receive inputs from the community 
and produce output that comprises the total weight within the 
community. (Refer to Figure 4 as an illustration of this with the ToF 
function node  T included).
In Python programming language, the NetworkX library can be used 
to create a graph. The community can be analyzed through nx.pagerank 
and nx.shortestpage functions. This can be represented as a community 
graph (i.e., a subset of the larger graph that includes sets that relate to one 
another closely, such as a network that defines the self) within a larger 
network graph (of multiple communities that relate networks of relating 
relations). Here, a graph of nodes represents the sets F and  T as well as 
elements x and y. The graph could be  defined as 
( ) { }, , , ,,G V E V FT xy= = , and EF xx TT y= () (){, ,, ), ,} .  Node F 
again represents the set of all things that you are afraid of, and node T 
represents the function that frames snakes with local woods. This is 
different from the representation that simply associates simply associates 
snakes with “woods” directly. Instead, this function is a more accurate way 
to present the variables as the networks increase in size and complexity. 
Node x represents an element in set F (i.e., an instance or a stimulus that 
you are afraid of, such as “snake”), and node y represents an element in 
the set for the function T(F).Here, the edges  (F, x) and (T, y) represent the 
membership of x in F and y in T(F),respectively, while the edge (x, T) 
represents the mapping of framing x with y through the function T. From 
this, the graph (or community network subgraph), for example, could 
be  defined as { } ( )( ) ( ){ }( ), " ", ", , " ", " " , " " , " ", " """ ""FxG Txy F x T T y=
. This is illustrated visually within a graph and Python code as depicted in 
1 All Python code is available on GitHub: https://github.com/
DarrenEdwards111/Example-relational-network-code
FIGURE 4
The basic schematic of the graph, whereby snake node x is framed 
with fear node F (illustrating the function of the snake as fear), and 
connecting with the computational function node T that expresses 
the ToF from fear F of snake x to local woods y. In addition, one 
central node receives input from the whole community, including a 
ToF between two nodes.
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 10 frontiersin.org
Figure 5. Here, it is also important to note that certain nodes of interest 
within a community can be  highlighted within Python, such as the 
ToF . This represents an important area of interest when doing a PBT 
analysis, as targeting the ToF function within the network with, for 
example, a mindfulness intervention, may undermine the function’s 
transfer strength and have a significant positive cascading effect across the 
network. As can be seen, ToF projects to the community node, and this 
has a direct causal effect on the community of “self, ” potentially increasing 
generalized fear and ultimately increasing the possibility for increased low 
self-esteem.
It is also useful to note that graph G can be represented as a single 
community within a larger graph of other communities, i.e., 
representing relational network subgroups (or communities) relating 
to other relational network subgroups, such as the ToF within the 
community for “self ” (see Supplementary material 6 for details).
Implementing set theory and logic of 
RFT into structural equation modeling 
and graphs
There has been some recent concern over the ergodic approach 
that provided much of the rationale for nomothetic population-
level statistical approaches ( Hayes and Hofmann, 2018; Hayes et al., 
2019, 2020; Ciarrochi et al., 2022 ). (For a full discussion, refer to 
Supplementary material 7 ). It is for these reasons that an individual 
idiographic time series approach to an RFT implementation in SEM 
(an ideographically driven SEM) is explored as opposed to less 
individually sensitive nomothetic approaches, with the main focus 
on a highly sensitive ideographic, autoregressive timeseries 
approach that meets the criteria for assessing intra-subject 
variability in participants at the individual level.
A
B
FIGURE 5
(A) Example of Python code for specifying two communities, and the resultant community network where the ToF community (function T node) within 
a broader relational network can be visualized within the graph. (B) Visual areas of interest within the network may be an area that a PBT therapist 
would consider targeting to undermine its negative impact across the network. It also shows in the resultant visualized network whether the ToF 
function T transfers fear F of snake x to local woods  y.
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 11 frontiersin.org
Pearl’s structural causal modeling ( Pearl, 2000 ) has been 
successfully applied to causal reasoning (action and change) in 
artificial intelligence (AI; Pearl, 1988 ), statistics, economics 
(Pearl, 2009 ), social sciences ( Pearl, 2000 ), and even as Bayesian 
networks represented as propositional reasoning in cognition 
(Pearl, 2011 ). This is to extend the ability of classical logic to 
describe properties within RFT (as described in the previous 
section) and to allow for a more general mathematical description 
of causation, which will eventually allow for graph theory 
modeling and therefore be  applicable in a clinical and 
PBT context.
Pearl (2000) suggests that a causal model is a triple ,,M UVF=  
whereby U is a set of background exogenous variables, V is a set of 
endogenous variables { }12 3, ,,VV V …  that are determined by variables 
in the union UV∪ . F is a set of functions { }12,,, nff f …  where fi  
is a mapping from ( )\ iU VV∪  to Vi  and a mapping from U to V is 
formed from the entire set of F. F can be  represented as set 
of equations:
 ( ), 1, ,i i iiv f pa u i n= = …  (2)
Whereby, pai is any unique minimal set of variables in 
{ }\ iVV  (parent variables) that is sufficient for representing fi, 
and for iUU⊆ . According to Pearl, particular “causal worlds” 
are determined by instances of Uu=  exogenous variables. 
Structural equations encode causal information, whereby 
anything left of the equal sign is the effect and anything right of 
the equal sign is the cause. Therefore, here the equal sign conveys 
the asymmetrical relation “is determined by. ”
In the theory of Pearl’s (2012), structural equations are intended 
to be  modular, whereby one equation can be  modified without 
changing the others. This allows the determination of three types of 
queries that can be  asked with respect to a causal model: (1) 
predictions, i.e., will X happen in the event of Y? (2) interventions, i.e., 
will X happen if we make sure that event Y occurs? (3) counterfactuals, 
i.e., would X have occurred had event Y occurred, given context Z? 
Bochman and Lifschitz (2015)  have shown that in the case of 
prediction questions, these can be  answered using deductive 
inferences from a logical description of the causal world. Answers to 
intervention actions and counterfactuals rely on a submodel Mx of a 
larger model M, where x is a variable of a set of variables X from V.  
This is a causal model obtained from M whereby the set of functions  
F are instead replaced by the function for variable x by the 
following set:
 { } { }.x iiF fV X X x= ∉=   (3)
Fx is therefore formed by deleting from F the functions fi that 
correspond to the members of set X and instead using the set of 
constant functions X = x. The submodel Mx can be understood as the 
result of performing an action X = x on M that produces the minimal 
change required, whereby X = x holds true under any background 
exogenous variables x. This is Pearl’s submodel for evaluating 
counterfactuals that consider alternative situations, such as “Had X 
been x would Y = y still hold as true?”
Just as with the earlier examples given with RFT, Boolean logic 
propositions (propositional formulas) can now be proposed, except 
this time within a causal structural equation model, called a 
Boolean structural equation, and specifically within an RFT 
framework. Here it is assumed that a set of propositions is 
partitioned into a set of background exogenous propositions and a 
finite set of explainable endogenous propositions. A Boolean 
structural equation, expressed as A = F , shows that F is a 
propositional formula in which the endogenous proposition A  
does not appear. It also implies that a set of Boolean structural 
equations A = F should exist within a Boolean causal model for each 
endogenous proposition. A causal world solution of a Boolean 
causal model M is any propositional interpretation that satisfies the 
equivalences AF↔  for all equations  A = F, in the Boolean causal 
model M.
As an illustration of how RFT can be applied this way, consider 
the classic firing squad example (Pearl, 2000). Here, let U, C, A, B and 
D, respectively, represent the following five propositions: (1) “Court 
orders the execution, ” (2) “Captain gives the signal, ” (3) “Rifleman A 
shoots, ” (4) Rifleman B shoots, ” (5) “Prisoner dies. ” This story of 
propositions can be formalized within the causal model M, where U 
is the only exogenous proposition within this model and this is stated 
as { }, ,,C UA CB CD A B= = = = ∨ . There are only two solutions to 
this: the first being that all propositions are true, and the other is that 
all propositions are false. Static queries can be answered about this 
causal model, such as casual model M implies that ¬→ ¬AD , and 
this implication is satisfied by all the propositions of M when 
considered true about the causal world.
In a different scenario, a subset of the endogenous propositions X 
of the Boolean causal model M can be evaluated, whereby a truth-
valued function I on X can be  denoted by the submodel MX
I  of  
M. Here, every equation A = F is replaced with A = I(A) where AX∈  
to form the submodel from M. To evaluate this new scenario, whereby 
in this scenario the captain did not give the signal, but the rifleman A 
shoots anyway, the prisoner dies, and rifleman B does not shoot, is 
given by the submodel M A
I
{}  of M with I(A) = t. This is the function 
of A being true, which means the proposition of the rifleman  A 
shooting is also true. This can be  denoted as 
{ },, ,C UA tB CD A B= = = = ∨ . As this submodel implies ¬→CD  
(as rifleman A does shoot his gun in the case of the captain not giving 
the order to shoot) and ¬→ ¬CB  (as riflemen B does not shoot his 
gun in the case of the captain not giving the order to shoot), and as 
these propositions are both true, this new situation is also justified.
This can be expanded more directly to the logical and set theory 
RFT interpretation of relational framing properties that have emerged 
from a logical theory of causal reasoning (relating to action and 
change) called causal calculus and emerged in the artificial intelligence 
(AI) literature but can also be applied to SEM. Largely based on work 
by Geffner (1994), causal calculus was introduced by McCain and 
Turner (1997) and generalized using first-order logic by Lifschitz 
(1997). The logical basis for causal calculus was first described by 
Bochman (2003), and its use as a general-purpose nonmonotonic 
formalism has also been explored (Bochman, 2004, 2007).
This allows for the establishment of propositional casual rules, 
such as A causes B, expressed as AB⇒ , where both A and B are 
propositional formulas. A set of propositional causal rules makes up 
a propositional causal theory. Nonmonotonic semantics of a causal 
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 12 frontiersin.org
theory can also be expressed, where for a causal theory Δ and a set of  
u proposition, Δ(u) denotes a set of propositions that are caused by u 
in Δ, such as
 ( ) { },  for someu BA B A u∆ = ⇒ ∈∆ ∈  (4)
In an RFT example, the frame of causation can be  explicitly 
represented within a structural equation model in the following set of 
propositions, which represents a modified version of the firing squad 
causal chain example and gives a maladaptive behavioral scenario. The 
propositions are as follows: (A) “ A spider specialist explains that 
poisonous spiders exist in the local woods”; (B) “Y ou fear poisonous 
spiders and now fear walking through the woods”; (C) “Y ou avoid 
walking through the local woods”; (D) “Y ou learn avoidance keeps 
you safe”; (E) “Y ou avoid all experiences which make you feel unsafe. ” 
This can be expressed through a causal chain, denoted as:
 
( ) { } ( ) { }
( ) { } ( ) { }
1 12 2
3 34 4
u BA B u CB C
u D CD u E DE
∆ = ⇒ ∈∆ ⇒∆ = ⇒ ∈∆ ⇒
∆ = ⇒ ∈∆ ⇒∆ = ⇒ ∈∆  (5)
Here, there are four causal theories Δ and five propositions, 
whereby each causal theory consists of a set of two propositions and 
leads to another causal theory within the chain of the same number of 
propositions. This gives an example of how runaway thoughts have 
causal effects within an RFT network (and how possible self-isolative 
behavior occurs). These types of causal chains can be developed into 
RFT structure graphs along with functions such as ToF .
Expressing causal logic through 
propositional ideographic graphs of 
graph theory
These sets of propositional logic expressed as causal theories within 
an RFT framework, as well as the other forms of mathematical relational 
frame logic mentioned, can be visualized within a graph using graph 
theory. This is provided to expand on current PBT approaches within 
the EEMM, which use process-based networks as part of their analysis 
at the individual ideographic level (Hofmann et al., 2021). There are 
existing graph theory packages available in R such as SEMgraph that 
specialize in modeling SEM graphs (Palluzzi and Grassi, 2021), as well 
as specialist non-SEM graph modeling approaches that focus specifically 
on RFT properties such as mutual entailment bidirectionality (Smith 
and Hayes, 2022). However, to date, no approach specifically brings 
about a propositional causal logic SEM RFT approach that 
comprehensively brings about complex relational framing dynamics 
within the causal networks that could be applied to PBT research.
Within graph theory, there are three types of path diagrams, 
which include (1) directed acyclic graphs (DAG) with values for each 
path within the graph in the form of beta coefficients Bjk , giving an 
indication of which paths or edges kj→()  within the graph have the 
most influence on some dependent measure (DV) within the network. 
In this case, all potential covariances are assumed null ( )0jkψ= ; (2) 
covariance models whereby only covariance can have a value greater 
than zero while coefficients can only equal zero ( )0jkB = ; (3) 
Bow-free acrylic path graphs (BAP) have both bidirectional covariance 
relations kj↔()  as well as acrylic directed edges kj→() . 
Bidirectional covariance only occurs when the k th and the j -th 
variables do not share a directed edge, so if 0jkB ≠  then 0jkψ= .
An SEM path diagram consists largely of linear regression 
equations and can be represented by a graph G = (V , E), whereby the 
variables can be expressed as a set of nodes V and connections can 
be expressed as the set of edges E. The set of edges E can include both 
bidirectional edges kj↔  if ks ib j∈ ()  to account for covariation, as 
well as directed kj→  if kp aj∈ ()  to account for the direct path 
coefficients and can be determined by the following:
 
YB YU jVj
kp aj
jk kj=+ ∈
∈ ()
∑
 
(6)
 
( ) ( )ψ = ∈=
if
; 0 otherwise
jjk
jk
j k or k sib
Cov U U
 
(7)
Here, Yj  is an observed variable, and U j  is an unobserved error 
term. The regression coefficients are expressed as Bjk , while 
covariance is expressed as ψjk  and indicates that the errors are 
dependent. This assumes that there is an unobserved latent confounder 
between k and j.
Equations 6 and 7 can be written in a matrix form Y = BY + U  and 
( ) ψ=Cov U . Given some random variables with a zero-mean vector 
( )( )0u θ= , the joint probability of p variables Y within a covariance 
matrix is given by:
 ( ) ( ) ( )
1 TIB IB −−∑= − −θψ  (8)
However, given that an idiographic approach is chosen here, and 
not a nomothetic one, certain ecological momentary assessments 
(EMA)-type questionnaires could capture the RFT properties (for a 
full discussion, see Supplementary material 8).
There are many ways EMA data can be  analyzed, and one 
particularly useful approach at this ideographic level of assessment 
is the Group Iterative Multiple Model Estimation (GIMME; Gates 
and Molenaar, 2012 ). The algorithm is useful for time series data 
with at least 60 observations per person and currently fewer than 
25 variables ( Lane et al., 2019 ). The GIMME algorithm, at its core, 
searches for common and unique dynamic processes among 
individuals. It uses Lagrangian multiplier diagnostics ( Sörbom, 
1975), and it considers paths that significantly exist for the majority 
of individuals. This can be expanded with the idiographic filter and 
the Model Implied Instrumental Variables with Two-Stage Least 
Squares Estimation (MIIV-2SLS). Latent Variable—Group Iterative 
Multiple Model Estimation (LV-GIMME) has been suggested as 
optimal for individual-level time series data in psychological 
studies (Gates et al., 2020 ). This contrasts with the full information 
estimators such as the maximum likelihood (ML) of typical 
normative level SEM, which estimates the measurement model 
coefficients as influenced by values at the latent variable model 
level. MIIV-2SLS instead allows for an estimation of latent values 
across time at the individual level for all relations of the dynamic 
factor MODEL (DFM). As such, LV-GIMME operates within an 
SEM in a dynamic factor analysis framework for analysis of 
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 13 frontiersin.org
multivariate time series data ( Molenaar, 1985 ), and this is given 
as follows:
 1tn t t tn An −= ++ +α φξ ζ  (9)
Whereby t is time, and t–1 is variable at a previous time interval.  
Φ is the P × P matrix where P is the number of variables in the 1t −ξ . 
The matrix contains the vector autoregressive (V AR) effects 
(coefficients) for the 1t −ξ  variables that predict the endogenous ηt  
values. Therefore, Φ contains the V AR (1) coefficients of how prior 
time point values relate to the subsequent point in time. In the original 
GIMME algorithm, 1t −ξ  and ηt  are simply observed variables, but 
they are latent variables in this SEM approach of LV-GIMME. The  
P × P -dimensioned A matrix has contemporaneous relations among 
the ηt  endogenous variables. tζ  is the P × 1 vector that contains the 
errors or disturbances and is assumed to have a mean of zero. GIMME, 
therefore, allows the identification of structures of directed relations 
(paths) among the variables in the time-series data. The relations are 
the Φ and the P × P -diementionsed A matrices. Crucially, once the 
SEM path structure is established, graph modeling can follow similarly 
as described for the traditional SEM.
Notably, the difference between a traditional normative cross-
sectional SEM and the idiographic SEM is that a traditional 
normative model would have specific directional paths such as those 
seen in Figure 6A, but an ideographic time series version such as 
GIMMIE would include a vector autoregression that updates the 
nodes given the additional data it has across time, as shown in 
Figure 6B.
Crucially, these types of time series autoregressive SEMs can 
be represented within a graph, whereby nodes represent each variable, 
and the edges represent the relation between the nodes, such as the 
regression coefficients. In a time series, ideographic SEM additional 
information can be included about the different time points. One way 
to represent these time points within a graph is to create a separate 
node for each time point and connect an edge from each time node to 
a variable node (as shown in Figure 7A), which can be compressed 
later to the final autoregressive nodes for visual simplicity. Functions 
can also be added, such as a ToF , to these types of time-series SEMs, 
as shown in Figure 7B.
The autoregressive V AR model can be  represented within the 
graph that illustrates the autoregressive nodal relationships, but in an 
SEM model as illustrated in Figure 8A. These types of autoregressive 
SEM graphs can be developed in Python, as indicated by the example 
code in Supplementary material 9.
It is also possible to apply logic and set theory in an SEM 
time-series autoregressive model such as GIMME. In an SEM, 
variables are often represented using sets, and the relationships 
between variables can be described using logical operators such 
as “ AND” and “OR” . For example, it is possible to specify the 
relationship between two latent variables as a function (this in 
itself could have a function such as ToF or an operator such as 
AND expressed between two observed variables) using a logical 
expression such as:
A
B
FIGURE 6
(A) Typical SEM pathways. (B) An illustration of the vector autoregressive updating in a time series ideographic SEM.
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 14 frontiersin.org
 
latent to bservedt
ANDo bserved
__
_
variable variable
varia
() = ()1
 bble2 t()
This logical expression as a function could be interpreted in a way 
that the latent variable at the time (t) is only present when both of the 
observed variables are present at the time (t).
Set theory can be used in this type of autoregressive idiographic 
SEM to describe the relationship between variables (see Figure 8B). 
For example, it is possible to specify that a latent variable at time t + 1  
is a subset of an observed variable at time t using set notation such as 
( ) ( )+⊆ 1 latent variable t observed variable t . This is interpreted as 
saying that the latent variable at time t + 1 includes all of the elements 
of the observed variables at time t, as well as possibly some additional 
elements. This naturally allows the RFT relational frames (such as ToF , 
opposition, and mutual entailment) to be expressed as logic and sets 
and modeled within this time series, autoregressive idiographic 
model approach.
Overcoming logical paradoxes of 
self-reference and why the observer 
self needs to be specified 
mathematically outside of formal 
axioms
Although in the vast majority of cases specifying “self ” leads to no 
problems in formal logic, perhaps one important observation is that 
self-reference within logic can, in some limited instances, lead to 
paradoxical statements that can be shown to be true but paradoxical in 
nature. This has important consequences when modeling the “self ” 
within graphs. As an example of this, Hofstadter, in his books I 
am  Strange Loop and Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid 
(Hofstadter, 1979, 2007), referred to the properties of self-referential 
systems as demonstrated in Gödel’s incompleteness theorems (Gödel, 
1931) and other areas as leading to paradoxes, which he refers to as 
strange loops. Penrose and Lucas made similar arguments, suggesting 
the mind and consciousness were beyond computation given Gödel’s 
incompleteness theorem (Lucas, 1961; Penrose and Mermin, 1990; 
Penrose, 1994 ). The full arguments for these are made in 
Supplementary material 10.
A
B
FIGURE 7
(A) Three time points t1, t2, t3 and two variables A and B. (B) A function 
node between two observed variables that express some relations 
between these observed variables, such as latent 
variable=f(obsevered_variable_1,observed variable_2).
A
B
FIGURE 8
(A) An autoregressive VAR model within a graph. In this example, the 
graph includes three nodes, A,B and  C, and four edges. The edges 
from node A to node A represent the autoregressive relationships, 
indicating that variable A depends on its own past values. The edge 
from node B to node C represents the relationship between these 
variables, indicating that B depends on C. (B) The edge from node  B 
at time t + 1 to node A could be described as ( ) ( )1,+⊆Bt At  which is 
interpreted as saying that the value of B at time t + 1 is a subset of 
the value of A at time  t.
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 15 frontiersin.org
The observer self, evolutionary 
Interface theory, and Markov kernels
One potentially useful avenue for modeling the observer self, and 
avoiding self-referential paradoxes is Hoffman and colleagues’ 
(Hoffman et al., 2015; Hoffman, 2016) interface theory of perception 
(ITP), whereby perceptual systems provide an organism-specific user 
interface promoted by evolutionary fitness and not veridical 
representations of the environment. This takes the ITP one step 
further by formally defining mathematically what they call a conscious 
agent (CA; Hoffman and Prakash, 2014; Fields et al., 2018), and this 
is applied as a minimally universally applicable formal model of 
conscious perception and behavior, potentially including the self as an 
observer to experience. CA is assumed to provide a universal 
representation of perceptual and cognitive processes in the context of 
ITP . There is also an assumption of consistency between CA and ITP , 
in the sense that a CA cannot respond (behave in response) to stimuli 
in the environment if the ITP does not detect them ( Hoffman and 
Prakash, 2014). This mathematical expression of the CA that uses a 
Markov kernel may offer a useful fit for defining the conscious 
observer self in ACT and RFT, in order to prevent issues with self-
reference paradoxes in strange loop logical systems. Notably, this can 
be implemented in graphs of graph theory alongside other logical RFT 
relational frame statements within a mathematically consistent and 
complete way, by utilizing a Markovian blanket, which would separate 
the observer self from the entanglement with logical propositional 
thoughts (i.e., self as content). Notably, conscious phenomenology in 
this approach is intended to model human phenomenology, whereby 
language plays a role in shaping phenomenology through concepts 
and categories that are verbally learned (from a Hebbian network) 
from the environment within the interface.
Crucially, ITP and CA can be  regarded as ontologically 
neutral, given that perception and phenomenological experience 
are more generally bound to a fitness function rather than some 
form of mentalism. This aligns ITP away from a cognitive naïve 
realism position and more in line with the behavioral pragmatism 
of RFT that also holds an a-ontological position ( Barnes-Holmes, 
2005 ; Codd, 2015 ; Monestes and Villatte, 2015 ). This means that 
RFT could be interpreted through this (functional) interfacing 
approach based on evolutionary fitness rather than a cognitively 
vertical phenomenological experience. It is therefore 
conceptually a good fit for mathematically describing the 
observer self of ACT and RFT as well as the self within EEMM 
more generally.
The CA framework can be  formally defined mathematically, 
which allows perceptions, decisions, and actions to be defined within 
a measurable space (definition 1 is of the Markov kernel, and 
definition 1 is of the CA):
Definition 1. Let 〈B, B〉 and 〈C, C〉 be measurable spaces, whereby 
B and C refer to σ-algebra of measurable space called events and 
represent a collection of subsets B and C, respectively. Then equip the 
unit interval 0, 1 with its Borel σ-algebra. The function : 0,1KBC ×→  
is a Markovian kernel from B to C if
 (i) For each measurable set EB∈ , the function ( ), : 0,1KEB⋅→   
enacted by ( ),b K bE  is a measurable function.
 (ii)  For each bB∈ , the function ( ),Kb ⋅  enacted by 
( ),,F K bF F C ∈  is a probability measure on C.
A CA can be represented as a directed graph, as illustrated in 
Figure 9. The graph demonstrates a cyclic process, whereby a kernel 
:DXG G×→  can be  thought of in the following way: for each 
instantiation 0g  of G in the immediately previous cycle, and the 
current instantiation of ( )0, ,;x XD xg∈⋅  gives the probability 
distribution of the gG∈  instantiated in the next step. Kernels A and  
P are instantiated in the same way. To put it more formally
Definition 2. Let 〈W,  W〉, 〈X, X〉 and 〈G, G〉 be measurable spaces. 
Let P be  a Markovian kernel :PW X X×→ , D be  a kernel 
:DXG G×→ , and A be a kernel :AG W W×→ . A CA is a 7 tuple 
XX GG WW PD At,, ,, ,, ,,() () ()  , where t is a positive integer  
parameter.
W is interpreted as elements of the world, X and G are interpreted 
as representing (consisting of tokens) different conscious experiences 
and actions, respectively. Kernels P, D, and A represent perception, 
decision, and action (behavior) operators. Any operator that changes the 
state of X (conscious experience) is regarded as “perception, ” any 
operator that changes the state of G (conscious action) is regarded as a 
“decision, ” and any operator that changes the state of W (world state) is 
regarded as an “action. ” The perception set X takes all phenomenological 
representations of experience, not just visual, i.e., all modalities. 
Similarly, as set G and kernel A are also multimodal, perception can 
be viewed as an action performed by the world. When states W, X, and 
G change, kernels P, D, and A act in response, respectively. Decisions D 
and actions A of the CA are assumed to be  freely chosen and not 
deterministic (particularly when directed by the observer self rather 
than self as content), and as such, these operators are treated as stochastic 
in the general case. CA-specific proper time is denoted by t and is 
incrementally “ticking” concurrently with the action of decisions D, and 
change of state of X (hence applicable for ideographic time series analysis 
such as in PBT). There are no assumptions about what X contains, such 
as containing tokens representing the value of t or the elements of 
G. Further details of this approach are given in Supplementary material 11.
Embodied cognition, entropy, Markov 
blanket, CA, and self
An important construct of the EEMM is the level of psychobiology 
and how this relates to, for instance, the dimension of “self. ” A 
conscious agent of “self ” would receive many inputs from brain 
neurons and interoceptively through the body. Embodied cognition 
and interception play a major role in shaping a meta-representation of 
“self. ” These are relevant to ACT and RFT concepts as, for example, 
FIGURE 9
Illustration within a three-node graph, the conscious agent (CA). W 
(world), X (experience), and G (conscious action) are measurable 
sets, while P (perceive), D (decision), and A (action) are Markovian 
kernels, and t is an integer parameter [Reprinted with permission 
from Elsevier (Fields et al., 2018)].
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 16 frontiersin.org
ACT embodied knowledge (such as being aware, engaged, and open) 
has been identified as relevant in participants naïve to ACT and used 
to describe (or score) several bodily postures (Falletta-Cowden et al., 
2022) that could be  interoceptively related. Embodiment, such as 
interoceptive awareness and related vagal function, has been shown to 
play an important role in emotional regulation and coping (Pinna and 
Edwards, 2020). Full details of interoception and how this relates to 
brain structures that form a representation of “self ” are given in 
Supplementary material 12 . Notably, the underlying learning is 
considered Hebbian in nature, as described in a previous study 
(Edwards et al., 2022).
Similar connectivity has been found with major depressive 
disorder (MDD). For example, MDD, which is also a disorder of the 
regulation of mood and emotion, has been assumed to be the result of 
cortical–limbic circuitry ( Kennedy et  al., 2001 ). A review of the 
evidence suggested that abnormalities in the structure and function 
of the prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, hippocampus, and 
amygdala were responsible for depression (Davidson et al., 2002). It is 
perhaps interesting that the hippocampus was mentioned, as this is 
the area where associational learning takes place, such as Pavlovian 
conditioning, and may relay information to the prefrontal cortex such 
as situation “ A ” is scary. The prefrontal cortex can, perhaps, then make 
decisions about what situations “ A ” should be avoided. Expanding on 
this, the hippocampus is thought to provide context-dependent 
information, as fear extinction is context-dependent, and is thought 
to involve the inhibitory control of the prefrontal cortex over 
amygdala-based fear processes, whereby hippocampal-based 
contextual information is integrated with the prefrontal–amygdala 
circuitry (Sotres-Bayon et al., 2004). Central brain components and 
relevant feedback loops are illustrated in Figure  10. Figure  11 
illustrates these connections leading to goals and values. Full 
mathematical accounts for generic relational frames, values, and 
associations can be found in the study by Edwards (2021).
There seem to be very clear neurological pathways between the 
emergence of the embodied self from interoceptive signals ( Seth, 
2013), the default mode network, which is thought to process self-
referential thought, and depression (Sheline et al., 2009; Paulus and 
Stein, 2010; Lemogne et al., 2012; Zhu et al., 2012; Koban et al., 2021). 
The default mode network is particularly important as the processing 
of self-referential thought includes self-reflection (perspective-taking), 
future things, ruminating and remembering events in the past, which 
are all deictic RFT processes, with very relevant neurological pathways 
to self as content and the observer self. Interestingly, drug compounds 
that low the processing of the default mode network such as psilocybin 
lead to participants reporting the phenomenological experience of 
their sense of self such as ego (the self-stories, narrative self as content) 
dissolving, and this includes the boundary between their self and the 
environment (Carhart-Harris et al., 2013; Lebedev et al., 2015; Pollan, 
2015; Barrett and Griffiths, 2018), and mindfulness exercises have also 
been found to dissolve self to some degree (Cooper et al., 2022), such 
as the body scan have led to similar effects such as dissolving bodily 
boundaries of self (Hanley et al., 2020) and rigid patterns of defensive-
self ( Garland et  al., 2017 ). For full details of how interoception, 
embodied cognition of self, relates to entropy and predictive coding 
and some of these ideas that emerged decades ago, when the physicist 
Schrödinger (1942) in his seminal book, asked “What Is Life?” (see 
Supplementary material 13).
However, to explore how biological systems act through Bayesian 
inference as suggested by predictive coding to reduce entropy 
specifically (Kuchling et al., 2020 ), Lagrangian mechanics need to 
be explained. This is a problem of dynamical systems and identifying 
a Lyapunov function can be used to analyze and solve any dynamic 
system using the fundamental theorem of vector calculus—the 
Helmholtz decomposition. This can be  used to characterize the 
general flow of systemic states toward the convergence of a 
nonequilibrium steady state. Markov blankets are then introduced, 
which separate the internal and external states of a system, whereby 
the Markov blanket is comprised of sensory and active states (see 
Figure 12A). Notably, the Markov blanket also acts as the evolutionary 
interface based on fitness that separates and disassociates the observer 
self from the self as the content of the world. Using the partition of the 
Markov blanket, the Lyapunov function can be  replaced with 
variational free energy to solve the equations of internal and external 
states and therefore characterize self-organization as equilibrium 
FIGURE 10
A combined lateral and medial view of the limbic, insular cortex, and prefrontal cortex axes. The biopsychological level, neuro-integrated, and 
embodied network.
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 17 frontiersin.org
states that can be portioned into a system (i.e., the internal state of a 
Markov blanket) and its external environment.
In terms of updating the system, the active inference is utilized. 
This is based on Bayesian inference, which uses Bayes’ theorem as 
a statistical approach whereby the probability of a hypothesis is 
updated with respect to some measured evidence gained from the 
sensorium or the environment. Bayes’ theorem can be given as 
( ) ( ) ( )
( )
P BA P A
AB PB= , where the conditional probability of an 
unobservable event  A given some observable event  B ( )P AB  (the 
inferred probability of an event A) is called the posterior belief. 
Conversely, ( )P BA  reflects the probability of event B given the 
occurrence of event A, P(A) is the prior belief, while P(B) is the 
marginal likelihood of evidence. In Bayesian inference, the Bayes 
theorem is used to accumulate information about an unobservable 
(or hidden) state by sampling measurable states, which is known as 
Bayesian belief updating as it converts prior beliefs into posterior 
beliefs based on its generative model, ( ) ( ) ( ).P BA P BA P A=  
Thus, the updating dynamics of a system can be described as the 
probability of likelihood assigned to sensory observations and 
prior (predictive expectation) beliefs combined. Hence, a self-
organizing system can be thought of as an information processing 
system that infers unobservable hidden states of its environment 
by comparing sensory samples with predictions of sensory input 
and updating its expectations about the causes of that input.
For a complete understanding of the Bayesian interpretation of 
nonequilibrium, steady state dynamics, a brief mathematical 
foundation, and an overview of the Helmholtz decomposition and 
Lyapunov function are given. Dynamics can be  formulated by 
functions that play the role of a Lyapunov function, such as those 
illustrated in classical mechanics with dissipative aspects. The same 
results can also be  derived through the Fokker-Plank equation in 
generalized coordinates of motion. This shows that the Lyapunov 
function is simply the negative log probability of a state being occupied 
at a nonequilibrium steady state. In this way, the flow of states at a 
nonequilibrium steady state can be placed on the same gradient as the 
quantity that is minimized (entropy) by the Bayesian belief updating 
(see Supplementary material 14 for details).
This approach exploits the principle of least action integral of 
Lagrangian mechanics and turns it into an integration over the self-
information of states, known as entropy in information theory. 
Crucially, the principle of least action manifests itself into the principle 
of least internal entropy for systems that possess a (dissipative) 
random dynamical attractor and, therefore, obtain a nonequilibrium 
steady state. The specific structure of the system or model m that 
underwrites the Bayesian inference is called the Markov blanket. The 
CA for self, utilizing a Markov blanket, therefore may be one way to 
structure the observer self from the world state which produced a 
four-node graph (see Figure  12B), and this forms a bidirectional 
indirect interaction between W and X via their proximal surfaces (see 
Figure 12C).
The Markov blanket consists of active and sensory states, whereby 
(1) internal states govern the active states but affect the external states 
and (2) external states govern sensory states but affect internal states 
(Kirchhoff et  al., 2018). The free energy (or prediction error) can 
be  minimized in two ways: either by (1) perception, which is the 
updating of the prediction based on the sensation, or (2) action, which 
is the changing of the sensation so that it matches the prediction (Seth, 
2013; Holmes and Nolte, 2019). The Markov blanket b consists of 
sensory states s that affect but are not affected by internal states μ as 
well as active states a that affect but are not affected by external states η.
FIGURE 11
A potential example of a biopsychological level, neuro-integrated, and embodied network (NIEN). (1) Large arrowheads = greater excitatory effect; (2) 
Fading arrowhead = inhibitory effect; (3) Dashed line with directional arrowhead = mediating association; (4) Dashed line with bidirectional arrow 
heads = mediating or moderation association.
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 18 frontiersin.org
As such, b is defined as the set of variables (states) that renders μ 
conditionally independent from η. This can be donated mathematically 
as described in Supplementary material 15. In addition to this, the 
sensory states s children in the form of active states a mediate the 
influence of internal states μ on external states η (see Figure 3 of this 
directional relation). These ensemble dynamics and Markov blankets 
can be seen in Figure 13 and depicted more generally with the fully 
embodied interoceptive system, which depicts the bottom-up and 
top-down relationships between interoception, parasympathetic vagal 
tone, and central self-regulatory centers.
This finalizes the overall N-frame system, whereby the Markov 
blanket separating the observer self and representing the evolutionary 
fitness interface with the world can be depicted within the relational 
frame ideographic graphs (see Figure 14). This can then be utilized 
for PBT analysis and overcoming some of the strange self-referential 
loops (as the observer self is outside of the system that describes it). 
The Markov blanket, which acts as the interface to the world, 
represents the set of variables that are related to, but not exclusively, 
self-reference (i.e., self as content), shielding from the effects of other 
variables at the observer-self that may cause paradoxes. Similarly, the 
CA is the self-observer outside of the Markov blanket, and therefore 
a self-referential system that is described mathematically as a Markov 
kernel can describe the probability of transitions from state to state 
in a Markov process. By representing self-reference as a Markov 
process, it may be possible to use the Markov kernel to model the 
transition between states of self-reference and non-self-reference, 
thus possibly avoiding paradoxes that arise from self-reference, which 
includes some function f of reinforcement feedback from the world 
w as specified in the previous study as a Markov model 
(Edwards, 2021).
In conclusion, though this framework has not been developed 
specifically for clinical purposes, it gives a possible way to bring about 
an idiographic functional contextual RFT approach to clinical 
assessment and treatment specification in the form of process-based 
therapy. It specifically does this by giving an ontologically neutral and 
functionally context-dependent evolutionary interface solution to 
extracting relational frames and scaling with PBT graphs. It does this 
by giving a mathematical description to RFT through propositional 
logic and then ideographically scaling this into complex network 
graphs, whereby clinicians could utilize these graphs to explore areas 
within the network whereby negative relational frame loops occur 
(such as a fear transformation of function) that leads to cognitive 
A
BC
FIGURE 12
(A) A Markov blanket b that highlights the exchange of information with its surroundings whereby external states (variables) η are conditionally 
independent of internal states μ. Note: Markov blanket = b; η = external states; μ = internal states; s = sensory states; a = active states. (B) P in a CA 
framework with a Markov blanket, with P2 in the CEP formalism, produces a four-node graph, replacing the three-node graph of the typical CA 
(Figure 9). Bidirectional indirect interaction between W and X via their proximal surfaces is demonstrated in B and C [Reprinted with permission from 
Elsevier (Fields et al., 2018)].
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 19 frontiersin.org
fusion, low self-esteem, avoidance, etc. Once these negative relational 
frame loop areas are identified, the therapist can then target these areas 
with interventions that are likely to undermine the dominance they 
hold over the network, such as value identification, mindfulness, and 
cognitive defusion tasks. An example of such targeting is given in 
Figure 14, whereby the red lines indicate the potential targeted process 
of change interventions (ACT or CBT based) to (1) undermine key 
negative areas within the network, e.g., targeting the negative feedback 
loop, such as from the EEMM dimension of self—verbal “self ” (such 
as fear, low self-esteem) and avoidance behavior which reinforces each 
other; (2) improve SAC as it is a direct gateway to depression; (3) to 
improve psychological flexibility as it is a direct gateway to both anxiety 
and depression. Using this approach should require a therapist with 
minimal training (video or workshop) to use some ecological 
momentary assessment of relational frames (instances of thought 
entanglement, etc.) application that processes that data as described, 
that would assess variables at several points in the day over a week (or 
more), and that automatically visualizes the data within network 
graphs. This interface solution for self may also be  an important 
contribution to the AI literature, whereby some form of self-reference, 
self-reflection, or self-awareness (similar to a default mode network) 
may be possible as they evolve to become more human-like and a 
natural extension to a previous study in this area (Edwards et al., 2022).
Data availability statement
Publicly available datasets were analyzed in this study. The datasets 
are available at the following link: https://github.com/
DarrenEdwards111/Example-relational-network-code.
Author Contributions
The author DE confirms being the sole contributor of this work 
and has approved it for publication.
FIGURE 13
A schematic representation of the ensemble dynamics and Markov blankets, and the bottom-up and top-down relationships between interoception, 
parasympathetic vagal tone, and central self-regulatory centers.
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 20 frontiersin.org
Conflict of interest
The author declares that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated 
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the 
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or 
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or 
endorsed by the publisher.
Supplementary material
The Supplementary material for this article can be found online 
at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743/
full#supplementary-material
References
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders: DSM-5: 10 Washington, DC: American psychiatric association.
Atkins, P . W ., Wilson, D. S., and Hayes, S. C. (2019). Prosocial: Using evolutionary science 
to build productive, equitable, and collaborative groups Vol. 33, New Harbinger Publications.
Barnes-Holmes, D. (2005). Behavioral pragmatism is a-ontological, not antirealist: a 
reply to Tonneau. Behav. Philos., 33, 67–79.
Barnes-Holmes, D., Hayes, S. C., and Roche, B. (2001). Relational frame theory: A post-
Skinnerian account of human language and cognition. New Y ork, NY: Plenum Publishers.
Barrett, F . S., and Griffiths, R. R. (2018). Classic hallucinogens and mystical 
experiences: phenomenology and neural correlates. Curr. Top. Behav. Neurosci. 36, 
393–430. doi: 10.1007/7854_2017_474
Bennett, A. T., and Cuthill, I. C. (1994). Ultraviolet vision in birds: what is its function? 
Vis. Res. 34, 1471–1478. doi: 10.1016/0042-6989(94)90149-X
Blackledge, J. T. (2003). An introduction to relational frame theory: basics and 
applications. Behav. Anal. Today 3, 421–433. doi: 10.1037/h0099997
Bochman, A. (2003). A logic for causal reasoning. Paper presented at the IJCAI.
Bochman, A. (2004). A causal approach to nonmonotonic reasoning. Artif. Intell. 160, 
105–143. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2004.07.002
Bochman, A. (2007). A causal theory of abduction. J. Log. Comput. 17, 851–869. doi: 
10.1093/logcom/exm045
Bochman, A., and Lifschitz, V . (2015). Pearl's causality in a logical setting. Paper 
presented at the Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 29
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Leech, R., Erritzoe, D., Williams, T. M., Stone, J. M., 
Evans, J., et al. (2013). Functional connectivity measures after psilocybin inform a 
novel hypothesis of early psychosis. Schizophr. Bull.  39, 1343–1351. doi: 10.1093/
schbul/sbs117
Ciarrochi, J., Sahdra, B., Hofmann, S. G., and Hayes, S. C. (2022). Developing an item 
pool to assess processes of change in psychological interventions: the process-based 
assessment tool (PBAT). J. Contextual Behav. Sci.  23, 200–213. doi: 10.1016/j.
jcbs.2022.02.001
Codd, R. T. III (2015). The functional contextual a-ontological stance and bas C. van 
Fraassen’s constructive empiricism. Journal of contextual. Behav. Sci. 4, 215–219. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcbs.2015.05.004
Cooper, A. C., Ventura, B., and Northoff, G. (2022). Beyond the veil of duality—
topographic reorganization model of meditation. Neurosci. Conscious. 2022:niac013. doi: 
10.1093/nc/niac013
Darwin, C. (1859). The origin of species by means of natural selection . 6th Edn 
Project Gutenburg.
Davidson, R. J., Pizzagalli, D., Nitschke, J. B., and Putnam, K. (2002). Depression: 
perspectives from affective neuroscience. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 53, 545–574. doi: 10.1146/
annurev.psych.53.100901.135148
FIGURE 14
Illustration of RFT-derived Boolean logic causal chains applied to an SEM within a graph of nodes and edges G = (V, E). Each node within a community 
represents a propositional causal chain (causality) or other forms of relational framing. Wider-directed lines indicate larger coefficients. Dark blue lines 
indicate a positive coefficient, whereas purple lines indicate negative coefficients. Note: It is plausible to assume these dynamics occur in the frontal 
cortex (whereby signals are fed from lower-level brain structures and body) as part of hierarchical pattern RFT relational framing (N-framing).
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 21 frontiersin.org
Dickinson, S. J., Pizlo - Singh, Z. M., and Hoffman, D. D. (2013).  “Natural selection 
and shape perception” in Shape perception in Human and Computer Vision, SJ Dickinson, 
Z Pizlo (Springer), 171–185.
Duchamp-Viret, P ., Chaput, M., and Duchamp, A. (1999). Odor response properties 
of rat olfactory receptor neurons. Science 284, 2171–2174. doi: 10.1126/
science.284.5423.2171
Edwards, D. J. (2021). Ensuring effective public health communication: insights and 
modeling efforts from theories of behavioral economics, heuristics, and behavioral analysis 
for decision making under risk. Front. Psychol. 12:715159. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.715159
Edwards, D. J., McEntaggart, C., and Barnes-Holmes, Y . (2022). A functional 
contextual account of background knowledge in categorization. Front. Psychol.  
13:745306. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.745306
Falletta-Cowden, N., Smith, P ., Hayes, S. C., Georgescu, S., and Kolahdouzan, S. A. 
(2022). What the body reveals about lay knowledge of psychological flexibility. J. Clin. 
Med. 11:2848. doi: 10.3390/jcm11102848
Fields, C., Hoffman, D. D., Prakash, C., and Singh, M. (2018). Conscious agent 
networks: formal analysis and application to cognition. Cogn. Syst. Res. 47, 186–213. doi: 
10.1016/j.cogsys.2017.10.003
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Garland, E. L., Hanley, A. W ., Baker, A. K., and Howard, M. O. (2017). Biobehavioral 
mechanisms of mindfulness as a treatment for chronic stress: an RDoC perspective. 
Chronic Stress 1:247054701771191. doi: 10.1177/2470547017711912
Gates, K. M., Fisher, Z. F ., and Bollen, K. A. (2020). Latent variable GIMME using 
model implied instrumental variables (MIIVs). Psychol. Methods 25, 227–242. doi: 
10.1037/met0000229
Gates, K. M., and Molenaar, P . C. (2012). Group search algorithm recovers effective 
connectivity maps for individuals in homogeneous and heterogeneous samples. 
NeuroImage 63, 310–319. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.06.026
Geffner, H. (1994). Causal default reasoning: Principles and algorithms. Paper 
presented at the AAAI.
Gehring, W . J. (2014). The evolution of vision. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Dev. Biol. 3, 1–40. 
doi: 10.1002/wdev.96
Geisler, W . S., and Diehl, R. L. (2003). A Bayesian approach to the evolution of 
perceptual and cognitive systems. Cogn. Sci.  27, 379–402. doi: 10.1207/
s15516709cog2703_3
Gödel, K. (1931). Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und 
verwandter Systeme I. Monatsh. Math. 38-38, 173–198. doi: 10.1007/BF01700692
Gross, A. C., and Fox, E. J. (2009). Relational frame theory: an overview of the 
controversy. Anal. Verbal Behav. 25, 87–98. doi: 10.1007/BF03393073
Hanley, A. W ., Dambrun, M., and Garland, E. L. (2020). Effects of mindfulness 
meditation on self-transcendent states: perceived body boundaries and spatial frames 
of reference. Mindfulness 11, 1194–1203. doi: 10.1007/s12671-020-01330-9
Hayes, S. C., Ciarrochi, J., Hofmann, S. G., Chin, F ., and Sahdra, B. (2022). Evolving 
an idionomic approach to processes of change: towards a unified personalized science 
of human improvement. Behav. Res. Ther. 156:104155. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2022.104155
Hayes, S. C., and Hofmann, S. G. (2018). Process-based CBT: The science and core 
clinical competencies of cognitive behavioral therapy, New Harbinger Publications.
Hayes, S. C., Hofmann, S. G., and Ciarrochi, J. (2020). A process-based approach to 
psychological diagnosis and treatment: the conceptual and treatment utility of an extended 
evolutionary meta model. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 82:101908. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2020.101908
Hayes, S. C., Hofmann, S. G., Stanton, C. E., Carpenter, J. K., Sanford, B. T., 
Curtiss, J. E., et al. (2019). The role of the individual in the coming era of process-based 
therapy. Behav. Res. Ther. 117, 40–53. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2018.10.005
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., Bunting, K., Twohig, M., and Wilson, K. G. (2004). “What 
is acceptance and commitment therapy?” in A practical guide to acceptance and 
commitment therapy eds. S. C. Hayes, K. D. Strosahl (Springer), 3–29.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., and Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and commitment 
therapy: Guilford press: New Y ork.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., and Wilson, K. G. (2011). Acceptance and commitment 
therapy: The process and practice of mindful change, Guilford press.
Hoffman, D. D. (2016). The interface theory of perception. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 25, 
157–161. doi: 10.1177/0963721416639702
Hoffman, D. D. (2019). The case against reality: How evolution hid the truth from our 
eyes. London: Allen Lane.
Hoffman, D. D., and Prakash, C. (2014). Objects of consciousness. Front. Psychol. 
5:577. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00577
Hoffman, D. D., and Singh, M. (2012). Computational evolutionary perception. 
Perception 41, 1073–1091. doi: 10.1068/p7275
Hoffman, D. D., Singh, M., and Mark, J. (2013). Does evolution favor true perceptions? 
Paper presented at the Human Vision and Electronic Imaging XVIII.
Hoffman, D. D., Singh, M., and Prakash, C. (2015). The interface theory of perception. 
Psychon. Bull. Rev. 22, 1480–1506. doi: 10.3758/s13423-015-0890-8
Hofmann, S. G., Barber, J. P ., Salkovskis, P ., Wampold, B. E., Rief, W ., Ewen, A.-C. I., et al. 
(2022). What is the common ground for modern psychotherapy? A discussion paper based 
on EACLIPT’s 1st webinar. Clin. Psychol. Europe 4, 1–8. doi: 10.32872/cpe.8403
Hofmann, S. G., Hayes, S. C., and Lorscheid, D. N. (2021). Learning process-based 
therapy: A skills training manual for targeting the core processes of psychological change in 
clinical practice Oakland, California: New Harbinger Publications.
Hofstadter, D. R. (1979). Gödel, escher, bach. Basic books: New Y ork.
Hofstadter, D. R. (2007). I am a strange loop. New Y ork: Basic books.
Holmes, J., and Nolte, T. (2019). Surprise and the bayesian brain: implications for 
psychotherapy theory and practice. Front. Psychol. 10:592. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00592
Jones, G., Teeling, E. C., and Rossiter, S. J. (2013). From the ultrasonic to the infrared: 
molecular evolution and the sensory biology of bats. Front. Physiol. 4:117. doi: 10.3389/
fphys.2013.00117
Keller, A., and Vosshall, L. B. (2008). Better smelling through genetics: mammalian 
odor perception. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 18, 364–369. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2008.09.020
Kennedy, S. H., Evans, K. R., Krüger, S., Mayberg, H. S., Meyer, J. H., McCann, S., et al. 
(2001). Changes in regional brain glucose metabolism measured with positron emission 
tomography after paroxetine treatment of major depression. Am. J. Psychiatr. 158, 
899–905. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.158.6.899
Kirchhoff, P ., Palacios, F ., and Kiverstein.,  (2018). The Markov blankets of life: 
autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. J. R. Soc. Interface 15:20170792. 
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0792
Koban, L., Gianaros, P . J., Kober, H., and Wager, T. D. (2021). The self in context: brain 
systems linking mental and physical health. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.  22, 309–322. doi: 
10.1038/s41583-021-00446-8
Kuchling, F ., Friston, K., Georgiev, G., and Levin, M. (2020). Morphogenesis as 
Bayesian inference: a variational approach to pattern formation and control in complex 
biological systems. Phys Life Rev 33, 88–108. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2019.06.001
Lane, S. T., Gates, K. M., Pike, H. K., Beltz, A. M., and Wright, A. G. (2019). 
Uncovering general, shared, and unique temporal patterns in ambulatory assessment 
data. Psychol. Methods 24, 54–69. doi: 10.1037/met0000192
Lebedev, A. V ., Lövdén, M., Rosenthal, G., Feilding, A., Nutt, D. J., and 
Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2015). Finding the self by losing the self: neural correlates of ego-
dissolution under psilocybin. Hum. Brain Mapp. 36, 3137–3153. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22833
Lemogne, C., Delaveau, P ., Freton, M., Guionnet, S., and Fossati, P . (2012). Medial 
prefrontal cortex and the self in major depression. J. Affect. Disord. 136, e1–e11. doi: 
10.1016/j.jad.2010.11.034
Lifschitz, V . (1997). On the logic of causal explanation. Artif. Intell. 96, 451–465. doi: 
10.1016/S0004-3702(97)00057-X
Lucas, J. R. (1961). Minds, Machines and Gödel1. Philosophy 36, 112–127. doi: 
10.1017/S0031819100057983
Maloney, L. T., and Zhang, H. (2010). Decision-theoretic models of visual perception 
and action. Vis. Res. 50, 2362–2374. doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2010.09.031
Mark, J. T., Marion, B. B., and Hoffman, D. D. (2010). Natural selection and veridical 
perceptions. J. Theor. Biol. 266, 504–515. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2010.07.020
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: Freeman, San Fransico.
Marr, D. (2010). Vision: A computational investigation into the human representation 
and processing of visual information Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT press.
McCain, N., and Turner, H. (1997). Causal theories of action and change. Paper 
presented at the AAAI/IAAI.
Molenaar, P . (1985). A dynamic factor model for the analysis of multivariate time 
series. Psychometrika 50, 181–202. doi: 10.1007/BF02294246
Monestes, J.-L., and Villatte, M. (2015). Humans are the selection criterion in 
psychological science, not “reality”: a reply to Herbert and Padovani. J. Contextual Behav. 
Sci. 4, 210–211. doi: 10.1016/j.jcbs.2015.06.003
Mulhern, T., Stewart, I., and McElwee, J. (2018). Facilitating relational framing of 
classification in young children. J. Contextual Behav. Sci.  8, 55–68. doi: 10.1016/j.
jcbs.2018.04.001
Nowak, M. A. (2006). Evolutionary dynamics: Exploring the equations of life , 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard university press.
Ollivier, F ., Samuelson, D., Brooks, D., Lewis, P ., Kallberg, M., and Komáromy, A. 
(2004). Comparative morphology of the tapetum lucidum (among selected species). Vet. 
Ophthalmol. 7, 11–22. doi: 10.1111/j.1463-5224.2004.00318.x
Palluzzi, F ., and Grassi, M. (2021). SEMgraph: An R package for causal network 
analysis of high-throughput data with structural equation models arXivpreprint 
arXiv:2103.08332.
Palmer, S. E. (1999). Vision science: Photons to phenomenology , Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: MIT press.
Paulus, M. P ., and Stein, M. B. (2010). Interoception in anxiety and depression. Brain 
Struct. Funct. 214, 451–463. doi: 10.1007/s00429-010-0258-9
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible 
inference Burlington, Massachusetts: Morgan kaufmann.
Edwards 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1150743
Frontiers in Psychology 22 frontiersin.org
Pearl, J. (2000). Models, reasoning and inference . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 19.
Pearl, J. (2009). Causal inference in statistics: an overview. Stat. Surv. 3, 96–146. doi: 
10.1214/09-SS057
Pearl, J. (2011). Bayesian networks. UCLA: Department of Statistics, UCLA. Available 
at: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/53n4f34m
Pearl, J. (2012). “The causal foundations of structural equation modeling. ” in 
Handbook of Structural Equation Modeling . ed. R. H. Hoyle (New Y ork: Guilford), 
68–91.
Penrose, R. (1994). Shadows of the mind 4 Oxford University Press Oxford.
Penrose, R. (1989). The emperor’s new mind: Concerning computers, minds, and the 
laws of physics  American Association of Physics Teachers. New Y ork: Oxford 
University Press.
Pereyra, N. A. (2020). “Review of logic and set theory. ” in Real and Complex Numbers 
for Physicists. (Melville, New Y ork: AIP Publishing LLC), 1–1.
Pinna, T., and Edwards, D. J. (2020). A systematic review of associations between 
Interoception, vagal tone, and emotional regulation: potential applications for mental 
health, wellbeing, psychological flexibility, and chronic conditions. Front. Psychol. 
11:1792. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01792
Pizlo, Z., Li, Y ., and Sawada, T. (2014). Making a machine that sees like US: Oxford 
University Press, USA.
Pollan, M. (2015). The trip treatment. The New Y orker, 9.
Prakash, C. (2020). On invention of structure in the world: interfaces and conscious 
agents. Found. Sci. 25, 121–134. doi: 10.1007/s10699-019-09579-7
Prakash, C., Stephens, K. D., Hoffman, D. D., Singh, M., and Fields, C. (2021). Fitness 
beats truth in the evolution of perception. Acta Biotheor. 69, 319–341. doi: 10.1007/
s10441-020-09400-0
Schrödinger, E. (1942). What is life? , Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge 
University Press.
Schwartenbeck, P ., FitzGerald, T., Dolan, R., and Friston, K. (2013). Exploration, novelty, 
surprise, and free energy minimization. Front. Psychol. 4:710. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00710
Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends 
Cogn. Sci. 17, 565–573. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.007
Sheline, Y . I., Barch, D. M., Price, J. L., Rundle, M. M., Vaishnavi, S. N., Snyder, A. Z., 
et al. (2009). The default mode network and self-referential processes in depression. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106, 1942–1947. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0812686106
Smith, J. M. (1982). Evolution and the theory of games , Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
Cambridge universitypress.
Smith, P ., and Hayes, S. C. (2022). An open-source relational network derivation script 
in R for modeling and visualizing complex behavior for scientists and practitioners. 
Front. Psychol. 13:914485. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.914485
Smith, J., and Price, G. R. (1973). The logic of animal conflict. Nature 246, 15–18. doi: 
10.1038/246015a0
Sörbom, D. (1975). Detection of correlated errors in longitudinal data. Br. J. Math. 
Stat. Psychol. 28, 138–151. doi: 10.1111/j.2044-8317.1975.tb00558.x
Sotres-Bayon, F ., Bush, D. E., and LeDoux, J. E. (2004). Emotional perseveration: an 
update on prefrontal-amygdala interactions in fear extinction. Learn. Mem. 11, 525–535. 
doi: 10.1101/lm.79504
Zettle, R. D., Hayes, S. C., Barnes-Holmes, D., and Biglan, A. (2016). The Wiley 
handbook of contextual behavioral science, New Y ork: John Wiley & Sons.
Zhu, X., Wang, X., Xiao, J., Liao, J., Zhong, M., Wang, W ., et al. (2012). Evidence of a 
dissociation pattern in resting-state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, 
treatment-naive major depression patients. Biol. Psychiatry 71, 611–617. doi: 10.1016/j.
biopsych.2011.10.035