fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 1
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 18 February 2022
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.812926
Edited by:
Marco Tramontano,
Santa Lucia Foundation, Scientiﬁc
Institute for Research, Hospitalization
and Healthcare (IRCCS), Italy
Reviewed by:
Giacomo Rossettini,
University of Genoa, Italy
Sara De Angelis,
Santa Lucia Foundation, Scientiﬁc
Institute for Research, Hospitalization
and Healthcare (IRCCS), Italy
*Correspondence:
Jorge E. Esteves
osteojorge@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Health Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 10 November 2021
Accepted: 11 January 2022
Published: 18 February 2022
Citation:
Esteves JE, Cerritelli F, Kim J and
Friston KJ (2022) Osteopathic Care
as (En)active Inference: A Theoretical
Framework for Developing an
Integrative Hypothesis in Osteopathy.
Front. Psychol. 13:812926.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.812926
Osteopathic Care as (En)active
Inference: A Theoretical Framework
for Developing an Integrative
Hypothesis in Osteopathy
Jorge E. Esteves1,2,3*, Francesco Cerritelli1, Joohan Kim4 and Karl J. Friston5
1 Clinical-Based Human Research Department, Foundation COME Collaboration, Pescara, Italy, 2 Malta ICOM Educational,
G˙zira, Malta, 3 Research Department, University College of Osteopathy, London, United Kingdom, 4 Department
of Communication, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea,5 Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, Institute
of Neurology, London, United Kingdom
Osteopathy is a person-centred healthcare discipline that emphasizes the body’s
structure-function interrelationship—and its self-regulatory mechanisms—to inform a
whole-person approach to health and wellbeing. This paper aims to provide a theoretical
framework for developing an integrative hypothesis in osteopathy, which is based on
the enactivist and active inference accounts. We propose that osteopathic care can be
reconceptualised under (En)active inference as a unifying framework. Active inference
suggests that action-perception cycles operate to minimize uncertainty and optimize
an individual’s internal model of the lived world and, crucially, the consequences of
their behaviour. We argue that (En)active inference offers an integrative framework for
osteopathy, which can evince the mechanisms underlying dyadic and triadic (e.g.,
in paediatric care) exchanges and osteopathic care outcomes. We propose that this
theoretical framework can underpin osteopathic care across the lifespan, from preterm
infants to the elderly and those with persistent pain and other physical symptoms.
In situations of chronicity, as an ecological niche, the patient-practitioner dyad provides
the osteopath and the patient with a set of affordances, i.e., possibilities for action
provided by the environment, that through shared intentionally, can promote adaptations
and restoration of productive agency. Through a dyadic therapeutic relationship, as
they engage with their ecological niche’s affordances—a structured set of affordances
shared by agents—osteopath and patient actively construct a shared sense-making
narrative and realise a shared generative model of their relation to the niche. In general,
touch plays a critical role in developing a robust therapeutic alliance, mental state
alignment, and biobehavioural synchrony between patient and practitioner. However,
its role is particularly crucial in the ﬁelds of neonatology and paediatrics, where it
becomes central in regulating allostasis and restoring homeostasis. We argue that
from an active inference standpoint, the dyadic shared ecological niche underwrites
a robust therapeutic alliance, which is crucial to the effectiveness of osteopathic care.
Considerations and implications of this model—to clinical practice and research, both
within- and outside osteopathy—are critically discussed.
Keywords: osteopathy, active inference, therapeutic alliance, predictive processing, enactivism, free-energy
principle, chronic pain, affective touch
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 2
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
INTRODUCTION
Osteopathy is a person-centred healthcare discipline that
emphasizes the body’s structure-function interrelationship and
its self-regulatory mechanisms to inform a whole-person clinical
approach to health and wellbeing, traditionally involving
primarily manual treatment (European Standards EN 16686,
2015). Although several authors regard it as a unique philosophy
of healthcare, which is practised according to distinctive
principles (e.g., Cotton, 2013; Paulus, 2013), others have argued
that osteopathic principles no longer deﬁne osteopathy as a
distinctive healthcare profession (e.g., McGrath, 2013; Tyreman,
2013). In fact, Tyreman (2013) argued that osteopathic principles
are principles of good patient-centred care in the current world
of healthcare. Although osteopathy cannot be a philosophy
like, for example, positivism or phenomenology, it can arguably
be viewed as a particular conceptualization of what human
health and unhealth are, one that guides osteopaths’ thinking
about patient care (Tyreman, 2018a,b). Within this conceptual
framework, the osteopath’s role should go beyond simply
explaining and treating, to provide support and insight into
the meaning of the patient’s illness experiences to improve
their sense of self and consequently their health and wellbeing
(Tyreman, 2018b). Despite the claimed person-centeredness
of osteopathic care, clinicians have, for long, focused on
cause-eﬀect “body-centred, ” biomedical care models (Thomson
et al., 2013; Tyreman, 2013; Esteves et al., 2020). Osteopaths
have traditionally focused on diagnosing and treating somatic
dysfunction, and its predecessor’ osteopathic lesion’ (Thomson
et al., 2013; Fryer, 2016; Noy et al., 2020). Somatic dysfunction
is described as “impaired or altered function of related component
of the somatic (body framework) system: skeletal, arthrodial, and
myofascial structures, and related vascular, lymphatic, and neural
elements” (Fryer, 2016). The concept of somatic dysfunction still
plays a vital role in osteopathic practice, professional regulation,
and professional identity (Fryer, 2016; Alvarez et al., 2020; Nesi,
2020; Santiago et al., 2020; Tramontano et al., 2020, 2022;
Cerritelli et al., 2021b). However, an uncritical emphasis on
evaluating and treating somatic dysfunctions can be regarded
as a biomedical form of clinical evaluation and, arguably, a
reductionist activity (Thomson et al., 2013). From an organism’s
perspective, the possibility of things going well or poorly is
rooted in the organism’s dynamic co-constitution, components,
and environment (Ongaro and Ward, 2017). Concentrating on
a body part in isolation from these dynamics obscures the
properties that make it potentially relevant to the health and
viability of the organism (Ongaro and Ward, 2017). Critically,
eﬀective person-centred care is highly dependent on developing
a solid therapeutic alliance between the patient and clinician,
which is inﬂuenced by biopsychosocial factors such as age, bodily
experiences, expectations, values and beliefs, and personal and
socio-cultural attributes (Miciak et al., 2018; Søndenå et al.,
2020). A robust therapeutic alliance enables osteopaths to assist
patients in making sense of their illness experiences by developing
new body narratives about their altered or changing physical
capacities (Gale, 2011), as well as the eﬀects on their identity,
relationship with their internal and external environment, and
sense of meaning in their lives (Tyreman, 2018a). Being truly
person-centred requires recognising and critically integrating
these factors into osteopathic care for patients (Tyreman, 2018b).
Recent advances in neuroscience, cognitive science and
philosophy, pain science, and musculoskeletal care, all of which
support osteopaths’ proponents of person-centred care, present
an unprecedented opportunity to develop and disseminate
evidence-based models of osteopathic care (Esteves et al., 2020).
We would argue that osteopathic concepts of self-regulation,
adaptation, sense of agency, and an individual’s capacity to engage
withóand act onótheir environment (Tyreman, 2018a; Vogel,
2021) are consistent with an ecologically enactive approach to
mind and life. These ideas are not entirely new in osteopathy
and are, arguably, aligned with Hoover’s (1963) perspective on
osteopathy as ecological medicine. In fact, he argued that Andrew
Taylor Still’s original ideas were centred around addressing
changes that interfered with an individual’s function and their
impact on their daily life (Hoover, 1963). However, to achieve
worldwide statutory regulation and recognition, osteopathy
moved closer to allopathic medicine and the biomedical care
model (Hoover, 1963). An ecologically enactive approach to
mind and life is founded on the Free Energy Principle and
its corollary, active inference theory (Friston, 2009; Bruineberg
et al., 2018). Indeed, some have argued that we should view
agency and the sense of agency through the lens of the Free
Energy Principle (Bruineberg, 2017). According to enactivism,
cognition and perception develop due to a dynamic interaction
between an acting organism and its environmental constraints,
referred to as aﬀordances (Thompson, 2010; Tschacher et al.,
2017)óaﬀordances are opportunities for action, e.g., a door
for opening or a ball for catching, rather than an action-
independent representation of the “way things are” (Seth,
2021). The mind, body, and environment are, therefore, highly
interdependent elements of an ecological system (Tschacher et al.,
2017). A fundamental notion of enactivism is sense-makingó
the evaluative interaction of an organism with its environment
(De Haan, 2020b). Recently, Stilwell and Harman (2019) have
proposed that pain should be regarded as a relational and
emergent process of sense-making through a lived body, which
cannot be separated from the world that we shape and that
shapes us. Interestingly, Littlejohn (1905), in his early conceptual
framework for osteopathy, focused on the functional adaptation
of the body in relation to the external environment. He viewed
osteopathy as person-centred care, which is based on four key
pillars: adaptation, function, environment and immunity (Gevitz,
1982). Although many of these early osteopathic care concepts
were lost to a predominantly cause-eﬀect disease-based model,
we argue that these ideas can be reconciled under the Free
Energy Principle (FEP) and the enactivist and active inference
frameworks.
Humans are an example of a complex and dynamic adaptive
system, and this should inform the osteopath’s clinical reasoning
process. Where is the breakdown in the patient’s adaptive
capacity, and how can osteopathy improve their adaptability
are some of the questions that osteopaths face in their
reasoning and decision making. The FEP explains how dynamic
adaptive systems maintain their integrity, i.e., non-equilibrium
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 3
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
steady-state, by restricting themselves to a limited number
of characteristic states (Hipolito, 2019). Any adaptive change
made by an organism or biological system must therefore
minimize its long-term average surprise, where surprise scores
the implausibility of a system being in a particular state (e.g., it
would be surprising to ﬁnd a ﬁsh out of water). Mathematically,
this amounts to minimizing the dispersion or entropy of sensed
states, because surprise (a.k.a. surprisal) is self-information.
Clinically, it mandates the mitigation of unpredicted and
uncharacteristic sensations (Edwards et al., 2012). The long-term
average of surprise is associated with the entropy (dispersion)
of sensations: a failure to minimize surprise would therefore
lead to an unbounded increase in entropy (sensory disorder)
and dissolution of self-organization and consequent homeostasis
(Edwards et al., 2012). Living systems typically resist a natural
tendency to disorder by minimizing surprise and uncertainty by
acting on the world and updating their internal statesóthrough
active inference (Friston, 2009; Ramstead et al., 2019) 1. This
active inference can be read as selecting the most likely course
of action, under an internal narrative or generative model of
the world (and body) that covers the consequences of action.
A breakdown in adaptive capacity of the person seeking care due
to an inﬂexible or distorted updating of such models will lead to
illness. A robust therapeutic alliance may be necessary for healthy
adaptationóby facilitating a revision of their generative model or
narrative that renders it apt for changes their world (and body).
Active inference foregrounds the crucial predisposition of
living organisms to adapt by creating, updating, and maintaining
inferences about their environment (Bouizegarene et al., 2020).
This is fundamental in the context of osteopathy, and despite the
still prevailing views that structural abnormality causes functional
disorder (Tyreman, 2013), it is clearly aligned with osteopathic
concepts of adaptation (Littlejohn, 1905; Vogel, 2021). Active
inference casts sentient behaviour as the selection of action
policies (i.e., sequences of active states) that minimize expected
free-energy, in order to reduce expected surprise. Acting to
minimise expected surprise can be read as acting to resolve
uncertainty, which equips the aﬀordanceóof any action on the
world with anóepistemic aspect (Ramstead et al., 2019). In
short, according to active inference, biological agents act to
fulﬁl prior beliefs (installed in a generative model) about the
consequences of action to ensure that the agent actively avoids
surprising states (Friston, 2009). Active inference generalizes
Bayesian inference beyond inferring the latent or hidden states
that cause sensations, to act in a way that minimizes expected
surprise (i.e., uncertainty). To this end, action selection and
choice behaviour can be viewed as inferring the policies that
minimize the free-energy expected on pursuing that policy
(Friston et al., 2020). This is sometimes known as planning
as inference. Active inference can therefore be regarded as
the process that conﬁrms and updates the evidence for the
generative model that a living system entails and enacts in
1Strictly speaking, the free energy principle says that systems that resist a tendency
to disorder must counter dissipative ﬂuctuations by, on average, decreasing
surprisal.
living (Ramstead et al., 2019); also known as self-evidencing
(Hohwy, 2016).
This paper aims to provide a theoretical framework for
developing an integrative hypothesis in osteopathy, which is
based on the enactivist and active inference accounts. In
osteopathy and other professions, evidence has undermined
existing biomedical or biomechanically based models of care,
resulting in the need to reconceptualise patient evaluation and
treatment strategies (Gliedt et al., 2017; Jull, 2017; Thomson
and Abbey, 2017; Smith, 2019). Therefore, it is crucial that
osteopaths and other healthcare professionals critically consider
relevant research that can assist in developing an integrative
model of care that focuses on the whole person rather than
on the mechanisms operating within the body (Tyreman,
2018b). Enactivism and active inference have recently been
proposed as robust theoretical frameworks to understand, for
example, pain (Tabor et al., 2017, 2020; Pezzulo et al., 2019;
Stilwell and Harman, 2019; Tabor and Burr, 2019; Coninx and
Stilwell, 2021; Kiverstein et al., 2021), patient care in psychiatry
(De Haan, 2020b), the development of a therapeutic alliance
(e.g., Connolly, 2022), and placebo (Ongaro and Ward, 2017;
Ongaro and Kaptchuk, 2019). We propose that osteopathic
care can be reconceptualised under (En)active inference as
a unifying framework. Active inference suggests that action-
perception cycles operate to minimize uncertainty and optimize
an individual’s internal model of the lived world and, crucially,
their behaviour. We argue that (En)active inference oﬀers an
integrative framework for osteopathy, which can evince the
mechanisms underlying dyadic and triadic (e.g., in paediatric
care) exchanges and osteopathic care outcomes. We propose that
this theoretical framework can underpin osteopathic care across
the lifespan, from preterm infants to the elderly and those with
persistent pain and other physical symptoms. In situations of
chronicity, as an ecological niche, the patient-practitioner dyad
provides the osteopath and the patient with a set of aﬀordances
that, through shared intentionally, can promote adaptations
and restoration of productive agency (Ramstead et al., 2019).
Underpinned by a robust therapeutic alliance, osteopaths help
patients make sense of their illness experiences by creating
new body narratives about their changed or changing physical
capacities and ensuing eﬀects on their identity, relationship
with their environment and meaning in their lives. Therefore,
through a dyadic therapeutic relationshipóa structured set of
aﬀordancesóosteopath and patient actively construct a shared,
sense-making narrative and realize a shared generative model
of their engagement with their ecological (therapeutic) niche
(Ramstead et al., 2019). In general, touch plays a critical
role in developing a robust therapeutic alliance, mental state
alignment, and biobehavioural synchrony between patient and
practitioner. However, its role is particularly crucial in the ﬁelds
of neonatology and paediatrics, where it becomes central in
regulating allostasis and restoring homeostasis (Mc Parlin et al.,
2022). We argue that from an (En)active inference standpoint, the
shared ecological niche underwrites a robust therapeutic alliance,
which is crucial to the eﬀectiveness of osteopathic care and other
forms of manual therapy.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 4
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
OSTEOPATHIC CARE ACROSS THE
LIFESPAN
Since its inception in the late nineteenth century in the
United States of America, osteopathy has developed as two
distinct healthcare disciplinesóosteopathic physicians and
osteopaths. Despite signiﬁcant diﬀerences in their scope of
practice, both osteopaths and osteopathic physicians provide
patient care informed by concepts of body unity, structure-
function relationships, and self-regulation to facilitate adaptation
and maintain homeostasis. Despite the osteopathic principles’
purported distinctiveness (e.g., Cotton, 2013; Paulus, 2013), these
concepts are widely accepted in various ﬁelds of science and
healthcareófor example, structure-function interrelationship is a
widely accepted biological principle (e.g., Bojar, 2020). Moreover,
they are fully aligned with contemporaneous principles of
patient-centred care (Tyreman, 2018b; Esteves et al., 2020; Vogel,
2021). However, an essential distinction of osteopathic care is
that it is health-centred rather than disease-centred, emphasising
the therapeutic relationship’s person-centred nature (Kuchera,
2018). This emphasis on health over disease is reﬂected in
Andrew Taylor Still’s writings on the science and practice of
osteopathy ó“To ﬁnd health is the object of the doctor. Anyone
can ﬁnd disease”(Still, 1902, p. 72).
Osteopaths care for patients of all ages who present with
a variety of clinical conditions. Although the majority of
evidence for osteopathic manipulative treatment focuses on
musculoskeletal disorders such as low back pain (Franke et al.,
2014) and neck pain (Franke et al., 2015), there is also
evidence of its eﬀectiveness on migraine patients (Cerritelli
et al., 2017) and preterm infants (Lanaro et al., 2017). Despite
these encouraging ﬁndings, the eﬀectiveness of osteopathic
manipulative treatment in managing musculoskeletal conditions
is highly variable. For instance, the results of a recent well-
conducted clinical trial in patients with non-speciﬁc low back
pain demonstrated that standard osteopathic treatment had a
negligible eﬀect on low back pain-speciﬁc activity limitations
compared to sham osteopathic treatment (Nguyen C. et al.,
2021). While one could argue that the recent clinical trial results
are not clinically meaningful, they nonetheless demonstrate
that a sham touch-based intervention improved pain outcomes
and absenteeism at work. Although some would argue that
these results may be explained by expectation-associated placebo
eﬀects, in individuals with chronic pain, the alleviation of
symptoms with placebo treatment is more likely attributed
to non-conscious Bayesian biases (Rossettini and Testa, 2018;
Kaptchuk et al., 2020). Beyond traditional mind-body dualism,
predictions are already encoded at the very instant of transduced
exteroceptive, interoceptive and proprioceptive sensory data
associated with bodily symptoms and the standard or sham
therapeutic intervention (Kaptchuk, 2018; Ongaro and Kaptchuk,
2019). Crucially, “the body understands and is capable of
responding to meaning without conceptual or linguistic content
speciﬁed” (Frenkel, 2008). In other words, the organism’s
embodied regulatory systems need to make an inference about
the viable states of that organism to minimize surprisal and
maintain homeostasis (Bruineberg, 2017). We would, therefore,
argue that a pleasant manual intervention delivered within the
context of a positive therapeutic encounter, which is underpinned
by eﬀective verbal and non-verbal communication strategies, is
apt to facilitate the revision of generative models in the following
sense. The therapeutic setting provides sensory evidence in
all the sensory modalities necessary to update a generative
model of the embodied self. Crucially, these not only include
the usual exteroceptive cues that allow the patient to infer
intentional stance of the therapist but, crucially proprioceptive
and interoceptive (e.g., aﬃliative touch) evidence that pertains
directly to the patient’s body and its responses. Although touch
is central to osteopathy and other healthcare professions such as
physiotherapy, chiropractic and nursing, evidence from the ﬁeld
of musculoskeletal care demonstrates that other environmental
elements or exteroceptive cues (aka “contextual factors”) as verbal
and non-verbal communication within the patient-practitioner
dyad, can nonetheless shape the context aimed at updating the
patient’s generative model (Palese et al., 2019; Rossettini et al.,
2020; Thomson and Rossettini, 2021).
Despite the challenges associated with the nature and strength
of clinical evidence regarding the eﬀectiveness of osteopathic
manipulative treatment for musculoskeletal disorders, little is
known regarding the impact that touch is having on the patient’s
nervous system during osteopathic procedures and its impact
on, for example, pain modulation, autonomic nervous system
function and emotional processing (McGlone et al., 2017). In a
study investigating the eﬀect of 5 min of CT aﬀerent optimal
velocity stroking touch to 5 min of static touch on the heart
rate and oxygen saturation levels on a cohort of preterm infants
between 28- and 37-weeks gestational age, Manzotti et al. (2019)
found that CT aﬀerent touch produced a signiﬁcant decrease
in infants’ heart-rates and increase in their blood oxygenation
levels, thus reducing their autonomic arousal. In a cohort of
asymptomatic adults, Tamburella et al. (2019) found a decrease
of resting cerebral perfusion immediately after osteopathic
treatment in a cluster of brain regions comprising the Posterior
Cingulate Cortex and the Superior Parietal Lobe; while Posterior
Cingulate Cortex perfusion increased signiﬁcantly after 3 days
post-osteopathic treatment. Given the Posterior Cingulate Cortex
key role in the Central Autonomic Network, the authors speculate
that the observed change in its perfusion might indicate an
osteopathic dependent sympathovagal modulation (Tamburella
et al., 2019). In another neuroimaging study in patients with
chronic low back pain, the osteopathic treatment led to a
distinct and speciﬁc reduction in cerebral perfusion in speciﬁc
interoceptive areasóbilateral insula, anterior cingulate cortex,
left striatum and right medial frontal gyrus (Cerritelli et al., 2020).
The changes observed in the insular cortex, corroborate the
hypothesis previously proposed that osteopathic treatment might
exploit an interoceptive paradigm, which may explain some of
its clinical eﬀects (D’Alessandro et al., 2016). Finally, recently
published data from the same cohort of chronic low back pain
suﬀerers, revealed that the left posterior insula is a speciﬁc target
of the osteopathic treatment eﬀect (Cerritelli et al., 2021a). The
authors argue that osteopathic care might produce a signiﬁcant
change in cerebral activity, speciﬁcally on key areas related to
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 5
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
the Central Autonomic Network and therefore to interoception
and interoceptive control (Cerritelli et al., 2021a). Taken together,
the results of these studies across the lifespan demonstrate
osteopathic and touch speciﬁc neurobiological correlates that
could arguably be interpreted through the lens of (En)active
inference, i.e., considering the whole person and the dynamic
interactions with their environment. Crucially, the interactions
with the environment which enact the patients’ experiences
are dependent on contextual factors and communication
between patient and practitioner. From a predictive processing
standpoint, cues in the environment and personality variables
are likely to shape the perception of touch even before the
touch occurs (Sailer and Leknes, 2022). Geri et al. (2019) have
argued that in physiotherapy, the practitioner’s hands, while
meeting the patient’s expectations, also provide the vehicle to
non-verbally communicate meaningful signals to the patient’s
brain, modulate their pain and regulate their emotions. Although
touch plays a central role in osteopathy and manual therapy
in general, therapeutic interventions should be framed within
a contemporary multidimensional, neurophysiologically based
(and arguably psychologically informed) model of care, which
avoids dependence on a predominantly passive approach (Rabey
et al., 2017). We argue that clinicians could critically consider
the value of an (En)active inference framework that does not
focus on one system or component of a model (e.g., biological,
psychological or social factors) in isolation. Person-centred care
should be truly focused on the whole organic person rather than
on the mechanisms operating within the body (Tyreman, 2018b).
In osteopathy, there are positive attempts to integrate existing
models of care in a person-centred framework (e.g., Smith,
2019; Castagna et al., 2021). Notwithstanding these positive
developments, empirical research is needed to develop further
and validate these putative conceptual frameworks.
Bayesian Brain, Persistent Physical
Symptoms and the Sense of Self
Predictive Coding, Predictive Processing, and the
Bayesian Brain
Predictive coding, which has its origins in the work of Helmholtz
(1867), is based on the premise that a system, such as the
brain, possesses an internal model of the causes of its sensory
input. What we perceive is always a delicate balance of top-
down knowledge-based prediction and bottom-up sensory input
(Clark, 2013). Thus, assuming that its current perceptual beliefs
are accurate, the perceptual system repeatedly predicts what it
should observe next (Friston, 2005; Kiebel et al., 2008; Bastos
et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2021). Predictive coding updates
perceptual beliefs when there is a discrepancy between sensory
evidence and predicted sensory input; this discrepancy allows
for the calculation of a “prediction error” (Smith et al., 2021).
In predictive coding theory, prediction errors are used to guide
belief updating and determine the smallest change in perceptual
beliefs necessary to minimize error signals; this is referred to
as Bayesian belief updating or inference (Smith et al., 2021).
Notably, predictive coding is primarily concerned with making
predictions about the connections between sensory evidence
and the generative model based on the current state of the
world rather than with anticipating the future. Much of the
work on predictive coding has been absorbed into the more
general theory of predictive processing. Predictive processing has
emerged as a leading theoretical framework in cognitive science
and philosophy of mind over the last few years (Hohwy, 2020). In
eﬀect, it basically extends the predictive coding paradigm to cover
the consequences of actionómoving from purely perceptual
inference to active inference.
According to predictive processing, the brain is a homeostatic
machine that is primarily capable of making sub-personal
(Bayesian) statistical inferences (Clark, 2013). On this view,
the brain is a hierarchical, multilevel predictive machine whose
primary function is to anticipate the distal causes of internal and
external sensory stimuli and minimize the discrepancy between
the prediction and the received stimulus’s occurring signal (Clark,
2013, 2015). Crucially, these causes include action; either motor
action or autonomic action, causing changes in proprioceptive
and interoceptive sensations, respectively. Thus, perception is
an active process: brains predict and test their hypotheses
against incoming sensory evidence rather than merely reacting
to the world (Friston, 2009). Anticipation and action consist of
making bidirectional inferences. At hierarchically lower-levels
of processing, the brain uses its generative model to make
predictions about the incoming interoceptive, proprioceptive and
exteroceptive input (Friston, 2005; Smith et al., 2019). When
the sensory input does not match the prediction, the lower-level
levels broadcast a prediction-error signal to the upper levels of
neural processing that drive changes in the generative model
(Clark, 2013; Smith et al., 2019). In the upper levels of neural
processing (e.g., secondary sensory and association cortices), by
updating its generative model, the brain better predicts how
the lower-level inputs will change; thereby resolving lower-
level prediction errors (Friston, 2009; Clark, 2013; Smith et al.,
2019). Diﬀerences between the predictions and the lower-level
expectations are calculated, and only residual “prediction errors”
are sent forward (and sideways) to generate better forecasts to
drive inference and learning (Clark, 2013, 2015). In short, the
minimization of prediction error can be accomplished through
perceptual inference and active inference . Whereas perceptual
inference involves updating the generative model based on
prediction errors; active inference is a process whereby the agent
acts on the world to create the sensations it predicts or anticipates
(Venter, 2021). In sum, active inference oﬀers an expressive
framework within which to understand health and unhealth
across the lifespan and, arguably, in providing person-centred
osteopathic care.
The Self and the Sense of Agency
We do not need to think about our embodied organism when
we are healthyóour “invisible” bodies provide us with familiar,
sensorial pleasures through our daily activities and interactions
with the environment and others (Arika, 2019). Our brain
uses the body to sample and make sense of sensory input,
thus contributing to our sense of self. Therefore, brains are
embodiedóthey communicate with their environment via an
“invisible” body. Moreover, the brain is embedded in and in
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 6
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
constant interaction with its environmentóan environment
that often contains other embodied brains (Seth, 2021). One
could therefore argue that a brain that is not embodied and
embedded in the natural world would be incapable of supporting
the phenomenologically rich and detailed experiences that
we typically enjoy (Kirchhoﬀ and Kiverstein, 2019). Although
“our conscious experiences of the world and the self are forms
of brain-based predictions, which arise with, through, and
because of our living bodies” (Seth, 2021), the sense of self
is a deeply phenomenological, multilevel perception. Crucially,
human selfhood includes the embodied self óthe sense of having
a body , the perspectival self óthe ability to perceive the world
from a ﬁrst-person perspective, the volitional self óthe sense of
agency, the narrative self óthe sense of personal identity, and the
social self ólinked to the way in which we are perceived by, and
interact with others (Seth, 2021; Figure 1).
While this multilevel sense of self is necessary for
understanding who we are and how we feel, human life is largely
deﬁned by goal-oriented activities within an environment.
Crucially, we are agentsóor actorsówho, through our
participation, shape our reality. Rather than perceiving ourselves
to know ourselves, we perceive ourselves to control ourselves
(Seth, 2021). As agents, our conscious experiences are thus
formed through direct interaction withóand exploration
ofóthe environment (Kirchhoﬀ and Kiverstein, 2019). We
anticipate ourselves into existence. Thus, agency can be deﬁned
as an organism’s or system’s capacity to perform goal-directed
or intentional actionsóagency is demonstrated whenever an
individual acts independently in their environment or when
they act under speciﬁc goals (Kauﬀman, 2000; Barandiaran
et al., 2009; Segundo-Ortin, 2020). Therefore, an agent should
model itself as an active agent capable of selectively interacting
with its environment (Bruineberg, 2017). This implies a sense
of agency, i.e., the ability of the system to infer the sensory
consequences of an action based on prior experiences (Friston
et al., 2013; Deane et al., 2020). Although action entails speciﬁc
types of movement, it is more than that (Gallagher, 2020).
Not all actions are conscious, but they can be embodied and
unconscious. Importantly, in a state of health and “invisibility”
of the body, the sense of agency and self do not require the agent
to consciously attend to the motor details of their own bodily
movements as they are engaged in action (Gallagher, 2020). From
an enactivist perspective, perception and cognition are action-
orientedótherefore, when one perceives something, perceives it
as actionable, i.e., something one can reach or not; or something
one can pick up or not (Gallagher, 2020). The ability to operate
as agents, thus creating our reality through anticipation and
participation, is a crucial factor that undergirds our physical
and emotional wellbeing. Through this lens, osteopaths make
a professional judgment about where the person’s relationship
FIGURE 1 |Multilevel representation of human selfhood according to Seth (2021). Embodied self—the sense of having a body, perspectival self—the ability to
perceive the world from a ﬁrst-person perspective, volitional self—the sense of agency, narrative self—the sense of personal identity, social self—linked to the way in
which we are perceived by, and interact with others.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 7
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
with their environment has broken down and what is preventing
them from realising full productive agency (Tyreman, 2018a).
The sign of becoming well is to regain agency and take one’s part
in the world again.
Persistent Physical Symptoms Through the Lens of
Predictive Processing
Persistent pain is a pervasive, complex, and distressing problem
for individuals and society, accounting for the majority of
disability and disease burden globally (GBD 2016 Disease and
Injury Incidence and Prevalence Collaborators, 2017; Mills et al.,
2019). Despite persistent pain’s global prevalence, its causes
and underlying mechanisms remain unclear. A growing body
of evidence indicates that persistent pain is a complex web of
sensory and emotional experiences coupled with behavioural
adaptations (Vachon-Presseau et al., 2016). In the case of chronic
low back pain, evidence indicates that the transition from acute
to persistent pain is facilitated by disruptions in the brain reward
system’s mesocorticolimbic circuitry (Vachon-Presseau et al.,
2016; Yu et al., 2020). In persistent pain states, the brain has
learned to ﬁlter emotions, actions, and reward through the lens of
pain, causing the brain to develop an addiction to pain (Vachon-
Presseau et al., 2016). As a result, eﬀective treatment strategies
must address this maladaptive neuroplasticity. Although a
recent neuroimaging study demonstrated beneﬁcial eﬀects of
osteopathic treatment on the interoceptive system of patients
with persistent low back pain (Cerritelli et al., 2020, 2021a),
additional research is necessary to fully understand the role of
osteopathic care in reversing chronic pain-related maladaptive
neuroplasticity. Indeed, it is improbable that osteopathic care
models centred on the “body” would successfully address the
conundrum of persistent pain and other physical symptoms.
Many believe that biopsychosocially informed person-centred
care is a viable solution to the problem. On the other hand,
the biopsychosocial model remains ambiguous in its ability to
precisely describe the nature of interactions between the various
systems (De Haan, 2020a,b). As a result, osteopathic care must
be conceptualised in terms of the agent’s relationship to their
internal and external environments.
While the body “disappears” in states of health and wellbeing,
it typically “reappears” at times of pain and dysfunction (Leder,
1990, p. 4). Therefore, physical or emotional pain aﬀects the
very foundation on which the sense of self rests (Arika, 2019).
The physiological arousal, which occurs in persistent pain and
other persistent physical symptoms, prompts the individual to
focus attention on their body (Van den Bergh et al., 2017).
In this context, pain and other physical symptoms should be
viewed as an action problemówhen a nociceptive signal travels
up from the periphery via the spinal cord, it presents the brain
with the question, “what is to be done”? (Morrison et al., 2013).
The nervous system is organized to anticipate potential pain
and adjust behaviour before tissue damage becomes critical.
Regulatory processes occur dynamically at diﬀerent levels and
in a Bayesian way, i.e., using previous experiences as they are
represented in the brain as an estimate of the likelihood that
a speciﬁc clinical condition applies (Morrison et al., 2013; Van
den Bergh et al., 2018). A critical point in cases of pain and
dysfunction is that the body does not simply become “visible”ó
it becomes the focus of attention. This selective attention to
the body disrupts the individual’s ability to interact with the
environment and others, i.e., their sense of agency. Arguably,
illness becomes a loss of agencyóthe person’s inability to
perform goal-oriented actions in the usual expected way marks
the beginning of becoming a patient. In predictive processing
formulations of active inference, the deployment of attention
is generally thought of as covert action. Technically, attention
boosts certain prediction errors thereby increasing their inﬂuence
on belief updating at higher hierarchical levels. This boost rests
on an estimation of the precision or conﬁdence that can be
placed certain prediction errors. In other words, prediction
errors are weighted by a prediction of predictability. Many active
inference formulations of chronic pain emphasise this attentional
aspect. Put simply, chronic pain represents the hypothesis “I am
in pain”— a hypothesis that is veriﬁed by selectively attending
to appropriate sources of sensory evidence; primarily, in the
interoceptive and nociceptive domain. Expressed in this way,
therapeutic revision of a self-model rests on exploring alternative
hypotheses (i.e., self-models) that generate a diﬀerent attentional
setóand a diﬀerent precision weighting of prediction errors.
On this view, pain and “illness” are not attributes of
sensations, but they are carefully crafted narratives over long
periods of suﬀering and engagement with one’s body and
healthcare practitioner. They are the best explanations at hand
for what one is experiencing. When one thinks of pain or
dysfunction, it is not so much the content and prior beliefs
that underwrite their commitment to their narrative that they
suﬀer from chronic pain. Instead, it is the fact that they cannot
attend away from the information or the sensory evidence
that has to be explained in that way (Edwards et al., 2012).
Individuals with persistent pain and other physical symptoms are
unable to ignore, attend away or attenuate selectively diﬀerent
sources of sensory evidence in order to deploy precision in
the context of selective attention or to attenuate or augment it
in the context of sensory attenuation (Friston, 2009; Edwards
et al., 2012; Pareés et al., 2014). Crucially, individuals have
to decide what to attenuate or what to attend to actively.
From a precision weighting standpoint, attention refers to the
optimization of the precision of prior beliefs regarding the
causes of sensory data concerning the precision of those data
(Adams et al., 2013; Vasil et al., 2020). Attentional selection
is complemented by the attenuation of precision, known as
sensory attenuation, i.e., attending away from or ignoring certain
sensations, particularly the ones produced by ourselves (Vasil
et al., 2020). The attenuation of sensory precision corresponds
eﬀectively to attending away from the consequences of action
(Edwards et al., 2012; Brown et al., 2013; Pareés et al., 2014).
From a predictive coding perspective, sensory attenuation is
considered a particular case of optimizing sensory data precision
thought to be encoded by the gain of neuronal populations
encoding prediction errors (Friston and Frith, 2015). Sensory
attenuation can be illustrated by our inability to perceive optical
ﬂow produced by saccadic eye movements. When visual motion
or ﬂow is produced exogenously, for example, by gently palpating
the eyeball, they can be perceived; however, the same does not
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 8
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
occur when produced by oculomotor action. This is known as
saccadic suppression.
Our brain’s predictions rest on internal models of the body
in the world, which are constructed via Bayesian inferences
constrained by sensory inputs, from which all perceptions and
actions emerge (Barrett et al., 2016). When faced with persistent
pain and other physical symptoms, the brain has to produce an
account of the information that is generated by somatic input
(Van den Bergh et al., 2018). Symptoms arise from unconscious
inferential processes concerning the nature of interoceptive
sensations, while taking into account implicit beliefs and
actionsóthis induces a sense of being real, regardless of the
actual somatic input (Henningsen et al., 2018a,b). Consequently,
the relationship between symptoms and bodily dysfunction can
be highly variable. This relationship may be completely absent
in conditions that are typically characterised by highly precise
prior expectations and low precision unpredicted somatic input
(Henningsen et al., 2018a,b). Arguably, persistent pain and other
physical symptoms are the results of a mismatch between the
prediction of pain (= p(pain | sensation)) and the likelihood
of pain (= p(sensation | pain)). Individuals tend to interpret
harmlessóor irrelevantósensations as the consequences of their
symptoms and suﬀering. It is not a failure to shift attention away
from the sensation that is a meaningless noise (Hechler et al.,
2016). It is instead a failure of dis-attention than a failure of
attentionóa loss of ability to attenuate. It is a loss of capacity
to render one’s body as invisible. Thus, bodily symptoms should
be considered in the context of “action and attention selection
dynamics”(Pezzulo et al., 2019).
In patients with persistent pain and other physical symptoms,
a growing number of authors propose that predictive processing
models are ideally suited to explain the unique individual
experience and hence provide truly patient-centred care (Van
den Bergh et al., 2017; Ongaro and Kaptchuk, 2019). It has
been argued that the application of predictive processing theory
to symptom generation and bodily distress promises to bridge
the gap between epistemology and mechanistic common-sense
approachesóthey eliminate the idea of a homunculus in the
mind, which does the perceiving, and replacing it with statistical
processes of predictions based on likelihood estimation (Van den
Bergh et al., 2018). However, pain is embodied and embedded and
represents a protective mechanismói.e., an action problemó
which emerges from ongoing interaction between the body and
the world (Tabor et al., 2017, 2020). Therefore, in the context of
persistent physical symptoms, it is crucial that models of care
based on predictive coding mechanisms also consider the role
of active inference in symptom perception and the underlying
psychopathological conditions (Pezzulo et al., 2019).
Touch and Osteopathy in Early Life and
Childhood - Shaping the Sense of Self
and Agency
The ﬁrst years of life are marked by rapid brain development
and learning. It is challenging for young infants to develop
the abilities necessary to navigate their complex environment.
They must make sense of their actions by observing the
proprioceptive eﬀects of their body movements. Simultaneously,
they must develop a fundamental understanding of the
behaviour of physical and social entities in their environment.
On a physiological level, this learning process is based on
the continuous formation and pruning of connections in
neuronal networks, which enables infants to interpret sensory
information and translate it into appropriate behavioural
responses increasingly sophisticatedly. Improved causal learning
(Lagnado and Sloman, 2002), self-other distinction (Jeannerod,
2004; Tsakiris et al., 2007), and social and moral interactions are
all possible as a result of this capability (Caspar et al., 2016).
Infants can learn to use their movements to perform coordinated,
intentional actions within a given environment by developing a
sense of agency and using their bodies to accomplish goals at an
even more fundamental level.
The literature abounds with evidence that human infants
construct probabilistic models to represent statistical regularities
in their environment (Ruﬀman et al., 2012; Gopnik and Bonawitz,
2015). Early accounts of motor control appeal to predictive
processing and prediction errors in the form of comparator
models (Blakemore et al., 2002). Sensory prediction is believed
to be based on eﬀerent signals (i.e., the motor command)
and is compared to aﬀerent sensory signals. According to the
(updated) comparator model theory of agency, whenever the
predicted and actual outcomes "match" (i.e., are congruent),
this serves as a cue for babies to experience a sense of agency
(Zaadnoordijk et al., 2019). The degree of congruence vs.
incongruence between predicted and actual sensory outcomes
is critical for “experienced” agency (Sato and Y asuda, 2005).
It appears, therefore, reasonable to assume that the infant’s
brain uses statistical learning principles to make predictions
about basic environmental contingencies, which is necessary for
the predictive processing framework’s fundamental assumptions
about the formation and optimization of predictive models.
The neonatal period is a time of signiﬁcant
neurodevelopment, and thus a time when the level and
type of social interaction may signiﬁcantly inﬂuence future
social behaviour (Porges and Furman, 2011; Meredith, 2015) and
internal models. Touch is critical for nurturing and attachment
during development (Walker and McGlone, 2013, for a review)
and many social and dyadic interactions in adulthood, with
well-documented beneﬁts to health and well-being (House
et al., 1988; Berscheid, 2003). Studies demonstrate that tactile
nurturing interactions in the neonatal period on adult behaviour
and sensitization to neuropeptides (such as oxytocin and
arginine vasopressin) positively inﬂuence aﬃliation, aggression,
sociosexual behaviour, parental behaviour, and stress reactions
(Cushing and Kramer, 2005). As new-born infants and caregivers
are in close physical proximity, this increases their growth and
development through numerous physiological, behavioural, and
neuropsychological metrics (Spitz, 1945; Harlow and Harlow,
1962; Kuhn and Schanberg, 1998).
There has been increasing interest in and growing use of
various touch-based therapies over the past half-century. This
growing interest and clinical use are supported by substantial
research showing the beneﬁts of touch and massage during
pregnancy and in the postpartum period (Harrison et al., 2000;
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 9
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
Guzzetta et al., 2009; Procianoy et al., 2010; Parashar et al., 2016;
Manzotti et al., 2019). Despite advances in understanding how
touch is connected to perinatal care, solid evidence is still lacking,
and ﬁndings are conﬂicting.
Arguably, osteopathic diagnosis and care and the associated
therapeutic relationships between clinicians and their patients
depend sensitively on a patient’s and therapist’s sense of touch.
Despite the centrality of touch in osteopathy, little is known
about the eﬀects of touch on the infant’s nervous system during
osteopathic procedures in both early life and childhood. Recently
published research provides preliminary evidence on the eﬀect of
osteopathic treatment on preterm infants’ heart rate and oxygen
saturation (Manzotti et al., 2020), thus highlighting the putative
role of osteopathic care in modulating physiological parameters
such as autonomic function in the new-born. Considering that
the primary function of the nervous system is to manage
allostasis, i.e., predicting the physiological needs for survival
(Barrett, 2020), these recent research ﬁndings may suggest
a putative role for osteopathic care in supporting allostatic
regulation in preterm infants.
Considering that touch, in all its manifestations, may be
regarded as a direct interaction channel with the infant, who may
use touch to explore their external and internal environment in
novel ways, we can hypothesize that by modifying proprioceptive
and interoceptive sensations, generative (self) models are
modiﬁed and updated, thereby aﬀecting the development
of the sense of self. The models are then compared to
environmental predictions, updating the sense of agency, and
ultimately generating actions that resolve uncertainty about
the updated model.
Beyond Body-Centred Models of Care:
Enactivism and Sense-Making
Human beings possess an ever-changing capacity to adapt to
their environment. Crucially, each one of us creates our own
Umwelt (an environment or “life-world” that is unique to us) as
a combined creature-environment “bubble” out of those features
perceived to be uniquely relevant to its own purposes (Tyreman,
2018a). Therefore, the dynamical interplay of causal factors, the
person and their own Umwelt make the prediction of illness
and dysfunction diﬃcultóattributing cause and eﬀect can be
challenging. As such, delivering high quality person-centred
osteopathic care is arduous and requires a deeper understanding
of the patient as a dynamic, complex adaptive system. Osteopathy
cannot simply be conceptualised as a body-centred intervention
informed by aetiological models of care: human functioning is
complex, unique to the person and unpredictable. Rather than
considering their individual patient’s clinical presentation as a
set of complex aetiological cause-eﬀect relationships, health and
disease should be seen in relation to life and the person within
their environment (Hoover, 1963; Tyreman, 2018a). Osteopaths
should therefore evaluate the person seeking care within an
inconstant ecological system (Tyreman, 2018a).
Despite the complexity and unpredictability of human
selfhood and functionówhich led Hoover (1963) to
propose that osteopathy should be regarded as ecological
medicineóosteopaths have long focused on the fallacy that
removing a structural cause of dysfunction could cure disease.
This aetiological model is, for many, an attractive way of
approximating osteopathy from orthodox medicine. However,
it has been argued that it is far from what Andrew Taylor Still
originally envisaged for osteopathyóa way of addressing changes
that interfered with an individual’s function and their impact on
their activities of daily living (Hoover, 1963). In recent years,
several attempts have been made to move away from heavy
reliance on aetiological structure-function models of care, by
endorsing the biopsychosocial model as the foundation for
person-centred osteopathic care (Penney, 2013; Thomson et al.,
2013; Esteves et al., 2020). Notwithstanding the centrality of the
biopsychosocial model in contemporary healthcare practice, the
model does have its own limitations. It has been argued that
the biopsychosocial model has been bio-medicalised, lacks a
framework that integrates all dimensions in a non-reductionist
manner, and it fails to show how its dimensions interrelate
(Stilwell and Harman, 2019; De Haan, 2020a,b). To address these
limitations of the biopsychosocial model, an enactive approach
to acute and chronic pain and mental health disorders has been
proposed (Stilwell and Harman, 2019; De Haan, 2020a,b; Coninx
and Stilwell, 2021). In line with these recent developments, we
have also recently proposed enactivism as a robust framework to
underpin the development of an integrative model for person-
centred care in osteopathy (Bohlen et al., 2021; Zegarra-Parodi
et al., 2021).
Enactivism is a perspective in embodied cognitive science,
commonly known as being part of the 4E approaches which
argue that mental processes are embodied, embedded, enacted,
and extended (Rowlands, 2010; Thompson, 2010; Arandia and
Di Paolo, 2021). Enactivism rejects an inner-outer division of
mind and world and therefore considers organisms as co-arising
and co-determining with their environment. As such, organisms
and their world are dynamically coupled, i.e., living beings rely
on a constant exchange with their environment to maintain
themselves (De Haan, 2020a,b). The enactive paradigm is deﬁned
by ﬁve core conceptsó autonomy, sense-making, embodiment,
emergence, and experience (De Jaegher and Di Paolo, 2007).
For our thesis, we will brieﬂy focus on two critical concepts:
Autonomy and sense-making.
Autonomy is a necessary and suﬃcient condition to speak
of an individual system (Varela, 1979; Di Paolo, 2005; Di Paolo
and Thompson, 2014; Segundo-Ortin, 2020; Arandia and Di
Paolo, 2021). In systemic terms, autonomous systems such as
organisms are deﬁned as operationally closed and precarious
networks of mutually enabling processes. Moreover, they are
self-constituting (self-producing and self-distinguishing), depend
on active engagements with the external enabling relations,
and can exist at diﬀerent scales from metabolic and immune
system activity to nervous, sensorimotor, and social dynamics
(Arandia and Di Paolo, 2021). The most basic form of autonomy
can be seen in autopoiesisóthe capacity of living systems to
generate and keep their identity as distinct from the environment
(Segundo-Ortin, 2020). Autopoiesis and adaptivity are critical
to the self-organization and autonomy of living beings (Varela,
1997; De Haan, 2020b). According to Di Paolo (2005, p. 439)
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 10
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
“Autopoiesis provides a self-distinct physical system that can be
the centre of a perspective on the world, and a self-maintained,
precarious network of processes that generates an either-or
normative condition. Adaptivity allows the system to appreciate
its encounters with respect to this condition, its own death, in a
graded and relational manner while it is still alive .”. From an
osteopathic perspective, it can be argued that the concepts of
autonomy, autopoiesis and adaptivity are fully aligned with the
concepts of body-mind unity, self-regulation and adaptation.
Another fundamental notion of enactivism is sense-makingó
the evaluative interaction between an organism and its
environment (De Haan, 2020a,b). More formally, sense-making
is deﬁned as the capacity of an autonomous system to regulate its
operation adaptively and its relationship with the environment
depending on the virtual consequences for its viability as a form
of life (Di Paolo et al., 2018). Sense-making is, therefore, critical
to living, is embodied and embedded, implies values (metabolic),
is aﬀective, and can be reﬂexive (existential sense-making) (De
Haan, 2020a,b). The combination of precarious autonomy,
sense-making, and adaptivity underpin perception, action,
emotion and cognition (Arandia and Di Paolo, 2021). Being
a sense-maker implies being ready to selectively act on the
aﬀordances provided by the environment, which are relevant to
maintain autonomyósense-making is paramount to understand
agency (Segundo-Ortin, 2020). The enactive approach interprets
organisms as co-arising and co-determining with their (social)
environment. Arguably, the clinical encounter can be seen as a
form of social environment, and the development of a robust
therapeutic alliance can be regarded as a form of participatory
sense-making. Participatory sense-making is deﬁned as “ the
coordination of intentional activity in interaction, whereby
individual sense-making processes are aﬀected and new domains
of social sense-making can be generated that were not available
to each individual on her own .” (De Jaegher and Di Paolo, 2007,
p. 497). Meaning emerges through these interactions, and it is
linked to embodied agency and experience, history, and situation,
with sensorimotor agency arising from perception-action loops.
Investigating how these loops contribute to the development
of a solid therapeutic alliance, how they are aﬀected by pain
and disability considering the three entangled dimensions of
embodiment (organic/physiological, sensorimotor/psychological
and intersubjective/social), and how to develop strategies for
increasing part of the agency lost is crucial to person-centred
osteopathic care.
From an enactivist standpoint, therapeutic interventions may
be used to increase insight, i.e., helping patients recognise what
they are feeling and their dominant patterns of sense-making (De
Haan, 2020b). The clinical encounter provides opportunities to
recognise inﬂexible and inappropriate patterns of interaction and
rehearse diﬀerent strategies to engage with the world, oneself and
others, in what can be described as participatory sense-making
(De Haan, 2020a).
ACTIVE INFERENCE
Osteopaths seek to understand the nature of their patient’s
breakdown in adaptive capacity to inform how osteopathy may
improve their adaptability and, therefore, their return to health
and wellbeing. Arguably, some of the osteopathic core conceptsó
unity, self-regulation and adaptationóalign with the enactivist
account, namely with the concepts of autopoiesis and sense-
making. Although enactivists argue that autopoiesis and sense-
making are central to understanding basic and non-basic minds,
it is also critical to understand the continuity between life and
mind through the lens of the free energy principle (FEP) (Wiese
and Friston, 2021). The FEP provides a formal analysis of the
properties central to autopoiesis and sense-making with active
inferenceóand is instantiated by all systems with a Markov
Blanket (Wiese and Friston, 2021).
Under the FEP , dynamical systems, given suﬃciently stable
boundary conditions, spontaneously self-organize to minimize
their expected variational free energy, eﬀectively maximizing
evidence for the world model they enact (Friston et al., 2013).
The autonomy of living systems is regarded as necessary
condition that allows their behaviour described in terms of
inference and free energy minimization (Allen and Friston, 2018;
Kiverstein, 2020). Although FEP fully endorses the Bayesian
brain hypothesis, the only way we can alter the shape of things,
i.e., bound entropy production, is to act on the worldóthis
is what distinguishes the FEP from predictive coding (Friston
et al., 2018). Therefore, through active inferenceói.e., through
perception-action loops in which the organism engages with
the relevant aﬀordances of its environmentóthat the organism
maintains a distinction between itself and the environment
(Kiverstein, 2020). The organism just is an actively maintained
boundaryótechnically known as a Markov Blanketóseparating
the external environment from its internal dynamics through
active inference (Friston et al., 2013; Hohwy, 2016; Kiverstein,
2020). Markov Blankets mediate the exchange between internal
and external states and thereby imply perception-action loops,
as the organism engages with the relevant aﬀordances of its
environment (Kiverstein, 2020). Crucially, active inference is
not simply a description of the embodied brain reducing
the uncertainty about its sensory observations via perceptual
inferenceóit concerns the active and selective sampling of the
world by an embodied agent (Ramstead et al., 2019). Creatures
are open, complex dynamic systems and changes to one aspect
of the self are likely to result in eddies and ripples of disorder,
that might lead to a person becoming a patient. Understanding
the FEPóas foundational for active inferenceóis therefore
central to our thesis.
Active Inference and Generative Models
- Free Energy Principle and Markov
Blankets
According to the FEP , any adaptive change made by a biological
system or organism must minimize its long-term average
surprise, i.e., its unpredicted sensations or prediction errors
(Edwards et al., 2012). Organisms must therefore behave in a
way that maintains themselves in the low entropy states they
expect to be in. This is achieved by minimizing a measurable
approximation to the entropy of these states, i.e., free energy
(Seth, 2021). A failure to minimize free energy would lead
to a progressive increase in entropy (sensory disorder) and
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 11
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
violate the principles of self-organization and homoeostasis
(Edwards et al., 2012). As noted above, minimizing free energy
or prediction errors requires the organism to have a hierarchical
generative model of how sensations (exteroceptive, interoceptive
and proprioceptive) are caused (Edwards et al., 2012; Seth,
2021). Biological systems then use these models to reduce the
diﬀerence between predicted and actual sensory signals, either
by changing sensory samples through actionó active inferenceó
or by changing the predictions through perceptionó perceptual
inference (Edwards et al., 2012; Friston et al., 2013; Seth,
2021). Through the lens of FEP , predictive coding, active and
interoceptive inference can, in their entirety, be understood as
ﬂowing from a critical constraint on what it means to be alive,
on what it means to exist (Seth, 2021).
Active inference is a “ﬁrst principles” approach to
understanding sentient behaviouróperception, planning,
and action in terms of probabilistic inferenceóframed as a
single imperative to minimize free energy (Parr et al., 2022).
The FEP reﬂects the enactivist account of cognitionóembedded,
extended, embodied, and enactive. Importantly, active inference
is about the consequences of action in the future. Therefore, it
goes beyond predictive coding. The objective is not simply to
use a generative model to infer the latent or hidden states that
cause sensations but to act in a way that minimizes expected
surprise, i.e., entropy or uncertainty (Friston et al., 2020). In
short, in active inference, the agent adjusts to their environment
by acting upon or changing the world to bring about the state
of the world predicted by the current best generative model
(Venter, 2021).
The FEP is a principle of least action, which describes
dynamics in terms of the most likely paths any system will
take. It entails separating the states of some universe into the
(internal) states owned by an agent and those (external) states
that are not, and the (blanket) states that mediate the exchange
between them. Self-organizing systems are attracted to certain
states or speciﬁc paths, and this attraction can be described in
terms of active inference. In active inference, the self-organizing
system corresponds to the internal states, which via the active
and sensory states aﬀect and are aﬀected by the environment,
i.e., the external states (Figure 2). Ultimately, a system that self-
organizes is a system that minimizes free energy (Parr, 2020; Parr
et al., 2020; Hipólito et al., 2021). The relationship between active
inference and FEP is operationally simpleóactive inference is
the application of the FEP to a particular system. Importantly,
when talking about self-organizing systems, we should not just
talk about an organism or agent but also about, for example,
the interoceptive or the neuroendocrine-immune systems. These
systems, which are crucial to understanding adaptation and
osteopathic care, can be conceived as self-organizing systems with
their local environment, states, and Markov Blankets.
In summary, to exist, a system needs to have a degree
of independence from its embedding environment (Ramstead
et al., 2020a,b). A Markov Blanket (or Markov boundary) is a
set of states that separate the system’s internal states from its
embedding environment and mediate the interactions between
the inside and outside, thus inducing conditional independence
between internal and external variables. The absence of certain
connections deﬁnes the Markov Blanket: internal states do not
cause sensory states, and external states do not cause active states
(Ramstead et al., 2020a,b). Systems that possess a Markov Blanket
must have an implicit generative model. The generative model is
the only construct needed to describe self-organization, where the
systems dynamics or can be read as belief updating. Technically,
the free-energy and its generative model are not evaluated or
realized explicitly (Friston, 2012; Ramstead et al., 2019, 2020b).
This is because the dynamics of the internal states are driven
by free energy gradients. These free energy gradients are the
prediction errors above.
Active Inference as Enactive Inference-
Shared Intentionally, Ecological Niches
and Affordances
The organism, its body and brain, and the world constitute
the generative model. This can be seen as analogous to an
Umwelt, in which an organism’s world is a key component of
its embodiment (Allen and Friston, 2018). It can therefore be
argued that conscious experience is shaped by active inference
and rooted in embodied activity, coupling the agentóan
embodiment of a generative modelóto the world (Kirchhoﬀ
and Kiverstein, 2019). This generative model underwrites
the organism’s interactions with its environment to ensure
the maintenance of a robust brain-body-environment system
(Bruineberg et al., 2018). Under active inference, the generative
model itself never exists outside the organism’s adaptive actions
and policy selections. Therefore, the generative model can be
regarded as being enacted (Ramstead et al., 2020b). This view is
aligned with embodied and enactive approaches to cognition and
enables one to model the dialectic between embodiment (what
an organism is) and enactment (what an organism does). On
this view, the generative model is what the organism expects and
guides what the organism is and does (Ramstead et al., 2020b).
Active inference can therefore be viewed as enactive inference
(Ramstead et al., 2020b). (En)active inference is the process by
which dynamical systems autonomously enact adaptive agency
(Ramstead et al., 2020b).
Active inference enables an organism or an agent to adjust
to their environment to ﬁt their expectations, and therefore
construct their niche (Bruineberg et al., 2018; Constant et al.,
2018). In particular, agents build shared expectations through
engagement with everyday social and material aﬀordances,
allowing adaptive niche construction by, for example, thinking
through other minds (Laland et al., 2001; Boyd et al., 2011;
Veissière et al., 2020; Figure 3). Crucially, cognition is ecological,
and as such, it depends on the aﬀordances for action provided
by the environment, i.e., the ﬁeld of aﬀordances (Rietveld
et al., 2018). From a clinical perspective, the ecological-enactive
and active inference frameworks are nicely exempliﬁed by the
treatment of chronic pain above: pain underwrites embodied
action that reﬂects the uncertainty of body and world (Tabor et al.,
2017; Miyahara, 2021), which ultimately alters the interaction of
the organism or agent with the environment and, therefore, the
ﬁelds of aﬀordances either temporarily (acute pain) or long term
in persistent pain (Coninx and Stilwell, 2021).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 12
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
FIGURE 2 |Active inference. This Figure depicts the coupling of an agent’s internal states (the dynamics of which entail predictions or beliefs about the niche) to its
external states (the dynamics of the agent’s niche). Adapted with permission from Vasil et al. (2020).
FIGURE 3 |Thinking through other minds. The agent osteopath and the agent patient build shared expectations through engagement with the clinical encounter
social and material affordances, allowing adaptive niche construction by thinking through other minds. In the context of communication in clinical practice, coupled
dynamics are strengthened by an adaptive prior for alignment. The adaptive prior for alignment speciﬁes the characteristically enhanced precision of the hypothesis
that “we” exist. This prior motivates similar agents to actively couple their respective actions and perceptions. The coupling of perception and action enables the
osteopath and patient to reliably align with (i.e., infer) the hidden states of the other. This circular process brings about a process of cultural niche construction that
creates, maintains, and modiﬁes a set of predictable epistemic resources. These specify a set of high value (i.e., predictable) observation-policy mappings, which are
used to disambiguate the mental states of conspeciﬁcs. Effective communication plays a crucial role in enabling agents with an adaptive prior for alignment to
effectively disambiguate external states. An agent’s external states are constituted, in part, by the internal, mental states of another agent (and vice versa). This
follows from the fact that external states cause sensation; for an agent equipped with an adaptive prior for alignment, inferring external states entails inferring other
agents’ hidden states. Adapted with permission from Vasil et al. (2020).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 13
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
OSTEOPATHIC CARE AS (EN)ACTIVE
INFERENCE
Osteopathic care can be considered in terms of inference about
others, based on the notion that we model and predict our
sensationsósensations that other agents like ourselves generate.
This viewpoint leads to osteopathic care based on a generative
model or narrative shared by agents who exchange sensory
signals. The dyadic or participatory sense-making process is
informed by selectively attending and attenuating sensory
information. Attending to interoceptive, exteroceptive and
proprioceptive sensations enables agents to predict each other’s
sensory input. Conversely, attenuating relevant interoceptive
and exteroceptive input enables one to articulate the narrative
by realising proprioceptive predictions (e.g., movement). The
mental statesóhidden states of patients are not observable, and
they need to be inferred, and, arguably, osteopaths achieve
this through communication, touch, movement and exercise.
The dyadic relationship leads to forming an ecological niche
beyond the body itself, where alignment is fundamental. In what
follows, we build on the concepts introduced earlier to propose
an (En)active inference account for osteopathic care. It can be
argued that our proposed framework is not unique to osteopathy
but can in fact, inform clinical practice in other healthcare
professions such as physiotherapy and chiropractic, where touch
and manual therapy play a central role in patient evaluation and
care. Arguably, some of the diﬀerences in patient evaluation and
care may be related to the various professions’ theoretical and
philosophical conceptual frameworks. Although our proposals
have implications for patient care in other professions, we centre
our discussions on osteopathic care for the purpose of this paper.
Osteopathic Care as Participatory
Sense-Making, Shared Expectations,
Synchronisation and Shared Generative
Models
One can regard osteopathic care as an interactive process
through which the two complex, dynamic systems (i.e., patient
and practitioner)ówith the multilevel Markov Blanketsó
working together to establish shared narratives (including
body narratives). Contextual factors and verbal and non-verbal
communication strategies within the patient-practitioner dyadó
language and hands-on careóare bidirectional sign-vehicles of
active (providing sensory data) and sensory states (receiving
information). Hands-on strategies in osteopathy and other
healthcare professions are a unique form of communication,
which can be regarded as an interactive action-perception
dynamic loop of the two active inference systems.
From a clinical application standpoint, to understand and
support, for example, those suﬀering with persistent physical
symptoms, osteopaths should consciously create new priors
or alternative hypotheses for predicting sensory data and
establish new ways of sense-making. Arguably, our proposal
has implications for other healthcare professionals (e.g.,
physiotherapists and nurses) who are typically involved in
the care of individuals who have musculoskeletal disorders
(Rossettini et al., 2018; Palese et al., 2019). Operationally,
clinicians should, therefore, recognise inﬂexible and
inappropriate patterns of interaction and implement clinical
strategies for their patients to engage with the worldóall
depending on the context of their symptoms and their personality
(Von Mohr and Fotopoulou, 2018). We see osteopathic care,
and musculoskeletal care in general, as a dynamic interactive
ritual that aﬀords opportunities for reinterpreting sensory
signals, redeploying attentions, and attenuating and ignoring
the irrelevant sensory inputs. To this end, osteopathic and
musculoskeletal care should be conceived as participatory
sense-making (De Haan, 2020a).
Eﬀective communication, particularly touch-based strategies,
can establish the foundation for trust, compliance, cooperative
and prosocial communication (Morrison et al., 2010). Crucially,
hands-on care provides an eﬀective vehicle for conveying
one’s perceptions and thoughts, providing context and clarity,
and establishing interpersonal connection as well as inferring
another’s sensory, emotional, and mental states, thus facilitating
biobehavioural synchrony (Hertenstein et al., 2006; Mc Parlin
et al., 2022). The bidirectional response elicited by hands-on
and supported by eﬀective communication provides context for
the sensory stimuli by matching with the practitioner’s intention
to improve their patient’s symptoms, allostatic regulation, and
homeostatic control during treatment (Ackerley et al., 2014;
Song et al., 2021; Mc Parlin et al., 2022). We would argue that
osteopathic care underpinned by a robust therapeutic alliance
may facilitate the development of brain-to-brain synchrony
(Morrison et al., 2010), allostatic co-regulation (Atzil-Slonim
and Tschacher, 2020; Nguyen T. et al., 2021; Mc Parlin et al.,
2022), and therefore consolidating interpersonal relationships
(Shamay-Tsoory et al., 2019). Establishing synchrony is crucial to
the osteopathic clinical encounter because the multilevel shared
Markov Blanketsówith mutually predictive sensations generated
by the two agentsóprovide the grounds for a shared narrative
and epistemic trust, which are necessary to dissolve strong beliefs
and priors. In short, because you are me and I am you—and
therefore I can trust you, I believe my explanations and my
narrative about me, and if you are me, then your explanations,
your narrative about you must be ﬁt for purpose to explain me.
This also has substantial implications for musculoskeletal care in
generalópatients regard hands-on care as a fundamental element
of the patient-practitioner relationship, thus strongly requesting
them (Rossettini et al., 2018). Therefore, establishing synchrony
provides multiagent pro-dyad exchange within an established
ecological niche, where agents share a sensorium, a common
language, a narrative or a generative model.
‘Self-Flattening’ and Psychologically
Informed Osteopathic Care
As person-centred care, it is crucial that osteopaths shift away
from body-centred passive models of care, to consciously
consider the role of eﬀective communication, education
and reassuranceóthis could be conceived as psychologically
informed osteopathic care. From an (En)active inference
perspective, psychologically informed osteopathic care works
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 14
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
bidirectionallyóin providing the novel sensory data, hands-
on care inﬂuences the predictive processes from lower to
higher levels of hierarchical neuronal architectures, and in
revising the implicit generative models (new interpretations
and intentions), communication, education and reassurance
inﬂuences the predictive processes from higher to lower
levels. In this context, sensory signals caused by hands-on
care strategies will be instantly, and possibly self-evidently,
interpreted at the lower levels, with the reference to the
generative models being revised by the clinician’s narrative. This
can be regarded as “ﬂattening sensory data, ” i.e., by adapting
Limanowski and Friston’s (2020) concept of “self-ﬂattening”.
This is, arguably, the process by which psychologically informed
osteopathic care modiﬁes the active inference cycle by providing
a new way of sense-making with the patient’s selfhood by
selectively attending to interoceptive, exteroceptive and
proprioceptive sensations. It is therefore important to both
attenuate some forms of attention that are orchestrated by
the patient’s higher levels of their hierarchical generative
models. We would argue that robust psychologically informed
osteopathic care may provide patients with something like
deep mindful meditation experiences, which ﬂatten the
landscape of free energy through reducing the precision of
high-level prediction errorsóand implicitly the top-down
deployment of precision or attention to sensory prediction
errors.
In a state of health and wellbeing, our bodies are typically
invisible. In the case of pain and dysfunction our attention is
drawn toward our bodies, something that can be explained as
a failure of sensory attenuation. What was invisible and now
rendered visible, mandates for some explanation that we are
compelled to make sense of our world and thus ﬁnding an
explanation for this sensory evidence. Arguably, one has lost the
ability to switch on and oﬀ, that otherwise would have rendered
things invisible. Paradoxically, this is not a failure of attention, but
a failure of dis-attention. It is a failure in one’s ability to ignore,
and one is therefore compelled to ﬁnd explanations for their
personal experience. For example, when applied to interoception,
one can link this inability to attenuate precision of prediction
errors to hypersensitivity in terms of interoceptive accuracy.
From an osteopathic standpoint, we need to equip the patient,
or restore the patient’s ability to ignore, or at least to have
some volitional control to what they attend to. Directing the
patient’s attention to diﬀerent parts of their sensorium, and
directing it away from other aspects of their belief system or their
hierarchical generative model will enable the patient to revise
their model through perceptual and active inference. Ultimately,
osteopathic care may update interoceptive active inference
processes by updating the sensory inputs providing action-
executions (allostatic prediction errors) and therefore bringing
the system to update the homeostatic forecasting model (Bohlen
et al., 2021; Petzschner et al., 2021). This means that patients
have to learn new ways of attending toóand attenuatingó
proprioceptive and interoceptive signals, which speaks to the
fundamental importance of ‘hands-on’ therapies that supply such
signals. For further insights into the practical application of this
theoretical framework, the reader is directed to our research
hypothesis and theory article on osteopathy and mental health
(Bohlen et al., 2021).
FUTURE DIRECTIONS—OSTEOPATHIC
CARE AND BEYOND
In this paper, we have proposed a theoretical framework for
developing an integrative hypothesis in osteopathy, which is
based on the enactivist and active inference accounts. This
theoretical framework has implications for osteopathic care
across the lifespan and with diﬀerent patient populations.
In situations of chronicity, osteopathic careóunderpinned by a
robust therapeutic allianceóenables patients to make sense of
their illness experiences by creating new narratives (including
body narratives) about their changed or changing physical
capacities, with ensuing eﬀects on their identity, relationship with
their environment and meaning in their lives. From an (En)active
inference perspective, the dyadic participatory sense-making
within a shared ecological niche underwrites a robust therapeutic
alliance, which is crucial to the eﬀectiveness of osteopathic care.
In the ﬁelds of neonatology and paediatrics, touch becomes
central in developing a robust therapeutic alliance, mental
state alignment, and biobehavioural synchrony between patient
and practitioner óall crucial in regulating allostasis, restoring
homeostasis and addressing the clinical problem.
This framework has implications to osteopathic care,
education and research, which may apply to other models of
care in the broader ﬁeld of musculoskeletal and psychologically
informed care (e.g., physiotherapy, chiropractic and nursing). To
this end, we prioritise several areas for future research including
the investigation of the mechanisms underpinning the process of
making sense of bodily signals and the eﬀects of osteopathic care,
and manual therapy in general, on those mechanisms in two
clinical populations: individuals suﬀering from chronic pain and
other persistent physical symptoms, and preterm infants. This
line of research focuses on the precision, sensory attenuation,
and mental action for deploying attention at diﬀerent levels in
a very hierarchical generative model as a means of gating the
sensory evidence that one has to explain.
Chronic pain and persistent bodily symptoms are associated
with an inability to ignore, attend away or selectively attenuate
diﬀerent sources of sensory evidence. Little is known regarding
the eﬀects of osteopathic care on these mechanisms. We
propose research investigating the role of osteopathic care in
enabling patients with persistent pain and bodily symptoms
to deploy precision, augment or attenuate it in the context
of selective attention and selective sensory attenuation. This
line of research should investigate the role of osteopathic care
and manual therapy in enabling individuals with these chronic
conditions to regain their sense of agency. Research methods
may include neurocomputational models, neuroimaging
studies, clinical trials, experimental studies and qualitative
phenomenological studies.
Prematurity is linked to failures in the development of
the minimal and social self and in the ability to selectively
attend or attenuate to aﬀective touch and other forms of
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 15
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
nurturing behaviour. Our current research demonstrates that
osteopathic care (Lanaro et al., 2017; Manzotti et al., 2020)
and aﬀective touch (Manzotti et al., 2019) play a positive
role in the health and wellbeing of preterm infants in
a neonatal intensive care setting. However, the eﬀects of
osteopathic care, manual therapy, and aﬀective touch on the
neurodevelopment of premature infants are currently unknown.
We propose research investigating how early osteopathic care,
manual therapy and aﬀective touch in neonatal intensive care
settings may contribute to the neurodevelopment of prematurely
born infants. This research should focus, particularly, on
the continuum between the development of the minimal
self and the interactive, social self. Research methods may
include clinical trials, experimental studies, cohort studies and
neurocomputational models.
In addition to researching the mechanisms and eﬀects of
osteopathic care, aﬀective touch, and manual therapy, we
propose exploring the interdependent processes within and
between practitioner and patient in a dynamic dyadic therapeutic
interaction. To this end, we propose research investigating
the interdependent processes within and between practitioner
and patient in a dynamic dyadic therapeutic interaction in
osteopathy, paediatrics, and musculoskeletal care. To fully
understand the mechanisms underpinning osteopathic care and
manual therapy in diﬀerent clinical populations, it is crucial
to study treatments as dynamic systems, focusing on processes
within the patient, within the practitioner and between patient
and practitioner (i.e., the dyad). This line of research should
focus primarily on dynamic dyadic processes such as synchrony
and co-regulation. To this end, we propose studying objective
physiological and subjective (experienced) processes, including
their interrelationship across diﬀerent time scales. This line
of research will ultimately contribute to understanding the
underlying mechanisms of existing therapeutic interventions
in osteopathy and manual therapy (and the development of
new interventions), which can improve the patients’ health
and well-being through dynamic dyadic processes. The premise
of these investigations is that both practitioner and patient
are trying to render themselves mutually predictable and
that therapeutic eﬃcacy (e.g., based on establishing epistemic
trust) will be reﬂected in peripheral markers of mutual
predictability aﬀorded by measures of generalised synchrony
(e.g., in video kinetics, ECG, heart rate variability, pupillometry,
EEG, respiration).
CONCLUSION
Here, we have proposed a theoretical account for developing
an integrative hypothesis in osteopathy under the (En)active
inference framework. This paper does not propose a new
osteopathic model of care. Instead, the theoretical framework
presented here lays the foundations for developing and validating
an integrative model for osteopathic care, which can inform
professional practice in a diverse range of clinical populations. In
particular, the proposed framework can inform clinical practice
and research in the broader concept of psychologically informed
osteopathic care. (En)Active inference oﬀers an integrative
framework for osteopathy, which can evince the mechanisms
underpinning dyadic exchanges and osteopathic care outcomes.
As an ecological niche, the patient-practitioner dyad provides
the osteopath and the patient with a set of aﬀordances
that can promote adaptations and restoration of productive
selfhood. For example, in the context of persistent physical
symptoms associated with a range of emotional and cognitive
factors, osteopaths need to enable patients to increase their
repertoire of attentional deployment to a level beyond the re-
interpretation of their interoceptive signals. Instead, they should
enable patients to restore their ability to ignore and reappraise
irrelevant signals, as means of returning to a natural state
of rendering, where appropriate, things invisible. This should
equip patients with the ability to regain control and explore
other ways to attend to relevant signals from within their body.
Crucially, to enable patients to meaningfully interpret these
sensory signals and therefore revise their generative models,
clinicians should use non-threatening, non-nocebic language.
We argue that the clinical encounter provides opportunities
to identify maladaptive priors and beliefs and implement
strategies to engage with the world as participatory sense-making.
The theoretical framework presented in this paper provides
osteopaths and other healthcare professionals with a “ﬁrst-
principles” approach to understanding their patient’s unique
“story” and how diﬀerent bio-psycho-social factors interact
to contribute to their bodily experiences and narratives. To
provide truly person-centred care, practitioners must move away
from dualistic thinking to understand how patients’ interactions
with their environment aﬀect their experiences, expectations,
and beliefs. In the case of persistent pain and other physical
symptoms, how they contribute to their suﬀering. We argue that
manual therapy is still an essential aspect of osteopathic and
musculoskeletal care; however, it should be used wisely within
a person-centred model where contextual factors, language,
reassurance, education, and non-verbal communication are
eﬀectively considered and used.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
JE wrote the ﬁrst draft of the manuscript. All authors contributed
to conception and revision of the manuscript, and approved and
are accountable for the submitted manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Andrea Bacceli for his help in realising
the ﬁgures, to Iñigo Arandia and to all members from the
Active Inference Research Group for their productive feedback
on the framework; namely, Boris Gaspar, Danny Giraud, David
Hohenschurz-Schmidt, Hilary Abbey, Lucas Bohlen, Robert
Shaw, Sanja Maretic, Sergi Casals-Gutiérrez, Tristan Delion,
and Zoe McParlin.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 16
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
REFERENCES
Ackerley, R., Saar, K., McGlone, F., and Backlund Wasling, H. (2014). Quantifying
the sensory and emotional perception of touch: diﬀerences between glabrous
and hairy skin. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 34, 2879ñ2883. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.2847-13.2014
Adams, R. A., Shipp, S., and Friston, K. J. (2013). Predictions not commands:
active inference in the motor system. Brain Struct. Funct. 218, 611ñ643. doi:
10.1007/s00429-012-0475-5
Allen, M., and Friston, K. J. (2018). From cognitivism to autopoiesis: towards a
computational framework for the embodied mind. Synthese 195, 2459ñ2482.
doi: 10.1007/s11229-016-1288-5
Alvarez, G., Van Biesen, T., and Roura, S. (2020). Professional identity in the
evolution of osteopathic models: response to Esteves et al. Int. J. Osteopathic
Med. 36, 58ñ59. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2020.05.001
Arandia, I. R., and Di Paolo, E. A. (2021). Placebo from an enactive perspective.
Front. Psychol. 12:660118. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.660118
Arika, N. (2019). The Interoceptive Turn is Maturing as a Rich Science of
Selfhood. Aeon Essays [Preprint] . Available online at: https://aeon.co/essays/
the-interoceptive-turn-is-maturing-as-a-rich-science-of-selfhood (accessed
August 20, 2021).
Atzil-Slonim, D., and Tschacher, W. (2020). Dynamic dyadic processes in
psychotherapy: introduction to a special section. Psychother. Res. 30, 555ñ557.
doi: 10.1080/10503307.2019.1662509
Barandiaran, X. E., Di Paolo, E., and Rohde, M. (2009). Deﬁning agency:
individuality, normativity, asymmetry, and spatio-temporality in action.Adapt.
Behav. 17, 367ñ386. doi: 10.1177/1059712309343819
Barrett, L. F. (2020). Seven and a Half Lessons About the Brain . Boston, MA:
Houghton Miﬄin Harcourt Publishing.
Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., and Hamilton, P. (2016). An active inference theory
of allostasis and interoception in depression. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B: Biol. Sci.
371:20160011. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0011
Bastos, A. M., Usrey, W. M., Adams, R. A., Mangun, G. R., Fries, P., and Friston,
K. J. (2012). Canonical microcircuits for predictive coding.Neuron 76, 695ñ711.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.038
Berscheid, E. (2003). “The human’s greatest strength: other humans, ” in A
Psychology of Human Strengths: Fundamental Questions and Future Directions
for a Positive Psychology , eds L. G. Aspinwall and U. M. Staudinger
(Washington, DC: American Psychological Association), 37ñ47.
Blakemore, S.-J., Wolpert, D. M., and Frith, C. D. (2002). Abnormalities in the
awareness of action. Trends Cogn. Sci. 6, 237ñ242.
Bohlen, L., Shaw, R., Cerritelli, F., and Esteves, J. E. (2021). Osteopathy and mental
health: an embodied, predictive, and interoceptive framework. Front. Psychol.
12:767005. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.767005
Bojar, D. (2020). Structure determines function ñ The role of topology in the
functionality of gene circuits. Synthetic Biol. 5:ysaa008. doi: 10.1093/synbio/
ysaa008
Bouizegarene, N., Ramstead, M., Constant, A., Friston, K., and Kirmayer, L. (2020).
Narrative as active inference. PsyArXiv [preprint] doi: 10.31234/osf.io/47ub6
Boyd, R., Richerson, P. J., and Henrich, J. (2011). The cultural niche: why
social learning is essential for human adaptation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
108(Suppl. 2), 10918ñ10925. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1100290108
Brown, H., Adams, R. A., Parees, I., Edwards, M., and Friston, K. (2013). Active
inference, sensory attenuation and illusions. Cogn. Process. 14, 411ñ427. doi:
10.1007/s10339-013-0571-3
Bruineberg, J. (2017). “Active inference and the primacy of the ’I can’ , ” inPhilosophy
and Predictive Processing , eds T. Metzinger, and W. Wiese (Frankfurt: MIND
Group), 1ñ18. Available online at: https://predictive-mind.net/epubs/active-
inference-and-the-primacy-of-the-i-can/OEBPS/Bruineberg.xhtml (accessed
September 15, 2021).
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., and Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating
brain is not a scientist: the free-energy principle from an ecological-
enactive perspective. Synthese 195, 2417ñ2444. doi: 10.1007/s11229-016-
1239-1
Caspar, E. A., Christensen, J. F., Cleeremans, A., and Haggard, P. (2016). Coercion
changes the sense of agency in the human brain. Curr. Biol. 26, 585ñ592.
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.12.067
Castagna, C., Consorti, G., Turinetto, M., and Lunghi, C. (2021). Osteopathic
models integration radar plot: a proposed framework for osteopathic diagnostic
clinical reasoning. J. Chiropractic Hum. 28, 49ñ59. doi: 10.1016/j.echu.2021.09.
001
Cerritelli, F., Chiacchiaretta, P., Gambi, F., Perrucci, M. G., Barassi, G., Visciano,
C., et al. (2020). Eﬀect of manual approaches with osteopathic modality on
brain correlates of interoception: an fMRI study.Sci. Rep. 10:3214. doi: 10.1038/
s41598-020-60253-6
Cerritelli, F., Chiacchiaretta, P., Gambi, F., Saggini, R., Perrucci, M. G., and Ferretti,
A. (2021a). Osteopathy modulates brainñheart interaction in chronic pain
patients: an ASL study. Sci. Rep. 11:4556. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-83893-8
Cerritelli, F., Lacorte, E., Ruﬃni, N., and Vanacore, N. (2017). Osteopathy for
primary headache patients: a systematic review. J. Pain Res. 10, 601ñ611. doi:
10.2147/JPR.S130501
Cerritelli, F., Lunghi, C., Esteves, J. E., Vaucher, P., van Dun, P. L. S., Alvarez,
G., et al. (2021b). Osteopathy: Italian professional proﬁle. A professional
commentary by a group of experts of the European community of practice. Int.
J. Osteopathic Med. 40, 22ñ28. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2021.03.004
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the
future of cognitive science. Behav. Brain Sci. 36, 181ñ204. doi: 10.1017/
S0140525X12000477
Clark, A. (2015). Embodied Prediction. Open MIND . Frankfurt am Main: MIND
Group.
Coninx, S., and Stilwell, P. (2021). Pain and the ﬁeld of aﬀordances: an enactive
approach to acute and chronic pain. Synthese [Preprint] doi: 10.1007/s11229-
021-03142-3
Connolly, P. (2022). Instability and uncertainty are critical for psychotherapy: how
the therapeutic alliance opens us up.Front. Psychol. 12:6171. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2021.784295
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J., Veissiere, S. P., Campbell, J. O., and Friston,
K. J. (2018). A variational approach to niche construction. J. R. Soc. Interface
15:20170685. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0685
Cotton, A. (2013). Osteopathic principles in the modern world. Special Issue:
Osteopathic Principles 16, 17ñ24. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2012.10.002
Cushing, B. S., and Kramer, K. M. (2005). Mechanisms underlying epigenetic
eﬀects of early social experience: the role of neuropeptides and steroids.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 29, 1089ñ1105.
D’Alessandro, G., Cerritelli, F., and Cortelli, P. (2016). Sensitization and
interoception as key neurological concepts in osteopathy and other manual
medicines. Front. Neurosci. 10:100. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00100
De Haan, S. (2020a). An enactive approach to psychiatry.Philos. Psychiatry Psychol.
27, 3ñ25. doi: 10.1353/ppp.2020.0001
De Haan, S. (2020b). Enactive Psychiatry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
De Jaegher, H., and Di Paolo, E. (2007). Participatory sense-making: an enactive
approach to social cognition. Phenomenol. Cogn. Sci. 6, 485ñ507. doi: 10.1007/
s11097-007-9076-9
Deane, G., Miller, M., and Wilkinson, S. (2020). Losing ourselves: active inference,
depersonalization, and meditation. Front. Psychol. 11:539726. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2020.539726
Di Paolo, E., and Thompson, E. (2014). “The enactive approach, ” inThe Routledge
Handbook of Embodied Cognition , ed. L. Shapiro (Milton Park: Routledge),
86ñ96.
Di Paolo, E. A. (2005). Autopoiesis, adaptivity, teleology, agency. Phenomenol.
Cogn. Sci. 4, 429ñ452. doi: 10.1007/s11097-005-9002-y
Di Paolo, E. A., Cuﬀari, E. C., and De Jaegher, H. (2018). Linguistic Bodies: The
Continuity Between Life and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Edwards, M. J., Adams, R. A., Brown, H., Parees, I., and Friston, K. J. (2012).
A Bayesian account of ‘hysteria’. Brain 135, 3495ñ3512. doi: 10.1093/brain/
aws129
Esteves, J. E., Zegarra-Parodi, R., van Dun, P., Cerritelli, F., and Vaucher, P. (2020).
Models and theoretical frameworks for osteopathic care ñ A critical view and
call for updates and research. Int. J. Osteopathic Med. 35, 1ñ4. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijosm.2020.01.003
European Standards EN 16686 (2015) The European Standard on Osteopathic
Healthcare Provision - EN 16686:2015 . Available online at: https://www.en-
standard.eu/une-en-16686-2015-osteopathic-healthcare-provision/ (accessed
January 9, 2022).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 16 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 17
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
Franke, H., Franke, J.-D., and Fryer, G. (2014). Osteopathic manipulative treatment
for nonspeciﬁc low back pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC
Musculoskeletal Disord. 15:286. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-15-286
Franke, H., Franke, J.-D., and Fryer, G. (2015). Osteopathic manipulative treatment
for chronic nonspeciﬁc neck pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int. J.
Osteopathic Med. 18, 255ñ267. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2015.05.003
Frenkel, O. (2008). A phenomenology of the “Placebo Eﬀect”: taking meaning from
the mind to the body. J. Med. Philos. 33, 58ñ79. doi: 10.1093/jmp/jhm005
Friston, K. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Series
B, Biol. Sci. 360, 815ñ836. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2005.1622
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain? Trends
Cogn. Sci. 13, 293ñ301. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005
Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T., Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T., and
Dolan, R. J. (2013). The anatomy of choice: active inference and agency. Front.
Hum. Neurosci. 7:598. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00598
Friston, K. J. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy 14,
2100ñ2121. doi: 10.3390/e14112100
Friston, K. J., Fortier, M., and Friedman, D. A. (2018). Of woodlice and men: a
Bayesian account of cognition, life and consciousness. An interview with Karl
Friston. ALIUS Bull. 2, 17ñ43.
Friston, K. J., and Frith, C. D. (2015). Active inference, communication and
hermeneutics. Cortex 68, 129ñ143. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2015.03.025
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., Yuﬁk, Y., Sajid, N., Price, C. J., and Holmes, E. (2020).
Generative models, linguistic communication and active inference. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 118, 42ñ64. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.07.005
Fryer, G. (2016). Somatic dysfunction: an osteopathic conundrum. Int. J.
Osteopathic Med. 22, 52ñ63. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2016.02.002
Gale, N. K. (2011). From body-talk to body-stories: body work in complementary
and alternative medicine: from body-talk to body-stories. Sociol. Health Illness
33, 237ñ251. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9566.2010.01291.x
Gallagher, S. (2020). Action and Interaction . New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
GBD 2016 Disease and Injury Incidence and Prevalence Collaborators (2017).
Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with
disability for 328 diseases and injuries for 195 countries, 1990-2016: a systematic
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016.Lancet (London, England),
390, 1211ñ1259. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32154-2
Geri, T., Viceconti, A., Minacci, M., Testa, M., and Rossettini, G. (2019). Manual
therapy: exploiting the role of human touch. Musculoskeletal Sci. Pract.
44:102044. doi: 10.1016/j.msksp.2019.07.008
Gevitz, N. (1982). The DO’s: Osteopathic Medicine in America, 1st Edn. Baltimore:
The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Gliedt, J. A., Schneider, M. J., Evans, M. W., King, J., and Eubanks, J. E. (2017). The
biopsychosocial model and chiropractic: a commentary with recommendations
for the chiropractic profession. Chiropractic Manual Therapies 25:16. doi: 10.
1186/s12998-017-0147-x
Gopnik, A., and Bonawitz, E. (2015). Bayesian models of child development. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Rev.: Cogn. Sci. 6, 75ñ86.
Guzzetta, A., Baldini, S., Bancale, A., Baroncelli, L., Ciucci, F., Ghirri, P., et al.
(2009). Massage accelerates brain development and the maturation of visual
function. J. Neurosci. 29, 6042ñ6051.
Harlow, H. F., and Harlow, M. K. (1962). Social deprivation in monkeys. Sci. Am.
207, 136ñ150.
Harrison, L. L., Williams, A. K., Berbaum, M. L., Stem, J. T., and Leeper, J. (2000).
Physiologic and behavioral eﬀects of gentle human touch on preterm infants.
Res. Nurs. Health 23, 435ñ446.
Hechler, T., Endres, D., and Thorwart, A. (2016). Why harmless sensations
might hurt in individuals with chronic pain: about heightened prediction and
perception of pain in the mind. Front. Psychol. 7:1638. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.
01638
Helmholtz, H. V. (1867).Handbuch der Physiologischen Optik, Vol. 3. Leipzig: Voss,
601ñ602.
Henningsen, P., Gündel, H., Kop, W. J., Löwe, B., Martin, A., Rief,
W., et al. (2018a). Persistent physical symptoms as perceptual
dysregulation: a neuropsychobehavioral model and its clinical implications.
Psychosomatic Med. 80, 422ñ431. doi: 10.1097/PSY.000000000000
0588
Henningsen, P., Zipfel, S., Sattel, H., and Creed, F. (2018b). Management of
functional somatic syndromes and bodily distress. Psychother. Psychosomatics
87, 12ñ31. doi: 10.1159/000484413
Hertenstein, M. J., Keltner, D., App, B., Bulleit, B. A., and Jaskolka, A. R. (2006).
Touch communicates distinct emotions. Emotion 6:528. doi: 10.1037/1528-
3542.6.3.528
Hipolito, I. (2019). A simple theory of every “thing”. Phys. Life Rev. 31, 79ñ85.
doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2019.10.006
Hipólito, I., Ramstead, M. J., Convertino, L., Bhat, A., Friston, K., and Parr, T.
(2021). Markov blankets in the brain. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 125, 88ñ97.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.02.003
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 50, 259ñ285. doi: 10.1111/nous.
12062
Hohwy, J. (2020). New directions in predictive processing.Mind Lang.35, 209ñ223.
doi: 10.1111/mila.12281
Hoover, H. (1963). A hopeful road ahead for osteopathy. J. Am. Osteopathic Assoc.
62, 608ñ616.
House, J. S., Landis, K. R., and Umberson, D. (1988). Social relationships and
health. Science 241, 540ñ545.
Jeannerod, M. (2004). Visual and action cues contribute to the selfñother
distinction. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 422ñ423.
Jull, G. (2017). Biopsychosocial model of disease: 40 years on. Which way is the
pendulum swinging? Br. J. Sports Med. 51:1187. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2016-
097362
Kaptchuk, T. J. (2018). Open-Label placebo: reﬂections on a research agenda.
Perspect. Biol. Med. 61, 311ñ334. doi: 10.1353/pbm.2018.0045
Kaptchuk, T. J., Hemond, C. C., and Miller, F. G. (2020). Placebos in chronic
pain: evidence, theory, ethics, and use in clinical practice. BMJ 2020:m1668.
doi: 10.1136/bmj.m1668
Kauﬀman, S. A. (2000). Investigations. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Kiebel, S. J., Daunizeau, J., and Friston, K. J. (2008). A hierarchy of time-scales and
the brain. PLoS Computat. Biol. 4:e1000209. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000209
Kirchhoﬀ, M. D., and Kiverstein, J. (2019). Extended Consciousness and Predictive
Processing: A Third Wave View . New York, NY: Taylor & Francis Group
(Routledge focus on philosophy.
Kiverstein, J. (2020). Free energy and the self: an ecologicalñenactive interpretation.
Topoi 39, 559ñ574. doi: 10.1007/s11245-018-9561-5
Kiverstein, J., Kirchhoﬀ, M., and Thacker, M. (2021). An Embodied Predictive
Processing Theory of Pain. Preprint . Available online at: http://philsci-archive.
pitt.edu/id/eprint/20051 (accessed December 24, 2021).
Kuchera, M. L. (2018). “Principles for osteopathic treatment, ” in Textbook of
Osteopathic Medicine , eds J. Mayer and C. Standen (Amsterdam: Elsevier),
285ñ302.
Kuhn, C. M., and Schanberg, S. M. (1998). Responses to maternal separation:
mechanisms and mediators. Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 16, 261ñ270.
Lagnado, D. A., and Sloman, S. (2002). “Learning causal structure, ” inProceedings
of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. (Routledge).
Laland, K. N., Odling-Smee, J., and Feldman, M. W. (2001). Cultural niche
construction and human evolution: niche construction and human evolution.
J. Evolution. Biol. 14, 22ñ33. doi: 10.1046/j.1420-9101.2001.00262.x
Lanaro, D., Ruﬃni, N., Manzotti, A., and Lista, G. (2017). Osteopathic
manipulative treatment showed reduction of length of stay and costs in preterm
infants: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Medicine 96:e6408. doi: 10.1097/
MD.0000000000006408
Leder, D. (1990). The Absent Body. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Limanowski, J., and Friston, K. (2020). Attenuating oneself: an active inference
perspective on “selﬂess” experiences. Philos. Mind Sci. 1, 1ñ16. doi: 10.33735/
phimisci.2020.I.35
Littlejohn, J. M. (1905). Principles of Osteopathy. Kirksville: Self-published.
Manzotti, A., Cerritelli, F., Esteves, J. E., Lista, G., Lombardi, E., La Rocca, S., et al.
(2019). Dynamic touch reduces physiological arousal in preterm infants: a role
for c-tactile aﬀerents? Dev. Cogn. Neurosci. 39:100703. doi: 10.1016/j.dcn.2019.
100703
Manzotti, A., Cerritelli, F., Lombardi, E., La Rocca, S., Chiera, M., Galli, M.,
et al. (2020). Eﬀects of osteopathic treatment versus static touch on heart rate
and oxygen saturation in premature babies: a randomized controlled trial.
Complement. Ther. Clin. Pract. 39:101116.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 17 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 18
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
Mc Parlin, Z., Cerritelli, F., Friston, K. J., Esteves, J. E. (2022). Therapeutic alliance
as active inference: the role of therapeutic touch and synchrony. Front. Psychol.
[Preprint]. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.783694
McGlone, F., Cerritelli, F., Walker, S., and Esteves, J. (2017). The role of gentle
touch in perinatal osteopathic manual therapy.Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.72, 1ñ9.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.11.009
McGrath, M. C. (2013). From distinct to indistinct, the life cycle of a medical
heresy. Is osteopathic distinctiveness an anachronism? Int. J. Osteopathic Med.
16, 54ñ61. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2012.08.004
Meredith, R. M. (2015). Sensitive and critical periods during neurotypical and
aberrant neurodevelopment: a framework for neurodevelopmental disorders.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 50, 180ñ188.
Miciak, M., Mayan, M., Brown, C., Joyce, A. S., and Gross, D. P. (2018).
The necessary conditions of engagement for the therapeutic relationship in
physiotherapy: an interpretive description study. Arch. Physiother. 8:3. doi:
10.1186/s40945-018-0044-1
Mills, S. E. E., Nicolson, K. P., and Smith, B. H. (2019). Chronic pain: a review
of its epidemiology and associated factors in population-based studies. Br. J.
Anaesthesia 123, e273ñe283. doi: 10.1016/j.bja.2019.03.023
Miyahara, K. (2021). Enactive pain and its sociocultural embeddedness.
Phenomenol. Cogn. Sci. 20, 871ñ886. doi: 10.1007/s11097-019-09630-9
Morrison, I., Löken, L. S., and Olausson, H. (2010). The skin as a social organ.Exp.
Brain Res. 204, 305ñ314. doi: 10.1007/s00221-009-2007-y
Morrison, I., Perini, I., and Dunham, J. (2013). Facets and mechanisms of adaptive
pain behavior: predictive regulation and action. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7:755.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00755
Nesi, J. (2020). Models and theoretical frameworks for osteopathic care ñ A critical
view from a nonregulated country. Int. J. Osteopathic Med. 36, 62ñ63. doi:
10.1016/j.ijosm.2020.05.006
Nguyen, C., Boutron, I., Zegarra-Parodi, R., Baron, G., Alami, S., Sanchez, K.,
et al. (2021). Eﬀect of osteopathic manipulative treatment vs sham treatment
on activity limitations in patients with nonspeciﬁc subacute and chronic low
back pain: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Internal Med. 181, 620ñ630. doi:
10.1001/jamainternmed.2021.0005
Nguyen, T., Abney, D. H., Salamander, D., Bertenthal, B. I., and Hoehl, S. (2021).
Proximity and touch are associated with neural but not physiological synchrony
in naturalistic mother-infant interactions. NeuroImage 244:118599. doi: 10.
1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118599
Noy, M., Macedo, L., and Carlesso, L. (2020). Biomedical origins of the term
“osteopathic lesion” and its impact on people in pain. Int. J. Osteopathic Med.
37, 40ñ43. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2020.06.002
Ongaro, G., and Kaptchuk, T. J. (2019). Symptom perception, placebo eﬀects, and
the Bayesian brain. Pain 160, 1ñ4. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001367
Ongaro, G., and Ward, D. (2017). An enactive account of placebo eﬀects. Biol.
Philos. 32, 507ñ533. doi: 10.1007/s10539-017-9572-4
Palese, A., Rossettini, G., Colloca, L., and Testa, M. (2019). The impact of
contextual factors on nursing outcomes and the role of placebo/nocebo eﬀects:
a discussion paper. Pain Rep. 4:e716. doi: 10.1097/PR9.0000000000000716
Parashar, P., Samuel, A. J., Bansal, A., and Aranka, V. P. (2016). Y akson touch as
a part of early intervention in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: a systematic
narrative review. Ind. J. Crit. Care Med.: Peer-Rev. Oﬀ. Publication Ind. Soc. Crit.
Care Med. 20:349.
Pareés, I., Brown, H., Nuruki, A., Adams, R. A., Davare, M., Bhatia, K. P., et al.
(2014). Loss of sensory attenuation in patients with functional (psychogenic)
movement disorders. Brain 137, 2916ñ2921. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu237
Parr, T. (2020). Inferring what to do (And What Not to). Entropy 22:536. doi:
10.3390/e22050536
Parr, T., Da Costa, L., and Friston, K. (2020). Markov blankets,
information geometry and stochastic thermodynamics. Philos. Trans.
R. Soc. A: Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 378:20190159. doi: 10.1098/rsta.2019.
0159
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., and Friston, K. J. (2022). Active Inference: The Free Energy
Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Paulus, S. (2013). The core principles of osteopathic philosophy. Special
Issue: Osteopathic Principles 16, 11ñ16. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2012.
08.003
Penney, J. N. (2013). The Biopsychosocial model: redeﬁning osteopathic
philosophy? Int. J. Osteopathic Med.16, 33ñ37. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2012.12.002
Petzschner, F. H., Garﬁnkel, S. N., Paulus, M. P., Koch, C., and Khalsa, S. S. (2021).
Computational models of interoception and body regulation. Trends Neurosci.
44, 63ñ76. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2020.09.012
Pezzulo, G., Maisto, D., Barca, L., and Van den Bergh, O. (2019). Symptom
perception from a predictive processing perspective. Clin. Psychol. Eur.
1:e35952. doi: 10.32872/cpe.v1i4.35952
Porges, S. W., and Furman, S. A. (2011). The early development of the autonomic
nervous system provides a neural platform for social behaviour: a polyvagal
perspective. Infant Child Dev. 20, 106ñ118.
Procianoy, R. S., Mendes, E. W., and Silveira, R. C. (2010). Massage therapy
improves neurodevelopment outcome at two years corrected age for very low
birth weight infants. Early Hum. Dev. 86, 7ñ11.
Rabey, M., Hall, T., Hebron, C., Palsson, T. S., Christensen, S. W., and
Moloney, N. (2017). Reconceptualising manual therapy skills in contemporary
practice. Musculoskeletal Sci. Pract. 29, 28ñ32. doi: 10.1016/j.msksp.2017.
02.010
Ramstead, M. J., Constant, A., Badcock, P. B., and Friston, K. J. (2019). Variational
ecology and the physics of sentient systems. Phys. Life Rev. 31, 188ñ205. doi:
10.1016/j.plrev.2018.12.002
Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., and Hipólito, I. (2020a). Is the free-energy
principle a formal theory of semantics? From variational density dynamics
to neural and phenotypic representations. Entropy 22:889. doi: 10.3390/
e22080889
Ramstead, M. J. D., Kirchhoﬀ, M. D., and Friston, K. J. (2020b). A tale of two
densities: active inference is enactive inference. Adaptive Behav. 28, 225ñ239.
doi: 10.1177/1059712319862774
Rietveld, E., Denys, D., and Van Westen, M. (2018). “Ecological-Enactive
Cognition as engaging with a ﬁeld of relevant aﬀordances: the Skilled
Intentionality Framework (SIF), ” inThe Oxford Handbook of 4E Cognition, eds
A. Newen, L. De Bruin, and S. Gallagher (Oxford: Oxford University Press),
40ñ70.
Rossettini, G., Latini, T. M., Palese, A., Jack, S. M., Ristori, D., Gonzatto, S.,
et al. (2020). Determinants of patient satisfaction in outpatient musculoskeletal
physiotherapy: a systematic, qualitative meta-summary, and meta-synthesis.
Disabil. Rehabil. 42, 460ñ472. doi: 10.1080/09638288.2018.1501102
Rossettini, G., Palese, A., Geri, T., Fiorio, M., Colloca, L., and Testa, M. (2018).
Physical therapists’ perspectives on using contextual factors in clinical practice:
ﬁndings from an Italian national survey. PLoS One 13:e0208159. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0208159
Rossettini, G., and Testa, M. (2018). Manual therapy RCTs: should we control
placebo in placebo control? Eur. J. Phys. Rehabil. Med. 54, 500ñ501. doi: 10.
23736/S1973-9087.17.05024-9
Rowlands, M. J. (2010). The New Science of the Mind: From Extended Mind to
Embodied Phenomenology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ruﬀman, T., Taumoepeau, M., and Perkins, C. (2012). Statistical learning as a basis
for social understanding in children. Br. J. Dev. Psychol. 30, 87ñ104.
Sailer, U., and Leknes, S. (2022). Meaning makes touch aﬀective.Curr. Opin. Behav.
Sci. 44:101099. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2021.101099
Santiago, R., Campos, B., Moita, J., and Nunes, A. (2020). Response to: models and
theoretical frameworks for osteopathic care - A critical view and call for updates
and research. Int. J. Osteopathic Med. 37, 52ñ53. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2020.07.
001
Sato, A., and Y asuda, A. (2005). Illusion of sense of self-agency: discrepancy
between the predicted and actual sensory consequences of actions modulates
the sense of self-agency, but not the sense of self-ownership. Cognition 94,
241ñ255.
Segundo-Ortin, M. (2020). Agency from a radical embodied standpoint: an
ecological-enactive proposal. Front. Psychol. 11:1319. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.
01319
Seth, A. (2021). Being You: A New Science of Consciousness. London: Penguin.
Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Saporta, N., Marton-Alper, I. Z., and Gvirts, H. Z. (2019).
Herding brains: a core neural mechanism for social alignment. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 23, 174ñ186. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2019.01.002
Smith, D. (2019). Reﬂecting on new models for osteopathy ñ it’s time for change.
Int. J. Osteopathic Med. 31, 15ñ20. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2018.10.001
Smith, R., Badcock, P., and Friston, K. J. (2021). Recent advances in the application
of predictive coding and active inference models within clinical neuroscience.
Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 75, 3ñ13. doi: 10.1111/pcn.13138
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 18 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926
fpsyg-13-812926 February 14, 2022 Time: 16:7 # 19
Esteves et al. Osteopathic Care as (En)active Inference
Smith, R., Weihs, K. L., Alkozei, A., Killgore, W. D. S., and Lane, R. D. (2019).
An embodied neurocomputational framework for organically integrating
biopsychosocial processes: an application to the role of social support in
health and disease. Psychosomatic Med. 81, 125ñ145. doi: 10.1097/PSY.
0000000000000661
Søndenå, P., Dalusio-King, G., and Hebron, C. (2020). Conceptualisation of the
therapeutic alliance in physiotherapy: is it adequate? Musculoskeletal Sci. Pract.
46:102131. doi: 10.1016/j.msksp.2020.102131
Song, Y., Su, Q., Y ang, Q., Zhao, R., Yin, G., Qin, W., et al. (2021). Feedforward
and feedback pathways of nociceptive and tactile processing in human
somatosensory system: a study of dynamic causal modeling of fMRI data.
NeuroImage 234:117957. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.117957
Spitz, R. A. (1945). Hospitalism: an inquiry into the genesis of psychiatric
conditions in early childhood. Psychoanalytic Study Child 1, 53ñ74.
Still, A. T. (1902). The Philosophy and Mechanical Principles of Osteopathy. Kansas
City: Hudson-Kimberly Pub Co.
Stilwell, P., and Harman, K. (2019). An enactive approach to pain: beyond the
biopsychosocial model. Phenomenol. Cogn. Sci. 18, 637ñ665. doi: 10.1007/
s11097-019-09624-7
Tabor, A., and Burr, C. (2019). Bayesian learning models of pain: a call to action.
Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 26, 54ñ61. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2018.10.006
Tabor, A., Keogh, E., and Eccleston, C. (2017). Embodied painónegotiating the
boundaries of possible action. Pain 158, 1007ñ1011.
Tabor, A., Van Ryckeghem, D. M. L., and Hasenbring, M. I. (2020). Pain unstuck:
the role of action and motivation. Clin. J. Pain 36, 143ñ149. doi: 10.1097/AJP.
0000000000000786
Tamburella, F., Piras, F., Piras, F., Spanò, B., Tramontano, M., and Gili, T.
(2019). Cerebral perfusion changes after osteopathic manipulative treatment:
a randomized manual placebo-controlled trial. Front. Physiol. 10:403. doi: 10.
3389/fphys.2019.00403
Thompson, E. (2010). Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of
Mind. Harvard: Harvard University Press.
Thomson, O. P., and Abbey, H. (2017). Your paradigm or mine? Navigating
the varied landscapes of osteopathic practice, research and education. Int. J.
Osteopathic Med. 24, 1ñ2. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2017.05.003
Thomson, O. P., Petty, N. J., and Moore, A. P. (2013). Reconsidering the patient-
centeredness of osteopathy. Int. J. Osteopathic Med. 16, 25ñ32. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijosm.2012.03.001
Thomson, O. P., and Rossettini, G. (2021). “Don’t focus on the ﬁnger, look at the
moon” - The importance of contextual factors for clinical practice and research.
Int. J. Osteopathic Med. 40, 1ñ3. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2021.06.001
Tramontano, M., Pagnotta, S., Lunghi, C., Manzo, C., Manzo, F., Consolo, S.,
et al. (2020). Assessment and management of somatic dysfunctions in patients
with patellofemoral pain syndrome. J. Am. Osteopathic Assoc. 120, 165ñ173.
doi: 10.7556/jaoa.2020.029
Tramontano, M., Tamburella, F., Dal Farra, F., Bergna, A., Lunghi, C., Innocenti,
M., et al. (2022). International overview of somatic dysfunction assessment
and treatment in osteopathic research: a scoping review. Healthcare 10:28.
doi: 10.3390/healthcare10010028
Tsakiris, M., Schütz-Bosbach, S., and Gallagher, S. (2007). On agency and body-
ownership: phenomenological and neurocognitive reﬂections. Conscious. Cogn.
16, 645ñ660.
Tschacher, W., Giersch, A., and Friston, K. (2017). Embodiment and schizophrenia:
a review of implications and applications. Schizophrenia Bull. 43, 745ñ753.
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbw220
Tyreman, S. (2013). Re-evaluating “osteopathic principles”.Int. J. Osteopathic Med.
16, 38ñ45. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2012.08.005
Tyreman, S. (2018a). “An anthropo-ecological narrative, ” in Textbook of
Osteopathic Medicine, eds J. Mayer and C. Standen (Munich: Elsevier).
Tyreman, S. (2018b). Evidence, alternative facts and narrative: a personal reﬂection
on person-centred care and the role of stories in healthcare. Int. J. Osteopathic
Med. 28, 1ñ3. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2018.04.005
Vachon-Presseau, E., Centeno, M. V., Ren, W., Berger, S. E., Tétreault, P.,
Ghantous, M., et al. (2016). The emotional brain as a predictor and ampliﬁer
of chronic pain. J. Dent. Res. 95, 605ñ612. doi: 10.1177/0022034516638027
Van den Bergh, O., Witthöft, M., Petersen, S., and Brown, R. J. (2017). Symptoms
and the body: taking the inferential leap. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 74, 185ñ203.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.01.015
Van den Bergh, O., Zacharioudakis, N., and Petersen, S. (2018). Interoception,
Categorization, and Symptom Perception. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Varela, F. J. (1979). Principles of Biological Autonomy. North-Holland: Elsevier.
Varela, F. J. (1997). Patterns of life: intertwining identity and cognition.Brain Cogn.
34, 72ñ87.
Vasil, J., Badcock, P. B., Constant, A., Friston, K., and Ramstead, M. J. D. (2020).
A world unto itself: human communication as active inference. Front. Psychol.
11:417. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00417
Veissière, S. P. L., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., and Kirmayer,
L. J. (2020). Thinking through other minds: a variational approach to
cognition and culture. Behav. Brain Sci. 43:e90. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X1900
1213
Venter, E. (2021). Toward an embodied, embedded predictive processing account.
Front. Psychol. 12:543076. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.543076
Vogel, S. (2021). W(h)ither osteopathy: a call for reﬂection; a call for submissions
for a special issue. Int. J. Osteopathic Med. 41, 1ñ3. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2021.09.
001
Von Mohr, M., and Fotopoulou, A. (2018). “Of interoception: active and social
inference of pain and pleasure on the skin, ” in The Interoceptive Mind:
From Homeostasis to Awareness , eds M. Tsakiris and H. D. Preester (Oxford:
University of Oxford), 102.
Walker, S. C., and McGlone, F. P. (2013). The social brain: neurobiological basis of
aﬃliative behaviours and psychological well-being. Neuropeptides 47, 379ñ393.
Wiese, W., and Friston, K. J. (2021). The neural correlates of consciousness
under the free energy principle: from computational correlates to
computational explanation. Philos. Mind Sci. 2, 1ñ32. doi: 10.33735/phimisci.
2021.81
Yu, S., Li, W., Shen, W., Edwards, R. R., Gollub, R. L., Wilson, G., et al. (2020).
Impaired mesocorticolimbic connectivity underlies increased pain sensitivity
in chronic low back pain. NeuroImage 218:116969. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2020.116969
Zaadnoordijk, L., Besold, T. R., and Hunnius, S. (2019). A match does not make
a sense: on the suﬃciency of the comparator model for explaining the sense of
agency. Neurosci. Conscious 2019:niz006. doi: 10.1093/nc/niz006
Zegarra-Parodi, R., Esteves, J. E., Lunghi, C., Baroni, F., Draper-Rodi, J., and
Cerritelli, F. (2021). The legacy and implications of the body-mind-spirit
osteopathic tenet: a discussion paper evaluating its clinical relevance in
contemporary osteopathic care. Int. J. Osteopathic Med.41, 57ñ65. doi: 10.1016/
j.ijosm.2021.05.003
Conﬂict of Interest: FC and JE are Topic Editors for the Research Topic:
“Enactivism and Active Inference in the Therapeutic Alliance” but were not
involved in the review or approval of this manuscript.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.
The handling editor declared a past co-authorship with JE and FC.
Publisher’s Note:All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Esteves, Cerritelli, Kim and Friston. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No
use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 19 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 812926