Vol.:(0123456789)
Biology & Philosophy (2021) 36:6
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-021-09782-6
1 3
Limiting the explanatory scope of extended active 
inference: the implications of a causal pattern analysis 
of selective niche construction, developmental niche 
construction, and organism‑niche coordination dynamics
Regina E. Fabry1 
Received: 3 October 2020 / Accepted: 1 February 2021 / Published online: 15 February 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Research in evolutionary biology and philosophy of biology and cognition strongly 
suggests that human organisms modify their environment through active processes 
of niche construction. Recently, proponents of the free-energy principle and varia-
tional active inference have argued that their approach can deepen our understanding 
of the reciprocal causal relationship between organisms and their niche on various 
scales. This paper examines the feasibility and scope of variational formalisations 
and conceptualisations of the organism-niche nexus with a particular focus on the 
extended active inference account. I will draw a conceptual distinction between 
selective niche construction, developmental niche construction, and organism-niche 
coordination dynamics and argue that these notions capture different causal patterns, 
each of which with a distinct scope. Against this background, I will analyse and 
discuss the extended active inference account and its strategy to integrate variational 
active inference with work on extended cognition. The proponents of extended 
active inference assume that their account can provide an explanation of selective 
niche construction, developmental niche construction, and organism-niche coordi-
nation dynamics. However, my key claim will be that this account has the potential 
to elucidate the workings of organism-niche coordination dynamics, but does not 
adequately capture the causal patterns of selective niche construction and develop-
mental niche construction.
Keywords Free-energy principle · Variational active inference · Selective niche 
construction · Developmental niche construction · Organism-niche coordination 
dynamics · Extended cognition
 * Regina E. Fabry 
 regina.fabry@rub.de
1 Department of Philosophy II, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany
 R. E. Fabry 
1 36 Page 2 of 26
Introduction
Since the 1980s, research in evolutionary biology (Flynn et  al. 2013; Laland 
and O’Brien 2011; Laland et al. 2000; Odling-Smee and Laland 2011; West and 
King 1987) has shown that niche construction activities by human and other ani-
mal populations are a ubiquitous phenomenon. This research, and its theoreti-
cal implications, has received great attention in philosophy of biology (Sterelny 
2003, 2012; Stotz 2010, 2017) and philosophy of cognition (Bertolotti and Mag-
nani 2017; Clark 2005, 2006, 2008; Menary 2014, 2015; Sterelny 2010). Building 
on this research, with a particular appraisal of Stotz’s (2017) work, I will argue 
that we should establish and maintain, on ontological and conceptual grounds, a 
distinction between selective niche construction, developmental niche construc-
tion, and organism-niche coordination dynamics, and that these notions capture 
different causal patterns in the physical world.
Recently, the insight that many cognitive phenomena are best understood by 
analysing the reciprocal causal relationship between organisms and their actively 
constructed environment has sparked interest in proponents of the free-energy 
principle and variational active inference, who seek to explain multiple mental 
phenomena as a continuous attempt to minimise free energy (see, e.g., Ram-
stead et al. 2019; Ramstead et al. 2016; Veissière et al. 2020). The overall goal 
of this paper is to explore the potential of the variational active inference scheme 
for deepening our understanding of selective niche construction, developmental 
niche construction, and organism-niche coordination dynamics. I will focus on 
the examination and interpretation of the extended active inference account devel-
oped by Constant et al. (2020), but I will also take the variational approach to 
niche construction by Constant et al. (2018) into consideration. I will discuss to 
what extent the theoretical integration of the variational active inference scheme 
(Friston 2013b; Hesp et al. 2019; Ramstead et al. 2018) and philosophical work 
on extended cognition (Clark 2008; Clark and Chalmers 1998; Kirchhoff 2012), 
proposed by Constant et al. (2020), succeeds in deepening our understanding of 
the reciprocal causal relationship between organisms and their niche.
I will proceed as follows. In a first step, I will specify the notions of selec-
tive niche construction, developmental niche construction, and organism-niche 
coordination dynamics (sections “Selective niche construction and developmental 
niche construction” and “Organism-niche coordination dynamics”). Building on 
this characterisation, I will argue that these notions capture distinct causal pat-
terns and that each of them has a specific scope (Sect. “Identifying causal pat-
terns”). In a second step, I will depict the free-energy principle and summarise 
the main tenets of the variational active inference scheme (Sect. “ The free-energy 
principle and variational active inference”). Against this background, I will pro-
vide a critical analysis of the extended active inference account—and key aspects 
of the variational approach to niche construction (Sect.  “Extended active infer -
ence: A critical analysis”). My key claim will be that the extended active infer -
ence account has the potential to deepen our understanding of organism-niche 
coordination dynamics, but misses out on the opportunity to adequately capture 
1 3
Limiting the explanatory scope of extended active inference:…
Page 3 of 26 6
selective niche construction and developmental niche construction. Finally, this 
claim will inspire a close examination of the feasibility and implications of a 
theoretical integration of the variational active inference scheme with work on 
extended cognition (Sect. “Extended active inference and organism-niche coor -
dination dynamics”). The upshot of this examination will be that this integra-
tion can indeed elucidate organism-coordination dynamics, but that more work 
needs to be done to move away from an organism-centred depiction of cognitive 
functions to capturing the dynamics of collective action and collaboration in the 
niche. In conclusion, I will suggest to limit the explanatory scope of the extended 
active inference account on formal and conceptual grounds. This conclusion 
comes with an invitation to the proponents of this account to elaborate on their 
formal and conceptual characterisation of organism-niche coordination dynamics 
and to show how the variational active inference scheme can elucidate selective 
niche construction and developmental niche construction.
Selective niche construction, developmental niche construction, 
and organism‑niche coordination dynamics
Research in evolutionary biology (Flynn et  al. 2013; Laland and O’Brien 2011; 
Laland et al. 2000; Odling-Smee and Laland 2011), philosophy of biology (Sterelny 
2003, 2012; Stotz 2010, 2017), and philosophy of cognition (Bertolotti and Magnani 
2017; Clark 2005, 2006, 2008; Menary 2014, 2015; Sterelny 2010) emphasises the 
crucial role of niche construction in shaping and transforming the selective fitness, 
life cycles, and cognitive abilities of humans and other animals. The basic assump-
tion is that the active construction and re-construction of the local environment 
leads to the modification of population-specific phylogenetic and ontogenetic tra-
jectories, as well as to genuinely new opportunities for individual action and cogni-
tion in the here-and-now. To a first approximation, niche construction “[…] refers 
to the activities, choices, and metabolic processes of organisms, through which they 
define, choose, modify, and partly create their own niches” (Laland et al. 2000, pp. 
132–133; see also Flynn et al. 2013; Odling-Smee and Laland 2011). Importantly, 
the notion of ‘niche construction’ has been used to refer to ontologically distinct 
phenomena. It is therefore crucial to introduce and maintain a conceptual distinction 
between selective niche construction, developmental niche construction, and organ-
ism-niche coordination dynamics.
Selective niche construction and developmental niche construction
As Stotz (2017) has convincingly argued, it is important to distinguish between 
selective niche construction (SNC) and developmental niche construction (DNC) 
(see also Griffiths and Stotz 2018). The notion of selective niche construction refers 
to a reciprocal causal relationship between the collective, cross-generational modi-
fication of the local environment by a population of organisms and the changes of 
selection pressures upon that population induced by it in the course of evolution 
 R. E. Fabry 
1 36 Page 4 of 26
(Laland et al. 2000). In other words, “[t]he selective niche is defined by the envi-
ronmental parameters which have a causal influence on the differential survival and 
reproduction rate of organisms” (Stotz 2017, p. 2), where these parameters are a 
direct result of active construction processes within a population across multiple 
generations. This specification of selective niche construction builds on niche con-
struction theory in evolutionary biology (Laland et al. 2000), which suggests that 
populations of human and non-human animals causally influence the genotype of 
future generations through their active construction of the local environment (Flynn 
et al. 2013).
A key example of the causal impact of niche construction on the selection of adap-
tive traits is phenotypic plasticity. We should distinguish between two types of phe-
notypic plasticity, i.e., behavioural plasticity and developmental plasticity (Sterelny 
2003; Stotz 2010). First, in response to and in interaction with variable and poten-
tially unstable environments, where these variabilities and instabilities are in part 
induced by niche construction processes, organisms display new behavioural reper -
toires and action schemes. Second, developmental plasticity captures the potential to 
flexibly develop new skills and evaluation and appraisal mechanisms (Sterelny 2003, 
p. 163; for a discussion, see Clark 2008). Crucially, an important feature of human 
brains is learning-driven plasticity (Menary 2015), which enables the development 
of new functional and structural neuronal connections that are associated with spe-
cific cases of organism-niche coordination dynamics (see section “Organism-niche 
coordination dynamics”). Sterelny (2003) assumes that “[…] there is every reason to 
think that developmental plasticity is an adaptation”, given that at least some of its 
features “[…] enhance current fitness by equipping agents for the specific features of 
the environment” (p. 166; for a discussion, see Stotz 2010). Developmental plastic-
ity can thus be seen as a selective response to niche construction and contributes, in 
important ways, to the variability and flexibility of human cognitive capacities.
This example also highlights the crucial ontological and conceptual difference 
between selective niche construction and developmental niche construction: while 
selective niche construction describes the changes of selection pressures caused by 
the population-specific modification of the environment, developmental niche con-
struction refers to changes of the expression of phenotypic traits caused by the col-
lective construction and re-construction of the environment (Stotz 2017). In other 
words, “[t]he constructed developmental niche captures the exogenetic (e.g. ecologi-
cal and social) legacies an organism inherits alongside its genes that together ensure 
the—potentially modified—reconstruction of the life cycle of the next generation” 
(Stotz 2017, p. 2). The idea of developmental niche construction, Stotz (2017) 
shows, originates in West and King’s (1987) conceptualisation of the ontogenetic 
niche, which is defined as “the set of ecological and social circumstances inherited 
by organisms” (p. 550).
For each generation of organisms, the developmental niche, understood as the 
outcome of the active inter-generational transmission of information and resources 
relevant for ontogenetic development, is “constructed in interaction with parents, 
other conspecifics, the physical and biological environment, and cognitive arte-
facts from tools to languages” (Stotz 2017, p. 3; see also Stotz 2010; Griffiths and 
Hochman 2015; Griffiths and Stotz 2018). Specifically, in the human case, the 
1 3
Limiting the explanatory scope of extended active inference:…
Page 5 of 26 6
developmental niche is characterised by modes of cultural learning (Heyes 2012, 
2018), institutions for cultural learning (e.g., kindergartens, schools), language, rep-
resentational systems (e.g., writing systems, numerical systems), and cognitive tools 
(e.g., pen and paper, abaci, computers), and so on (cf. Menary and Gillett 2016). The 
members of each generation modify their own developmental niche and the develop-
mental niche of the subsequent generation through their collective interaction with 
resources in their environment—they contribute to “cumulative downstream niche 
construction” (Sterelny 2003, p. 150; italics removed; see also Sterelny 2010, 2012). 
A particularly relevant type of human cumulative downstream niche construction 
that helps us understand the peculiarity of human cognition, Sterelny (2003, 2012) 
argues, is informational epistemic engineering: “[…] human cognitive competence 
often depends on epistemic engineering: on organizing our physical environment 
in ways that enhance our information-processing capacities” (Sterelny 2012, p. 
xii; for discussions, see Clark 2008; Stotz 2010). Through informational epistemic 
engineering, and other forms of developmental niche construction, populations and 
sub-populations of organisms thus change the environmental landscape they and the 
members of the next generation(s) are inhabiting, exploiting, and manipulating.
Stotz (2017) mentions two key functions of developmental niche construction: 
species-specific typicality and diversity. First, the characteristics of the develop-
mental niche enable the “species-typical expression of the genetic factors” (Stotz 
2017, p. 4), thereby ensuring that all organisms within a species develop typical phe-
notypic traits. Second, developmental niche construction gives rise to phenotypic 
diversity across populations, because “the developmental niche also provides input 
to developmental plasticity” (ibid.). In other words, the expression of the adaptive 
trait of developmental plasticity, which likely is a product of selective niche con-
struction (see above), depends upon the particular features of the environment, i.e., 
the population-specific results of developmental niche construction. This gives rise 
to the question as of how the effects of developmental niche construction can be 
characterised if we consider the coordination of individual organisms and their 
developmental niche. I will address this question in the next sub-section.
Organism‑niche coordination dynamics
Following Stotz (2017), I have described developmental niche construction as a 
cumulative, inter-generational process that is realised by a population or sub-popu-
lation of organisms. However, philosophers have also paid attention to the recipro-
cal causal interaction between an individual organism and its developmental niche 
in the here-and-now. I refer to these interactions as organism-niche coordination 
dynamics (cf. Menary 2013; Menary and Gillett 2016). These interactions of an 
individual organism and its developmental niche lead to the acquisition and applica-
tion of collectively shaped, culturally evolved knowledge and skills (Sterelny 2003; 
Stotz 2010).
This is closely related, I suggest, to the way in which Clark (2008) captures the 
crucial contributions of the cognitive niche to cases of extended cognition. In its 
original formulation (Clark and Chalmers 1998), the thesis of extended cognition 
 R. E. Fabry 
1 36 Page 6 of 26
says that many cognitive processes (e.g., remembering, problem-solving) extend 
from the brain to the rest of the body and the local environment. Being opposed to 
internalism about cognitive functioning, the extended cognition thesis rests on the 
parity principle: “If, as we confronted some task, a part of the world functions as a 
process which, were it done in the head, we would have no hesitation in recogniz-
ing as part of the cognitive process, then that part of the world is (so we claim) part 
of the cognitive process” (Clark and Chalmers 1998, p. 8; italics in original). An 
extended cognitive function has to meet (to varying degrees) the following criteria 
of trust and glue: (1) the worldly or environmental resource that forms part of the 
cognitive process has to be “reliably available and typically invoked”; (2) the infor -
mation it delivers has to be “automatically endorsed”, that is, it need not be subject 
to deliberate scrutiny by the organism; (3) the resource has to be “easily accessible 
as and when required” (Clark 2010, p. 46; for a discussion of these criteria, see, 
e.g., Sutton 2010). If these trust and glue criteria are fulfilled, the organism and a 
certain resource in the environment form a causally coupled system that qualifies 
as an extended cognitive system (Clark and Chalmers 1998). Importantly, as Clark 
and Chalmers (1998) argue, “[…] the relevant external features are active, playing 
a crucial role in the here-and-now” (p. 9; italics in original). This active causal role 
of resources in or features of the environment is specified by Clark (2008) in his dis-
cussion of cognitive niche construction.
Discussing the cognitive role of manipulating objects in space by individual cog-
nisers, Clark defines cognitive niche construction “[…] as the process by which ani-
mals build physical structures that transform problem spaces in ways that aid (or 
sometimes impede) thinking and reasoning about some target domain or domains” 
(Clark 2008, p. 62). Many, if not all cases of thinking and reasoning discussed by 
Clark and Chalmers (1998) and Clark (2008) are captured as processes that are 
realised by the individual organism (Sterelny 2010). This is suggested, for exam-
ple, by Clark’s (2008) assumption that cognitive niche construction has an important 
impact on “the fitness landscape for individual lifetime learning” (Clark 2008, p. 
62; emphasis added). Individual cognitive processes, proponents of extended cogni-
tion argue, extend into the cognitive niche. The cognitive niche, I would add, has 
been shaped and modified, through the trans-generational, cumulative process of 
developmental niche construction, which has brought about new tools and resources 
for individual cognition. This is in line with Kim Sterelny’s (2010) claim that  
“[t]he most critical, mind-and-brain shaping environmental supports for cognition 
are these cumulatively built, collectively provided tools for thinking, tools that are 
provided to many or all of a generation by many or all of the previous generation” 
(p. 478; see also Menary 2015).
The important role of organism-niche coordination dynamics, which is distinct 
from developmental niche construction, is also emphasised in recent philosophi-
cal work on cognitive integration and enculturation (Menary 2013, 2015; Menary 
and Gillett 2016). The key assumption of the cognitive integration framework is 
that many, if not all culturally evolved, socio-culturally shaped cognitive processes 
are realised by “[…] multiple cognitive layers where neural, bodily, and environ-
mental processes all conspire to complete cognitive tasks” (Menary 2015, p. 2). 
The notion of enculturation captures the transformation of individual cognitive 
1 3
Limiting the explanatory scope of extended active inference:…
Page 7 of 26 6
capacities through the socio-culturally scaffolded acquisition of culturally evolved 
cognitive practices in the developmental niche. Cognitive practices can be defined 
as the embodied, socio-culturally shaped interaction of an organism with cogni-
tive resources in the developmental cognitive niche (Menary 2015); key examples 
of cognitive practices include reading (Fabry 2018a; Menary 2014), writing (Fabry 
2018b; Menary 2007), and arithmetic (Fabry 2020; Jones 2020; Menary 2015; Pant-
sar 2019). In the course of enculturation, individual organisms acquire, if all goes 
well, competence in cognitive practices—they undergo an active process of cogni-
tive transformation. According to Menary (2015), these “[…] cognitive transfor -
mations occur when the development of the cognitive capacities of an individual 
are sculpted by the cultural and social niche of that individual” (p. 8). This sug-
gests that cognitive practices are primarily realised by the coordination dynamics 
linking individual organisms and the developmental cognitive niche. It should be 
noted, however, that Menary (2013, 2015) acknowledges that cognitive practices 
are often characterised by the collaboration of several enculturated organisms who 
jointly complete a cognitive task. While cognitive integrationists emphasise the 
importance of selective niche construction and developmental niche construction for 
understanding the population-specific unfolding of cognitive practices across time, 
their analysis of integrated thinking, reasoning, and problem-solving focuses on “the 
physical dynamics of brain–body–niche interactions in real-time” (Menary and Gil-
lett 2016, p. 73; emphasis added). The upshot is that the developmental cognitive 
niche plays a double role: it makes crucial causal contributions to cognitive transfor-
mation, and it provides the individual organism with resources and opportunities for 
the (collaborative) completion of cognitive tasks.
Identifying causal patterns
Selective niche construction, developmental niche construction, and organism-
niche coordination dynamics contribute to a single, pervasive phenomenon: 
the reciprocal relationship between organisms and their environment. However, 
building on recent work in philosophy of science (Potochnik 2017; Potochnik 
and Sanches de Oliveira 2020), I argue that the three concepts capture differ -
ent causal patterns. Causal patterns are defined as “regularities in phenomena” 
(Potochnik 2017, p. 25), which feature as “explanatory dependence relations” in 
scientific explanations (ibid., p. 140). Given that we are living in a causally com-
plex world, “any given phenomenon embodies many causal patterns” (ibid., p. 
200). Across scientific contexts, causal patterns serve the purpose of identifying 
causal dependence relations that can partly explain the occurrence of the target 
phenomenon. Furthermore, “[…] they indicate the scope of that dependence” (p. 
139; italics in original; see also Potochnik and Sanches de Oliveira 2020). The 
general aim of causal scientific explanation, then, is to represent a causal pat-
tern and to show how it contributes, perhaps also relative to other causal patterns, 
to the manifestation of the phenomenon under investigation. A consequence of 
causal complexity and the multiplicity of causal patterns is that “[t]he same phe-
nomenon may […] be targeted by many different research programs, in principle 
 R. E. Fabry 
1 36 Page 8 of 26
or in fact” (Potochnik 2017, p. 200). Following up on this idea, Potochnik and 
Sanches de Oliveira (2020) suggest that scientific explanation in the cognitive 
sciences (and well beyond) requires a “pluralism of explanatory style” (p. 9; ital-
ics removed). Each explanatory style, understood as a practice-based mode of 
gaining knowledge through scientific explanation, is in the service of identifying, 
representing, and understanding a relevant causal pattern and its scope.
In sum, the suggestion is that a target phenomenon is characterised by diverse 
causal patterns with a certain scope and that these dependence relations need to be 
captured by employing different explanatory styles. This presents an alternative to 
the assumption that phenomena have a hierarchical, compositional structure and that 
this structure warrants a distinction of different levels of organisation and different, 
corresponding levels of explanation (Oppenheim and Putnam 1958; for a discussion, 
see Craver 2015). Several philosophers of science have convincingly argued that the 
postulation of a hierarchical organisation of the physical world is problematic on 
ontological and epistemological grounds (DiFrisco 2017; Eronen 2015; Potochnik 
and McGill 2012). The general assumption that a state or process at level l is com-
posed solely of states and processes at level l-1 has been falsified by a number of 
examples showing that causal dependence relations explaining the occurrence of the 
relevant target phenomenon cut across organisational levels (Potochnik and McGill 
2012). This calls the explanatory relevance and feasibility of the postulation of the 
hierarchical organisation of the physical world into question. Engaging in detail with 
this argument is beyond the scope of the present paper. What matters for current 
purposes is the proposal that the dependence relations holding for a certain target 
phenomenon should be captured by different causal patterns, which require us to 
employ adequate explanatory styles, rather than assuming that dependence relations 
can be ascribed to discrete levels of organisation on corresponding levels of expla-
nation (Potochnik 2017; Potochnik and Sanches de Oliveira 2020).
The idea that a target phenomenon is characterised by multiple causal patterns, 
each with a specific scope, helps us specify the distinction between selective niche 
construction, developmental niche construction, and organism-niche coordina-
tion dynamics. Selective niche construction captures the modification of selection 
pressures that results from the niche construction activities by an entire population 
across multiple generations. By contrast, developmental niche construction is char -
acterised by the modification of phenotypic traits that is a direct outcome of niche 
construction activities by an entire population (or sub-population) across at least two 
generations. Given these differences, the causal patterns are clearly distinct, while it 
remains a theoretical option that “[t]he developmental and selective niche of a popu-
lation can but do not have to overlap” (Stotz 2017, p. 2).
Based on Stotz’s (2017) analysis, there are at least two causal aspects that clearly 
distinguish selective niche construction and developmental niche construction. First, 
while selective niche construction captures changes to the genotype, developmental 
niche construction captures changes to the phenotype. Second, both types of niche 
construction have a different temporal scope. Selective niche construction is a pro-
cess that spans multiple generations across evolutionary time. Developmental niche 
construction, however, is a process that is realised by atleast two generations. Both 
1 3
Limiting the explanatory scope of extended active inference:…
Page 9 of 26 6
selective niche construction and developmental niche construction are processes that 
are realised by multiple organisms within a population.
By contrast, organism-niche coordination dynamics captures the reciprocal causal 
dependence relation between an individual organism and its (cognitive) niche. The 
temporal scope of this causal pattern is far more limited than the temporal scope of 
both selective and developmental niche construction. The dynamical coordination 
of an individual organism and its niche is realised in the here-and-now. This still 
allows for the option to identify task-specific coordination dynamics at time points 
 t1,  t2,  t3, …, for example if we aim for a specification of the learning trajectory of an 
individual organism in interaction with its niche.
In sum, selective niche construction, developmental niche construction, and 
organism-niche coordination dynamics are ontologically and conceptually distinct. 
This distinction can be specified by taking the relevant causal pattern, the quantity 
of causally relevant organisms, and the temporal scope of the dependence relation 
into consideration.1
The free‑energy principle and variational active inference
Recently, proponents of a variational approach to human cognition have argued that 
the reciprocal causal relationship between an organism and its niche can be captured 
by describing it formally and conceptually as a process of free energy minimisation 
(Bruineberg et al. 2018; Constant et al. 2018, 2020). According to the free-energy 
principle (FEP), “[…] any self-organising system that is at equilibrium with its 
environment must minimize its free energy” (Friston 2010, p. 127). The FEP can 
be described as a “first-principle” (Colombo and Wright 2018), which can help us 
understand, its proponents argue, the structural and functional processes that char -
acterise living biological systems (Friston 2013b). For current purposes, I will focus 
on the implications of the FEP and Variational Active Inference, 2 one of the pro -
cess theories building on it (Hohwy 2020), for our understanding of selective niche 
construction, developmental niche construction, and organism-niche coordination 
dynamics.
In order to maintain its physical integrity in an environment that is characterised 
by multiple variable and fluctuating states, any organism must minimise the entropy 
of its sensory states (Friston 2013b). The minimisation of entropy entails that “[…] 
1 It should be noted that Bertolotti and Magnani (2017) seem to pursue a similar strategy. While they 
do not distinguish between selective niche construction and developmental niche construction, they do 
maintain that there is a difference between ecological niche construction (equivalent to selective niche 
construction) and cognitive niche construction (equivalent to organism-niche coordination dynamics) 
and that these distinct causal patterns should be explained in different ways. While the ecological niche 
and its constructors stand in an enabling relationship, cognitive niche construction, Bertolotti and Mag-
nani (2017) argue, can be described in relational terms by assuming that individual cognisers modify the 
affordances available to them.
2 In what follows, I will refer to the process of free energy minimisation as ‘variational active inference’ 
and to the theoretical account describing this process mathematically and conceptually as ‘Variational 
Active Inference’ in capital letters.
 R. E. Fabry 
1 36 Page 10 of 26
there is a high probability that a system will be in any small number of states, and 
low probability that it will be in the remaining states” (Friston 2010, p. 127). For -
mally, entropy reflects the long-term average of surprisal, which is defined as the 
negative log probability of an organism’s sensory states (Friston 2010, 2013b). 
Organisms cannot assess and minimise surprisal directly, given that surprisal could 
depend, in principle, on multiple hidden causes in the environment to which the 
organism does not have direct access (Hohwy 2015). The computational intractabil-
ity of directly minimising surprisal forces free energy, understood as an information-
theoretic quantity, into the picture: “[…] free energy is an upper bound on surprise, 
which means that if agents minimize free energy, they implicitly minimize surprise” 
(Friston 2010, p. 128).3 Free energy is minimised through adaptive behaviour given 
a probabilistic generative model. The model is generative, because its purpose is 
“[…] to capture the statistical structure of some set of observed inputs by inferring a 
causal matrix able to give rise to that very structure” (Clark 2016, p. 21). The model 
is probabilistic, because it captures the causal structure of the environment in a way 
that approximates Bayesian variational inference (Hohwy 2015). For current pur -
poses, it is important to clearly distinguish between a generative model and a gener-
ative process (Bruineberg et al. 2018). According to Constant et al. (2018), “[a] gen-
erative model is a mapping from sensory observations, action policies, to external 
(hidden) causes. These causes constitute the generative process, which describes the 
transitions among hidden causes in the world (including the organism’s own actions) 
that generate sensory inputs” (p. 3; italics in original). In the present context, the 
generative process translates into the state transitions in the niche.
The internal states of an organismic generative model and external states that 
comprise the generative process are statistically separated by a Markov blanket (Fris-
ton 2013b; Friston et al. 2014). The Markov blanket is constituted by sensory states 
and active states. According to Friston (2013b), the distinction between internal and 
external states, which is induced by a Markov blanket, and the distinction between 
sensory and active states within the Markov blanket can be defined in the following 
way: “External states cause sensory states that influence – but are not influenced by 
– internal states, while internal states cause active states that influence – but are not 
influenced by – external states” (p. 2). The formal postulation of a Markov blanket, 
its proponents argue, allows for a specification of the reciprocal causal relationship 
between an organismic generative model and a generative process (i.e., state transi-
tions in the niche).
An organism that is situated in a niche minimises its free energy by optimising its 
generative model through variational active inference. The generative model encodes 
priors (i.e. Bayesian beliefs) about the most probable causes of sensory input. These 
priors are modified in light of new sensory evidence, which corresponds to percep-
tion, and induce changes to sensory input through sensory sampling, which cor -
responds to action (Constant et al. 2018, 2020; Hesp et al. 2019). The continuous 
3 In the literature on the FEP, surprisal is sometimes also called surprise. Following Clark (2013), in 
order to avoid the misunderstanding that this information-theoretical quantity is equal to the phenomenal.
 experience of being surprised, I prefer to use the more technical term surprisal.
1 3
Limiting the explanatory scope of extended active inference:…
Page 11 of 26 6
updating of the generative model, if all goes well, leads to the minimisation of free 
energy and therefore to the minimisation of surprisal.
Under variational active inference, the relative causal influence of perception and 
action on free energy minimisation is modulated by the estimated precision (inverse 
variance) of sensory signals (Friston 2010; Veissière et al. 2020). This continuous 
process of “second order statistics” assesses the certainty in sensory signals and 
therefore the strength of their assigned causal influence on the updating of prior 
beliefs (Hohwy 2013, p. 66).
Importantly, salient aspects of the environment promise to provide precise sen-
sory signals for perception, thereby contributing to the efficiency of free energy 
minimisation (Veissière et  al. 2020). Salience, in this context, is defined as “[…] 
the information gain, reduction of uncertainty, Bayesian surprise or epistemic value” 
(Constant et al. 2018, p. 9), where epistemic value denotes “the expected informa-
tion gain under predicted outcomes” (Friston et  al. 2015, p. 192). Salience, then, 
is a property of external states relative to the internal states of an organism. What 
emerges is a variational description of a perceiving and acting organism that opti-
mises its generative model of external states in the niche in virtue of the statistical 
postulation of a Markov blanket.
Extended active inference: A critical analysis
Building on the FEP, the postulation of Markov blankets, and the formal and con-
ceptual description of variational active inference, the proponents of the extended 
active inference account, on which I will focus in this paper, suggest that it could 
“[…] provide a mechanistic basis for the psychological and functional aspects of 
the cognitive niche” (Constant et al. 2020, p. 9). Similarly, the closely related vari-
ational approach to niche construction, its proponents argue, “[…] could provide a 
promising modelling tool for research on the niche construction perspective” (Con-
stant et al. 2018, p. 2). The epistemic goal of the extended active inference account 
and the variational approach to niche construction is, therefore, to capture the recip-
rocal causal relationship between an organism and its niche.
Referring to Stotz (2017) and West and King (1987), Constant et al. (2020) intro-
duce a distinction between selective niche construction, developmental niche con-
struction, and cognitive niche construction (equivalent to organism-niche coordina-
tion dynamics). However, they conflate this ontological and conceptual distinction: 
“The concept of the cognitive niche we refer to here is a sort of hybrid between 
the concepts of the selective, developmental, and cognitive niches” (p. 3). Unfortu-
nately, they do not provide any reasons for this conflation. Similarly, in introducing 
their variational approach to niche construction, Constant et al. (2018) build on Stotz 
(2017) to establish a distinction between selective niche construction and devel-
opmental niche construction. However, they seem to misinterpret Stotz’s (2017) 
distinction by suggesting that “[the] developmental niche […] [is] a temporal sub-
set of the selective niche” (Constant et al. 2018, p. 2), rather than a distinct causal 
pattern, that may or may not overlap with the causal pattern captured by selective 
niche construction. Furthermore, it remains unclear how exactly this distinction thus 
 R. E. Fabry 
1 36 Page 12 of 26
established translates into their variational model. Their expectation that “[…] the 
DNC–SNC [developmental niche construction–selective niche construction] tandem 
[…] tend[s], over time and on average, to consolidate organism-niche complemen-
tarity across timescales” suggests that their model ultimately seems to conflate the 
ontologically and conceptually distinct processes of selective niche construction and 
developmental niche construction (Constant et al. 2018, p. 11). Given that selective 
niche construction, developmental niche construction, and organism-niche coordina-
tion dynamics capture different causal patterns with a different scope of the relevant 
dependence relations (see Sect. “Identifying causal patterns”), it is open to debate 
whether the extended active inference account and, to a lesser degree, the variational 
approach to niche construction can succeed in reaching their goal of describing the 
reciprocal relationship between organisms and their environment across scales. In 
what follows, I will focus on an analysis of the extended active inference account 
and enrich my observations and assumptions by taking the variational approach to 
niche construction into consideration.
Constant et al. (2020) are interested in the question as of how Variational Active 
Inference can contribute to a better understanding of “the computational function 
of cognitive extensions, and the (developmental and intergenerational) process 
whereby this computational function emerges” (p. 2). In exploring the relationship 
between an organism and its niche, they distinguish between the psychological habi-
tat, defined as a space of action possibilities provided by the niche (i.e., affordances), 
and the functional habitat, defined as a space that provides epistemic resources for 
the completion of cognitive tasks. While the psychological habitat is set to explain 
the organism’s phenomenal experiences that are associated with its interaction with 
the niche, the explanatory role of the functional habitat is to elucidate the causal 
contributions of the niche to an organism’s ability to complete certain cognitive 
tasks. It is the functional habitat, understood as a sub-set of the overall physical hab-
itat of organisms, that is key to understanding the functional role of the niche.
The reciprocal causal relationship between an organism and its niche, Constant 
et al. (2020) argue, can be aptly described in terms of variational active inference: 
“Changes in brain states and functional architectures optimize organisms’ generative 
(i.e., causal) model of the causal structure of their cognitive niche” in moments of 
perception (p. 9), thereby minimising free energy. Using the mathematical tools of 
variational calculus, this optimisation of the generative model through approximate 
Bayesian belief updating is formalised in the following way (Constant et al. 2020, p. 
7):
F (s,/u1D707) represents the free energy functional (the function of a function) of sen-
sations s and internal states /u1D707 of an organism, D represents the Kullback–Leibler 
divergence measuring the divergence between the variational density q/u1D707(/u1D702) and the 
distribution of the posterior probability of sensory causes p(/u1D702/uni007C.vars) , which is always 
≥ 0 . The value of surprisal is expressed by −lnp(s) . This formalism captures the 
optimisation of an organism’s generative model in perception.
(1)F(s,/u1D707) = D /bracketleft.s1q/u1D707(/u1D702) ∥ p(/u1D702/uni007C.vars)/bracketright.s1− ln p(s)
1 3
Limiting the explanatory scope of extended active inference:…
Page 13 of 26 6
Conceptually, the optimisation of the model is modulated by the estimated pre-
cision of sensory signals. Precision estimation is understood as a “meta-learning 
mechanism” that facilitates the organism’s “attunement to causal regularities in the 
environment” (Constant et al. 2018, p. 9). Precision estimation is therefore crucial 
for optimising the bound on surprisal.
Importantly, while perception can optimise the bound on surprisal, only action 
can minimise the bound on surprisal given that it is “an attribute of sensations 
actively sampled” (Friston 2013a, p. 212). In active inference, proprioceptive and 
interoceptive changes “[…] resolve uncertainty through the active sampling of sali-
ent, uncertainty reducing sensations, while allowing for preferred, unsurprising out-
comes” (Constant et al. 2020, p. 8; see also Hesp et al. 2019). This is captured by the 
following formal expression (ibid.):
Action, this expression suggests, minimises surprisal by sampling the niche in 
such a way that it conforms to expected sensory and internal states. Active sampling 
is guided by the salience of specific causal regularities in the niche. The salience of 
certain objects and artefacts, for example, structures the active minimisation of free 
energy (Constant et  al. 2018). Salience, then, is a relational property establishing 
connections between the organismic generative model and components of the gen-
erative process, i.e., the niche. The salience of causal regularities in the niche is, in 
many cases, a result of previous niche construction activities. Constant et al. (2018, 
2020) describe the process of actively creating salient causal regularities so as to 
facilitate free energy minimisation as uploading.
In the context of analysing cognitive cases of free energy minimisation, Constant 
et al. (2020) suggest that the notion of cognitive uploading is an extension of the 
concept of cognitive offloading, where cognitive offloading is defined as “the use of 
physical action to alter the information requirements of a task so as to reduce cogni-
tive demand” (Risko and Gilbert 2016, p. 676). Offloading refers to the manipula-
tion of objects in the niche by an individual organism so as to complete a specific 
cognitive task (e.g., remembering, problem-solving). In cases of uploading, Con-
stant et al. (2020) propose, “[a] function is uploaded when social and technological 
change means it is now taken care of by the niche rather than the individual” (p. 
5). I will return to the relevance of uploading for understanding variational active 
inference in the Sect. “Extended active inference and organism-niche coordination 
dynamics”. For now, it suffices to note that salient causal regularities are, at least 
in many cases, the result of cognitive uploading. In turn, as Constant et al. (2020) 
argue, “[…] cognitive uploading helps agents to minimize the bound on surprisal” 
(p. 15).
So far, I have summarised Constant et al. (2020) conceptual and formal descrip-
tion of the ways in which an organism minimises its free energy by generatively 
modelling its niche (i.e., the generative process) in perception and action. As seen in 
previous section, free energy minimisation is dependent upon the statistical separa-
tion between internal and external states by a Markov blanket. The Markov blan-
ket induces a formal symmetry between the internal states of the organism and the 
(2)F(s,/u1D707) = D /bracketleft.s1q/u1D707(/u1D702) ∥ p(/u1D702)/bracketright.s1− Eq
/bracketleft.s1lnp(s(a)/uni007C.var/u1D702)
/bracketright.s1
 R. E. Fabry 
1 36 Page 14 of 26
external states of the niche. Given this formal symmetry, it is possible to transform 
the variational formalism such that the niche becomes the generative model and 
the organism becomes the generative process (Constant et al. 2018, 2020). In other 
words, “[…] there must be a description of niche dynamics, where the environment 
models how the agent’s internal dynamics are generating its active states” (Con-
stant et al. 2018, p. 5). The consequence of this transformation is that the organism’s 
active states are represented as the sensory states of the niche, while the sensory 
states of the organism become the active states of the niche (cf. ibid.). This circular 
causality (Bruineberg et al. 2018) of the states of the organism and its niche can be 
expressed by rewriting Eq. (1) so that the sensations s and internal states /u1D707 of the 
organism in Eq. (1) become the organism’s actions a as ‘sensed’ by the niche and 
the states of the niche /u1D702 (Constant et al. 2020, p. 10):
This formal transformation enables a description of the causal relationship 
between an organism and its niche ‘from the perspective’ of the niche. More impor -
tantly, however, it allows us to describe the organism and its niche as a causally 
coupled system that jointly minimises free energy. As Constant et al. (2018) put it, 
“[…] the generative model of both agent and niche are the veridical explanations 
of their respective sensory fluctuations and the variational free energies of both are 
jointly minimised with respect to the posterior beliefs parametrized by their respec-
tive states” (p. 7).
The assumption that the reciprocal causal relationship between an organism and 
its niche can be described in terms of joint free energy minimisation finds support in 
a recent simulation study of desire path behaviour, where this behaviour is a simpli-
fied example of niche construction (Bruineberg et al. 2018). In a nutshell, these sim-
ulations show how an organism and its niche (a simple maze) are mutually attuned 
to each other through the organism’s actions (the carving of a path through the 
maze), which feed back into the organism’s sensations of the niche, thereby jointly 
minimising free energy.
On this view, free energy minimisation is conceptualised as a process that com-
prises the coupled organism-niche system. In this sense, Constant et  al. (2020) 
argue, free energy minimisation is extended: “[…] the free energy of two systems 
(i.e., organism and niche) is just the sum of their respective free energies, condi-
tioned upon the (i.e., sensory and active) states they share (Bruineberg et al. 2018)” 
(p. 12). Under this description, active inference extends into the niche. The upshot of 
Constant et al. (2020) account is a theoretical integration of Variational Active Infer-
ence and philosophical work on extended cognition (Clark 2008; Clark and Chalm-
ers 1998; Kirchhoff 2012, 2015). I will discuss the feasibility and implications of 
this integration in detail in the next section.
For now, the question arises how the extended active inference account relates 
to the distinction, introduced above, between selective niche construction, devel-
opmental niche construction, and organism-niche coordination dynamics. These 
three concepts, I have argued above, capture different causal patterns with a 
distinct scope. Recall that Constant et al. (2020) state that “[t]he concept of the 
(3)F(a,/u1D702) = D /bracketleft.s1q/u1D702(/u1D707) ∥ p(/u1D707/uni007C.vara)/bracketright.s1− lnp(a)
1 3
Limiting the explanatory scope of extended active inference:…
Page 15 of 26 6
cognitive niche we refer to here is a sort of hybrid between the concepts of the 
selective, developmental, and cognitive niches” (p. 2). This conceptual hybridi-
sation, however, conflates important ontological and conceptual differences 
between selective niche construction, developmental niche construction, and 
organism-niche coordination dynamics. This conflation would render the vari-
ational model of the reciprocal causal relationship between an organism and its 
niche unconvincing, as this model would not capture the different causal patterns 
– and their inter-relations – characterising the target phenomenon. This conclu-
sion, however, could be avoided if we re-assess the niche conception that is at the 
core of the extended active inference account. It is possible, I propose, to appreci-
ate the explanatory merits of the extended active inference account without com-
mitting to the conceptual conflation of selective niche construction, developmen-
tal niche construction, and organism-niche coordination dynamics.
To explore this possibility, I will take a closer look at the variational model 
suggested by Constant et al. (2020) and interpret it against the background of the 
distinction between the different causal patterns that contribute to the target phe-
nomenon, i.e., to the reciprocal relationship between organisms and their environ-
ment. The formal description of extended active inference, I argue, represents the 
causal reciprocal relationship between an individual organism and its cognitive 
niche. Equations  (1 ) and (2 ) above have it that it is the individual sensing and 
acting organism that generatively models the niche. Given the formal symmetry 
between the internal states of the organism and the external states of the niche 
induced by the Markov blanket, the states that realise extended active inference, 
captured in Eq.  (3 ), are, likewise, the states of an individual organism and its 
cognitive niche. This joint minimisation of free energy, my interpretation of the 
formal expression of extended active inference implies, is realised in the here-
and-now or at times  t1,  t2,  t3, …, if we wish to describe the temporal unfolding 
of extended active inference. As it stands, the extended active inference account 
does not capture selective niche construction, for it remains silent on the selec-
tion pressures induced by niche construction activities by an entire population 
across multiple generations. Furthermore, the extended active inference account 
does not capture developmental niche construction, because its focus is on the 
individual organism, rather than on an entire population (or sub-population) of 
organisms that modifies the cognitive niche across two (or more) generations, 
thereby changing the array of possible phenotypic traits. Contrary to the stipula-
tion by Constant et al. (2020), then, extended active inference does not capture “a 
sort of hybrid between the concepts of the selective, developmental, and cogni-
tive niches” (p. 2), but organism-niche coordination dynamics.
This conclusion can be further substantiated by taking the assumptions of the 
original extended cognition thesis into consideration. Recall that the analysis of cog-
nitive niche construction developed by Clark (2008) focuses on the engagement of 
an individual organism with resources in the cognitive niche (see Sterelny 2010). 
Furthermore, in their original proposal of the extended cognition thesis, Clark and 
Chalmers (1998) stress that the cognitive resources in the niche “[…] are active, 
playing a crucial role in the here-and-now” (p. 9; italics in original). This way of 
theorising identifies the individual organism in its occurrent interaction with the 
 R. E. Fabry 
1 36 Page 16 of 26
cognitive niche as the relevant causal pattern for explaining cognition. Given that the 
extended active inference account is committed to these key principles of extended 
cognition, it follows that this account captures organism-niche coordination dynam-
ics, rather than selective niche construction or developmental niche construction.
A similar interpretation of the explanatory scope of Variational Active Inference 
applies, I suggest, to Constant’s et  al. (2018) variational approach to niche con-
struction.4 Their formal model of the reciprocal causal organism-niche relationship, 
and joint free energy minimisation, bears a strong resemblance to the model devel-
oped by the extended active inference account. Their model, it seems to me, captures 
organism-environment coordination dynamics, rather than selective niche construc-
tion or developmental niche construction. This becomes obvious in their analysis of 
situated learning under variational active inference, for example, which provides a 
formal and conceptual interpretation of the ways in which an organismic generative 
model is updated so as to be optimally attuned to the generative process, i.e., the 
niche. According to Constant et al. (2018), situated learning
[…] requires of organisms that they engage conventionalized patterns of col-
lective activity, grounded in material artefacts and other physical aspects of 
the niche, which have been transmitted to allow for the progressive integration 
of the organism as a legitimate member of the community. […] By provid-
ing opportunities for learning how to learn, the developmental niche does not 
merely indicate what information ought to be learned, but also how best to 
learn it. As a meta-learning device, the information encoded in the material 
states of the local environment function to guide active inference by weighting 
sensory inputs according to their reliability, or salience, and constitute a more 
general device that allow organisms to learn how to learn, by guiding action–
perception cycles (active inference). (p. 9)
Clearly, active inference, precision estimation, and the active exploitation of sali-
ent causal regularities in the niche, as they are described by Constant et al. (2018), 
are features of organism-niche coordination dynamics. The reason for this is that 
“action–perception cycles”, precision estimation, and salience exploitation are real-
ised by an individual organism, rather than by a population of organisms, in the 
here-and-now and across time points  t1,  t2,  t3, …, not across the lifetimes of multi-
ple generations (in the case of selective niche construction) or across the lifetimes 
of at least two generations (in the case of developmental niche construction), as I 
have argued above. The developmental niche certainly plays a role in organism-
niche coordination dynamics, and this role is captured by Constant’s et al. (2018) 
treatment. However, what is not captured by this approach is the population-specific, 
trans-generational, cumulative process of developmental niche construction, even 
though Constant et al. (2018) might claim otherwise. Furthermore, the variational 
model suggested by Constant et al. (2018) does not represent the causal pattern of 
selective niche construction.
4 This interpretation also applies to the variational ecology framework (Ramstead et al., 2019), which 
recapitulates and integrates the variational approach to niche construction (Constant et al., 2018).
1 3
Limiting the explanatory scope of extended active inference:…
Page 17 of 26 6
My claim that the variational model, as it stands, exclusively captures organism-
niche coordination dynamics, and leaves the causal patterns of selective niche con-
struction and developmental niche construction unexplained, can be further substan-
tiated by noting how Constant et al. (2018) summarise their approach:
Active inference allows the organism to specify (often implicitly) those fea-
tures of the environment that will be adaptive given the demands of their 
phenotype, i.e. they can specify those features of the niche, the learning of 
which makes them an accurate model of their environment. On a developmen-
tal timescale, this rests on the meta-learning function of niche construction, 
which guides optimization, or phenotypic plasticity. On the scale of phylogeny, 
it rests on the inheritance of constraints passed on across generations in the 
form of species relevant information (salience), which will further guide the 
optimization in development. (p. 11; emphasis added)
I take it as uncontroversial that organism-niche coordination dynamics, which is 
captured by the variational model, “rests on” population-specific, cross-generational 
processes of selective niche construction and developmental niche construction. Yet, 
I do maintain that organism-niche coordination dynamics, selective niche construc-
tion, and developmental niche construction are characterised by different causal pat-
terns, each with a different scope.
The upshot is that the extended active inference account (Constant et al. 2020) 
and the variational approach to niche construction (Constant et  al. 2018) provide 
variational models of organism-niche coordination dynamics. However, these mod-
els do not represent the causal patterns at play in selective niche construction and 
developmental niche construction.
In reply to this conclusion, the proponents of the extended active inference 
account (Constant et  al. 2020) and the variational approach to niche construction 
(Constant et al. 2018) have three options. First, they could deny that there is a non-
trivial ontological and conceptual distinction between selective niche construction, 
developmental niche construction, and organism-niche coordination dynamics. They 
would then have to show why this distinction is not relevant for their variational 
models and why and how the extended active inference account and the variational 
approach to niche construction do capture all three causal patterns.
Second, they could (at least to a certain extent) agree with my analysis and sug-
gest that the reliance of their models on the Markov blanket formalism allows them 
to extend their model so as to capture selective niche construction and developmen-
tal niche construction as I have characterised it. According to variational neuro-
ethology (Ramstead et  al. 2019), a recent framework based on Variational Active 
Inference, the general definition and formalisation of Markov blankets allows for the 
possibility of recursively nested Markov blankets. The idea is that “[…] the Markov 
blanket ontology can be reiterated recursively, such that the MBs [Markov blankets] 
at any one scale are composed in turn of MBs at the scale above and below – which 
are also made of MBs, and so on, all the way up and all the way down” (Ramstead 
et  al. 2019, p. 192; see also Hesp et  al. 2019). They could then attempt to show, 
on formal and conceptual levels, that selective niche construction and developmen-
tal niche construction could be captured by modelling them as processes defined 
 R. E. Fabry 
1 36 Page 18 of 26
over different ensembles of recursively nested Markov blankets. This strategy, if the 
resulting formalisations were mathematically and computationally tractable, could 
save the general idea that Variational Active Inference has the resources to capture 
selective niche construction, developmental niche construction, and organism-niche 
coordination dynamics while avoiding the limitations of the current versions of the 
extended active inference account and the variational approach to niche construction.
Finally, a third option for replying to the conclusion of my analysis would be to 
agree that the extended active inference account and the variational approach to 
niche construction only capture organism-niche coordination dynamics and allow 
for the possibility that different explanatory styles might be needed for understand-
ing selective niche construction and developmental niche construction, for example 
non-variational mathematical models in evolutionary biology (Laland et  al. 2000) 
and developmental systems theory (Griffiths and Hochman 2015; Griffiths and Stotz 
2018), respectively. This would entail a commitment to “pluralism of explanatory 
styles” (Potochnik and Sanches de Oliveira 2020, p. 1314).
These three options offer a standing invitation to the proponents of the extended 
active inference account and the variational approach to niche construction to reply 
to my analysis. For the time being, however, I submit that the extended active infer -
ence account, against the key assumption made by its proponents, merely captures 
organism-niche coordination dynamics and leaves the question as of how selective 
niche construction and developmental niche construction can be explained in terms 
of variational active inference unresolved. Still, this allows for the possibility to 
examine the integration of Variational Active Inference with philosophical theoris-
ing about extended cognition. I will take up this task in the next section.
Extended active inference and organism‑niche coordination 
dynamics
Recall that the extended cognition thesis, as originally formulated by Clark and 
Chalmers (1998), rests on the parity principle. This principle would be confirmed, 
Constant et  al. (2020) argue, by the assumption that “[…] the description of the 
dynamics underlying learning in the generative process are formally equivalent to 
the learning in the generative model” (p. 16). In other words, formal equivalence 
implies functional parity of internal and external states. The parity principle, as Sut-
ton (2010) notes, emphasises the functional isomorphism of internal and external 
states. According to the extended active inference account, internal and external 
states are functionally isomorphic, at least at a coarse-grained level, given the formal 
symmetry of the individual organism and its niche, which is statistically induced by 
the Markov blanket (Constant et al. 2020).
This formal reframing of the parity principle and the (coarse-grained) functional 
isomorphism of internal and external states, it seems to me, forces a recapitulation 
of the discussion of the theoretical merits of the parity principle for understanding 
paradigm cases of extended cognition into the picture. Under the assumption that 
organism-niche interactions play, in many cases, an indispensable role in the com-
pletion of cognitive tasks, Menary (2010a, b) and Sutton (2010) have argued that a 
1 3
Limiting the explanatory scope of extended active inference:…
Page 19 of 26 6
complementarity principle should be preferred over the parity principle to describe 
the reciprocal causal relationship between an organism and its cognitive niche. Sut-
ton (2010) defines the complementarity principle in the following way (p. 194):
[…] in extended cognitive systems, external states and processes need not 
mimic or replicate the formats, dynamics, or functions of inner states and pro-
cesses. Rather, different components of the overall (enduring or temporary) 
system can play quite different roles and have different properties while cou-
pling in collective and complementary contributions to flexible thinking and 
acting.
External states in the niche, this definition of the complementarity principle sug-
gests, do not play a crucial role in cognising because they are functionally isomor -
phic to organismic internal states, but because they have different properties and 
thereby complement the properties of organismic states. In other words, “[…] it is 
because the external vehicles provide a different kind of functionality and because 
they can coordinate with internal processes that they are integral parts of our cog-
nitive systems” (Menary 2010a, b, p. 235). The complementarity principle, then, 
motivates the cognitive integration framework (Menary 2013, 2015; Menary and 
Gillett 2016), briefly described above, and its commitment to organism-niche coor -
dination dynamics for understanding the manifestation of (socio-culturally shaped) 
cognitive capacities.
The complementarity principle, it seems to me, is fully consistent with extended 
active inference, as it captures, on a conceptual level, the mutual attunement of an 
individual organism and its cognitive niche in the business of jointly minimising free 
energy (and thereby surprisal). In support of this assumption, it should be noted that 
Constant et al. (2018) emphasise the importance of “organism-niche complementa-
rity” for understanding their reciprocal causal relationship expressed by the formali-
sation of variational active inference (p. 10). Furthermore, the formal symmetry of 
internal and external states induced by the statistical properties of a Markov blanket 
does not entail functional parity.
Perhaps, then, it would be preferable to rely on the complementarity principle, 
rather than on the parity principle, to fully appreciate the crucial role of the niche 
for cognitive functioning. The complementarity principle invites us to consider how 
external resources in the cognitive niche often transform the overall cognitive pro-
cessing capacities of the individual organism. The cognitive integration framework 
and its account of enculturation, for example, makes a strong case for the cognitive 
transformation of individual organisms by virtue of their active engagement with 
external resources, e.g., linguistic and numerical symbols, in the cognitive niche 
(Menary 2007, 2014, 2015). For current purposes, however, it is important to note 
that Clark (2006), refining the original extended cognition thesis, capitalises on the 
importance of the complementarity of internal organismic states and the properties 
of external states in the niche for understanding the crucial role of oral and written 
language for our cognitive processing capacities: “Central to this vision of language 
as a complementary resource is an appreciation of the power of added worldly struc-
ture (in this case, perceptible material symbols) to transform the tasks that confront 
an intelligent agent” (Clark 2006, p. 371; my emphasis) The transformative “power” 
 R. E. Fabry 
1 36 Page 20 of 26
of linguistic symbols and other resources in the cognitive niche, I suggest, is ren-
dered possible by their complementarity to, rather than the functional isomorphism 
with, the internal states of the organism. The complementarity principle, then, would 
be entirely consistent with the minimisation of free energy by joint organism-niche 
systems as described by the extended active inference account. In contrast to the 
parity principle, it has the advantage of highlighting the importance of the unique 
properties of external resources in the niche for understanding their substantial con-
tributions to cognitive extension.
This examination of the conceptual relationship between the parity principle 
and the functional isomorphism of internal and external states on the one hand and 
extended active inference on the other hand invites us to examine Constant et  al. 
(2020) conception of cognitive uploading, already introduced in the previous sec-
tion, in more detail. According to this conception, “[…] the notion of uploading 
refers to the creation of novel cognitive functions that are taken on board by the 
cognitive niche per se, instead of being merely managed by the cognitive niche” 
(Constant et al. 2020 p. 5; see also Constant et al. 2018). This notion helps specify, 
the proponents of the extended active inference account suggest, “[…] individual- 
and group-level dynamics unfolding over developmental and intergenerational time 
scales” (ibid.). Against the backdrop of a clear distinction between selective niche 
construction, developmental niche construction, and organism-niche coordination 
dynamics, this conception of uploading seems to characterise an important aspect of 
developmental niche construction, thereby capturing a causal pattern that is distinct 
from organism-niche coordination dynamics, which is, I have argued, the causal pat-
tern targeted by the extended active inference account.
Constant et al. (2020) consider another aspect of cognitive uploading, stating that 
“[n]ovel cognitive functions produced through cognitive uploading can result from 
gene-culture coevolutionary dynamics that ‘glue’ organisms to those functions per -
formed by the ‘trusted’ niche” (ibid.). This way of characterising cognitive upload-
ing seems to capture the causal pattern of selective niche construction, given that 
it forces the impact of niche construction activities on genetic selection pressures 
into the picture. It seems, then, that cognitive uploading is a process that needs to be 
ascribed to selective niche construction and developmental niche construction.
The question arises why the trust and glue criteria, established by Clark and 
Chalmers (1998) and Clark (2010) to specify the extendedness of cognitive func-
tions, are applied to cases of extended active inference. The trust and glue criteria, 
I assume, were originally established for providing a specification of the causal pat-
tern of organism-niche coordination dynamics as described by the extended cogni-
tion thesis (see Sect. “Organism-niche coordination dynamics”). Thus, these crite-
ria, which specify, in the present context, that external states ascribed to a resource 
in the cognitive niche have to be “reliably available and typically invoked”, “auto-
matically endorsed”, and “easily accessible as and when required” (Clark 2010, p. 
46), cannot elucidate the causal patterns of selective niche construction and devel-
opmental niche construction. The trust and glue criteria, however, do help us under -
stand under what conditions active inference can be said to extend from the individ-
ual organism to the cognitive niche. It should be noted, however, that these criteria 
1 3
Limiting the explanatory scope of extended active inference:…
Page 21 of 26 6
are organism-centred, i.e., they specify the coordination dynamics of an individual 
organism and its niche.
One way to move beyond this organism-centredness, Constant et al. (2020) pro-
pose, is to take work on diachronic extended cognition into consideration (Kirch-
hoff 2012, 2015). According to this view, cognitive processes extend, in many cases, 
into a cognitive niche in which organisms jointly engage in patterned, social-cultural 
practices (Roepstorff, Niewöhner and Beck 2010). It seems to me that Constant et al. 
(2020) suggest that their extended active inference account of uploading would be 
entirely consistent with diachronic extended cognition (cf. p. 18). If my analysis of 
the scope of cognitive uploading is correct, however, it follows that the extended 
active inference account in its current form does not capture diachronic extended 
cognition for two reasons. First, uploading refers to selective niche construction and 
developmental niche construction. The extended active inference account only cap-
tures organism-niche coordination dynamics that is synchronic, not diachronic. Sec-
ond, the current formalisation of extended active inference is organism-centred and 
therefore does not capture the collective engagement in socio-cultural practices by 
multiple organisms.
Two steps would be needed, then, to formalise diachronic extended cognition in 
terms of variational active inference. First, under the assumption that diachronic 
extended cognition spans across individuals and across developmental time, its pro-
ponents would need to show how Variational Active Inference could accommodate 
the process of developmental niche construction and how this causal pattern relates 
to organism-niche coordination dynamics. Second, and relatedly, it would need to 
be shown how the formal apparatus of variational active inference can capture the 
coordination dynamics of a collective of organisms and their co-constructed niche. 
Despite the general suggestion by Constant et  al. (2020) that a description of the 
diachronic engagement of collaborating organisms is important for understanding 
the full scope of extended cognition, as suggested by Kirchhoff (2012), their current 
version of the extended active inference account remains, on a formal and concep-
tual level, organism-centred.
This organism-centeredness also seems to characterise Constant’s et  al. (2020) 
suggestion to establish a connection between variational active inference and epis-
temic action. According to Kirsh and Maglio (1994), who first examined and con-
ceptualised this class of actions, epistemic actions are “physical actions that make 
mental computation easier, faster, or more reliable […] that an agent performs to 
change his or her own computational state” (pp. 513–514; for discussions, see Clark 
2008; Menary 2010b). Epistemic actions, generally, reduce the “space complexity”, 
“time complexity”, and “the probability of error in mental computation” (ibid., p. 
514).5
5 It is important to appreciate the scientific context of Kirsh and Maglio’s (1994) pioneering work in the 
cognitive sciences. At the time this work was published, classical, internalistic computationalism was 
still the leading paradigm in the study of cognition. The proposal that epistemic actions, i.e., the embod-
ied manipulation of external resources, directly contribute to problem-solving and other cognitive pro-
cesses was breaking new ground, paving the way towards philosophical and empirical work on extended 
cognition, distributed cognition, and cognitive integration.
 R. E. Fabry 
1 36 Page 22 of 26
The reduction of space complexity, time complexity and the probability of errors, 
Constant et al. (2020) suggest, can be expressed in terms of variational active infer -
ence in the following way (p. 17):
Space complexity corresponds to reduced numbers of counterfactual scenarios 
that one has to model, which naturally entails minimizing the probability of 
errors (i.e., the more complex the generative model is, the more it is likely to 
overfit), and by the same token increases performance in terms of time com-
plexity of computation
Note that within Variational Active Inference, space and time complexity 
express the statistical complexity of the organismic generative model. It is a 
measure of the difference between Bayesian prior beliefs and the posterior prob-
ability of sensory causes (Friston 2010). The generative model will be optimised 
if its complexity is minimised while maintaining a high level of accuracy (cf. 
Constant et  al. 2020). The variational formalisation, then, gives rise to a new 
expression of the reduction space complexity, time complexity, and the probabil-
ity of error as originally defined by Kirsh and Maglio (1994), thereby specifying 
the contribution of epistemic action to variational organism-niche coordination 
dynamics.
This assumption can be further substantiated by taking the crucial contribu-
tion of the estimation of salience and precision estimation into consideration. 
Constant et al. (2020) suggest “[…] that neutrally supported estimations of sali-
ence (a.k.a., expected surprise) help select actions that can purposefully roll in 
cognitive operations flowing through bioexternal resources” (p. 17). In other 
words, salience estimation provides a measure of understanding the selection of 
specific external resources in the niche for epistemic actions, given current task 
demands. Furthermore, epistemic actions are modulated, the extended active 
inference account suggests, by precision estimation. Specifically, “[…] the inter -
nal flux of precision (i.e., uncertainty in my beliefs) is resolved by the exter -
nally structured flow of epistemic (i.e., salience minimizing) action that serves 
to improve the long-term fit between by actions and my goals, as well as the cost 
of computing these long-term goals” (ibid., p. 18). Together, salience estimation 
and precision estimation, then, structure the ways in which an organism per -
forms epistemic actions by manipulating cognitive resources in the niche. This 
way of formalising and re-conceptualising epistemic action elucidates, I suggest, 
the cognitive role of the active manipulation of resources in the niche, thereby 
specifying an important aspect of organism-niche coordination dynamics.
The upshot is that the extended active inference account formalises and re-
conceptualises key aspects of the extended cognition thesis. In particular, the 
parity principle and the functional isomorphism of internal and external states 
can be cashed out in terms of variational active inference. However, the for -
mal expression of extended active inference is equally consistent with the com-
plementarity principle, which should be preferred, I have argued, on theoretical 
grounds. In addition, a reliance on the complementarity principle foregrounds 
the importance of epistemic actions for free energy minimisation under varia-
tional active inference: epistemic actions can reduce, as suggested by Constant 
1 3
Limiting the explanatory scope of extended active inference:…
Page 23 of 26 6
et  al. (2020), the space complexity, time complexity, and the probability of 
errors of the organismic generative model. However, given that the extended 
active inference account only captures individual-specific organism-niche coor -
dination dynamics, it does not provide, in its current form, a specification of 
uploading, which is a function of selective niche construction and developmen-
tal niche construction. Furthermore, given this focus of the extended active 
inference account, it does not speak to key aspects of diachronic extended cogni-
tion, as this would require a variational description of collective organism-niche 
coordination dynamics and its relation to developmental niche construction.
Concluding remarks
In this paper, I have explored the explanatory scope of Variational Active Infer -
ence models of the reciprocal causal relationship between organisms and their 
niche with a focus on the extended active inference account (Constant et al. 2020) 
and additional considerations on the variational approach to niche construction 
(Constant et al. 2018). I have proposed, based on Stotz’s (2017) analysis, that the 
notions of selective niche construction, developmental niche construction, and 
organism-niche coordination dynamics refer to ontologically distinct causal pat-
terns, each of which has a specific scope. I have argued that the extended active 
inference account, in its current version, only captures organism-niche coordina-
tion dynamics and leaves selective niche construction and developmental niche 
construction, against the goal set by Constant et  al. (2020), unexplained. For 
the time being, I am therefore opting for limiting the explanatory scope of the 
extended active inference account—and the variational approach to niche con-
struction—given that both interpretations and applications of Variational Active 
Inference follow the same explanatory strategy and share key commitments. 
Under the assumption that the extended active inference account can, however, 
contribute to a better understanding of organism-niche coordination dynamics, I 
have examined the theoretical implications of integrating Variational Active Infer -
ence with the extended cognition thesis. In conclusion, I submit that the extended 
active inference account can indeed cash out some of the key insights of work 
on extended cognition, especially the cognitive function of epistemic actions and 
the complementarity, rather than functional parity, of internal and external states. 
However, given the focus of the extended active inference account on individ-
ual-specific organism-niche coordination dynamics in the here-and-now, more 
work needs to be done, I suggest, to provide a concise and conceptually coherent 
account of cognitive uploading and diachronic extended cognition.
Ultimately, this paper offers a standing invitation to the proponents of the 
extended active inference account and the variational approach to niche construc-
tion to take up the challenge to show, on formal and conceptual levels, how Vari-
ational Active Inference can explain selective niche construction, developmen-
tal niche construction, and collective organism-niche coordination dynamics and 
how these distinct causal patterns are related under variational active inference.
 R. E. Fabry 
1 36 Page 24 of 26
Acknowledgement I would like to thank Markus Pantsar for his helpful comments on a previous version 
of this paper.
Compliance with ethical standards 
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is 
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission 
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen 
ses/by/4.0/.
References
Bertolotti T, Magnani L (2017) Theoretical considerations on cognitive niche construction. Synthese 
194:4757–4779. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122 9-016-1165-2
Bruineberg J, Rietveld E, Parr T, van Maanen L, Friston KJ (2018) Free-energy minimization in joint 
agent-environment systems: a niche construction perspective. J Theor Biol 455:161–178. https ://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2018.07.002
Clark A (2005) Word, niche, and super-niche. Theoria 54:255–268
Clark A (2006) Language, embodiment, and the cognitive niche. Trends Cogn Sci 10(8):370–374. https ://
doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.06.012
Clark A (2008) Supersizing the mind: embodiment, action, and cognitive extension. Oxford University 
Press, New York
Clark A (2010) Memento’s revenge: the extended mind, extended. In: Menary R (ed) The extended mind. 
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass, pp 43–66
Clark A (2013) Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science. 
Behav Brain Sci 36(03):181–204. https ://doi.org/10.1017/S0140 525X1 20004 77
Clark A (2016) Surfing uncertainty: prediction, action, and the embodied mind. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, New York
Clark A, Chalmers D (1998) The extended mind. Analysis 58(1):7–19
Colombo M, Wright C (2018) First principles in the life sciences: the free-energy principle, organicism, 
and mechanism. Synthese, 1–26. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122 9-018-01932 -w
Constant A, Clark A, Kirchhoff MD, Friston KJ (2020) Extended active inference: constructing predictive 
cognition beyond skulls. Mind Lang, 1–22. https ://doi.org/10.1111/mila.12330 
Constant A, Ramstead MJD, Veissiere SPL, Campbell JO, Friston KJ (2018) A variational approach to 
niche construction. J R Soc Interface 15(141):1–14. https ://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0685
Craver CF (2015) Levels. In: Metzinger TK, Windt JM (eds) Open MIND. Frankfurt am Main: MIND 
Group, pp. 1–26. https ://doi.org/10.15502 /97839 58570 498
DiFrisco J (2017) Time scales and levels of organization. Erkenntnis 82(4):795–818. https ://doi.
org/10.1007/s1067 0-016-9844-4
Eronen MI (2015) Levels of organization: a deflationary account. Biol Philos 30(1):39–58. https ://doi.
org/10.1007/s1053 9-014-9461-z
Fabry RE (2018) Betwixt and between: the enculturated predictive processing approach to cognition. 
Synthese 195(6):2483–2518. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122 9-017-1334-y
Fabry RE (2018) Enculturation and narrative practices. Phenomeno Cogn Sci 17(5):911–937. https ://doi.
org/10.1007/s1109 7-018-9567-x
1 3
Limiting the explanatory scope of extended active inference:…
Page 25 of 26 6
Fabry RE (2020) The cerebral, extra-cerebral bodily, and socio-cultural dimensions of enculturated arith-
metical cognition. Synthese 197(9):3685–3720. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122 9-019-02238 -1
Flynn EG, Laland KN, Kendal RL, Kendal JR (2013) Developmental niche construction. Dev Sci 
16(2):296–313. https ://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12030 
Friston K (2010) The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat Rev Neurosci 11(2):127–138. 
https ://doi.org/10.1038/nrn27 87
Friston K (2013) Active inference and free energy. Behav Brain Sci 36(03):212–213. https ://doi.
org/10.1017/S0140 525X1 20021 42
Friston K (2013) Life as we know it. J R Soc Interface 10(86):1–12
Friston K, Rigoli F, Ognibene D, Mathys C, Fitzgerald T, Pezzulo G (2015) Active inference and epis-
temic value. Cogn Neurosci 6(4):187–214
Friston K, Sengupta B, Auletta G (2014) Cognitive dynamics: from attractors to active inference. Proc 
IEEE 102(4):427–445. https ://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC .2014.23062 51
Griffiths PE, Hochman A (2015) Developmental systems theory. In: Encyclopedia of life sciences. John 
Wiley & Sons, New Jersey. pp. 1–7. https ://doi.org/10.1002/97804 70015 902.a0003 452.pub2
Griffiths P, Stotz K (2018) Developmental systems theory as a process theory. In: Nicholson DJ, Dupré 
J (eds) Everything flows: towards a processual philosophy of biology. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, pp 225–245
Hesp C, Ramstead M, Constant A, Badcock P, Kirchhoff M, Friston K (2019) A multi-scale view of the 
emergent complexity of life: a free-energy proposal. In: Georgiev GY, Smart JM, Flores Martinez 
CL, Price ME (eds) Evolution, development and complexity. Cham, Springer International Publish-
ing, pp 195–227
Heyes C (2012) Grist and mills: on the cultural origins of cultural learning. Philo Trans Royal Soc B: 
Biol Sci 367(1599):2181–2191. https ://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2012.0120
Heyes C (2018) Cognitive gadgets: the cultural evolution of thinking. Harvard University Press, Cam-
bridge, Mass.
Hohwy J (2013) The predictive mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Hohwy J (2015) The neural organ explains the mind. In: Metzinger T, Windt JM (eds) Open MIND. 
Frankfurt am Main,MIND Group, pp 1–22. https ://doi.org/10.15502 /97839 58570 016
Hohwy J (2020) Self-supervision, normativity and the free energy principle. Synthese, 1–25. https ://doi.
org/10.1007/s1122 9-020-02622 -2
Jones M (2020) Numerals and neural reuse. Synthese 197(9):3657–3681. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122 
9-018-01922 -y
Kirchhoff MD (2012) Extended cognition and fixed properties: steps to a third-wave version of extended 
cognition. Phenomenol Cogn Sci 11(2):287–308. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1109 7-011-9237-8
Kirchhoff MD (2015) Extended cognition & the causal-constitutive fallacy: in search for a diachronic and 
dynamical conception of constitution. Res 90(2):320–360. https ://doi.org/10.1111/phpr.12039 
Kirsh D, Maglio P (1994) On distinguishing epistemic from pragmatic action. Cogn Sci 18(4):513–549. 
https ://doi.org/10.1207/s1551 6709c og180 4_1
Laland KN, O’Brien MJ (2011) Cultural niche construction: an introduction. Biol Theory 6(3):191–202
Laland KN, Odling-Smee J, Feldman MW (2000) Niche construction, biological evolution, and cultural 
change. Behav Brain Sci 23(1):131–146
Menary R (2007) Writing as thinking. Lang Sci 29(5):621–632. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.langs 
ci.2007.01.005
Menary R (2010) Cognitive integration and the extended mind. In: Menary R (ed) The extended mind. 
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass, pp 227–243
Menary R (2010) Dimensions of mind. Phenomenol Cogn Sci 9(4):561–578. https ://doi.org/10.1007/
s1109 7-010-9186-7
Menary R (2013) Cognitive integration, enculturated cognition and the socially extended mind. Cogn 
Syst Res 25–26:26–34. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsy s.2013.05.002
Menary R (2014) Neural plasticity, neuronal recycling and niche construction. Mind Lang 29(3):286–
303. https ://doi.org/10.1111/mila.12051 
Menary R (2015) Mathematical cognition: a case of enculturation. In: Metzinger T, Windt JM (eds) Open 
MIND, Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group, pp 1–20. https ://doi.org/10.15502 /97839 58570 818
Menary R, Gillett AJ (2016) Embodying culture: integrated cognitive systems and cultural evolution. In: 
Kiverstein J (ed) The Routledge handbook of philosophy of the social mind. Routledge, London, 
New York, pp 88–103
 R. E. Fabry 
1 36 Page 26 of 26
Odling-Smee J, Laland KN (2011) Ecological inheritance and cultural inheritance: what are they and 
how do they differ? Biolo Theory 6(3):220–230
Oppenheim P, Putnam H (1958) Unity of science as a working hypothesis. In: Feigl H, Scriven M, Max-
well G (eds) Minnesota studies in the philosophy of science. University of Minnesota Press, Min-
neapolis, pp 3–36
Pantsar M (2019) The enculturated move from proto-arithmetic to arithmetic. Front Psychol 10:1–15. 
https ://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg .2019.01454 
Potochnik A (2017) Idealization and the aims of science. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Potochnik A, McGill B (2012) The limitations of hierarchical organization. Philo Sci 79(1):120–140. 
https ://doi.org/10.1086/66323 7
Potochnik A, Sanches de Oliveira G (2020) Patterns in cognitive phenomena and pluralism of explana-
tory styles. Topics Cogn Sci 12:1306–1320. https ://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12481 
Ramstead MJD, Constant A, Badcock PB, Friston KJ (2019) Variational ecology and the physics of sen-
tient systems. Phys Life Rev 31:188–205. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev .2018.12.002
Ramstead MJD, Veissière SPL, Kirmayer LJ (2016) Cultural affordances: scaffolding local worlds 
through shared intentionality and regimes of attention. Front Psychol 7:1–21
Ramstead MJD, Badcock PB, Friston KJ (2018) Answering Schrödinger’s question: a free-energy formu-
lation. Phys Life Rev 24:1–16
Risko EF, Gilbert SJ (2016) Cognitive offloading. Trends Cogn Sci 20(9):676–688
Roepstorff A, Niewöhner J, Beck S (2010) Enculturing brains through patterned practices. Neural Netw 
23(8–9):1051–1059. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.neune t.2010.08.002
Sterelny K (2003) Thought in a hostile world: the evolution of human cognition. Blackwell, Malden, 
Mass.
Sterelny K (2010) Minds: extended or scaffolded? Phenomenol Cogn Sci 9(4):465–481. https ://doi.
org/10.1007/s1109 7-010-9174-y
Sterelny K (2012) The evolved apprentice: how evolution made humans unique. MIT Press, Cambridge, 
Mass.
Stotz K (2010) Human nature and cognitive–developmental niche construction. Phenomenol Cogn Sci 
9(4):483–501. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1109 7-010-9178-7
Stotz K (2017) Why developmental niche construction is not selective niche construction: and why it 
matters. Interface Focus 7(5):1–10. https ://doi.org/10.1098/rsfs.2016.0157
Sutton J (2010) Exograms and interdisciplinarity: history, the extended mind, and the civilizing process. 
In: Menary R (ed) The extended mind. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass, pp 189–225
Veissière SPL, Constant A, Ramstead MJD, Friston KJ, Kirmayer LJ (2020) Thinking through other 
minds: a variational approach to cognition and culture. Behav Brain Sci 43:1–22. https ://doi.
org/10.1017/S0140 525X1 90012 13
West MJ, King AP (1987) Settling nature and nurture into an ontogenetic niche. Dev Psychobiol 
20(5):549–562
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.