Causal Inference Engine: A platform for directional gene set
enrichment analysis and inference of active transcriptional
regulators
Saman Farahmand1,3 Corey O’Connor2 Jill A. Macoska3 and Kourosh Zarringhalam1,4 ∗
1Computational Sciences PhD program, University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA 02125, USA 2Department of
Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA 02125, USA 3Center for Personalized Cancer
Therapy, University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA 02125, USA 4Department of Mathematics, University of
Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA 02125, USA
ABSTRACT
Inference of active regulatory mechanisms underlying
speciﬁc molecular and environmental perturbations is
essential for understanding cellular response. The success
of inference algorithms relies on the quality and coverage
of the underlying network of regulator-gene interactions.
Several commercial platforms provide large and manually-
curated regulatory networks and functionality to perform
inference on these networks. Adaptation of such platforms
for open-source academic applications has been hindered by
the lack of availability of accurate, high-coverage networks
of regulatory interactions and integration of eﬃcient causal
inference algorithms. In this work, we present CIE, an
integrated platform for causal inference of active regulatory
mechanisms form diﬀerential gene expression data. Using
a regularized Gaussian Graphical Model, we construct a
transcriptional regulatory network by integrating publicly
available ChIP-Seq experiments with gene-expression data
from tissue-speciﬁc RNA-Seq experiments. Our GGM
approach identiﬁes high conﬁdence TF-gene interactions
and annotates the interactions with information on mode of
regulation (activation vs. repression). Benchmarks against
manually-curated databases of TF-gene interactions show
that our method can accurately detect mode of regulation.
We demonstrate the ability of our platform to identify
active transcriptional regulators by using controlled in vitro
overexpression and stem-cell diﬀerentiation studies and
utilize our method to investigate transcriptional mechanisms
of ﬁbroblast phenotypic plasticity.
INTRODUCTION
Technological advancements in high-throughput sequencing
have made it possible to measure expression of genes at
relatively low cost. However, the direct measurement of
regulatory mechanisms, such as transcription factor (TF)
activity, in a high-throughput manner is still not readily
available. Consequently, there is a need for computational
approaches that can identify active regulatory mechanisms
from observable gene expression data. The scientiﬁc
community has developed a multitude of algorithms and
biophysical models to study the impact of TF activity on
gene expression. Some of these algorithms attempt to infer TF
activity and dynamics directly from gene expression data (1,
2). Others rely on biophysical approaches to model expression
∗To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1-617-287-7486; Fax: +1-617-287-6433; Email: kourosh.zarringhalam@umb.edu
of genes based on known TF-gene interactions (3). Another
class of algorithms, which are the main focus of this work,
use prior biological knowledge on biomolecular interactions to
link a differential gene expression (DGE) proﬁle to upstream
regulators (e.g., TFs) (4, 5, 6, 7). The essential ingredients
of these algorithms are (i) a DGE proﬁle, (ii) a network of
biomolecular interactions, and (iii) an inference algorithm to
query the network.
The DGE proﬁle as obtained from RNA-Seq or microarrays
studies is the observable input and quantiﬁes the difference
in transcript abundance between two conditions (e.g., healthy
vs. disease, stimulated vs. not stimulated, etc.). The network
of biomolecular interactions encapsulates the prior biological
knowledge. The accuracy and ability of inference algorithms
to identify upstream molecular drivers of observed DGE
proﬁles rely to a large degree on the quality and coverage
of the network and availability of auxiliary information
on interactions within the network. There are several
sources of publicly available protein-protein interactions and
signaling pathways (e.g., STRINGdb (8), Pathway Commons
(9), Kyto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
Pathways (10), etc.). In case of regulatory networks, Ingenuity
(www.ingenuity.com) provides a high-coverage manually-
curated network of regulatory interactions in an integrated
platform, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis tool (4). Among
other things, this platform provides pathway inference and
enrichment analysis functionality and network visualization
tools. However, the Ingenuity tools are inaccessible for the
majority of academic applications and there is a need for freely
available alternatives for academic purposes.
Several approaches for reconstruction of regulatory
networks form gene expression data have been proposed by
the scientiﬁc community (11, 12). Public sources of gene
regulatory interactions are either computationally derived,
based on biological experiments, or manually curated from
biomedical literature (13, 14, 15). These sources include the
Transcriptional Regulatory Element Database (TRED) (16),
the Transcription Regulatory Regions Database (TRRD) (17),
and Transcriptional Regulatory Relationships Unraveled by
Sentence-based Text Mining (TRRUST) (18). These databases
provide valuable information on gene regulatory mechanisms,
but drawbacks exist. The scope of the databases containing
experimentally validated interactions are very small, and cover
only a fraction of TF-gene interactions. On the other hand,
databases of computationally predicted and expression-driven
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which wasthis version posted July 11, 2019. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/698852doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Figure 1. CIE platform for inference of active regulators. CIE takes a user provided DGE proﬁle as input (left panel). User selects a prior regulatory network
from the provided databases. In the server side (middle panel), the input is processed and the Shiny web-server starts R scripts to perform the inference analysis
based on the user selected options. Predicted active regulators associated with the DEG proﬁle are displayed with interactive graphics and are downloadable in
table format (right panel). CIE also offers pathway enrichment analysis by mapping the inferred regulators to pathways from the Reactome database.
interactions are typically very noisy. Importantly, the majority
of the databases do not report the direction of regulation
(activation vs. repression) - which is crucial to understanding
the functional behavior of the cell.
In this work, we present Casual Inference Engine (CIE), a
platform for active regulator inference on biological networks
consisting of a web-server and a user-friendly R-package.
The platform provides various inference models, including
methods based on Fisher’s exact test (enrichment test) as well
as directional enrichment models that can utilize information
on mode of regulation (6, 7). Moreover, we present an
approach based on regularized Gaussian Graphical Models
(GGM) to construct an accurate and high-coverage annotated
networks of TF-gene regulatory interactions. We achieve
this by integrating publicly available high-throughput ChIP-
Seq experiments deposited in ChIP-Atlas (19) with tissue
speciﬁc gene expression data from GTEx (20). We show
the consistency and accuracy of our reconstructed network
by benchmarking against manually curated interactions in
the TRRUST database. We demonstrate the utility of our
platform in identifying active regulators using controlled in
vitro overexpression studies as well as more complex gene
expression data from a stem cell differentiation experiment.
Additionally, we show how our platform can assist in
identifying novel transcriptional regulatory mechanisms using
gene expression data from primary prostate ﬁbroblast cells
stimulated with TGFβ and CXCL12. Although our focus in
this work is on transcriptional regulatory networks, the R-
package provides functionality to perform inference on any
type of user provided network. The CIE platform provides
higher-order pathway enrichment analysis on identiﬁed active
regulators using Reactome pathways (21). Figure 1 shows a
schematic overview of the CIE platform.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Regulatory network
The interaction network can be viewed as a graph G=
(V,E), consisting of a set of nodes V (biological entities)
and a set of edges E=(u,v). The network is not limited to
interactions between TFs and genes and can include other
types of interactions (e.g., interactions between compounds
and proteins, protein-protein interactions, etc.). Some of
these edges may be associations (an undirected edge u−v,
indicating change in uis correlated with change in v), causal
(a directed edge u→v, indicating that uregulates v) or signed
causal (with + or −, indicating mode of regulation).
Databases
We utilized three sources of TF-gene interaction networks.
Our criterion for inclusion was that they either must include
high-conﬁdence, manually curated interactions with literature
support or must have direct experimental evidence. These
sources are:
(A) The TRRUST database: TRUSST (18) is a manually-
curated database of human transcriptional regulatory network
derived from PubMed articles with partial information on
mode of regulation. It contains 9,396 regulatory interactions
between 795 human TFs and 2,067 target genes.
(B) The TRED database: TRED (16) is an integrated
repository for both cis- and trans- regulatory elements in
mammals with experimental evidence. It includes a total of
6,726 interactions between 36 TF and 2,910 genes. These
interactions are not annotated with mode of regulation.
(C) ChIP-Seq derived TF-gene interactions: We obtained all
publicly available ChIP-Seq data ( > 96,000 experiments)
that are processed and deposited into ChIP-Atlas (19). A
TF-gene interaction network was assembled by merging
all experiments and applying various ﬁlters for peak signal
intensity (0-1,000) and distance to the transcription start site
(TSS) (1kb, 5kb, and 10KB). These ﬁlters are integrated in the
CIE platform and can be applied interactively in the web-app.
For example, peak intensity score of 500 and distance of 5kb
to TSS results in 185,271 interactions between 642 TFs and
16,148 target genes. Note that ChIP-Seq network does not
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which wasthis version posted July 11, 2019. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/698852doi: bioRxiv preprint 
directly provide information on mode of regulation and all
TF-gene interactions in this database are unannotated.
(D) STRINGdb: In addition to TF-gene interactions, we
also included Protein-gene interactions from STRINGdb
(8). STRINGdb includes protein-protein interactions (PPI)
from various sources including curated, experimentally
supported, and computationally-derived interactions. Some of
the interactions are causal and annotated, but most interactions
in the STRINGdb are undirected. For each undirected PPI
u−v, we constructed two directed interactions u→v and
v→u.
Differential Gene Expression Proﬁles.
We used several DGE proﬁles from microarray and RNA-Seq
experiments to evaluate the utility of our platform. For
microarray data, gene expression proﬁles were normalized
and differentially expressed genes were computed using the
R limma package (? ). We applied a 1.3 absolute value fold
change and <0.05 FDR corrected p-value ﬁlter for selecting
differentially expressed genes. RNA-Seq data was processed
using the HISAT2 (22) pipeline and differentially expressed
genes were identiﬁed for each treatment the edgeR package
(23). Similar ﬁlters for FDR and fold change were applied to
identify differentially expressed genes. The data sets that we
utilized for our evaluation are:
(A) Controlled overexpression experiments. We utilized
three datasets from (24), in which recombinant antiviruses
were used to infect normal human epithelial cell in order to
overexpress speciﬁc oncogenes. The over expressed genes
are E2F3, c-Myc and H-Ras. There are 272, 220 and 268
differentially expressed genes compared to the WT in the
experiments respectively.
(B) Stem cell directed differentiation. We used a time-
course in vitro differentiation model of pancreatic beta cell
development from (25). NEUROG3+ Pancreatic progenitor
cells convert to NKX2-2+ endocrine cells, which are able to
further differentiate into fully-functional insulin producing
cells upon implantation into mice (26). A total of 1,000
differentially expressed genes were identiﬁed from this
dataset.
(C) ﬁbroblast phenotypic plasticity. We utilized data from
RNA-Seq experiments performed on prostatic stromal
ﬁbroblasts stimulated with Vehicle, TGFβ , and CXCL12
(27). A total of 10,032 differentially expressed genes were
identiﬁed in ﬁbroblasts treated with TGFβ or CXCL12. The
DGE proﬁle of TGFβ and CXCL12 were 75% similar (7,502
transcripts). A total of 1,012 (10%) were induced by TGFβ
treatment only and 1,357 (13%) by CXCL12 treatment only.
161 (2%) were differentially regulated in opposite directions
by CXCL12 and TGFβ.
Construction of transcriptional regulatory networks
The network constructed from ChIP-data is noisy as the
experiments are performed under various conditions in
different cell lines. Moreover, the interactions are not
annotated with mode of regulation (activation vs. repression).
To reduce the noise and annotate the interactions, we utilized
a regularized Gaussian Graphical Model (glasso) (28) to
integrate the ChIP-derived network with tissue speciﬁc RNA-
Seq data obtained form the Genotype-Tissue Expression
project (The GTEx Consortium) (20). Processed normalized
gene expression values were obtained from (29), where
GTEx RNA sequencing reads from 15 tissues from 2,585
paired-end RNA-Seq samples were re-processed, uniformly
realigned, and normalized to remove batch effects and
tissues with low number of samples. Every ChIP-derived
interaction was taken account without any ﬁlters (≈ 4×
106 interactions). To construct the tissue-speciﬁc annotated
regulatory networks, we estimated a sparse covariance matrix
using each tissue-expression data separately, while softly
enforcing ChIP-derived interaction using anℓ1 penalty matrix.
Gene expression was log transformed prior to analysis. Only
protein-coding genes were utilized and genes with no on-
to-one map between Ensemble ID and HGNC symbol were
excluded.
The process of constructing a posterior network form
gene expression data and ChIP-network is as follows. Let
S denote the empirical covariance matrix estimated from
the RNA-Seq expression data for a given tissue, Σ be the
(unknown) covariance matrix, and Θ=Σ −1 be the precision
matrix. Glasso directly estimates the precision matrix Θ by
maximizing the ℓ1 penalized log likelihood
L=−log(detΘ)+ tr(SΘ)+ kΛ||Θ||1, (1)
on the space of positive semi-deﬁnite matrices. Here Λ is a
shrinkage parameter matrix and kis a scaler tuning parameter.
The prior ChIP-network structure was incorporated in the
penalty as follows. First, we constructed an adjacency matrix
A from the ChIP-network. The rows and columns of A
were arranged by TFs ﬁrst and then by genes. If there is
a connection between transcription factor i and gene j the
corresponding entry in the adjacency matrix is set to 1 (i.e.,
Aij=1), and otherwise it is set to 0. The penalty matrix Λ
has the same size as the adjacency matrix. The entries of this
matrix are constant values and are set to differentially penalize
the connections based on the information in the adjacency
matrix as follows:
Λij=
{λd i=j;
λs i̸=j; Aij=0,
λp i̸=j; Aij̸=0.
(2)
In our implementation, diagonal elements were not
penalized (i.e., λd=0). Interacting TFs and genes (i.e., .,
Aij=1) were penalized by a small nonzero value (λs=0.05)
and non-interacting pairs were penalized by a relatively large
value (λp=0.5). The matrix was then scaled by a constant
value k. We utilized a path of values ranging from 1 to 6
with step size 0.1 for k. For each scaling value, we ﬁtted
the model by maximizing the log likelihood and calculated
the corresponding precision matrix Θ, from which a posterior
regulatory network was constructed based on the conditional
independence property of GGMs (30). More precisely there is
a connection between TF iand gene j if and only if Θij≥ϵ.
The threshold value ϵ was selected 1e−4 empirically as a
small value. For each posterior network, we calculated the
scale-free property using the R-squared (R 2) value between
log(p(d)) and log(d) , where p(d) represents the proportion
of nodes in the network with dinteractions (31, 32). We chose
a value ofkfor each tissue that generated the highestR2 value.
Figure 2 illustrates the approach. Once the ﬁnal posterior
network was constructed, the signs of the interactions were
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which wasthis version posted July 11, 2019. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/698852doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Figure 2. Assembly of tissue-speciﬁc regulatory networks. The empirical
covariance matrix was estimated from GTEx tissue-speciﬁc gene expression
data. ChIP-Atlas prior network was converted into an adjacency matrix of
prior TF-gene interactions and softly enforced into graphical lasso using a
penalty matrix Λ with various degrees of stringency. The sparse precision
matrix Θ was estimated by optimizing the penalized log likelihood, from
which the posterior network was constructed. The precision matrix encodes
the direct interaction between entities in the network. A non-zero value
Θij ≥ϵ indicates that there is an interaction between ith TF and jth target
gene. The sign of interaction (activation vs. repression) is calculated from the
partial correlation matrix.
determined using the partial correlation matrix:
ρij=− Θij
√Θii
√Θjj
, i ̸=j (3)
Note that the connections in each posterior network are
supported by both ChIP-Seq data as well as by partial
correlation of gene expression values. A total of 15 tissue-
speciﬁc posterior network were constructed using this
process. Additionally, we examined the overlap between
these networks to identify the connections that appear across
multiple tissues. Such connections can be viewed as consistent
universal interactions. We refer to these network as merged
networks. In our implementation, we constructed merged
network using interactions that are consistent across 2, 3, 4,
or 5 tissues.
Inferring active regulators
CIE provided several (directional and un-directional)
enrichment tests to query the networks and identify
transcriptional regulators from a user provided DGE proﬁle.
The starting point of the inference is selection of one of the
causal networks of interactions that are provided by CIE. The
type of inference depends on the availability of information
on the mode of regulation in the causal graph. The ﬁrst
method is the Fisher’s exact test or the enrichment scoring
(ES) statistic, which is the standard for gene set enrichment
analysis (33). This method does not take information on
mode regulation into account. The next enrichment method is
Ternary scoring (TS) statistic proposed by Chindelevitch et.
al. (7). This method is suitable for fully annotated networks.
For networks with a mixture of annotated and unannotated
edges, we utilized the Quaternary scoring (QS) statistic
proposed by Fakhry et. al .(6).
All these methods are build on a common core, calculating
the goodness of the ﬁt of the score, which measure the
agreement between predictions made by regulators in the
graph and the observed DEG proﬁle. For each regulator in
the selected network, a contingency table is constructed that
tabulates the agreement between the predictions made by the
regulator according to the graph and the observations based on
the DGE proﬁle. The rows of the table represent the prediction
made by the regulator and the columns represent observed
differential expression proﬁle. In case of the Enrichment
scoring statistic, a 2×2 contingency is constructed, with
rows representing genes that are predicted to be regulated, or
unregulated by the regulator according to the network, and the
columns representing genes that are observed to be regulated,
or unregulated according to the observed DGE proﬁle. In
case of Ternary scoring statistics a 3×3 contingency table is
constructed, with rows representing genes that are predicted
to be upregulated, downregulated, or unregulated by the
regulator and the columns represent genes that are observed
to be upregulated, downregulated, or unregulated according
to the DGE proﬁle. Finally, in case of Quaternary scoring
statistic a 4×3 contingency table is constructed in a similar
manner with an additional row representing regulated or
unregulated corresponding to unsigned edges in the network.
The statistical signiﬁcance of the score is calculated using
a permutation (generalized hyper-geometric) test and the p-
values are reported. Details of these algorithms can be found
in the original publications (6, 7).
The CIE web server
The CIE web server was implemented using R Shiny,
Docker, ShinyProxy, and a NGINX web server. The applet
RCytoscapeJs was used for network visualization. The core
of functionality of the web server is driven by the CIE
R package. The open-source version of Shiny is a single-
threaded web server for web applications implementing with
R. If it is used to run a web application that takes a few
seconds at most to load, this will not cause any noticeable
impairment. However, CIE takes up to several minutes to load
and the open-source Shiny web server cannot allow another
user to connect during this time as it can only do one task
at a time. To overcome this limitation, we used ShinyProxy
and Docker container to allow creation of multiple instances.
ShinyProxy detects a new user’s request and starts a Docker
container of CIE application speciﬁcally for the user. NGINX
takes the request from the user and forwards it through
reverse proxy to ShinyProxy. The CIE web server is located
at https://markov.math.umb.edu/app/cie, and is accessible by
all major browsers. The inference result table consists of
the regulator’s symbol, total number of target genes, number
of the signiﬁcant target genes (i.e., differentially expressed
genes), and the corresponding p-values. The result table can
be downloaded in a text format. Users can also run higher-
order pathway enrichment analysis by mapping the inferred
regulators to Reactome pathways (21).
The CIE R-package
We also provide CIE R-package for ofﬂine and local usage
available to download at https://github.com/umbibio/CIE-R-
Package, under the GNU public license. The package is
capable of producing the same plots and results as the web
server with a simple functional call and allows for more ﬁne-
tune control, automation, and customized input networks. The
CIE R package is parallelized to provide efﬁcient and fast
inference. It utilizes the multidplyr and dopar packages to
implement this parallel computation. Multidplyr allows the
table of statistics from which enrichment is calculated to be
produced quickly, and dopar calculates the p-values in parallel
by wrapping a function call to their calculator. Our package
is documented and includes a comprehensive manual and
instructional vignettes.
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which wasthis version posted July 11, 2019. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/698852doi: bioRxiv preprint 
0e+00
1e+05
2e+05
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415
Number of tissues
Number of interactions
A)
0
5000
10000
15000
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Proportion of positives
Frequency
B)
Figure 3. A) Number of interactions shared across tissues. B) Proportion
of positive interactions shared in at least 5 tissues. The bimodal distribution
shows that interactions are consistently annotated as positive (1.0) or negative
(0).
RESULTS
We performed our GGM approach to integrate ChIP-derived
network from ChIP-Atlas (19) with tissue-speciﬁc gene
expression data from GTEx (20). For each tissue, a grid of
regularization parameters was applied, and the best network
based on the highest R-squared value was selected (SI Table
1).
Summary statistics
We examined the overlap between recovered interactions
in each tissue. Figure 3a shows the number of recovered
regulatory interactions shared between tissues. Interactions
that appear across several tissues are called consistent and
reﬂect non-tissue speciﬁc, universal TF-gene interactions.
As expected, we observed a signiﬁcant drop in number of
consistent interactions as number of tissues increase. There
are a total number of 95,745 interactions between 739 TFs
and 14,660 genes that appear across at least 5 tissues. We
further examined the consistency of recovered signs (mode
of regulation) across tissues. This analysis was carried out
on interactions that appear in at least 5 tissues. For each
interaction, the proportion of times that the interaction was
annotated as positive (or negative) across the tissues in
which the interaction appeared was calculated. Completely
consistent interactions will have either positive proportion of 1
(i.e., recovered always as positive) or 0 (i.e., recovered always
as negative). Figure 3b shows the frequency of the positive
proportions. As can be observed the distribution is bimodal,
with most interactions recovered consistently as either positive
or negative, indicating that TF-gene interactions tend to be
activation or repression independent of the tissue. For cross-
tissue merged networks, a majority voting scheme was used to
annotate inconsistent interactions.
Benchmark results
We compared our inferred mode of regulation with the signs
reported in the TRRUST database, a high-quality, manually-
curated database of human TF-gene interactions, which can
be considered as the gold standard for our purpose. For this
benchmark, we merged all annotated interactions across all
tissues. Figure 4a shows the number of posterior interactions
and their associated sign distribution recovered by the GGM
approach. Of the interactions in the ChIP-network, 47%
were supported by a tissue speciﬁc gene expression data and
annotated by our GGM approach (Figure 4a top). The ﬁnal
sign of recovered interactions were decided according to a
A)
1
0.65
1
0.75
1
0.81
1
0.69
1
0.5
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Accuracy F1 PrecisionSensitivitySpecificity
Tissue
All tissues
Five tissues
Zero: 53.0%
Negative: 26.0%
Positive: 21.0%
B)
Figure 4. A) Summary statistics of annotated interactions in the ChIP-
network and overlap with TRRUST database. B) Classiﬁcation performance
of annotated interactions in ChIP-network compared with TRRUST.
majority voting scheme resulting in 55% positive and 45%
negative interactions (Figure 4a top). We compared the sign of
annotated interactions with the signs reported in the TRRUST
database. The overlap between the ChIP-network and the
TRRUST data base is 3,812 TF-gene interactions (Figure
4a bottom), of which 1,247 are annotated in both TRRUST
and the tissue corrected ChIP-network. Further restricting the
interactions in the ChIP-network to consistent interactions that
appear across at least 5 tissues, results in 147 overlap with
annotated TRRUST interactions (see also SI Figures 1 and
2). Figure 4b shows classiﬁcation performance of these 1,247
and 147 overlapping interactions between tissue corrected and
cross 5-tissue merged ChIP-networks with TRRUST. As can
be seen the agreement is high in both cases (F1-scores 0.75
and 1.0), demonstrating that our approach is highly accurate
in identifying sings of regulation.
Recovering known perturbations in controlled
overexpression experiments
To test the performance of our tissue-corrected ChIP-network
and inference algorithms, we used the CIE platform to
identify drivers of differential expressed genes in controlled
overexpression studies. For this analysis, we utilized three
differential expression proﬁles, all of which were obtained by
over expressing an oncogene. The genes are E2F3, c-Myc,
and H-Ras. The number of differentially expressed genes in
experiment are 272, 220 and 268 respectively. Table 1 outlines
the top 10 regulators predicted by CIE on each experiment
sorted by the FDR corrected p-values of the enrichment
statistics (ES). The FDR corrected p-values of the Ternary
score (TS) along with the predicted direction of regulation by
the Ternary method are also presented in the table.
In the case of E2F3 experiment, E2F1 is returned as the top
putative regulator along with E2F2 as another top regulator.
E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3 are close related family of transcription
factors with very similar roles that function to control the
cell cycle and are implicated in cancer (34). The direction
of regulation for these factors are correctly predicted as
upregulated by Ternary method. Another predicted regulator
is EZH2, which is a downstream of the pRB-E2F pathway and
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which wasthis version posted July 11, 2019. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/698852doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Table 1. Top 20 predicted regulators by CIE on tissue corrected ChIP-network
E2F3 c-Myc H-Ras
Name ES TS Reg. Name ES TS Reg Name ES TS Reg.
E2F1 3.9e-8 4.9e-11 up TP53 8.8e-18 2.5e-20 up FOSL1 2.6e-28 2.0e-42 up
PSIP1 1.7e-6 1.6e-6 up SSRP1 3.5e-14 2.2e-22 up TP63 4.5e-13 9.6e-2 up
FOXM1 3.7e-6 1.5e-8 up WDR5 1.9e-12 5.6e-20 up KDM6B 2.4e-12 6.2e-19 up
EZH2 3.7e-6 2.2e-4 up SMARCA4 1.0e-11 2.7e-12 up ELF3 2.1e-11 1.6e-12 up
BRCA1 1.5e-5 3.1e-3 up E2F4 2.1e-9 3.3e-17 up EGR1 3.1e-11 3.0e-6 up
E2F2 4.3e-5 1.1e-5 up MYC 2.1e-8 1.9e-5 up MAFF 3.2e-10 3.3e-15 up
MYBL2 5.7e-5 5.6e-4 up TRIM28 1.7e-7 9.6e-14 up FOS 1.7e-9 1.0e-5 up
E2F7 6.8e-5 5.4e-6 up TEAD4 1.9e-7 3.7e-12 up JUNB 2.9e-9 1.9e-12 up
ETS1 1.2e-4 6.6e-3 up NFKB1 6.2e-7 1.7e-6 up BCL3 6.1e-8 2.7e-8 up
CEBPD 1.0e-3 1.8e-2 down ILF3 8.4e-7 3.4e-12 up SMAD3 6.7e-8 7.7e-9 up
Columns: Predicted regulator (Name), FDR corrected p-value (Enrichment Score: ES and Ternary Score: TS), predicted direction of regulation (Reg.)
is essential for proliﬁration and ampliﬁed in several primary
tumors (35). Interestingly, the Ternary method predicts the
direction of regulation of CEBPD as down. It is documented
that CEBPD reverses E2F1-mediated gene repression and
increased level of CEBPD attenuates E2F1-induced cancer
cell proliferation (36). In the c-Myc experiment, the algorithm
recovered MYC as one of the top putative regulators and it
is predicted to be upregulated. CIE also predicted WDR5,
a required interactor of MYC that associates with the same
target genes in vivo and is implicated in driving tumorigenesis
(37). Finally, in the H-Ras experiment, EGR1 is the top
putative regulator returned by the algorithm with a signiﬁcant
p-value and predicted to be upregulated. EGR1 is a key
regulator of oncogenic processes and is downstream of H-RAS
(38). In all cases the biology behind the recovered regulators
is sufﬁciently evident, demonstrating the ability of the CIE
platform and the tissue corrected ChIP-network in recovering
correct regulators of differential gene expression.
Note that Ternary (and Quaternary) scores are generally
more stringent than the enrichment score. Unlike the
enrichment score, they also match the direction of regulation
between the network and the DEG proﬁle. Additionally, the
Ternary and Quaternary are able to make inference on the
direction of perturbation of the predicted active regulators.
Drivers of stem cell directed differentiation
To test the utility of the CIE platform and the higher-
order pathway enrichment on inferred regulators in generating
biological insight, we utilized a more complex data set of
stem cell directed differentiation of pancreatic beta cells (25)
and the mixed signed STRINGdb network with Quaternary
scoring method. Figures 5A and B show the CIE causal
regulatory inference results. Among the top predictors, Gastrin
(GAST), IL6 and NEUROG3 are predicted to be up-regulated
by CIE, all of which are involved in the development of
the pancreatic endocrine cell lineage (39, 40). Users can
interactively select top regulators predicted by CIE and
perform pathway enrichment analysis using the Reactome
(21) pathways. Figure 5C shows the enriched Reactome
pathways returned by CIE using the top 5 predicted regulators.
Several signiﬁcant pathways were acquired through this
analysis such as regulation of gene expression in late stage
(branching morphogenesis) pancreatic bud precursor cells,
which is essentially pointing to the endocrine differentiation
of the epithelial cells (41). Furthermore, Regulation of beta-
cell development is also identiﬁed, which provides a direct
link to the transient cellular stages leading to the generation of
all pancreatic endocrine cells including insulin-producing beta
cells (41). Finally, transcriptional regulation of pluripotent
stem cells is identiﬁed, which encodes regulatory networks
NameFDRRegAURKB0.001upGAST0.002upIL6 0.007upFGF20.008upNEUROG30.010up
Reactome Pathway FDRInterleukin-4 and Interleukin-13 signaling 0.0004Regulation of gene expression in late stage pancreatic bud precursor cells0.0027POU5F1 (OCT4), SOX2, NANOG activate genes related to proliferation0.0027Transcriptional regulation of pluripotent stem cells0.0094Regulation of beta-cell development0.0153Signaling by Interleukins0.0153Interleukin-10 signaling 0.0183Senescence-Associated Secretory Phenotype (SASP)0.0183Developmental Biology0.0317Cytokine Signaling in Immune system0.0317Regulation of gene expression in endocrine-committed (NEUROG3+) progenitor cells0.0317
A) B)
C)
Inferred regulatorUpregulated target geneDownregulatedtargetgene  
Figure 5. CIE output on differentiation of pancreatic beta cell. A) Inferred regulatory network corresponding to top 5 predicted regulators and their target genes.
B) Table of top 5 predicted active regulators.C) Reactome pathways corresponding to the top 5 predicted regulators by CIE.
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which wasthis version posted July 11, 2019. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/698852doi: bioRxiv preprint 
underlying Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) differentiation into
any cell type or tissue type in body (42).
Signaling mechanisms underlying ﬁbroblast-to-
myoﬁbroblast phenoconversion. In this section we show
how the CIE platform can be utilized to test a speciﬁc
biological hypothesis regarding transcriptional regulators.
We demonstrate this use case in the context of ﬁbroblast
phenotypic plasticity. Fibroblasts are an abundant cell type
within the human connective tissue and play a primary role in
secretion of the components of the extracellular matrix (ECM)
(43). Fibroblasts have striking similarities with mesenchymal
stem cells (MSCs) and share some functions with MSCs,
including phenotypic plasticity governed at the genetic level
(44). It is known that Fibroblast can phenotypically convert
to myoﬁbroblasts in response to pro-ﬁbrotic proteins such
as TGFβ and CXC-type chemokines, secreted by the aging
and/or inﬂammatory cells (27, 45, 46). Phenotypic conversion
can occur through two independent cellular signaling
mechanisms: One that depends upon TGFβ /TGFβR axis
activation and Smad singling, and another that depends upon
CXCL12/CXCR4-axis activation, EGFR transactivation, and
downstream signaling through MEK/ERK and PI3K/Akt
pathways - all of which converge in the nucleus to promote
the expression of multiple collagen genes (45, 46).
We previously reported that TGFβ and CXCL12 induced
or repressed a transcriptional molecular signature that was
75% similar and 25% dissimilar (27). There is evidence that
both TGFβ and CXCL12 may be acting upon the same set
of bHLH (basic Helix-Loop-Helix) E-box and Egr-1/Egr-2
TFs that bind to consensus sequences in the promoters of the
COL1A1 and COL1A2 and other genes (47, 48). To test this
hypothesis we utilized the DGE proﬁles from the RNA-Seq
experiments for both TGFβ and CXCL12 treatment (27) and
performed a CIE analysis using Ternary scoring statistic and
merged tissue corrected ChIP-network.
The algorithm predicts many active regulators. Notably,
AHR, BHLHE40, TCF4, TCF12, ARNT, ARNTL, MYC,
and NEUROG2 bHLH transcription factors, and Egr-1, Egr-
2 transcription factors are predicted by the algorithm as
top putative regulators. We also examined the promoter of
COL1A1 and COL1A2 and identiﬁed multiple binding sites
for several of these TFs, including AHR, Egr-1, BHLHE40,
ARNT, TCF4. In particular, Egr-1 has multiple binding sites
in the promoters of these genes. Taken together, these results
support the hypothesis that Egr- bHHL-family TFs can drive
the expression of collagen genes in response to TGFβ and
CXCL12.
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this work, we present Causal Inference Engine (CIE), an
integrated platform for identiﬁcation and interpretation of
active regulators of transcriptional response. The platform
offers visualization tools and pathway enrichment analysis to
map predicted regulators to Reactome pathways. We provide
a parallelized R-package for fast and ﬂexible directional
enrichment analysis that can run the inference on any
user provided custom regulatory network. Multiple inference
algorithms are provided within the CIE platform along
with regulatory networks from curated sources TRRUST
and TRED as well as a causal protein-gene interactions
derived from the STRINGdb. Importantly we provide a
high conﬁdence annotated causal transcriptional regulatory
network by combining publicly available ChIP-Seq data with
tissue speciﬁc gene expression data. Using a novel regularized
gaussian graphical model, we softly enforce the TF-gene
interaction identiﬁed by ChIP-Seq experiments in estimating
the precision and partial correlation matrices form tissue gene-
expression data, from which we drive tissue-speciﬁc annotated
transcriptional regulatory networks. Further by merging the
networks, we obtained a set of consistent TF-gene interactions
that are universally applicable independent of the context.
Benchmarks against the gold standard TRRUST database
demonstrate that our approach is well able to recover mode
of regulation with high accuracy. We demonstrated the utility
of our approach in discovering known and novel biology
using controlled in vitro over-expression studies as well as
stem cell differentiation. Moreover, we demonstrated how
our platform can be utilized to investigate speciﬁc biological
hypotheses of transcriptional regulatory mechanisms in the
context of ﬁbroblast phenotypic plasticity in response to
signaling events. Our approach and platform can be adopted
for other settings, such as identifying candidate co-activators
of speciﬁc transcription factors and reconstructing regulatory
networks from single cell gene expression data. We hope
that this platform provides the scientiﬁc community an open
source alternative tool to interpret differential gene expression
and to generate new biological insights. In the future, we
plan to integrate additional networks and pathway inference
methods in our platform. We also plan to pursue biological
validation of our results on ﬁbroblast phenotypic plasticity
using ChIP-Seq methodologies.
DATA AVAILABILITY
CIE is an open source collaborative initiative available in
the GitHub repository: https://github.com/umbibio/CIE-R-
Package All of the used databased can be downloaded
through CIE web server via Download menu:
https://markov.math.umb.edu/app/cie
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary Data are available at NAR online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Authors would like to acknowledge Yasaman Rezvani for help
with R-code.
FUNDING
KZ would like to acknowledge funding from UMB Joseph P.
Healey Research Grant JHG-18-15. CO was supported by the
NIH-funded Initiative for Maximizing Student Development
(IMSD) at University of Massachusetts Boston.
Conﬂict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Asif, H. M. S. and Sanguinetti, G. (may, 2011) Large-scale learning
of combinatorial transcriptional dynamics from gene expression..
Bioinformatics (Oxford, England), 27(9), 1277–83.
2. Bulashevska, S. and Eils, R. (jun, 2005) Inferring genetic regulatory logic
from expression data.. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England), 21(11), 2706–
13.
3. Djordjevic, M., Sengupta, A. M., and Shraiman, B. I. (nov, 2003)
A biophysical approach to transcription factor binding site discovery..
Genome research, 13(11), 2381–90.
4. Kr ¨amer, A., Green, J., Pollard, J., and Tugendreich, S. (feb, 2014) Causal
analysis approaches in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Bioinformatics,
30(4), 523–530.
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which wasthis version posted July 11, 2019. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/698852doi: bioRxiv preprint 
5. Zarringhalam, K., Enayetallah, A., Gutteridge, A., Sidders, B., and
Ziemek, D. (2013) Molecular causes of transcriptional response: a
Bayesian prior knowledge approach. Bioinformatics, p. btt557.
6. Fakhry, C. T., Choudhary, P., Gutteridge, A., Sidders, B., Chen, P.,
Ziemek, D., and Zarringhalam, K. (2016) Interpreting transcriptional
changes using causal graphs: new methods and their practical utility on
public networks. BMC Bioinformatics, 17(1), 318.
7. Chindelevitch, L., Ziemek, D., Enayetallah, A., Randhawa, R., Sidders,
B., Brockel, C., and Huang, E. S. (apr, 2012) Causal reasoning on
biological networks: interpreting transcriptional changes. Bioinformatics,
28(8), 1114–1121.
8. Szklarczyk, D., Franceschini, A., Wyder, S., Forslund, K., Heller, D.,
Huerta-Cepas, J., Simonovic, M., Roth, A., Santos, A., Tsafou, K. P.,
Kuhn, M., Bork, P., Jensen, L. J., and von Mering, C. (jan, 2015) STRING
v10: protein-protein interaction networks, integrated over the tree of life..
Nucleic acids research, 43(Database issue), D447–52.
9. Cerami, E. G., Gross, B. E., Demir, E., Rodchenkov, I., Babur,¨O., Anwar,
N., Schultz, N., Bader, G. D., and Sander, C. (2011) Pathway Commons,
a web resource for biological pathway data. Nucleic acids research,
39(suppl 1), D685—-D690.
10. Kanehisa, M. and Goto, S. (2000) KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes
and genomes. Nucleic acids research, 28(1), 27–30.
11. Bansal, M., Belcastro, V ., Ambesi-Impiombato, A., and Di Bernardo, D.
(2007) How to infer gene networks from expression proﬁles. Molecular
systems biology, 3(1), 78.
12. Chouvardas, P., Kollias, G., and Nikolaou, C. (2016) Inferring active
regulatory networks from gene expression data using a combination of
prior knowledge and enrichment analysis. BMC bioinformatics, 17(5),
181.
13. Gerner, M., Sarafraz, F., Bergman, C. M., and Nenadic, G. (2012)
BioContext: an integrated text mining system for large-scale extraction
and contextualization of biomolecular events. Bioinformatics, 28(16),
2154–2161.
14. Fakhry, C. T., Zarringhalam, K., and Chen, P. (2015) Biomedical relation
extraction using stochastic difference equations. In 2015 IEEE High
Performance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC)IEEE pp. 1–6.
15. Farahmand, S., Riley, T., and Zarringhalam, K. (2019) ModEx: A text
mining system for extracting mode of regulation of Transcription Factor-
gene regulatory interaction. BioRxiv, p. 672725.
16. Jiang, C., Xuan, Z., Zhao, F., and Zhang, M. Q. (2007) TRED:
a transcriptional regulatory element database, new entries and other
development. Nucleic acids research, 35(suppl 1), D137—-D140.
17. Kolchanov, N. A., Podkolodnaya, O. A., Ananko, E. A., Ignatieva, E. V .,
Stepanenko, I. L., Kel-Margoulis, O. V ., Kel, A. E., Merkulova, T. I.,
Goryachkovskaya, T. N., Busygina, T. V ., Kolpakov, F. A., Podkolodny,
N. L., Naumochkin, A. N., Korostishevskaya, I. M., Romashchenko,
A. G., and Overton, G. C. (jan, 2000) Transcription Regulatory Regions
Database (TRRD): its status in 2000. Nucleic Acids Research, 28(1),
298–301.
18. Han, H., Shim, H., Shin, D., Shim, J. E., Ko, Y ., Shin, J., Kim, H., Cho,
A., Kim, E., Lee, T., Kim, H., Kim, K., Yang, S., Bae, D., Run, A., Kim,
S., Yeong, C., Hyeon, K., Cho, J., yunghee Kang, Shin, S., and Lee, I.
(2015) TRRUST: a reference database of human transcriptional regulatory
interactions. Scientiﬁc reports, 5.
19. Oki, S., Ohta, T., Shioi, G., Hatanaka, H., Ogasawara, O., Okuda, Y .,
Kawaji, H., Nakaki, R., Sese, J., and Meno, C. (dec, 2018) ChIPAtlas:
a datamining suite powered by full integration of public ChIPseq data.
EMBO reports, 19(12), e46255.
20. GTEx Consortium, Laboratory, Data Analysis &Coordinating Center
(LDACC)Analysis Working Group, Statistical Methods groupsAnalysis
Working Group, Enhancing GTEx (eGTEx) groups, NIH Common
Fund, NIH/NCI, NIH/NHGRI, NIH/NIMH, NIH/NIDA, Biospecimen
Collection Source SiteNDRI, Biospecimen Collection Source SiteRPCI,
Biospecimen Core ResourceV ARI, Brain Bank RepositoryUniversity of
Miami Brain Endowment Bank, Leidos BiomedicalProject Management,
ELSI Study, Genome Browser Data Integration &VisualizationEBI,
Genome Browser Data Integration &VisualizationUCSC Genomics
Institute, University of California Santa Cruz, analysts:, L., Laboratory,
Data Analysis &Coordinating Center (LDACC):, program management:,
N., collection:, B., Pathology:, manuscript working group:, E., Battle,
A., Brown, C. D., Engelhardt, B. E., and Montgomery, S. B. (oct,
2017) Genetic effects on gene expression across human tissues. Nature,
550(7675), 204–213.
21. Fabregat, A., Jupe, S., Matthews, L., Sidiropoulos, K., Gillespie, M.,
Garapati, P., Haw, R., Jassal, B., Korninger, F., May, B., Milacic, M.,
Roca, C. D., Rothfels, K., Sevilla, C., Shamovsky, V ., Shorser, S.,
Varusai, T., Viteri, G., Weiser, J., Wu, G., Stein, L., Hermjakob, H.,
and D’Eustachio, P. (jan, 2018) The Reactome Pathway Knowledgebase.
Nucleic Acids Research, 46(D1), D649–D655.
22. Kim, D., Langmead, B., and Salzberg, S. L. (2015) HISAT: A fast spliced
aligner with low memory requirements. Nature Methods,.
23. Robinson, M. D., McCarthy, D. J., and Smyth, G. K. (2010) edgeR: a
Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene
expression data. Bioinformatics, 26(1), 139–140.
24. Bild, A. H., Yao, G., Chang, J. T., Wang, Q., Potti, A., Chasse, D., Joshi,
M.-B., Harpole, D., Lancaster, J. M., Berchuck, A., and Others (2006)
Oncogenic pathway signatures in human cancers as a guide to targeted
therapies. Nature, 439(7074), 353–357.
25. Gutteridge, A., Rukstalis, J. M., Ziemek, D., Ti ´e, M., Ji, L., Ramos-
Zayas, R., Nardone, N. A., Norquay, L. D., Brenner, M. B., Tang, K., and
Others (2013) Novel pancreatic endocrine maturation pathways identiﬁed
by genomic proﬁling and causal reasoning. PloS one, 8(2), e56024.
26. Kroon, E., Martinson, L. A., Kadoya, K., Bang, A. G., Kelly, O. G.,
Eliazer, S., Young, H., Richardson, M., Smart, N. G., Cunningham, J.,
Agulnick, A. D., D’Amour, K. A., Carpenter, M. K., and Baetge, E. E.
(apr, 2008) Pancreatic endoderm derived from human embryonic stem
cells generates glucose-responsive insulin-secreting cells in vivo. Nature
Biotechnology, 26(4), 443–452.
27. Patalano, S., Rodr\’\iguez-Nieves, J., Colaneri, C., Cotellessa, J.,
Almanza, D., Zhilin-Roth, A., Riley, T., and Macoska, J. (2018)
CXCL12/CXCR4-Mediated Procollagen Secretion Is Coupled To Cullin-
RING Ubiquitin Ligase Activation. Scientiﬁc reports, 8(1), 3499.
28. Friedman, J., Hastie, T., and Tibshirani, R. (2008) Sparse inverse
covariance estimation with the graphical lasso. Biostatistics, 9(3), 432–
441.
29. Wang, Q., Armenia, J., Zhang, C., Penson, A. V ., Reznik, E., Zhang, L.,
Minet, T., Ochoa, A., Gross, B. E., Iacobuzio-Donahue, C. A., and Others
(2018) Unifying cancer and normal RNA sequencing data from different
sources. Scientiﬁc data, 5, 180061.
30. Uhler, C. (jul, 2017) Gaussian Graphical Models: An Algebraic and
Geometric Perspective.
31. Saha, A., Kim, Y ., Gewirtz, A. D., Jo, B., Gao, C., McDowell, I. C.,
Engelhardt, B. E., and Battle, A. (2017) Co-expression networks reveal
the tissue-speciﬁc regulation of transcription and splicing. Genome
Research,.
32. Zhang, B. and Horvath, S. (2005) A General Framework for Weighted
Gene Co-Expression Network Analysis. Statistical Applications in
Genetics and Molecular Biology,.
33. Maciejewski, H. (2013) Gene set analysis methods: statistical models and
methodological differences. Brieﬁngs in bioinformatics, p. bbt002.
34. Chen, H.-Z., Tsai, S.-Y ., and Leone, G. (2009) Emerging roles of E2Fs
in cancer: an exit from cell cycle control. Nature Reviews Cancer, 9(11),
785–797.
35. Bracken, A. P., Pasini, D., Capra, M., Prosperini, E., Colli, E., and Helin,
K. (oct, 2003) EZH2 is downstream of the pRB-E2F pathway, essential for
proliferation and ampliﬁed in cancer. The EMBO Journal, 22(20), 5323–
5335.
36. Pan, Y . C., Li, C. F., Ko, C. Y ., Pan, M. H., Chen, P. J., Tseng, J. T., Wu,
W. C., Chang, W. C., Huang, A. M., Sterneck, E., and Wang, J. M. (2010)
CEBPD reverses RB/E2F1-mediated gene repression and participates in
HMDB-induced apoptosis of cancer cells. Clinical Cancer Research,.
37. Thomas, L. R., Wang, Q., Grieb, B. C., Phan, J., Foshage, A. M., Sun,
Q., Olejniczak, E. T., Clark, T., Dey, S., Lorey, S., Alicie, B., Howard,
G. C., Cawthon, B., Ess, K. C., Eischen, C. M., Zhao, Z., Fesik, S. W., and
Tansey, W. P. (may, 2015) Interaction with WDR5 promotes target gene
recognition and tumorigenesis by MYC.. Molecular cell, 58(3), 440–52.
38. Nandan, M. O., Yoon, H. S., Zhao, W., Ouko, L. A., Chanchevalap, S.,
and Yang, V . W. (2004) Kr¨uppel-like factor 5 mediates the transforming
activity of oncogenic H-Ras. Oncogene, 23(19), 3404–3413.
39. Gradwohl, G., Dierich, A., LeMeur, M., and Guillemot, F. (2000)
neurogenin3 is required for the development of the four endocrine cell
lineages of the pancreas.. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America,.
40. Krause, M. d. S., Bittencourt, A., de Bittencourt, P. I. H., McClenaghan,
N. H., Flatt, P. R., Murphy, C., and Newsholme, P. (2012) Physiological
concentrations of interleukin-6 directly promote insulin secretion, signal
transduction, nitric oxide release, and redox status in a clonal pancreatic
β-cell line and mouse islets. Journal of Endocrinology,.
41. Servitja, J. M. and Ferrer, J. (apr, 2004) Transcriptional networks
controlling pancreatic development and beta cell function. Diabetologia,
47(4), 597–613.
42. Guenther, M. G. (jun, 2011) Transcriptional control of embryonic and
induced pluripotent stem cells. Epigenomics, 3(3), 323–343.
43. Sriram, G., Bigliardi, P. L., and Bigliardi-Qi, M. (2015) Fibroblast
heterogeneity and its implications for engineering organotypic skin
models in vitro. European journal of cell biology, 94(11), 483–512.
44. Denu, R. A., Nemcek, S., Bloom, D. D., Goodrich, A. D., Kim, J., Mosher,
D. F., and Hematti, P. (2016) Fibroblasts and Mesenchymal Stromal/Stem
Cells Are Phenotypically Indistinguishable. Acta haematologica, 136(2),
85–97.
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which wasthis version posted July 11, 2019. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/698852doi: bioRxiv preprint 
45. Gharaee-Kermani, M., Kasina, S., Moore, B. B., Thomas, D., Mehra, R.,
and Macoska, J. A. (2012) CXC-type chemokines promote myoﬁbroblast
phenoconversion and prostatic ﬁbrosis. PloS one, 7(11), e49278.
46. Rodr\’\iguez-Nieves, J. A., Patalano, S. C., Almanza, D., Gharaee-
Kermani, M., and Macoska, J. A. (2016) CXCL12/CXCR4 Axis
Activation Mediates Prostate Myoﬁbroblast Phenoconversion through
Non-Canonical EGFR/MEK/ERK Signaling. PloS one, 11(7), e0159490.
47. Fang, F., Ooka, K., Bhattachyya, S., Wei, J., Wu, M., Du, P., Lin, S.,
Del Galdo, F., Feghali-Bostwick, C. A., and Varga, J. (2011) The early
growth response gene Egr2 (alias Krox20) is a novel transcriptional target
of transforming growth factor-βthat is up-regulated in systemic sclerosis
and mediates proﬁbrotic responses. The American journal of pathology,
178(5), 2077–2090.
48. Jung, F., Johnson, A. D., Kumar, M. S., Wei, B., Hautmann, M., Owens,
G. K., and McNamara, C. (1999) Characterization of an E-box-Dependent
cis Element in the Smooth Muscle α-Actin Promoter. Arteriosclerosis,
Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology,19(11), 2591–2599.
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which wasthis version posted July 11, 2019. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/698852doi: bioRxiv preprint 