TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED /two.tnum/zero.tnum December /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
DOI /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnbot./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Minoru Asada,
Osaka University, Japan
REVIEWED BY
Shuangming Yang,
Tianjin University, China
Beck Strohmer,
Technical University of Denmark,
Denmark
*CORRESPONDENCE
Yi Zeng
yi.zeng@ia.ac.cn
RECEIVED /two.tnum/two.tnum August /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
ACCEPTED /three.tnum/zero.tnum November /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
PUBLISHED /two.tnum/zero.tnum December /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
CITATION
Feng H and Zeng Y (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum) A
brain-inspired robot pain model based
on a spiking neural network.
Front. Neurorobot./one.tnum/six.tnum:/one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum.
doi: /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnbot./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum
COPYRIGHT
© /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum Feng and Zeng. This is an
open-access article distributed under
the terms of the
Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY) . The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which
does not comply with these terms.
A brain-inspired robot pain
model based on a spiking neural
network
Hui Feng /one.tnum,/two.tnumand Yi Zeng /one.tnum,/two.tnum,/three.tnum,/four.tnum*
/one.tnumBrain-inspired Cognitive Intelligence Lab, Institute of Autom ation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China, /two.tnumSchool of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academ y of Sciences, Beijing,
China, /three.tnumCenter for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Techn ology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China, /four.tnumNational Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automati on,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Introduction: Pain is a crucial function for organisms. Building a “Robot Pain ”
model inspired by organisms’ pain could help the robot learn se lf-preservation
and extend longevity. Most previous studies about robots and p ain focus on
robots interacting with people by recognizing their pain expres sions or scenes,
or avoiding obstacles by recognizing dangerous objects. Robot s do not have
human-like pain capacity and cannot adaptively respond to dange r. Inspired
by the evolutionary mechanisms of pain emergence and the Free En ergy
Principle (FEP) in the brain, we summarize the neural mechanism s of pain and
construct a Brain-inspired Robot Pain Spiking Neural Network (BR P-SNN) with
spike-time-dependent-plasticity (STDP) learning rule and po pulation coding
method.
Methods: The proposed model can quantify machine injury by detecting
the coupling relationship between multi-modality sensory inf ormation and
generating “robot pain” as an internal state.
Results: We provide a comparative analysis with the results of neuroscie nce
experiments, showing that our model has biological interpretab ility. We also
successfully tested our model on two tasks with real robots—the ale rting actual
injury task and the preventing potential injury task.
Discussion: Our work has two major contributions: (/one.tnum) It has positive
implications for the integration of pain concepts into robotics in the intelligent
robotics ﬁeld. (/two.tnum) Our summary of pain’s neural mechanisms and t he
implemented computational simulations provide a new perspe ctive to explore
the nature of pain, which has signiﬁcant value for future pain res earch in the
cognitive neuroscience ﬁeld.
KEYWORDS
brain-inspired intelligent robot, robot pain, spiking neural ne twork, free energy
principle, spike-time-dependent-plasticity
/one.tnum. Introduction
Pain is vital to individual organisms’ survival and the social life between organism s
(Walters and Williams, 2019 ). The International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP)
deﬁnes pain as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with, or
resembling that associated with, actual or potential tissue damage” (
Raja et al., 2020 ).
Frontiers in Neurorobotics /zero.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org
Feng and Zeng /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnbot./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum
Pain can alert to actual injuries and prevent potential injuries,
help organisms protect themselves (
Hardcastle, 1997 ; Loeser
and Melzack, 1999 ), and synergistically trigger various cognitive
functions, such as pain memory and pain empathy ( Jackson
et al., 2006 ; Wiech and Tracey, 2013 ; Asada, 2019 ). Designing
Robot Pain inspired by the organisms’ pain has essential
implications for the survival and longevity of robots.
Previous works related to robots and pain have focused
on how robots recognize pain signals, such as humans’ painful
expressions, and realize pain empathy for humans (
Cao et al.,
2021; Werner et al., 2022 ). Kuehn and Haddadin (2016)
designed the robot’s neural reﬂex behavior for pain, which is
only a pain-induced avoidance response and not a human-
like pain capacity.
Sur and Amor (2017) attempted to model
the robot’s pain capacity, but the network structure they used
is diﬀerent from the biological mechanism. We explored the
neural mechanisms of pain and established a Brain-inspired
Robot Pain Spiking Neural Network (BRP-SNN) to simulate the
brain regions involving pain, using the spike-timing-dependent-
plasticity (STDP) learning rule to train the connection weights.
Our model makes the robots have human-like pain capacity and
has greater biological plausibility.
We believe that the deﬁnition of Robot Pain should be
inspired by the nature of organisms’ pain. First, the pain
mechanism in organisms has evolved over thousands of years,
and it is closely related to physical injury (
Bagnato et al., 2015 ).
Broom proposed that pain is the neural activity at the brain level
that accompanies physical injury (
Broom, 2001 ). This neural
activity occurs primarily in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC;
Frankland and Teixeira, 2005 ). In addition, this neural activity
can be associated with injury-related cues, such as scenes of
physical injury or a dangerous object. When a similar cue
occurs, the brain will generate the same neural activity and
avoid potential injury in time (
Karsdorp and Vlaeyen, 2009 ).
This phenomenon is called pain memory ( Eich et al., 1985 ).
Therefore, pain is a passive response to actual physical injury
and active response to potential physical injury (
Sur and Amor,
2017). We argue that the Robot Pain should be designed in
line with the neural mechanism of pain mentioned above—it
should ﬁrst respond to actual machine injury and then respond
to potential machine injury.
For the cognitive process of actual physical injury, we take
inspiration from the brain’s Free Energy Principle (FEP;
Friston,
2010). FEP proposes that the brain constantly makes predictions
about the outside world, and all senses will receive real sensory
information from the external world. If the predictions are
consistent with the real sensory information, the brain is in a
low-entropy state; if the predictions are inconsistent with the
real sensory information, the brain is in a high-entropy state
(
Friston et al., 2006 ; Karl, 2012 ). Physical injury and other
unexpected phenomena all belong to the high-entropy state
(
Peters et al., 2017 ), which indicates that the brain’s predictions
and sensations are inconsistent at a certain level. As the main
brain region associated with pain, the ACC has also been
conﬁrmed to be associated with prediction error of diﬀerent
levels by multiple neuroscience studies (
Oliveira et al., 2008 ;
Castellar et al., 2010 ; Jessup et al., 2010 ). Inspired by the FEP and
ACC function, we summarize a functional connection map of
brain regions for cognizing actual physical injury and generating
pain experience. In addition, we explored the cognitive processes
for potential physical injuries. The experience of pain can be
associated with injury-related cues, such as scenes or sounds
of injury. The visual or auditory cortex of the brain ﬁres
accordingly and establishes synaptic connections with the ACC
through associative learning. When a similar cue reappears, the
brain uses these synaptic connections to generate a rapid pain
experience and avoid potential injury (
Wiech and Tracey, 2013 ).
We simulated the pain-related mechanisms mentioned above
with a Spiking Neural Network (SNN), and experimentally
validated our model on a real robot.
This paper proposed a Brain-inspired Robot Pain Spiking
Neural Network (BRP-SNN) model inspired by the neural
mechanisms of organisms’ pain. This model has three major
contributions: (1) We summarized a neural mechanism of pain
emergence from the perspective of pain evolution and the brain’s
Free Energy Principle (FEP). (2) We use an SNN to build a
Brain-inspired Robot Pain model that can respond to both actual
and potential injury, and obtain a result curve similar to the
neuroscience experiment. (3) We apply the proposed model to
the robot and complete the alerting actual injury task and the
preventing potential injury task.
/two.tnum. Materials and methods
/two.tnum./one.tnum. The neural mechanism of pain
Most of the existing neuroscience literature describes the
neural mechanism of pain: nociceptive stimuli speciﬁcally
activate nociceptors in the skin, and nociceptive information is
transmitted through the spinal cord, thalamus, and brainstem
to the Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC) and other areas of the
cerebral cortex, forming a painful experience. It is a speciﬁc
pathway that has evolved over thousands of years of evolution
(
Sneddon, 2019 ). However, this pathway is not suﬃcient to
support the modeling of Robot Pain.
Broom (2001) proposed that the emergence of pain was
ﬁrst related to body injury during evolution. Pain is a neural
activity accompanying the body injury, and it is preserved
and internalized in the brain because of its survival beneﬁts.
Nociceptors have also evolved (
Perl and Kruger, 1996 ). In
further learning, corresponding brain regions (e.g., visual and
auditory cortex) will capture cues related to the injury when
the body injury actually occurs. These brain regions will be
connected to pain regions through associative learning (
Schlund
Frontiers in Neurorobotics /zero.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org
Feng and Zeng /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnbot./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum
et al., 2011 ; Wiech and Tracey, 2013 ). This connection ensures a
rapid avoidance response to a potential body injury.
The ﬁrst step of pain emergence is the cognition of the
actual body injury. The brain’s Free Energy Principle (FEP)
proposes that organisms are constantly maintaining the low-
entropy state, and abnormal phenomena are the high-entropy
state (
Friston et al., 2006 ; Karl, 2012 ; Peters et al., 2017 ), such
as body injury. Entropy cannot be quantiﬁed, but Free Energy
(FE) can be approximately equal to entropy. Therefore, the
FEP can be seen as the theoretical basis for cognitive actual
body injury. Bogacz describes the details of the FEP and gives
a formula derivation (
Bogacz, 2017): the brain can never directly
obtain the real state φ of the external world, but can only
constantly estimate the external world state ˆφ, and the body’s
senses can receive real sensory information s about the real
external world state and use it to verify brain’s estimate. FE
in
Bogacz (2017) is simpliﬁed as a negative logarithm of the
joint probability distribution of external state estimation and
real sensory information − ln p(s, ˆφ), which means that the
greater the joint probability distribution, the more accurate the
estimate, the smaller the FE, and the smaller the entropy of
the organism. The FE expression is expanded with the Bayesian
formula p(s, ˆφ) = p(s| ˆφ)p( ˆφ):
FE = − ln p(s, ˆφ)
= − ln p(s| ˆφ) − ln p( ˆφ)
(1)
The probability distribution is replaced with a Gaussian
distribution f [s; g(.), σ ] with mean g(.) and variance σ ,
supposing σ = 1:
FE = − ln f1(s; gs( ˆφ), σs) − ln f2( ˆφ; µ φ , σφ )
= [s − gs( ˆφ)]2
2σs
+ [ ˆφ − µ φ ]2
2σφ
− 1
2 ln σs − 1
2 ln σφ
= 1
2 [s − gs( ˆφ)]2 + 1
2 [ ˆφ − µ φ ]2
(2)
For the ﬁnal derived expression, the ﬁrst item represents the
prediction error, where gs() is a generative function representing
the mapping between world states and sensory information that
needs to be learned empirically in advance. The brain actively
estimates the state of the world ˆφ and predicts the sensory
information through the generation function gs( ˆφ), and the
senses receive the real sensory information s, subtracting the two
parts can produce prediction error. The second item represents
the prior error, which indicates that the brain’s estimates must
be compared with the prior knowledge µ φ stored in the brain.
Prediction error and prior error together determine the value of
the FE. The FE has three main functions: 1. It can be used to
guide the brain to change its estimates. 2. It can be used to guide
the brain to perform actions. 3. As an internal variable, it can
reﬂect the internal state of the brain and can be used to study a
variety of cognitive functions.
The cognitive process of body injury and pain emergence
can be explained by FEP: The brain can predict the body sensory
information of all modalities [ s1, s2, ..., sn] based on the current
body state ˆφ. This body state can be known based on prior
knowledge stored by the brain (e.g., the previous moment’s body
state φ′ and the performed action a′). Equation (3) shows the
calculated rule of the FE in this scenario. If FE is 0, it means
that the body is in a normal state. If FE is >0, it means that the
prediction error arises and the body is in an injured state, which
leads to the pain experience.
FE = [s1 − gs1 ( ˆφ)]2 + [s2 − gs2 ( ˆφ)]2 + ...
+[sn − gsn ( ˆφ)]2 + [ ˆφ − gφ (φ′, a′)]2 (3)
It is worth noting that the brain has many prediction
processes at diﬀerent levels in addition to the above prediction
from body state to body sensation. In the case of an injection,
the prediction of whether or not be pain is essentially an event-
level prediction, which is a prediction of the pain event in the
context where the pain has evolved. This is a diﬀerent level from
the prediction of cognitive body injury we described above.
Numerous neuroscientiﬁc studies have shown that pain is
associated with the Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC) of the
brain (
Davis et al., 1997 ; Frankland and Teixeira, 2005 ; Du
et al., 2020 ). The ACC has also been shown to be responsible
for prediction error computation and conﬂict detection ( Silvetti
et al., 2013 ; Wiech and Tracey, 2013 ). Silvetti et al. proposed
that the ACC contains neurons representing event prediction
and neurons representing prediction errors. They argued that
the ACC can receive feedback from the external environment,
which together with the prediction neurons leads to the ﬁring of
the prediction error neurons (
Silvetti et al., 2011 ). Inspired by the
FEP and ACC function, we summarize the connectivity map of
brain regions that cognize actual physical injuries and generate
pain experiences.
As shown in
Figure 1. The body state neurons of ACC
constantly infer self body state and predict multi-modality
sensory information, and the corresponding prediction neurons
of ACC are activated. The senses of the body can receive the real
sensory information and the corresponding sensory neurons are
activated. When the body state is normal, the information from
the sensory neurons and the prediction neurons are consistent,
which does not cause the prediction error neurons of ACC to
ﬁre, and the body in a low-entropy state. When the body is
injured, it deﬁnitely causes the sensory information of some
modalities to be inconsistent with the predicted information,
causing prediction error neurons to ﬁre and the brain cognizes
that the body is injured. Then pain neurons are activated to ﬁre
and produce pain experiences. The body in a high-entropy state.
We also investigated the neural mechanisms associated with
pain memory. Here we use vision as an example, as shown in the
gray module in
Figure 1. Visual Cortex has a direct connection
to the pain-related region in the ACC ( Wiech and Tracey, 2013 ).
Frontiers in Neurorobotics /zero.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org
Feng and Zeng /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnbot./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum
FIGURE /one.tnum
The connectivity map of brain regions of Pain. Body state neurons e ncode body state. Prediction neurons encode predictions of sensory
information. Pain neurons characterize whether the body is in a p ain state. Sensory neurons encode received real sensory informat ion. Visual
Cortex encodes injury-related cues.
The Visual Cortex will capture the injury-related cues when the
body injury occurs. Due to the temporal correlation, the weight
connections between the corresponding visual cortex neurons
and the pain-related neurons of the ACC will be enhanced by
association learning. The brain will use these connections to
identify potential injury and avoid it.
/two.tnum./two.tnum. Brain-inspired robot pain spiking
neural network
This subsection introduces the implementation details of
the BRP-SNN inspired by the neural mechanisms of pain. We
ﬁrst introduce the basic tools and methods, then introduce the
overall architecture of the BRP-SNN.
/two.tnum./two.tnum./one.tnum. Neuron model and synapse learning
method
The emergence of a spiking neural network (SNN) has
facilitated the development of neuromorphic computing (
Yang
et al., 2021). In recent years, SNNs have been successfully applied
to many aspects, such as meta-learning and few-shot learning
(
Yang et al., 2022b ,c), working memory and decision making
(Zhao et al., 2018 ; Yang et al., 2022a ). The Leaky Integrate-and-
Fire (LIF) neuron is the most common neuron model for SNN
(
Tal and Schwartz, 1997 ; Gerstner and Kistler, 2002 ), and we use
it as the basic unit of our BRP-SNN. The LIF neuron dynamics
are described by the following Equations (3) and (4):
τm
du
dt = − [ut − urest] + RI(t) (4)
lim
δ→0
u(tf + δ) = ureset (5)
ut is the membrane potential of the neuron at time t, urest
is the membrane potential at steady-state, R is the resistance,
I(t) is input current, and τm is the time constant. When the
membrane potential ut exceeds a certain threshold uth, the
neuron ﬁres, and tf is the ﬁring time. Once the neuron ﬁred, the
membrane potential returns to its reset state ureset. In this paper,
the parameters of the LIF neuron model are: urest = ureset =
−65mV, τm = 10ms, uth = − 50mV.
We use spike-timing-dependent-plasticity (STDP) as a
synapse learning rule to update synaptic weights. STDP is the
most basic learning method in the brain, which relies on the
time diﬀerence between the ﬁring of pre-synaptic neurons and
post-synaptic neurons to train the synaptic weight (
Dan and
Poo, 2004 ; Sjöström and Gerstner, 2010 ; Markram et al., 2012 ;
Chevtchenko and Ludermir, 2020 ). The weights update rule is
written as Equation (5):
/Delta1ω=



A+exp( /Delta1t
τ + ), /Delta1t < 0
−A−exp( −/Delta1t
τ − ), /Delta1t > 0
(6)
With /Delta1t = ti − tj, where ti and tj are the ﬁring
time of the pre-synaptic neuron and the post-synaptic neuron
respectively. A+ and A− are the learning rates. τ+ and τ−
are the time constants. According to this rule, the connections
will be strengthened when pre-synaptic neurons ﬁre before
post-synaptic neurons and will be weakened when pre-synaptic
neurons ﬁre after post-synaptic neurons. In this paper, τ+ =
τ− = 10ms, A+ = 0.5, A− = 0.1. The choice of these
parameters is based on the settings in reference (
Sjöström and
Frontiers in Neurorobotics /zero.tnum/four.tnum frontiersin.org
Feng and Zeng /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnbot./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum
FIGURE /two.tnum
The Gaussian Receptive Field (GRF) coding method (
Bohte et al.,
/two.tnum/zero.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum).
Gerstner, 2010). The values of τ+ and τ− are consistent with the
values in that literature. The A+ and A− reﬂect the strength of
LTP and LTD, respectively, and the eﬀect of LTP is considered
more in this paper.
/two.tnum./two.tnum./two.tnum. Population coding method
Population coding is a neuron coding method of SNN. The
representation information of one neuron is limited, and the
population coding is more eﬀective and biologically plausible
(
Fang and Zeng, 2021 ; Fang et al., 2021 ).
Population coding uses a neuron population to encode input
data, which can represent continuous values. In this paper, we
adopted the Gaussian receptive ﬁeld (GRF) population coding
method mentioned in
Bohte et al. (2002). Each dimensional
receptive ﬁeld is a group of neurons, where each neuron
corresponds to a Gaussian activation function. Each input will
cause all neurons in the receptive ﬁeld to ﬁre at diﬀerent times
through a diﬀerent Gaussian activation function,
Figure 2 shows
eight neurons per dimensional receptive ﬁeld. For each input
pattern, the response time t is calculated for each neuron, and
neurons with response times >9 are coded as not triggered
because they are considered insuﬃciently excitable. The single
input a = {∗ , ∗, ∗, 9, 2, 0, 8, ∗, ∗} was encoded by eight Gaussian
activation functions, and the black dot marking Ti indicates the
ﬁring time of the i-th neuron involved in its encoding.
/two.tnum./two.tnum./three.tnum. Model implementation
When body states are known, the prediction error generated
by the prediction process from the body state to body sensations
of all modalities can lead to pain. According to this mechanism,
the speciﬁc cognitive process of Robot Pain is as follows: the
robot continuously infers the current body state through the
previous moment state and the executed action, and predicts the
sensory information that will be received by all robot sensors.
When the prediction error occurs, it indicates body injury,
which in turn leads to Robot Pain.
As shown in
Figure 3, The BRP-SNN simulates the function
and connection of the brain regions mentioned in Figure 1,
which contains the State Module, Prediction Module, Sensory
Module, Error Module, Pain Module, and Cue Module. Each
module is a neuron population. The State Module encodes
diﬀerent body states. The Prediction Module represents the
predictive sensory information of diﬀerent modalities. The
Sensory Module encodes the real sensory information of
diﬀerent modalities. The Error Module represents prediction
error. The Pain Module represents whether Robot Pain is
produced or not. The Cue Module encodes the injury-
related cues. The blue arrows in
Figure 3 indicate excitatory
connections, and the red arrows in Figure 3 indicate inhibitory
connections.
The mapping relationship between the State Module and the
Prediction Module needs to be learned empirically by collecting
robot body data. The connection weights are established through
STDP in the process of learning. After learning, the State
Module can activate the corresponding Prediction Module
through forwarding prediction. The Error Module represents
the prediction error, once any neuron in this module ﬁres,
indicating that the prediction error arises. According to the
excitatory and inhibitory synaptic connections in the ACC
mentioned in
Silvetti et al. (2011), we designed that the
Prediction Module to the Error Module is the inhibitory
connection, and the Sensory Module to the Error Module is the
excitatory connection. The dynamics of neurons in the Error
Module are described by Equation (6):
/Delta1u = − ωpvp + ωsvs(ωp, ωs > 0) (7)
/Delta1u represents an update of the membrane potential of
the neurons in the Pain Module. −ωp represents inhibitory
weights. ωs represents excitatory weights. vp is the input from
the Prediction Module. vs is the input from the Sensory Module.
When the ﬁring pattern of the Prediction Module is consistent
with the Sensory Module, the eﬀects of excitatory and inhibitory
on the neuron of the Error Module are counteracted, and the
Error Module does not ﬁre, such as the B neuron in
Figure 3,
indicating a normal body state. When the ﬁring pattern of the
Prediction Module is inconsistent with the Sensory Module, the
eﬀects of excitatory and inhibitory are not counteracted and
speciﬁc neurons in the Error Module will ﬁre. For example, the
excitatory eﬀect from the Sensory Module acts on A neuron,
but the inhibitory eﬀect from the Prediction Module acts on
the other neuron. The red dashed arrow in
Figure 3 indicates
an inhibitory eﬀect that has not yet been established. A neuron
receives only excitatory eﬀects, so it ﬁres. The Error Module to
the Pain Module is excitatory and fully connected. When the
robot body state is known, any neuron ﬁre of the Error Module
causes the Pain Module to ﬁre, indicating the Robot Pain state.
Frontiers in Neurorobotics /zero.tnum/five.tnum frontiersin.org
Feng and Zeng /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnbot./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum
FIGURE /three.tnum
The network architecture of the BRP-SNN. The State Module can a ctivate the corresponding Prediction Module through forwarding pr ediction.
The Prediction Module to the Error Module is the excitatory connect ion, and the Sensory Module to the Error Module is the inhibitory
connection. The Error Module represents prediction error. The Pai n Module represents whether Robot Pain is produced or not. The Cue Mod ule
encodes the injury-related cues.
The Cue Module encodes the injury-related cues, such as
a dangerous object captured by the camera. The connections
between the Cue Module and Pain Module can be established
through STDP by association learning. This BRP-SNN can
not only recognize actual machine injury and produce Robot
Pain, but also recognize injury-related cues and avoid potential
machine injury.
/three.tnum. Experiment
/three.tnum./one.tnum. Experiment settings
We use the Nao robot as an experimental platform and apply
the BRP-SNN to implement two tasks: the alerting actual injury
task and the preventing potential injury task.
As shown in
Figure 4A, the left arm of the Nao robot
contains three joints: shoulder joint, elbow joint, and wrist joint,
and contains two links: link A and link B. In order to mimic the
robot injury process without actually damaging the robot. Our
experiments assume that the left arm is in a normal body state
when it is straight and in an injured state when it is bent. This
means that it is assumed that link A and link B are an integral
link. The elbow joint sensor (between linkA and linkB) will
not receive any action command from the robot, and the robot
FIGURE /four.tnum
The Nao robot. (A) Shows the assumed normal body state. (B)
Shows the assumed injured state.will not process any input information from this elbow joint
sensor. Under this assumption, the bending elbow as shown
in
Figure 4B is an undesirable deformation of the robot that is
similar to a human fracture.
In this experiment, we only consider two sensory modalities
of the robot: proprioception sp and vision sv, which were the
angle data of each joint of the arm and the position coordinate
data of the hand in the camera. As in Equation (8), a special case
Frontiers in Neurorobotics /zero.tnum/six.tnum frontiersin.org
Feng and Zeng /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnbot./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum
FIGURE /five.tnum
Collecting dataset and training by STDP. Proprioception data onl y includes the ShoulderPitch joint angle θ/one.tnum, the ShoulderRoll joint angle θ/two.tnum, and
the WristYaw joint angle θ/three.tnum, and the Elbow joint is not considered. Vision data is the coordinate position ( x, y) of the hand in the camera.
of Equation (3).
FE = [sv − gsv ( ˆφ)]2 + [sp − gsp ( ˆφ)]2 + [ ˆφ − gφ (φ′, a′)]2 (8)
The State Module encodes the body state. Lanillos and
Cheng (2018) propose that the robot should determine
body state through multi-modal sensations using the FEP ,
corresponding to the FE’s function1 described in Section 2.1.
They set the body state as a variable that requires continuous
learning. The robot will actively estimate the current body state
and verify this estimate by sensory information received from
sensors, continuously updating this estimate until the prediction
error (FE) is zero, to determine the current body state. Inspired
by this, we divide our experiment into two steps: Step 1 is
to determine the robot’s initial body state using the method
proposed by
Lanillos and Cheng (2018). This corresponds to the
FE’s function 1. Step 2 is to infer the body state at each moment
by the initial state and the executed actions during the task,
predict each sensation, and calculate the prediction error at each
moment, to determine whether the robot is in the injury state.
This corresponds to the FE’s function 3. Step 1 uses the State
Module, Prediction Module, Sensory Module, and Error Module
of BRP-SNN. Step 2 uses the State Module, Prediction Module,
Sensory Module, Error Module, and Pain Module of BPR-SNN.
The body state is a high-dimensional variable in the brain.
For computational purposes, Lanillos et al. deﬁned body state
in the proprioception data space. This does not mean that body
state is equivalent to proprioception, but only consistent with
its data dimension and the range of values. We follow this
assumption that body states are deﬁned in the proprioception
data space and encoded by the State Module of BRP-SNN. The
Sensory Module encodes real proprioception and vision data.
We set the initial value of the body state and continuously
make predictions to both sensor data. The prediction error
(Error Module ﬁres) will guide the body state estimation update
using the exhaustive search algorithm until the Error Module no
longer ﬁres. After the initial robot body state is determined, the
subsequent body states can be inferred by prior knowledge (the
body state and the executed actions at the previous moment). In
a normal situation, there is no prediction error when the current
body state makes predictions about the current sensation, the
Error Module does not ﬁre. When the body is injured, the Error
Module ﬁres, which in turn causes the Pain Module ﬁres, and the
robot is in a pain state.
The mapping relationship between body state and
proprioception gsp () and vision gsv () should be learned in
advance for the forwarding prediction of the State Module to
the Prediction Module. The robot collects training data through
several random movements (motor babbling) while the left
arm is straight. As shown in
Figure 5. Proprioception data only
includes the ShoulderPitch joint angle θ1, the ShoulderRoll joint
angle θ2, and the WristYaw joint angle θ3, and the Elbow joint
is not considered. Vision data is the coordinate position ( x, y) of
the hand in the camera, obtained by grayscale processing of the
image captured by the camera and calculating the median value
of the corresponding pixel coordinates. The body state φ is set
in the proprioception data space, so the mapping relationship
gsp (φ) = φ. The mapping relationship gsv () needs to be learned
using STDP.
/three.tnum./two.tnum. The alerting actual injury task
/three.tnum./two.tnum./one.tnum. Experiment results
We designed two actual injury paradigms in the alerting
actual injury task: undesirable body deformation and motor
system injury.
In the case of undesirable body deformation, when the elbow
bending caused by a black object occurs, the robot’s prediction
will be inconsistent with the real sensory data. Then the robot
Frontiers in Neurorobotics /zero.tnum/seven.tnum frontiersin.org
Feng and Zeng /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnbot./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum
FIGURE /six.tnum
The Alerting Actual Injury Task (the assumed undesirable bod y deformation). (A) Shows the normal state of the robot. (B) Shows that the elbow is
bent with a black object. (C) Shows that the robot is in the Robot Pain state and makes an alarm, an d the red circle represents the predicted
position of the hand by BRP-SNN.
FIGURE /seven.tnum
The Alerting Actual Injury Task (the assumed motor system inju ry). (A) Shows the normal state of the robot. The hand’s position in the camera
should also move downward when performing the downward action. (B) Shows hitting the arm with a black object, (C) shows that the motor
system injury occurs and the position of the hand will not move. The robot is in the Robot Pain state and makes an alarm, and the red circ le
represents the predicted position of the hand by BRP-SNN.
turns into the Robot Pain state and says “OUCH!” for alarm.
Figure 6A shows the normal state of the robot. Figure 6B shows
that the elbow is bent with a black object. Figure 6C shows that
the robot is in the Robot Pain state and makes an alarm, and
the red circle represents the predicted position of the hand by
BRP-SNN.
In the case of motor system injury, we made the following
assumption: when a black object hits the robot’s arm and touches
the tactile sensor, the robot does not execute any action at
the program level, simulating motor system injury. In this
experiment, the robot constantly does random movements and
predicts the sensory information at the next moment by its
current body state and the action command (prior knowledge).
When the injury occurs, the predicted position is inconsistent
with the real sensory. Then the robot is in the Robot Pain state
and says “OUCH!” for alarm.
Figure 7A shows the normal state
of the robot. The hand’s position in the camera should also move
downward when performing the downward action.
Figure 7B
shows hitting the arm with a black object, Figure 7C shows that
the motor system injury occurs and the position of the hand will
not move. The robot is in a Robot Pain state and makes an alarm,
and the red circle represents the predicted position of the hand
by BRP-SNN.
/three.tnum./two.tnum./two.tnum. Model analysis
Figure 8 shows the synaptic weights between the State
Module and the neurons that characterize vision information
in the Prediction Module, indicating the mapping relationship
between the body state and the prediction of vision information.
These weights are learned by STDP training rules from the data
set collected in advance (as shown in
Figure 5). The closer the
color is to yellow, the larger the weight is; and the closer the color
is to purple, the smaller the weight is.
Figure 9 represents the spike diagram of modules of the BRP-
SNN in the actual injury condition. The X-axis represents the
time, and the Y-axis represents the neuron index.
Figure 9A
represents the ﬁring pattern of the State Module. Figure 9B
represents the ﬁring pattern of the Prediction Module when
predicting sensory information.
Figure 9C represents the ﬁring
pattern of the Sensory Module when receiving the real sensory
information. It is shown that the ﬁring neuron index of the
Frontiers in Neurorobotics /zero.tnum/eight.tnum frontiersin.org
Feng and Zeng /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnbot./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum
FIGURE /eight.tnum
The synaptic weights between the State Module and the
neurons that characterize vision information in the Prediction
Module. The closer the color is to yellow, the larger the weight
is; and the closer the color is to purple, the smaller the weight is .
Prediction Module is inconsistent with the Sensory Module, so
the Error Module fries.
Figure 9D shows the ﬁring pattern of
the Error Module. Due to the excitatory connection between the
Error Module and the Pain Module, the Pain Module then ﬁres,
indicating the Robot Pain state. In BRP-SNN, we design the time
step as 100 ms, and the robot collects sensor information per
100 ms.
Figure 9 represents the ﬁring of each module during
1,000 ms when the robot experiences actual injury. The sensor
acquires abnormal sensory information every 100 ms, which
is encoded by the Sensory Module, which causes the Error
Module to ﬁre. The Error Module is ﬁred 10 times in 1,000
ms.
Figure 10 shows the comparative analysis of our proposed
model with previous neuroscience studies about ACC. Silvetti
et al. (2011, 2013) proposed a neural model of the ACC–the
Reward Value and Prediction Model (RVPM) and validated it in
model-based human fMRI experiments.
Figure 10A represents
the average activation intensity of the ACC module of the RVPM
over time. In this experiment, the cue signal is ﬁrst fed into the
model, which is a square wave with a 2,000 ms duration and unit
amplitude. Then, a prediction process with a 2,000 ms duration
starts. The reward feedback signal with a 400 ms duration is
added at 1,600 ms. Each experiment is 2,500 ms and is performed
20 times. We simulated the same experiment steps in the BRP-
SNN. As shown in
Figure 10B, body state information (robot
proprioceptive information) was ﬁrst fed to the State Module
to start a prediction process with a 2,000 ms duration. Then, a
feedback signal (real visual information) of 400 ms duration is
added to the Sensory Module at 1,600 ms. The total duration
of the experiment is also 2,500 ms. We performed it 20 times
and calculated the average activation intensity of the whole
ACC. It is worth noting that each unit of RVPM represents
a continuous value, and the calculation rule for the average
activation intensity is the sum of the amplitudes of multiple
signals. However, each module of our BRP-SNN is a neuron
group with discrete spike signals, and the calculation rule for the
average activation intensity is the sum of the ﬁring rates of all
modules in ACC every 100 ms. The diﬀerent data morphology
and calculation rules result in inconsistent limits on the Y-axis in
the two ﬁgures. But, both ﬁgures reﬂect the same change trend of
average activation intensity: At the beginning of the prediction,
both curves increase signiﬁcantly, indicating that the prediction
module is ﬁring. At the reception of an environmental feedback
signal that is inconsistent with the prediction, both curves
increase again, indicating that the prediction error module is
ﬁring. At the end of the prediction, both curves decrease to
0, indicating that the whole ACC is at rest state. This result
indicates that our BRP-SNN has the same change trend as RVPM
under the same experimental conditions.
/three.tnum./three.tnum. The preventing potential injury task
/three.tnum./three.tnum./one.tnum. Experiment results
In both actual injury paradigms, the black object is captured
by the camera and encoded by the Cue Module, and establishes
the connection between the Cue Module and the Pain Module
by association learning. When the robot sees the black object
again, even if the actual injury has not occurred, the Pain Module
also ﬁres and then executes the avoidance behavior.
Figure 11A
shows that the dangerous black object approaches the robot, and
the robot recognizes it.
Figure 11B shows that the robot executes
avoidance behavior to prevent potential injury.
/three.tnum./three.tnum./two.tnum. Model analysis
When the camera of the robot detects the black object, this
black object is encoded by the Cue Module. When the actual
injury occurs, the connection between the Cue Module and
the Pain Module can be established. When the robot sees the
black object again, the Cue Module ﬁre, as shown in
Figure 12A.
Then the Pain Module ﬁre, as shown in Figure 12B, and avoid
potential injury.
/four.tnum. Discussion
This paper proposes a Brain-Inspired Robot Pain model
that simulates the neural mechanism and behavioral results of
organisms’ pain. This model can alert to actual injury and avoid
potential injury, and obtain the result curves similar to previous
neuroscience experiments.
In this paper, we argue that pain is a kind of neural activity
occurring at the brain level accompanied by physical injury,
and it is a subjective reﬂection of the objective physical injury
event. It means that the organism has a self-body model, which
reﬂects the coupling relationship between the multi-modality
Frontiers in Neurorobotics /zero.tnum/nine.tnum frontiersin.org
Feng and Zeng /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnbot./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum
FIGURE /nine.tnum
The spike diagrams of the BRP-SNN in the actual injury task. The X-axis represents the time, and the Y-axis represents the ne uron index.
(A) Represents the ﬁring pattern of the State Module. (B) Represents the ﬁring pattern of the Prediction Module when pre dicting sensory
information. (C) Represents the ﬁring pattern of the Sensory Module when receiv ing the real sensory information. (D) Shows the ﬁring pattern of
the Error Module.information of the body, such as the multisensory modalities
and motor modality. Once a physical injury event occurs, the
coupling relationship will be broken, and the organism will be
in a state of increased entropy. Then the brain will perceive this
abnormal state and react to it, gradually evolving into pain. In
our work, only two sensory modalities and one motion modality
of the robot are considered. If robots have more sensors in the
future, our model can also be generalized to more modalities.
We have made certain assumptions in robot experiments,
such as taking normal elbow bending as an abnormal
deformation of robot and designing motor system injury at the
program level. That is because we cannot actually harm the
robots in the lab. The two tasks of the robot are only a validation
of our BRP-SNN model. We also hope to use the principle of this
model to make the robots produce ’Robot Pain’ in a real work
environment, to realize the alarm and prevention of injury in
the future.
In the training phase of the connection weights between
the State Module and the Prediction Module, we set the initial
weights to 0 and use the STDP to adjust the weights according to
the correlation of the ﬁring times of the pre-synaptic and post-
synaptic spikes. In this paper, we mainly emphasize the eﬀect of
LTP , and the weight values that meet the LTP condition will be
increased. We manually restricted the size of the weights to the
range [0, 5] to facilitate observation and debugging.
There are still some limitations to our work. First, our model
implements the task on a robot under the speciﬁc conditions we
designed, so its robustness has not been veriﬁed yet. In future
Frontiers in Neurorobotics /one.tnum/zero.tnum frontiersin.org
Feng and Zeng /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnbot./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum
FIGURE /one.tnum/zero.tnum
The comparative analysis of our proposed model with the previous ne uroscience model–RVPM. (A) Shows the average activation of the whole
ACC at the RVPM under diﬀerent levels of reward events. (B) Shows the average ﬁring rate of the whole ACC module of the BRN-SNN . This
result shows that our BRP-SNN has the same change trend as RVPM un der the same experimental conditions.
FIGURE /one.tnum/one.tnum
The preventing potential injury task. (A) Shows that the dangerous black object approaches the robot, and the r obot recognizes it. (B) Shows
that the robot executes avoidance behavior to prevent potential i njury.
FIGURE /one.tnum/two.tnum
The spike diagrams of the BRP-SNN in the potential injury task. T he X-axis represents the time, and the Y-axis represents the neuron index.
(A) Represents the ﬁring pattern of the Cue Module. (B) Represents the ﬁring pattern of the Pain Module.
Frontiers in Neurorobotics /one.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org
Feng and Zeng /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnbot./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum
work, we will validate the utility of our model under other
experimental conditions (e.g., robot data from other modalities).
Second, in the preventing potential injury task, the process from
the ﬁring of the Cue Module (potential danger detection) to
triggering the ﬁring of the Pain Module (pain state activation)
is trained by STDP through association learning. However, the
transition from the pain state activation to the execution of
the avoidance action is artiﬁcially set by us. In fact, for an
organism, the avoidance action is learned by trial and error.
In the next step, we will explore the learning process of pain-
triggered self-defensive actions and the relationship between
pain models and intrinsic rewards in the reinforcement learning
method. In addition, we plan to further investigate more neural
mechanisms and computational models of cognitive functions
related to pain, such as pain empathy. Pain empathy is an
important factor to promote harmonious coexistence among
social groups, and robots with empathic abilities will be more
moral (
Asada et al., 2009 ; Asada, 2015 ). In the future, we will
explore the computational models of pain empathy and the
altruistic behavior of robots.
This paper proposes a Brain-Inspired Robot Pain Spiking
Neural Network inspired by the neural mechanism of organisms’
pain, enabling the robot to have a human-like pain capacity.
We explored the neural mechanism of pain emergence from
the perspective of pain evolution and the brain’s Free Energy
Principle, and we used SNN to simulate relevant brain regions’
functions and connections to build a Robot Pain model with the
STDP method and the population coding method. Our model is
inspired by the pain’s neural mechanisms and achieves not only
the alarming of actual machine injuries but also the prevention
of potential danger, which has positive implications for the
integration of pain concepts into the robotics ﬁeld. Our work
is a meaningful step toward creating more brain-like intelligent
robots in the future.
Data availability statement
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will
be made available by the authors, without undue reservation.
Author contributions
HF and YZ designed the study, developed the algorithm,
performed the result analysis and experiments, and wrote and
revised the paper. All authors contributed to the article and
approved the submitted version.
Funding
This work was supported by the new generation of
artiﬁcial intelligence major project of the Ministry of
Science and Technology of the People’s Republic of China
(Grant No. 2020AAA0104305) and the Strategic Priority
Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant
No. XDB32070100).
Acknowledgments
We appreciate Enmeng Lu, Feifei Zhao, Dongcheng Zhao,
Yuxuan Zhao, and Hongjian Fang for valuable discussions. We
would like to thank all the reviewers on their help for shaping
and reﬁning the paper.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in
the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential conﬂict
of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent those
of their aﬃliated organizations, or those of the publisher,
the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be
evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made
by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by
the publisher.
Supplementary material
The Supplementary Material for this article can be
found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fnbot.2022.1025338/full#supplementary-material
References
Asada, M. (2015). Towards artiﬁcial empathy. Int. J. Soc. Robot . 7, 19–33.
doi: 10.1007/s12369-014-0253-z
Asada, M. (2019). Artiﬁcial pain may induce empathy, morality, and ethics in the
conscious mind of robots. Philosophies. 4, 38. doi: 10.3390/philosophies4030038
Asada, M., Hosoda, K., Kuniyoshi, Y., Ishiguro, H., Yoshika wa, Y.,
Ogino, M., et al. (2009). Cognitive developmental robotics: a s urvey.
IEEE Trans. Auton. Mental Dev . 1, 12–34. doi: 10.1109/TAMD.2009.20
21702
Frontiers in Neurorobotics /one.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org
Feng and Zeng /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnbot./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum
Bagnato, C., Takagi, A., and Burdet, E. (2015). “Artiﬁcial n ociception and motor
responses to pain, for humans and robots, ” in 2015 37th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMB C),
7402–7405. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2015.7320102
Bogacz, R. (2017). A tutorial on the free-energy framework f or
modelling perception and learning. J. Math. Psychol . 76, 198–211.
doi: 10.1016/j.jmp.2015.11.003
Bohte, S. M., Kok, J. N., and La Poutre, H. (2002). Error-back propagation
in temporally encoded networks of spiking neurons. Neurocomputing 48, 17–37.
doi: 10.1016/S0925-2312(01)00658-0
Broom, D. M. (2001). Evolution of pain. Vlaams Diergeneesk. Tijdschr. 70, 17–21.
Cao, S., Fu, D., Yang, X., Barros, P., Wermter, S., Liu, X., an d Wu, H. (2021).
How can AI recognize pain and express empathy.
Castellar, E. N., Kühn, S., Fias, W., and Notebaert, W. (2010). Outcome
expectancy and not accuracy determines posterror slowing: ERP support. Cogn.
Aﬀect. Behav. Neurosci . 10, 270–278. doi: 10.3758/CABN.10.2.270
Chevtchenko, S. F., and Ludermir, T. B. (2020). “Learning fr om sparse
and delayed rewards with a multilayer spiking neural network, ” i n 2020
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) (Glasgow), 1–8.
doi: 10.1109/IJCNN48605.2020.9206846
Dan, Y., and Poo, M.-m. (2004). Spike timing-dependent plastici ty of neural
circuits. Neuron 44, 23–30. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.007
Davis, K. D., Taylor, S. J., Crawley, A. P., Wood, M. L., and Miku lis, D. J. (1997).
Functional MRI of pain- and attention-related activations in the human cingulate
cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 77, 3370–3380. doi: 10.1152/jn.1997.77.6.3370
Du, J., Fang, J., Xu, Z., Xiang, X., Wang, S., Sun, H., et al. (20 20).
Electroacupuncture suppresses the pain and pain-related anxiety o f chronic
inﬂammation in rats by increasing the expression of the NPS/NP SR system in the
ACC. Brain Res. 1733, 146719. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2020.146719
Eich, E., Reeves, J. L., Jaeger, B., and Graﬀ-Radford, S. B. (1 985). Memory
for pain: relation between past and present pain intensity. Pain 23, 375–380.
doi: 10.1016/0304-3959(85)90007-7
Fang, H., and Zeng, Y. (2021). “A brain-inspired causal reaso ning model based
on spiking neural networks, ” in 2021 International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks (IJCNN) (Shenzhen), 1–5. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN52387.2021.9534102
Fang, H., Zeng, Y., and Zhao, F. (2021). Brain inspired sequenc es production by
spiking neural networks with reward-modulated STDP. Front. Comput. Neurosci .
15, 8. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2021.612041
Frankland, P. W., and Teixeira, C. M. (2005). A pain in the acc. Mol. Pain 1,
1744–8069. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-1-14
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain t heory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energ y principle for the
brain. J. Physiol. Paris 100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001
Gerstner, W., and Kistler, W. M. (2002). Spiking Neuron Models:
Single Neurons, Populations, Plasticity . Cambridge University Press.
doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511815706
Hardcastle, V. G. (1997). When a pain is not. J. Philos . 94, 381–409.
doi: 10.2307/2564606
Jackson, P. L., Rainville, P., and Decety, J. (2006). To what ex tent do we share
the pain of others? Insight from the neural bases of pain empathy . Pain 125, 5–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2006.09.013
Jessup, R. K., Busemeyer, J. R., and Brown, J. W. (2010). Error eﬀects in anterior
cingulate cortex reverse when error likelihood is high. J. Neurosci . 30, 3467–3472.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4130-09.2010
Karl, F. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy 14,
2100–2121. doi: 10.3390/e14112100
Karsdorp, P. A., and Vlaeyen, J. W. (2009). Active avoidance bu t not
activity pacing is associated with disability in ﬁbromyalgia. Pain 147, 29–35.
doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2009.07.019
Kuehn, J., and Haddadin, S. (2016). An artiﬁcial robot nervo us system to teach
robots how to feel pain and reﬂexively react to potentially damagin g contacts. IEEE
Robot. Autom. Lett . 2, 72–79. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2016.2536360
Lanillos, P., and Cheng, G. (2018). “Adaptive robot body learning
and estimation through predictive coding, ” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) (Madrid), 4083–4090.
doi: 10.1109/IROS.2018.8593684
Loeser, J. D., and Melzack, R. (1999). Pain: an overview. Lancet 353, 1607–1609.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(99)01311-2
Markram, H., Gerstner, W., and Sjöström, P. J. (2012). Spike-t iming-
dependent plasticity: a comprehensive overview. Front. Synapt. Neurosci . 4, 2.
doi: 10.3389/978-2-88919-043-0
Oliveira, F., Mcdonald, J., and Goodman, D. (2008). Performanc e monitoring
in the anterior cingulate is not all error related: expectancy de viation and the
representation of action-outcome associations. J. Cogn. Neurosci . 19, 1994–2004.
doi: 10.1162/jocn.2007.19.12.1994
Perl, E. R., and Kruger, L. (1996). “Nociception and pain: evolut ion of concepts
and observations, ” in Pain and Touch ed L. Kruger (Elsevier: Academic Press),
179–211. doi: 10.1016/B978-012426910-1/50006-6
Peters, A., McEwen, B. S., and Friston, K. (2017). Uncertain ty and stress: why it
causes diseases and how it is mastered by the brain. Prog. Neurobiol. 156, 164–188.
doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2017.05.004
Raja, S. N., Carr, D. B., Cohen, M., Finnerup, N. B., Flor, H., Gib son, S.,
et al. (2020). The revised IASP deﬁnition of pain: concepts, cha llenges, and
compromises. Pain. 161, 1976. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001939
Schlund, M. W., Magee, S., and Hudgins, C. D. (2011). Human avo idance
and approach learning: evidence for overlapping neural systems an d experiential
avoidance modulation of avoidance neurocircuitry. Behav. Brain Res. 225, 437–448.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.07.054
Silvetti, M., Seurinck, R., and Verguts, T. (2011). Value and pr ediction error
in medial frontal cortex: Integrating the single-unit and sy stems levels of analysis.
Front. Hum. Neurosci . 5, 75. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2011.00075
Silvetti, M., Seurinck, R., and Verguts, T. (2013). Value and pr ediction error
estimation account for volatility eﬀects in ACC: a model-based fMRI study. Cortex
49, 1627–1635. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.05.008
Sjöström, J., and Gerstner, W. (2010). Spike-timing dependent plasticity.
Scholarpedia. 5, 1362. doi: 10.4249/scholarpedia.1362
Sneddon, L. U. (2019). Evolution of nociception and pain: evide nce from ﬁsh
models. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 374, 20190290. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2019.0290
Sur, I., and Amor, H. B. (2017). “Robots that anticipate pain: a nticipating
physical perturbations from visual cues through deep predicti ve models, ” in
2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sy stems (IROS)
(Vancouver, BC), 5541–5548. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2017.8206 442
Tal, D., and Schwartz, E. L. (1997). Computing with the leaky int egrate-and-ﬁre
neuron: logarithmic computation and multiplication. Neural Comput. 9, 305–318.
doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.2.305
Walters, E. T., and Williams, A. C. d. C. (2019). Evolution of mech anisms
and behaviour important for pain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 374, 20190275.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2019.0275
Werner, P., Lopez-Martinez, D., Walter, S., Al-Hamadi, A., Grus s, S.,
and Picard, R. W. (2022). Automatic recognition methods suppo rting
pain assessment: a survey. IEEE Trans. Aﬀect. Comput . 13, 530–552.
doi: 10.1109/TAFFC.2019.2946774
Wiech, K., and Tracey, I. (2013). Pain, decisions, and actio ns: a motivational
perspective. Front. Neurosci. 7, 46. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2013.00046
Yang, S., Gao, T., Wang, J., Deng, B., Azghadi, M. R., Lei, T., et al. (2022a). SAM: a
uniﬁed self-adaptive multicompartmental spiking neuron model f or learning with
working memory. Front. Neurosci. 16, 850945. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.850945
Yang, S., Gao, T., Wang, J., Deng, B., Lansdell, B., and Linares -Barranco,
B. (2021). Eﬃcient spike-driven learning with dendritic even t-based processing.
Front. Neurosci. 15, 601109. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.601109
Yang, S., Linares-Barranco, B., and Chen, B. (2022b). Heter ogeneous ensemble-
based spike-driven few-shot online learning. Front. Neurosci . 16, 850932.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.850932
Yang, S., Tan, J., and Chen, B. (2022c). Robust spike-based co ntinual meta-
learning improved by restricted minimum error entropy criteri on. Entropy 24, 455.
doi: 10.3390/e24040455
Zhao, F., Zeng, Y., and Xu, B. (2018). A brain-inspired decisi on-
making spiking neural network and its application in unmanned
aerial vehicle. Front. Neurorobot . 12, 56. doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2018.
00056
Frontiers in Neurorobotics /one.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org