Life, its origin, and its distribution:
A perspective from the Conway-Kochen
Theorem and the Free Energy Principle
Chris Fields1and Michael Levin2,3
1 Allen Discovery Center
Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155 USA
ﬁeldsres@gmail.com
ORCID: 0000-0002-4812-0744
2 Allen Discovery Center
Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155 USA
michael.levin@tufts.edu
ORCID: 0000-0001-7292-8084
3 Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University
Boston, MA 02115, USA
January 7, 2025
Abstract
We argue here that the Orgin of Life (OOL) problem is not just a chemistry
problem, but is also, and primarily, a cognitive science problem. When interpreted
through the lens of the Conway-Kochen theorem and the Free Energy Principle, con-
temporary physics characterizes all complex dynamical systems that persist through
time as Bayesian agents. If all persistent systems are to some – perhaps only minimal
– extent cognitive, are all persistent systems to some extent alive, or are living sys-
tems only a subset of cognitive systems? We argue that no bright line can be drawn,
and we re-assess, from this perspective, the Fermi paradox and the Drake equation.
We conclude that improving our abilities to recognize and communicate with diverse
intelligences in diverse embodiments, whether based on familiar biochemistry or not,
will either resolve or obviate the OOL problem.
Keywords: Diverse intelligence, Drake equation, Fermi paradox, Free Will Theorem
1
1 Introduction
The Origin of Life (OOL) problem is ordinarily thought of as a chemistry problem [1]: how
can the right molecules, under the right conditions, be compartmentalized in a way that
initiates an autocatalytic process that maintains not just the right molecular concentrations,
but also the enabling conditions and the compartmentalization? Many ideas have been
suggested, typically focused on either autocatalysis or compartmentalization as the primary
problem. It is widely believed that multiple OOL events could have occurred on the early
Earth, with only one lineage – that of the last universal common ancestor (LUCA) of all
known life – surviving [2, 3, 4]. It is also widely believed that OOL events could occur
elsewhere, prompting searches for evidence of extraterrestrial life by various means.
The OOL event leading to LUCA and its lineage is important in a number of related ﬁelds.
First, it represents an originating singularity that must back-stop the reproductive cycle
that is a cornerstone of evolutionary biology. Second, by eﬀectively deﬁning “synthetic” life,
it sets a boundary condition on synthetic biology and bioengineering, both eﬀorts to create
and study life-as-it-could be [5] in novel implementations. Third, it is a critical ﬁxed point
for exo-biology, pushing us to deﬁne what it is that we are looking for on worlds beyond our
planet, and to construct models of what diﬀerent origin stories would mean for the further
development of complexity and intelligence. Most crucially, it strongly impacts the very
deﬁnition of “life”: a standard account in which life is a distinct category set apart from
non-living matter is challenged by the need to identify and explain a sharp phase transition
in which life arose from non-life. Related to this are questions of the relationship of life and
mind. Whatever theories we formulate for the minimal dynamics needed to create minds,
it is imperative to understand their relationship to the OOL. The conventional view is that
cognition arose at some point during life’s expansion along an axis of complexity, i.e. that
cognitive beings are a subset of living beings [6].
Here we review an alternative way of thinking about the OOL problem that is motivated
by the Conway-Kochen (CK) theorem [7, 8], a result in fundamental physics, and the Free
Energy Principle (FEP), a theoretical framework that originated in neuroscience [9, 10]
and has been extended over the past decade into a description of generic physical systems
[11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. The CK theorem characterizes all physical systems as agentic in the
speciﬁc sense of displaying behavior that is not, even in principle, predictable from local
causal inﬂuences. The FEP characterizes all physical systems as inferential in the speciﬁc
sense of behaving as Bayesian satisﬁcers. Together, the CK theorem and the FEP suggest
a view of cognition that is substantially broader than mainstream views in biology, e.g.
as represented in [6], and may even surprise advocates of basal cognition in, e.g. plants
or microbes [17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. They suggest, in particular, that all complex systems
are organizations of agential materials that perform Bayesian satisﬁcing on multiple scales
[22, 23, 24]. This in turn suggests that the OOL problem is not, or at least not just, a
chemistry problem, but is rather a cognitive science problem: the problem of characterizing
the level or type of cognition at which it becomes meaningful for a system to be considered
living. It raises the questions of whether life and cognition are co-extensive, as many have
2
argued [25, 26, 27, 28], and of what speciﬁc attributes distinguish living cognitive systems
from non-living cognitive systems if they are not. It suggests that developing methods to
both identify and communicate with diverse intelligences with diverse embodiments that
exhibit behavior in diverse state spaces [22, 29, 30, 31] will be required to fully address the
OOL problem.
We ﬁrst review the CK theorem in§ 2 and the FEP in § 3. We then consider the fundamental
question of whether life is co-extensive with cognition in § 4. We discuss the extraordinary
range of possible embodiments, over essentially arbitrary spatial and temporal scales, that
become available when the materials available in the universe are considered agential. We
also consider the variety of state spaces that such systems may traverse over their “lifes-
pans”, some of which may be only minimally coupled to our familiar three-dimensional (3d)
embedding space in which the overt behavior of familiar organisms unfolds. We formulate
typical criteria for life, including reproduction with variation and autopoietic metabolism,
in ways that can be applied to diverse embodiments inhabiting diverse state spaces. We
then turn in § 5 to Enrico Fermi’s famous “Where are they?” question, and discuss the
kinds of communication capabilties we might expect diverse cognitive systems – which we
may or may not consider to be “alive” – to be capable of employing.
2 The Conway-Kochen theorem as a generic charac-
terization of agency
In 2006, John Conway and Simon Kochen published their “free will theorem”; they pub-
lished a more general, and hence stronger, version in 2009. The CK theorem concerns in-
teractions between an observer and some system of interest that comply with both Special
Relativity (SR) and Quantum Theory (QT). The former requires that interactions between
system and observer are causal, in the speciﬁc sense of transferring information between
systems i) forward in time and ii) at no more than the speed of light; indeed compliance
with these two conditions deﬁne “causality” in SR. Figure 1 shows an interaction meeting
these conditions. At every point on the “world line” depicting either system’s trajectory
through spacetime, here for simplicity drawn vertically to indicate the passage of time with
no (relative) motion in space, possible past causal inﬂuences on either system are contained
with that system’s “past light cone”, which is the region of spacetime, extending arbitrarily
into the past, from which a signal propagating at no more than the speed of light could
reach the system. As shown in Fig. 1, the past light cone of the system of interest at time
t2, when it receives an action by the observer, entirely contains the past light cone of the
observer at t1, when action on the system was initiated. Likewise, the past light cone of the
observer at t3, when it receives an observational outcome from the system, entirely contains
the system’s past light cone at t2.
3
Figure 1: The setting for the CK theorem: an observer (left black vertical world line)
interacts with a system of interest (right black vertical world line). Discrete exchanges of
information are shown as red arrows; each exchange traverses space (horizontal axis) and
takes time (vertical axis). The observer’s past light cone (blue dashed lines) at t1 when
action on the system is initiated (lower blue disk) lies entirely within the system’s past light
cone (green dashed lines) at t2 when the system receives the action (green disk).
The CK theorem in its original form states that in any observational situation compliant
with SR and QT, if the actions of the observer at some timet1 are not completely determined
by the events in the observer’s past light cone at that time, then the observed system’s
response, at some t2 > t1 to the observer’s actions at t1, are not completely determined
by the events in the system’s past light cone at t2. The proof is somewhat involved, and
4
depends on the earlier Kochen-Specker theorem [32] showing that observations compliant
with QT exhibit non-causal dependencies on context. The underlying intuition, however,
is straightforward: the evolution of the quantum state of part of the universe can only be
fully understood as a projection of the evolution of the quantum state of the entire universe.
Local information, e.g. the information available from a past light cone, is never suﬃcient
to completely specify a quantum state; this insuﬃciency of local information also underlies
the Wootters-Zurek “no-cloning” theorem [33]. This is particularly clear in the case of
spatially-extended systems in entangled states, in which spacelike-separated components of
a single system appear, in the laboratory reference frame of an observer, to have distinct
past light cones. The insuﬃciency of local information for quantum state speciﬁcation
applies to both the observer and the observed system, replacing the “if – then” formulation
of the original theorem with the stronger formulation of the 2009 version.
The CK theorem shows us that, at least in the context of current fundamental physics,
all systems exhibit one of the typical hallmarks of living systems: their resistance to local,
causal determination of behavior, and hence their ability to act in ways that are surprising.
It is possible to write this oﬀ as “randomness” or “stochasticity” and hence to view it in
essentially thermodynamic terms, but we note that doing so already provides the minimal
requirement – a degree of autonomy – for a system to exist on the spectrum of agency,
which can then be scaled up into higher forms of intelligence (with greater historicity,
metacognition, etc.) by the processes of evolution or engineering. Here we follow Wheeler
[34], Fuchs [35], and others in interpreting the CK theorem, and indeed QT generally, as
implying that all systems have a fundamentally agentic character. We will describe one
way of formulating this in the next section: if two systems are distinguishable – formally,
if their joint state is not entangled – they have independent and hence “free” choice of
computations to perform on, and hence semantics to assign to, their inputs [36]. That such
freedom of interpretation is the basis of agency is a key tenant of 2nd-order cybernetics
[37, 38, 39].
3 The FEP as a generic characterization of cognition
The FEP describes the behavior of physical systems that can be distinguished from the
environments in which they are embedded, and provides a criterion that such systems must
satisfy in order to remain distinguishable from their environments over some period of
time. It can be stated, in obviously tautological form, as the claim that any system that is
distinguishable from its environment must behave in a way that maintains its distinguisha-
bility from its environment, from the perspective of an external observer, and possibly
from its own perspective [11]. More technically, any such system must behave in a way
that maintains the conditional statistical independence of its states from the states of its
environment. The FEP describes the maintenance of conditional statistical independence
as the asymptotic minimization of a variational free energy (VFE) [40] measured at the
system–environment boundary, and describes the minimization of VFE as Bayesian sat-
isﬁcing. Hence the FEP provides a dictionary for translating descriptions of behavior in
5
the languages of either classical dynamical systems [11, 12, 13, 14] or QT [15, 16] into the
languages of the cognitive, and when many agents are involved, the social sciences.
To see how the FEP works, let U (for “universe”) be some collection of physical degrees of
freedom that is large enough to be considered isolated, and consider factorizations U = SE
of U into a system S and its environment E, by deﬁnition everything other than S. The
FEP describes the behavior of the two factors, or components, S and E of U if and only if
their states are conditionally statistically independent of each other. Conditional statistical
independence of S from E and vice-versa requires i) that S and E are both suﬃciently large
components of U, i.e. that they are large enough to have “internal states” not directly
aﬀected by their interaction, and ii) that the interaction is suﬃciently weak, i.e. that
the coupling between their degrees of freedom is suﬃciently sparse. Both classical and
quantum physics provide precise criteria for meeting these conditions. Classical dynamical
systems factor into two conditionally statistically independent components if and only if a
Markov blanket (MB) – a “small” set of states through which all interactions ﬂow – can be
deﬁned between them [41]; see [11] for a deﬁnition in a generic classical setting. Quantum
systems factor into two conditionally statistically independent components if and only if
the joint state of the components factors, i.e. if and only if |U⟩= |SE⟩= |S⟩|E⟩in Dirac’s
notation. If this condition fails, S and E are, by deﬁnition, entangled. If this condition
holds, a holographic screen can be deﬁned through which all interactions ﬂow [36]; this
holographic screen plays the same role in the QT description that an MB plays in the
classical description.
Given this description of S and E, the distinction between S and E persists through time
if and only if the MB, or in the QT case, holographic screen, that deﬁnes their mutual
boundary B persists through time. Note that this B is a boundary in the state space of
U as shown in Fig. 2, which may or may not correspond to a boundary in our familiar
3d embedding space. The boundary B is preserved, in turn, if and only if the interaction
between S and E, which we will denote by the Hamiltonian operator HSE that implements
the interaction in QT, remains within bounds that i) permit suﬃcient thermodynamic free
energy ﬂows between S and E to power their respective internal processes [42], and ii)
prevent any decrease in the number of “internal” states of S or E. The ﬁrst of these
conditions sets a lower bound on variation of HSE , while the second sets an upper bound.
Such bounds on interactions are familiar in biology; they correspond to the bounds within
which homeostasis can be maintained. If the size of the boundary B is allowed to vary
slowly with respect to the “natural” timescale ofHSE while always maintaining homeostasis,
these bounds correspond to bounds for allostasis.
6
Figure 2: Decomposition of an isolated system U with internal dynamics HU into com-
ponents S and E, with internal dynamics HS and HE respectively. The interaction HSE
between S and E is deﬁned at the decompositional boundary B between them, and must
be weak relative to HS and HE to maintain separability. Consistent with Fig. 1, B has a
temporal width set by the characteristic time of HSE ; with a lower (i.e. high-energy) limit
of twice the Planck time [36].
The FEP is based on the recognition that the internal processes implemented by S and E
– which we will denote by the Hamiltonian operators HS and HE, respectively, that imple-
ment these processes in QT – can be viewed as representations, or in statistical language,
generative models, of the interaction HSE . Each of S and E can, in this case, be regarded
as continually predicting, by executing their internal processes HS and HE, respectively,
that their mutual interaction HSE will remain within its homeostatic bounds, which are
the bounds within which S and E remain separable and the internal processes HS and HE
remain well-deﬁned. This mutual dependence between HS, HE, and HSE is particularly
clear in the QT representation, where by deﬁnition, the internal process of the total system
U is HU = HS + HE + HSE , and since U is by deﬁnition isolated, we can set HU = 0.
We then have HS + HE = −HSE , so that if HS and HE remain within bounds required to
maintain separability, HSE must remain within a corresponding bound.
For any system that implements a generative model of its interaction with its environment
– eﬀectively, a generative model of its expected inputs and available outputs – departures
from model expectations can be represented, in a variational approximation, by a VFE
[40]; again see [11] for a formulation in the current setting. The maintenance of HSE
within homeostatic bounds by the actions of HS and HE can, therefore, be represented as
minimization of this VFE. Minimization of VFE over inputs can, however, be represented
formally as Bayesian satisﬁcing; hence the actions of HS and HE can be viewed as Bayesian
satisﬁcing, and the systems S and E can be viewed as Bayesian agents. In FEP language,
S and E engage, at all times, in active inference, both adjusting their generative models
to account for incoming data and acting on each other to maintain their incoming data
within model-expected bounds, i.e. within the bounds required to maintain separability
[43, 44, 45].
7
Treating physical interactions between separable agents as active inference, with the outputs
(“actions”) of one being the inputs (“sensations”) of the other, redescribes such interac-
tions as communication. How each party responds to communicative interactions depends
on their internal process, i.e. on HS and HE, respectively, for systems S and E. These
processes generate actions from sensations, and hence encode, typically implicitly, the “dif-
ferences that make a diﬀerence” to each system, and hence the semantics, in Bateson’s
[46] sense, that they assign to their sensations [47, 48]. As HS and HE are conditionally
independent in separable systems, these semantics can be regarded as “freely chosen” in the
sense of not locally determined, as employed in the CK theorem. Asymptotically, the FEP
drives systems toward mutual predictability and hence a shared language, with generalized
synchrony and entanglement as the asymptotic limits in classical and quantum treatments,
respectively [15].
4 Life = Cognition, or Life ⊂Cognition?
By recasting fundamental physics in agentive language in a way that applies to all time-
persistent systems, the CK theorem and the FEP erase any “bright lines” separating
cognitive systems from the “merely physical” while providing a natural association be-
tween dynamic and cognitive complexity. Relatively simple, intuitively “dumb” systems
like electrons or rocks are negligibly cognitive, while complex systems like octopi, humans,
or ecosystems are more cognitive; in all cases, to a kind and degree that must be deter-
mind by experiment [49]. Indeed without further limiting assumptions, the CK theorem
and the FEP are consistent with the radical panpsychism proposed by philosophers such as
Galen Strawson [50] or Philip Goﬀ [51], though since neither the CK theorem nor the FEP
are themselves theories of consciousness, they by no means require it (Fields, Albarracin,
Friston, Kiefer, Ramstead, and Safron, in review).
Erasing the line between the “merely physical” and the cognitive immediately raises the
question of where life ﬁts in. Are we justiﬁed in identifying the living with the cognitive,
as argued by Maturana and Varela [25] or Pattee [26], if doing so extends the meaning of
“living system” to include everything that persists through time? How important are often-
cited functions such as replication, metabolism, or compartmentalization to the deﬁnition
of “life” [52]? How important is organic chemistry – is it the exclusive source of complex
systems, or can other chemistries also generate complex systems autonomously? Is it even
worth trying to deﬁne life in general terms, given just the single example of the lineage of
LUCA [53]? It is worthwhile to consider the use of terminology in asking these questions.
It is often held that applying cognitive terms to unconventional substrates (cells, organs,
“machines”, etc.) is useless wordplay at best, and a category error at worst. We propose an
instrumentalist stance, where ontological categories are not taken as inviolable philosophical
givens, but instead must be updated with the progress of science, and the degree of utility
of terms comes from the interaction protocols they enable or suppress. For example, the
statement that a system is roughly in position X on the spectrum of agency cashes out
via the degree of empirical beneﬁts provided by using tools from cognitive and behavioral
8
science on that system. We have covered elsewhere [54, 55, 56, 57, 58] numerous examples of
how such erasure of boundaries facilitates novel research programs and leads to new practical
capabilities and discoveries, for example, in biomedicine and bioengineering. Thus, the idea
that cognition is extremely wide-spread does not devalue the concept, but instead suggests
experimental testing, in new systems, of tools and concepts that have proven useful for
understanding conventional embodied minds
The FEP originated as a theory of living systems, and it generates many identiﬁed features
of life from its minimal physical assumptions. All separable systems, for example, must be
compartmentalized, although as noted, they may be compartmentalized in a space other
than our 3d embedding space. Gene regulatory networks, for example, are compartmen-
talized in a state space of molecular concentrations, while execution traces of computer
programs are compartmentalized in state spaces of possible encodings on ﬁnite data struc-
tures. The FEP generically reproduces three of the four “pillars” advanced as deﬁnitive of
life (or in their terminology, “lyfe”) by Bartlett and Wong [52], dissipation, homeostasis,
and learning, though some systems display these functions only in some minimal-complexity
limit. The fourth pillar, autocatalytic reproduction, is not required by the FEP; however,
is a natural strategy for any system attempting to reduce its local VFE, as putting a
copy of yourself into your environment typically increases its predictability [59]. The FEP
generically induces systems of suﬃcient complexity to develop neuromorphic morpholo-
gies to maximize information gain from their environments [60]. It generically induces
compartmentalization and hierarchical information processing [14, 61, 62, 63]. It induces
communication and collective problem solving in groups of similar agents exposed to a
shared environment, and hence provides natural descriptions of multicellular development,
swarm behavior, and evolution at the population scale [64, 65, 66, 67].
An obvious riposte to the claim that the FEP generically describes life is to point to complex
artifacts such as computers, and to claim that they are obviously not alive. While such
systems are compartmentalized, dissipative, and capable of learning, this argument goes,
they cannot be alive because they do not maintain homeostasis and are not autocatalytic.
We must ask, however, whether this is merely an intuition pump. Organic-chemistry based
systems exist to which we supply a designer-perfect environment, arbitrarily-large supplies
of thermodynamic free energy, and assisted kinematic replication with externally-supplied
parts; examples include genomic DNA, proteins, and viruses. If we constructed computers
from organic parts and maintained them inside our bodies, would we still regard them as
non-living artifacts? Many organisms, including not only obligate human parasites and
pathogens but also most domestic animals, rely on human-supplied environmental services
to maintain homeostasis and reproduce – does this dependence on us render them any less
alive? We ourselves are dependent on our microbial endosymbionts, as they are on us. All
organisms are reliant on their environments; this lack of independence from the environment
could be considered deﬁnitional. Historically, “we know it when we see it” has not been a
reliable approach to life or mind. We would argue that it is even less so now [22, 31].
If the FEP does generically describe life, where does this leave the OOL problem? Was
there just one origin of life, at the Big Bang? Or are OOL events ubiquitous, occurring
9
wherever organic or any other chemistry is available to generate complexity? If the FEP
does not generically describe life, i.e. if living systems are some proper subset of agentive,
cognitive systems, what must be added to the properties and capabilities that the FEP
does render generic to produce a deﬁnition of life, and how can such additions be squared
with the increasingly blurry lines between naturally-evolved systems and bio-engineered
constructs [22, 31]? One could, following [53], argue that such questions do not and even
cannot matter. What clearly does matter is whether we can identify and communicate with
the diverse intelligent systems that the FEP tells us will be ubiquitous, whenever we come
across them.
5 Where are they?
The Fermi Paradox – why we have never observed evidence of intelligent extraterrestrial
life even though the observable universe is large enough that we might expect to – has
been widely discussed since [68]; Webb [69] reviews 75 proposed solutions. As Webb points
out, however, both the statement of the paradox and its proposed solutions implicitly
model extraterrestrial life as similar to human life, psychologically and culturally even if
not biologically. This assumption adds drama, and lends much of the discussion an air of
science ﬁction. The FEP models all systems as having a psychology that minimizes VFE, a
psychology that even individual cells can have [26]. It associates psychological complexity
with system complexity, provided the bandwidth of the system’s boundary permits it [63].
Additional assumptions would, however, be necessary to predict a psychology similar to that
of humans; hence the FEP tells us nothing about how prevalent a human-like psychology,
let alone culture, might be. While we do not, moreover, have access to truly alien life,
we do now have the opportunity to study synthetic and hybrid beings that have not been
subject to the typical evolutionary selective forces across the tree of life. Cyborgs, hybrots,
biobots, minimal active matter, and AI all present a unique challenge to the task of being
able to predict emergent form and function when environment and heredity do not tell the
whole story [23, 70].
The FEP does, however, tell us that a cognitive system much more complex and intelligent
that we are exists here on Earth. Phylogenetic evolution and individual morphogenetic
development have the same formal structure when described by the FEP, diﬀering only in
spatial and temporal scale [71]; the entire lineage of LUCA can, therefore, be described as
the morphogenesis of a single organism, Life as we know it [72]. We can characterize this
organism genetically [73], and describe how its development has altered its environment [74],
but our communications even with parts of it to which we are closely related are clumsy,
and we have essentially no understanding, beyond the abstraction of VFE minimization, of
its overall psychology. We are not equipped to “see” the environment of all of Life as we
know it, and we cannot tractably model its overall interaction with its environment in any
detail. Expanding the system of interest to the planetary Gaia of Lovelock and Margulis [74]
yields an even more complex system, some processes in which have been modeled as active
inference [75], but to which the above comments about full or detailed models apply. What
10
would it be like to communicate with this system? Can tools be developed to assist the
mapping from theoretically predicted perceptual and goal spaces of systems such as these
to our own – a kind of augmented reality to enable the understanding or even co-existence
of highly diverse minds? Can a partial lifting of our innate mind-blindness be driven in
the same way that a good theory of electromagnetism and its resulting technology enabled
us to operate across an EM spectrum of whose existence we were not even aware? We do
not know. The diﬃculties we have in recognizing perception-action loops, problem-solving
behavior, and intelligent navigation of unconventional spaces of even our own natural organs
[30] underscore the narrow ﬁlters that our evolutionary ﬁrmware provides.
A model of a physical system as an information processor – a computer – is a mapping from
observable physics to a computable function [76]. Such maps can be constructed at any
scale, with computational complexity decreasing as the scale over which events are coarse-
grained increases. Within a given scale, many distinct maps are possible. Any physical
system can, therefore, be viewed as simultaneously computing many distinct functions,
with which function it is “seen” as computing depending on the perspective taken and the
measurements made [77]. The FEP, therefore, not only describes generic systems as VFE
minimizers at every scale [14]; it allows multiple such descriptions. Whether a description
supports productive interactions with the system depends on how well it captures the way
that the system itself measures and acts on its world – the “reference frames” that it employs
to make sense of what its world is doing to it [15]. To understand, and especially to inﬂuence,
how systems behave, it works best to communicate with them in their own language. This
is the phenomenon of scale- and description-dependent “causal emergence” [78], which we
grasp intuitively with other people and, to some extent, with other mammals, can approach
experimentally in the case of model organisms [79, 80], but have only a theoretical grasp
on in the case of generic systems.
The FEP thus suggests that the solution to the Fermi Paradox is to drop our anthropo-
morphism about intelligent life. It suggests that we are surrounded by intelligent life, some
much more intelligent than we are, that we cannot yet detect, or do not understand and
cannot yet communicate with. It suggests that intelligent life pervades the universe, but
that we should not expect it to resemble us in structure, embodiment, or habits. Sup-
posing that we will encounter technological artifacts of a kind we might imagine someday
building, or receive signals of a kind we might imagine someday sending, is supposing that
intelligence implies a psychology, and a manipulative body, functionally similar to ours.
The FEP suggests that life, and psychology, are far more diverse even than the lineage of
LUCA, let alone the sublineage leading to mammals, and to us.
Even given such expectations, however, Earth-bound life provides suﬃcient diversity to
challenge our abilities to construct models and conduct experiments. As [6] reveals, only
a minority of life scientists accept that organisms are in general intelligent. We do not yet
understand the sensory and behavioral capabilities of microbes in suﬃcient detail to ade-
quately predict behavior in novel environments; our understanding of eukaryotic cells, e.g.
human cancer cells, is even more limited. Comparative genomics continues to reveal novel,
apparently lineage-restricted functions, and genomic sequence diversity is large enough that
11
lateral contributions from non-LUCA lineages, as illustrated schematically in [4], cannot be
ruled out. Synthetic biology and biorobotics are, moreover, now constructing living systems
that have both no evolutionary histories in their current embodiments and apparently novel
problem-solving capabilities [81, 82, 83]. On the more macroscopic side, ecology remains
largely a science of observations and phenomenological models, and we have little apprecia-
tion of even eusocial insect colonies as cognitive individuals. We struggle with ﬁnding ways
to communicate with collective intelligences, such as ant colonies (vs. the individual ants)
[65], and are rarely aware that we ourselves are likewise examples of collective intelligence.
We ﬁnd it hard to recognize our cognitive kin at unfamiliar spatio-temporal scales or op-
erating in unfamiliar problem spaces, and we seem to work hard to maintain all manner
of distinctions as a bulwark against losing what is left of anthropocentric ideas. Even the
most basic aspect of being a real agent – having physical embodiment – is not nearly as
solid as it once was. We can now understand ourselves as temporarily persistent, dynamical
patterns – not objects – like solitons, hurricanes, etc. Our nature as self-modifying patterns
within metabolic [84] and cognitive [85] media forces us to confront the question of what
other patterns are actually agents? The tenuous distinction between thoughts and thinkers
may open roads to recognizing an increasingly wide class of unconventional agents to which
we had been completely blind (Fields and Levin, in review). We are, in other words, still
only minimally prepared to confront the other living systems present on our own planet.
Intelligent life originating on other planets, or its artifacts, may be unrecognizable by us.
6 The Drake Equation in light of the FEP
The Drake Equation estimates the number N of extraterrestrial intelligent systems de-
tectable from Earth as N = RfpneflfifcL, where R is the rate of star formation, fp is the
fraction of stars with planets, ne is the number of life-supporting planets per such star,
fl, fi, and fc are the fractions of such planets that develop life, intelligent life, and techno-
logical cultures respectively, and L is the average time a technological culture is detectable
[69]. The uncertainties in all of the factors except R and fp are very large, and published
estimates of N vary by many orders of magnitude. Implicit in the Drake Equation is the as-
sumption that detectable extraterrestrial intelligent systems have undergone evolutionary,
cultural, and technological developments comparable to ours; such systems are, for exam-
ple, often assumed to be intentionally broadcasting information about themselves or to be
actively engaged in colonizing planets other than their own. Hence the Drake Equation is
primarily concerned with the detection of artifacts – EM signals, material objects, or other
information-bearing patterns that cannot be attributed to “natural causes” given known
physics and chemistry. This focus on artifacts, and hence on ﬁnding evidence for extrater-
restrial intelligence that is “technological” in roughly the way we are, but presumably more
advanced, aligns the Drake Equation with its inspiration, the Fermi Paradox, but distances
it from the primary concerns of exobiology. The relevance or even the meaningfulness of
the terms appearing in the Drake equation have all been criticized; for a large sample of
such criticisms, see [86].
12
The FEP suggests that the number of extraterrestrial intelligent systems is very large, but
says nothing about their detectability. By characterizing all physical systems as Bayesian
agents, moreover, it erases any ﬁrm distinction between “artifacts” and “products of na-
ture”; any information-bearing pattern – anything distinguishable from noise – could be a
“signal” s from a system with some level of intelligence. It suggests, therefore, that the ac-
tually important number is the conditional probability P(r|s) that a extraterrestrial signal
s, whatever its form, is recognized as such by us. In this it roughly agrees with Gertz [86],
who argues that the only important number is fd, the probability of detecting intelligent
extraterrestrial life by any means.
Humans are constantly bathed in large-scale information-bearing patterns, from the non-
uniform distribution of visible stars to anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background [87],
that we regard as “natural” and hence of no interest from a biological or cognitive-science
perspective. Viewing non-randomness at the Solar System scale as communicative similarly
fails the test of utility discussed above. What, then, would be the utility of regarding a
piece of space junk of clearly non-human manufacture as a communication, or as biologically
meaningful? On the one hand, such a discovery would shatter our anthrocentrism, making
it clear that we are not “alone in the universe” as many either fear or hope. On the other, it
would conﬁrm our anthropocentrism, but conﬁrming our deep assumption that any beings
out there are “like us” in signiﬁcant ways. The utility of regarding such a discovery as not
“natural”, in other words, lies not in how it allows us to better deal with our environment,
but in what it tells us about ourselves. It would tell us that we are not unique, but rather in
some sense inevitable. The Drake equation assumes, by including the term fc, these poles
of uniqueness or inevitability. The FEP, in contrast, challenges us to imagine a universe full
of intelligent systems, the vast majority of which are nothing at all like us. It re-interprets
Gertz’s fd as the probability that humans become smart enough to recognize intelligent
extraterrestrial life when it presents itself.
A more radical take on the FEP is that it setsN = 1, by deﬁnition, for any observer, whether
an individual human, all of humanity, the lineage of LUCA, Gaia, or any other system, large
or small. The one other intelligent system that is detectable is the detecting system’s total
environment. Any system’s challenge is to understand what its total environment is trying
to tell it. One thing that its total environment cannot tell it is the origin of the boundary B
between them, since this event is the OOL for both the system and its total environment.
7 Conclusions
The OOL problem has been framed against a background of classical physics operating
in classical spacetime, and assumes an abiotic environment that operates as a classical
mechanism. The Conway-Kochen theorem and the Free Energy Principle challenge these
assumptions, the former by showing that local determinism conﬂicts with known physics,
and the latter by providing a formal interpretation of even classical dynamical systems
as Bayesian agents. Taken together, the CK theorem and the FEP characterize physical
13
systems as at least minimally agentive at every scale, and suggest that life, cognition, and
complexity are both inseparable and ubiquitous. If this is the case, the OOL problem is
replaced, in practice, with the problem of recognizing and successfully interacting with
diverse intelligences in diverse embodiments, which may, but may not, involve familiar
biochemistry.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, C.F. and M.L.; writing—original draft prepa-
ration, C.F. and M.L.; writing—review and editing, C.F. and M.L. All authors have read
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: M.L. gratefully acknowledges the support of Eugene Jhong.
Conﬂicts of interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
References
[1] Walker SI, Packard N, Cody GD. Re-conceptualizing the origins of life. Phil. Trans.
R. Soc. A 2017, 375:, 20160337. http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2016.0337
[2] Cornish-Bowden A; C´ ardenas ML. 2017 Life before LUCA.J. Theor. Biol. 2017, 434,
68–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2017.05.023
[3] Jia TZ; Caudan M; Mamjanov I. Origin of species before origin of
life: The role of speciation in chemical evolution. Life 2021, 11, 154.
https://doi.org/10.3390/life11020154
[4] Moody ERR; ´Alvarez-Carretaro S; Mahendrarajah TA; Clark JW; Betts HC; Dom-
browski N; Sz´ aanth´ o LL; Boyle RA; Daines S; Chen X; Lane N; Yang Z; Shields GA;
Sz¨ oll¨ osi GJ; Spang A; Pisani D; Williams TA; Lenton TM; Donoghue PCJ. The na-
ture of the last universal common ancestor and its impact on the early Earth system.
Nat. Ecol. Evol. 2024, 8, 1654–1666. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-024-02461-1
[5] Langton, C.G. Artiﬁcial Life: An Overview. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1995.
[6] Bayne T; Brainard D; Bryne RW; Chittka L; Clayton N; Heyes C; Mather J;¨Olveczky
B; Shadlen M; Suddendorf T; Webb B. What is cognition? Curr. Biol. 2019, 29,
R608–R615.
[7] Conway JH; Kochen S. The free will theorem. Found. Phys. 2006, 36, 1441–1473.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-006-9068-6
[8] Conway JH; Kochen S. The strong free will theorem. Notices Am. Math. Soc. 2009,
56, 226–232.
[9] Friston, K. The free-energy principle: A uniﬁed brain theory? Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
2010, 11, 127–138.
14
[10] Friston, K. Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 2013, 10, 20130475.
[11] Friston, K. J. A free energy principle for a particular physics, Preprint
arxiv:1906.10184 (2019).
[12] Ramstead, M. J.; Sakthivadivel, D. A. R.; Heins, C.; Koudahl, M.; Millidge, B.; Da
Costa, L; Klein, B.; Friston, K. J. On Bayesian mechanics: A physics of and by beliefs.
Interface Focus 2022, 13(2923), 2022.0029.
[13] Friston, K. J.; Da Costa, L.; Sakthivadivel, D. A. R.; Heins, C.; Pavliotis, G. A.;
Ramstead, M. J.; Parr, T. Path integrals, particular kinds, and strange things. Phys.
Life Rev. 2023, 47, 35–62.
[14] Friston K; Heins C; Verbelen T; Da Costa L; Salvatori T; Markovic D; Tschantz A;
Koudahl M; Buckley C; Parr T. From pixels to planning: Scale-free active inference.
arxiv:2407.20292, 2024.
[15] Fields, C.; Friston, K. J.; Glazebrook, J. F.; Levin, M. A free energy principle for
generic quantum systems. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. , 2022, 173, 36–59.
[16] Fields, C.; Fabrocini, F.; Friston, K. J.; Glazebrook, J. F.; Hazan, H.; Levin, M.;
Marcian` o, A. Control ﬂow in active inference systems, Part I: Classical and quantum
formulations of active inference. IEEE Trans. Mol. Biol. Multi-Scale Comm. 2023,
9, 235–245.
[17] Lyon P. The cognitive cell: Bacterial behavior reconsidered. Front. Microbiol. 2015,
6, 264.
[18] Baluˇ ska F; Levin M. On having no head: Cognition throughout biological systems.
Front. Psychol. 2016, 7 902.
[19] Baluˇ ska F; Gagliano M; Wizany G (eds).Memory and Learning in Plants. Springer,
Cham, Switzerland, 2018.
[20] Baluˇ ska F; Reber A. Sentience and consciousness in single cells: How the ﬁrst minds
emerged in unicellular species. BioEssays 2019, 41, 1800229.
[21] Lyon P. Of what is “minimal cognition” the half-baked version? Adapt. Behav. 2020,
28, 407–428.
[22] Levin M. Technological approach to mind everywhere: An experimentally-grounded
framework for understanding diverse bodies and minds. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 2023,
16, 768201. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2022.768201.
[23] Clawson, W.; Levin, M. Endless forms most beautiful 2.0: Teleonomy and the bio-
engineering of chimaeric and synthetic organisms. Biol. J. Linn. Soc. 2023, 139,
457–486. https://doi.org/10.1093/biolinnean/blac073.
15
[24] Fields, C.; Levin, M. Regulative development as a model for ori-
gin of life and artiﬁcial life studies. BioSystems 2023, 229, 104927.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystems.2023.104927.
[25] Maturana, H. R.; Varela, F. J. Autopoesis and Cognition: The Realization of the
Living. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1980.
[26] Pattee, H. H. Cell psychology. Cognit. Brain Theory 1982, 5, 325–341.
[27] Stewart, J. Cognition = Life: implications for higher-level cognition. Behav. Process.
1996, 35, 31–326.
[28] di Primio, F.; M¨ uller, B. F.; Lengeler, J. W. Minimal cognition in unicellular or-
ganisms. In: Meyer, J. A.; Berthoz, A.; Floreano, D.; Roitblat, H. L.; Wilson, S.
W. (Eds) From Animals to Animats. International Society for Adaptive Behavior,
Honolulu, HI, 2000, pp. 3–12.
[29] Levin, M. Life, death, and self: Fundamental questions of primitive cognition viewed
through the lens of body plasticity and synthetic organisms. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 2021, 564, 114–133. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.10.077
[30] Fields, C.; Levin, M. Competency in navigating arbitrary spaces as an invariant for
analzing cognition in diverse embodiments. Entropy 2022, 24, 819.
[31] Rouleau N; Levin M. Discussions of machine versus living intelligence need more
clarity. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2024, 6, 1424–1426.
[32] Kochen, S.; Specker, E. The problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics. J.
Math. Mech. 1967 17, 59–87.
[33] Wootters, W. K.; Zurek, W. J. A single quantum cannot be cloned. Nature 1982,
299, 802–803.
[34] Wheeler, J. A. Information, physics, quantum: the search for links. In: Zurek, W.
(Ed) Complexity, Entropy, and the Physics of Information. CRC Press, Boca Raton,
FL, 1989, pp. 3–28.
[35] Fuchs, C. QBism: The perimeter of quantum Bayesianism. arxiv:1003.5209, 2010.
[36] Fields, C.; Glazebrook, J. F.; Marcian` o, A. The physical meaning of the Holographic
Principle. Quanta 2022, 11, 72–96. https://doi.org/10.12743/quanta.v11i1.206.
[37] Von Foerster, H. Objects: Tokens for (eigen-) behaviors. ASC Cybern. Forum 1976,
8, 91–96.
[38] Kampis, G. Explicit epistemology. Revue Pensee d’Aujourd’hui 1996, 24, 264–275.
[39] Pattee, H. H. The physics of symbols: Bridging the epistemic cut. Biosystems 2001,
60, 5–21.
16
[40] Feynman, R. P. Statistical Mechanics. Benjamin, Reading, MA, 1972.
[41] Pearl, J. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Infer-
ence. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1988.
[42] Fields, C.; Goldstein, A.; Sandved-Smith, L. Making the thermodynamic cost of
active inference explicit. Entropy 2024, 26, 622.
[43] Friston, K.; FitzGerald, T.; Rigoli, F.; Schwartenbeck, P.; Pezzulo, G. Active infer-
ence: A process theory. Neural Comput. 2017, 29, 1–49.
[44] Ramstead, M.J.D.; Badcock, P.B.; Friston, K.J. Answering Schrodinger’s question:
A free-energy formulation. Phys. Life Rev. 2018, 24, 1–16.
[45] Ramstead, M.J.D.; Constant, A.; Badcock, P.B.; Friston, K.J. Variational ecology
and the physics of sentient systems. Phys. Life Rev. 2019, 31, 188–205.
[46] Bateson, G. Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in Anthropology, Psychi-
atry, Evolution, and Epistemology; Jason Aronson: Northvale, NJ, USA, 1972.
[47] Fields, C.; Levin, M. How do living systems creat meaning? Philosophies 2020, 5,
36.
[48] Fields, C.; Glazebrook, J. F.; Levin, M. (2021). Minimal physicalism as a scale-free
sub- strate for cognition and consciousness. Neurosci. Cons. 2021, 2021, niab013.
https: //doi.org/10.1093/nc/niab013
[49] Abramson, C. I.; Levin, M. Behaviorist approaches to investigating memory and
learning: A primer for synthetic biology and bioengineering. Commun. Integr. Biol.
2021, 14, 230–247.
[50] Strawson, G. Consciousness and its Place in Nature. Imprint Academic, Exeter, UK,
2006.
[51] Goﬀ, P. Galileo’s error: Foundations for a New Science of Consciousness . Pantheon,
London, 2019.
[52] Bartlett, S; Wong, M. L. Deﬁning Lyfe in the Universe: From three privileged func-
tions to four pillars. Life 2020, 10, 42.
[53] Mariscal, C; Doolittle, W. F. Life and life only: A radical alternative to life deﬁni-
tionism. Synthese 2020, 197, 2975–2989. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-018-1852-2
[54] Pezzulo, G.; Levin, M. Re-membering the body: applications of computational neu-
roscience to the top-down control of regeneration of limbs and other complex organs.
Integr. Biol. (Camb.) 2015, 7(12), 1487–517.
[55] Davies, J.; Levin, M. Synthetic morphology with agential materials. Nature Rev.
Bioeng. 2023, 1, 46–59.
17
[56] Lagasse, E.; Levin, M. Future medicine: from molecular pathways to the collective
intelligence of the body. Trends Molec. Med. 2023, 29(9), 687–710.
[57] Levin, M. The multiscale wisdom of the body: Collective intelligence as a tractable
interface for next-generation biomedicine. Bioessays 2024, online version of record,
e202400196.
[58] McMillen, P.; Levin, M. Collective intelligence: A unifying concept for integrating
biology across scales and substrates. Commun. Biol. 2024, 7(1), 378.
[59] Fields, C.; Levin, M. Somatic multicellularity as a satisﬁcing solution to the
prediction-error minimization problem. Commun. Integr. Biol. 2019, 12, 119–132.
[60] Fields, C.; Friston, K.; Glazebrook, J. F.; Levin, M.; Marcian` o, A. The free energy
principle induces neuromorphic development. Neuromorph. Comput. Engin. 2022, 2,
042002. https://doi.org/10.1088/2634-4386/aca7de.
[61] Kirchhoﬀ, M.; Parr, T.; Palacios, E.; Friston, K.; Kiverstein, J. The Markov blankets
of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. J. R. Soc. Interface
2018, 15, 0792. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0792.
[62] Kuchling, F.; Fields, C.; Levin, M. Metacognition as a consequence of competing
evolutionary time scales. Entropy 2022, 24, 601. https://doi.org/10.3390/e24050601.
[63] Fields, C. The free energy principle induces intracellular compart-
mentalization. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm. 2024, 723, 150070.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2024.150070.
[64] Kuchling, F.; Friston, K.; Georgiev, G.; Levin, M. Morphogenesis as
Bayesian inference: A variational approach to pattern formation and con-
trol in complex biological systems. Phys. Life Rev. 2020, 33, 88–108.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2019.06.001.
[65] Friedman, D.; Tschantz, A.; Ramstead, M. J. D.; Friston, K. J.; Constant, A. Active
infer-ants: An active inference framework for ant colony behavior. Front. Behav.
Neurosci. 2021 15, 647732. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2021.647732.
[66] Friston, K.; Friedman, D. A.; Constant, A.; Knight, V. B.; Fields, C.; Parr, T.;
Campbell, J. O. A variational synthesis of evolutionary and developmental dynamics.
Entropy 2023, 25, 964. https://doi.org/10.3390/e25070964.
[67] Friston, K.; Parr, T.; Heins, C.; Constant, A.; Friedman, D.; Isomura, T.; Fields,
C.; Verbelen, T.; Ramstead, M.; Clippinger, J.; Frith, C. D. Federated inference and
belief sharing. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2024, 156, 105500.
[68] Hart, M. H. An explanation for the absence of extraterrestrials on earth. Quart. J.
R. Astro. Soc. 1975, 16, 128–135.
18
[69] Webb, S. If the Universe is Teeming with Aliens ... Where is Everybody? Springer,
Cham, Switzerland,2015.
[70] Ebrahimkhani, M. R.; Ebisuya, M. Synthetic developmental biology: build and con-
trol multicellular systems. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2019, 52, 9–15.
[71] Fields, C.; Levin, M. Scale-free biology: integrating evolutionary and developmental
thinking. Bioessays 2020, 42, 1900228.
[72] Fields, C.; Levin, M. Does evolution have a target morphology? Organisms 2020, 4,
57–76.
[73] Hug, L. A.; Baker, B. B.; Anantharaman, K.; Brown, C. T.; Probst, A. J.; Castelle,
C. J. et al. A new view of the tree of life. Nature Microbiol. 2016, 1, 16048.
[74] Lovelock, J. E.; Margulis, L. Atmospheric homeostasis by and for the biosphere: The
Gaia hypothesis, Tellus 1974, 26, 2–10,
[75] Rubin, S.; Parr, T.; Da Costa, L.; Friston, K. Future climates: Markov blankets and
active inference in the biosphere. J. R. Soc. Interface 2020, 17, 20200503.
[76] Horsman, C.; Stepney, S.; Wagner, R. C.; Kendon, V. When does a physical system
compute? Proc. R. Soc. A 2014, 470, 20140182.
[77] Bongard. J.; Levin, M. There’s plenty of room right here: Biological systems as
evolved, overloaded, multi-scale machines. Biomimetics 2023, 8, 110.
[78] Hoel, E. P. When the map is better than the territory. Entropy 2017, 19, 188.
[79] Levin, M. Bioelectric signaling: Reprogrammable circuits underlying embryogenesis,
regeneration, and cancer. Cell 2021, 184, 1971–1989.
[80] Levin, M. Bioelectric networks: The cognitive glue enabling evolutionary scaling from
physiology to mind. Anim. Cogn. 2023, 26, 1865–1891.
[81] Blackiston, D.; Lederer, E.; Kriegman, S.; Granier, S.; Bongard, J.; Levin, M. A
cellular platform for the development of synthetic living machines. Science Robotics
2021, 6, eabf1571.
[82] Kriegman, S.; Blackiston, D.; Levin, M.; Bongard, J. Kinematic self-replication in
reconﬁgurable organisms. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2021, 118, e2112672118.
[83] Gumuskaya, G.; Srivastava, P.; Cooper, B. G.; Lesser, H.; Semegran, B.; Garnier, S.;
Levin, M. Motile living biobots self-construct from adult human somatic progenitor
seed cells. Adv. Sci. (Weinh) 2024, 11, e2303575.
[84] Prigogine, I. Dissipative structures, dynamics and entropy. Int. J. Quant. Chem.
1975, 9(S9), 443–456.
19
[85] Levin, M. Self-Improvising Memory: A Perspective on Memories as Agential, Dy-
namically Reinterpreting Cognitive Glue. Entropy 2024, 26, 481.
[86] Gertz, J. The Drake Equation at 60: Reconsidered and abandoned. arxiv:2105.03984,
2021.
[87] PLANCK Collaboration (P. A. R. Ade et al.) Planck 2013 results. I. Overview of
products and scientiﬁc results. Astron. Astrophys. 2013, 571, A1.
20