ARTICLE OPEN
Psilocybin increases optimistic engagement over time:
computational modelling of behaviour in rats
Elizabeth L. Fisher 1 ✉, Ryan Smith 2, Kyna Conn3,4, Andrew W. Corcoran 1, Laura K. Milton3,4, Jakob Hohwy1,5 and
Claire J. Foldi 3,4,5
© The Author(s) 2024
Psilocybin has shown promise as a novel pharmacological intervention for treatment of depression, where post-acute effects of
psilocybin treatment have been associated with increased positive mood and decreased pessimism. Although psilocybin is proving
to be effective in clinical trials for treatment of psychiatric disorders, the information processing mechanisms affected by psilocybin
are not well understood. Here, weﬁt active inference and reinforcement learning computational models to a novel two-armed
bandit reversal learning task capable of capturing engagement behaviour in rats. The model revealed that after receiving
psilocybin, rats achieve more rewards through increased task engagement, mediated by modiﬁcation of forgetting rates and
reduced loss aversion. Theseﬁndings suggest that psilocybin may afford an optimism bias that arises through altered belief
updating, with translational potential for clinical populations characterised by lack of optimism.
Translational Psychiatry          (2024) 14:394 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-024-03103-7
INTRODUCTION
Psilocybin has shown promise as a novel pharmacological
intervention for treatment of depression, where post-acute effects
of psilocybin treatment have been associated with increased
positive mood and decreased pessimism [1–3]. Although accu-
mulating evidence indicates that psilocybin is effective for
treatment of psychiatric disorders, the information processing
mechanisms underlying the effects of psilocybin are not well
understood [ 4, 5]. Establishing the information processing
mechanisms of psilocybin could signiﬁcantly beneﬁt our under-
standing of the drug ’s neurobiological substrate and its ther-
apeutic actions, potentially helping to improve its efﬁcacy and
speciﬁcity, which could assist in informing clinical decisions. One
way we can investigate the post-acute effects of psilocybin is with
animal models [6, 7], which have a number of beneﬁts, including
the ability to collect many data points in controlled environments
and over sustained periods after treatment, as well as circumvent-
ing issues with expectancy effects that may confound the results
from clinical trials in humans [8].
To understand the information processing mechanisms of
psilocybin, computational modelling approaches allow us to
investigate the change in speciﬁc model parameters over time,
providing insight into how psilocybin may help treat depression.
Such computational modelling approaches fall into the burgeon-
ing ﬁeld of computational psychiatry that aims to develop precise
treatments for psychiatric disorders, based on the speci ﬁc
information processing mechanisms of a particular individual, with
an understanding that shared symptoms may arise from different
computational processes [9–13]. Here, we employed a novel two-
armed bandit reversal learning task capable of capturing
engagement behaviour in rats. Measuring engagement behaviour
has translational potential for individuals with depression, who
often choose to withdraw from the world rather than engage in
rewarding activities [14, 15]. In fact, modifying such behaviour is a
primary target of existing behavioural activation interventions
within cognitive-behavioural therapies [16, 17]. In our experiment,
two groups of rats were administered psilocybin (n = 12) or saline
(n =10) 24 h before the initiation of the task. The rats could
engage with the task for three hours each day for 14 days and
completed the task in their home cage such that they could decide
to either engage in the task or stay in the cage without engaging.
The present study used both behavioural measures and
computational modelling methods to distinguish the mechanisms
underlying task engagement. The space of models included both
model-free reinforcement learning (RL) [18] and active inference
(AI) [ 19–21] models, with a range of possible parameters
motivated by prior research on depression. As optimism bias is
associated with increased engagement with the world and
depression is linked to diminished optimism, we include
parameters related to optimism, allowing us to investigate if
increased engagement in the task can be accounted for by
increased optimism [ 22–26]. We hypothesised that psilocybin
would increase subsequent task engagement through discrete
changes in information processing in rats.
METHODS
Animals
All animals were obtained from the Monash Animal Research Platform.
Female Sprague-Dawley rats (n = 22) arrived at 6 weeks of age and were
Received: 19 May 2024 Revised: 18 September 2024 Accepted: 19 September 2024
1Monash Centre for Consciousness and Contemplative Studies, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.2Laureate Institute for Brain Research, University of Tulsa, Tulsa
Oklahoma, OK, USA. 3Anorexia and Feeding Disorders Laboratory, Department of Physiology, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.4Biomedicine Discovery Institute,
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.5These authors contributed equally: Jakob Hohwy, Claire J. Foldi.✉email: beth.ﬁsher@monash.edu
www.nature.com/tpTranslational Psychiatry
1234567890();,:
allowed to acclimate to the reverse light cycle (lights off at 11AM) for
7 days prior to any intervention. Young female rats were used in these
studies to compare outcomes to previous studies in the laboratory
investigating the role of psilocybin on cognitiveﬂexibility [27]. Because
reinforcement learning motivation is known toﬂuctuate over the estrous
cycle [28], a male rat was housed in all experimental rooms at least 7 days
prior to experimentation, synchronizing cycling (cf. the Whitten Effect [29]).
Before training, rats were housed individually in specialised cages
(26 cm W × 21 cm H × 47.5 cm D) and were habituated to sucrose pellets
(20 mg, AS5TUT, Test Diet, CA, USA) sprinkled into the cage for two
consecutive days. Pre-training involvedﬁrst training animals to take pellets
from the magazine (magazine training) on a“free-feeding” schedule, and
subsequently training animals to make nose-poke responses to obtain a
pellet (nose-poke training), whereby a nose-poke into either port delivered
a pellet at aﬁxed ratio (FR) 1 schedule. At the completion of pre-training,
when rats were between 8 and 9 weeks of age, a single dose of psilocybin
(1.5 mg/kg; USONA Lot# AMS0167, dissolved in saline) or saline alone
(control) was administered intraperitoneally and reversal learning training
commenced the following day. Psilocybin efﬁcacy was conﬁrmed by the
adoption of hind limb abduction, a stereotypical posture, within 15 min
post-administration. All experimental procedures were conducted in
accordance with the Australian Code for the care and use of animals for
scientiﬁc purposes and approved by the Monash Animal Resource Platform
Ethics Committee (ERM 29143).
Reversal learning task
For the reversal learning task, Feeding Experiment Devices (version 3;
FED3) [30] were placed in the home cage of the rat for 3 h a day (Fig.1).
The rats were maintained onad libitum access to food (standard rat and
mouse chow; Barastoc, Australia) throughout the entire experimental
paradigm in order to rule out hunger as a motivating factor for
performance. The reversal learning task was a modi ﬁed two-armed
bandit designed so that 10 pokes on the rewarded side of the FED3, with
each poke resulting in a reward, triggered the reversal of the rewarded
side. This continued on a deterministic schedule of reinforcement (i.e.,
“active” pokes delivered a reward 100% of the time) over 14 experimental
sessions on separate and consecutive days, where the left side was active
ﬁrst. There were three outcomes from the rats’ actions in the reversal
learning task. If the rat poked the active side and received a sucrose pellet,
the outcome was a‘reward’. If the rat poked the non-active side of the
FED3 the outcome was a‘loss’, as they exerted energy without reward. If
the rat did not engage in the task, the outcome was‘null’, which was
considered a better outcome than a loss as the rat did not exert energy
without reward.
Locomotor activity and anxiety-like behaviour
To examine potential inﬂuences of general locomotor and anxiety-like
behaviour that may contribute to task performance, a separate cohort of
female Sprague-Dawley rats (age-matched to 8-9 weeks old) were
administered psilocybin ( n = 8) or saline ( n = 8) and 24 h later were
tested in the openﬁeld (OF) and elevated plus maze (EPM). Behavioural
tests were recorded with an overhead camera connected to a computer
and analysed with Ethovision XT (V 3.0; Noldus, NL) tracking software
using centre of mass for detection. The EPM consisted of an elevated
4 - a r mp l a t f o r mm a d eo fg r e yP e r s p e x( 7 0c ml o n g×1 0c mw i d e×9 0c m
high) with two closed (40 cm high walls) and two open (“risky”)a r m s .
Rats were placed in the centre platform (10 × 10 cm) facing an open arm
and the proportion of time spent in the closed arms relative to the open
arms in each 10-min trial, was used as the primary measure of anxiety-
like behaviour [31]. The OF test consisted of a deep open topped box
(60 × 60 × 55 cm deep) in which distance travelled in each 10-min trial
w a su s e da st h ep r i m a r ym e a s u r eo fl o c o m o t o ra c t i v i t ya n dt h e
proportion of time spent in the aversive (“risky”) centre zone (middle
square of a 3 × 3 grid; 20 × 20 cm) was used as a secondary measure of
anxiety-related behaviour, although it is shown to be less sensitive to
the effects of anxiolytic drugs [32].
Computational modelling methods
We considered model-free reinforcement learning (RL) [18] and active
inference (AI) [19–21, 33] models as possible explanations of observed
choice behaviour. For all computational models, the rat had three actions
to choose from: ‘poke left’, ‘poke right’,o r ‘stay in cage ’, and three
outcomes: ‘reward’, ‘loss’,o r ‘null’. A reward was modelled as a positive
outcome, loss as a negative outcome, and null as a neutral outcome (i.e.,
less aversive than a loss, as the rat conserved energy).
Reinforcement learning models. Four different model-free RL models were
considered that reﬂect hypotheses about how an optimism bias might be
computationally implemented in such models. We hypothesised that
psilocybin increased optimism by asymmetric belief updating, which was
the main focus of these models; however, other parameters that have been
associated with depression or optimism were also considered. Note that
we only include model-free RL modelling approaches here, which do not
include explicit beliefs about state transition probabilities. In this study, we
have opted to use active inference models to include state transition
beliefs, acknowledging that more complex RL models with explicit
transition beliefs (i.e.,“model-based” RL) could also have been considered
[33–37].
All models included, V
0, which is the initial value of the expected
reward for each action, ‘stay in cage’, ‘poke left’, ‘poke right’. The initial
value of the expected reward was restricted to positive values. The value
of the expected reward was transformed into a discrete probability
distribution using a softmax function, which included a standard inverse
temperature parameter (β) controlling randomness (value insensitivity) in
choice, as follows wherea is set of possible actions.
patðÞðÞ ¼
exp βQa tðÞðÞ
P
a exp βQa tðÞðÞ (1)
Here, trial is denoted byt. Expected values (Q) were updated based on
reward prediction errors ( RPEÞ. These prediction errors re ﬂect the
difference between the current (rÞ and the expected reward, as follows:
RPEðtÞ¼ rðtÞ/C0 QaðtÞ (2)
The reward value was coded as 1 for a reward,−1 for a loss, and 0 for
the null outcome.
Simple Rescorla– Wagner
The simplest RL (Rescorla –Wagner) model included one learning rate
parameter, α, in addition to V0 and β, The expected reward was here
updated at the same rate regardless of whether the rat observed a reward
or a loss.
Qaðt þ 1Þ¼ QaðtÞþ α /C1 RPEðtÞ
Qaðt ¼ 1Þ¼ V0
(3)
Fig. 1 Treatment and reversal learning task design. Rats
completed a reversal learning task over 14 experimental sessions
on separate consecutive days in their cage, with theﬁrst session
beginning 24 h after treatment with psilocybin (n = 12) or saline
(n = 10). The reversal learning task had a deterministic reinforce-
ment schedule and was designed so that 10 pokes on the rewarded
side, with each poke resulting in a reward, triggered the reversal of
the rewarded side. The rat could select from three actions: poke left,
poke right, or stay in the cage. Created with biorender.com.
E.L. Fisher et al.
2
Translational Psychiatry          (2024) 14:394 
Pessimistic Rescorla– Wagner
The pessimistic Rescorla–Wagner model aimed to account for a pessimism
bias the rat might possess. For this model, weﬁxed the initial value for the
expected reward for the‘stay in cage’ action to be 0. Duringﬁtting, the
estimated initial values of V0 for the ‘poke left’ and ‘poke right’ actions
were then permitted to take negative or positive values. This allowed the
rat to potentially begin the trial with a pessimism bias, in which it initially
believed that selecting left or right sides would lead to a negative outcome
(promoting avoidance), which would need to be unlearned through
subsequent task engagement.
Asymmetric learning model loss aversion
As depression and optimism have been associated with differences in
belief updating to good versus bad outcomes [ 38], we tested a
Rescorla–Wagner model with separate learning rates for rewards and
losses.
if rðtÞ > 0
Qaðt þ 1Þ¼ QaðtÞþ αwin /C1 RPEðtÞ
if r tðÞ < 0
Qaðt þ 1Þ¼ QaðtÞþ αloss /C1 RPEðtÞ
(4)
Additionally, as depression is related to increased loss aversion, this
model included a loss aversion parameter [ 22]. This parameter was
implemented as the negative reward value assigned to the loss outcome.
Instead of being encoded as a−1 (as in the other models above), this
negative reward could take larger values if a rat was more loss averse.
Thus, under a loss outcome, the negative reward was scaled by a loss
aversion (LA) parameter as follows:
RPEðtÞ¼ LA /C1 rðtÞ/C0 Q
aðtÞ (5)
Dynamic learning rate (associability)
Theoretically, learning rate should be greater when the environment is
expected to be volatile/unpredictable, while learning rate should decrease
in a stable/predictable environment. Prior work suggests this learning rate
adjustment may be altered in affective disorders [39]. To evaluate the
possibility that differences in learning rate adjustment could account for
differences in optimistic behaviour, we included an‘associability’RL model
that allows learning rate to be adjusted on a trial-by-trial basis, based on
the magnitude of previous prediction errors (i.e., larger prediction errors
effectively increase learning rates, as they suggest conﬁdence in current
expectations should be low). This model includes a parameter (η), which
modulates how strongly the strength of learning rate can change after
each trial. The update equations for associability (κ), which is used to
modulate the baseline learning rate on each trial, are as follows:
κ
a t þ 1ðÞ ¼ 1 /C0 ηðÞ /C1 κa tðÞ þ ηjRPE tðÞ j (6)
Note that a lower bound (L) on the value ofκ is required, which weﬁta s
an additional parameter. The expected reward is then calculated by the
following equation:
Q
a t þ 1ðÞ ¼ Qa tðÞ þ α /C1 κa tðÞ /C1 RPE (7)
Active inference models. In addition to RL models, we consider active
inference (AI) models, which incorporate Bayesian learning and an intrinsic
information-seeking drive that could play a role in promoting engagement
behaviour (Fig.2). The categories ofactions and outcomes (oÞ were set in
the same manner here as in the RL models. The main differences from RL,
as described further below, are that: 1) the model explicitly learns
probabilities of each outcome under each action and estimates its
conﬁdence in current beliefs about those probabilities; 2) the reward value
of each outcome is encoded in the form of a probability distribution,
pðojCÞ, where higher probabilities correspond to greater subjective reward;
and 3) action selection is driven by an objective function called negative
expected free energy (QÞ, which jointly maximises expected reward and
expected reductions in uncertainty about outcome probabilities.
Expected free energy is calculated by the following equation:
Q
action ¼ Eqo ;s;AjactionðÞ Inq Ajs; o; actionðÞ /C0 Inq AðÞ½/C138|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
Infortmation/C0 seeking
þ Eqo ;s;AjactionðÞ ½In σ CðÞðÞ /C138|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ ﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ ﬄ}
Reward/C0 seeking
(8)
Here, A is a matrix that encodes the reward probabilities,pðojsÞ, as the
relationship between action states (sÞ and observations (o). C is a vector
that encodes the reward values for the rat. The σ symbol indicates a
softmax function. The ﬁrst term in the expected free energy equation
calculates how much information about the reward probabilities would be
gained by taking an action. In other words, if the rat selects a certain
action, the magnitude of this term indicates how much it expects to
increase its con ﬁdence in the best action. In this model actions are
considered observable. Note here that the symbol q indicates an
approximate probability distribution. The second term inQ
action calculates
the expected probability of reward under each action, based on current
beliefs.
The ﬁrst AI model included ﬁve parameters with theoretical links to
depression and optimism, similar to those in the RL models. To investigate
the differences in belief updating from positive and negative outcomes
associated with depression and optimism [ 38], we included separate
forgetting rate parameters ( α
decay ) for rewards and losses. In the AI
framework, forgetting rates are conceptually similar to (but mathematically
distinct from) learning rates in RL, as they indicate how strongly the rat
forgets its prior beliefs before observing a new reward or loss. The higher
the value for the forgetting rate, the more the rat updates its beliefs after a
new observation (i.e., larger values down-weight prior beliefs before each
update). Learning speci ﬁcally involves updating the parameters of a
Dirichlet distribution ( a) over the likelihood matrix A after each
observation, as shown in the equation below. We included aﬁxed value
(0.5) for learning rate (α
update).
pðAÞ¼ DirichletðaÞ
a ¼ qo reward
t jschoice
t
/C0/C1
¼
10 0
0 pr pr
0 ð1 /C0 prÞð 1 /C0 prÞ
2
64
3
75
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
Stay in Cage;Poke Left;Poke Right
Stay in Cage
Reward
Loss
atrialþ1 ¼ð 1 /C0 αdecay Þ/C1 atrial þ αupdate /C1 P
t ot /C10 st
(9)
Here we included an additional parameter ( pr)r e ﬂecting the initial
expected probability of a reward under either action at the start of the task
(prior to learning). Greater values for this parameter reﬂect more optimistic
initial expectations [26, 40].
Fig. 2 Active inference model.A graphical depiction of the active
inference model. See Methods for more details on the model and
equations.
E.L. Fisher et al.
3
Translational Psychiatry          (2024) 14:394 
Similar to the RL model space, we included a loss aversion parameter
(LAÞ encoding the value of a loss, assigning aﬁxed positive value of 2 for
observing reward:
C ¼
0
2
/C0 LA
2
64
3
75
Stay in Cage
Reward
Loss
(10)
We included an inverse temperature (action precision) parameter (βÞ
that controlled the level of randomness in action selection:
pðactionðtÞjβÞ¼ σðβ /C1 InpðQactionðtÞÞÞ (11)
Finally, we compared this model to a simpler four-parameter AI model that
omitted the prior reward probability (pr) parameter, wherepr is ﬁxed at 0.5.
Model comparison
Model simulations for the AI and model-free RL models were run in
MATLAB (v.9.12.0, (R2022a)). To estimate the parameters for all models, a
variational Bayes algorithm (variational Laplace) was used, which
maximises the likelihood of the rat ’s actions while incorporating a
complexity cost to deter overﬁtting [41]. To ﬁnd the best model, we then
used Bayesian model comparison across the 4 model-free RL models and 2
AI models [42]. To conﬁrm the recoverability of parameters in the best
model, we then simulated behavioural data using the parameters we
estimated for each rat (based on the same number of trials each rat
performed in the task). Using this simulated behavioural data, we then
estimated these parameters and evaluated how strongly the estimates
correlated with the true generative values. Recoverability was acceptable
for all parameters in the winning model (see Supplementary Materials).
Statistical analysis
All analyses were performed in R (v4.1.1) using functions from the
Tidyverse package (v1.3.2; [43]). To explore whether model parameters
might jointly differentiate groups, we performed logistic regression
analyses with the parameters as predictors and group classiﬁcation as
the outcome variable. Interactions between each parameter and time (day)
were included. This was carried out using the glm() function in R with the
‘binomial’family and the‘logit’link function.
Behavioural performance and computational model parameters were
modelled using generalised additive mixed-effects models (GAMMs), a
semiparametric extension of the generalised linear mixed-effects model-
ling framework that enables theﬁtting of nonparametric curves (splines)
describing how the mean of an outcome variabley varies as a smooth
function f of explanatory variable(s) x (labelled ‘smoothers’)[ 44–46]. A
smoothing penalty is applied during theﬁtting of smooth terms, ensuring
that the complexity (i.e.,‘wiggliness’)o f f ðxÞ is appropriately constrained
(e.g., reducing f ðxÞ to a linear function in the event there is insufﬁcient
evidence of nonlinearity in the mapping betweeny and x).
GAMMs were estimated using restricted maximum likelihood via the
gam() function of the mgcv package (v1.8-40; [46]). All GAMMs took the
following generic form:
gE ðyÞðÞ ¼ β
0 þ β1Group þ f Day; by ¼ GroupðÞ þ f ID DayðÞ þ ϵ; (12)
where Group encoded a two-level factor variable reﬂecting group allocation
(psilocybin, control) and Day encoded the consecutive sequence of test
sessions (days 1-14). Thin-plate regression splines [47] were used to model
changes iny over Day for each level of Group. Factor smooths on Day were
implemented for each individual rat (ID) to capture randomﬂuctuations in
behaviour over successive sessions (this term essentially functions as a
time-varying random intercept; for similar approaches, see Corcoran et al.
[48]; Cross et al. [49]). The selection of link functiongð:Þ was informed by
the distribution ofy and quality of modelﬁt, which was evaluated using
functions from the mgcViz (v0.1.9; [50]) and itsadug (v2.4.1; [51]) packages.
To understand the relationship between the behavioural outcomes and
the winning model parameters, we ran Pearson correlations between each
model parameter and behavioural outcome measure.
RESULTS
Behavioural results
Rats that received psilocybin tended to achieve more rewards in
the reversal learning task than those that received saline (b = 36.1,
t(239) = 1.92, p = 0.056). There was a signi ﬁcant difference
between smoothers; rats in the psilocybin group achieved
signiﬁcantly more rewards on days 7–14 compared to those in
the control group (Fig.3A). Rats in the psilocybin group showed
signiﬁcantly more losses on average than the control group
(b = 15.60, t(218) = 2.04, p = 0.042). Comparison of smoothers
indicated that this difference was driven by fewer losses in the
control group on days 4–6 (Fig. 3B). As task engagement was
optional, one group could have both more wins and more losses
than another group due to more frequent engagement.
We found no difference in win-stay or lose-shift behaviour
between the two groups (Fig.3C, D). In contrast, the control group
selected the action of‘staying in the cage’signiﬁcantly more than
the psilocybin group (i.e., reﬂecting less frequent task engage-
ment; b = −0.11, t(221) = −1.99, p = 0.048). Comparison of
smoothing splines further revealed signi ﬁcant reductions
in psilocybin group stay-in-cage times on days 5–7 and 12–14
(Fig. 3E).
Rewards showed a strong positive association with the amount
of time rats chose to engage in the task ( r = 0.93, p < 0.001).
Rewards were positively associated with losses ( r = 0.69,
p < 0.001). This was because the chances of reward and loss both
increased with greater task engagement (Fig.3F).
Model comparisons
When comparing four reinforcement learning (RL) and two active
inference (AI) models with Bayesian model comparison we found
the winning model to be theﬁve parameter AI model (protected
exceedance probability = 1). Model validation and parameter
recoverability analyses conﬁrmed the validity and reliability of
this model (see Supplementary Materials).
Active inference model results . The inter-correlations for the
winning AI model parameters and behavioural results showed
several associations in expected directions (Fig.4F). The strongest
association was with number of rewards received and the loss
aversion parameter, where lower loss aversion was correlated with
more rewards. Rewards were associated with forgetting rates in
the expected directions.
The primary ﬁnding within these results was that the location
within parameter space for each rat changed over time in
response to psilocybin. Namely, logistic regressions capturing the
variance among all parameters found forgetting rate for rewards
was signi ﬁcantly higher in the psilocybin group ( b = 0.62,
z(295) = 2.034, p = 0.042) and forgetting rate for losses was
signiﬁcantly lower in the psilocybin group ( b = 0.57,
z(295) = −2.053, p = 0.040). We found a signi ﬁcant interaction
between forgetting rate for rewards and day ( b = −0.080,
z(295) = 2.294, p = 0.022), indicating that the forgetting rate for
rewards for the psilocybin group increased more over time. There
was a signi ﬁcant interaction between loss aversion and day
(b = −0.11, z(295) = −2.580, p = 0.010), indicating that the psilo-
cybin group had smaller loss aversion on the later days of testing.
Taken together, the logistic regression found that parameter
space change for psilocybin group compared to saline group was
as follows: forgetting rates for rewards were higher, forgetting
rates for losses were lower, forgetting rate for rewards increased
more over time, and loss aversion was lower for the psilocybin
group over time. Thisﬁnding highlights the post-acute effects of
psilocybin on the best-ﬁt location within model parameter space.
A secondary analysis of the individual parameters was
performed to investigate the shifts in individual parameter values
over time. Results for these GAMMS, which did not take into
account the other parameters, showed forgetting rates for losses
were signi ﬁcantly lower on average in the psilocybin group
(b =
0.18, z(267) = −1.99, p = 0.046). This between-group differ-
ence was most pronounced on day 1, but remained present across
the experiment (Fig. 4A). Although there was no main effect of
E.L. Fisher et al.
4
Translational Psychiatry          (2024) 14:394 
group for the forgetting rate for rewards, comparison of
smoothers revealed this parameter to be signiﬁcantly higher in
the psilocybin group on day 14 (Fig.4B).
None of the remaining model parameters showed signiﬁcant
between-group main effects. However, smoothing splines differed
signiﬁcantly between groups for both the loss aversion and action
precision parameters on speciﬁc days. Loss aversion was lower in
the psilocybin group on day 13 and 14, suggesting that this
reduced anticipated aversiveness of losses over time (Fig. 4C).
Action precision was signiﬁcantly lower for the smoothing splines
in the psilocybin group on days 4 and 5 (Fig. 4D). As action
precision indicates less randomness in choice, this most likely
reﬂected the fact that rats in this group less deterministically
chose to stay in their cage and not perform the task on those days.
Other aspects of behaviour relevant to task performance. Because
engagement during the reversal task could be inﬂuenced by prior
experience with sucrose rewards, response vigour, general
locomotor activity and anxiety-like behaviour, we assessed these
aspects of behaviour separately. During pre-training (Fig. 5A),
where poking into either side of the FED3 resulted in a pellet,
there was no overall difference between rats that would go on to
be administered psilocybin or saline (Fig.5B; p = 0.102) and while
both groups preferred the right over the left nose-poke
(Fig. 5C, D), initial group differences in sucrose collection did not
contribute to subsequent task performance. In contrast, we found
that during the reversal task (Fig. 5E), the rate of responding
(response vigour) showed a trend toward increase vigour after
psilocybin for the target (rewarded) nose-poke over the 14 days
(Fig. 5F; p = 0.096) but this was not the case for non-target
(incorrect) responses (Fig.5E–G).
We found that post-administration day-to-day performance
variability, as measured by reversal rate, had stabilised by the late
reversal learning period (Fig.5J; sessions 12–14, p = 0.681), where
signiﬁcantly higher rates of reversal were observed for the
psilocybin group (Fig.5K; p > 0.001). This improvement in reversal
Fig. 3 Effects of psilocybin on behavioural measures across days of reversal learning.The ﬁrst 5 panels in thisﬁgure illustrate pairwise
comparisons of the behavioural measures across days including (A) rewards, (B) losses, (C) win-stay strategies (logit-scaled), (D) lose-shift
strategies (logit-scaled), and (E) stay in cage behaviour (log-scaled). Estimated marginal means are represented with dotted lines (psilocybin
group) or solid lines (saline group) with shading indicating SEM. Solid red lines indicate signiﬁcant differences between groups (p < 0.05).
Correlations between behavioural measures presented inF.* p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
E.L. Fisher et al.
5
Translational Psychiatry          (2024) 14:394 
ability in the later sessions also coincided with the greatest trend
towards an effect of psilocybin on total number of rewards
received (p = 0.083) Taken together, this suggests that psilocybin
could enhance reversal learning to improve reward outcomes (i.e.,
goal-directed action) over time, rather than a generalised increase
in engagement with the operant device. An effect of psilocybin in
early learning was not observed but this may be due to
performance instability during this initial period (Fig. 5H–I;
p = 0.0657 and p < 0.05, respectively).
We have previously shown that psilocybin administered at the
same dose used here did not affect effortful responding in rats
using a progressive ratio of reinforcement as a measure of
incentive motivation [ 27]. However, to rule out possible
contributions to task performance from general locomotor
activity and anxiety-like behaviour in the present study,
we examined the effects of psilocybin on behaviour in the OF
(Fig. 5L) and EPM (Fig. 5P) in a separate cohort of animals.
Psilocybin did not alter loco motor activity or change the
duration spent in risky or safe zones of either the OF
(Fig. 5M–O) or EPM (Fig. 5Q, R; all ps > 0.3217), indicating that
these behavioural features did not explain the increase in task
performance observed.
DISCUSSION
This study explored the enduring effects of psilocybin on
behaviour and information processing in rats, in an effort to
further understand the mechanisms of how psilocybin may treat
conditions such as depression. Our results support the notion that
post-acute effects of psilocybin increase engagement in a reversal
learning task, and suggest this may be explained by speci ﬁc
changes in the rats ’ location within model parameter space,
primarily due to altered forgetting rates and reduced loss aversion.
These results could have translational/clinical relevance to
conditions, such as major depression, which are linked to a
withdrawal from the world, and indeed existing (e.g., behavioural
activation) treatments often speciﬁcally aim to promote greater
engagement. Our results show the increased engagement could
be due to increased optimism via an asymmetry in belief
updating, highlighting optimism as a possible treatment target.
We investigated the changes in parameter values in response to
psilocybin administration in the model using a logistic regression.
One’s overall location within a high-dimensional parameter space
is an important concept in computational psychiatry, as it can help
characterise the way multiple computational factors jointly impact
Fig. 4 Effects of psilocybin on model parameters across days of reversal learning.The ﬁrst 5 panels in this ﬁgure illustrate pairwise
comparisons of the model parameters across days including (A) forgetting rate for losses (logit-scaled), (B) forgetting rate for rewards (logit-
scaled), (C) loss aversion (log-scaled), (D) action precision (log-scaled), and (E) prior reward probability (logit-scaled). Estimated marginal means
are represented with dotted lines (psilocybin group) or solid lines (saline group) with shading indicating SEM. Solid red lines indicate
signiﬁcant differences between groups (p < 0.05 Correlations between parameters in the best-ﬁt computational (AI) model and behavioural
results measures (F). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
E.L. Fisher et al.
6
Translational Psychiatry          (2024) 14:394 
Fig. 5 Raw behavioural data. A–D Nose-poke training results prior to psilocybin or saline administration.E–G Response rates for psilocybin
and saline groups in the reversal learning task.H–K Reversal rates for psilocybin and saline groups during initial and stable performance
periods. L–O Open ﬁeld data for rats that received psilocybin and saline aged matched to cohort in current study.P–R Elevated plus maze data
for rats that received psilocybin and saline aged matched to cohort in current study. PSI psilocybin, SAL saline. Data presented are
mean ± SEM.
E.L. Fisher et al.
7
Translational Psychiatry          (2024) 14:394 
a patient’s decision making. It is this insight into mechanisms of
psychiatric disorders that provides promise for precision treat-
ments in psychiatry [9, 12, 13]. Our computational results, where
we investigated how psilocybin affected locations with the
parameter space of the model, found psilocybin reduced belief
updating rates after losses and increased belief updating rates
after wins; that is, over time, the rats that received psilocybin
forgot more about their previous beliefs when receiving a reward
compared to when receiving a loss. These results are in line with
an optimism bias, which relates to an asymmetry in belief
updating in which individuals learn more from positive than
negative outcomes [26, 38, 52, 53]. Interestingly, this biased belief
updating manifests as more engagement in the environment. If an
individual holds the (biased) belief that an action will lead to a
positive outcome, they are more likely to choose that action–
engaging more, and enabling themselves to minimise missed
opportunities. Through this increased engagement with the world,
optimism has been associated with improved quality of life and is
suggested to be adaptive [26, 54–61]. As the psilocybin-receiving
rats increase the asymmetry in their belief updating, they also
increase their engagement with the task. These results, along with
complementary behaviouralﬁndings ruling out other explanations
of increased engagement, support this optimism-based inter-
pretation. Additionally, our results complement recent work
showing that the antidepressant properties of ketamine treatment
may be due to increased optimism from asymmetry in belief
updating [62].
It is important to note that saline treated control rats also
showed asymmetry in their belief updating, where they had a
lower forgetting rate for losses vs. rewards. This is not surprising,
since research shows that some optimism in rats is widely present
in healthy animals, and is absent mainly in rat models of
depression [63, 64]. Our control group did not undergo any
additional experimental interventions to develop pessimism, and
would therefore be expected to show some optimism bias [65].
Our ﬁndings suggest that psilocybin ampliﬁes the asymmetry in
updating seen in wild type rats. Future research on optimism
should test the effects of psilocybin in a depression model cohort,
such as in a model of chronic mild stress [66].
Our computational results also show that psilocybin reduced
loss aversion in rats. The rats that received psilocybin had more
losses than the control group, but still engaged more with the
task. As the rats had reduced loss aversion, they expected to
dislike losses less. This means they were less deterred from
engaging in the task than the control group, despite the
possibility of a loss. As expected, this was also associated with
more rewards. Our results thus suggest that, in addition to
asymmetric belief updating, psilocybin may further increase
engagement by reducing loss aversion. As loss aversion and
pessimism are elevated in depression, these results are potentially
promising in understanding how psilocybin may counter these
crucial features of this disorder [22, 38, 67–69]. Notably, these
differences in loss aversion were seen in the later days of the task.
This is consistent with human studies showing positive psilocybin
effects weeks or months after treatment [70, 71].
Previous studies on psilocybin and decision-making indicate
that psilocybin may improve cognitiveﬂexibility [72–74]; a further
study found that psilocybin may reduce punishment by changing
one’s concerns for the outcome of their game partner in a social
decision-making task [73
]. The currentﬁndings add to a growing
literature in this area highlighting a range of effects that emerge in
different task contexts, and which perhaps have similar underlying
mechanisms. Neurobiologically, our ﬁnding that changes in task
engagement occur post-acutely complements research showing
that after psilocybin administration in mice, increased indices of
neuroplasticity, measured by dendritic spine density, peaked
7 days post-administration [75]. While the relationships between
structural neuroplasticity, decision-making and task engagement
remain poorly understood in the context of psilocybin actions, it is
plausible that increased task engagement depends on elements of
both neural and cognitiveﬂexibility.
Although it is beyond the scope of this paper to directly extend
research into the serotonergic effects of psilocybin, ourﬁndings
might also be relevant to existing neurobiological theories on the
role of serotonin. For example, one theory suggests that increased
serotonin promotes exploration in order to identify new polices
that can then be exploited [76]. As psilocybin is a potent agonist
for multiple serotonin receptor subtypes [ 77], the rats in the
present study that explored their environment more would have
likely had elevated serotonin signalling (at least acutely), suggest-
ing a neural mechanism underlying our computational and other
behavioural results. In our task, increased engagement resulted in
more rewards so the rat can then exploit increased engagement
after the initial elevation in serotonin availability. This increased
engagement policy results in optimistic learning of the task as the
rat continues to receive rewards. If serotonin does increase
exploration after psilocybin treatment, it may have clinical
implications when considering the environment within which a
patient will explore and learn their new polices after treatment. In
our task, performance also beneﬁted from increased engagement;
however, it should be noted that it is unknown at present whether
this will generalise to other experimental or real-world contexts in
which patients might bene ﬁt. Future studies should therefore
extend our modelling approach to other environments and test
potential links to current work on the neurobiology of serotonin
and psilocybin [78–80].
Taken together, these results further support a way in which
psilocybin treatment has potential to improve core symptoms of
depression, associated with anhedonic, apathetic withdrawal, and
diminished optimism, by altering speciﬁc computational mechan-
isms that lead to improved optimism and greater engagement
with the world [14, 15, 38, 67–69, 81, 82]. Further research should
consider if these effects on task engagement are speci ﬁct o
psilocybin, or if they can occur for other psychoactive agents (such
as opiates), including how such psychoactive agents might
manifest in the model parameters. This would be informative
not only about the mechanism of psilocybin, but also about
different intervention targets. For example, even if opiates
increase engagement, the underlying model might not reveal
the same kind of belief updating asymmetry found here, which
could have additional clinical relevance. To garner a more
comprehensive picture from the perspective of alternative
computational modelling constructs, future research could also
include other model-based RL approaches that utilise a Partially
Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP), in addition to the
(POMDP-based) AI models we focused on here [34, 37]. In this
context, major differences between POMDPs in AI vs. RL models
include, among others, that RL-based POMDPs need not (but
could) incorporate Bayesian learning or an explicit directed
exploration drive. Another consideration when contrasting AI
and model-based RL is that the latter often does not assume
partial observability. That is, it is typically assumed that the state is
known, and a transition model is used to predict future rewards
under possible sequences of state transitions. In contrast, use of
POMDP architectures and associated generative models has been
a foundational feature in AI (although these models can reproduce
full observability using appropriate likelihood functions).
Other future research directions could include testing relevant
antagonists and dose-dependence trials to understand the
optimal serotonin receptor binding and occupancy required for
increased engagement, and potentially evaluate the associated
dose-dependence of computational parameter estimates. Finally,
it is important to highlight that, as the clinical potential of these
results depends on translatability to human participants, it will be
crucial toﬁnd ways to ensure this is feasible. The current paradigm
used here in rats required gathering behaviour over a large
E.L. Fisher et al.
8
Translational Psychiatry          (2024) 14:394 
number of sequential days, which could be logistically and
methodologically challenging, especially in patient samples. Thus,
adapted study procedures will likely need to be explored.
Conclusion
In summary, we ﬁnd that, in rats, psilocybin increases engage-
ment with the environment consistent with an ampli ﬁed
optimism bias. Computational modelling suggests the
psilocybin-receiving rats have heightened expectations of reward
as a result of changes in relative rates of belief updating from
rewards and losses, as well as reduced loss aversion. This result
has translational potential, and should motivate conﬁrmation of
these effects in human studies.
DATA AVAILABILITY
Code and data used presented in this paper are openly available on the Open
Science Framework repository (DOI 10.17605/OSF.IO/EU8KH). Note: The original FED3
recordings did not include‘Stay in Cage’trials. The original data along with the code
implemented to include‘Stay in Cage’trials, and processed data are available online.
REFERENCES
1. Barrett FS, Doss MK, Sepeda ND, Pekar JJ, Grif ﬁths RR. Emotions and brain
function are altered up to one month after a single high dose of psilocybin. Sci
Rep. 2020;10:2214.
2. Lyons T, Carhart-Harris RL. More Realistic Forecasting of Future Life Events After
Psilocybin for Treatment-Resistant Depression. Front Psychol. 2018;9:396454.
3. Mason NL, Mischler E, Uthaug MV, Kuypers KPC. Sub-Acute Effects of Psilocybin
on Empathy, Creative Thinking, and Subjective Well-Being. J Psychoactive Drugs.
2019;51:123–34.
4. Goldberg SB, Pace BT, Nicholas CR, Raison CL, Hutson PR. The experimental
effects of psilocybin on symptoms of anxiety and depression: A meta-analysis.
Psychiatry Res. 2020;284:112749.
5. Prouzeau D, Conejero I, Voyvodic PL, Becamel C, Abbar M, Lopez-Castroman J.
Psilocybin Efﬁcacy and Mechanisms of Action in Major Depressive Disorder: a
Review. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2022;24:573–81.
6. Gregorio DD, Aguilar-Valles A, Preller KH, Heifets BD, Hibicke M, Mitchell J, et al.
Hallucinogens in Mental Health: Preclinical and Clinical Studies on LSD, Psilocy-
bin, MDMA, and Ketamine. J Neurosci. 2021;41:891–900.
7. Meccia J, Lopez J, Bagot RC. Probing the antidepressant potential of psilocybin:
integrating insight from human research and animal models towards an
understanding of neural circuit mechanisms. Psychopharmacology.
2023;240:27–40.
8. Aday JS, Heifets BD, Pratscher SD, Bradley E, Rosen R, Woolley JD. Great Expec-
tations: recommendations for improving the methodological rigor of psychedelic
clinical trials. Psychopharmacology. 2022;239:1989–2010.
9. Adams RA, Huys QJM, Roiser JP. Computational Psychiatry: towards a mathe-
matically informed understanding of mental illness. J Neurol Neurosurg Psy-
chiatry. 2016;87:53–63.
10. Browning M, Paulus M, Huys QJM. What is Computational Psychiatry Good For?
Biol Psychiatry. 2023;93:658–60.
11. Chekroud AM, Lane CE, Ross DA. Computational Psychiatry: Embracing Uncer-
tainty and Focusing on Individuals, Not Averages. Biol Psychiatry. 2017;82:e45–7.
12. Friston K. Computational psychiatry: from synapses to sentience. Mol Psychiatry.
2023;28:256–68.
13. Huys QJM, Maia TV, Frank MJ. Computational psychiatry as a bridge from neu-
roscience to clinical applications. Nat Neurosci. 2016;19:404–13.
14. Chase HW, Frank MJ, Michael A, Bullmore ET, Sahakian BJ, Robbins TW. Approach
and avoidance learning in patients with major depression and healthy controls:
relation to anhedonia. Psychol Med. 2010;40:433–40.
15. Cooper JA, Arulpragasam AR, Treadway MT. Anhedonia in depression: biological
mechanisms and computational models. Curr Opin Behav Sci. 2018;22:128–35.
16. Soucy Chartier I, Provencher MD. Behavioural activation for depression: Efﬁcacy,
effectiveness and dissemination. J Affect Disord. 2013;145:292–9.
17. Tindall L, Mikocka-Walus A, McMillan D, Wright B, Hewitt C, Gascoyne S. Is
behavioural activation effective in the treatment of depression in young people?
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychol Psychother Theory Res Pract.
2017;90:770–96.
18. Sutton RS, Barto AG. Reinforcement Learning, second edition: An Introduction.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 2018.
19. Friston K, FitzGerald T, Rigoli F, Schwartenbeck P, Pezzulo G. Active Inference: A
Process Theory. Neural Comput. 2017;29:1–49.
20. Parr T, Pezzulo G, Friston KJ. Active inference: the free energy principle in mind,
brain, and behavior. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press; 2022.
21. Smith R, Friston KJ, Whyte CJ. A step-by-step tutorial on active inference and its
application to empirical data. J Math Psychol. 2022;107:102632.
22. Charpentier CJ, Martino BD, Sim AL, Sharot T, Roiser JP. Emotion-induced loss
aversion and striatal-amygdala coupling in low-anxious individuals. Soc Cogn
Affect Neurosci. 2016;11:569–79.
23. Engelmann JB, Berns GS, Dunlop BW. Hyper-responsivity to losses in the anterior
insula during economic choice scales with depression severity. Psychol Med.
2017;47:2879–91.
24. Hertel PT, Gerstle M. Depressive Deﬁcits in Forgetting. Psychol Sci. 2003;14:573–8.
25. Huh HJ, Baek K, Kwon JH, Jeong J, Chae JH. Impact of childhood trauma and
cognitive emotion regulation strategies on risk-aversive and loss-aversive pat-
terns of decision-making in patients with depression. Cognit Neuropsychiatry.
2016;21:447–61.
26. Sharot T. The optimism bias. Curr Biol. 2011;21:R941–
5.
27. Conn K, Milton LK, Huang K, Munguba H, Ruuska J, Lemus MB, et al. Psilocybin
restrains activity-based anorexia in female rats by enhancing cognitiveﬂexibility:
contributions from 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptor mechanisms. Mol Psychiatry.
2024;27;1–14.
28. Verharen JPH, Kentrop J, Vanderschuren LJMJ, Adan RAH. Reinforcement learning
across the rat estrous cycle. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2019;100:27–31.
29. Cora MC, Kooistra L, Travlos G. Vaginal Cytology of the Laboratory Rat and Mouse:
Review and Criteria for the Staging of the Estrous Cycle Using Stained Vaginal
Smears. Toxicol Pathol. 2015;43:776–93.
30. Matikainen-Ankney BA, Earnest T, Ali M, Casey E, Wang JG, Sutton AK, et al. eLife.
An open-source device for measuring food intake and operant behavior in
rodent home-cages. Elife. 2021;10:e66173.
31. File SE, Lippa AS, Beer B, Lippa (thirsty rat conﬂict) MT. Animal Tests of Anxiety.
Curr Protoc Neurosci. 2004;26:8.3.1–8.3.22.
32. Prut L, Belzung C. The openﬁeld as a paradigm to measure the effects of drugs
on anxiety-like behaviors: a review. Eur J Pharmacol. 2003;463:3–33.
33. Sajid N, Ball PJ, Parr T, Friston KJ. Active Inference: Demystiﬁed and Compared.
Neural Comput. 2021;33:674–712.
34. Costa VD, Mitz AR, Averbeck BB. Subcortical Substrates of Explore-Exploit Deci-
sions in Primates. Neuron. 2019;103:533–545.e5.
35. Kaelbling LP, Littman ML, Cassandra AR. Planning and acting in partially obser-
vable stochastic domains. Artif Intell. 1998;101:99–134.
36. Rao RPN. Decision making under uncertainty: a neural model based on partially
observable markov decision processes. Front Comput Neurosci. 2010;4:146.
37. Safavi S, Dayan P. Multistability, perceptual value, and internal foraging. Neuron.
2022;110:3076–90.
38. Garrett N, Sharot T, Faulkner P, Korn CW, Roiser JP, Dolan RJ. Losing the rose
tinted glasses: neural substrates of unbiased belief updating in depression. Front
Hum Neurosci. 2014;8:639.
39. Brown VM, Zhu L, Wang JM, Frueh BC, King-Casas B, Chiu PH. Associability-
modulated loss learning is increased in posttraumatic stress disorder. eLife.
2018;7:e30150.
40. Sharot T, Riccardi AM, Raio CM, Phelps EA. Neural mechanisms mediating opti-
mism bias. Nature. 2007;450:102–5.
41. Friston K, Mattout J, Trujillo-Barreto N, Ashburner J, Penny W. Variational free
energy and the Laplace approximation. NeuroImage. 2007;34:220–34.
42. Rigoux L, Stephan KE, Friston KJ, Daunizeau J. Bayesian model selection for group
studies — Revisited. NeuroImage. 2014;84:971–85.
43. Wickham H, Averick M, Bryan J, Chang W, McGowan LD, François R, et al. Wel-
come to the Tidyverse. J Open Source Softw. 2019;4:1686.
44. Hastie T, Tibshirani R. Generalized Additive Models: Some Applications. J Am Stat
Assoc. 1987;82:371–86.
45. Lin X, Zhang D. Inference in Generalized Additive Mixed Models by Using
Smoothing Splines. J R Stat Soc Ser B Stat Methodol. 1999;61:381–400.
46. Wood SN. Generalized Additive Models: An Introduction with R, 2nd ed. Boca
Raton: Chapman and Hall/CRC; 2017.
47. Wood SN. Thin Plate Regression Splines. J R Stat Soc Ser B Stat Methodol.
2003;65:95–114.
48. Corcoran AW, Maceﬁeld VG, Hohwy J. Be still my heart: Cardiac regulation as a
mode of uncertainty reduction. Psychon Bull Rev. 2021;28:1211–23.
49. Cross ZR, Corcoran AW, Schlesewsky M, Kohler MJ, Bornkessel-Schlesewsky I.
Oscillatory and Aperiodic Neural Activity Jointly Predict Language Learning. J
Cogn Neurosci. 2022;34:1630–49.
50. Fasiolo M, Nedellec R, Goude Y, Wood SN. Scalable Visualization Methods for
Modern Generalized Additive Models. J Comput Graph Stat. 2020;29:78–86.
51. Rij J van, Wieling M, Baayen RH, Rijn H van. itsadug: Interpreting time series and
autocorrelated data using GAMMs. 2022.
52. Garrett N, Sharot T. Optimistic update bias holdsﬁrm: Three tests of robustness
following Shah et al. Conscious Cogn. 2017;50:12–22.
E.L. Fisher et al.
9
Translational Psychiatry          (2024) 14:394 
53. Sharot T, Guitart-Masip M, Korn CW, Chowdhury R, Dolan RJ. How Dopamine
Enhances an Optimism Bias in Humans. Curr Biol. 2012;22:1477–81.
54. Bateson M. Optimistic and pessimistic biases: a primer for behavioural ecologists.
Curr Opin Behav Sci. 2016;12:115–21.
55. Cohen F, Kearney KA, Zegans LS, Kemeny ME, Neuhaus JM, Stites DP. Differential
Immune System Changes with Acute and Persistent Stress for Optimists vs
Pessimists. Brain Behav Immun. 1999;13:155–74.
56. Conversano C, Rotondo A, Lensi E, Della Vista O, Arpone F, Reda MA. Optimism
and Its Impact on Mental and Physical Well-Being. Clin Pract Epidemiol Ment
Health CP EMH. 2010;6:25–9.
57. de Ridder D, Fournier M, Bensing J. Does optimism affect symptom report in
chronic disease?: What are its consequences for self-care behaviour and physical
functioning? J Psychosom Res. 2004;56:341–50.
58. Dolcos S, Hu Y, Iordan AD, Moore M, Dolcos F. Optimism and the brain: trait
optimism mediates the protective role of the orbitofrontal cortex gray matter
volume against anxiety. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2016;11:263–71.
59. Krittanawong C, Maitra NS, Hassan Virk HU, Fogg S, Wang Z, Kaplin S, et al.
Association of Optimism with Cardiovascular Events and All-Cause Mortality:
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Am J Med. 2022;135:856–63.e2.
60. Lee E, Jayasinghe N, Swenson C, Dams-O’Connor K. Dispositional optimism and
cognitive functioning following traumatic brain injury. Brain Inj. 2019;33:985–90.
61. Mulkana SS, Hailey BJ. The Role of Optimism in Health-enhancing Behavior. Am J
Health Behav. 2001;25:388–95.
62. Bottemanne H, Morlaas O, Claret A, Sharot T, Fossati P, Schmidt L. Evaluation of
Early Ketamine Effects on Belief-Updating Biases in Patients With Treatment-
Resistant Depression. JAMA Psychiatry. 2022;79:1124–32.
63. Enkel T, Gholizadeh D, von Bohlen und Halbach O, Sanchis-Segura C, Hurlemann
R, Spanagel R, et al. Ambiguous-Cue Interpretation is Biased Under Stress- and
Depression-Like States in Rats. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010;35:1008–15.
64. Rygula R, Papciak J, Popik P. Trait Pessimism Predicts Vulnerability to Stress-
Induced Anhedonia in Rats. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013;38:2188–96.
65. Richter SH, Schick A, Hoyer C, Lankisch K, Gass P, Vollmayr B. A glass full of
optimism: Enrichment effects on cognitive bias in a rat model of depression.
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2012;12:527–42.
66. Willner P. The chronic mild stress (CMS) model of depression: History, evaluation
and usage. Neurobiol Stress. 2016;6:78–93.
67. Hobbs C, Vozarova P, Sabharwal A, Shah P, Button K. Is depression associated
with reduced optimistic belief updating? R Soc Open Sci. 2022;9:190814.
68. Korn CW, Sharot T, Walter H, Heekeren HR, Dolan RJ. Depression is related to an
absence of optimistically biased belief updating about future life events. Psychol
Med. 2014;44:579–92.
69. Strunk DR, Lopez H, DeRubeis RJ. Depressive symptoms are associated with
unrealistic negative predictions of future life events. Behav Res Ther.
2006;44:861–82.
70. Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Day CMJ, Rucker J, Watts R, Erritzoe DE, et al.
Psilocybin with psychological support for treatment-resistant depression: six-
month follow-up. Psychopharmacology. 2018;235:399–408.
71. Gukasyan N, Davis AK, Barrett FS, Cosimano MP, Sepeda ND, Johnson MW, et al.
Efﬁcacy and safety of psilocybin-assisted treatment for major depressive disorder:
Prospective 12-month follow-up. J Psychopharmacol. 2022;36:151–8.
72. Doss MK, Považan M, Rosenberg MD, Sepeda ND, Davis AK, Finan PH, et al.
Psilocybin therapy increases cognitive and neuralﬂexibility in patients with major
depressive disorder. Transl Psychiatry. 2021;11:1–10.
73. Gabay AS, Carhart-Harris RL, Mazibuko N, Kempton MJ, Morrison PD, Nutt DJ,
et al. Psilocybin and MDMA reduce costly punishment in the Ultimatum Game.
Sci Rep. 2018;8:8236.
74. Torrado Pacheco A, Olson RJ, Garza G, Moghaddam B. Acute psilocybin enhances
cognitive ﬂexibility in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2023;48:1011–20.
75. Shao LX, Liao C, Gregg I, Davoudian PA, Savalia NK, Delagarza K, et al. Psilocybin
induces rapid and persistent growth of dendritic spines in frontal cortex in vivo.
Neuron. 2021;109:2535–
44.e4.
76. Shine JM, O’Callaghan C, Walpola IC, Wainstein G, Taylor N, Aru J, et al. Under-
standing the effects of serotonin in the brain through its role in the gastro-
intestinal tract. Brain. 2022;145:2967–81.
77. Rickli A, Moning OD, Hoener MC, Liechti ME. Receptor interaction proﬁles of
novel psychoactive tryptamines compared with classic hallucinogens. Eur Neu-
ropsychopharmacol J Eur Coll Neuropsychopharmacol. 2016;26:1327–37.
78. Erkizia-Santamaría I, Alles-Pascual R, Horrillo I, Meana JJ, Ortega JE. Serotonin 5-
HT2A, 5-HT2c and 5-HT1A receptor involvement in the acute effects of psilocybin
in mice. In vitro pharmacological proﬁle and modulation of thermoregulation
and head-twich response. Biomed Pharmacother. 2022;154:113612.
79. Hesselgrave N, Troppoli TA, Wulff AB, Cole AB, Thompson SM. Harnessing psi-
locybin: antidepressant-like behavioral and synaptic actions of psilocybin are
independent of 5-HT2R activation in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci.
2021;118:e2022489118.
80. Vargas MV, Dunlap LE, Dong C, Carter SJ, Tombari RJ, Jami SA, et al. Psychedelics
promote neuroplasticity through the activation of intracellular 5-HT2A receptors.
Science. 2023;379:700–6.
81. Rizvi SJ, Pizzagalli DA, Sproule BA, Kennedy SH. Assessing anhedonia in
depression: Potentials and pitfalls. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2016;65:21–35.
82. Robinson OJ, Chase HW. Learning and Choice in Mood Disorders: Searching for
the Computational Parameters of Anhedonia. Comput Psychiatry Camb Mass.
2017;1:208–33.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
ELF: Conceptualization, Computational Modelling, Formal Analysis, Writing— Original
Draft, Writing— Review & Editing, Visualization. RS: Computational Modelling, Formal
Analysis, Writing— Review & Editing. KC: Investigation, Formal Analysis, Writing—
Review & Editing, Visualization. AWC: Formal Analysis, Writing— Review & Editing,
Visualization. LKM: Investigation, Formal Analysis. JH: Writing— Review & Editing. CJF:
Writing— Review & Editing, Visualization.
COMPETING INTERESTS
We would like to acknowledge A/Prof Alexxai Kravitz (Washington University in St
Louis) for input into task design and operations and the USONA Institute
Investigational Drug Supply Program (Madison, WI) for providing the psilocybin
used in these studies. We acknowledge the use of Biorender for aspects of the
ﬁgures. This work was supported by a National Health and Medical Research Council
Grant (Grant No. GNT2011334) to CJF and a Three Springs Foundation Grant awarded
to JH. CJF sits on the scientiﬁc advisory board for Octarine Bio, Denmark. No other
authors report biomedicalﬁnancial interests or potential conﬂicts of interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-024-03103-7.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Elizabeth L. Fisher.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any
medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed
the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted
material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in
this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s
Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
E.L. Fisher et al.
10
Translational Psychiatry          (2024) 14:394 