Citation: Fisher, E.L.; Hohwy, J. The
Universal Optimism of the
Self-Evidencing Mind. Entropy 2024,
26, 518. https://doi.org/10.3390/
e26060518
Academic Editor: Gordana Dodig-
Crnkovic
Received: 20 May 2024
Revised: 5 June 2024
Accepted: 12 June 2024
Published: 17 June 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
entropy
Article
The Universal Optimism of the Self-Evidencing Mind
Elizabeth L. Fisher
 and Jakob Hohwy *
Monash Centre for Consciousness and Contemplative Studies, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC 3800,
Australia; beth.fisher@monash.edu
* Correspondence: jakob.hohwy@monash.edu
Abstract: Karl Friston’s free-energy principle casts agents as self-evidencing through active inference.
This implies that decision-making, planning and information-seeking are, in a generic sense, ‘wishful’.
We take an interdisciplinary perspective on this perplexing aspect of the free-energy principle and
unpack the epistemological implications of wishful thinking under the free-energy principle. We use
this epistemic framing to discuss the emergence of biases for self-evidencing agents. In particular,
we argue that this elucidates an optimism bias as a foundational tenet of self-evidencing. We allude
to a historical precursor to some of these themes, interestingly found in Machiavelli’s oeuvre, to
contextualise the universal optimism of the free-energy principle.
Keywords: free-energy principle; active inference; self-evidencing; epistemology; wishful thinking;
optimism bias; Friston; Machiavelli
1. Introduction: Active Inference and Wishful Thinking
The thoroughgoing conceptual motif in Karl Friston’s free-energy principle is self-
evidencing—given the beliefs harnessed by an agent’s internal generative model, the agent
selectively samples sensory data to maximise evidence for their own model. This means
that agents select policies for action that they believe will reduce uncertainty given their
model. Policies are selected in active inference, estimating which policy promises the best
reduction in future uncertainty. Here, uncertainty should be understood in terms of the
agent’s characteristic states, which are conveyed in the internal model as the states the
agent expects to occupy.
Active inference, then, effectively appears to be an exercise in self-fulfilling proph-
esying. Crudely speaking, agents keep sampling until they acquire evidence for their
beliefs about their expected states. If you ‘prophesy’ that you will be drinking coffee, then
the possession of that prophecy induces a prediction error since you are not currently
drinking coffee, and you then cast around sampling until the prediction error is quashed
by observations of a hot cup of coffee in your hand.
Less crudely, actions can be in the service of either epistemic value or pragmatic
value. In a particular context, agents can believe their best policy is to resolve uncertainty
about the state of affairs—exploring to most efficiently update their model of which causes
give rise to their observations (or what their preferences should be), or they can exploit,
resolving uncertainty about their preferred state. Policies for utility and for epistemic
value are selected on the basis of their ambiguity, the fidelity of the mapping from action to
observation, and risk, the divergence between the expected observations under a policy and
the expected states given the model. These quantities fall out of the free-energy principle,
which then speaks directly to decision-making and resolves the exploration–exploitation
dilemma for self-evidencing agents [1].
Equating inference with a broad concept of ‘thinking’, Friston and colleagues argue
that this implies that all thinking is ‘wishful’, both thinking about fulfilling our preferences,
such as drinking coffee, and thinking about information gain, such as looking in all the
cupboards to find the coffee in the first instance [ 2]. We seek out the observations we
Entropy 2024, 26, 518. https://doi.org/10.3390/e26060518 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy
Entropy 2024, 26, 518 2 of 12
wish for in active sensing and acting for utility. Notice that, in contrast to some colloquial
understandings, the wishful thinking that accompanies self-evidencing under the free-
energy principle is normatively neutral; one can wish for all sorts of things, positive or
negative. You can wish for doom and gloom and go about selectively sampling observations
to make that wish self-fulfilling.
The free-energy principle also underwrites the way agents balance accuracy and
complexity. Agents strive to make accurate inferences, that is, they update their prior
beliefs to acquire posterior beliefs that are most in accordance with the observations they
sample. At the same time, agents need to minimise complexity, which is the divergence
between their prior and posterior beliefs. Acquiring overly complex beliefs—new beliefs
that diverge markedly from prior beliefs—bodes poorly for generalisability because they
are likely to be overfitted and energetically and epistemically costly [1]. Self-evidencing
agents, therefore, minimise free energy in ways that balance accuracy and complexity.
Notice that, in active inference terms, accuracy sits with low ambiguity since ambiguous
policies evidence beliefs poorly, and complexity sits with risk since complex model updates
risk being far from the agent’s characteristic states.
2. The Epistemology of Active Inference
If all thinking is wishful (under the normatively neutral definition above), then there
seems to be a threat to the epistemological aspects of belief formation under the free-
energy principle. How can agents have justified beliefs and track reality if their belief
formation is wishful? In order to assess this threat, we, therefore, turn to epistemology—the
philosophical domain of theory of knowledge.
In epistemology, there are two main positions on justification of beliefs (for an overview,
see [3]). According to foundationalism, beliefs are justified by basic beliefs that do not,
themselves, require justification. According to coherentism, beliefs are justified by their
relations to other, neighbouring beliefs in a web of belief. Self-evidencing aligns most
obviously with coherentism because beliefs are indeed harboured in the internal model’s
web of interconnected beliefs and because doubt is always resolved by an appeal to other
beliefs about how to maximise information gain or minimise risk. Even hard-wired beliefs,
such as a fish ‘believing’ it belongs in water, can be construed as self-evidenced over
evolutionary time scales.
Concretely, the internal model of active inference agents embodies more or less ex-
plicit beliefs about the expected precision of evidence, which are used to control the
information flow into and within the model. In other words, the agent keeps track of
the precisions, at numerous time scales, of the sensory input and updates beliefs about
precisions when they unexpectedly change (precision being the inverse of variance). The
better the agent is at optimising its beliefs about precisions, the better they are at keeping
track of volatility—non-linear changes—in their sensory input. An agent unable to learn
such changes in variability will not change their learning rate or their habits, even when
the world demands it (e.g., in response to increased variability due to illness or accident or,
at a larger scale, due to severe weather events related to climate change, or the advent of
new diseases such as COVID-19).
The internal model’s web of belief, therefore, encompasses both beliefs about states
and causes in the world and metacognitive beliefs—beliefs about the precisions of other
beliefs. Together, these beliefs drive the active sampling behaviours of the agent. If the
sampled observations cohere with the expectations over the long-term average, then it is
successfully self-evidencing.
There is a foundationalist tenor to self-evidencing as well. After all, everything the
agent does is geared towards optimal sampling of observations that provide the most
evidence for (that is, they justify) the agent’s beliefs; over time, beliefs are increasingly
finessed through successive active sampling of observations. Prior beliefs will tend to
acquire precision, and less and less updating will be necessary from observations unless
volatile events occur requiring renewed learning and formation of new policies. This
Entropy 2024, 26, 518 3 of 12
conforms to Bayesian inference, in particular empirical Bayes, where priors are dynamically
determined by the evidential history of the model in question. If we assume that sensory
evidence itself—as causal nudgings of the agent’s model—is independent of the web of
belief, then the aspects of fundamentalism may come into place.
We, thus, regard it as a still-open question of how exactly self-evidencing is positioned
in the debate between foundationalism and coherentism. There is, thus, some prospect
that self-evidencing is an attractive epistemological framework because it may take what
is best from both sides in this core philosophical debate (in epistemology, attempts in this
vein are sometimes given the neologism ‘foundherentism’; cf. [4], a position that has been
developed for predictive processing in [5]).
However, from the agent’s perspective, all that matters is the sampling of observations
that cohere as best as possible with their beliefs in ways that the agent expects to be both
accurate and unambiguous and neither too complex nor risky. Leaning into coherentism in
this way implies that active inference agents are not directly or primarily concerned with
seeking truth. As far as the agent is concerned, they need beliefs that are well-evidenced,
given their model. That is, they are after beliefs that will let them occupy their characteristic
states. If all those beliefs actually turn out to be false, then the agent need not care. In
principle, the entire belief system can come adrift from truth and yet be highly coherent
(for discussion, see [6,7]). For all the agent knows, everything can proceed swimmingly, yet
in reality, they are a mere brain-in-vat, captured and fed phoney input from an evil scientist
(cf. Cartesian scepticism).
Self-fulfilling prophesying, wishful thinking, unconcern with the truth, and scepticism
might present active inference in an unfavourable, subjectivist, relativist light. The correc-
tive to this picture is that the world needs to play its part too. Setting aside Matrix-like,
evil scientist scenarios, self-evidencing will suffer if the wished-for observations are (liter-
ally) unrealistic. Your self-induced prediction error about having coffee in your hand will
persist unresolved if there is no coffee around. And if acquiring coffee for some reason is
unexpectedly risky (because the coffee bean wars have broken out), then persisting with
the desire for coffee will lead to ruin. Wishful thinking is, in other words, bridled by reality.
Hence, self-evidencing is not entirely and subjectively self-supervised; rather, though the
agent is exclusively aiming for coherence, their inference is supervised by the world (and
this position then appears to be a candidate foundherentism).
Zooming out, we can then make a distinction between the internal, generative model
harboured by the agent and the external generative process, where states and their causes
conspire to determine the agent’s sensory input. For example, the agent has beliefs about
how to get coffee into the house and into the cup and into the mouth, and the world has
facts about coffee, houses and mouths and facts about transitions among these states. Since
we cannot rule out sceptical scenarios, there is no guarantee that the model and the process
resemble each other—hence, we do not know if our beliefs track truth. However, an appeal
to what is known as the no-miracles argument from the philosophy of science plausibly
opens a door to realism. This is the idea that it would be a miracle if a scientific theory is
predictively and instrumentally successful if it did not track truth to some degree; so, if we
rule out miracles, then theories must track truth to some degree [8]. Similarly, if an agent
manages to self-evidence, then its internal model must eventually begin to resemble the
generative process, at least to some degree; it would be a miracle if it manages to persist
in self-evidencing if its beliefs about how the world causes its sensory input were always
wholly false. If there is no coffee, no coffee infrastructure, no cupboards, no coffee cups
and so on, then it would be a miracle if acting on the belief that there are these things
consistently gives you coffee observations.
Here, self-evidencing presents an intriguing dynamic. Given that the success of
the generative model is not a miracle, it must stem from how the model begins to carry
information about the generative process. This happens through the causal coupling of
internal states of the model and the external states of the world, mediated through the
sensory and active states of the organism’s boundary with the world (also known as the
Entropy 2024, 26, 518 4 of 12
organism’s Markov blanket). Through active inference, this causal coupling runs both
ways, not only from the world to the agent but also from the agent to the world. In other
words, just as the internal model carries information about the world, the world begins to
carry information about the agent, including the agent’s beliefs and preferences. This has
implications for the Cartesian evil demon, who must be entrained by its victim’s beliefs
and preferences if it wants the victim to exist (i.e., self-evidence) for any length of time
(see [9]). It also has implications for non-sceptical environments, where agent’s actions can
help shape the world so that the world comes to afford our wishful thinking (cf. also niche
construction, see [10]).
Overall, active inference then implies a nuanced view of epistemology and realism,
which removes the appearance that wishful thinking is a threat to knowledge. Though
behaviour is driven by the agent’s beliefs, those beliefs are beholden to reality, and even-
tually, the agent’s beliefs seem likely to resemble reality. At least, the agent’s beliefs will
recapitulate the structure of reality’s generative process, capturing the dynamic structure
of how causes give rise to observations. The internal model represents the structure of
the external world, with some degree of veridicality, but moulded from the perspective of
the agent’s pragmatic concerns as they forage for information and utility. In this dynamic
process, there will be increased coupled oscillation of the internal states of agents and the
external states (cf. [9,11]), where the external world begins to carry information about—or
“model”—the agent’s beliefs and preferences.
3. Biases Aplenty
Though the active inference agent’s web of beliefs is beholden to the evidence it can
sample from the world, there is ample scope for false inference and misguided learning.
Models are finessed over time, and more wholesale belief and policy revision and overall
model selection are required when the agent encounters volatility. For example, you might
spend much time experimenting before you learn to extract the optimal flavour from your
expensive single-origin coffee beans, and then, you might have to forget it all and become a
tea drinker when climate change begins to destroy quality coffee crops. In this unfolding,
protracted (empirical Bayes) process, the agent can feasibly achieve intermittent, relatively
satisfactory self-evidencing levels on the basis of biased beliefs (for example, enjoying coffee
made with boiled water for a period of time based on the false belief that water temperature
does not matter for coffee taste). Indeed, we should expect agents’ self-prophesying to have
as many biases as reality allows at any given time.
In particular, if the agent’s starting point is wishful thinking (as discussed above), then
false inference should be expected to be profligate, being only gradually whittled away by
reality. Moreover, biases may well tend to persist longer than they need to because wishful
agents will selectively sample observations that will confirm their beliefs. For example, it
is often better for an agent to act to specifically confirm their biased beliefs about future
outcomes than act to more unspecifically seek evidence that might lead to revision of those
beliefs, since deviation of predictions from preferences comes with a risk cost [2].
Fundamentally, then, biases appear to be rational, since they can conform with
Bayesian inference under the free-energy principle (cf. the complete class theorem [ 12]),
and will persist as long as the agent’s selected observations manage to not contradict
them sufficiently.
It seems that not all biases are created equally, since some afford better, more precise
and robust self-evidencing over appropriate, relatively long timespans. You might have a
bias that you are talented enough to be a professional sportsperson, which might serve you
well in the short-term, making you try your best on the sports field, helping create social
networks and staying healthy, but reality will soon enough crush that dream. In contrast,
some perceptual biases seem to survive in the long-term probably because they facilitate
mainly useful, if strictly false, inferences; an example might be when the ventriloquist effect
illusorily makes sound appear from visible mouths when watching a movie on an older TV
with offset speakers rather than being located where the speaker is. Of course, different
Entropy 2024, 26, 518 5 of 12
kinds of biases are subject to different kinds of pragmatic and contextual factors and often
reflect complex social dynamics that may give rise to undesirable biases, such as racial or
gender biases.
Overall, we should expect active inference agents to manifest self-serving, wishful
biases, which butt up against reality only to the degree agents cannot manage to make them
self-fulfilling prophesies. And, of course, human agents are loaded with dozens, if not
hundreds, of biases [13] (many of which we are blind to when it comes to ourselves [14]).
Interestingly, in accordance with the active inference story we have told here, a recent
reductive analysis sees biases as boiling down to belief plus belief-consistent (i.e., selectively
sampled, wishful) information processing [15].
4. Optimism Bias and the Existence of Self-Evidencing Agents
Among the biases, some appear more robust and fundamental than others. The
money illusion and the fame effect might be relatively socially and historically superficial,
for example. In contrast, the optimism bias, which shall be our focus here, seems more
widespread and general. To us, this suggests some biases may serve deep-seated purposes
for our longer-term self-evidencing.
The optimism bias is a bias where our expectations are better than reality, such that
agents overestimate the likelihood of good outcomes and underestimate the likelihood
of bad outcomes [16]. For example, an optimistic agent may believe the chance of them
having a good time at a party is higher than the likelihood actually is, or they might
overestimate the likelihood of improving their health by starting a jogging habit, or they
might believe the divorce rate for marriages is lower than the actual 50% [17]. The bias is
observed in humans but also in a very wide range of other animals, such as goats, rats, pigs,
mice, monkeys, chickens and other birds, hamsters, horses, dogs, lambs, cows, flies, sheep,
bees and fish [ 18,19]. Note that the optimism bias, as it is discussed in this substantial
body of literature, is precisely defined in terms of overestimation of the likelihood of good
outcomes and underestimation of the likelihood of bad outcomes; hence, it is important
to set aside more colloquial connotations of ‘optimism’. The optimism bias is typically
assessed in individuals through a belief-updating task, where optimistic individuals update
their beliefs more to positive than negative outcomes, or in ambiguous cue interpretation
tasks, where individuals interpret ambiguous cues to indicate positive outcomes rather
than negative outcomes.
The optimism bias has proven to be adaptive—helpful for self-evidencing—as indi-
viduals with optimism are associated with a range of better life outcomes from higher
salaries at work to a reduced risk of cardiovascular disease [16,20,21]. The benefits from the
optimism bias are in part due to how the bias promotes the agent to engage in the world;
increased engagement in actions increases the chance of a positive outcome more than not
engaging at all by minimising the risk of missed opportunity. For example, if an agent
overestimates the likelihood of reducing their risk of cancer through diet and exercise, they
will be more likely to both exercise and eat well. Although this may not achieve the reduced
risk initially believed, the agent will be in a better position than if they were not to exercise
or eat well at all.
Optimistic agents maintain their optimism bias by learning more from good news
than bad news [22,23]. Asymmetric belief updating is one way optimism can persist in
a world dominated by bad news; when optimists learn positive information, they will
update the generative model underlying their decision-making more than when they learn
negative information. Updating beliefs more to positive information creates a positive
generative model, which tends to lead to good outcomes when there are sufficient good
outcomes available in the generative process. Importantly, it follows that, in some contexts,
the optimism bias can lead to maladaptive outcomes, namely where the context in question
affords too few positive outcomes (for example, if the divorce rate was, in fact, 100%).
The context dependence of the optimism bias is relevant for its role with respect to self-
evidencing. Research shows that optimism helped maintain immune responsiveness when
Entropy 2024, 26, 518 6 of 12
exposed to a stressor [24]; however, when the stressor lasted more than one week, optimism
was shown to be associated with a lower immune response compared to pessimism. This
suggests that, as optimistic individuals engage more with a stressor, they may cope well
for a small stressor that they can resolve and overcome, resulting in a positive immune
response, whereas when the stressor is larger, they have the same engagement without
the ability to overcome it, resulting in more stress and a weakened immune response. On
the other hand, individuals who lack optimism do not engage with either type of stressor,
resulting in a negative outcome for the mild stressor as they fail to overcome it when they
could. Yet ignoring the large stressor can be a positive outcome as the individual is not
constantly thinking and worrying about this issue (for discussion of this dynamic and
depressive pessimism in the context of the free-energy principle, see [25]). This highlights
the importance of the environment the agent is in for optimism to be beneficial. In other
words, there needs to be chances for the agent to fulfil their optimistic belief in order for
optimism to subserve optimal self-evidencing.
If the optimism bias is best characterised as enabling agents to minimise missed op-
portunities for minimising uncertainty, then that implies agents believe the world abounds
with opportunity for self-evidencing, there for the taking. In this perspective, the optimism
bias is not a bias in the sense of being irrational, since it simply reflects that the agent’s
model includes a cost function (that is, a belief) that strongly favours seized opportunity
over missed opportunity, even though seeking out opportunity can at times be costly. This
would predict that optimists have less loss aversion, and that they tend to ignore losses
more than wins.
In fact, this is what we found in a study of optimism bias in rats, conceptualising the
bias in terms of increased engagement and hypothesising that the animals would be more
optimistic if treated with psilocybin [ 26]. Our further simulation modelling work with
active inference adds to the face validity of this approach, capturing development, belief
updating and behaviour with the same model of the bias [ 27]. This kind of work, thus,
supports the overall validity of active inference models of the optimism bias (see Figure 1).
However, even if the optimism bias can be modelled in active inference and cast as
rational (given a belief about minimising missed opportunity), a more complex picture
emerges when viewed in the broadest possible terms of the free-energy principle. Given
the increase in entropy over time—prescribed by the second law of thermodynamics—the
universe is moving toward more disorder. This means that thermodynamic fluctuations
are tugging at our (Markov blanket) boundaries at all times [11]. Concretely, this means
that, every time an agent has arrived at a belief about something on the basis of their self-
evidencing, they will learn that this is a kind of pyrrhic victory, since dissipative forces will
soon undermine that belief and turn the positive outcome into a negative one that is less
consistent with the agent’s belief. Put differently, as the current posterior becomes the prior
for the next inference, agents should come to appreciate that all priors decline over time,
mandating new belief formation (previously, we have leveraged this idea in conceptual
and active inference models of binocular rivalry [ 28,29]). This persistent occurrence of
negative outcomes suggests, at least initially, that, over appropriate time horizons, we
really should be pessimists. Our opportunities for self-evidencing are, after all, limited
by all the uncertainty we encounter in the shape of dissipative forces that, in the end, will
literally tear us apart (that is, irreparably damage our organismic boundaries or Markov
blankets [30]). No one lives forever, and societies and species vanish, having existed only
as tiny blips on the radar of the universe. Puzzlingly, in spite of this prima facie case for
pessimism, we, and many animals, are staunchly optimistic.
Appealing to the free-energy principle can help address this puzzle. We have primarily
cast the free-energy principle in epistemic terms of self-evidencing, but this emerges out of
an analysis of existence consistent with thermodynamics, such that organisms that exist
must be self-evidencing [31]. Inexistence is conceived as having no boundary (or Markov
blanket) and, therefore, what would be the agent’s internal states are, instead, dissipated
through all possible states. Existence, in contrast, implies having an intact boundary and
Entropy 2024, 26, 518 7 of 12
occupying only a limited set of states, namely those states that are characteristic for the or-
ganism, given its internal model (cf. homeostatic set ranges in biological organisms, which
are expected—preferred—with high precision). To exist is to occupy a non-equilibrium
steady state, appearing to transiently resist thermodynamic fluctuations. The existence of
biological organisms, then, implies the ensuing active sampling of states (or observations
at the boundary) that cohere with the internal model, which is how we have described
self-evidencing within active inference.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 12 
 
 
question aﬀords too few positive outcomes (for example, if the divorce rate was, in fact, 
100%). 
The context dependence of the optimism bias is relevant for its role with respect to 
self-evidencing. Research shows that optimism helped maintain immune responsiveness 
when exposed to a stressor [24]; however, when the stressor lasted more than one week, 
optimism was shown to be associated with a lower immune response compared to pessi-
mism. This suggests that, as optimistic individuals engage more with a stressor, they may 
cope well for a small stressor that they can resolve and overcome, resulting in a positive 
immune response, whereas when the stressor is larger, they have the same engagement 
without the ability to overcome it, resulting in more stress and a weakened immune re-
sponse. On the other hand, individuals who lack optimism do not engage with either type 
of stressor, resulting in a negative outcome for the mild stressor as they fail to overcome 
it when they could. Yet ignoring the large stressor can be a positive outcome as the indi-
vidual is not constantly thinking and worrying about this issue (for discussion of this dy-
namic and depressive pessimism in the context of the free-energy principle, see [25]). This 
highlights the importance of the environment the agent is in for optimism to be beneﬁcial. 
In other words, there needs to be chances for the agent to fulﬁl their optimistic belief in 
order for optimism to subserve optimal self-evidencing. 
If the optimism bias is best characterised as enabling agents to minimise missed op-
portunities  for  minimising  uncertainty,  then  that  implies  agents  believe  the  world 
abounds with opportunity for self-evidencing, there for the taking. In this perspective, the 
optimism bias is not a bias in the sense of being irrational, since it simply reﬂects that the 
agent’s model includes a cost function (that is, a belief) that strongly favours seized op-
portunity over missed opportunity, even though seeking out opportunity can at times be 
costly. This would predict that optimists have less loss aversion, and that they tend to 
ignore losses more than wins. 
In fact, this is what we found in a study of optimism bias in rats, conceptualising the 
bias in terms of increased engagement and hypothesising that the animals would be more 
optimistic if treated with psilocybin [26]. Our further simulation modelling work with 
active inference adds to the face validity of this approach, capturing development, belief 
updating and behaviour with the same model of the bias [27]. This kind of work, thus, 
supports the overall validity of active inference models of the optimism bias (see Figure 
1). 
 
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 12 
 
 
 
Figure 1. (Top). Self-evidencing involves both the generative model and the generative process. Fig-
ure 1 is a heuristic for optimistic self-evidencing. The agent has both stronger predictions about 
good outcomes and updates their beliefs more to good outcomes (green arrows, left). As the agent 
predicts and updates more to good outcomes, they select actions of engagement (optimistic, green 
arrow, right) rather than disengagement (pessimistic, red dashed arrow, right) with the world. The 
actions the agent selects aﬀect the generative process such that their future observations can be dy-
namically inﬂuenced. Although optimistic self-evidencing is constrained by the generative process, 
the agent’s actions also inﬂuence the generative process through the dynamic coupled oscillation 
process described in the main text. One can imagine the same ﬁgure with a pessimistic agent whose 
predictions and belief updates are stronger for bad outcomes (i.e., a thick red arrow, left) and how 
this would lead to a diﬀerent outcome in the dynamic process. (Bottom). A graphical depiction of 
an active inference model and the expected free-energy equation formalised in terms of information 
seeking and reward seeking. For details, see [26,27]. 
However, even if the optimism bias can be modelled in active inference and cast as 
rational (given a belief about minimising missed opportunity), a more complex picture 
emerges when viewed in the broadest possible terms of the free-energy principle. Given 
the increase in entropy over time—prescribed  by the second law of thermodynamics—the  
universe is moving toward more disorder. This means that thermodynamic ﬂuctuations 
are tugging at our (Markov blanket) boundaries at all times [11]. Concretely, this means 
that, every time an agent has arrived at a belief about something on the basis of their self-
evidencing, they will learn that this is a kind of pyrrhic victory, since dissipative forces 
will soon undermine that belief and turn the positive outcome into a negative one that is 
less consistent with the agent’s belief. Put diﬀerently, as the current posterior becomes the 
prior for the next inference, agents should come to appreciate that all priors decline over 
time, mandating new belief formation (previously, we have leveraged this idea in concep-
tual and active inference models of binocular rivalry [28,29]). This persistent occurrence 
of negative outcomes suggests, at least initially, that, over appropriate time horizons, we 
really should be pessimists. Our opportunities for self-evidencing are, after all, limited by 
all the uncertainty we encounter in the shape of dissipative forces that, in the end, will 
literally tear us apart (that is, irreparably damage our organismic boundaries or Markov 
blankets [30]). No one lives forever, and societies and species vanish, having existed only 
as tiny blips on the radar of the universe. Puzzlingly, in spite of this prima facie case for 
pessimism, we, and many animals, are staunchly optimistic. 
Appealing to the free-energy principle can help address this puzzle. We have primar-
ily cast the free-energy principle in epistemic terms of self-evidencing, but this emerges 
out of an analysis of existence consistent with thermodynamics, such that organisms that 
exist must be self-evidencing [31]. Inexistence is conceived as having no boundary (or 
Markov blanket) and, therefore, what would be the agent’s internal states are, instead, 
dissipated through all possible states. Existence, in contrast, implies having an intact 
boundary  and  occupying  only  a  limited  set  of  states,  namely  those  states  that  are 
Figure 1. (Top) Self-evidencing involves both the generative model and the generative process.
Figure 1 is a heuristic for optimistic self-evidencing. The agent has both stronger predictions about
good outcomes and updates their beliefs more to good outcomes (green arrows, left). As the agent
predicts and updates more to good outcomes, they select actions of engagement (optimistic, green
arrow, right) rather than disengagement (pessimistic, red dashed arrow,right) with the world. The
actions the agent selects affect the generative process such that their future observations can be
dynamically influenced. Although optimistic self-evidencing is constrained by the generative process,
the agent’s actions also influence the generative process through the dynamic coupled oscillation
process described in the main text. One can imagine the same figure with a pessimistic agent whose
predictions and belief updates are stronger for bad outcomes (i.e., a thick red arrow,left) and how
this would lead to a different outcome in the dynamic process. (Bottom) A graphical depiction of
an active inference model and the expected free-energy equation formalised in terms of information
seeking and reward seeking. For details, see [26,27].
According to this decidedly ‘high-road’ account of self-evidencing [32], an existing
agent has a simple belief at the highest level of its hierarchy, namely “I exist”. This
belief is equivalent to the agent’s belief that they self-evidence. That is, and against the
cosmic odds, the agent believes that there are opportunities for reducible, explorable and
Entropy 2024, 26, 518 8 of 12
exploitable uncertainty. Conversely, ceasing to believe that there are such opportunities for
self-evidencing is for the agent to cease believing that they exist.
It may be, therefore, that the optimism bias observed in the everyday behaviour of
many species is an expression of the fundamental tenet of the free-energy principle, namely
that our existence is inextricably bound up with a belief that the world benevolently affords
our existence—that the world offers us opportunities to seize in spite of its consistently
observed inhospitality. This might be regarded as instrumentally rational because it keeps
us going in the medium term, but on a more cosmic time scale, it does begin to look like
wishful thinking in the pejorative sense.
This line of reasoning is already evident in the active inference literature:
Importantly, the agent’s generative model cannot simply mimic external dynam-
ics (otherwise the agent would simply follow external dissipative dynamics).
Rather, the model must also specify the preferred conditions for the agent’s
existence, or the regions of states that the agent has to visit to maintain its exis-
tence or satisfy the criteria for its existence in terms of occupying characteristic
states. These preferred states (or observations) can be specified as the priors of
the model—which implies that the model implicitly assumes that its preferred
(prior) sensations are more likely to occur (i.e., are less surprising) if it satisfies the
criteria for existence. This means it has an implicit optimism bias. This optimism
bias is necessary for the agent to go beyond the mere duplication of external
dynamics to prescribe active states that underwrite its preferred or characteristic
states [1], p. 46 (see also [33]).
Here, it will be useful to contrast the discussion so far with some of the literature on
the free-energy principle where a different notion of ‘optimism’ is in play. In this literature,
‘optimism’ seems to be a label for wishful thinking (of the sort we described at the beginning
of this paper). We do not believe using ‘optimism’ in that manner is apt, since one can
wish for pessimistic outcomes. This appeal to optimism was spurred by one of the recent
recurrences of the Dark Room Problem, which is the complaint that an agent seeking to
minimise uncertainty should occupy a certain environment, such as a dark room. This
complaint is heard often and repeatedly but is easily dismissed by invoking self-evidencing
relative to a model that may or may not specify darkened rooms as characteristic. In the
recent recurrence of the problem, a response was that agents leave the certain and, therefore,
uninteresting dark room because they optimistically believe there will be information and
utility on the outside (see response and replies in [34,35]). The problem with this response
is that the agent who seeks out dark rooms in the first place would also do so because
they ‘optimistically’ expect to occupy their characteristic states by sitting in the dark—but
seeking out uninteresting states is not optimistic. A better way to tell the story about
leaving the dark room emerges from the way we have introduced the optimism bias: the
agent in the dark room will have decreasing priors driven by a belief in increasing volatility.
Hence, over time, they will come to experience the dark room as increasingly uncertain,
and then, they will leave in order to restore self-evidencing. They leave because they know
deep down that dissipative forces will eventually get to them, and they optimistically
believe that moving somewhere else may keep them safe for a bit longer—until they must
move again. This is an optimism bias because agents go through life experiencing many
losses (dissipative forces tend to emerge everywhere), and yet, they asymmetrically update
their beliefs more for the (fleeting) wins they do experience. This keeps them going.
To further substantiate this role for optimism, we can appeal to the coupled oscillation
implied by active inference (discussed above in the context of Cartesian scepticism). If
agents act on their internal model’s optimistic belief, then the external states will begin to
carry information—conform to—that belief. That is, by acting on the belief that the world
benevolently offers opportunities to seize, the world will be shaped accordingly, facilitating
self-evidencing. Consider how people pursue romantic partners based on the biased
optimistic belief that the divorce rate is 10% rather than the actual rate of approximately
50%; acting on the bias does not deflate the divorce rate itself, but when enough of us are
Entropy 2024, 26, 518 9 of 12
engaged, it does help orchestrate practices and communities so we keep congregating in
various beneficial ways that would not occur if we all stayed home (that is, by acting on
the optimistic belief, we help make it the case that the divorce rate does not plummet to
0% due to the fact that no one can be bothered to marry). We can also consider how, in
spite of the dire planetary outlook from global warming, we nevertheless optimistically
engage in mitigating action, which just might change the way global warming unfolds in
ways that would not be possible if pessimism is allowed to reign. Put differently, by acting
optimistically rather than realistically, we can potentially delay the time of the tipping point
beyond which no action whatsoever can save us (for discussion, see e.g., [36], p. 489).
In short, self-evidencing entails the coupling of the generative model and generative
process, which can help establish the universal optimism bias itself as a self-fulfilling
prophesy, at least for some time. Here, it should be noted that coupling, as such, is neutral
on existence and has the ability to withstand dissipative forces, such that the universal
optimism bias implies a transient ‘master-slave’ dynamic, where the agent has enough of
an upper hand in shaping the generative process—as long as the agent exists.
We have surmised that the optimism bias reflects the implications of the belief that
we exist. We have placed this optimistically biased belief in our own existence somewhat
uncomfortably between being rational and being irrational. We, thus, propose a universal
optimism bias, which says that, from the perspective of the free-energy principle, agents are
optimistic if they exist.
The behavioural manifestations of optimistically biased belief updating in humans
and other animals could be rooted in other cognitive processes; so, our hypothesis about the
origins of the optimism bias here is, of course, subject to empirical fortune. The hypothesis
does make sense of the fact that optimism is associated with better health and life outcomes
and is absent or reversed to pessimism in a range of life-shortening afflictions. If indeed
the bias is universal, we should observe it across all active systems (including, perhaps,
artificial machine-learning agents, cf. [37]). Since acting for utility and for epistemic value
is balanced relative to the same objective function within the free-energy principle, we also
predict that we will observe the optimism bias in epistemic action, such that agents update
beliefs more after information gains than after information losses.
5. A Historical Perspective on Dissipative Forces and Optimism: Machiavelli
We want to end by broadening the perspective on the universal optimism bias by
alluding to an intriguing historical precursor, namely Niccolò Machiavelli. This will help
contextualise Friston’s work and infuse discussion of the themes coming to their apotheosis
in the free-energy principle with a new and surprising historical ancestor.
It is a pity that, in the popular eye, Machiavelli is infamous for his blunt list of advice
to autocratic rulers on how to brutally maintain power, set out inThe Prince. Machiavelli
also set out treatments of how to maintain republics, marked by civic liberty (where his
real sympathies seem to lie), in The Discourses, and he discussed the objectives of militaries,
in an argument against the instability caused by using mercenaries, in The Art of War (for
an overview and references to Machiavelli’s works, see [ 38]). In our terms, Machiavelli
articulated the requisite policies for action that predict low uncertainty and continued
existence, given various generative models (e.g., of a prince, republic, or military).
The principle Machiavelli employs to write the very different sets of policies for these
various generative models of governance rests on two opposing forces, Fortuna vs. virtù.
Fortuna is not to be confused with our common notion of fortune as benign luck; Fortuna
is cast by Machiavelli as a goddess of entropy, resembling “one of our destructive rivers
which, when it is angry, turns the plains into lakes, throws down the trees and buildings,
takes earth from one spot, puts it in another; everyone flees before the flood; everyone
yields to its fury and nowhere can repel it” ([39]: Ch. 25). Likewise, virtù is not virtue in our
conventional moralising sense but, rather, having a flexible disposition to vary behaviour
according to Fortuna’s challenges. Therefore, “Fortuna shows her power where virtù and
wisdom do not prepare to resist her, and directs her fury where she knows that no dykes or
Entropy 2024, 26, 518 10 of 12
embankments are ready to hold her” ([39]: Ch. 25). Here, virtù is distinctively pre-emptive,
keyed to anticipations of uncertainty and beliefs about how to hold it at bay. Based on this
Homeric struggle between chaos and the policies for restraining it, Machiavelli indeed sets
out sophisticated policies, relatively to particular generative models, that track notions of
ambiguity and risk, exploration and exploitation, and accuracy and complexity.
Crucially, as everybody knows, against the will of the gods, mere humans always
eventually lose. The resistance against Fortuna will, in the end, be futile, and yet, we
optimistically persist. The flexible disposition of virtù rests on a belief that, this time,
the dykes and embankments will hold against Fortuna; things will change so that it
makes sense to engage after all. For example, the party tonight will be different from
the many underwhelming past ones because, perhaps, tonight I will, in fact, be the social
butterfly, or, at a larger scale, we optimistically engage in positive climate action to stem
the (self-inflicted) forces of Fortuna felt worldwide. Machiavelli asserts in The Discourses
the following:
[M]en are able to assist Fortuna but not to thwart her. They can weave her designs
but cannot destroy them. They ought, then, never to give up as beaten, because,
since they do not know her purpose and she goes through crooked and unknown
roads, they can always hope, and hoping are not to give up, in whatever fortune
and whatever affliction they may be ([40], p. 408).
With this Machiavellian framing, the brain is, therefore, marked with universal opti-
mism as it enacts its virtù—its policies that it expects will maintain itself against the divine
odds in an uncertain, ever-changing world.
6. Concluding Remarks
We have presented some of the core tenets of Karl Friston’s free-energy principle,
pointing to its reliance on a universal optimism bias. We hope this articulation, which can
be framed usefully in terms—presaged by Machiavelli—of dissipative forces and optimism,
helps with placing this principle in our fundamental understanding of agents like us and
other animals.
The free-energy principle itself might be cast by some as rather Machiavellian in the
narrow-minded, nefarious sense. Friston could be observed as letting the principle loose as
an organising, subduing framework in the chaotic zoo of theories about brains, behaviours,
systems and the existence of things. However, in our experience, Friston is not out to
forcefully subdue competing theories and frameworks in the blunt manner of theThe Prince
nor is he after the short-term victories in the scientific skirmishes of The Art of War; rather,
he is, in the style of the republic governance of The Discourses, more pursuing long-haul
success, fully expecting all scientific denizens to maintain their theoretical liberties, but
comfortable in the knowledge that, implicitly or explicitly, they all do conform to the
free-energy principle.
Fittingly, this belief in the long-term success of the free-energy principle reveals Fris-
ton’s own optimism bias too. In the philosophy of science, the ‘pessimistic meta-induction’
concludes that, since all scientific theories through history have been overturned by new
theories, we should pessimistically expect our current theories to also be overturned [41].
The future will show if Friston’s optimism is warranted and if the free-energy principle
indeed is the scientific equivalent of the black swan.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, E.L.F. and J.H.; Writing—original draft, E.L.F. and J.H. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was supported by the Three Springs Foundation.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Entropy 2024, 26, 518 11 of 12
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Parr, T.; Pezzulo, G.; Friston, K.J.Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior; MIT Press: Cambridge,
MA, USA, 2022.
2. Kruglanski, A.W.; Jasko, K.; Friston, K. All Thinking is ‘Wishful’ Thinking. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2020, 24, 413–424. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
3. Steup, M.; Neta, R. Epistemology. In Stanford Encycklopedia of Philosophy ; Zalta, E.N., Nodelman, U., Eds.; Spring:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2024. Available online: https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2024/entries/epistemology/
(accessed on 19 May 2024).
4. Haack, S. Evidence and Inquiry: Towards Reconstruction in Epistemology; Blackwell: Oxford, UK, 1993.
5. Gładziejewski, P . Perceptual justification in the Bayesian brain: A foundherentist account. Synthese 2021, 199, 11397–11421.
[CrossRef]
6. Seth, A.K. Being You; Faber & Faber: London, UK, 2021.
7. Clark, A. Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2016.
8. Putnam, H. Mathematics, Matter, and Method; Cambridge University Press: London, UK; New York, NY, USA, 1975.
9. Hohwy, J. How to Entrain Your Evil Demon. InPhilosophy and Predictive Processing; Metzinger, T.K., Wiese, W., Eds.; MIND Group:
Frankfurt, Germany, 2017. [CrossRef]
10. Constant, A.; Ramstead, M.J.D.; Veissière, S.P .L.; Campbell, J.O.; Friston, K.J. A variational approach to niche construction.J. R.
Soc. Interface 2018, 15, 20170685. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Friston, K. Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 2013, 10, 20130475. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Wald, A. An Essentially Complete Class of Admissible Decision Functions. Ann. Math. Stat. 1947, 18, 549–555. [CrossRef]
13. Kahneman, D.; Slovic, P .; Tversky, A.Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases; Macmillan Publishers Limited: New York,
NY, USA, 1982.
14. Pronin, E.; Hazel, L. Humans’ Bias Blind Spot and Its Societal Significance. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 2023, 32, 402–409. [CrossRef]
15. Oeberst, A.; Imhoff, R. Toward Parsimony in Bias Research: A Proposed Common Framework of Belief-Consistent Information
Processing for a Set of Biases. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 2023, 18, 1464–1487. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Sharot, T. The optimism bias. Curr. Biol. 2011, 21, R941–R945. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Williams, S. Sticky Expectations: Responses to Persistent Over-Optimism in Marriage, Employment Contracts, and Credit Card
Use. Notre Dame Law Rev. 2009, 84, 733.
18. Lagisz, M.; Zidar, J.; Nakagawa, S.; Neville, V .; Sorato, E.; Paul, E.S.; Bateson, M.; Mendl, M.; Løvlie, H. Optimism, pessimism and
judgement bias in animals: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2020, 118, 3–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Espigares, F.; Abad-Tortosa, D.; Varela, S.A.M.; Ferreira, M.G.; Oliveira, R.F. Short telomeres drive pessimistic judgement bias in
zebrafish. Biol. Lett. 2021, 17, 20200745. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Rozanski, A.; Bavishi, C.; Kubzansky, L.D.; Cohen, R. Association of Optimism with Cardiovascular Events and All-Cause
Mortality: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Am. J. Med. 2022, 135, 856–863.e852. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21. Conversano, C.; Rotondo, A.; Lensi, E.; Della Vista, O.; Arpone, F.; Reda, M.A. Optimism and Its Impact on Mental and Physical
Well-Being. Clin. Pract. Epidemiol. Ment. Health CP EMH 2010, 6, 25–29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Garrett, N.; Sharot, T. Optimistic update bias holds firm: Three tests of robustness following Shah et al. Conscious. Cogn. 2017, 50,
12–22. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Sharot, T.; Guitart-Masip, M.; Korn, C.W.; Chowdhury, R.; Dolan, R.J. How dopamine enhances an optimism bias in humans.
Curr. Biol. 2012, 22, 1477–1481. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Cohen, F.; Kearney, K.A.; Zegans, L.S.; Kemeny, M.E.; Neuhaus, J.M.; Stites, D.P . Differential Immune System Changes with Acute
and Persistent Stress for Optimists vs. Pessimists. Brain Behav. Immun. 1999, 13, 155–174. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Kiverstein, J.; Miller, M.; Rietveld, E. How mood tunes prediction: A neurophenomenological account of mood and its disturbance
in major depression. Neurosci. Conscious. 2020, 2020, niaa003. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Fisher, E.L.; Smith, R.; Conn, K.; Corcoran, A.W.; Milton, L.K.; Hohwy, J.; Foldi, C.J. Psilocybin increases optimistic engagement
over time: Computational modelling of behavior in rats. bioRxiv 2024, arXiv:2024.05.16.594614. [CrossRef]
27. Fisher, E.L.; Whyte, C.; Hohwy, J. An Active Inference Model of the Optimism Bias. PsyArXiv Prepr. 2024, 1–23. [CrossRef]
28. Hohwy, J.; Roepstorff, A.; Friston, K. Predictive coding explains binocular rivalry: An epistemological review. Cognition 2008, 108,
687–701. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Parr, T.; Corcoran, A.W.; Friston, K.J.; Hohwy, J. Perceptual awareness and active inference.Neurosci. Conscious. 2019, 2019, niz012.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
30. Palacios, E.R.; Razi, A.; Parr, T.; Kirchhoff, M.; Friston, K. On Markov blankets and hierarchical self-organisation.J. Theor. Biol.
2020, 486, 110089. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. Friston, K. A free energy principle for a particular physics. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1906.10184.
32. Friston, K. Beyond the Desert Landscape. In Andy Clark and His Critics; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2019. [CrossRef]
33. Parr, T.; Friston, K.J. Generalised free energy and active inference. Biol. Cybern. 2019, 113, 495–513. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2024, 26, 518 12 of 12
34. Van de Cruys, S.; Friston, K.J.; Clark, A. Controlled Optimism: Reply to Sun and Firestone on the Dark Room Problem. Trends
Cogn. Sci. 2020, 24, 680–681. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Sun, Z.; Firestone, C. Optimism and Pessimism in the Predictive Brain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2020, 24, 683–685. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Metzinger, T.The Elephant and the Blind: The Experience of Pure Consciousness: Philosophy, Science, and 500+ Experiential Reports; The
MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2024. [CrossRef]
37. Schubert, J.A.; Jagadish, A.K.; Binz, M.; Schulz, E. In-context learning agents are asymmetric belief updaters. arXiv 2024,
arXiv:2402.03969.
38. Nederman, C. Niccolò Machiavelli. In The Stanford Encycklopedia of Philosophy; Zalta, E.N., Nodelman, U., Eds.; Winter: Heidelberg,
Germany , 2023. Available online: https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2023/entries/machiavelli/ (accessed on 19 May 2024).
39. Machiavelli, N. The Prince; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1988.
40. Machiavelli. The Chief Works and Others; Gilbert, A.H., Ed.; Duke University Press: Durham, NC, USA, 1965.
41. Laudan, L. A confutation of convergent realism. Philos. Sci. 1981, 48, 19–49. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.