entropy
Communication
Accessing Active Inference Theory through Its Implicit and
Deliberative Practice in Human Organizations
Stephen Fox
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Fox, S. Accessing Active
Inference Theory through Its Implicit
and Deliberative Practice in Human
Organizations. Entropy 2021, 23, 1521.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e23111521
Academic Editors: Karl Friston,
Daniela Cialﬁ, Thijs van de Laar,
Kai Ueltzhöffer, Thomas Parr
and Manuel Baltieri
Received: 13 September 2021
Accepted: 13 November 2021
Published: 15 November 2021
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, FI-02150 Espoo, Finland; stephen.fox@vtt.ﬁ; Tel.: +358-40-747-8801
Abstract: Active inference theory (AIT) is a corollary of the free-energy principle, which formalizes
cognition of living system’s autopoietic organization. AIT comprises specialist terminology and
mathematics used in theoretical neurobiology. Yet, active inference is common practice in human
organizations, such as private companies, public institutions, and not-for-proﬁts. Active inference
encompasses three interrelated types of actions, which are carried out to minimize uncertainty
about how organizations will survive. The three types of action are updating work beliefs, shifting
work attention, and/or changing how work is performed. Accordingly, an alternative starting
point for grasping active inference, rather than trying to understand AIT specialist terminology and
mathematics, is to reﬂect upon lived experience. In other words, grasping active inference through au-
toethnographic research. In this short communication paper, accessing AIT through autoethnography
is explained in terms of active inference in existing organizational practice (implicit active inference),
new organizational methodologies that are informed by AIT (deliberative active inference), and
combining implicit and deliberative active inference. In addition, these autoethnographic options for
grasping AIT are related to generative learning.
Keywords: active inference; autoethnography; business models; environment; free energy principle;
gap analysis; generative learning; joint agent-environment systems; process control; radar charts;
survival; variational free energy
1. Introduction
Many human organizations do not survive [1,2]. Apropos, it is recognized in orga-
nizational studies that better understanding is needed of interactions between inference,
action, and learning [ 3–5]. Active inference theory (AIT) is relevant to this aim, as AIT
encompasses interactions between inference, action, and learning at all levels of life from
cells to societies [6]. In addition, AIT is applicable to automation technologies, which are
becoming more widely used by human organizations [7].
However, AIT comprises specialist terminology and mathematics from theoretical
neurobiology [8,9], which can obscure that active inference is an everyday experience in
human organizations. In particular, active inference encompasses three interrelated types
of actions, which can be carried out to minimize uncertainty about how organizations
will survive. The three types of action are updating work beliefs, shifting work attention,
and/or changing how work is performed. Accordingly, an alternative starting point for
grasping active inference, rather than trying to understand AIT specialist terminology and
mathematics, is to reﬂect upon lived experience. In other words, grasping active inference
through qualitative autoethnographic research, which involves self-reﬂection on personal
experience and connecting those reﬂections to wider contexts [10].
In this short communication paper, autoethnography is related to wider contexts
through a common method in organizational practice: gap analysis with radar charts [11,12].
This is done to illustrate accessing AIT through common practice in human organizations.
Next, in Section 2, an introduction to major constructs in active inference is provided in
terms of radar charts. Then, in Section 3, a description is provided of active inference
Entropy 2021, 23, 1521. https://doi.org/10.3390/e23111521 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy
Entropy 2021, 23, 1521 2 of 10
within established methods in organizational practice (i.e., implicit active inference). Subse-
quently, in Section 4, combination of implicit and deliberative active inference is discussed,
with deliberative active inference being explicit application of AIT in the development of
organizational practice. In conclusion, in Section 5, generative learning of AIT is related to
autoethnography involving reference to active inference practice in human organizations.
2. Active Inference Constructs
2.1. Varying Survival Information Deﬁcit (i.e., Variational Free Energy)
Living things aim to minimize their uncertainty about how they will survive in the
environments in which they are situated. Uncertainty comprises information gaps between
living things’ models of themselves in the environment and their actual selves in the real
environment, for example, an information gap between an organization’s sales forecast
and its actual sales (e.g., forecast sales of 120 products per week versus actual sales of
100 products per week). One information gap can be related to another. For example,
sales forecasts and actual sales are related to cash ﬂow forecasts and actual cash ﬂow
(e.g., 120,000 euros income per week versus 100,000 euros income per week). A technical
term used in theoretical neurobiology for such information gaps is surprisal.
As illustrated in Figure 1, which uses the radar chart gap analysis format, information
gaps combine in the survival information deﬁcit. This varies as living things change and
as environments change. In neurobiology terminology, the varying survival information
deﬁcit can be described as variational free energy. The bigger the survival information
deﬁcit, the worse the ﬁt with the environment. As illustrated in Figure 1c, there is an upper
limit to survival information deﬁcit beyond which survival is not possible. In neurobiology
terminology, this maximum survival information deﬁcit can be described as variational
free energy upper bound [13,14].
Figure 1. Varying survival information deﬁcit. ( a) Organization (inner shape) has good ﬁt with the environment (outer
shape) due to minimal survival information deﬁcit (green): organization can prosper in the environment. ( b) Survival
information deﬁcit increases but is tolerable (orange): organization can survive in the environment. ( c) Survival information
deﬁcit increases further and is not sustainable (red): organization cannot survive in the environment unless it improves
its ﬁt with the environment. The red area illustrates the maximum survival information deﬁcit for the organization in its
current environment.
As with other living things, different human organizations have different maximum
survival information deﬁcits at different times as they change and as environments change.
For example, an organization with large cash reserves can survive the information gap
(i.e., surprisal) of slightly fewer sales than it forecast. Subsequently, however, when the
company has used up all its cash reserves, the same company may not be able to survive
lower sales than it has forecast because its ﬁnancial outgoings (i.e., costs) will be more than
its ﬁnancial incomings (i.e., revenue).
Entropy 2021, 23, 1521 3 of 10
2.2. Forecasting Errors (i.e., Prediction Errors)
As summarized in Figure 2, in order to reduce survival information deﬁcit, organi-
zations can take actions along numerous parameters to change themselves and/or the
environments in which they are situated. From an ecological perspective, these survival
parameters can be described as ﬁtness components [ 15]. The term generative process
refers to the actual structure of the world that generates observations that are made by the
organization. Generative model refers to how the organization expects the observations to
be generated [14]. In practice, a generative model corresponds to a business model [16].
Figure 2. Forecasting errors. (a) Expected minimal survival information deﬁcit (green) in the organization’s generative model
of itself in its environment is increased by forecasting errors about survival parameters to tolerable survival information
deﬁcit (orange). ( b) Expected tolerable survival information deﬁcit (orange) in the organization’s generative model of itself
is increased by forecasting errors on survival parameters to unsustainable survival information deﬁcit (red).
Entropy 2021, 23, 1521 4 of 10
Organizations’ actions are based on their forecasts about the effects of their actions
on their survival parameter information gaps. These parameters can include, for example,
marketing, product development, procurement, production, delivery, ﬁnance, etc. Together,
parameters can comprise an organization’s business model [16], which can be described as
a generative model in the context of theoretical neurobiology terminology. Forecasts are
statements of survival preferences. For example, a preference for surviving in competitive
markets through high volume sales of economy goods. Forecasts are predictions of future
observations rather than plans that will be inevitably realized. This is because organizations
cannot know all causal factors in the environment that can affect their preferred observa-
tions, such as preferred observations of high-volume sales. Rather, many causal factors
are hidden from the organization. They can be hidden because of the general difﬁculty
of acquiring perfect information. In addition, they may be hidden because of deliberate
concealment, such as competitors keeping secret their rapid development of new products.
Apropos, in the context of theoretical neurobiology terminology, factors that contribute to
causing observations are referred to as hidden states.
Actions are taken iteratively to reduce differences between what is forecast to be
observed and what is observed (i.e., to reduce prediction errors). Actions can involve
making use of existing information (i.e., exploiting existing information) and/or searching
for other information (i.e., exploring for new information). Attention and work can be based
more on internal beliefs than information coming from the environment if an organization
has more conﬁdence in internal beliefs than in information coming from the environment;
or vice versa. Actions can be updating beliefs about how to survive, shifting focus of
attention in trying to survive, and/or changing work performed in order to survive.
Actions can involve changing self and/or environment in order to improve ﬁt between self
and environment.
Figure 2a illustrates an organization making forecasting errors in marketing and in
ﬁnance. In particular, the organization forecasts incorrectly that its new market offering
will meet customers’ expectations, and that sales from its new market offering will maintain
its cash ﬂow. Consequently, its actual survival information deﬁcit is more than its expected
survival information deﬁcit. Figure 2b illustrates that the organization does update its
generative model so that its expected survival information deﬁcit is larger but tolerable.
However, the organization does not take the needed action of shifting its attention to pay
closer attention to customers’ expectations. In addition, the organization does not take
the needed action of changing its work to provide a new market offering that better meets
customers’ expectations. Hence, the organization’s actual survival information deﬁcit in
the generative process of the environment is more than its expected survival information
deﬁcit and increases beyond tolerable to unsustainable.
2.3. Organizational Identity (i.e., Expected Free Energy)
As illustrated in Figure 2a, forecasting errors can combine to increase actual survival
information deﬁcit. Then, as illustrated in Figure 2b, actual survival information deﬁcit
can lead to an organization updating its expected survival information deﬁcit. In the
context of theoretical neurobiology terminology, expected survival information deﬁcit can
be described as expected free energy. It is important to note that while forecasts can be
made for survival parameter information gaps, forecasts cannot be made for expected
survival information deﬁcit.
In the context of theoretical neurobiology, explanations of why expected free energy
cannot be predicted involve specialist mathematics. By contrast, those working in organi-
zational practice can make reference to everyday experiences to understand why expected
survival information deﬁcit cannot be forecast. For example, from an internal perspective,
different survival parameters involve different types of information, such as product sales
in product units and cash ﬂow in ﬁnancial currency. Accordingly, survival information
gaps cannot be added together into an overall amount. From an external perspective,
market responses are different on different survival parameters. For example, competitors
Entropy 2021, 23, 1521 5 of 10
may introduce new products and banks may change ﬁnancial arrangements. Again, these
changes cannot be added together into an overall amount. Moreover, there can be unpre-
dictable interactions between different external organizations and other causal factors in
the environment that are hidden from the organization. For example, sudden weather
events can disrupt both supply into the organization and demand for its products.
Hence, rather than being a forecast, expected survival information deﬁcit is an ex-
pectation of the impression that an organization will make on its environment. This can
be considered in terms of organizational identity, which encompasses how an organiza-
tion prefers to see itself and would prefer to be seen by others [ 17,18]. For example, an
organization could prefer to be seen as an organization with a strong ﬁnancial base that
provides its customers with good value products. As observations of an organization
will be different among different people, expected survival information deﬁcit can be
considered as an average.
3. Implicit Organizational Active Inference
Active inference is implicit in some existing practices in human organizations. In this
section, a short summary is provided that goes beyond extant literature [19] by relating
process management charts to AIT surprisal and to countervailing preferences for suprisal
minimization within human organizations [20]. As shown in Figure 3, organizations can
plan and monitor survival parameter actions using bar charts, such as Gantt charts [21].
These charts are widely used in project activities, such as product development. Figure 3a
illustrates that the bars on such charts can provide summaries of preferred, expected, toler-
able, and unsustainable outcomes from actions. The forecast is that the action outcome will
be within the expected range. There is a forecasting error because, as shown in Figure 3b,
the actual action outcome is outside the expected range on the survival parameter.
Figure 3. Gantt chart style activity bar. (a) The planning bar shows the preferred, forecast, tolerable,
unsustainable ranges for the activity. The term surprisal is applicable to the tolerable range and
unsustainable range. (b) The bar shows the actual activity outcome, which is more than expected but
within tolerable limits.
As shown in Figure 4 below, organizations can also plan and monitor survival param-
eter actions using statistical process control charts [22]. These charts are widely used in
repetitive activities, for example in mass production. Figure 4 shows that such charts can
have upper control limits (UCL) and lower control limits (LCL), within which are upper
warning limits (UWL) and lower warning limits (LWL). UWL and LWL indicate the limits
of expected deviation from the mean that represents the preferred process outcome. UCL
and LCL indicate the limit of tolerable deviation from the mean. The forecast is that the
process will stay within the expected deviation from the mean, i.e., between the UWL
and the LWL. In Figure 4, the actual processes have been operating within the expected
deviation from the mean (i.e., between UWL and LWL) but have begun to drift outside the
expected range. Thus, there is a forecasting error.
Entropy 2021, 23, 1521 6 of 10
Figure 4. Statistical process control chart. The forecast is that the process will stay within the expected deviation from
the mean. UWL (upper warning limit) and LWL (lower warning limit) indicate the limits of expected deviation from the
mean that is the preferred process outcome. UCL (upper control limit) and LCL (lower control limit) indicate the limit of
tolerable deviation from the mean. The actual processes have been operating within the expected deviation from the mean
(i.e., between UWL and LWL) but have drifted outside the expected range. Thus, there is a forecasting error. The term
surprisal is applicable to the tolerable range and unsustainable range.
It is routine for organizations to make precise forecasts about survival parameter
actions. These can include sales forecasts for a new market offering and forecasts of cash
ﬂows from those sales (Figure 2). They can also include durations for product development
projects that are intended to bring new products to market before competitors (Figure 3). In
addition, they can include manufacturing dimensions for new product parts (Figure 4). As
illustrated in Figure 2, predictions errors on individual survival parameters are interrelated
in affecting survival information deﬁcit. However, their interactions are characterized
by dynamic complexity between each other and as they interact with the environment.
For example, launching a new product later than predicted during product development
planning can give competitors an advantage. Also, manufacturing outside of predicted
dimensions can lead to poor product operation, which leads to potential customers buying
competitors’ products. Both of these can lead to lower than predicted sales and lower than
predicted cash ﬂow. However, effects on sales and cash ﬂow are also dependent upon the
actions of competitors. Thus, survival information deﬁcit cannot be predicted precisely.
Rather, process charts are applied to individual internal processes on individual survival
parameters. They do not enable organizations to control the environment, which can exert
determining inﬂuence over survival information deﬁcit. Hence, predictions about the
outcome of an action, or a series of actions, on a survival parameter are not predictions
of survival information deﬁcit. Rather, they provide a basis for expectations about the
survival information deﬁcit.
Within active inference theory (AIT), there are not process management constructs
such as those in Gantt charts and SPC charts. Rather, there are preferred observations and
the fundamental goal of surprisal minimization. Accordingly, there are not gradations such
as tolerable and unsustainable in AIT. However, organizations need process management
charts in order to manage countervailing preferences within organizational silos [20]. For
Entropy 2021, 23, 1521 7 of 10
example, a product development department may prefer to spend more money and take
more time than competitors to minimize product surprisal. In other words, to minimize the
gap between the product to be offered by the organization and potential customers’ ideal
product. By contrast, the sales department would prefer to introduce a new product at a
lower price and before its competitors. This being preferred to minimize sales surprisal,
i.e., to minimize the gap between sales forecasts and actual sales. Apropos, process
management charts are used to address the potential for organizations’ personnel to
minimize the source of surprisal that is most important to them, but to increase another
source of surprisal that is less important to them. In addition, process management
charts address the potential for causes beyond the control of the organization to affect
processes. For example, SPC charts used in manufacturing address the potential for the
properties of natural materials to affect the accuracy of their machining. Consider, for
example, the potential for knots in hardwood to decrease the precision of their machining
into furniture components. This can lead to machining drifting above warning limits
towards control limits. This can happen despite the best efforts of personnel to keep
machining within warning limits: i.e., to minimize machining surprisal. Here, there can
again be countervailing preferences that need to be managed. For example, machining
surprisal could be minimized by the organization buying hardwood that has far fewer
knots. However, such hardwood could be far above the ﬁnancial budget for manufacturing
the furniture components. Thus, machining surprisal could be minimized at the expense of
budget surprisal. So it is that minimizing surprisal in human organizations can involve
managing multiple countervailing preferences with the aid of process management charts.
4. Combining Implicit and Deliberative Organizational Active Inference
Deliberative active inference involves making reference to AIT literature in the de-
velopment of new organizational practice. One detailed example of deliberative active
inference is reported in [23]. As summarized in Table 1 below, there can be ﬁve generaliz-
able characteristics of deliberative active inference. First, there is an aspect of organizational
survival that is not addressed successfully already by implicit organizational active infer-
ence. Second, AIT literature suggests new directions for addressing the issue. Third, AIT
can be related to other theoretical resources from research in the natural sciences. Fourth,
new methods based on deliberative active inference can be related to established constructs
from organizational studies. Fifth, new methods based on deliberative active inference can
be related to established organizational practice. The remainder of this section describes a
new example in which these ﬁve characteristics are considered, and in which there can be
combination with implicit active inference from the outset. In particular, implicit active
inference in the use of radar charts [11,12].
Table 1. Characteristics of Deliberative Active Inference.
Characteristic Example
Issue in organizational survival not addressed successfully by
implicit active inference in extant methodologies
Reciprocal synchronicity of organizations and
their environments
AIT literature suggests new directions for addressing the
organizational issue AIT studies concerned with joint agent-environment systems
AIT can be related to other theoretical resources from natural
science research
Natural science research concerned with joint learning and
development of agents and environments
New deliberative active inference method can be related to
established constructs from organizational studies Organizational lifecycles and organizational design
New deliberative active inference method can be related to
established organizational practice Business model design and set-based design
Entropy 2021, 23, 1521 8 of 10
As summarized in Table 1, an aspect of organizational survival that is not addressed
successfully by implicit organizational active inference is the ﬁt of organizations with
the environments in which they intended to survive and grow. In particular, ﬁt is not
addressed in terms of the reciprocal synchronicity of organizations and environments as
they jointly learn to adapt to each other into order to co-exist successfully. AIT literature
suggests new directions for addressing this issue through studies concerned with joint
agent-environment systems [14] and model structure learning [ 24]. AIT can be related
to other theoretical resources from research in the natural sciences concerned with joint
learning and development of agents and environments [ 25]. New methods based on
deliberative active inference can be related to established constructs from organizational
studies, for example, organizational lifecycles [26] and organizational design [27]. New
methods based on deliberative active inference can be related to established organizational
practice in business model design [16] and set-based design [28].
In order to survive, organizations need to adapt their business models, which set-out
their what (e.g., market offerings), their how (e.g., operating processes) and their why
(e.g., value proposition). Here, it is important to note that notion of business models
being generative models is established in organizational studies. For example, it has
been argued that business models generate virtuous cycles, or feedback loops, that are
self-reinforcing [16]. However, this notion does not address the fundamental problem that
self-reinforcement of a business model can lead an organization not learning sufﬁciently
about environmental changes in order to undertake necessary business model adaptation.
For example, it is possible for a global provider of instant photographs to recognize that
its technology would be superseded by digital photography. Nonetheless, failure to carry
out work to adapt in order to provide digital photography can lead to the organization
not surviving [29]. More generally, an organization may not survive if its attention and its
work are based more on its out-of-date internal beliefs than on new information coming
from the environment [30,31]. This fundamental problem is addressed directly in studies
concerned with joint agent–environment systems, for example, with formulations such
as a stubborn agent might persist in its behavior despite contrary evidence [ 14]. From
an organizational perspective, contrary evidence could be, for example, falling product
sales, decreasing revenues, cash ﬂow problems, and other contractions that can lead an
organization into a so-called death spiral [32].
AIT literature concerned with model structure learning provides important insights
into how organizations can keep themselves open to learning from the environment,
rather than learning only to reinforce their existing internal model. In particular, AIT
literature encompasses a generative model being equipped with open slots for learning
about new concepts. These open slots facilitate model expansion, which can be followed
by model reduction in order to prevent models becoming overly complex [24]. Similar in
organizational practice is set-based design. This is an approach to design that involves being
open to multiple design options simultaneously, rather than successively criticizing and
modifying a single design option [28]. However, set-based design is focused on product
development and business model design can be focused on reinforcement. Apropos,
changing business models from one to another often involves the abrupt change of so-
called pivoting [33] rather than continual synchronous adaptation with the environment.
By contrast, reference to AIT literature highlights the need for continuous learning with
the environment [14] and the need to keep open slots for model expansion together with
procedures preventing models from becoming overly complex [24]. Thus, reference to AIT
stimulates consideration of set-based business model design in practice in accordance with
fundamental active inference questions: should we change our work, should we shift our
attention, and/or should we update our current generative model in accordance with new
learning from the environment. Throughout, radar charts can be used to regularly map
both the organization and the environment as shown in Figures 1 and 2 above.
Entropy 2021, 23, 1521 9 of 10
5. Conclusions
Theoretical neurobiology terminology and mathematics used in AIT may not be the
best starting points for explaining AIT to the widest range of potential beneﬁciaries. An
alternative is for explanation to begin with individuals engaging in autoethnography,
i.e., self-reﬂection on personal experience and connecting reﬂections to wider contexts [ 10].
This may be a better alternative for many because all living things that survive are already
practitioners in what is intended to be described by AIT terminology and mathematics. In
particular, AIT is concerned with the daily experiences of trying to minimize uncertainty
about how to survive by updating beliefs, shifting attention, and performing work, which
may or may not be inﬂuenced by information from the environment depending upon
conﬁdence in beliefs. Thus, understanding of active inference can begin by reﬂecting upon
lived experience, such as poor marketing leading to cash ﬂow problems that undermine
organizational survival (Figure 2). Then, that lived experience can inform selection and
application of AIT constructs when seeking better explanation and improvement of efforts
to survive amidst changing environments.
Autoethnography can involve consideration of implicit and deliberative active infer-
ence in organizational practice using common methods such as radar charts. Importantly,
relating AIT to widely used methods such as radar charts has potential to facilitate genera-
tive learning of AIT by people who do not have a background in theoretical neurobiology.
Generative learning is the process of transforming incoming information into usable knowl-
edge. Generative learning involves actively constructing meaning from to-be-learned
information by mentally reorganizing it and integrating it with one’s existing knowledge,
for example, existing knowledge of methods applied in organizational practice. Within
generative learning, the mind is not a passive consumer of information. Rather, the mind
actively constructs its own interpretations of information and draws inferences from those
interpretations. This form of active cognitive processing enables learners to develop an
understanding of incoming information that they can apply in new situations [ 34]. For
some, the specialist AIT terminology and mathematics used in theoretical neurobiology
may provide the best format of incoming knowledge to transform into usable knowledge.
For many others, charts and other methods used in everyday organizational practice may
provide a better starting point.
Funding: The research was funded by the Digilogic project (European Commission grant number 101016583).
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The author thanks the anonymous reviewers for their critical appraisal and
constructive recommendations.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Coad, A.J.-L. Death is not a success: Reﬂections on business exit. Int. Small Bus. J. Res. Entrep. 2013, 32, 721–732. [CrossRef]
2. Cole, R.; Johan, S.; Schweizer, D. Corporate failures: Declines, collapses, and scandals. J. Corp. Financ. 2021, 67, 101872. [CrossRef]
3. Argyris, C.; Schön, D.A. Organizational Learning: A Theory of Action Perspective; Addison-Wesley: Reading, MA, USA, 1978.
4. Argyris, C.; Putnam, R.; Smith, D.M. Action Science: Concepts, Methods, and Skills for Research and Intervention ; Jossey-Bass:
San Francisco, CA, USA, 1985.
5. McArthur, P .W. The Ladder of Inference. In The Sage Encyclopedia of Action Research ; Coughlin, D., Brydon-Miller, M., Eds.;
Sage Press: London, UK, 2014; pp. 486–488.
6. Veissière, S.P .L.; Constant, A.; Ramstead, M.J.D.; Friston, K.J.; Kirmayer, L.J. Thinking through other minds: A variational
approach to cognition and culture. Behav. Brain Sci. 2020, 43, e90. [CrossRef]
7. Pio-Lopez, L.; Nizard, A.; Friston, K.; Pezzulo, G. Active inference and robot control: A case study. J. R. Soc. Interface
2016, 13, 20160616. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Friston, K. The free-energy principle: A uniﬁed brain theory? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2010, 11, 127–138. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Friston, K.; FitzGerald, T.; Rigoli, F.; Schwartenbeck, P .; O’Doherty, J.; Pezzulo, G. Active inference and learning.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2016, 68, 862–879. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2021, 23, 1521 10 of 10
10. Maréchal, G. Autoethnography. In Encyclopedia of Case Study Research; Mills, A.J., Durepos, G., Wiebe, E., Eds.; Sage Publications:
Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, 2010; Volume 2, pp. 43–45.
11. Cheng, Y.; Zhou, W.; Cheng, Y.; Cheng, T.; Cheng, K.; Wang, F. Discussion on Enterprise Competitive Capability Based on Radar
Chart Analysis—Taking “HV Company” as an Example. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent and
Interactive Systems and Applications, Bangkok, Thailand, 28–30 June 2019; pp. 475–483.
12. Xiao-Tong, Y.; Hong, G. Competitive Evaluation of Internet Enterprises with Improved Radar Chart. In Proceedings of the 24th
International Conference on Management Science and Engineering (ICMSE), Nomi, Japan, 17–20 August 2017.
13. Bruineberg, J.; Rietveld, E. Self-organization, free energy minimization, and optimal grip on a ﬁeld of affordances.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2014, 8, 599. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Bruineberg, J.; Rietveld, E.; Parr, T.; van Maanen, L.; Friston, K.J. Free-energy minimization in joint agent-environment systems:
A niche construction perspective. J. Theor. Biol. 2018, 455, 161–178. [CrossRef]
15. Siepielski, A.M.; Dibattista, J.D.; Evans, J.A.; Carlson, S. Differences in the temporal dynamics of phenotypic selection among
ﬁtness components in the wild. Proc. R. Soc. B Boil. Sci. 2010, 278, 1572–1580. [CrossRef]
16. Casadesus-Masanell, R.; Ricart, J.E. How to design a winning business model. Harv. Bus. Rev. 2011, 89, 100–107.
17. Albert, S.; Whetten, D.A. Organizational identity. Res. Organ. Behav. 1985, 7, 263–295.
18. Cheney, G.; Christensen, L.T. Organizational Identity: Linkages between Internal and External Communication. In The New
Handbook of Organizational Communication; Sage Publications Ltd.: Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, 2001; pp. 231–269.
19. Fox, S. Active inference: Applicability to different types of social organization explained through reference to industrial engi-
neering and quality management. Entropy 2021, 23, 198. [CrossRef]
20. T ett, G. The Silo Effect: The Peril of Expertise and the Promise of Breaking Down Barriers; Simon and Schuster: New Y ork, NY , USA, 2015.
21. Wilson, J.M. Gantt charts: A centenary appreciation. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2003, 149, 430–437. [CrossRef]
22. Oakland, J.S. Statistical Process. Control; Routledge: London, UK, 2007.
23. Fox, S. Future-Prooﬁng Startups: Stress Management Principles Based on Adaptive Calibration Model and Active Inference
Theory. Entropy 2021, 23, 1155. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Smith, R.; Schwartenbeck, P .; Parr, T.; Friston, K. An Active Inference Approach to Modeling Structure Learning: Concept
Learning as an Example Case. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 2020, 14, 41. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Stotz, K. Why developmental niche construction is not selective niche construction: And why it matters. Interface Focus
2017, 7, 20160157. [CrossRef]
26. Picken, J.C. From startup to scalable enterprise: Laying the foundation. Bus. Horiz. 2017, 60, 587–595. [CrossRef]
27. Hernaus, T.; Aleksic, A.; Klindži´ c, M. Organizing for Competitiveness—Structural and Process Characteristics of Organizational
Design. Contemp. Econ. 2013, 7, 25–40. [CrossRef]
28. Toche, B.; Pellerin, R.; Fortin, C. Set-based design: A review and new directions. Des. Sci. 2020, 6, 18. [CrossRef]
29. Anthony, S.D. Kodak’s downfall wasn’t about technology.Harvard Business Review. 2016. Available online: https://hbr.org/2016
/07/kodaks-downfall-wasnt-about-technology (accessed on 11 September 2021).
30. Teger, A.I. Too Much Invested to Quit; Pergamon Press: New York, NY, USA, 1980.
31. Sydow, J.; Schreyogg, G.; Koch, J. Organizational path dependence: Opening the black box. Acad. Manag. Rev. 2009, 34, 689–709.
32. Dyer, J. Are you Caught in the Cost-Cutting Death Spiral? Industry Week. 2015. Available online: https://www.industryweek.
com/operations/continuous-improvement/article/22007310/are-you-caught-in-the-costcutting-death-spiral (accessed on
11 September 2021).
33. Kirtley, J.; O’Mahony, S. What is a pivot? Explaining when and how entrepreneurial ﬁrms decide to make strategic change and
pivot. Strat. Manag. J. 2020. [CrossRef]
34. Fiorella, L.; Mayer, R.E. Eight Ways to Promote Generative Learning. Educ. Psychol. Rev. 2015, 28, 717–741. [CrossRef]