entropy
Article
Future-Prooﬁng Startups: Stress Management Principles Based
on Adaptive Calibration Model and Active Inference Theory
Stephen Fox
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Fox, S. Future-Prooﬁng
Startups: Stress Management
Principles Based on Adaptive
Calibration Model and Active
Inference Theory. Entropy 2021, 23,
1155. https://doi.org/10.3390/
e23091155
Academic Editor: Georg Northoff
Received: 14 July 2021
Accepted: 31 August 2021
Published: 2 September 2021
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, FI-02150 Espoo, Finland; stephen.fox@vtt.ﬁ; Tel.: +358-40-747-8801
Abstract: In this paper, the Adaptive Calibration Model (ACM) and Active Inference Theory (AIT)
are related to future-prooﬁng startups. ACM encompasses the allocation of energy by the stress
response system to alternative options for action, depending upon individuals’ life histories and
changing external contexts. More broadly, within AIT, it is posited that humans survive by taking
action to align their internal generative models with sensory inputs from external states. The ﬁrst
contribution of the paper is to address the need for future-prooﬁng methods for startups by providing
eight stress management principles based on ACM and AIT. Future-prooﬁng methods are needed
because, typically, nine out of ten startups do not survive. A second contribution is to relate ACM
and AIT to startup life cycle stages. The third contribution is to provide practical examples that
show the broader relevance ACM and AIT to organizational practice. These contributions go beyond
previous literature concerned with entrepreneurial stress and organizational stress. In particular,
rather than focusing on particular stressors, this paper is focused on the recalibrating/updating of
startups’ stress responsivity patterns in relation to changes in the internal state of the startup and/or
changes in the external state. Overall, the paper makes a contribution to relating physics of life
constructs concerned with energy, action and ecological ﬁtness to human organizations.
Keywords: active inference theory (AIT); adaptive calibration model (ACM); double-loop learning;
conservation of resources; free energy principle; physics of life; startups; stress; triple-loop learning
1. Introduction
Startups are founded by entrepreneurs with the aim of developing scalable enterprises.
However, despite startup founders aiming for growth, the failure rate of startups is approx-
imately 90 percent. Thus, rather than grow, typically only one out of ten startups survive.
Moreover, predicting which startup will be successful is so difﬁcult that it can be more
effective to allocate startup funding randomly rather than on the basis of analyzing startups’
plans [1–4]. Accordingly, new perspectives are needed to better enable startups’ survival
and growth: especially amidst the challenges introduced by widespread climate-related
environmental changes [5–10]. Here, future-prooﬁng is relevant. This involves anticipating
future challenges and applying methods to minimizes their effects [11–15].
A long established method for improving the performance of organizations is the
deﬁnition of principles that can guide operations successfully in a wide variety of set-
tings [16,17]. In 2021, it is argued that, in order to avoid exacerbating climate change and
to develop the resilience of human enterprises to climate change, nature-based methods
are preferred [18,19]. Hitherto, however, underlying principles that guide the organization
of nature have not been considered as a basis for providing principles for future-prooﬁng
startups. This is despite the nature-based term, ecosystem, being widely used in connection
with startups [20,21]. By contrast, in this paper, the Adaptive Calibration Model (ACM) [22]
and Active Inference Theory (AIT) [23] are related to the future-prooﬁng of startups.
ACM addresses the allocation of ﬁnite time and energy by the stress response sys-
tem to alternative options for actions, depending upon individuals’ life histories and
changing external contexts [ 22]. ACM is relevant to organizational life cycles from an
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155. https://doi.org/10.3390/e23091155 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 2 of 23
entrepreneur with a startup idea through to the few startups that grow to become large
organizations. For example, the need to manage stress is recognized in literature concerned
with entrepreneurs [24,25] and large organizations [26,27]. Active Inference Theory (AIT)
is a physics of life process theory [ 23], which is a corollary of the Free Energy Principle
(FEP) [28]. Within AIT, living things, including humans, implement internal generative
models in order to survive. This involves humans surviving by taking action to align
their internal generative models with sensory inputs from external states. In accordance
with FEP , this is done to address the existential need for active systems to minimize the
long-term average of unwanted surprise from external states: i.e., from the world [ 28].
Within stress studies incorporating AIT, stress arises from existential information entropy
in trying to align the internal state with the external state: i.e., stress arises from uncer-
tainty about survival [29,30]. Apropos, stress can lead to the collapse of higher goals in
internal generative models [ 29], and stress can lead to the formulation of maladapted
internal generative models with negative prior expectations that override positive sensory
inputs [30].
As explained in the following sections, ACM and AIT can provide physics of life
principles for addressing the potential of the stress response system to support or to
undermine survival through action. ACM and AIT are related to future-prooﬁng startups
in the ﬁve remaining sections. In Section 2, ACM is related to life cycle phases of startups.
In Section 3, ACM and AIT are related to business model development and marketing. In
Section 4, ACM and AIT is related to startup practice in terms of the need for living things to
maintain non-equilibrium steady states (NESS). In Section 5, stress management principles
for the future-prooﬁng of startups based on ACM and AIT are proposed. In Section 6,
principal contributions are stated and directions for further research are proposed. ACM
and AIT are applied together in this paper because under active inference, self-organizing
systems must select between alternative courses of action based upon their expected
potential to align sensory data predicted by the internal generative models with those data
generated by external states. However, AIT does not deﬁne what are the sequences of
stress management actions (i.e., policies) that the self-organizing system can select between.
Hence, ACM complements AIT by offering a deﬁned set of stress responsivity patterns that
do offer stress management policies that a startup can select between.
Three contributions are intended from the paper. First, to make a contribution to
addressing the need for future-prooﬁng methods for startups. Second, to relate ACM
and AIT to startup life cycles in order to provide principles for recalibrating/updating
stress response patterns to changes in startups’ internal states and changes in the external
state within which startups seek to survive. This is different to previous studies that
have focused on particular stressors [ 24–27]: rather than on recalibration/updating of
stress responsivity patterns. Third, to provide practical examples that show the broader
relevance ACM and AIT to organizational practice. Previous research has explained the
relevance of AIT to human organizations that offer high volume low variety goods and/or
services: e.g., mass production organizations deploying quality management systems.
However, previous research has highlighted the need to for further investigation of AIT’s
relevance to human organizations [31]. Overall, the paper makes a contribution to relating
physics of life constructs concerned with energy, action, and ecological ﬁtness to practice in
human organizations.
2. Adaptive Calibration Model (ACM): Startup Life Cycle
ACM addresses ways by which living things deploy stress response systems to allocate
ﬁnite time and energy throughout their life cycle in order to survive [22]. Startups can have
four lifecycle stages: business model development, transition, scaling, and exit. During
business model development, organization is typically informal. During transition, the
loosely structured informality of the initial stage changes to a more structured form that
can facilitate rapid scaling. During the scaling phase, functional specialists take roles once
covered by generalists, and formal procedures replace ad hoc decision making. At some
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 3 of 23
point, an “exit” is undertaken through initial public offering of shares, private sale, merger,
or acquisition [32]. In terms of ecological ﬁtness, these four stages can be considered as two
phases: arrival of the ﬁttest and survival of the ﬁttest [ 33]. In particular, the arrival of the
species with the highest ecological ﬁtness for an environmental niche is brought about by
natural innovation processes. Subsequently, the survival of the ﬁttest takes place through
preservation of ﬁttest through natural selection of useful adaptations. Ecological ﬁtness
is the potential of living things to survive in environmental niches through competition,
cooperation, and/or construction that changes the environment [34].
At the outset of a startup when it is one person with an idea, the startup’s stress
response system can be its founder’s stress response system, which will involve interactions
between the person’s the sympathetic system, parasympathetic system, and hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA). The sympathetic nervous system prepares the body for the
“ﬁght or ﬂight” response during any potential danger. This is complemented by the
parasympathetic nervous system that inhibits the body from overworking and restores the
body to a calm and composed state [35]. Meanwhile, the HPA controls reactions to stress
and regulates many body processes, including energy storage and expenditure. As the life
cycle of a startup progresses, these functions need to be replaced by well-resourced formal
operating procedures [27,36].
The allocation of time and energy during life cycle stages is crucial as both are limited.
Hence, there are trade-offs between their allocation to different components of ecological
ﬁtness. For example, between investing in exploitation of existing information to promote
current market offerings versus investing in exploration for new information to enable new
market offerings. Within ACM, each trade-off is a decision node in allocation of resources,
and each decision node inﬂuences the next decision node, which opens up some options
while closing off other options, in a chain over the life course [37].
Within ACM, there is no one best life course. Rather there is adaptive developmental
plasticity that involves interaction between internal and external variables. With regard
to internal variables, the stress response system acts as an integrative mechanism, which
mediates the development of alternative life strategies that are adaptive in different envi-
ronmental conditions. This leads to conditional adaptive developmental variation through
what is described in organizational studies as double-loop learning [ 38]. In particular,
information encoded by the stress response system during development feeds back on the
long-term calibration of the system itself. This double-loop learning results in adaptive
patterns of stress responsivity, stress appraisals, and consequent individual differences
in life history-related behavior. With regard to changing external variables, at different
locations at different times there can be changing resource availability, environment charac-
teristics, and uncertainty. The purpose of adaptive developmental plasticity is to maximize
ecological ﬁtness [22]. In terms of ACM, the move from one life cycle stage to the next can
be switch points for the calibration of stress responsivity. For example, in the life cycle of
startups when there are crises of leadership and bureaucracy during moving from informal
to formal structure [32].
Through the stress response system, Adaptive Calibration Model (ACM) addresses
the coordination of allostatic responses. Allostasis is the process of achieving internal
stability through physiological or behavioral change—in contrast with homeostasis, which
maintains internal stability by maintaining the organism’s internal state at a set point [22].
Also, ACM encompasses the encoding and ﬁltering of information from the environment,
thus mediating openness to environmental inputs. In particular, the stress response system
continuously “samples” the environment, and its pattern of activation over the years
provides a representation of key dimensions of the environment, which can then be used
to orient the individual’s developing life history strategy. Different strategies may require
different calibrations of the stress response system. In addition, ACM encompasses the
regulation of traits and behaviors that can affect ecological ﬁtness [22].
Within ACM, four prototypical patterns of stress responsivity are posited: sensitive
(I), buffered (II), vigilant (III), and unemotional (IV). Sensitive pattern (I) is characterized
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 4 of 23
by openness to the physical and social environment, which enable rapid adjustment to
temporary perturbations in the environment through low risk cooperative life history
strategies. Buffered pattern (II) is characterized by low-to-moderate stress responsivity in
active engagement with the social environment involving long-term relationships. Buffered
pattern is distributed widely across environmental conditions compared to sensitive pattern
that is more likely in protective, low-stress developmental contexts. Vigilant pattern (III)
develops in stressful contexts, where they enable people to cope effectively with dangers
and threats in the physical and social environment. In the vigilant pattern, psychological
resources are employed to monitor and cope with possible sources of threat and/or social
competition, rather than to maximize learning and relaxed exploration as in the sensitive
pattern (I). In the unemotional pattern (IV), there is generalized unresponsivity that inhibits
social learning and sensitivity to social feedback, which can also increase risk-taking by
blocking information about dangers and threats in the environments. Different stress
responsivity patterns can lead to different appraisals of the same event: i.e., different stress
appraisals of the same event [22].
A summary of ACM for startups is provided in Figure 1. Based on [22], this diagram shows
that the stress response system (SRS) filters and/or amplifies unpredictable/uncontrollable
events and threats/dangers in relation to support system that can offset them. At the same
time, SRS ﬁlters and/or ampliﬁes novelties in the environment and social feedback. Filter-
ing and/or ampliﬁcation regulate life history traits in terms of decisions about allocation of
time and energy to competitive actions, cooperative actions, and/or construction actions.
Initially, SRS is situated amidst psychomotor characteristics of founders. Subsequently, SRS
is situated with organizational characteristics such as policy statements. Throughout, these
include stress responsivity patterns (I, II, III, or IV), which affect and are affected by the SRS
as it is calibrated through double-loop learning during active inference. In the following
sections, adaptive calibration through active inference is related to startup lifecycle stages.
Entropy 2021, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 23 
 
 
Within ACM, four prototypical patterns of stress responsivity are posited: sensitive 
(I), buffered (II), vigilant (III), and unemotional (IV). Sensitive pattern (I) is characterized 
by openness to the physical and social envi ronment, which enable rapid adjustment to 
temporary perturbations in the environment through low risk cooperative life history 
strategies. Buffered pattern (II) is characterized by low-to-moderate stress responsivity in 
active engagement with the social environm ent involving long-term relationships. Buff-
ered pattern is distributed widely across environmental conditions compared to sensitive 
pattern that is more likely in protective, low-stress developmental contexts. Vigilant pat-
tern (III) develops in stressful contexts, where they enable people to cope effectively with 
dangers and threats in the physical and social  environment. In the vigilant pattern, psy-
chological resources are employed to monitor and cope with possible sources of threat 
and/or social competition, rather than to maximize learning and relaxed exploration as in 
the sensitive pattern (I). In the unemotional pattern (IV), there is generalized unrespon-
sivity that inhibits social learning and sensitivity to social feedback, which can also in-
crease risk-taking by blocking information about dangers and threats in the environments. 
Different stress responsivity patterns can lead to different appraisals of the same event: 
i.e., different stress appraisals of the same event [22]. 
A summary of ACM for startups is provided in Figure 1. Based on [22], this diagram 
shows that the stress response system (SRS) filters and/or amplifies unpredictable/uncon-
trollable events and threats/dangers in relation to support system that can offset them. At 
the same time, SRS filters and/or amplifies no velties in the environment and social feed-
back. Filtering and/or amplification regulate life history traits in terms of decisions about 
allocation of time and energy to competitive actions, cooperative actions, and/or construc-
tion actions. Initially, SRS is situated amidst psychomotor characteristics of founders. Sub-
sequently, SRS is situated with organizational  characteristics such as policy statements. 
Throughout, these include stress responsivity pa tterns (I, II, III, or IV), which affect and 
are affected by the SRS as it is calibrated through double-loop learning during active in-
ference. In the following sections, adaptive calibration through active inference is related 
to startup lifecycle stages. 
 
Figure 1. Adaptive Calibration Model for Startups. 
Figure 1. Adaptive Calibration Model for Startups.
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 5 of 23
3. Business Model Development and Transition: Arrival of the Fittest
3.1. Business Model Development: Formulation of Internal Generative Model
The ﬁrst phase of a startup can involve ﬁve activities [ 39]. First, formulating fal-
siﬁable hypotheses about a startup idea. Second, embedding these hypotheses into a
designed business model. Third, developing a minimum viable product in order to test
the business model. Fourth, customer development through identifying “earlyvangelist”
customers from whom to receive feedback that can inform discovery and/or creation of
many more customers. Fifth, running tests with multiple iterations to make decisions about
whether or not to persevere with the startup idea. Together, these ﬁve activities span build-
measure-learn-feedback that can lead to the startup having a well-deﬁned business model
encompassing its value proposition, market segments, cost structure, revenue streams,
etc., [39]. Common across the ﬁve activities are opportunity creation, effectuation, and
bricolage. In startup scholarship concerned with opportunity creation, opportunities for
entrepreneurial proﬁt are formed endogenously through action amidst uncertainty where
outcomes are difﬁcult to determine [40,41]. Similarly, within scholarship concerned with
effectuation, opportunities are often endogenous to actors who focus on what can be done
to move toward a yet-to-be-determined near-term future end point [42,43]. Additionally,
within scholarship concerned with bricolage, actors are creative. In particular, they use
whatever is at hand to create new solutions to problems as they arise [44,45]. The need for
action is common across lean startup, opportunity creation, effectuation, and bricolage.
The importance of action is further emphasized in scholarship that reports on action theory
and action learning [46,47].
Similarly, action is at the core of AIT [ 48]. In particular, humans survive by taking
action to reduce information gaps between their internal models and reality [ 30]. This
involves actions being taken with the aim of aligning the sensory data predicted by the
internal generative models with those data generated by external states. Better aligning
includes formulating new internal generative models through insights gained via curiosity
in exploring new external states [49]. For other livings things, such exploration may require
being physically present in the new external state. By contrast, humans can undertake
curiosity-driven exploration without being physically present in the new external state:
for example, through discovery via the World Wide Web. Moreover, beliefs about the
new external state can exist, at least partially, only in the mind of a person who envisages
a future external state: for example, a future external state in which a startup has been
founded and has grown into a large organization with global reach. Thus, the formulation
of an internal generative model can involve imagining a future external state. In particular,
a person can imagine themselves in the future within the imagined future external state [50].
Through this sophisticated active inference, a startup founder can consider simultaneously
“what would happen if I did that” and “what I would believe about what would happen if I
did that” [51]. Additionally, through theory of mind, the startup founder can consider what
other people think about the action taken and what other humans would think about the
startup founder for taking the action [52]. Thus, a startup founder can formulate internal
generative models that can encompass alternative potential startups situated in future
external states. These internal generative models can encompass alternative courses of
action, such as market offerings of goods/services, founder’s own feelings about those
market offerings, founder’s estimate of potential customers’ feelings about the market
offerings, and founder’s estimate of the feelings of society about the startup founder and
the startup.
Compared to detailed internal generative models for routine daily life, nascent internal
generative models for alternative potential future startups can be lacking in detail. They can
be conceptual models that need more sampling from the external state to become schematic
models that can provide the basis for beginning lean startup by formulating falsiﬁable
hypotheses about the startup ideas. Further sampling from the external state is required
to embed these hypotheses into a business model. Then, more sampling is required to
enable development of a minimum viable product in order to test the business model. By
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 6 of 23
the fourth stage of lean startup, alignment of internal generative models with external
states begins to involve actions in the external state. These actions in the external state
encompass opportunity creation, effectuation and bricolage. In particular, interaction with
earlyvangelist customers to get iterative feedback in development of the minimum viable
product. That is, a version of the startup’s proposed marketing offering with just enough
features to be usable by early customers who can then provide feedback for future product
development. Subsequently, in the ﬁfth state of lean startup, running tests, can involve
aligning what has become a detailed internal generative model with the external state
through changing what is sampled from the external state and through changing actions
in the external state. For example, changing what is sampled by eliciting feedback from
a wider range of potential customers about the minimum viable product, and changing
actions in the external state by modifying the minimum viable product in response to
their feedback. Subsequently, in order for the startup to survive through enacting its
business model, the founder will need to exploit information gained through the preceding
exploratory active inference [53] carried out during the ﬁve phases of lean startup activities.
As shown in Figure 2 below ideally, after a startup has gone through the lean startup
activities, it will have a meta generative model that is aligned with descriptions of its
intended potential customers. Meta generative models encompass characteristics that are
applicable to many different activities in many different situations. For example, the meta
generative model of an individual person can include personality type, which underlies
prior expectations during many different situations [ 54]. Meta generative models for
startups’ potential customers can encompass descriptions of goals that they are attempting
to accomplish, and their related needs for the startup’s good/service. Descriptions can
include visual images that can distill multiple details including demographics, locations,
occupations, hobbies, levels of digital literacy, disposal income, etc. As summarized in
Figure 2, meta generative models are autopoietic models of self in the world and provide
the basis for why actions are taken in the world. Activity-speciﬁc generative models
provide the basis for how actions are taken in the world. For example, generative models
for marketing management activities or generative models for operations management
activities. Together with sensory inputs, these generative models, inﬂuence what sensory
inputs are experienced from actions taken in the world. Such multi-level generative models
are often referred to as being hierarchical in accordance with the notion of top-down
expectations and bottom-up sensory inputs [54].
Entropy 2021, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 23 
 
 
required to embed these hypotheses into a business model. Then, more sampling is re-
quired to enable development of a minimum vi able product in order to test the business 
model. By the fourth stage of lean startup, alignment of internal generative models with 
external states begins to involve actions in the external state. These actions in the external 
state encompass opportunity creation, effectuation and bricolage. In particular, interac-
tion with earlyvangelist customers to get iterative feedback in development of the mini-
mum viable product. That is, a version of the startup’s proposed marketing offering with 
just enough features to be usable by earl y customers who can then provide feedback for 
future product development. Subsequently, in the fifth state of lean startup, running tests, 
can involve aligning what has become a detailed internal generative model with the ex-
ternal state through changing what is sampled from the external state and through chang-
ing actions in the external state. For example, changing what is sampled by eliciting feed-
back from a wider range of potential custom ers about the minimum viable product, and 
changing actions in the external state by modifying the minimum viable product in re-
sponse to their feedback. Subsequently, in order for the startup to survive through enact-
ing its business model, the founder will need to exploit information gained through the 
preceding exploratory active inference [53] carried out during the five phases of lean 
startup activities. 
As shown in Figure 2 below ideally, after a startup has gone through the lean startup 
activities, it will have a meta generative mode l that is aligned with descriptions of its in-
tended potential customers. Meta generative models encompass characteristics that are 
applicable to many different activities in many different situations. For example, the meta 
generative model of an individual person can include personality type, which underlies 
prior expectations during many different situations [54]. Meta generative models for 
startups’ potential customers can encompass descriptions of goals that they are attempt-
ing to accomplish, and their related needs for the startup’s good/service. Descriptions can 
include visual images that can distill multiple details including demographics, locations, 
occupations, hobbies, levels of digital literacy, disposal income, etc. As summarized in 
Figure 2, meta generative models are autopoietic models of self in the world and provide 
the basis for why actions are taken in the world. Activity-specific generative models pro-
vide the basis for how actions are taken in the world. For example, generative models for 
marketing management activities or generative models for operations management activ-
ities. Together with sensory inputs , these generative models, influence what sensory in-
puts are experienced from actions taken in the world. Such multi-level generative models 
are often referred to as being hierarchical in accordance with the notion of top-down ex-
pectations and bottom-up sensory inputs [54]. 
 
Figure 2. Meta generative model for intended customers as defined by startup ( a) are aligned with (b) the startup’s own 
meta generative model developed during lean startup activities. 
Figure 2. Meta generative model for intended customers as deﬁned by startup (a) are aligned with (b) the startup’s own
meta generative model developed during lean startup activities.
This model is hierarchical in the sense that the why states predict the how states, which
themselves predict what sensory data. The inversion of this model (i.e., inference) then
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 7 of 23
involves passing the what messages back up the hierarchy to infer the how states and, in
turn, the why states. As is appropriate for a practitioner paper, the term meta generative
model is used here colloquially. It is used to refer to an additional hierarchical level or
factor in the generative model. The preﬁx ‘meta’- is used in the sense of ‘next to’. This can
be regarded as a superordinate hierarchical level that is ‘next’ to the penultimate level in
a hierarchical generative model. Alternatively, it can be regarded as an additional factor
that is ‘next’ to the remaining factors that constitute the generative model. This meta level
is meant to convey the inclusion of latent or hidden states that are conserved over time
and contextualise (activity-dependent) state transitions in other parts of the generative
model. Accordingly, meta generative model is used here to summarize the multitude of
inter-related variables that can exert why inﬂuence over the how of activity-speciﬁc models.
Overall, the more likely prior expectations in the meta generative model are considered
to predict a sensory input (i.e., the higher the prior probability), the more attention will
be paid to the prior expectation and the more inﬂuence the prior expectation will have on
what is experienced. By contrast, the lower the prior probability, the more attention will be
paid to the sensory input and any prediction error between prior expectation and what is
actually experienced [54].
From the perspective of ACM, the startup meta generative model comprises decisions
about the allocation of ﬁnite time and energy that begin the life history strategy of the
startup. To the extent that the startup meta generative model is developed by one founder,
it can be an expression of that person’s stress responsivity pattern (I, II, III, or IV), which
reﬂects the life history strategy of that person so far. As the formulation of the startup meta
generative model involves creative exploration of potential for survival and growth in
future environments, it can involve ﬁltering and/or ampliﬁcation of opportunities and/or
threats in those imagined future environments as they are sampled by the stress response
system. If only one founder is involved, business development can involve only that
person’s stress appraisals of alternative imagined future environments.
3.2. Transition: Interface between Internal State and External State
Interactions between the internal generative model and the external state takes place
across the interface state (i.e., Markov blanket state [31]). For startups, transition towards
scaling up takes place across the interface state through marketing that involves analyzing
market characteristics, formulating market offerings, and adapting market offerings in
relation to market responses. Ideally, marketing will lead to the situation summarized in
Figure 3 below, where there is zero prediction error and zero relative entropy between
sales forecast (i.e., what is predicted to happen) and actual sales (i.e., what happens).
Probabilities can be allocated to predictions and probabilities can be allocated to events
as they are happening. For example, the ﬁnal value of some sales orders may only be
deﬁnite months after the initial order has been received: meanwhile probabilities can be
allocated to the total sales values. Relative entropy (D), sometimes referred to as Kullback–
Leibler divergence, is a measure of differences between a reference probability distribution
(e.g., a sales forecast) and a related probability distribution (e.g., total sales values). Zero
prediction error and zero relative entropy can be achieved through the marketing of the
startup’s good/service matching the speciﬁcation for the good/service. This can lead to the
situation where market sales match the startup’s sales forecast. However, poor marketing,
such as poor pricing of market offerings, is often a cause of startup failure [2].
AIT can be related to the failure of startups offerings to survive in markets in terms of
expectation disconﬁrmation [55]. In particular, the startup’s marketing can lead to potential
customers having positive beliefs about the startup’s offering. Potential customers’ positive
beliefs can lead to them having positive expectations about trying the startup’s offering.
Their belief-based positive expectations can lead to them make speciﬁc positive predictions
about what they will experience when trying out the startup’s offering. However, if
their positive expectations are not conﬁrmed when they take action to try the startup’s
offering, they experience an unwanted surprise from the prediction error about would
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 8 of 23
be experienced. The resulting actions of the customer, which are contrary to what the
startup’s internal model predicted, in turn causes unwanted surprise for the startup. In
particular, it is unwanted surprise for the startup because the startup believes in its market
offering and has predicted positive cash ﬂows from its market offering because it expects
potential customers to try it out and want to experience it again in the future. Moreover,
many potential customers experiencing unwanted surprise from the startup’s offering
threatens the startups survival because it will not have incoming revenue from sales to
cover outgoing costs from its operations. Rather, the startup will have unsustainable
negative cash ﬂow.
Entropy 2021, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 23 
 
 
predictions about what they will experience when trying out the startup’s offering. How-
ever, if their positive expectations are not confirmed when they ta ke action to try the 
startup’s offering, they experience an unwanted surprise from the prediction error about 
would be experienced. The resulting actions of the customer, which are contrary to what 
the startup’s internal model predicted, in turn causes unwanted surprise for the startup. 
In particular, it is unwanted surprise for th e startup because the startup believes in its 
market offering and has predicted positive cash flows from its market offering because it 
expects potential customers to try it out and want to experience it again in the future. 
Moreover, many potential customers experiencing unwanted surprise from the startup’s 
offering threatens the startups survival because it will not have incoming revenue from 
sales to cover outgoing costs from its operations. Rather, the startup will have unsustain-
able negative cash flow. 
 
Figure 3. Startup interface state. Within the interface between th e startup and its potential customers are the startup’s 
advertising of its good/service. If what is advertised is the sam e a s  what i s  produ ced  by  the startu p,  as  define d in it s  
good/service specification, there can be zero prediction erro r and zero relative entropy as customers’ experiences match 
their expectations from the startup’s advertising, hence actual sales match startup’s sales forecasts: i.e., internal generative 
model is aligned with the external state. 
As shown in Figure 4 below, the limit of tolerable expectancy disconfirmation can 
comprise two sources. First, expected differe nce between preferred sensory inputs from 
the startup’s market offer and actual sensory inputs from the startup’s market offer. Sec-
ond, some additional tolerance for unwanted surprise, which can be described as float or 
slack on an action [56]: in this case, the acti on of trying out the startup’s market offering. 
If an action is carried out many times, limi ts of tolerable expectancy disconfirmation can 
be defined in statistical process control (SPC) charts [31]. However, if the action is a one-
off, for example, during the trial of a startup’s good/service by a potential customer, then 
the limit of tolerable expectancy disconfirmation is a one-off. If the potential customer 
expects there to be no difference between preferred sensory inputs and actual sensory 
inputs, then the expected difference is zero. Moreover, the potential customer does not 
expect there to be any information gap betw een her internal generative model for using 
the startup’s market offering and actually using it in the external state of the world. 
Expected difference and limit of tolerable expectancy disconfirmation can be related 
to AIT in terms of expected free energy (E FE) and variational free energy (VFE) upper 
bound. VFE can be considered as information gap between agents’ internal models and 
reality [30], which varies as internal states change and/or external states change. If the VFE 
Figure 3. Startup interface state. Within the interface between the startup and its potential customers are the startup’s
advertising of its good/service. If what is advertised is the same as what is produced by the startup, as deﬁned in its
good/service speciﬁcation, there can be zero prediction error and zero relative entropy as customers’ experiences match
their expectations from the startup’s advertising, hence actual sales match startup’s sales forecasts: i.e., internal generative
model is aligned with the external state.
As shown in Figure 4 below, the limit of tolerable expectancy disconﬁrmation can
comprise two sources. First, expected difference between preferred sensory inputs from the
startup’s market offer and actual sensory inputs from the startup’s market offer. Second,
some additional tolerance for unwanted surprise, which can be described as ﬂoat or slack
on an action [56]: in this case, the action of trying out the startup’s market offering. If an
action is carried out many times, limits of tolerable expectancy disconﬁrmation can be
deﬁned in statistical process control (SPC) charts [31]. However, if the action is a one-off,
for example, during the trial of a startup’s good/service by a potential customer, then the
limit of tolerable expectancy disconﬁrmation is a one-off. If the potential customer expects
there to be no difference between preferred sensory inputs and actual sensory inputs, then
the expected difference is zero. Moreover, the potential customer does not expect there
to be any information gap between her internal generative model for using the startup’s
market offering and actually using it in the external state of the world.
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 9 of 23
Entropy 2021, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 23 
 
 
place in a precarious balance between energy input and energy output, the limit of tolera-
ble expectancy disconfirmation is existential: i.e., survival is not possible beyond the limit. 
 
Figure 4. Limit of tolerable expectancy disconfirm ation from startup’s market offering. (a) predicted sensory input (pre-
ferred sensory input plus expected difference between preferred sensory input and actual sensory input); ( b) tolerable 
prediction error as sensory inputs are farther from preferred than expected but are within limit of tolerable sensory input 
from unwanted surprise; (c) not tolerable prediction error as sensory inputs are farther from preferred than expected and 
are beyond limits of tolerable sensory inputs from unwanted surprise. 
As the person survives through a precario us daily balancing of energy expenditure 
and energy consumption, any additional en ergy consumption involved in making the 
same deliveries can threaten the person’s su rvival through a vicious cycle in which not 
being able to complete deliveries due to exhaustion will result in being paid less and hav-
ing less money to buy food. This example illustrates that survival can depend upon resolv-
ing information gaps between internal generative model and external state. In which case, 
the information gap between preferred sensory input and limit of tolerable expectancy 
Figure 4. Limit of tolerable expectancy disconﬁrmation from startup’s market offering. ( a) predicted sensory input
(preferred sensory input plus expected difference between preferred sensory input and actual sensory input); (b) tolerable
prediction error as sensory inputs are farther from preferred than expected but are within limit of tolerable sensory input
from unwanted surprise; (c) not tolerable prediction error as sensory inputs are farther from preferred than expected and
are beyond limits of tolerable sensory inputs from unwanted surprise.
Expected difference and limit of tolerable expectancy disconﬁrmation can be related to
AIT in terms of expected free energy (EFE) and variational free energy (VFE) upper bound.
VFE can be considered as information gap between agents’ internal models and reality [30],
which varies as internal states change and/or external states change. If the VFE upper
bound, evaluated at some sensory input, is very large the information gap between internal
model and reality can be too wide to be sustainable. Accordingly, within AIT, loosely
speaking, agents select sequences of actions (i.e., policies) that will bring about future
observations that minimize VFE. As future outcomes are yet to be observed, actions need
to be selected that can minimize expected free energy (EFE): i.e., expected information gap
between internal model and reality after action has been taken. Conceptually, the EFE can
be related to the VFE by noting that VFE can be expressed as complexity minus accuracy
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 10 of 23
(i.e., minimizing free energy leads to the most accurate but minimally complex explanation
of the world). In the EFE the accuracy term of the VFE is replaced by a negative ambiguity,
and the complexity term is replaced by risk. This means that the expected free energy
favors minimally ambiguous and minimally risky futures. Action selections intended to
minimize EFE seek to resolve uncertainty and to maximize reward. Actions will tend to
be exploratory when beliefs about states are very uncertain. Conversely, action selections
will tend to exploit information, which has been gained during exploration, in order to
maximize reward when conﬁdence in beliefs about states is high. It is important to note
that VFE, and related constructs, such as EFE, do not have the same measurement units as
sensory inputs. Rather VFE is a function of sensory input in the space of log probabilities.
As shown in Figure 4a, a potential customer for the startup’s offerings may expect
some difference, and also have some additional tolerance for more than expected difference:
i.e., some additional ﬂoat/slack for unwanted surprise from an action. The term, tolerance,
is not an integral feature of AIT. Rather, it is a term that is widely used in industry. Here,
tolerance means the difference between the prediction and maximum permissible error.
In SPC charts for repetitive processes, tolerance is between process mean and process
control limits. Tolerance corresponds to the difference between prediction and what can
be described, in AIT terms, as maximum negative evidence for the internal generative
model [31]. This additional tolerance for unwanted surprise can arise from the startup’s
competitors’ existing market offerings not providing the potential customer with preferred
sensory inputs. Consider, for example, a potential customer in Africa who survives
by making deliveries with rented old bicycles [ 57]. This is extremely strenuous work
involving thousands of peddling and pushing actions that can consume thousands of
calories of energy. The person survives through a precarious daily balancing of energy
expenditure and energy consumption. Survival depends on earning more money from
making deliveries than is needed to pay bicycle rental charges and is needed to buy food
calories for peddling and pushing the rented bicycle.
The person may have mixed expectations about a startup’s market offer of rental cargo
bicycles that are powered by electric batteries (e-bike) [58]. In particular, the person may
predict rental costs to be higher but predict this to be more than off-set by reduction of
current costs from buying food to get energy to peddle and push conventional bicycles. As
summarized in Figure 4a, tolerance for unwanted surprise is minimal. This is because the
person has minimal surplus resources available to cope with unwanted surprise [59].
In Figure 4b, sensory inputs from trying out the e-bike are not as expected but within
tolerable limits: e.g., better than fatigue from making the same deliveries with the conven-
tional old rental bicycles. This is because the same deliveries were made and the same
money paid, but the amount of peddling and pushing was less. By contrast, in Figure 4c,
sensory inputs from trying out the e-bike are worse than tolerable limits: e.g., worse than
the fatigue from making the same deliveries with the conventional old rental bicycles. This
is because use of the e-bike did not reduce the amount of peddling and pushing actions
sufﬁciently to offset its extra rental costs. Hence, there was almost the same amount of
peddling and pushing but less money available to buy food calories. Thus, tolerance for ex-
pectancy disconﬁrmation can involve comparisons between alternative internal generative
models. In this case, internal generative model for continuing with renting old bikes versus
internal generative model for beginning to rent e-bikes. However, when life takes place
in a precarious balance between energy input and energy output, the limit of tolerable
expectancy disconﬁrmation is existential: i.e., survival is not possible beyond the limit.
As the person survives through a precarious daily balancing of energy expenditure
and energy consumption, any additional energy consumption involved in making the same
deliveries can threaten the person’s survival through a vicious cycle in which not being
able to complete deliveries due to exhaustion will result in being paid less and having
less money to buy food. This example illustrates that survival can depend upon resolving
information gaps between internal generative model and external state. In which case,
the information gap between preferred sensory input and limit of tolerable expectancy
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 11 of 23
disconﬁrmation can be described as survival information deﬁcit. Uncertainty about the
ways in which this survival information deﬁcit could be addressed are a source of existential
information entropy. For example, the delivery person may speculate about different ways
that the e-bike could be otherwise be used to increase deliveries made and/or reduce
energy expenditure from peddling and pushing. However, any speculative probabilities
assigned to these speculative options are associated with mismatches between energy input
and energy output that cannot be survived.
If the majority of potential customers experience prediction errors about the startup’s
e-bike offering no worse that as summarized in Figure 4b, that offering can provide the
basis for transition towards scaling. By contrast, it cannot provide the basis for transition
towards scaling if the majority of potential customers experience prediction errors that are
beyond their limits of tolerable expectancy disconﬁrmation as summarized in Figure 4c. In
which case, the startup should update its meta internal generative model through double-
loop learning [38] informed by its ﬁrst-loop learning from negative customer feedback. For
example, its value proposition should be revised.
At the same time, through ACM double-loop learning, the startup may re-calibrate its
stress responsivity pattern. For example, a startup founder with stress responsivity pattern
I, sensitive, may move towards stress responsivity pattern III, vigilant, due to the perceived
threat to survival in the intended business environment. However, this could lead to
exaggerated stress appraisals. Moreover, if permanent, this could be counterproductive
because in the vigilant pattern (III), psychological resources are employed to monitor and
cope with possible sources of threat and/or social competition, rather than to maximize
exploration and learning as in the sensitive pattern (I).
4. Scaling and Exit: Survival of the Fittest
4.1. Scaling: Maintaining Non-Equilibrium Steady State (NESS)
The internal states of startups need to survive in the external states of the world around
them by the startups maintaining a non-equilibrium steady state (NESS). Maintaining
a steady state involves a startup’s internal state not dissipating into the external state.
For example, a startup can maintain a steady state through its operations management
ensuring that its internal resources are not scattered into the external state by being taken
into the possession of external creditors via bankruptcy proceedings. Maintaining a non-
equilibrium steady state involves the startup being able to continually adapt internally in
relation to changes in the external state. Internal adaptations can be reactive in response to
changes in the external state and/or proactive to bring about changes in the external state.
Non-equilibrium steady states can range from near-equilibrium, which is maintained by
homeostasis, to drifting towards far-from-equilibrium, which is addressed by allostasis [29].
Survival as the ecologically ﬁttest depends upon making adaptations that are better than
those of competitors in the same environment. For a startup, internal adaptations can
include improving business processes, and external adaptations can include improvements
to enabling infrastructures for the operation of its market offerings.
Homeostasis can be described as being a ﬁrst-order feedback loop that regulates
essential variables in near-equilibrium steady states. For example, a startup ensuring that
outgoing costs are at least matched by incoming revenues through diligence in routine
actions such as sending out invoices. In terms of organizational studies, reﬁnements
to processes such as, for example, sending out invoices, come from single-loop learn-
ing [38]. Allostasis can be described as a second-order feedback loop that reorganizes
a system’s input–output relations when ﬁrst-order feedback has failed, and the steady
state is moving towards far-from-equilibrium. Allostatic reorganization being done to
restore a near-equilibrium steady state by reestablishing stability of essential variables.
In terms of organizational studies, allostasis is analogous to double-loop learning [ 38].
Allostasis involves the stress response system which coordinates allocation of time and
energy to different activities that are intended to promote ecological ﬁtness [ 60]. That
is, promote the compatibility of a living thing with the environmental niche in which it
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 12 of 23
intends to survive [61]. It is very important to avoid allostatic overload arising from second-
order feedback loops being continually overtaxed. This is because allostatic overload can
contribute to burnout [62], which is a common cause of startup failure [2,63]. Moreover,
allostatic overload can contribute to the collapse of higher goals [29]. Apropos, there are
many ways that a startup can reorganize its input-output relations, including changing its
markets by pivoting to another business model [64].
However, the homeostasis and allostasis of startups can be affected by biases [ 65].
These can include initial overconﬁdence followed by escalation of commitment to failing
courses of action. Such biases are examples of an internal generative model determining
attention, expectation, and action irrespective of sensory inputs coming from the external
state [54] such as negative sensory inputs from market analyses. Importantly, internal
generative models can be affected negatively by stress [30], and stress is common among
startup founders [63]. In accordance with ACM, and within AIT, updating the internal
generative model can be based on the action of changing what sensations are sampled
from the external state. For startups, this can include stopping paying attention to sources
of negative market signals and carrying on with the same course of action based on the
erroneous expectation, which has been generated by the biased internal model, that this will
lead to survival. In terms of ACM, this could involve re-calibration to stress responsivity
pattern IV , unemotional. If permanent, this would be counterproductive because pattern
IV involves generalized unresponsivity that inhibits social learning and sensitivity to social
feedback, which can also increase risk-taking by blocking information about dangers and
threats in the environment. Negative market signals can include lack of interest among
potential customers for the startup’s market offering.
In the e-bike example, there could be several reasons why the e-bike did not reduce the
amount of peddling and pushing sufﬁciently. For example, it could be because the e-bike is
not suitable for hilly terrain in a country such as Burundi [57]. Also, additional peddling
and pushing could be required to get to battery recharging center where empty batteries are
returned and charged batteries are collected. Accordingly, the startup could try to survive
by preventing dissipation of its non-equilibrium steady state (NESS) through allostasis
involving reorganizing its input–output relations. This could involve niche construction
and participation in wider ecosystem engineering. In other words, allocating ﬁnite time
and energy primarily to construction actions.
Niche construction involves adaption of the environment to better enable survival [66].
This can involve adaptive preferences [67] where people forego a ﬁrst preference in order
to survive. For example, people prefer to live above ground, but people will adapt this
preference and modify the environment by building underground settlements if that
can fulﬁl their primary goal of surviving [ 68]. On a wider scale, ecosystem engineering
can involve more far-reaching changes to the environment that alter survival pressures
positively for the ecosystem engineers but negatively for others [ 69]. Thus, there can
be eco-evolutionary feedbacks in ecosystem dynamics [70]. This can lead those that are
negatively affected to disperse. This happens when the expected ecological ﬁtness beneﬁts
of moving outweigh the expected ecological ﬁtness costs of moving [71,72].
In the e-bike example, niche construction by the startup could include moving its
operations to a region with ﬂat terrain and setting up one e-bike center from which its
e-bikes are rented and repaired, and where the e-bike batteries are recharged and replaced.
Then, in order to reduce the time and energy spent by customers in travelling to a from the
one e-bike center, the startup could extend its niche construction by arranging for some of
its services to be carried out at small roadside shops. For example, the startup could deliver
charged batteries to the roadside shops and collect empty batteries left by their customers.
Wider ecosystem engineering could involve the startup working with other organizations
involved in introducing battery power for other machines to setup multi-machine battery
charging points at multiple locations. Additionally, the startup could work with other
organizations to support the introduction of renewable energy sources for battery charging
points [73,74]. Such allocation of time and energy to construction and cooperation in
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 13 of 23
competition against established vehicle rental companies could lead to maintaining NESS
and scaling of the startup’s operations towards the exit stage of its life cycle.
4.2. Exit: Relative Ecological Fitness
Ecological ﬁtness can be absolute and relative. Absolute ﬁtness refers to ability to
survive in an environment. Relative ﬁtness refers to ability to survive better than others in
an environment. Numerically, relative ﬁtness ranges from anything above 0 to 1: with best
relative ﬁtness being 1 [61]. For the most favorable initial public offering of shares, private
sale, merger, or acquisition, a startup needs to show that it is on its way to establishing best
relative ﬁtness.
For example, e-vehicle niche construction and ecosystem engineering could lead to
the dispersal of established vehicle rental companies to other regions, such as hilly regions
where the electric power of e-bikes may not be adequate. However, as there are already
established vehicle rental companies in those regions, survival may not be possible through
geographical relocation. Rather, the favorable landscape for established vehicle rental
companies can ﬁrst become fragmented by the niche construction of e-vehicle companies.
Then, further niche construction for e-vehicles can lead to loss of favorable habitat for
established vehicle rental companies as their landscape splits into patches, which little by
little shrink and become more isolated from each other [75].
By contrast, as e-vehicle technology improves, wider ecosystem engineering can lead
to the new e-vehicle niches becoming less isolated and more interconnected into a new
e-vehicle landscape that encompass hilly as well as ﬂat terrain. Hence, the NESSs of
established vehicle rental companies becomes harder to maintain, and it becomes more
likely that their internal resources will be scattered into the external state by being taken
into the possession of external creditors via bankruptcy proceedings. However, while the
landscape and NESSs of established vehicle rental companies may have survived many
previous decades, the landscape and the NESSs of e-vehicle rental companies may be more
short-lived as niche construction for bikes powered by hydrogen fuel cells begins [76].
As summarized in Figure 5 below, market incumbents, such as established vehicle
rental companies, and possibly e-vehicle rental companies in the near future, may not
change in response to new market expectations because people working in market in-
cumbents can have biases that lead to them only sampling inputs from the external state
sensory that support their biases [77,78].
Entropy 2021, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 23 
 
 
sources for battery charging points [73,74]. Such allocation of time and energy to construc-
tion and cooperation in competition against established vehicle rental companies could 
lead to maintaining NESS and scaling of the startup’s operations towards the exit stage of 
its life cycle. 
4.2. Exit: Relative Ecological Fitness 
Ecological fitness can be absolute and relative. Absolute fitness refers to ability to 
survive in an environment. Relative fitness refers to ability to survive better than others 
in an environment. Numerically, relative fitness ranges from anything above 0 to 1: with 
best relative fitness being 1 [61]. For the most  favorable initial public offering of shares, 
private sale, merger, or acquisition, a startup needs to show that it is on its way to estab-
lishing best relative fitness. 
For example, e-vehicle niche construction and ecosystem engineering could lead to 
the dispersal of established vehicle rental companies to other regions, such as hilly regions 
where the electric power of e-bikes may not be adequate. However, as there are already 
established vehicle rental companies in those regions, survival may not be possible 
through geographical relocation. Rather, the favorable landscape for established vehicle 
rental companies can first become fragmented by the niche construction of e-vehicle com-
panies. Then, further niche construction for e-vehicles can lead to loss of favorable habitat 
for established vehicle rental companies as their landscape splits into patches, which little 
by little shrink and become more isolated from each other [75]. 
By contrast, as e-vehicle technology improves, wider ecosystem engineering can lead 
to the new e-vehicle niches becoming less isolated and more interconnected into a new e-
vehicle landscape that encompass hilly as well as flat terrain. Hence, the NESSs of estab-
lished vehicle rental companies becomes harder to maintain, and it becomes more likely 
that their internal resources will be scattered into the external state by being taken into the 
possession of external creditors via bankru ptcy proceedings. However, while the land-
scape and NESSs of established vehicle rental companies may have survived many previ-
ous decades, the landscape and the NESSs of e-vehicle rental companies may be more 
short-lived as niche construction for bikes powered by hydrogen fuel cells begins [76]. 
As summarized in Figure 5 below, market incumbents, such as established vehicle 
rental companies, and possibly e-vehicle rental companies in the near future, may not 
change in response to new market expectations because people working in market incum-
bents can have biases that lead to them only sampling inputs from the external state sen-
sory that support their biases [77,78]. 
 
Figure 5. Evolving meta generative model of ( a) customers is not matched by ( b) market incumbent’s meta generative 
model that is locked-in to its biases. 
Figure 5. Evolving meta generative model of ( a) customers is not matched by ( b) market incumbent’s meta generative
model that is locked-in to its biases.
Biases throughout the organizations being based on, for example, lock-ins to past
investments that lead to persisting with path dependent actions even when there is sensory
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 14 of 23
evidence that they are no longer effective [ 79,80]. People and organizations may not
recognize their own biases, and their biases can be difﬁcult to reduce even when they are
recognized [81,82]. Consequently, maintaining the internal state in the external states of the
world can be undermined by the market incumbent’s actions in the world being determined
by an out-of-date meta generative model rather than sampling from the external state of the
changing world. Importantly, this can prevent a favorable exit if electric power is already
perceived as going to be superseded soon, for example, by hydrogen power.
Accordingly, to avoid loss of relative ﬁtness that can undermine the exit stage, it
is important to maintain stress responsivity pattern I, sensitive, or stress responsivity
pattern II, buffered, in order to enable openness to the physical and social environment as
it changes. Rather than the ﬁght/ﬂight responses predominating in the vigilant pattern
(III) or the unresponsivity of the unemotional pattern (IV). Neither of which, if permanent,
may enable balanced stress appraisals and learning needed to update internal generative
models in changing environments.
5. Future-Prooﬁng Principles for Startups
ACM and AIT are based on living things that have evolved through many millennia to
survive within a few types of natural environments that change little from one generation to
the next. By contrast, human niche construction and ecosystem engineering can bring many
environmental changes within one generation. Some of these changes are unintended,
negative, and difﬁcult to control [83]. Moreover, climate-related environmental changes
are becoming more widespread [ 5–10]. Accordingly, maintaining the NESS of human
organizations in the 21st century and beyond can depend on changing the ratio between
exploration for information and exploitation of that information. In particular, more time
and energy may need to be spent on exploration followed by there being less time to
exploit the information gained during exploration. Moreover, maintaining the NESS of
human organizations in the 21st century and beyond can depend on being able to cope
with shorter periods of homeostasis and more instances of allostasis.
Hence, a ﬁrst organizing principle for future-prooﬁng is for startups to carry out
formal deﬁnition of their stress responsivity patterns. This can begin with startup founders
deﬁning their own ACM stress responsivity patterns. This can be carried out, for example,
during SWOT analyses that deﬁne strengths and weaknesses in relation to opportunities
and threats [84]. There is no one best stress responsivity pattern. Rather, a stress responsiv-
ity pattern can be a strength or a weakness depending upon the opportunities and threats
in the environment. Accordingly, startups need to assess the compatibility of their stress
responsivity pattern with the opportunities and threats in the environment. As shown in
Figure 1, the stress response system ﬁlters and/or ampliﬁes threats in relation to support
that can offset them. However, either too little or too much support can undermine the
potential for the stress response system to enable ecological ﬁtness [22].
A second organizing principle is for startups to address the potential of their stress
response systems to exert determining inﬂuence over sampling from the environment
during business model development. This can be addressed by making AIT an explicit
process in which the relationship between internal generative models and sampling from
the environment is recognized. In particular, as summarized in Figure 6 below, the potential
for founders’ internal meta generative models, including their stress responsivity patterns,
to lead to motivated cognition and wishful seeing [77,78], should be recognized. This is
important because it can lead to their startup’s business models being based on biased
sampling that conﬁrms their founders’ preconceptions and their habitual stress appraisals.
Rather than being based on alignment with the expectations of potential customers as
shown in Figure 2.
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 15 of 23
Entropy 2021, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 23 
 
 
its stress response system being that of its founder to it being a set of well-resourced work 
procedures [27,36], which can emulate the roles of the sympathetic system, the parasym-
pathetic nervous system, and HPA. 
Beginning during the transition stage, a fourth organizing principle for startups is to 
check the compatibility of their stress responsivity patterns with changing external envi-
ronments. In particular, check the extent to which double-loop learning has led to the 
stress responsivity pattern being well aligned with the current environment or has led to 
it being badly aligned by being fixated on past environments [85]. In terms of organiza-
tional studies, explicit consideration of the effects of implicit double-loop learning can be 
described as triple loop learning [86]. In doing so, startups can consider what is their own 
limit for tolerable expectancy disconfirmation. As summarized in Figure 4, like their cus-
tomers, startups can expect some disconfirma tion and can have some slack resources to 
deal with expected disconfirmation and unex pected disconfirmation [87,88]. However, 
startups cannot have infinite slack resource s and need to recognize that unwanted sur-
prise from the environment that exceeds limit of tolerable expectancy disconfirmation will 
undermine survival. 
 
Figure 6. Startup meta generative model ( a) based on motivated cognition an d wishful seeing arising from ( b) startup 
founder’s psychomotor meta generative model including ACM stress responsivity pattern (I, II; III or IV). 
As startups begin their scaling stage toward exit stage, during which functional spe-
cialists take roles once covered by generalists, a fifth organizing principle is to check that 
the formal stress response system that is documented in work procedures is not super-
seded in practice by the human stress respon se systems of the functional specialists who 
are appointed during crises of leadership and bureaucracy [32]. 
During exponential growth of scaling towards the exit stage, it is essential to ensure 
that the resources required to do work in accordance with customer expectations does not 
exceed the resources available to the startup. This is important to prevent organizational 
stress that can lead to the collapse of high er goals such as ethical standards [89]. The 
amount of resources required to do work in accordance with customer expectations can 
be exceeded if an accumulation of individual ly small organizational errors leads to the 
startup being overwhelmed by what can be described as firefighting: in other words, be-
coming trapped in a quagmire of deadline pressure, overtime working and energy deple-
tion [31,90]. This represents a failure of homeostasis’ first-order feedback loop that regu-
lates essential variables in near-equilibrium steady states. It also represents a failure of 
stress response system’s co-ordination of allostasis’ second-order feedback loop that reor-
ganizes input–output relations when first-or der feedback has failed. This is because or-
ganizational firefighting moves organizations closer to, rather than away from, far-from-
Figure 6. Startup meta generative model ( a) based on motivated cognition and wishful seeing arising from ( b) startup
founder’s psychomotor meta generative model including ACM stress responsivity pattern (I, II; III or IV).
As startups move to their transition stage, they move from informal structure towards
formal structure. Apropos, a third organizing principle is for startups to move from
its stress response system being that of its founder to it being a set of well-resourced
work procedures [ 27,36], which can emulate the roles of the sympathetic system, the
parasympathetic nervous system, and HPA.
Beginning during the transition stage, a fourth organizing principle for startups is
to check the compatibility of their stress responsivity patterns with changing external
environments. In particular, check the extent to which double-loop learning has led to
the stress responsivity pattern being well aligned with the current environment or has
led to it being badly aligned by being ﬁxated on past environments [ 85]. In terms of
organizational studies, explicit consideration of the effects of implicit double-loop learning
can be described as triple loop learning [86]. In doing so, startups can consider what is their
own limit for tolerable expectancy disconﬁrmation. As summarized in Figure 4, like their
customers, startups can expect some disconﬁrmation and can have some slack resources
to deal with expected disconﬁrmation and unexpected disconﬁrmation [87,88]. However,
startups cannot have inﬁnite slack resources and need to recognize that unwanted surprise
from the environment that exceeds limit of tolerable expectancy disconﬁrmation will
undermine survival.
As startups begin their scaling stage toward exit stage, during which functional
specialists take roles once covered by generalists, a ﬁfth organizing principle is to check
that the formal stress response system that is documented in work procedures is not
superseded in practice by the human stress response systems of the functional specialists
who are appointed during crises of leadership and bureaucracy [32].
During exponential growth of scaling towards the exit stage, it is essential to ensure
that the resources required to do work in accordance with customer expectations does not
exceed the resources available to the startup. This is important to prevent organizational
stress that can lead to the collapse of higher goals such as ethical standards [ 89]. The
amount of resources required to do work in accordance with customer expectations can
be exceeded if an accumulation of individually small organizational errors leads to the
startup being overwhelmed by what can be described as ﬁreﬁghting: in other words,
becoming trapped in a quagmire of deadline pressure, overtime working and energy
depletion [31,90]. This represents a failure of homeostasis’ ﬁrst-order feedback loop that
regulates essential variables in near-equilibrium steady states. It also represents a failure
of stress response system’s co-ordination of allostasis’ second-order feedback loop that
reorganizes input–output relations when ﬁrst-order feedback has failed. This is because
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 16 of 23
organizational ﬁreﬁghting moves organizations closer to, rather than away from, far-from-
equilibrium. Accordingly, particularly during exponential growth of scaling towards
the exit stage, startups need to have stress response systems that can address emergent
weaknesses of internal operations. Especially, emergent weaknesses that can undermine
the stability of essential variables, such as cash ﬂow, which are needed to regulate traits and
behaviours affecting ecological ﬁtness [22]. Hence, a sixth organizing principle is that the
stress responsivity pattern needs to be updated through explicit AIT processes to ensure it
can address emergent weaknesses of internal operations during exponential growth.
A seventh organizing principle, which encompasses all stages of the startup lifecycle,
is to avoid toxic stress that can lead to stress response system maladaptation. In particular,
maladaptation through not recalibrating/updating stress responsivity pattern or maladap-
tation from recalibrating/updating to a stress responsivity pattern that is not congruent
with the environment. In order to avoid toxic stress, it is necessary to maintain at least
the minimum resources required to enable ecological ﬁtness: i.e., to enable survival in
operating markets. This involves the response to the loss of resources, for example from
prediction errors, being to carry out resource development to replenish and/or enhance
resource stocks. Resource development to prevent toxic stress need not involve large
ﬁnancial expenditure. For example, it can include taking rest, social support, and/or
refreshing skills [91,92]. This proactive response to resource loss can be formalized as an
explicit policy for active inference by the startup: initially by its founder and subsequently
by its management. This can be done with the rationale that replenishing resources reduces
potential underlying stress about survival. Thus, while there can be uncertainty, and asso-
ciated information entropy, about the ways in which resources will be deployed in order to
survive, this is not uncertainty about survival itself and the associated information entropy
is not existential information entropy that can lead to maladaptive stress. As summarized
in Figure 7 below, maintaining resources is necessary to reduce potential for expectancy
disconﬁrmations to take stress beyond positive stress and tolerable stress towards toxic
stress [93]. Figure 7a summarizes actual sensory inputs being within expected difference
from preferred sensory inputs: i.e., sensory inputs are within the expected range. In such
scenarios, information entropy arises from speciﬁc uncertainties about particular work
tasks [94]: not from uncertainties about survival. There is no need for the startup to draw
upon its spare resources (i.e., slack), and stress can be positive involving brief mild stress
responses. Figure 7b summarizes actual sensory inputs going beyond expected range but
within the scope of the startup’s spare resources. In such a scenario, stress can be tolerable
if it is intense but temporary. Figure 7c summarizes actual sensory inputs going beyond
expected range and beyond the scope of the startup’s spare resources that have already
been reduced by previous prediction errors. In such a scenario, stress can be toxic if it is
prolonged. Figure 7d summarizes actual sensory inputs going beyond expected range
after all the startup’s spare resources have been consumed by dealing with its previous
prediction errors. Loss of resources can increase stress because there are fewer resources
available to enable ecological ﬁtness [ 91,92]. The more prediction errors that are made
and the more resources are lost, the more uncertainty there will be about the startup’s sur-
vival and higher potential for existential information entropy that can lead to maladaptive
stress [29,30]. In such a scenario, stress can be more likely to lead to a counterproductive
calibration of the stress response system.
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 17 of 23
Entropy 2021, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 23 
 
 
 
Figure 7. From task entropy to existential entropy. ( a) Expectancy disconfirmation within range of expected difference: 
information entropy arises from work tasks. (b) Within limit of tolerable expectancy disconfirmation: information entropy 
arises from work tasks but with more uncertainty. ( c) Beyond limit of tolerable expectancy disconfirmation: information 
entropy arises from survival uncertainty. (d) Beyond limit of tolerable expectancy disconfirmation: existential information 
entropy arising from increased survival uncertainty can lead to counterproductive calibration of stress response system. 
As summarized in Figure 8 below, an eighth organizing principle, which also encom-
passes all startup lifecycle stages, is to manage expectations. In particular, to align external 
expectations with internal expectations in order to avoid, what can be described as expec-
tancy discrepancy/violation/disconfirmation [55,95,96]. For example, align customers’ ex-
pectations for good/service with startup’s specifications for good/service. Also, to align 
financial backers’ expectations for sales growth with startup’s plans for sales growth. The 
alignment of expectations can minimize the startup’s uncertainty about how it will sur-
vive. This is because there is minimal information gap between the startup’s internal gen-
erative models and the external state. When  there is minimal information gap, any pre-
diction errors will be within the range of expected difference from preferred sensory in-
puts, and stress will be minimal [29,30]. In terms of organization studies, the startup will 
not be stressed commercially or financially because sales forecasts will be reached, and 
cash flow forecasts will be within expected range of deviations. In terms of AIT, this cor-
responds to actual posteriors (e.g., sales income) matching expected posteriors (e.g., sales 
forecast) with free energy related to actions in the sales policy matching expected free 
energy, and being less that the variational free energy upper bound [31]. When there is 
minimal information gap, which is within expected range of deviations in sales forecasts 
Figure 7. From task entropy to existential entropy. (a) Expectancy disconﬁrmation within range of expected difference:
information entropy arises from work tasks. (b) Within limit of tolerable expectancy disconﬁrmation: information entropy
arises from work tasks but with more uncertainty. (c) Beyond limit of tolerable expectancy disconﬁrmation: information
entropy arises from survival uncertainty. (d) Beyond limit of tolerable expectancy disconﬁrmation: existential information
entropy arising from increased survival uncertainty can lead to counterproductive calibration of stress response system.
As summarized in Figure 8 below, an eighth organizing principle, which also en-
compasses all startup lifecycle stages, is to manage expectations. In particular, to align
external expectations with internal expectations in order to avoid, what can be described
as expectancy discrepancy/violation/disconﬁrmation [55,95,96]. For example, align cus-
tomers’ expectations for good/service with startup’s speciﬁcations for good/service. Also,
to align ﬁnancial backers’ expectations for sales growth with startup’s plans for sales
growth. The alignment of expectations can minimize the startup’s uncertainty about how
it will survive. This is because there is minimal information gap between the startup’s
internal generative models and the external state. When there is minimal information
gap, any prediction errors will be within the range of expected difference from preferred
sensory inputs, and stress will be minimal [ 29,30]. In terms of organization studies, the
startup will not be stressed commercially or ﬁnancially because sales forecasts will be
reached, and cash ﬂow forecasts will be within expected range of deviations. In terms of
AIT, this corresponds to actual posteriors (e.g., sales income) matching expected posteriors
(e.g., sales forecast) with free energy related to actions in the sales policy matching expected
free energy, and being less that the variational free energy upper bound [31]. When there is
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 18 of 23
minimal information gap, which is within expected range of deviations in sales forecasts
and cash ﬂow forecasts, any stress that is experienced in dealing with sensory inputs from
customers and funders can be brief mild stress that can be described as positive stress [93].
Expectations should be updated and realigned in response to the loss of resources and/or
the development of new resources in order to minimize potential for future expectancy
discrepancies/violations/disconﬁrmations [55,95,96].
Entropy 2021, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 23 
 
 
and cash flow forecasts, any stress that is experienced in dealing with sensory inputs from 
customers and funders can be brief mild stress that can be described as positive stress [93]. 
Expectations should be updated and realigned in response to the loss of resources and/or 
the development of new resources in order to minimize potential for future expectancy 
discrepancies/violations/disconfirmations [55,95,96]. 
 
Figure 8. Manage expectations between internal state of the startup and the external state including, for example, financial 
backers, to minimize stress that can arise from survival uncertainty. 
6. Conclusions 
6.1. Principal Contributions 
There are three contributions from this paper. The first contribution is to address the 
need for future-proofing methods for startups. This has been done through the definition 
of the eight organizing principles based on ACM and AIT that are summarized in Table 1 
below. Together, these eight stress management principles go beyond previous literature 
concerned with entrepreneurial stress and organizational stress. In particular, rather than 
focusing on particular stressors, the principl es are concerned with the recalibration/up-
dating of startups’ stress responsivity pattern s to changes in the internal state of the 
startup and/or to changes in the external stat e: instead of stress responsivity patterns be-
ing based on previous internal states and/or external states. In doing so, the eight princi-
ples address startups’ two fundamental growth challenges amidst dynamic environmen-
tal change [5–10]: arrival as the fittest and survival as the fittest. 
A second contribution is relating ACM and AIT to four life cycle stages of startups. 
In doing so, overlaps between ACM and AIT are apparent. In particular, both encompass 
internal models that can have a determining influence over sampling from the external 
state and actions taken in the external state. Furthermore, both encompass internal models 
being changed by what can be described as double-loop learning [38]. Within ACM, this 
is the recalibration of stress responsivity patterns (I, II, III, IV). Within AIT, this is the up-
dating of internal generative models. Within both ACM and AIT, double-loop learning 
does not necessarily lead to better alignment of the internal state with the external state. 
Rather, double-loop learning can be maladaptive [22,29,30]. From an organizational prac-
tice perspective, both ACM and AIT are pertinent to phenomena such as motivation cog-
nition, wishful seeing (Figure 6), lock-ins and path dependencies (Figure 5) [77–80], within 
which preconceptions in internal models can override sensory inputs from the external 
state. When individuals and/or organizations get so stuck in their preconceptions, inter-
ventions can be required to get them unstuck [30,81,82]. This can involve reflection that 
can lead to triple-loop learning [86]. 
 
 
Figure 8. Manage expectations between internal state of the startup and the external state including, for example, ﬁnancial
backers, to minimize stress that can arise from survival uncertainty.
6. Conclusions
6.1. Principal Contributions
There are three contributions from this paper. The ﬁrst contribution is to address the
need for future-prooﬁng methods for startups. This has been done through the deﬁni-
tion of the eight organizing principles based on ACM and AIT that are summarized in
Table 1 below. Together, these eight stress management principles go beyond previous
literature concerned with entrepreneurial stress and organizational stress. In particular,
rather than focusing on particular stressors, the principles are concerned with the recalibra-
tion/updating of startups’ stress responsivity patterns to changes in the internal state of the
startup and/or to changes in the external state: instead of stress responsivity patterns being
based on previous internal states and/or external states. In doing so, the eight principles
address startups’ two fundamental growth challenges amidst dynamic environmental
change [5–10]: arrival as the ﬁttest and survival as the ﬁttest.
A second contribution is relating ACM and AIT to four life cycle stages of startups.
In doing so, overlaps between ACM and AIT are apparent. In particular, both encompass
internal models that can have a determining inﬂuence over sampling from the external
state and actions taken in the external state. Furthermore, both encompass internal models
being changed by what can be described as double-loop learning [38]. Within ACM, this is
the recalibration of stress responsivity patterns (I, II, III, IV). Within AIT, this is the updating
of internal generative models. Within both ACM and AIT, double-loop learning does not
necessarily lead to better alignment of the internal state with the external state. Rather,
double-loop learning can be maladaptive [ 22,29,30]. From an organizational practice
perspective, both ACM and AIT are pertinent to phenomena such as motivation cognition,
wishful seeing (Figure 6), lock-ins and path dependencies (Figure 5) [77–80], within which
preconceptions in internal models can override sensory inputs from the external state.
When individuals and/or organizations get so stuck in their preconceptions, interventions
can be required to get them unstuck [30,81,82]. This can involve reﬂection that can lead to
triple-loop learning [86].
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 19 of 23
Table 1. Future-prooﬁng principles based on ACM and AIT.
Startup Stage Principle
Business model development 1. Deﬁne stress response system in terms of ACM stress
responsivity patterns and assess strengths and weakness
in relation to opportunities and threats
2. Address potential of stress responsivity pattern to exert a
determining inﬂuence over sampling from the
environment by making AIT an explicit process
Transition 3. Move from stress response system being that of its
founder to it being a set of documented work procedures
with sufﬁcient allocation of resources
4. Check the extent to which double-loop learning has led to
the stress responsivity pattern being well aligned or badly
aligned with the current environment
Scaling towards exit 5. Ensure that the documented stress response system is not
superseded in practice by the human stress response
systems of human functional specialists
6. Through explicit AIT processes, ensure stress responsivity
patterns can address emergent weaknesses of internal
operations during exponential growth
All stages 7. Avoid stress response system maladaptation from toxic
stress by always counteracting loss of resources through
development of new resources
8. Align expectations in external state and in expectations in
internal state in order to minimize counterproductive
stress in both states
The third contribution is to provide practical examples that show the broader relevance
ACM and AIT to organizational practice. This has been done with examples across the life
cycle stages of startups, which are also relevant other types of organizations. These include
examples related to business model development (Figure 2), marketing (Figure 3), customer
experience (Figure 4), and organizational ﬁreﬁghting (Figure 7). In addition, the examples
illustrate the congruence between life science theories and practice in human organizations.
For example, the congruence between survival through minimizing long-term average
surprise and organizations minimizing expectancy discrepancy, expectancy violation, and
expectancy disconﬁrmation [55,95,96]. Here, it is important to note that there is ongoing
debate about the exact meaning of terms, such as EFE and VFE, and interrelationships
between them [97] Accordingly, there is not ﬁxed exact correspondence between technical
terminology and practice examples [98]. Overall, the paper makes a contribution to relating
physics of life constructs concerned with energy, action and ecological ﬁtness to practice in
human organizations.
6.2. Directions for Further Research
Further research can encompass action research focused on implementation trials for
the eight principles summarized in Table 1. Particularly relevant are startups that involve
individuals and organizations that have developed in very different environments to have
different stress responsivity patterns, and so can make different stress appraisals of the same
events. For example, very different environments in northern Europe, where resources
are plentiful, and southern Africa where resources are scarce. Particularly relevant are
startups that involve the conversion and/or transportation of physical matter amidst
the physical challenges brought by climate change. This is because of the potential for
increased incidence of uncontrollable events that unpredictably increase expenditure of
energy needed to survive. For example, increased energy required to survive as a startup
involved in the delivery of physical goods by e-vehicles. As summarized in Figure 7, when
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 20 of 23
the expenditure of energy and other resources repeatedly exceeds expectations, it is more
likely that toxic stress will lead to counterproductive calibration of stress responsivity
patterns. This could be particularly problematic when startups involve individuals and
organizations that have different stress responsivity patterns that lead to different sampling
and stress appraisals from the same situations.
As well as enabling contributions to the future-prooﬁng of startups, such action
research could lead to ﬁndings relevant to research into stress appraisals in new envi-
ronments [99], interactions between resource depletion and stress appraisals [ 100], and
dynamics between uncertainty and anxiety [101]. More broadly, such action research could
lead to ﬁndings that are relevant to research into joint agent-environment systems where
environments change alongside agents—often due to the action of agents themselves [ 102].
In particular, there could be relevance to research that encompasses the inﬂuence of agents’
prior beliefs over their inference. For example, the potential for prior beliefs that poorly
represent the environment to lead to false inferences [103], which could undermine sur-
vival. In turn, advances in these life science ﬁelds have potential to further inform the
future-prooﬁng of startups. For example, research into dynamics between uncertainty and
anxiety suggests that adoption of belief structures and clear goals can constrain experience
of uncertainty. Also, it suggests that the formulation of clear explanatory narratives can
support transforming uncertainty into understanding [ 101]. Thus, action research into
future-prooﬁng startups could encompass the formulation of narratives that explain how
belief structures and concrete goals relate to markets in which startups intend to survive.
Such an exercise can be framed as an explicit updating of startups’ internal generative
models with belief structures encompassing the deﬁnition of stress responsivity patterns.
Funding: The research was funded by the Digilogic project (European Commission grant num-
ber 101016583).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The author thanks the anonymous reviewers for their critical appraisal and
constructive recommendations.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Fortune; Grifﬁth, E. Why Startups Fail, According to Their Founders. 2014. Available online: https://fortune.com/2014/09/25
/why-startups-fail-according-to-their-founders (accessed on 29 June 2021).
2. CB Insights. The Top 20 Reasons Startups Fail. Available online: https://conferences.law.stanford.edu/vcs2019/wp-content/
uploads/sites/63/2018/09/001-top-10.pdf (accessed on 2 July 2021).
3. McKenzie, D. Identifying and Spurring High-Growth Entrepreneurship: Experimental Evidence from a Business Plan Competi-
tion. In Policy Research Working Papers Impact Evaluation Series WPS 7391; World Bank Group: Washington, DC, USA, 2015.
4. McKenzie, D.; Sansone, D. Predicting entrepreneurial success is hard: Evidence from a business plan competition in Nigeria. J.
Dev. Econ.2019, 141, 102369. [CrossRef]
5. Huang, J.; Zhang, G.; Zhang, Y.; Guan, X.; Wei, Y.; Guo, R. Global desertiﬁcation vulnerability to climate change and human
activities. Land Degrad. Dev.2020, 31, 1380–1391. [CrossRef]
6. Patton, A.I.; Rathburn, S.L.; Cfapps, D.M. Landslide response to climate change in permafrost regions. Geomorphology 2019, 340,
116–128. [CrossRef]
7. Boer, M.M.; de Dios, V .R.; Bradstock, R.A. Unprecedented burn area of Australian mega forest ﬁres.Nat. Clim. Chang.2020, 10,
171–172. [CrossRef]
8. Wu, X.; Lu, Y.; Zhou, S.; Chen, L.; Xu, B. Impact of climate change on human infectious diseases: Empirical evidence and human
adaptation. Environ. Int.2016, 86, 14–23. [CrossRef]
9. Chowdhury, F.R.; Ibrahim, Q.S.U.; Bari, M.S.; Alam, M.J.; Dunachie, S.J.; Rodriguez-Morales, A.J.; Patwary, M.I. The association
between temperature, rainfall and humidity with common climate-sensitive infectious diseases in Bangladesh. PLoS ONE2018,
13, e0199579. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 21 of 23
10. Wrathall, D.J.; Mueller, V .; Clark, P .U.; Bell, A.; Oppenheimer, M.; Hauer, M.; Abel, K. Meeting the looming policy challenge of
sea-level change and human migration. Nat. Clim. Chang.2019, 9, 898–901. [CrossRef]
11. Jentsch, M.F.; Bahaj, A.S.; James, P .A. Climate change future prooﬁng of buildings—Generation and assessment of building
simulation weather ﬁles. Energy Build.2008, 40, 2148–2168. [CrossRef]
12. Crossman, J.; Futter, M.N.; Oni, S.K.; Whitehead, P .G.; Jin, L.; Butterﬁeld, D.; Baulch, H.M.; Dillon, P .J. Impacts of climate change
on hydrology and water quality: Future prooﬁng management strategies in the Lake Simcoe watershed, Canada. J. Great Lakes
Res. 2013, 39, 19–32. [CrossRef]
13. Thornbush, M.; Golubchikov, O.; Bouzarovski, S. Sustainable cities targeted by combined mitigation–adaptation efforts for
future-prooﬁng. Sustain. Cities Soc.2013, 9, 1–9. [CrossRef]
14. Masood, T.; McFarlane, D.; Parlikad, A.K.; Dora, J.; Ellis, A.; Schooling, J. Towards the future-prooﬁng of UK infrastructure.
Infrastruct. Asset Manag.2016, 3, 28–41. [CrossRef]
15. Love, P .E.; Ahiaga-Dagbui, D.; Welde, M.; Odeck, J. Light rail transit cost performance: Opportunities for future-prooﬁng.Transp.
Res. Part A Policy Pract.2017, 100, 27–39. [CrossRef]
16. Davis, J.P .; Eisenhardt, K.M.; Bingham, C.B. Optimal structure, market dynamism, and the strategy of simple rules.Adm. Sci. Q.
2009, 54, 413–452. [CrossRef]
17. Lemak, C.H.; Goodrick, E. Strategy as Simple Rules: Understanding success in a rural clinic. Health Care Manag. Rev.2003, 28,
179–188. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. European Commission. The EU and Nature-Based Solutions. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/info/research-and-
innovation/research-area/environment/nature-based-solutions_en (accessed on 30 June 2021).
19. Stefanakis, A.I.; Calheiros, C.S.; Nikolaou, I. Nature-based solutions as a tool in the new circular economic model for climate
change adaptation. Circ. Econ. Sustain.2021, 1, 303–318. [CrossRef]
20. Kwak, H.; Rhee, M. Comparative study of a startup ecosystem in Seoul, Korea and Chengdu, China. Asia-Pac. J. Bus. Ventur.
Entrep. 2018, 13, 131–154.
21. Pandey, N.K. An analysis of startup ecosystem in metropolitan city in India. Int. J. Eng. Manag. Res.2018, 8, 237–244. [CrossRef]
22. Del Giudice, M.; Ellis, B.J.; Shirtcliff, E.A. The adaptive calibration model of stress responsivity. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.2011, 35,
1562–1592. [CrossRef]
23. Linson, A.; Clark, A.; Ramamoorthy, S.; Friston, K. The active inference approach to ecological perception: General information
dynamics for natural and artiﬁcial embodied cognition. Front. Robot. AI2018, 5, 21. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Wach, D.; Stephan, U.; Weinberger, E.; Wegge, J. Entrepreneurs’ stressors and well-being: A recovery perspective and diary study.
J. Bus. Ventur.2020, 106016. [CrossRef]
25. Kollmann, T.; Stöckmann, C.; Kensbock, J.M. I can’t get no sleep—The differential impact of entrepreneurial stressors on
work-home interference and insomnia among experienced versus novice entrepreneurs. J. Bus. Ventur. 2019, 34, 692–708.
[CrossRef]
26. Sonnentag, S.; Frese, M. Stress in Organizations; John Wiley & Sons Inc.: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2013.
27. Rodr íguez, I.; Kozusznik, M.W.; Peiró, J.M.; Tordera, N. Individual, co-active and collective coping and organizational stress: A
longitudinal study. Eur. Manag. J.2019, 37, 86–98. [CrossRef]
28. Buckley, C.L.; Kim, C.S.; McGregor, S.; Seth, A.K. The free energy principle for action and perception: A mathematical review.J.
Math. Psychol.2017, 81, 55–79. [CrossRef]
29. Goekoop, R.; de Kleijn, R. How higher goals are constructed and collapse under stress: A hierarchical Bayesian control systems
perspective. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.2021, 123, 257–285. [CrossRef]
30. Peters, A.; McEwen, B.S.; Friston, K. Uncertainty and stress: Why it causes diseases and how it is mastered by the brain. Prog.
Neurobiol. 2017, 156, 164–188. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. Fox, S. Active inference: Applicability to different types of social organization explained through reference to industrial
engineering and quality management. Entropy 2021, 23, 198. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Picken, J.C. From startup to scalable enterprise: Laying the foundation. Bus. Horiz.2017, 60, 587–595. [CrossRef]
33. Wagner, A. Arrival of the Fittest: Solving Evolution’s Greatest Puzzle; Penguin: London, UK, 2014.
34. Peacock, K.A. The three faces of ecological ﬁtness. Stud. Hist. Philos. Sci. Part C Stud. Hist. Philos. Biol. Biomed. Sci.2011, 42,
99–105. [CrossRef]
35. Schmidt, A.; Thews, G. Autonomic Nervous System. In Human Physiology, 2nd ed.; Janig, W., Ed.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 1989; pp. 333–370.
36. Nielsen, K.; Nielsen, M.B.; Ogbonnaya, C.; Känsälä, M.; Saari, E.; Isaksson, K. Workplace resources to improve both employee
well-being and performance: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Work Stress2017, 31, 101e120. [CrossRef]
37. Ellis, B.J.; Figueredo, A.J.; Brumbach, B.H.; Schlomer, G.L. The impact of harsh versus unpredictable environments on the
evolution and development of life history strategies. Hum. Nat.2009, 20, 204–268. [CrossRef]
38. Argyris, C. Double loop learning in organizations. Harv. Bus. Rev.1977, 55, 115–125.
39. Ghezzi, A. Digital startups and the adoption and implementation of Lean Startup Approaches: Effectuation, Bricolage and
Opportunity Creation in practice. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang.2019, 146, 945–960. [CrossRef]
40. Alvarez, S.A.; Barney, J.B. Discovery and creation: Alternative theories of entrepreneurial action. Strateg. Entrep. J.2007, 1, 11–26.
[CrossRef]
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 22 of 23
41. Welter, C.; Mauer, R.; Wuebker, R.J. Bridging behavioral models and theoretical concepts: Effectuation and bricolage in the
opportunity creation framework. Strateg. Entrep. J.2016, 10, 5–20. [CrossRef]
42. Sarasvathy, S.D. Worldmaking. InEntrepreneurial Action: Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence and Growth; Corbett, A.C.,
Katz, J.A., Eds.; Emerald Group: Bingley, UK, 2012; Volume 14, pp. 1–24.
43. Sarasvathy, S.D. Effectuation: Elements of Entrepreneurial Expertise; Edward Elgar: Cheltenham, UK, 2008.
44. Archer, G.R.; Baker, T.; Mauer, R. Towards an alternative theory of entrepreneurial success: Integrating bricolage, effectuation and
improvisation. Front. Entrep. Res.2009, 29, 4.
45. Baker, T.; Nelson, R. Creating something from nothing: Resource construction through entrepreneurial bricolage.Adm. Sci. Q.
2005, 50, 329–366. [CrossRef]
46. Frese, M. Toward a Psychology of Entrepreneurship: An Action Theory Perspective; Now Publishers Inc.: Delft, The Netherlands, 2009.
47. De Oliveira Lacerda, R.T.; Bernardes, M.L.; dos Santos Simon, B. Critical aspects of action learning: Results of integration between
university and Brazilian startups. Administração Ensino Pesquisa–RAEP2020, 21, 112–142.
48. Ramstead, M.J.D.; Kirchhoff, M.D.; Friston, K.J. A tale of two densities: Active inference is enactive inference. Adapt. Behav.2020,
28, 225–239. [CrossRef]
49. Friston, K.J.; Lin, M.; Frith, C.D.; Pezzulo, G.; Hobson, J.A.; Ondobaka, S. Active inference, curiosity and insight. Neural Comput.
2017, 29, 2633–2683. [CrossRef]
50. Hesp, C.; Tschantz, A.; Millidge, B.; Ramstead, M.; Friston, K.; Smith, R. Sophisticated Affective Inference: Simulating Anticipatory
Affective Dynamics of Imagining Future Events. In International Workshop on Active Inference; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2020; pp. 179–186.
51. Friston, K.; Da Costa, L.; Hafner, D.; Hesp, C.; Parr, T. Sophisticated inference. Neural Comput.2021, 33, 713–763. [CrossRef]
52. Ondobaka, S.; Kilner, J.; Friston, K. The role of interoceptive inference in theory of mind. Brain Cogn.2017, 112, 64–68. [CrossRef]
53. Allen, M.; Friston, K.J. From cognitivism to autopoiesis: Towards a computational framework for the embodied mind. Synthese
2018, 195, 2459–2482. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Fox, S. Psychomotor predictive processing. Entropy 2021, 23, 806. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Oliver, R.L. Effect of expectation and disconﬁrmation on postexposure product evaluations—An alternative interpretation. J.
Appl. Psychol.1977, 62, 480–486. [CrossRef]
56. Agusti-Perez, M.; Galan, J.L.; Acedo, F.J. Relationship between slack resources and performance: Temporal symmetry and
duration of effects. Eur. J. Manag. Bus. Econ.2020, 29, 255–275. [CrossRef]
57. BBC News. In Pictures: The Cyclists of Burundi. 2016. Available online: https://www.bbc.com/news/in-pictures-35870057
(accessed on 2 July 2021).
58. Naumov, V .; Pawlu´ s, M. Identifying the Optimal Packing and Routing to Improve Last-Mile Delivery Using Cargo Bicycles.
Energies 2021, 14, 4132. [CrossRef]
59. Dolmans, S.A.M.; Reymen, I.M.M.J.; van Burg, E.; Romme, A.G.L. Dynamics of resource slack and constraints: Resource positions
in action. Organ. Stud.2014, 35, 511–549. [CrossRef]
60. Boyce, W.T.; Ellis, B.J. Biological sensitivity to context: I. An evolutionary-developmental theory of the origins and functions of
stress reactivity. Dev. Psychopathol.2005, 17, 271–301. [CrossRef]
61. Orr, H.A. Fitness and its role in evolutionary genetics. Nat. Rev. Genet.2009, 10, 531–539. [CrossRef]
62. Juster, R.P .; Sindi, S.; Marin, M.F.; Perna, A.; Hashemi, A.; Pruessner, J.C.; Lupien, S.J. A clinical allostatic load index is associated
with burnout symptoms and hypocortisolemic proﬁles in healthy workers. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2011, 36, 797–805. [CrossRef]
63. Wei, X.; Cang, S.; Hisrich, R.D. Entrepreneurial stressors as predictors of entrepreneurial burnout. Psychol. Rep.2015, 116, 74–88.
[CrossRef]
64. Kirtley, J.; O’Mahony, S. What is a pivot? Explaining when and how entrepreneurial ﬁrms decide to make strategic change and
pivot. Strateg. Manag. J.2020. [CrossRef]
65. Zhang, S.X.; Cueto, J. The study of bias in entrepreneurship. Entrep. Theory Pract.2015, 41, 419–454. [CrossRef]
66. Okasha, S. On niche construction and extended evolutionary theory. Biol. Philos.2005, 20, 1–10. [CrossRef]
67. Bruckner, D. In defense of adaptive preferences. Philos. Stud.2009, 142, 307–324. [CrossRef]
68. Gillies, A.D.S.; Mudd, K.E.; Aughenbaugh, N.B. Living Conditions in Underground Houses in Coober Pedy, Australia. Potential
Earth-Shelter. Undergr. Space1981, 163–177. [CrossRef]
69. Jones, C.G.; Lawton, J.H.; Shachak, M. Positive and negative effects of organisms as physical ecosystem engineers. Ecology 1997,
78, 1946–1957. [CrossRef]
70. Post, D.M.; Palkovacs, E.P . Eco-evolutionary feedbacks in community and ecosystem ecology: Interactions between the ecological
theatre and the evolutionary play. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B2009, 364, 1629–1640. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71. Ronce, O. How does it feel to be like a rolling stone? Ten questions about dispersal evolution. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst.2007, 38,
231–253. [CrossRef]
72. Etherington, T.R. Least-cost modelling and landscape ecology: Concepts, applications, and opportunities. Curr. Landsc. Ecol. Rep.
2016, 1, 40–53. [CrossRef]
73. Pagany, R.; Ramirez Camargo, L.; Dorner, W. A review of spatial localization methodologies for the electric vehicle charging
infrastructure. Int. J. Sustain. Transp.2019, 13, 433–449. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2021, 23, 1155 23 of 23
74. McPherson, M.; Ismail, M.; Hoornweg, D.; Metcalfe, M. Planning for variable renewable energy and electric vehicle integration
under varying degrees of decentralization: A case study in Lusaka, Zambia. Energy 2018, 151, 332–346. [CrossRef]
75. Kun, Á.; Oborny, B.; Dieckmann, U. Five main phases of landscape degradation revealed by a dynamic mesoscale model analysing
the splitting, shrinking, and disappearing of habitat patches. Sci. Rep.2019, 9, 11149. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Mellino, S.; Petrillo, A.; Cigolotti, V .; Autorino, C.; Jannelli, E.; Ulgiati, S. A Life Cycle Assessment of lithium battery and
hydrogen-FC powered electric bicycles: Searching for cleaner solutions to urban mobility. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy2017, 42,
1830–1840. [CrossRef]
77. Dunning, D.; Balcetis, E. Wishful seeing: How preferences shape visual perception. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci.2013, 22, 33–37.
[CrossRef]
78. Nurse, M.S.; Grant, W.J. I’ll see it when I believe it: Motivated numeracy in perceptions of climate change risk.Environ. Commun.
2020, 14, 184–201. [CrossRef]
79. Teger, A.I. Too Much Invested to Quit; Pergamon Press: New York, NY, USA, 1980.
80. Sydow, J.; Schreyogg, G.; Koch, J. Organizational path dependence: Opening the black box. Acad. Manag. Rev.2009, 34, 689–709.
81. Fox, S. Dismantling the box: Application of principles for reducing preconceptions during ideation. Int. J. Innov. Manag.2016, 20,
1650049. [CrossRef]
82. Fox, S. Addressing the inﬂuence of groupthink during ideation concerned with new applications of technology in society. Technol.
Soc. 2019, 57, 86–94. [CrossRef]
83. Fox, S. Multiscale free energy analysis of human ecosystem engineering. Entropy 2021, 23, 396. [CrossRef]
84. Brooks, G.; Heffner, A.; Henderson, D. A SWOT analysis of competitive knowledge from social media for a small start-up
business. Rev. Bus. Inf. Syst.2014, 18, 23–34. [CrossRef]
85. Stempﬂe, J. Overcoming organizational ﬁxation: Creating and sustaining an innovation culture. J. Creat. Behav.2011, 45, 116–129.
[CrossRef]
86. Paul Tosey, P .; Visser, M.; Saunders, M.N.K. The origins and conceptualizations of ‘triple-loop’ learning: A critical review.Manag.
Learn. 2011, 43, 291–307. [CrossRef]
87. Baloc, R.A.; Sha, N.; Panhwar, K.N. The relationship of slack resources with subjective wellbeing at work: Empirical study of
sugar mills from Pakistan. Int. Strateg. Manag. Rev.2014, 2, 89–97. [CrossRef]
88. Sun, Y.; Du, S.; Ding, Y. The relationship between slack resources, resource bricolage, and entrepreneurial opportunity
identiﬁcation—Based on resource opportunity perspective. Sustainability 2020, 12, 1199. [CrossRef]
89. Youssef, F.F.; Dookeeram, K.; Basdeo, V .; Francis, E.; Doman, M.; Mamed, D.; Maloo, S.; Degannes, J.; Dobo, L.; Ditshotlo, P . Stress
alters personal moral decision making. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2012, 37, 491–498. [CrossRef]
90. Black, L.J.; Repenning, N.P . Why ﬁreﬁghting is never enough: Preserving high-quality product development. Syst. Dyn. Rev.
2001, 17, 33–62. [CrossRef]
91. Hobfoll, S.E. Conservation of Resources Theory: Its Implication for Stress, Health, and Resilience. In The Oxford Handbook of Stress,
Health, and Coping; Folkman, S., Ed.; Oxford Library of Psychology: Oxford, UK, 2011; pp. 127–147.
92. Hobfoll, S.E. Conservation of resources and disaster in cultural context: The caravans and passageways for resources. Psychiatry
2012, 75, 227–232. [CrossRef]
93. Shern, D.L.; Blanch, A.K.; Steverman, S.M. Impact of toxic stress of individuals and communities: A review of the literature. Ment.
Health Am.2014. Available online: https://www.mhanational.org/sites/default/ﬁles/Impact%20of%20Toxic%20Stress%20on%
20Individuals%20and%20Communities-A%20Review%20of%20the%20Literature.pdf (accessed on 24 July 2021).
94. Fox, S.; Kotelba, A. Variational Principle of Least Psychomotor Action: Modelling effects on action from disturbances in
psychomotor work involving human, cyborg, and robot workers. Entropy 2019, 21, 543. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95. Witiw, C.D.; Mansouri, A.; Mathieu, F.; Nassiri, F.; Badhiwala, J.H.; Fessler, R.G. Exploring the expectation-actuality discrepancy:
A systematic review of the impact of preoperative expectations on satisfaction and patient reported outcomes in spinal surgery.
Neurosurg. Rev.2018, 41, 19–30. [CrossRef]
96. Park, S.Y.; Cho, M.; Kim, S. The effect of CSR expectancy violation: Value from expectancy violation theory and conﬁrmation bias.
J. Mark. Commun.2021, 27, 365–388. [CrossRef]
97. Millidge, B.; Tschantz, A.; Buckley, C.L. Whence the expected free energy?Neural Comput.2021, 33, 447–482. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98. Andrews, M. The math is not the territory: Navigating the free energy principle. Biol. Philos.2021, 36, 1–19. [CrossRef]
99. Szabo, A.; Ward, C.; Fletcher, G.J. Stress appraisal, information processing strategies, and somatic symptoms: A longitudinal
study with immigrants. J. Health Psychol.2019, 24, 650–660. [CrossRef]
100. Palmwood, E.N.; McBride, C.A. Challenge vs. threat: The effect of appraisal type on resource depletion. Curr. Psychol.2019, 38,
1522–1529. [CrossRef]
101. Hirsh, J.B.; Mar, R.A.; Peterson, J.B. Psychological entropy: A framework for understanding uncertainty-related anxiety. Psychol.
Rev. 2012, 119, 304. [CrossRef]
102. Bruineberg, J.; Rietveld, E.; Parr, T.; van Maanen, L.; Friston, K.J. Free-energy minimization in joint agent-environment systems: A
niche construction perspective. J. Theor. Biol.2018, 455, 161–178. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Parr, T.; Benrimoh, D.A.; Vincent, P .; Friston, K.J. Precision and false perceptual inference.Front. Integr. Neurosci.2018, 12, 39.
[CrossRef]