Citation: Fox, S. Minimizing Entropy
and Complexity in Creative
Production from Emergent
Pragmatics to Action Semantics.
Entropy 2024, 26, 364. https://
doi.org/10.3390/e26050364
Academic Editor: Ashwin Vaidya
Received: 8 March 2024
Revised: 22 April 2024
Accepted: 23 April 2024
Published: 26 April 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
entropy
Article
Minimizing Entropy and Complexity in Creative Production
from Emergent Pragmatics to Action Semantics
Stephen Fox
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, FI-02150 Espoo, Finland; stephen.fox@vtt.fi
Abstract: New insights into intractable industrial challenges can be revealed by framing them in
terms of natural science. One intractable industrial challenge is that creative production can be much
more financially expensive and time consuming than standardized production. Creative products
include a wide range of goods that have one or more original characteristics. The scaling up of
creative production is hindered by high financial production costs and long production durations. In
this paper, creative production is framed in terms of interactions between entropy and complexity
during progressions from emergent pragmatics to action semantics. An analysis of interactions
between entropy and complexity is provided that relates established practice in creative production
to organizational survival in changing environments. The analysis in this paper is related to assembly
theory, which is a recent theoretical development in natural science that addresses how open-ended
generation of complex physical objects can emerge from selection in biology. Parallels between
assembly practice in industrial production and assembly theory in natural science are explained
through constructs that are common to both, such as assembly index. Overall, analyses reported in
the paper reveal that interactions between entropy and complexity underlie intractable challenges in
creative production, from the production of individual products to the survival of companies.
Keywords: active inference; assembly index; assembly theory; complexity; creativity; entropy;
generative; latent; manifest; pragmatics; production; semantics; survival; world models
1. Introduction
It has been argued that “the primordial confrontation underlying the existence of our
Universe can be conceived as the battle between entropy and complexity” [1]. The potential
for interactions between entropy and complexity is apparent from their generic definitions.
In particular, entropy can be described as the number of different ways that a set of objects
could be arranged, and complexity can be described as the amount of information needed to
describe a system [2]. Interrelationships between entropy and complexity can be illustrated
by the mixing of two paint colors to make another paint color. Consider, for example, a
container containing blue paint to which yellow paint is added in order to make green
paint. The particles in the yellow paint could be arranged in many different ways and the
particles in the blue paint could be arranged in many different ways. However, complexity
is low because there can be a simple description: blue paint on the bottom and yellow paint
on the top. Subsequently, both entropy and complexity increase when the paints are stirred
and begin to mix together. This is because there are more ways in which the paint particles
could be arranged, and because more information is needed to describe the many color
patterns that emerge during the mixing process. Then, when the blue and yellow have
been fully mixed together to make green, entropy can still be high because there are many
ways in which the particles in the mixed paint could be arranged, but complexity is low
because the paint can be described in one word: green. Such interactions between entropy
and complexity [3] are summarized by the grey dotted lines in Figure 1 below.
Entropy 2024, 26, 364. https://doi.org/10.3390/e26050364 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy
Entropy 2024, 26, 364 2 of 14
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 15 
 
 
green. Such interactions between entropy and complexity [3] are summarized by the grey 
dotted lines in Figure 1 below. 
Figure 1 summarizes a situated perspective of interactions between entropy and com-
plexity. As explained in more detail in subsequent sections of the paper, general tenden-
cies for entropy to increase and for complexity to rise then fall can be latent tendencies at 
a particular place and time. These latent tendencies can be managed, for example, through 
application of industrial engineering methods, which can lead to the entropy and com-
plexity that manifest in a particular situation to be much lower. 
 
Figure 1. Situated perspective of interactions between entropy and complexity. 
In this paper, interactions between entropy and complexity are analyzed from the 
perspective of organizational survival, which is dependent upon the production of crea-
tive products. Here, the creative product example is bicycles that have personalized stor-
age containers attached to them, i.e., personalized cargo bikes [4]. There are many creative 
options for one-of-a-kind cargo bikes [5], in cluding shapes and positions of storage con-
tainers, patterns and colors of cargo-bike decorations. 
Previous studies published in the journal Entropy have related the complexity of 
products to countries’ economic development [6,7]. Other studies published in the journal 
Entropy have encompassed creativity. For exam ple, at the macroeconomic level, it has 
been argued that the tendency towards maximum entropy promotes widespread creativ-
ity [8]. At the level of the individual, it has been argued that creativity is a consequence of 
the human brain’s energy eﬃciency [9]. However, previous studies have not addressed 
interactions between entropy and complexity in creative production. This is an important 
research gap because creative product lifecycl es can foster innovation [10] and can pro-
vide an important pathway to economic development [11]. 
In this paper, interactions between entropy and complexity are analyzed in terms of 
progressions from emergent pragmatics to action semantics during the production of cre-
ative products. Within pragmatics, product de ﬁnitions are based on implicit knowledge 
of a product’s characteristics. By contrast, within semantics, product deﬁnitions are based 
on explicit representations of a product’s characteristics. In Section 2, the nomenclature 
used in the paper is explained. The nomenclature distinguishes between general and sit-
uated, and between latent and manifest. In Section 3, a practical example of a cargo bike 
company is described. In Section 4, intera ctions between situated latent entropy and 
Figure 1. Situated perspective of interactions between entropy and complexity.
Figure 1 summarizes a situated perspective of interactions between entropy and com-
plexity. As explained in more detail in subsequent sections of the paper, general tendencies
for entropy to increase and for complexity to rise then fall can be latent tendencies at a
particular place and time. These latent tendencies can be managed, for example, through ap-
plication of industrial engineering methods, which can lead to the entropy and complexity
that manifest in a particular situation to be much lower.
In this paper, interactions between entropy and complexity are analyzed from the
perspective of organizational survival, which is dependent upon the production of creative
products. Here, the creative product example is bicycles that have personalized storage
containers attached to them, i.e., personalized cargo bikes [4]. There are many creative op-
tions for one-of-a-kind cargo bikes [5], including shapes and positions of storage containers,
patterns and colors of cargo-bike decorations.
Previous studies published in the journal Entropy have related the complexity of
products to countries’ economic development [6,7]. Other studies published in the journal
Entropy have encompassed creativity. For example, at the macroeconomic level, it has been
argued that the tendency towards maximum entropy promotes widespread creativity [8].
At the level of the individual, it has been argued that creativity is a consequence of the
human brain’s energy efficiency [ 9]. However, previous studies have not addressed in-
teractions between entropy and complexity in creative production. This is an important
research gap because creative product lifecycles can foster innovation [10] and can provide
an important pathway to economic development [11].
In this paper, interactions between entropy and complexity are analyzed in terms
of progressions from emergent pragmatics to action semantics during the production of
creative products. Within pragmatics, product definitions are based on implicit knowledge
of a product’s characteristics. By contrast, within semantics, product definitions are based
on explicit representations of a product’s characteristics. In Section 2, the nomenclature used
in the paper is explained. The nomenclature distinguishes between general and situated,
and between latent and manifest. In Section 3, a practical example of a cargo bike company
is described. In Section 4, interactions between situated latent entropy and situated latent
complexity are explained. In Section 5, transitions to situated manifest entropy and situated
manifest complexity are explained. Broader implications from the analysis are discussed in
Section 6. Overall, by distinguishing between latent and manifest, a contribution is made
Entropy 2024, 26, 364 3 of 14
to theory concerned with interactions between entropy and complexity. This contribution
is related to assembly theory, which is a recent theoretical development in natural science
that addresses how open-ended generation of complex physical objects can emerge from
biology [12–14].
2. Nomenclature
As summarized in Figure 2, one overall concept can be described in general terms
or in situated terms. Examples include situated action, situated knowledge, and situated
learning [15,16]. Similarly, pragmatics is concerned with how situations influence communi-
cation through the prior knowledge of people and the characteristics of the communication
setting [17–19]. By contrast, semantic descriptions are general descriptions that can have
the same meaning to many people in many settings.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 15 
 
 
situated latent complexity are explained. In Section 5, transitions to situated manifest en-
tropy and situated manifest complexity are explained. Broader implications from the anal-
ysis are discussed in Section 6. Overall, by distinguishing between latent and manifest, a 
contribution is made to theory concerned with interactions between entropy and com-
plexity. This contribution is related to asse mbly theory, which is a recent theoretical de-
velopment in natural science that addresses how open-ended generation of complex phys-
ical objects can emerge from biology [12–14]. 
2. Nomenclature 
As summarized in Figure 2, one overall concept can be described in general terms or 
in situated terms. Examples include situat ed action, situated knowledge, and situated 
learning [15,16]. Similarl y, pragmatics is concerned with how situations in ﬂuence com-
munication through the prior knowledge of people and the characteristics of the commu-
nication setting [17–19]. By contrast, semantic des criptions are general descriptions that 
can have the same meaning to many people in many settings. 
 
Figure 2. General/Situated. 
As illustrated in Figure 3, an overall concept may have several main elements. For 
example, switching costs is a conceptualization that is concerned with the costs involved 
in a person switching from a currently preferred product and/or brand to another product 
and/or brand. Switching costs can be procedural, ﬁnancial, and/or relational [20]. In some 
situations, initially, there may only be the procedural costs of making arrangements, i.e., 
single. Subsequently, ﬁnancial costs may also come into e ﬀect, i.e., dual, and then rela-
tional costs may begin, i.e., tripart. 
 
Figure 3. Situated: single, dual, tripart. 
As summarized in Figure 4, the elements of a concept may be latent, or they may 
manifest in a particular situation. For example, no ﬁnancial costs may manifest in switch-
ing from one product to another product, provided that the customer stays with the cur-
rent product for a contractually predeﬁned minimum period of time [21]. Distinction be-
tween latent and manifest is made in diverse ﬁelds such as applied design, conﬂict man-
agement, and entrepreneurship studies [22–24]. 
Figure 2. General/Situated.
As illustrated in Figure 3, an overall concept may have several main elements. For
example, switching costs is a conceptualization that is concerned with the costs involved in
a person switching from a currently preferred product and/or brand to another product
and/or brand. Switching costs can be procedural, financial, and/or relational [ 20]. In
some situations, initially, there may only be the procedural costs of making arrangements,
i.e., single. Subsequently, financial costs may also come into effect, i.e., dual, and then
relational costs may begin, i.e., tripart.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 15 
 
 
situated latent complexity are explained. In Section 5, transitions to situated manifest en-
tropy and situated manifest complexity are explained. Broader implications from the anal-
ysis are discussed in Section 6. Overall, by distinguishing between latent and manifest, a 
contribution is made to theory concerned with interactions between entropy and com-
plexity. This contribution is related to asse mbly theory, which is a recent theoretical de-
velopment in natural science that addresses how open-ended generation of complex phys-
ical objects can emerge from biology [12–14]. 
2. Nomenclature 
As summarized in Figure 2, one overall concept can be described in general terms or 
in situated terms. Examples include situat ed action, situated knowledge, and situated 
learning [15,16]. Similarl y, pragmatics is concerned with how situations in ﬂuence com-
munication through the prior knowledge of people and the characteristics of the commu-
nication setting [17–19]. By contrast, semantic des criptions are general descriptions that 
can have the same meaning to many people in many settings. 
 
Figure 2. General/Situated. 
As illustrated in Figure 3, an overall concept may have several main elements. For 
example, switching costs is a conceptualization that is concerned with the costs involved 
in a person switching from a currently preferred product and/or brand to another product 
and/or brand. Switching costs can be procedural, ﬁnancial, and/or relational [20]. In some 
situations, initially, there may only be the procedural costs of making arrangements, i.e., 
single. Subsequently, ﬁnancial costs may also come into e ﬀect, i.e., dual, and then rela-
tional costs may begin, i.e., tripart. 
 
Figure 3. Situated: single, dual, tripart. 
As summarized in Figure 4, the elements of a concept may be latent, or they may 
manifest in a particular situation. For example, no ﬁnancial costs may manifest in switch-
ing from one product to another product, provided that the customer stays with the cur-
rent product for a contractually predeﬁned minimum period of time [21]. Distinction be-
tween latent and manifest is made in diverse ﬁelds such as applied design, conﬂict man-
agement, and entrepreneurship studies [22–24]. 
Figure 3. Situated: single, dual, tripart.
As summarized in Figure 4, the elements of a concept may be latent, or they may
manifest in a particular situation. For example, no financial costs may manifest in switching
from one product to another product, provided that the customer stays with the current
product for a contractually predefined minimum period of time [21]. Distinction between
latent and manifest is made in diverse fields such as applied design, conflict management,
and entrepreneurship studies [22–24].
Entropy can also be considered in terms of latent and manifest. For example, the
potential to access a larger number of states is a latent entropy as it refers to the number
of states that could possibly be accessed. The states that are accessed are the states that
manifest [25]. Also, complexity can be considered in terms of latent and manifest. For
example, it has been argued that latent attractors in a complex system may not be visible
when one of them is manifest: “However, these latent attractors may be very important
in the long run because they determine which states are possible for the system when
conditions change” [26]. Distinguishing between latent and manifest can resolve conflicts
Entropy 2024, 26, 364 4 of 14
between positive and negative perspectives [ 8]. As is explained in more detail in sub-
sequent sections with the practical example, maximizing latent entropy and complexity
can enable maximum potential for adaptability within changing environments (positive),
but survival may not be possible if manifest entropy and manifest complexity are not
minimized (negative).
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 15 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Situated: latent/manifest. 
Entropy can also be considered in terms of latent and manifest. For example, the po-
tential to access a larger number of states is a latent entropy as it refers to the number of 
states that could possibly be accessed. The states that are accessed are the states that man-
ifest [25]. Also, complexity can be considered in terms of latent and manifest. For example, 
it has been argued that latent attractors in a complex system may not be visible when one 
of them is manifest: “However, these latent attractors may be very important in the long 
run because they determine which states are possible for the system when conditions 
change” [26]. Distinguishing between latent and manifest can resolve con ﬂicts between 
positive and negative perspectives [8]. As is explained in more detail in subsequent sec-
tions with the practical example, maximizing  latent entropy and complexity can enable 
maximum potential for adaptability within changing environments (positive), but sur-
vival may not be possible if manifest entropy and manifest complexity are not minimized 
(negative). 
Entropy and complexity can comprise several elements, which may or may not man-
ifest in a particular situation. For example,  there can be information–theoretic entropy, 
statistical physics entropy, and thermodynamic entropy. Also, complexity can be consid-
ered in terms of several elements, which may or may not manifest in a particular situation. 
For example, creative product lifecycles are characterized by what can be described as 
dynamic complexity, which combines complicatedness, unpredictability, and frequent 
changes. Some creative products are more complicated than others. For example, an 
ocean-going cruise liner has many more components and interconnections between them 
than a cargo bike. Unpredictability arises from individual customers having authority 
over production. This leads to each creative product having di ﬀerent initial conditions, 
which limits the potential for the application of fully predeﬁned speciﬁcations for produc-
tion. Subsequently, frequent changes arise during creative production as iterations be-
tween customer and producer lead to the re ﬁnement of vague initial product concepts 
into detailed completed products [27]. 
In terms of the Ladder of Abstraction, en tropy and complexity are high-level con-
cepts. The Ladder of Abstraction provides a structure for the organization of diﬀerent lev-
els of abstraction from concrete to abstract [28–30]. However, both entropy and complex-
ity can become more concrete for practitioners when, rather than being thought of as gen-
eral concepts, they are related to the particularities of speci ﬁc situations, such as, for ex-
ample, the creative production of one-of-a-kind cargo bikes. 
3. Practical Example 
A ﬁctitious company called CBikes is in the cargo bike market. In order to be able to 
survive and grow in this environment, CBik es needs to adapt with changing market 
trends. At the same time, CBikes must maintain internal stability by minimizing 
Figure 4. Situated: latent/manifest.
Entropy and complexity can comprise several elements, which may or may not man-
ifest in a particular situation. For example, there can be information–theoretic entropy,
statistical physics entropy, and thermodynamic entropy. Also, complexity can be consid-
ered in terms of several elements, which may or may not manifest in a particular situation.
For example, creative product lifecycles are characterized by what can be described as
dynamic complexity, which combines complicatedness, unpredictability, and frequent
changes. Some creative products are more complicated than others. For example, an
ocean-going cruise liner has many more components and interconnections between them
than a cargo bike. Unpredictability arises from individual customers having authority over
production. This leads to each creative product having different initial conditions, which
limits the potential for the application of fully predefined specifications for production.
Subsequently, frequent changes arise during creative production as iterations between cus-
tomer and producer lead to the refinement of vague initial product concepts into detailed
completed products [27].
In terms of the Ladder of Abstraction, entropy and complexity are high-level concepts.
The Ladder of Abstraction provides a structure for the organization of different levels
of abstraction from concrete to abstract [28–30]. However, both entropy and complexity
can become more concrete for practitioners when, rather than being thought of as general
concepts, they are related to the particularities of specific situations, such as, for example,
the creative production of one-of-a-kind cargo bikes.
3. Practical Example
A fictitious company called CBikes is in the cargo bike market. In order to be able to
survive and grow in this environment, CBikes needs to adapt with changing market trends.
At the same time, CBikes must maintain internal stability by minimizing information
uncertainty in its interactions with customers. In particular, information uncertainty that
would entail physical disorder and consequent energy loss, which can prevent CBikes from
growing or even surviving. In other words, CBikes needs to adapt with its environment
while minimizing information–theoretic entropy that could entail statistical physics entropy
and consequent thermodynamic entropy [31]. CBikes entered the cargo bike market by
offering customers predefined options for cargo bikes, i.e., standardized cargo bikes. As a
consequence of limiting its offerings to predefined cargo bikes, CBikes failed to attract many
potential customers who want one-of-a-kind cargo bikes. In order to reduce information
uncertainty about its survival, CBikes begins to offer one-of-a-kind cargo bikes.
Entropy 2024, 26, 364 5 of 14
Hence, CBikes must adapt its online configuration platform to be able to facilitate
individual customers’ one-of-a-kind orders for cargo bikes, and to facilitate engineer-to-
order production (ETO) of such cargo bikes. Here, the term production encompasses design
and manufacture. Online configuration platforms are online brochures that can enable
users to select and configure sub-assemblies and finishes into their preferred products [32].
The introduction of online configuration platforms is accompanied by extensive industrial
engineering, which is carried out to minimize information uncertainty, physical disorder,
and energy loss from initial interactions with customers through to product completion.
Configuration platforms can enable companies to mediate between adapting with the
external market and maintaining internal stability. In the short term, internal stability can
be facilitated by not updating the product variety offered via configuration platforms. For
example, CBikes could continue to offer only standard cargo bikes. However, not updating
product variety can lead to not surviving due to insufficient adaptation with environmental
changes such as increasing demand from potential customers for one-of-a-kind cargo bikes.
For companies, information from new external markets begins with emergent pragmat-
ics. Subsequently, it is formalized by companies as semantic information [33]. Pragmatics
can encompass physical objects and related descriptors, which can include language and
images [34]. As summarized in Equation (1) [35], pragmatics involves Bayesian inference
about the state of the world (w). Here, the business’s recipient (B) of a customer’s (C) signal
(s) infers what the state of the world (w) is likely to be now, given that the customer ( C)
produced the signal (s) and knowing that the customer ( C) is reasoning about how the
business’s recipient (B) is most likely to interpret that signal (s) based on (w). In other
words, without information about the specific context (w), pragmatic information can
be ambiguous.
PB(w|s) ∝ PC(s|w)P(w) (1)
By contrast, within semantics, information is predefined, standardized, and explicit.
Semantic information can encompass physical objects and the actions related to them,
i.e., action semantics [36]. The semantics used in describing creative products and the work
involved in their production can include natural language, machine-readable language,
visual images, and physical objects [32,33].
When the founders of CBikes were exploring the possibility to set up a cargo bike
company, they may have had discussions that were entirely dependent on pragmatics
because there may have been no standard sub-assemblies and associated descriptors for
cargo bikes. Rather, cargo bikes may have been the individual fabrications of ingenious
hobbyists [4,5]. Subsequently, when developing a configuration platform for predefined
options for cargo bikes, they would have standardized sub-assemblies and the associated
descriptors. Then, the CBikes configuration platform, as with other configuration platforms,
would be based on semantic information [ 33]. This is information that can have the
same meaning for customers outside the company and for all those within the company.
Semantic information can be considered to be disambiguated pragmatic information that is
generalizable beyond a few specific situations and specific people.
Production information can be considered to be semantic information when it has zero
information–theoretic entropy because it can only be interpreted in one way. When there
is zero information–theoretic entropy, production work can be carried out correctly first
time every time. By diversifying its market offerings to encompass individual customers’
requirements for one-of-a-kind cargo bikes, CBikes is opening its production processes to
pragmatic information. This is because the informal descriptions of requirements provided
by each individual customer are founded upon those customers’ personal knowledge and
particular situations.
Thus, paradoxically, in trying to reduce information uncertainty about its survival,
which has been caused by insufficient sales of standard cargo bikes, CBikes has to risk
undermining its survival by being open to high information–theoretic entropy from the
pragmatics of individual customers’ ambiguous information about one-of-a-kind cargo
bikes. This can undermine CBikes’ survival because it entails increased information un-
Entropy 2024, 26, 364 6 of 14
certainty, which can permeate throughout production processes to bring physical disorder
and consequent energy loss. This is a practical example of the fundamental need to bal-
ance external adaptability and internal stability in order to survive and grow in changing
environments [31].
4. Interactions between Latent Entropy and Latent Complexity
Natural science’s assembly theory is concerned with the open-ended generation of
novelty through a forward dynamical assembly process [14]. As summarized in Figure 5,
for practical purposes, interactions between latent entropy and latent complexity can be
framed in terms of generative world models and the interface states between them.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 15 
 
 
Production information can be considered to be semantic information when it has 
zero information–theoretic entropy because it can only be interpreted in one way. When 
there is zero information–theoretic entropy, production work can be carried out correctly 
ﬁrst time every time. By diversifying its market o ﬀerings to encompass individual cus-
tomers’ requirements for one-of-a-kind cargo bikes, CBikes is opening its production pro-
cesses to pragmatic information. This is because the informal descriptions of requirements 
provided by each individual customer are founded upon those customers’ personal 
knowledge and particular situations. 
Thus, paradoxically, in trying to reduce information uncertainty about its survival, 
which has been caused by insu ﬃcient sales of standard cargo bikes, CBikes has to risk 
undermining its survival by being open to high information–theoretic entropy from the 
pragmatics of individual customers’ ambi guous information about one-of-a-kind cargo 
bikes. This can undermine CBikes’ survival because it entails increased information un-
certainty, which can permeate throughout pr oduction processes to bring physical disor-
der and consequent energy loss. This is a pr actical example of the fundamental need to 
balance external adaptability and internal stability in order to survive and grow in chang-
ing environments [31]. 
4. Interactions between Latent Entropy and Latent Complexity 
Natural science’s assembly theory is concerned with the open-ended generation of 
novelty through a forward dynamical assembly process [14]. As summarized in Figure 5, 
for practical purposes, interactions between la tent entropy and latent complexity can be 
framed in terms of generative world models and the interface states between them. 
 
Figure 5. World models comprising generative meta models and activity-speciﬁc models. 
World models are models of self in the world, which can generate cycles of inferences 
about survival in changing environments. As shown in Figure 5, a world model can com-
prise one meta model that in ﬂuences many activity-speci ﬁc models. A meta generative 
model can encompass characteristics that inﬂuence many diﬀerent activities in many dif-
ferent situations and provide the basis for why actions are taken in the world. For a busi-
ness, its meta model can be deﬁned within documents such as the description of its busi-
ness model within its strategic plan documents. Activity-speci ﬁc generative models pro-
vide the basis for how actions are taken in the world. For example, generative models for 
production activities, which can be documented as work procedures within the business’s 
quality management system manuals and within related computational models [37]. 
These activity-speciﬁc models inﬂuence what sensory inputs are experienced from actions 
taken in the world. By contrast, the world models of individual people are embodied psy-
chomotor world models [38]. For individual customers, meta generative models can com-
prise underlying psychological and physiological characteristics, such as personality type 
and soma type, which can in ﬂuence a person’s inferences in all the many diﬀerent types 
Figure 5. World models comprising generative meta models and activity-specific models.
World models are models of self in the world, which can generate cycles of inferences
about survival in changing environments. As shown in Figure 5, a world model can
comprise one meta model that influences many activity-specific models. A meta generative
model can encompass characteristics that influence many different activities in many
different situations and provide the basis for why actions are taken in the world. For
a business, its meta model can be defined within documents such as the description
of its business model within its strategic plan documents. Activity-specific generative
models provide the basis for how actions are taken in the world. For example, generative
models for production activities, which can be documented as work procedures within
the business’s quality management system manuals and within related computational
models [37]. These activity-specific models influence what sensory inputs are experienced
from actions taken in the world. By contrast, the world models of individual people are
embodied psychomotor world models [ 38]. For individual customers, meta generative
models can comprise underlying psychological and physiological characteristics, such as
personality type and soma type, which can influence a person’s inferences in all the many
different types of activities that they perform. For example, a person who has an inventive
personality type [39] and a mesomorph soma type [40] might want to have a one-of-a-kind
cargo bike to transport heavy goods by peddle power.
As explained in Section 2, the potential to access a larger number of states is a latent
entropy, as it refers to the number of states that could possibly be accessed [ 25]. When
CBikes decided to offer to produce one-of-a-kind cargo bikes, CBikes updated its meta
model from being a business that made standard cargo bikes, i.e., a make-to-stock (MTS)
business, to being an engineer-to-order (ETO) business. This update entailed the updating
of activity-specific models for production, which requires an increase in latent entropy
as CBikes needs to increase potential for adaptive behavior in its operations to be able
to deal with the unpredictability and changing characteristics of customer requirements
for one-of-a-kind cargo bikes. As discussed in Section 2, creative product lifecycles are
characterized by what can be described as dynamic complexity, which combines compli-
catedness, unpredictability, and frequent changes [27]. A measure of the complexity [2] of
Entropy 2024, 26, 364 7 of 14
a creative product can be the amount of information needed to describe it at any specific
time, with more information being needed to describe higher dynamic complexity than to
describe lower dynamic complexity. Before they begin to be described explicitly in product-
specific sketch drawings, etc., the complexity of creative products is a latent complexity,
which can be framed as being a latent state space. That is the set of all possible states of
the dynamical system [41] for the creation of one-of-a-kind cargo bikes. Variables of the
latent state space include, for example, the possible shapes and possible decorations of
cargo bike storage containers. The specific values of all variables in any one case cannot
be predicted fully in advance [ 42]. However, a configuration platform can be set up to
establish a latent solution space for the production of cargo bikes. The term solution space,
which may also be referred to as feasible region, can provide a framework for constraint
satisfaction optimization. In constraint satisfaction problems, a solution can be defined
in terms of a set of constraints that impose conditions that variables must satisfy [43,44].
In this case, there can be regulatory constraints and customer constraints for cargo bikes,
which need to be satisfied by variables such as the shapes and the decorations of cargo bike
storage containers.
Interactions between latent entropy and latent complexity in creative production
arise from it not being possible to define values for all variables in advance. Regulatory
constraints can be defined in advance, but customer constraints cannot be defined in
advance. For example, minimum and maximum sizes for cargo bike wheels can be defined
in advance as minimum and maximum variable values that satisfy regulatory constraints
for the roadworthiness of cargo bikes. However, it cannot be predicted in advance what
what shape and what decorations any individual customer will imagine for a cargo bike’s
storage container, and how much a customer will be prepared to pay for a unique cargo bike.
Rather, customer constraints can only be defined as follows: if the customer is satisfied,
then the customer will pay and CBikes can survive. Thus, CBikes’ openness to allowing
individual customers to have authority over the production of cargo bikes increases the
number of different ways in which the set of variables in cargo bike production could be
arranged; i.e., latent entropy increases. Hence, the amount of information that could be
needed to describe all possible cargo bikes increases; i.e., latent complexity increases.
5. Transitions to Manifest Entropy and Manifest Complexity
5.1. Transition Process
Natural science’s assembly theory is concerned with open-ended generation of novelty
through a forward dynamical assembly process [14]. As summarized in Figure 6, definition
of the feasible region for each individual cargo bike order involves Bayesian iterations
of active inference between the customer and the business: i.e., iterations of perceptual,
epistemic, and instrumental inference. These iterations of active inference are generated by
the customer’s and the business’s world models.
Perceptual inference involves inferring external sensory stimuli from predictions based
on internal representations that are within world models. Epistemic inference includes
updating internal representations in world models related to survival in an environment.
Instrumental inference involves inferring action options and their consequences for sur-
vival in the environment. Perceptual inference is important for survival because it enables
perception of differences between prior predictions about action consequences and the
current state of the environment, i.e., perception of prediction errors that can undermine
survival. Epistemic inference is important for survival as it enables updating of world mod-
els to match the complexity of the environment in which survival is intended. Epistemic
inference can entail learning about the environment, which updates world model structure
(e.g., to include new types of cargo bikes), and/or world model parameters (e.g., cargo
bikes can be between one meter and two meters long). Optimal fit of the world model
with the environment is necessary to enable planning of actions through instrumental
inference, which can be predicted accurately to enable survival in the environment through
minimization of manifest entropy. Such iterations of active inference are necessary for
Entropy 2024, 26, 364 8 of 14
optimal fit of a meta model and for optimal fit of activity-specific models. For CBikes, its
activity-specific models encompass production activities such as the definition of feasible
regions, i.e., solution spaces, for individual customers’ cargo bike orders.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 15 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Generative iterations of active inference from emerging pragmatics to action semantics. 
Perceptual inference involves inferring ex ternal sensory stimuli from predictions 
based on internal representations that are within world models. Epistemic inference in-
cludes updating internal representations in world models related to survival in an envi-
ronment. Instrumental inference involves inferring action options and their consequences 
for survival in the environment. Perceptual inference is important for survival because it 
enables perception of di ﬀerences between prior prediction s about action consequences 
and the current state of the environment, i.e., perception of prediction errors that can un-
dermine survival. Epistemic inference is import ant for survival as it enables updating of 
world models to match the complexity of the environment in which survival is intended. 
Epistemic inference can entail learning about the environment, which updates world 
model structure (e.g., to include new types of  cargo bikes), and/or world model parame-
ters (e.g., cargo bikes can be between one meter and two meters long). Optimal ﬁt of the 
world model with the environment is necessar y to enable planning of actions through 
instrumental inference, which can be predicted accurately to enable survival in the envi-
ronment through minimization of manifest entropy. Such iterations of active inference are 
necessary for optimal ﬁt of a meta model and for optimal ﬁt of activity-speciﬁc models. 
For CBikes, its activity-speciﬁc models encompass production activities such as the de ﬁ-
nition of feasible regions, i.e., solution spaces, for individual customers’ cargo bike orders. 
About half of the feasible region shown in Figure 6 is already predeﬁned (solid lines), 
because regulatory requirements for cargo bikes are already well-de ﬁned. However, the 
deﬁnition of customer-speciﬁc requirements is open (dotted lines). Active inference itera-
tions for the deﬁnition of the open feasible region for a cargo bike order begin with a nas-
cent idea for a new cargo bike in the mind of a customer. As summarized in Equation (1) 
[35], pragmatics involves Bayesian inference about the state of the world (w). As summa-
rized in Equation (2), for practical purposes in the production of creative products, the 
state of the world can be reduced to the state of  the feasible region (fr) for that product. 
Here, CBike’s recipient (
B) of the customer’s (C) signal (s) infers what the state of the feasi-
ble region (fr) is likely to be now, given that the customer ( C) produced the signal (s) and 
knowing that the customer (C) is reasoning about how the business’s recipient (B) is most 
likely to interpret that signal (s) based on (fr). 
PB(fr|s) ∝ PC(s|fr)P(fr) (2)
Figure 6. Generative iterations of active inference from emerging pragmatics to action semantics.
About half of the feasible region shown in Figure 6 is already predefined (solid lines),
because regulatory requirements for cargo bikes are already well-defined. However, the def-
inition of customer-specific requirements is open (dotted lines). Active inference iterations
for the definition of the open feasible region for a cargo bike order begin with a nascent
idea for a new cargo bike in the mind of a customer. As summarized in Equation (1) [35],
pragmatics involves Bayesian inference about the state of the world (w). As summarized in
Equation (2), for practical purposes in the production of creative products, the state of the
world can be reduced to the state of the feasible region (fr) for that product. Here, CBike’s
recipient (B) of the customer’s (C) signal (s) infers what the state of the feasible region (fr) is
likely to be now, given that the customer (C) produced the signal (s) and knowing that the
customer (C) is reasoning about how the business’s recipient (B) is most likely to interpret
that signal (s) based on (fr).
PB(fr|s) ∝ PC(s|fr)P(fr) (2)
Within engineering design, active inference iterations about a feasible region (fr) can
be made explicit by iterations of rough sketch drawings, which initially need only be
sufficiently detailed to facilitate shared information uncertainty reduction between B and
C. Such sketches can provide visual summaries of the implicit shared knowledge being
developed between B and C during iterations of active inference. Thus, sketch drawings can
provide visual pragmatics as they emerge between B and C. However, in order to minimize
manifest entropy, these visual pragmatics need to be converted into action semantics [36]
before any production actions are taken by CBikes.
Within natural science’s assembly theory, it is argued that “The more complex a given
object, the less likely an identical copy can exist without selection of some information-
driven mechanism that generates that object” [14]. This argument has been formulated to
differentiate between objects that are generated through a selection mechanism for repro-
duction and objects that are generated in series of random events. Here, an identical copy
does not refer to the physical details of one-of-a-kind cargo bikes, which are intentionally
different, but to the economic characteristics of a one-of-a-kind cargo bike being bought
by an individual customer for a price with a profit margin that enables CBikes to survive
Entropy 2024, 26, 364 9 of 14
and grow. In this case, the information-driven mechanism that generates cargo bikes is
exchanges between CBikes and its customers that are facilitated by CBikes’ online configu-
ration platform. The exchanges between CBikes and its customers are generated by their
world models through iterations of active inference.
5.2. Peak Manifest Entropy and Peak Manifest Complexity
As shown in Figure 7, at point i, the amount of information needed to describe the
cargo bike can rise to a peak (red line) before every detail of the cargo bike’s production is
defined in multimodal semantics.
Entropy 2024, 26, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 15 
 
 
Within engineering design, active inference iterations about a feasible region (fr) can 
be made explicit by iterations of rough sketch drawings, which initially need only be suf-
ﬁciently detailed to facilitate shared info rmation uncertainty reduction between B and C. 
Such sketches can provide visual summaries of the implicit shared knowledge being de-
veloped between B and C during iterations of active inference. Thus, sketch drawings can 
provide visual pragmatics as they emerge between B and C. However, in order to minimize 
manifest entropy, these visual pragmatics need to be converted into action semantics [36] 
before any production actions are taken by CBikes. 
Within natural science’s assembly theory, it is argued that “The more complex a 
given object, the less likely an identical copy can exist without selection of some infor-
mation-driven mechanism that generates that object” [14]. This argument has been for-
mulated to di ﬀerentiate between objects that are generated through a selection mecha-
nism for reproduction and objects that are generated in series of random events. Here, an 
identical copy does not refer to the physical details of one-of-a-kind cargo bikes, which 
are intentionally diﬀerent, but to the economic characteristics of a one-of-a-kind cargo bike 
being bought by an individual customer for a price with a pro ﬁt margin that enables 
CBikes to survive and grow. In this case, the information-driven mechanism that gener-
ates cargo bikes is exchanges between CBikes  and its customers that are facilitated by 
CBikes’ online conﬁguration platform. The exchanges between CBikes and its customers 
are generated by their world models through iterations of active inference. 
5.2. Peak Manifest Entropy and Peak Manifest Complexity 
As shown in Figure 7, at point i, the amount of information needed to describe the 
cargo bike can rise to a peak (red line) before every detail of the cargo bike’s production 
is deﬁned in multimodal semantics. 
 
Figure 7. Interactions between situated entropy and situated complexity: (i) transition from manifest 
information–theoretic entropy in design work (thin blue line) to manifest tripartite entropy in man-
ufacturing work (thicker blue line) begins after the amount of information needed to describe cargo 
bike manufacturing has begun to decline because of its deﬁnition in multimodal semantics (red line); 
(ii) there is a spike in manifest tripartite entropy (thicker blue line) at place and time where ﬁberglass 
storage container is ﬁtted to cargo bike steel frame while  the amount of information needed  to de-
scribe the cargo bike decreases (red line); (iii) bo th manifest entropy (blue line) and manifest com-
plexity (red line) are minimal when the cargo bike is completed and can be observed easily. 
Figure 7. Interactions between situated entropy and situated complexity: (i) transition from mani-
fest information–theoretic entropy in design work (thin blue line) to manifest tripartite entropy in
manufacturing work (thicker blue line) begins after the amount of information needed to describe
cargo bike manufacturing has begun to decline because of its definition in multimodal semantics (red
line); (ii) there is a spike in manifest tripartite entropy (thicker blue line) at place and time where
fiberglass storage container is fitted to cargo bike steel frame while the amount of information needed
to describe the cargo bike decreases (red line); (iii) both manifest entropy (blue line) and manifest
complexity (red line) are minimal when the cargo bike is completed and can be observed easily.
Manifest information–theoretic entropy (thin blue line) should peak before manufactur-
ing work begins. This is because manifest information–theoretic entropy in manufacturing
work can lead to manifest physical statistics entropy that entails manifest thermodynamic
entropy in what can be described as situated manifest tripartite entropy (thicker blue line).
As discussed in Section 2, the term situated manifest tripartite entropy can be used to
describe the combination of information–theoretic entropy, statistical physics entropy, and
thermodynamic entropy at a particular place and time. For practical purposes, tripartite
entropy can be described as combinations of information uncertainty, physical disorder,
and energy loss. The concluding sketch-drawing pragmatics between CBikes’ salespersonB
and the customer C may entail little, if any, information uncertainty for them, but can entail
high information uncertainty for anybody else. Hence, there can be high physical disorder
and energy loss for CBikes if physical work begins before there is information certainty for
all variable values in the feasible region, i.e., the solution space, for this customer’s order.
For example, there can be information uncertainty of 2.58 bits if the assembly instructions
for the cargo bike can be interpreted in six different ways with equal probability. If only one
of these six ways is the correct way to assemble the cargo bike, there will be physical disor-
Entropy 2024, 26, 364 10 of 14
der in five out of six attempts. In particular, there is the physical disorder of assembling
the cargo bike incorrectly, then disassembling the cargo bike, followed by trying again to
assemble it correctly. This physical disorder entails irreversible energy loss through un-
productive energy expenditure. In this example, tripartite entropy arises from there being
six different ways in which the cargo bike can be assembled. This corresponds with the
generic definition description of entropy as “a measure of the number of different ways a
set of objects can be arranged” [2,45]. This example illustrates that, although experiences of
situated manifest entropy can be subjective, computation of situated manifest entropy can
be observer-independent and can enable different observers, such as factory supervisors
and business managers, to have access to the same information. Detailed examples of
situated entropy calculations can be found in [46].
Industrial engineering methodologies can be applied to prevent situated manifest
tripartite entropy without increasing manifest complexity in production work. In other
words, reduce the number of ways a product can be assembled to one without increasing the
amount of information needed to describe the assembly work. For example, the industrial
engineering methodology, Design for Assembly (DFA) is applied to facilitate assembly
work being done correctly the first time by any production worker. An example of this is
consolidating many simple small parts, such as metal sections, bolts, nuts, washers, into a
few larger components, which can only be put together in one way. Parts consolidation can
reduce the DFA assembly index for a product, which incorporates definition of minimum
number of parts and minimum assembly time per part [47,48]. Interestingly, the construct
of assembly index is also central to natural science’s assembly theory that addresses how
open-ended generation of complex physical objects can emerge from selection. Within
assembly theory, “the assembly index of an object is the length of the shortest pathway to
construct the object starting from its basic building blocks” [13].
5.3. Small Spike in Manifest Entropy despite Decreasing Manifest Complexity
The example of there being six different ways to assemble a cargo bike is situated
tripartite entropy because the entropy relates to information uncertainty, physical disorder,
and energy loss in a particular situation: the assembly of a cargo bike at a specific place
and time. However, it is important to distinguish between situated latent tripartite entropy
and situated manifest tripartite entropy. The entropy is latent before the assembly work
begins. If the assembly work is never done, then that situated latent tripartite entropy may
never manifest. If the assembly work is done, there can be different amounts of situated
manifest tripartite entropy. This is because the extent to which situated tripartite entropy
manifests is determined by situation-specific variables. In this example, situation-specific
variables could be the level of assembly experience of two different assembly workers. A
novice could have five unsuccessful assembly attempts on average, but an expert might
draw upon past experience and need only one attempt to assemble the cargo bike correctly.
Thus, it is not inevitable that all situated latent tripartite entropy becomes situated manifest
tripartite entropy.
Industrial engineering seeks to turn the implicit knowledge of individual expert pro-
duction workers, which can be exchanged among expert production workers through
pragmatics, into action semantics that can be actioned correctly first time by novice pro-
duction workers. This can be facilitated through action semantics [ 36] in the form of
standardized production tools that are developed for specific production operations, such
as specific assembly tasks. For example, physical tools called jigs can be used to facilitate
positioning, supporting, and fixing components during assembly work [49]. Nonetheless,
as shown in Figure 7, at point ii, there can be a spike in situated manifest tripartite entropy
when the irregular curved shape of a one-of-a-kind fiberglass storage container is fitted to
the regular straight shape of a cargo bike’s steel frame. This is because it is not economically
viable to manufacture individual jigs for one-of-a-kind storage containers. Rather, there
has to be some trial and error involved in the fixing work, which can lead to a small spike
in manifest entropy. However, this does not entail a spike in manifest complexity, as there
Entropy 2024, 26, 364 11 of 14
is no need for increased information to describe the production work. This is because
compatible tolerances can be defined for the manufacture of glass fiber storage containers
and the fixing of them to cargo bike steel frames [50]. For example, the diameter of a curved
storage container can be plus/minus 10 mm, and the overall dimensions of the complete
cargo bike can also be plus/minus 10 mm. Furthermore, there can be a corresponding
tolerance in the time schedule for the assembly work, which can be described as slack [51].
In terms of natural science’s assembly theory, the formulation of jigs and tolerances can be
considered to be in terms of memory within an assembly space that enables the minimal
number of operations necessary to construct an object [14].
5.4. Minimal Manifest Entropy and Minimal Manifest Complexity
As shown in Figure 7, at point iii, both manifest entropy (blue line) and manifest
complexity (red line) are minimal when production of the cargo bike has been completed.
There is minimal manifest entropy because the measure of the number of different ways a
set of objects can be arranged is zero, as the set of objects (i.e., cargo bike components) have
all already been arranged and fixed together. Manifest complexity is minimal because the
amount of information needed to describe the cargo bike is greatly reduced, as it is now
one completed product in one place rather than many components in many places.
After each one-of-a-kind cargo bike has been completed, CBikes can perform iterations
of active inference with the aim of trying to reduce the peak of manifest entropy and the
peak of manifest complexity for future orders. This can involve epistemic inference to
update its activity-specific model for production with multimodal semantic descriptions of
cargo bike components that could be used again in future orders. These descriptions could
be in the form of digital component descriptions that can include digital images that can be
viewed by customers and related digital component descriptors that can be used by CBikes
for production. The use of such digital component descriptions in CBikes’ configuration
platform can facilitate perceptual inferences that are shared by CBikes and its customers.
Shared perceptual inference can be followed by shared instrumental inference about which
actions should be taken in the physical production of the cargo bike. For example, there
could be shared instrumental inference that the storage container should be positioned in
front of the person peddling rather than positioned behind the person peddling. In terms
of natural science’s assembly theory, the repeated use of the same components in future
objects can be considered in terms of copy number. For example, “once the pathway for a
new object has been discovered, the production of an object gets easier as the copy number
increases because a high copy number implies that an object can be produced readily
in a given context” [ 14]. These words from natural science’s assembly theory provide
a summary of everyday practice in industrial engineering within human organizations’
quality management systems, which are intended to make production increasingly easy
over time.
However, it is important to recognize that the reduction of situated manifest entropy
and situated manifest complexity by one business through an online configuration platform
and associated industrial engineering does not reduce them universally. Rather, reducing
them locally can lead to them increasing elsewhere. For example, more digital component
descriptions for an online configuration platform depends upon there being more computer
hardware, which depends upon more mining for rare earth metals, more intercontinental
transportation of metals, more energy intensive metals processing, etc.: all of which can
increase manifest entropy and manifest complexity in accordance with the representation
of general entropy and general complexity [3] illustrated in Figure 1.
6. Discussion
Analyses of interactions between entropy and complexity can provide insights into
interactions between physics and biology [12–14]. For example, the aim of natural science’s
assembly theory is “to develop a new understanding of the evolution of complex matter
that naturally accounts for selection and history in terms of what operations are physically
Entropy 2024, 26, 364 12 of 14
possible in constructing an object” [14]. In this paper, the “complex matter” includes cargo
bike components and production tools. “Selection” of “physically possible” “operations”
“in constructing an object” of a cargo bike arises from the need to survive in the changing
environment of cargo bike markets. In particular, CBikes needed to “select” operations that
are “physically possible” for “constructing” one-of-a-kind cargo bikes. CBikes needed to do
this because it could not achieve enough sales to survive by offering standard cargo bikes.
Components and tools for one-of-a-kind cargo bikes have a different “history” than physical
“operations” that are “physically possible” for “constructing” standard cargo bikes.
Companies’ “selection” of operations with a fitting “history” in order to survive
in changing environments can be motivated by wanting to avoid the internal shame
and external stigma that can be associated with financial bankruptcy [ 52]. Here, fitting
“history” refers to ecological fitness. For example, the “history” of production tools for
mass production (i.e., MTS) of curved containers is a history of increasing investment
in component-specific molds and presses, which can produce thousands of components
that are exactly the same. By contrast, the “history” of production tools for one-of-a-kind
production (i.e., ETO) of curved containers is a history of continuing investment in tools
for cutting sheet materials and bending them into unique shapes. CBikes cannot invest
in molds and presses for mass production (i.e., MTS) because they do not fit the market
environment in which CBikes aims to survive and grow (i.e., ETO). CBikes will not invest
in production tools that are not fitting with its environment because of fear of business
failure, which can have many grave implications [ 53–55]. More generally, humans are
driven to take actions to mitigate threats to survival. Business decision-makers can find
themselves impelled by biology [ 56] and compelled by culture [ 57] to take new actions
in order to survive [58]. Thus, selection for survival is as relevant to industrial assembly
practice as it is to natural science’s assembly theory. Moreover, further analysis of industrial
assembly practices may provide some insights that could inform further development of
natural science’s assembly theory.
Here, industrial production operations have been analyzed in terms of interrelation-
ships between entropy and complexity. This analysis has distinguished between general
and situated, and between latent and manifest (Figures 1–4 and 7). It can be argued that
high-situated latent entropy and high-situated latent complexity are both good for business
survival. For example, a business with a world model characterized by high latent entropy
has high potential to be able to adapt with changing environments (Figure 5). Furthermore,
a business with an online configuration platform that is open to defining feasible regions
for one-of-a-kind products has high latent complexity, which can attract a wide diversity of
potential customers. However, it can be argued that high situated manifest entropy and
high situated manifest complexity are both bad for business survival. Hence, industrial
engineering is widely deployed in conjunction with configuration platforms (Figure 6). For
example, when physical goods, such as cargo bikes, are fully predefined, i.e., standardized,
industrial engineering methods such as parts consolidation can be applied fully to reduce
situated manifest entropy and reduce situated manifest complexity. In other words, meth-
ods such as parts consolidation can reduce the number of ways in which a product can be
assembled without increasing the amount of information needed to describe the assembly
work. Even when physical goods are not fully predefined, industrial engineering tools,
such as jigs, can be used to reduce situated manifest entropy and reduce situated manifest
complexity. Overall, configuration platforms and associated industrial engineering can
minimize entropy and complexity in creative production from emergent pragmatics to
action semantics. One direction for future research in natural science could be to investigate
whether this, and other insights from analysis of industrial assembly practice, can be found
in microscopic assembly that is driven concurrently by physics and biology.
Funding: This research was funded by the Research Council of Finland grant number 357221.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No data was used in the research reported in this paper.
Entropy 2024, 26, 364 13 of 14
Conflicts of Interest: Author Stephen Fox was employed by the company VTT Technical Research
Centre of Finland. The author declares that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
References
1. Solomon, S.; Golo, N. How do life, economy and other complex systems escape the heat death? Entropy 2014, 16, 1687–1727.
[CrossRef]
2. Modis, T. Links between entropy, complexity, and the technological singularity.Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang.2022, 176, 121457.
[CrossRef]
3. Carroll, S. The Big Picture: On the Origins of Life, Meaning, and the Universe; Dutton: New York, NY, USA, 2016.
4. Carracedo, D.; Mostofi, H. Electric cargo bikes in urban areas: A new mobility option for private transportation. Transp. Res.
Interdiscip. Perspect.2022, 16, 100705. [CrossRef]
5. Baichtal, J. Make: Bicycle Projects: Upgrade, Accessorize, and Customize with Electronics, Mechanics, and Metalwork; Maker Media, Inc.:
North Sebastopol, CA, USA, 2015.
6. Servedio, V .D.P .; Buttà, P .; Mazzilli, D.; Tacchella, A.; Pietronero, L. A new and stable estimation method of country economic
fitness and product complexity. Entropy 2018, 20, 783. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Angelini, O.; Di Matteo, T. Complexity of products: The effect of data regularisation. Entropy 2018, 20, 814. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Koutsoyiannis, D.; Sargentis, G.-F. Entropy and Wealth. Entropy 2021, 23, 1356. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Palmer, T. Human Creativity and consciousness: Unintended consequences of the brain’s extraordinary energy efficiency?Entropy
2020, 22, 281. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Müller, K.; Rammer, C.; Trüby, J. The role of creative industries in industrial innovation.Innovation 2009, 11, 148–168. [CrossRef]
11. Gouvea, R.; Vora, G. Creative industries and economic growth: Stability of creative products exports earnings. Creat. Ind. J.2018,
11, 22–53. [CrossRef]
12. Marshall, S.M.; Murray, A.R.G.; Cronin, L. A probabilistic framework for identifying biosignatures using Pathway Complexity.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A2017, 375, 20160342. [CrossRef]
13. Marshall, S.M.; Moore, D.G.; Murray, A.R.; Walker, S.I.; Cronin, L. Formalising the pathways to life using assembly spaces.
Entropy 2022, 24, 884. [CrossRef]
14. Sharma, A.; Czégel, D.; Lachmann, M.; Kempes, C.P .; Walker, S.I.; Cronin, L. Assembly theory explains and quantifies selection
and evolution. Nature 2023, 622, 321–328. [CrossRef]
15. Gherardi, S. Situated knowledge and situated action: What do practice-based studies promise. In The SAGE Handbook Of New
Approaches in Management and Organization; SAGE Publication Ltd.: London, UK, 2008; pp. 516–525.
16. O’Brien, B.C.; Battista, A. Situated learning theory in health professions education research: A scoping review. Adv. Health Sci.
Educ. 2020, 25, 483–509. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Kecskes, I. Situation-bound utterances as pragmatic acts. J. Pragmat.2010, 42, 2889–2897. [CrossRef]
18. Wilson, D.; Sperber, D. Relevance Theory. InThe Handbook of Pragmatics; Horn, L.R., Ward, G., Eds.; Blackwell: Oxford, UK, 2004;
pp. 607–632.
19. Taylor, J.R.; Van Every, E.J.The Situated Organization: Case Studies in the Pragmatics of Communication Research; Routledge: London,
UK, 2010.
20. Burnham, T.A.; Frels, J.K.; Mahajan, V . Consumer switching costs: A typology, antecedents, and consequences.J. Acad. Mark. Sci.
2003, 31, 109–126. [CrossRef]
21. Malhotra, A.; Kubowicz Malhotra, C. Exploring switching behavior of US mobile service customers. J. Serv. Mark.2013, 27, 13–24.
[CrossRef]
22. Cash, P .; Snider, C. Investigating design: A comparison of manifest and latent approaches.Des. Stud.2014, 35, 441–472. [CrossRef]
23. Krul, K.; Ho, P .; Yang, X. Land titling as a conflict remedy or driver? Analyzing institutional outcomes through latent and manifest
conflicts in China’s forest sector. Land Use Policy2021, 100, 104880. [CrossRef]
24. Audretsch, D.B.; Obschonka, M.; Gosling, S.D.; Potter, J. A new perspective on entrepreneurial regions: Linking cultural identity
with latent and manifest entrepreneurship. Small Bus. Econ.2017, 48, 681–697. [CrossRef]
25. Fox, S.; Heikkilä, T.; Halbach, E.; Soutukorva, S. Bio-inspired intelligent systems: Negotiations between minimum manifest task
entropy and maximum latent system entropy in changing environments. Entropy 2023, 25, 1541. [CrossRef]
26. Vallacher, R.R. Social Psychology, Applications of Complexity to. InEncyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science; Meyers, R., Ed.;
Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2009; pp. 8420–8435.
27. Fox, S.; Jokinen, T.; Lindfors, N.; Ylen, J.-P . Formulation of robust strategies for project manufacturing business.Int. J. Manag. Proj.
Bus. 2009, 2, 217–237. [CrossRef]
28. Hayakawa, S.I.; Hayakawa, A.R. Language in Thought and Action, 1st ed.; Harcourt Brace Jovanovich: New York, NY, USA, 1939.
29. Seabury, M.B. Critical thinking via the abstraction ladder. Engl. J.1991, 80, 44–49. [CrossRef]
30. Cui, H.; Li, T.; Wang, C.J. Climbing up the ladder of abstraction: How to span the boundaries of knowledge space in the online
knowledge market? Humanit. Soc. Sci. Commun.2023, 10, 351. [CrossRef]
31. Fox, S.; Vahala, P . Start-ups as adaptable stable systems based on synchronous business models.Systems 2022, 10, 81. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2024, 26, 364 14 of 14
32. Zheng, P .; Xu, X.; Yu, S.; Liu, C. Personalized product configuration framework in an adaptable open architecture product
platform. J. Manuf. Syst.2017, 43, 422–435. [CrossRef]
33. Xuanyuan, S.; Li, Y.; Patil, L.; Jiang, Z. Configuration semantics representation: A rule-based ontology for product configuration.
In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE SAI Computing Conference (SAI), London, UK, 13–15 July 2016; pp. 734–741.
34. Dant, T. The pragmatics of material interaction. J. Consum. Cult.2008, 8, 11–33. [CrossRef]
35. Goodman, N.D.; Frank, M.C. Pragmatic interpretation as probabilistic inference. Trends Cogn. Sci.2016, 20, 818–829. [CrossRef]
36. van Elk, M.; van Schie, H.; Bekkering, H. Action semantics: A unifying conceptual framework for the selective use of multimodal
and modality-specific object knowledge. Phys. Life Rev.2014, 11, 220–250. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Fox, S. Human-artificial intelligence systems: How human survival first principles influence machine learning world models.
Systems 2022, 10, 260. [CrossRef]
38. Fox, S. Psychomotor predictive processing. Entropy 2021, 23, 806. [CrossRef]
39. Tan, C.S.; Lau, X.S.; Kung, Y.T.; Kailsan, R.A.L. Openness to experience enhances creativity: The mediating role of intrinsic
motivation and the creative process engagement. J. Creat. Behav.2019, 53, 109–119. [CrossRef]
40. Cinarli, F.S.; Kafkas, M.E. The effect of somatotype characters on selected physical performance parameters.Phys. Educ. Stud.
2019, 23, 279–287. [CrossRef]
41. Palmer, T.N.The Primacy of Doubt: From Climate Change to Quantum Physics, How the Science of Uncertainty Can Help Predict and
Understand Our Chaotic World; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2022.
42. Kauffman, S. Innovation and the evolution of the economic web. Entropy 2019, 21, 86. [CrossRef]
43. Huang, W.; Zou, J.; Liu, Y.; Yang, S.; Zheng, J. Global and local feasible solution search for solving constrained multi-objective
optimization. Inf. Sci.2023, 649, 119467. [CrossRef]
44. Tsang, E. Foundations of Constraint Satisfaction: The Classic Text; Herstellung und Verlag, BoD–Books on Demand: Norderstedt,
Germany, 2014.
45. Martin, J.S.; Smith, N.A.; Francis, C.D. Removing the entropy from the definition of entropy: Clarifying the relationship between
evolution, entropy, and the second law of thermodynamics. Evol. Educ. Outreach2013, 6, 30. [CrossRef]
46. Fox, S.; Kotelba, A. Variational Principle of Least Psychomotor Action: Modelling effects on action from disturbances in
psychomotor work involving human, cyborg, and robot workers. Entropy 2019, 21, 543. [CrossRef]
47. Boothroyd, G.; Alting, L. Design for assembly and disassembly. CIRP Ann.1992, 41, 625–636. [CrossRef]
48. Naiju, C.D. DFMA for product designers: A review. Mater. Today Proc.2021, 46, 7473–7478. [CrossRef]
49. Fiedler, F.; Ehrenstein, J.; Höltgen, C.; Blondrath, A.; Schäper, L.; Göppert, A.; Schmitt, R. Jigs and fixtures in production: A
systematic literature review. J. Manuf. Syst.2024, 72, 373–405. [CrossRef]
50. Zhang, C.; Wang, H.P . Robust design of assembly and machining tolerance allocations. IIE Trans.1998, 30, 17–29. [CrossRef]
51. Evdokimov, I.V .; Tsarev, R.Y.; Yamskikh, T.N.; Pupkov, A.N. Using PERT and Gantt charts for planning software projects on the
basis of distributed digital ecosystems. J. Phys. Conf. Ser.2018, 1074, 012127. [CrossRef]
52. Sousa, M.D. The persistence of bankruptcy stigma. Am. Bankruptcy Inst. Law Rev.2018, 26, 217–242. [CrossRef]
53. Shepherd, D.A.; Wiklund, J.; Haynie, J.M. Moving forward: Balancing the financial and emotional costs of business failure. J. Bus.
Ventur. 2009, 24, 134–148. [CrossRef]
54. Van Kesteren, J.; Adriaanse, J.; Van der Rest, J.P . The story behind bankruptcy: When business gets personal.QUT Law Rev.2017,
17, 57–73. [CrossRef]
55. Sawada, Y.; Ueda, M.; Matsubayashi, T. Socioeconomic causes of suicide. In Economic Analysis of Suicide Prevention; Springer:
Singapore, 2017; pp. 33–68.
56. Mobbs, D.; Hagan, C.C.; Dalgleish, T.; Silston, B.; Prévost, C. The ecology of human fear: Survival optimization and the nervous
system. Front. Neurosci.2015, 9, 55. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57. Tajti, T. Bankruptcy stigma and the second chance policy: The impact of bankruptcy stigma on business restructurings in China,
Europe and the United States. China-EU Law J.2018, 6, 1–31. [CrossRef]
58. Naidoo, V . Firm survival through a crisis: The influence of market orientation, marketing innovation and business strategy.Ind.
Mark. Manag.2010, 39, 1311–1320. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.