/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Fox, S. Synchronous
Generative Development amidst
Situated Entropy. Entropy 2022, 24, 89.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e24010089
Academic Editor: Matteo Convertino
Received: 23 November 2021
Accepted: 4 January 2022
Published: 5 January 2022
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
entropy
Article
Synchronous Generative Development amidst Situated Entropy
Stephen Fox
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, FI-02150 Espoo, Finland; stephen.fox@vtt.ﬁ; Tel.: +358-40-747-8801
Abstract: The Sustainable Development Goals have been criticized for not providing sufﬁcient balance
between human well-being and environmental well-being. By contrast, joint agent-environment
systems theory is focused on reciprocal synchronous generative development. The purpose of this
paper is to extend this theory towards practical application in sustainable development projects.
This purpose is fulﬁlled through three interrelated contributions. First, a practitioner description
of the theory is provided. Then, the theory is extended through reference to research concerned
with multilevel pragmatics, competing signals, commitment processes, technological mediation, and
psychomotor functioning. In addition, the theory is related to human-driven biosocial-technical
innovation through the example of digital twins for agroecological urban farming. Digital twins
being digital models that mirror physical processes; that are connected to physical processes through,
for example, sensors and actuators; and which carry out analyses of physical processes in order to
improve their performance. Together, these contributions extend extant theory towards application
for synchronous generative development that balances human well-being and environmental well-
being. However, the practical examples in the paper indicate that counterproductive complexity can
arise from situated entropy amidst biosocial-technical innovations: even when those innovations are
compatible with synchronous generative development.
Keywords: active inference; agroecology; federated digital twins; free energy principle; generative
model; generative process; joint agent-environment systems; situated entropy; synchronicity
1. Introduction
Situated entropy encompasses thermodynamic entropy, statistical physics entropy,
and information-theoretic entropy. The thermodynamic entropy of energy being unavail-
able to perform productive work is situated in different experiences of physical disorder
(statistical physics entropy) and information uncertainty (information-theoretic entropy).
Consider, for example, the different experiences of situated entropy that can arise from
replacement of tropical forest with areas of industrial agriculture. Initially, the tropical
forest experiences [1,2] extreme physical disorder and information uncertainty when its
trees are ripped up. Hence, situated entropy is high for the forest. Conversely, people
engage in industrial agriculture experience low physical disorder and low information
uncertainty when using chemicals on the newly constructed ﬂat ﬁelds and when driving
lorries on the newly constructed hard paved roadways. Hence, situated entropy is initially
low for people. However, over time, chemical fertilizers and pesticides can undermine both
soil health and human health, which results in increased physical disorder and information
uncertainty for both [ 3,4]. At the same time, the underside of new roadways can soon
crack because of ground heave due to heavy rains, and the forest can begin to grow back
through the road. This can lead to people experiencing increased physical disorder and
information uncertainty as they have to drive around wide cracks in the road. As the
road deteriorates and the forest tries to regrow through the road cracks, there can be more
balance between situated entropy experienced by people and situated entropy experienced
by the environment compared to when the road was ﬁrst built. Yet, it is not a positive
balance because it is a balance in which neither thrives. Indeed, transportation problems are
a major cause of post-harvest losses [5,6]. More energy can be expended to try to minimize
Entropy 2022, 24, 89. https://doi.org/10.3390/e24010089 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 2 of 23
peoples’ situated entropy. For example, more energy could be expended in repeated road
repairs. Alternatively, even more energy could be expended by ripping up the entire forest
to stop it impinging on human activities. However, such imbalance between very low
situated entropy experienced by people and very high situated entropy experienced by en-
vironments is also not positive. This is because systems characterized by very low entropy
can be vulnerable to disturbances [7,8], and disturbances are inevitable [9,10], including
natural disturbances that can destroy well-constructed infrastructure in a few hours [11].
Apropos, although most Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are focused on hu-
man development, they do include some consideration of environmental well-being. For
example, there are goals for “Life Below Water” and for “Life On Land”. The SDGs are
17 interlinked global goals, which were set up in 2015 by the United Nations General
Assembly and are intended to be achieved by the year 2030. However, there has been
criticism that the SDGs do not provide sufﬁcient balance between human well-being and
environmental well-being. For example, it has been argued that SDGs do not address
conﬂict between economic growth and environmental sustainability [12,13]. By contrast,
joint agent-environment systems theory is focused on reciprocal synchronous generative
development [14,15]. The purpose of this paper is to extend this theory towards practi-
cal application in sustainable development projects: in particular, those involving digital
twins [16,17].
This purpose is fulﬁlled through three contributions. The ﬁrst is providing a de-
scription for practitioners. This is necessary because extant descriptions of joint agent-
environment systems rely upon specialist terminology of neuroscience and theoretical
biology [14,15]. Hence, they are of limited usefulness for the broad range of people who
may contribute to sustainable development projects involving digital twins. Second, main
constructs in joint agent-environment systems are extended. This is necessary because
extant descriptions of joint agent-environment systems do not encompass the complexity
of human-driven biosocial-technical systems. Rather, they deal with simpler cases such
as earthworms changing the soil they inhabit [15]. Third, joint agent-environment theory
is related to federated digital twins. That is sets of digital models that mirror physical
processes; that are connected to physical processes, for example, through sensors and
actuators; and which carry out analyses of physical processes in order to improve their
performance. Federated digital twins comprise several different digital twins that share
data [16,17]. The federated digital twins example is of different types of agroecological
urban farming [18]. Agroecology is a term used to describe human agricultural systems
that take into account interactions between plants, animals, people, and the environment.
For example, agroecology encompasses the well-being of soil and people in the cultivation
and processing of food in and around urban areas [19]. Agroecology integrates scientiﬁc
discipline, social movement, and sustainable practice, all of which are relevant to SDGs [20].
Moreover, agroecology is very relevant to joint agent-environment systems as it involves
the coupling of human and natural processes [21].
Joint agent-environment systems theory is extended towards practical application
in sustainable development projects through the contributions in the remaining ﬁve sec-
tions of this paper. Next, in Section 2, an overview of previous studies relating entropy
to sustainable development is provided. In addition, the potential progress beyond the
state-of-the-art provided by joint agent-environment systems theory is discussed. Then, in
Section 3, a description of joint agent-environment systems theory is provided for develop-
ment project practitioners. Subsequently, in Section 4, theoretical extensions are explained.
In Section 5, the extended theory is related to federated digital twins for agroecological
urban farming. In conclusion, principal contributions are stated and directions for future
research are discussed in Section 6.
2. Entropy Studies and Sustainable Development
The 2015 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are the latest formalization of global
statements about the need for sustainable development. They follow from the Millennium
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 3 of 23
Development Goals (MDGs), which were eight international development goals that were
established following the Millennium Summit of the United Nations in 2000. Only one of
the eight MDGs addressed environmental sustainability, and the MDGs did not address
conﬂict between economic growth and environmental sustainability [22]. The MDGs lack
of emphasis on environmental sustainability came 23 years after the World Commission
on Environment and Development report Our Common Future was published by the
United Nations through Oxford University Press [23]. This followed the 1972 bestselling
book The Limits to Growth: A Report for the Club of Rome’s Project on the Predicament
of Mankind [24]. In The Limits to Growth, its authors concluded that if humanity kept
pursuing economic growth without regard for environmental costs, global society would
experience a sharp decline in economic, social, and environmental conditions. Subsequent
analyses support the book’s forecasts [25]. Amidst decades of global statements about
the need for sustainable development, agroecology has emerged as a conceptualization of
agriculture based on intrinsic coupling of human and natural processes [21].
Over the decades of global statements about the need for sustainable development,
there have been many related entropy descriptions. One has been described as entropy pes-
simism. This description is based on thermodynamic entropy, within which all matter and
energy is transformed from states available for human purposes, such as natural resources,
to states unavailable for human purposes, such as pollution and waste [26,27]. Apropos, it
has been argued that thermodynamic entropy excess is a “fee” that has to be paid by society
for the use of modern industrial technologies in agriculture [28], and that the rate of ther-
modynamic entropy production is an important measure in assessing sustainability [29]. At
the same time, information-theoretic entropy has been applied to describe different aspects
of sustainability including power systems [30], urbanization [31], and water resources [32].
The entropy weight coefﬁcient method has been applied. Within this information-theoretic
method, the smaller the entropy value, the greater the weight of a performance indicator.
The method has been applied in the formulation of SDG-based indices to calculate the
weights of development performance indicators [33]. More broadly, information-theoretic
entropy has been included in analyses of sustainability that focus on the need for there
to be ﬂexibility as well as efﬁciency in ecosystems [ 7]. Thermodynamic entropy [ 34]
and information-theoretic entropy [35] have been applied separately in the description of
human-nature coupled systems. However, the most comprehensive account is provided
by joint agent-environment systems theory with its focus on reciprocal synchronous gen-
erative development [14,15] and its foundation in physics of life principles [36,37], which
have been applied in analyses of human [38,39] and natural systems [40,41]. Addressing
entropy is at the core of these formulations. In particular, addressing information-theoretic
entropy can enable biological systems to maintain their sensory states within sustainable
physiological states and so resist the second law of thermodynamics by which entropy
tends towards a maximum.
Within the physics of life formalisms that underlie joint agent-environment sys-
tems [ 14,15], it is postulated that the brain embodies an internal model of the world
that is generative in that it can simulate the sensory data that it should receive if its model
of the world is correct. These simulated (i.e., predicted) sensory data can be compared
to actual observations, and differences between predicted and observed sensations can
be used to update the model [ 42]. Similarly, analyses carried out by digital twins often
involve model-based simulations [ 43]. Moreover, key constructs in agent-environment
systems’ generative models are important for digital twin simulation models. In particular,
there is a trade-off between accuracy and complexity, within which the model should be
as accurate as possible, but complexity must be minimized in order to facilitate reliable
economic updating [ 44]. The model should also be focused on minimizing risk to the
operation of the physical processes and on minimizing the ambiguity of data collected
from the physical processes. Minimizing risk and ambiguity being necessary to facilitate
survival in a changing world [45]. Thus, joint agent-environment systems theory provides
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 4 of 23
a ﬁrst principles account of coupling of human and natural processes, which is relevant to
digital twins. Hence, joint agent-environment systems theory is the focus of this paper.
3. Synchronous Generative Agent-Environment Systems
In this section, a description is provided for practitioners. This is necessary because
extant descriptions of joint agent-environment systems rely upon specialist terminology
and mathematics of neuroscience and theoretical biology [14,15]. Hence, they are of limited
usefulness for the broad range of people who may contribute to sustainable development
projects involving digital twins. These can include local people with different backgrounds
who have valuable knowledge and skills in agroecological practice but have low levels of
functional and digital literacy due to divides in education and technology access. Partici-
pants can also include non-government organizations’ (NGOs) project staff and academic
institutions’ computer scientists who can be equally unfamiliar with specialist terminol-
ogy and mathematics of neuroscience and theoretical biology. Accordingly, descriptions
involving widely used visual formats, such as radar charts, can be useful to provide a
basis for working towards a shared understanding of joint agent-environment systems.
An example of this would be when local people, project staff, and computer scientists
need to have a shared understanding from which to begin the co-design of urban agroe-
cology, digital twins, and interactions between them. Thus, visual formats are used in
this section. First, description is provided of varying synchronization between agents and
environments. Then, there is description of interactions between generative models and
generative processes.
3.1. Varying Synchronization
Environments consist of multiple agents that mutually constrain each other until an
attracting synchronization manifold is reached [15]. An attracting manifold is a set of states
toward which a system tends to evolve from a wide variety of starting conditions. Synchro-
nization among agents in an attracting manifold involves them remaining close to each
other even when there are disturbances. Figure 1 illustrates varying agent-environment
synchronization. In Figure 1a, there is high synchronization as there is a good ﬁt between
the agent and the environment. There can be little physical disorder and little information
uncertainty for the agent and for the environment in such a situation. Hence, unproductive
energy expenditure can be low, and there can be ample energy available to perform produc-
tive work. In Figure 1b, there is medium synchronization because the agent does not change
but the environment changes. In Figure 1c, there is low synchronization because the agent
still does not change, but environment changes increase. In such a situation, there can be
very high situated entropy for the agent and for the environment because both experience
high physical disorder and high information uncertainty. Hence, unproductive energy
expenditure can be high and there can be little energy available to perform productive work.
Hence, the agent cannot survive unless the agent improves its ﬁt with the environment, or
the agent migrates to another environment.
Figure 1 illustrates that synchronization is manifold because synchronization involves
multiple survival parameters (i.e., multiple ﬁtness components [ 46]). In Figure 1, there
are eight survival parameters. For example, the survival parameters of a person can be
for physiology, safety, social belonging, esteem, creativity, aesthetics, self-actualization,
and transcendence [47]. As such parameters have different quantitative metrics and dif-
ferent qualitative descriptions, varying survival information deﬁcit (i.e., variational free
energy [39]) cannot be calculated conclusively. Moreover, it cannot be calculated conclu-
sively because the agent cannot have perfect knowledge of the environment. Rather, many
details of the environment can be described as being hidden [15].
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 5 of 23
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 5 of 22 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Decreasing agent-environment synchronization. (a) High synchronization: agent and en-
vironment share attracting synchronization manifold, which entails low survival information deficit 
at the interfaces between the agent and the environment (green). (b) Medium synchronization: agent 
does not change but environment changes, which entails medium survival information deficit at the 
interfaces between agent and environment (orange). (c) Low synchronization: agent does not change 
but environment changes increase, which entails high  survival information deficit at the interfaces 
between the agent and the environment (red), so the agent cannot survive unless the agent improves 
its fit with environment, or the agent migrates to another environment. 
Figure 1 illustrates deteriorating agent-en vironment synchronization. However, as 
illustrated in Figure 2 below, agents and en vironments can learn and develop together. 
For example, forest gardens are highly resilient agroecosystems that involve a gradual 
process of people improving their immediate environment through the protection of use-
ful bush, palm, tree, and vine species. These agroecosystems have been productive since 
prehistoric times [48]. In such situations, agent and environment can be equally flexible in 
learning about each other and developing together. Figure 2a illustrates that an agent in-
itially has a high survival information deficit  when it arrives in a new environment and 
hence has low synchronization. Figure 2b illustrates that the agent tries to change the en-
vironment in order to reduce the ambiguity of sensory inputs from the environment. This 
is done to increase the expected accuracy of sensory inputs from the environment. For 
example, expected accuracy of food yields from different species of bushes, palms, trees, 
and vines. This can involve reducing some species that yield food more erratically than 
other species. Figure 2b illustrates that changing the environment reduces the agent’s sur-
vival information deficit, but there is still not high synchronization. 
Figure 2c illustrates that the agent learns more about the environment and changes 
itself in order to improve synchronization with the environment to reduce the risk of not 
surviving. For example, the agent can expand the range of bushes, palms, trees, and vines 
that it will eat from if that is the only way to survive. This can re duce the complexity of 
survival if it leads to simple nearby provision of sufficient food. Such varying of survival 
information deficit (i.e., variational free energy [39]) can be thought of as a varying trade-
off between complexity and accuracy to achieve futures that are minimally risky and min-
imally ambiguous. As illustrated by Figure 2c, the agent changing itself can involve the 
agent changing its boundaries with the environment. This involves changing the scope of 
its internal states and the actions that it seeks to have autonomy over [36,37]. Changing of 
boundaries can balance transaction costs between work done internally by the agent and 
work done externally in the environment [49]. 
Figure 1. Decreasing agent-environment synchronization. ( a) High synchronization: agent and
environment share attracting synchronization manifold, which entails low survival information
deﬁcit at the interfaces between the agent and the environment (green). ( b) Medium synchronization:
agent does not change but environment changes, which entails medium survival information deﬁcit
at the interfaces between agent and environment (orange). ( c) Low synchronization: agent does
not change but environment changes increase, which entails high survival information deﬁcit at the
interfaces between the agent and the environment (red), so the agent cannot survive unless the agent
improves its ﬁt with environment, or the agent migrates to another environment.
Figure 1 illustrates deteriorating agent-environment synchronization. However, as
illustrated in Figure 2 below, agents and environments can learn and develop together.
For example, forest gardens are highly resilient agroecosystems that involve a gradual
process of people improving their immediate environment through the protection of useful
bush, palm, tree, and vine species. These agroecosystems have been productive since
prehistoric times [48]. In such situations, agent and environment can be equally ﬂexible
in learning about each other and developing together. Figure 2a illustrates that an agent
initially has a high survival information deﬁcit when it arrives in a new environment and
hence has low synchronization. Figure 2b illustrates that the agent tries to change the
environment in order to reduce the ambiguity of sensory inputs from the environment.
This is done to increase the expected accuracy of sensory inputs from the environment.
For example, expected accuracy of food yields from different species of bushes, palms,
trees, and vines. This can involve reducing some species that yield food more erratically
than other species. Figure 2b illustrates that changing the environment reduces the agent’s
survival information deﬁcit, but there is still not high synchronization.
Figure 2c illustrates that the agent learns more about the environment and changes
itself in order to improve synchronization with the environment to reduce the risk of not
surviving. For example, the agent can expand the range of bushes, palms, trees, and vines
that it will eat from if that is the only way to survive. This can reduce the complexity of
survival if it leads to simple nearby provision of sufﬁcient food. Such varying of survival
information deﬁcit (i.e., variational free energy [39]) can be thought of as a varying trade-off
between complexity and accuracy to achieve futures that are minimally risky and minimally
ambiguous. As illustrated by Figure 2c, the agent changing itself can involve the agent
changing its boundaries with the environment. This involves changing the scope of its
internal states and the actions that it seeks to have autonomy over [ 36,37]. Changing of
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 6 of 23
boundaries can balance transaction costs between work done internally by the agent and
work done externally in the environment [49].
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 6 of 22 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Increasing agent-environment synchronization. (a) Low synchronization: agent and envi-
ronment have low synchronization, which entails high survival information deficit at interfaces be-
tween agent and environment (red). (b) Medium synchronization: the agent does not change itself, 
but the agent changes the environment, which entails medium survival information deficit at inter-
faces between agent and environment (orange). (c) High synchronization: the agent changes and the 
environment changes, which entails minimal surviv al information deficit at interfaces between 
agent and environment (green). 
3.2. Generative Models and Generative Processes 
As illustrated in Figure 3, this mutualistic flexibility can be represented as reciprocal 
oscillating interactions between agents’ generative models of themselves in the world and 
the generative process of themselves in the actual world. Agents’ generative models gen-
erate their expectations about the world, wh ile the generative process generates agents’ 
observations of the world [15,40,41]. However, in other situations, one agent may be less 
flexible than others. In industrial agriculture, for example, people are the driver of joint 
dynamics. Initially, this can benefit people at the expense of the environment. However, 
through circular causation, it can come to be at the expense of people as well. For example, 
people engaged in industrial agriculture experience low physical disorder and low infor-
mation uncertainty when using chemicals on newly constructed flat fields. Hence, situ-
ated entropy is initially low for people. However, over time, chemical fertilizers and pes-
ticides can undermine both soil health and human health, which results in increased phys-
ical disorder and information uncertainty for both [3,4,50,51]. 
Nonetheless, as illustrated in Figure 3, some agents will persist with a course of ac-
tions (i.e., a policy) even when its unsustai nable consequences have been apparent for a 
long time [52]. For example, agents can be committed to overgrazing [53,54]. Figure 3a 
illustrates the actual survival information deficit of an agent being worse than the minimal 
survival information deficit the agent had expected. Figure 3b illustrates the agent’s actual 
survival information deficit being more than the agent’s updated expectation for tolerable 
survival information deficit. Figure 3c illustrates that the agent does not survive because, 
although the agent updated its expectations, it did not update its policies about how to 
survive. Rather, instead of changing the structure of its generative model by introducing 
new survival parameters and new policies, the agent persisted with the same policies on 
the same survival parameters. As well as the agent not surviving, the environment may 
not survive because of the agent’s persistence [55]. Overall, Figure 3 illustrates that there 
Figure 2. Increasing agent-environment synchronization. ( a) Low synchronization: agent and
environment have low synchronization, which entails high survival information deﬁcit at interfaces
between agent and environment (red). ( b) Medium synchronization: the agent does not change
itself, but the agent changes the environment, which entails medium survival information deﬁcit at
interfaces between agent and environment (orange). (c) High synchronization: the agent changes and
the environment changes, which entails minimal survival information deﬁcit at interfaces between
agent and environment (green).
3.2. Generative Models and Generative Processes
As illustrated in Figure 3, this mutualistic ﬂexibility can be represented as reciprocal
oscillating interactions between agents’ generative models of themselves in the world
and the generative process of themselves in the actual world. Agents’ generative models
generate their expectations about the world, while the generative process generates agents’
observations of the world [ 15,40,41]. However, in other situations, one agent may be
less ﬂexible than others. In industrial agriculture, for example, people are the driver
of joint dynamics. Initially, this can beneﬁt people at the expense of the environment.
However, through circular causation, it can come to be at the expense of people as well. For
example, people engaged in industrial agriculture experience low physical disorder and
low information uncertainty when using chemicals on newly constructed ﬂat ﬁelds. Hence,
situated entropy is initially low for people. However, over time, chemical fertilizers and
pesticides can undermine both soil health and human health, which results in increased
physical disorder and information uncertainty for both [3,4,50,51].
Nonetheless, as illustrated in Figure 3, some agents will persist with a course of
actions (i.e., a policy) even when its unsustainable consequences have been apparent for
a long time [52]. For example, agents can be committed to overgrazing [53,54]. Figure 3a
illustrates the actual survival information deﬁcit of an agent being worse than the minimal
survival information deﬁcit the agent had expected. Figure 3b illustrates the agent’s actual
survival information deﬁcit being more than the agent’s updated expectation for tolerable
survival information deﬁcit. Figure 3c illustrates that the agent does not survive because,
although the agent updated its expectations, it did not update its policies about how to
survive. Rather, instead of changing the structure of its generative model by introducing
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 7 of 23
new survival parameters and new policies, the agent persisted with the same policies on
the same survival parameters. As well as the agent not surviving, the environment may
not survive because of the agent’s persistence [55]. Overall, Figure 3 illustrates that there
will not be high synchronicity when a generative model does not resemble a generative
process [15].
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 7 of 22 
 
 
will not be high synchronicity when a genera tive model does not resemble a generative 
process [15]. 
 
Figure 3. Expected synchrony versus actual synchrony. (a) Expected survival information deficit in 
generative model is minimal but actual survival information deficit in generative process is me-
dium. (b) Agent updates expected survival information deficit to medium, but the actual survival 
information deficit is high. (c) Agent updates expected survival information deficit to high, but the 
actual survival information deficit is too high for the agent to survive. 
The more commitment an agent has to a policy, the more stubborn an agent can be 
in persisting with actions based on the same old policy irrespective of the agent experi-
encing observations that indicate continuing with the policy is counterproductive. Within 
joint agent-environment systems theory, the technical term concentration parameter is 
used [15] rather than the everyday word commitment. Paradoxically, commitment to a 
failing course of action can be consistent with there being a varying trade-off between 
complexity and accuracy in order to achiev e futures that are minimally risky and mini-
mally ambiguous. This can happen if an agent seeks to reduce complexity by paying more 
Figure 3. Expected synchrony versus actual synchrony. ( a) Expected survival information deﬁcit
in generative model is minimal but actual survival information deﬁcit in generative process is
medium. (b) Agent updates expected survival information deﬁcit to medium, but the actual survival
information deﬁcit is high. (c) Agent updates expected survival information deﬁcit to high, but the
actual survival information deﬁcit is too high for the agent to survive.
The more commitment an agent has to a policy, the more stubborn an agent can be in
persisting with actions based on the same old policy irrespective of the agent experiencing
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 8 of 23
observations that indicate continuing with the policy is counterproductive. Within joint
agent-environment systems theory, the technical term concentration parameter is used [15]
rather than the everyday word commitment. Paradoxically, commitment to a failing course
of action can be consistent with there being a varying trade-off between complexity and ac-
curacy in order to achieve futures that are minimally risky and minimally ambiguous. This
can happen if an agent seeks to reduce complexity by paying more attention to its familiar
policy than to observations that indicate continuing with the policy is counterproductive.
Here, it is important to note that human identities can be symbolized by speciﬁc livestock
and/or speciﬁc crops, which are strongly associated with their survival histories and their
cultural values [56,57]. Hence, an agent can focus on reducing the existential risk to identity
by ignoring observations that indicate continuing with the policy is counterproductive.
Thus, the trade-off between complexity and accuracy involves focusing on the risky reward
of continuing with the policy from which identity is derived and ignoring ambiguity arising
from the expected inaccuracy of sensory inputs from the environment.
Agents can be considered to be dynamical living systems that survive through main-
taining a near-to equilibrium steady state in relation to environmental ﬂuctuations. Within
this framing, continuing to pay more attention to a familiar policy than to observations
indicating that the policy is counterproductive can be considered in terms of conserving
ﬂows and dissipative ﬂows that exchange energy and matter with the external environment.
For example, soil-plant systems exchange both energy and matter with their surround-
ings and are consequently open systems that tend towards a non-equilibrium steady state
that is characterized by minimum production of entropy [ 36,37,58,59]. Where there are
small amplitude environmental ﬂuctuations, conserving ﬂows cause the agent to revisit
the same regions repeatedly through what can be described as homeostatic processes. By
contrast, large amplitude ﬂuctuations need to be counteracted by dissipative ﬂows that
enable the living system to establish a new near-to equilibrium steady state through what
can be described as allostatic processes. Allostasis is the process of achieving internal
stability through physiological or behavioral change—in contrast with homeostasis, which
maintains internal stability by maintaining the organism’s internal state at a set point [60].
Persisting with homeostatic conserving ﬂows amidst large amplitude ﬂuctuations can lead
to the agent being in an unsustainable stable steady state.
In this context, Figure 3c illustrates what can be described as oscillation death. This
involves the end of back-and-forth reciprocal exchanges of agent-environment learning
and development, in which synchronous near-to equilibrium steady-states are sustained
by both. Instead, oscillation death involves agent and environment forming stable steady-
states that undermine the survival of both. For example, neither agent nor environment
may be able to survive overgrazing. Moreover, overgrazing can decouple agent and
environment, leading to the loss of general oscillation synchrony between them. This can
be described in terms of rhythmogenesis. That is the generation of rhythms found in most
of the coupled physical, chemical, and biological systems in which underlying coupling acts
as a feedback factor [61]. For example, sustainable agricultural practices need to involve
people synchronizing with the environment’s seasonal rhythms [62].
A summary of important constructs is provided in Table 1. These are generative
process, generative model, observations, commitment, actions, accuracy, complexity, risk,
ambiguity, and synchrony.
Table 1. Constructs.
Construct Description
Generative process Generates agents’ observations of the world.
Generative model Generates agents’ expectations about the world.
Observations Observed sensory inputs coming from the generative process.
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 9 of 23
Table 1. Cont.
Construct Description
Commitment Commitment to a course of action inﬂuences how much attention
agents pay to observations.
Actions Courses of action are inﬂuenced by observations
and commitment.
Accuracy Generative model should be as accurate as possible in its
expectations about observations.
Complexity Complexity of generative model should be minimized to facilitate
its reliable economic updating.
Risk Generative model should be focused on minimizing risk
to survival.
Ambiguity Generative model should minimize ambiguity of observations
from the generative process.
Synchrony Reciprocal exchanges of learning and development between agent
and environment.
4. Theory Extension
Extant descriptions of joint agent-environment systems do not encompass the com-
plexity of observations, commitment, and actions in human-driven biosocial-technical
systems. Rather, they provide illustrative examples such as earthworms changing the
structure and chemical composition of the soil they inhabit [15]. Accordingly, in this sec-
tion, the construct of observations is extended in terms of multilevel pragmatics [63] and
competing signals [64]. Next, the construct of concentration parameters is extended in
terms of commitment processes [65]. Then, the construct of actions is extended in terms of
technological mediation [66] and psychomotor functioning [67]. Subsequently, a synthesis
is provided.
4.1. Observations: Multilevel Pragmatics and Competing Signals
Within joint agent-environment systems theory, the observations of an agent are
caused by the generative process of the environment. Pragmatics is concerned with how
context inﬂuences the meanings of observations. Pragmatics encompass three levels of
meaning from observations: what is explicit, what is implicit, and what is implied [63]. For
example, a farmer’s observations of grazing lands turning into desert sands can involve the
explicit sight of grass being replaced by sand. This explicit observation carries the implicit
meaning that the farmer’s livestock cannot obtain necessary nutrition by grazing there.
Thus, implicit observations of signals from the environment can relate to ecological ﬁtness,
i.e., the ﬁt of the agent with the environment. Implicit observations of decreasing ecological
ﬁtness can carry the implication that it will not be possible to survive, for example, as a
livestock farmer.
Pragmatic meaning can come from more than one observation at the same time. For
example, a lorry driver can observe the sun setting behind a well-known landmark. To-
gether, these explicit observations can carry the implicit meaning that there is not sufﬁcient
time remaining to travel the distance to the delivery destination before the deadline. This
implicit meaning can carry the implication that the lorry driver’s employment will be
terminated. It can carry this implication if the lorry driver has missed delivery deadlines in
the past and has been threatened with unemployment if late again.
As the rational, the emotional, and the instinctual can be tangled together in human
behavior [68], negative observations can be followed by what can appear to be irrational
continuation or escalation of the same actions [ 69,70]. For example, when agents, such
as livestock farmers and lorry drivers, have invested much in their current occupations
and do not have any alternative occupations available to them, they can be more likely to
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 10 of 23
ignore what is implicit and what is implied in explicit observations, and they keep trying to
survive by persisting with current policies. This could involve, for example, looking farther
and farther for grazing land and driving a lorry longer and faster without taking rest stops.
Observations can involve competing signals. For example, lorry drivers would rather
not drive along a dangerous unlit road during the night. However, they may feel impelled
to do so if observation of time signals indicates that the only hope of arriving by the delivery
deadline, and so staying employed, is to drive through the night. Time signals are observed,
for example, by seeing the sun setting, looking at a watch, etc. Yet, while driving through
the night, the lorry driver can observe features of the environment that signal that it is not
safe to continue, such as wrecks of lorries that have crashed in the past and small shrines
for people who died on the road.
Amidst competing signals from observations, agents can engage in active inference.
This involves three types of actions to bring about agents’ prior expectations for observa-
tions. In particular, observations that are consistent with their preferred states. The three
types of actions in active inference are updating beliefs, shifting attention, and/or changing
work method. For example, the lorry driver may update beliefs about the dangers of
driving at night when a full moon in a cloudless sky illuminates the road. At the same time,
the lorry driver needs to shift attention away from feelings of fatigue that have accumulated
from already having driven for many hours without rest. This can be done by changing the
method of work to include asking local villagers to run ahead of the lorry and use gestures
to signal the depth of road cracks. Thus, the lorry driver can pay attention to external
gestures rather than internal fatigue. This example illustrates that preferred states can be
very far from ideal states.
Indeed, as shown by global shortages of lorry drivers, working in heavy haulage can
be less than ideal even in rich countries [71,72] and can be inherently dangerous in other
parts of the world [73,74]. Hence, lorry drivers’ prior expectations for observations that
are consistent with preferred states are observations that are consistent with the preferred
state of surviving. These can include many prior expectations for observations that lorry
drivers would rather not experience, such as having to drive through day and night along
dangerous roads. However, lorry drivers may do this if it is their only means of survival. In
terms of competing signals, observations of many negative signals can be pooled together.
For example, observations of many cracks in a road may be indistinguishable from each
other as individually minor threats to survival. By contrast, threats of not being able to
retain employment as a lorry driver can be separate from other observations that are pooled
together [75,76]. Similarly, a livestock farmer can observe competing signals, one of which
is separated from a pool of other signals. For example, there can be many observations of
external signals arising from the sparsity of grazing lands that can be pooled together. By
contrast, the internal signal of not believing that there is any other way of surviving than
being a livestock farmer can be separate.
4.2. Concentration Parameters-Commitment Processes
Commitment to a course of action (i.e., to a policy) is inﬂuenced by the level of
satisfaction with the policy, size of prior investment in the policy (i.e., sunk cost), and
quality of alternative policies [ 65]. It has been argued that commitment processes exist
in non-human as well as human life [ 77]. Notably, there can be increasing commitment
to a failing policy even when this commitment can lead to extinction [78]. Commitment
to a failing policy can involve risky behavior and motivated ignorance. In particular, if
the magnitude of the expected reward is sufﬁciently high from a policy, agents will seek
out the reward in the absence of sufﬁcient information. For example, if the reward for
a farmer is carrying on with the way of life that is all that the farmer and the farmer’s
family have ever known, the farmer may display what could be described as the risky
behavior of persisting with a failing course of action that threatens survival. This can
involve the motivated ignorance of people choosing to avoid the costs that may come
with obtaining new information about alternative policies [79]. For example, the physical
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 11 of 23
disorder to livestock farmers of desertiﬁcation is accompanied by information uncertainty
about tasks and about identity. There is task ambiguity, for example, about where sufﬁcient
grazing land will be found today. There is identity risk, for example, about what will
become of a committed livestock farmer in the future if desertiﬁcation makes livestock
farming impossible.
Thus, there can be continued strong commitment to a policy when satisfaction with
the policy is low (e.g., trying to farm amidst desertiﬁcation), but the size of sunk cost in
the policy is high (e.g., generations of farming), and the quality of alternative policies is
perceived as being low (e.g., abandoning an established way of life for identity uncertainty).
Hence, people can continue to pay more attention to their out-of-date beliefs than to current
sensory inputs. At the same time, people can avoid sensory inputs that contradict their
out-of-date beliefs, such as not looking where the widest expanses of desertiﬁcation can be
seen, and they can approach sensory inputs that conﬁrm their out-of-date beliefs, such as
looking intensively for any indications of new grass growth.
Several methods can support analysis of commitment processes in practice. The size
of prior investment in a current policy can be considered in terms of its path dependency.
In particular, historical paths provide prior beliefs that inﬂuence the extent of learning
from new sensory inputs. When more attention is paid to prior beliefs than to new sensory
inputs, there will be inertia rather than learning [15]. Hence, addressing path dependencies
involves recognition of, and reﬂection upon, historical paths of decisions that have led to
current policies [80]. The quality of alternative policies can be considered in terms of the
procedural, ﬁnancial, relational, and collective costs of switching to them [81]. Analysis of
resistance to changing from an existing policy to an alternative policy can be considered in
terms of forces against change and forces for change within life spaces [82].
4.3. Actions–Psychomotor Functioning and Technological Mediation
Explicit observation of signals from the environment may or may not be consistent with
the subsistence farmers’ predictions of what they will experience based on their generative
models. There is low surprisal when what happens is what farmers have predicted will
happen as a consequence of their actions. There is low surprisal because there are small
information gaps between the farmers’ generative models and the generative process of
the environment. Observations that are encountered frequently will have low surprisal,
while observations that are encountered rarely will have high surprisal. Minimization of
surprisal can be achieved through acting on the world and/or changing self [15].
For example, if the environment goes from supporting subsistence farming to fragmen-
tation to collapse [83], farmers can act on the world and change themselves. Acting on the
world can include expending more energy on actions such as searching for potential water
sources and digging much deeper wells in more places after established water sources have
dried out [84]. Thus, physical disorder and information uncertainty from environment
fragmentation can lead to the entropy of energy not being available to perform productive
work, such as caring for livestock that are stressed by water shortages [85].
Humans have long developed and applied technologies in order to mediate between
such environmental challenges and survival preferences. Yet, there is a long ongoing pattern
of human technologies addressing one environmental challenge but introducing other
environmental challenges that are more difﬁcult to address. For example, the development
and use of water pumps has increased access to water in arid regions. However, pump
technology depletes groundwater reserves and, while doing so, well yields decrease,
pumping costs increase, water quality deteriorates, aquatic ecosystems are damaged, and
land subsides irreversibly. Nonetheless, despite the depletion of groundwater reserves
having been observed for decades, pump technology continues to be deployed more
widely [86,87].
At the same time, technologies that are developed and used to make human work
less strenuous can have negative unintended consequences for people’s psychomotor
functioning [88]. Thus, technologies that are developed with good intentions have led to
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 12 of 23
negative consequences for people acting on the world and for people changing themselves.
Negative effects can be on complex mind–body behaviors, which include interactions
between, for example, personality type and body memory [ 67]. Changes to self can
include suffering from multiple interrelated mental and physical health issues [89]. Hence,
although commitment to continuing with a failing course of action can override negative
observations, such commitment is not sufﬁcient to prevent psychomotor functioning being
undermined. Thus, commitment to a failing course of action cannot carry on indeﬁnitely as
psychomotor functioning is necessary for survival.
4.4. Synthesis
Table 2 provides a summary of unsustainable interactions between observations,
policy commitment, and actions. In Table 2, these are actions when an environment goes
from supporting subsistence farming to fragmentation to collapse [83]. Notably, there are
no better policy options as implications for survival become increasingly negative. As
discussed above, policy commitment is inﬂuenced by satisfaction with the policy, sunk cost
in the policy (i.e., size of investment in the policy), and the quality of alternative policies.
For brevity, the quality of alternative policies is summarized in Table 2 as whether or not a
better policy is available. As the environment deteriorates, policy satisfaction decreases
and sunk cost increases as more investment has to be made to survive. For example, more
and deeper wells have to be dug to obtain water. At the same time, there is no better
policy available to the subsistence farmers. Thus, there is no competing signal to those
observed by the farmers as they try to maintain their long-established subsistence way of
life. In particular, there is no competing signal for explicit signals such as more and more
sand replacing an increasingly wide region of what used to be grasslands. This explicit
observation carries the implicit meaning of reduced ﬁt with the environment, which carries
the implication that it will not be possible to survive as a livestock farmer.
Table 2. Unsustainable interactions between observations, policy commitment, and actions.
Environment
Agents
Observations Policy Commitment Actions
Explicit
Surprisal
Implicit
Fitness
Implied
Survival Satisfaction Sunk Cost Better
Option
Technology
Mediation
Psychomotor
Functioning
Subsistence Low High Yes High Low No High High
Fragmented Medium Medium Maybe Medium Medium No Medium Medium
Collapsed High Low No Low High No Low Low
Overall, the summary in Table 2 shows that environment deterioration brings negative
effects for surprisal, ﬁtness, and survival as technological mediation and psychomotor
functioning are not able to address environmental deterioration. By contrast, Table 3
provides a summary of regenerative interactions between observations, policy commitment,
and actions. This shows that environmental fragmentation is addressed because there is
a better policy option and alternative technology available compared to carrying on with
the previous policy option. This is because there has been increasing recognition of the
need to improve how technologies mediate between people and the environment. In terms
of ecosystem engineering, where people make widespread environmental changes across
countries and continents, agroecology is an example of technology mediation to bring
about positive global balance between human production and environmental systems [90].
In terms of niche construction, where people change a local environment, the Songhai
Center at Porto Novo in Benin is an example founded in agroecology that extends to
the entrepreneurial local development and use of agricultural machinery by local people.
Songhai has stated commitment to bioenergy, bio-production, bioprocessing, and bio-
consumption. Bio-production involves protecting the environment’s natural resources by
integrating growing agricultural crops, raising ﬁsh, livestock husbandry, and producing
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 13 of 23
energy. Bioprocessing involves agrifood products being made from local organically
grown products that are processed locally. Bio-consumption involves providing local
markets, restaurants, and hotels. Overall, Songhai processes are intended to manage
ﬂows of bioenergy and biomass in order to generate new and better biological capital,
while producing food in sufﬁcient quantities to promote human health and generate new
agroecology enterprises that pay attention to signals from the environment [91–93]. Thus,
Songhai provides an example of synchronous generative development that balances the
well-being of people and the environment. In doing so, there is a positive balance across
situated entropy experienced by people and by the environment. For both, agroecological
technology mediation brings some changes compared to the physical order that emerges
through many millennia in nature. These changes bring some physical disorder and some
information uncertainty, but these are within the scope of positive balance in human and
in environmental generative development. There is no attempt to suppress human and
environmental diversity in order to bring situated entropy to zero across all actions. For
example, there is no attempt to impose a continuous monoculture. Rather, individual self-
expression is encouraged. For example, up to 70 percent of graduates from Songhai Center
succeed in engaging in their own agribusiness activities [94]. Here, it is important to note
that a positive balance of situated entropy does not equal zero situated entropy for both
people and for the environment. For example, brain entropy, which is the number of neural
states a given brain can access, is associated with intelligence [95] and with creativity [96].
More broadly, diversity in nature fosters open-ended evolution of ecological ﬁtness [97,98].
Thus, a positive balance of situated entropy between people and environment is a balance
that reduces physical disorder and information uncertainty but does not focus on entirely
eliminating either. In other words, there is a balance between entropy pessimism [26] and
entropy optimism [99], within which reducing entropy can increase efﬁciency but not to
such an extent that there is no ﬂexibility to develop amidst disturbances [7,8].
Table 3. Regenerative interactions between observations, policy commitment, and actions.
Environment
Agents
Observations Policy Commitment Actions
Explicit
Surprisal
Implicit
Fitness
Implied
Survival Satisfaction Sunk Cost Better
Option
Technology
Mediation
Psychomotor
Functioning
Subsistence Low High Yes High Low No High High
Fragmented Medium Medium Maybe Medium Medium Yes Medium Medium
Regenerated Low High Yes High Medium No High High
5. Federated Digital Twins for Synchronous Generative Development
5.1. Federated Digital Twins
Digital twins are digital models that mirror physical processes; that are connected to
physical processes through, for example, sensors and actuators; and which carry out analy-
ses of physical processes in order to improve their performance. Federated digital twins
comprise several different digital twins that share data [16,17]. The physical process can be
conceptualized as the generative process and the digital model can be conceptualized as the
generative model. Sensors enable observations and actuators enable action. Thus, digital
twins are consistent with key constructs in synchronous generative agent-environment
systems. In addition, both digital twins and synchronous generative agent-environment
systems [14,15] are consistent with the conceptualization that every good regulator of
a system must be a good model of that system [ 100]. A good model is a model with
a structure that mirrors the most ecologically relevant aspects of the environment [ 101].
Furthermore, within the physics of life framework that underlies synchronous generative
agent-environment systems [14,15], it is postulated that the brain embodies an internal
model of the world that is generative in the sense that it can simulate the sensory data
that it should receive if its model of the world is correct. These simulated (i.e., predicted)
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 14 of 23
sensory data can be compared to actual observations, and differences between predicted
and observed sensations can be used to update the model [42]. Similarly, analyses carried
out by digital twins often involve model-based simulations [43]. Moreover, key constructs
in synchronous generative agent-environment systems’ generative models are important
for digital twin simulation models. In particular, there is a trade-off between accuracy
and complexity, within which the model should be as accurate as possible, but complexity
should be minimized in order to facilitate reliable economic updating. The model should
also be focused on minimizing risk to the operation of the physical process and on mini-
mizing the ambiguity of data collected from the physical process. Thus, digital twins have
important similarities with synchronous generative agent-environment systems.
Digital twins can be applied to urban agroecological processes [ 102]. For example,
digital twins are applicable to soil-less agriculture, such as hydroponics and aquaponics.
Hydroponics is a soil-less growing system where roots of plants are submerged in the
nutrient solution. Aquaponics combines aquaculture and hydroponics by feeding aquatic
animals discharge into hydroponics tanks [ 103,104]. Digital twins can also be applied
to vertical farming where food is grown on the walls and on the roofs of buildings with
controlled irrigation for minimal water consumption [105]. More broadly, there has been
consideration of potential to apply digital twins to urban agroecological methods in urban
agriculture [106]. A widespread example of urban agroecology is urban allotments [107]
to which digital twins for so called smart farming are applicable [ 108]. Different means
of observations and actions are involved in different urban agricultural processes. For
example, aquaponics in controlled internal environments can involve extensive observa-
tions and actions with automated sensors and actuators. Similarly, automated sensors and
actuators can facilitate vertical farming on the outside of high-rise buildings. Actuators
can carry out actions such as opening and closing water valves. However, harvesting
actions can be difﬁcult to automate. Importantly, citizens can be involved in the partic-
ipatory design of technology deployments that involve automated data collection with
sensors [109]. Some sensing can also be reliant on human observations in so called par-
ticipatory sensing [110], for example, the observations of which fruits and vegetables are
ripe at an urban allotment. More broadly, it is possible to facilitate participatory sensing
through so-called citizen observatories. These build on citizen science methodologies to
engage citizens in community-based environmental monitoring. For example, citizens can
be trained as citizen scientists who collect and analyze data using a variety of techniques
and technologies [111]. Notably, it has been argued that citizen science can contribute to
widening agroecology implementation and to realization of SDGs [112,113].
Overall, the development of digital twin deployments should be a work of collective
imagination involving participants from across communities [114], which takes into account
different perceptions and norms [115]. Such participatory design can take into account
established design principles for community-based natural resource management [116]. In
Table 4, digital twins are related to constructs in synchronous generative agent-environment
systems through the example of urban agriculture. Key constructs are generative process,
generative model, observations, commitment, actions, accuracy, complexity, risk, ambiguity,
and synchrony.
While sensing for aquaponics and vertical farming, digital twins can be fully auto-
mated. By contrast, sensing for urban allotments can rely on human observations that
are communicated through, for example, simple text message options. Focus of commit-
ment can be different for different urban agricultural options. Private sector aquaponics
entrepreneurs’ commitment can be founded upon a large ﬁnancial sunk cost, whereas
individuals who tend their own allotments can have a large sunk cost of time and effort.
Accordingly, risks can be different but still related to survival. Risk can be thought of as
expected divergence between predicted and preferred outcomes. In other words, risk can be
thought of as beliefs about the probability of reward for each choice one could make. Risk
can be framed as being a hierarchy that begins with task risks, that can extend to identity
risks, and to existential risk. Task risks for the aquaponics entrepreneur begin at the level
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 15 of 23
of valves not regulating processes, extend to the identity risk of being a failed entrepreneur,
and can lead to not being able to survive bankruptcy. Accordingly, it is imperative to mini-
mize the ambiguity of sensory inputs at the level of task risks because if the aquaponics
nutrient solution condition is not good, but sensors indicate that it is good, the aquaponics
enterprise could fail. To minimize ambiguity, the digital twin setup must facilitate accurate
observations and actions. Accuracy can be facilitated by managing complexity.
Table 4. Synchronous generative agent-environment systems related to digital twins.
Construct
Example
Aquaponics Vertical Farming Urban Allotments
Generative process Feeding of aquatic animals’
discharge into hydroponics
Plants growing on sides and
roofs of buildings
Plants growing in soil at small
plots of land
Generative model Digital twin of aquaponics
tanks input/output valves
Digital twins of vertical
farming irrigation valves
Digital twin of allotment
soil conditions
Observations Automated sensors Automated sensors Human observations sent to
digital twin via text messages
Commitment Private sector ﬁnancial
investment in equipment
Public sector ﬁnancial
investment in equipment
Personal investment of time
and effort
Actions Automated valves Automated valves Manual tending of soil/plants
Accuracy Valve operation to maintain
the best nutrient solution
Valve operation to maintain
best irrigation levels
Human assessment and
tending of soil/plant
Complexity Valves’ number, variety, and
operating parameters
Valves’ number, variety, and
operating parameters
Human behavior in tending of
soil and plants
Risk Failed private investment Failed public investment Insufﬁcient food to survive
Ambiguity Nutrient solution condition Plant hydration levels Condition of soil and plants
Synchrony Synchronization between physical processes, digital models, and human mental models
5.2. Situated Entropy
Situated entropy can have a determining inﬂuence over complexity. Physical disorder
in aquaponics can be low due to being situated inside buildings. By contrast, physical disor-
der from vertical farming situated on the outside of tall buildings can be higher. Compared
to these two options, urban allotments situated at ground level may experience medium
physical disorder. Aquaponic systems are engineered to minimize physical disorder and
information uncertainty to minimize unproductive energy consumption. Compared to an
urban allotment, the engineering of aquaponics systems involves far more initial energy
expenditure. However, aquaponics systems can be scaled out through modular kits [117].
Thus, the initial energy expenditure can be spread out over many installations that have
low unproductive energy consumption in their operation. Also, vertical farming can be
scaled out through modular kits. Physical disorder and information uncertainty in vertical
farming can be reduced by situating inside buildings [118]. Furthermore, physical disorder,
information uncertainty, and unproductive energy consumption of urban allotments can
be reduced through initial energy expenditure in careful planning of, for example, plant
types and irrigation methods [119].
Yet, the complexity of human-driven biosocial-technical systems can be increased by
having simulation models in digital twins as well as generative models in human minds.
For example, from the point of view of digital twins, information uncertainty may be
highest for the urban allotments because incoming data depends upon human inputs rather
than upon automated sensors. By contrast, from the point of view of people, information
uncertainty may be highest for vertical farming because it is most difﬁcult to be able to see
the condition of plants close up. Thus, a digital twin may analyze a vertical farm to be in
bad condition, but a human may view the same vertical farm as being in good condition.
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 16 of 23
Furthermore, this may be because the human observations may be inﬂuenced by escalating
commitment to a failing vertical farming installation. For example, people may consider
that they will become unemployed (implied) if they are responsible for large public sector
investments in failed vertical farming (implicit) as would be signaled by a bad condition
such as plants being brown instead of green (explicit). At the same time, a subcontractor
providing digital twin services may be reluctant to question the view of the public sector
ofﬁcials who are responsible for authorizing the payments needed for the subcontractor
to survive. Hence, there is potential for information uncertainty between a digital model
developed by humans and the different humans’ own mental models. This can lead to
physical disorder and unproductive energy consumption as humans try to take a closer
look at the plants in the vertical farm installation and eventually take legal proceedings
against each other in order to allocate ﬁnancial responsibility for the failure of a vertical
farm installation.
Potential for situated entropy can increase if the federation of digital twins is complex.
Accordingly, the structuring of digital twins and their interconnection for data exchange
should be sparse and should be transparent [120]. Nonetheless, more than technical en-
gineering is required for minimizing unproductive energy expenditure [121]; there needs
to be recognition from the outset of potential for physical disorder and information un-
certainty arising from conﬂict among human mental models. For example, agroecology
technologies can contribute to mediating between scarce water resources and human de-
mand for water. Yet, decisions about the supply of piped water to urban agroecological
farming can be affected by competing demand from a wide range of people with different
mental models. Such competition can involve digital twins that encompass a very wide
range of activities in the same city [122]. However, digital twins do not encompass the social
power of different parties competing for water supply. For example, one city authority
that has invested heavily in vertical farming can have more inﬂuence over the allocation of
scarce water resources than a few aquaponics entrepreneurs and many allotment farmers.
As water supply is essential to psychomotor functioning, it can be anticipated that all
people will have a fundamental commitment to opposing any threat to water supply. A
summary of situated entropy variables is provided in Table 5. This highlights that the
entropy of energy being unavailable for productive work can depend upon the amount
of unproductive energy expenditure arising from potential for physical disorder, for ex-
ample, from the microclimate of high-rise building with a vertical farming installation.
Furthermore, there can be unproductive energy consumption if a human does not agree
with the analyses of digital twins and does not agree with other people about the allocation
of piped water supplies. Thus, even though agroecology is compatible with synchronous
generative agent-environment systems, there can be conﬂict between different human
priorities and different digital models, and that can lead to unproductive energy expen-
diture. Accordingly, it is important that potential conﬂicts between different participants’
priorities are addressed in the participative design of urban agroecology, digital twins, and
interactions between them. Agroecology’s tripartite foundation, in scientiﬁc discipline,
social movement, and sustainable practice [20] can provide examples into how potential
conﬂicts can be addressed [123,124].
Table 5. Situated entropy related to synchronous generative agent-environment system of
urban agroecology.
Situated Entropy
Examples of Relative Potential for Situated Entropy
Aquaponics Vertical Farming Urban Allotments
Physical
Disorder
Automation Low High Medium
Human Low High Medium
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 17 of 23
Table 5. Cont.
Situated Entropy
Examples of Relative Potential for Situated Entropy
Aquaponics Vertical Farming Urban Allotments
Information
Uncertainty
Automation Low Medium High
Human Medium High Medium
Unproductive
energy expenditure
Automation Low Low Medium
Human
Depends on agreement with
digital twin and with people
competing for water supply
Depends on extent of physical
disorder at heights, on
agreement with digital twin,
and with people competing for
water supply
Depends on extent of physical
disorder on the ground, on
agreement with digital twin,
and with people competing for
water supply
6. Conclusions
6.1. Principal Contributions
Joint agent-environment systems theory is focused on reciprocal synchronous gener-
ative development. The purpose of this paper is to extend this theory towards practical
application in sustainable development projects, in particular, those involving digital twins.
In Figures 1–3, description for practitioners employs the radar chart format that is applied
widely in organizational practice. As summarized in Tables 2 and 3, theory extension is also
made through synthesis with research concerned with multilevel pragmatics, competing
signals, commitment processes, technological mediation, and psychomotor functioning. In
addition, the extended theory is related to federated digital twins for agroecological urban
farming. As summarized in Tables 4 and 5, this example indicates the complexity that can
arise in human-driven biosocial-technical systems, even when individual implementations
of agroecology are compatible with synchronous generative development.
A limitation of the paper is that the examples provided in the paper encompass
only few of the many types of agents that can interact with each other in environments.
Nonetheless, the formulation of situated entropy in this paper is relevant to many different
agents in many different environments. For example, a person driving an ox cart can
experience high situated entropy in a typical urban setting when there is low synchrony
between the agent (i.e., the ox) and the environment (i.e., hard paved urban landscapes).
By contrast, a person driving an ox cart can experience low situated entropy when in
high synchrony with an urban agroecological setting (i.e., soil-based urban landscape).
Thus, interrelationships between synchrony and situated entropy should be an important
consideration in the development of so called post-anthropocentric cities, within which
humans and non-humans are interdependent [125]. Another limitation of the paper is that
it does not encompass creativity in generative models. Nonetheless, a generative model can
involve the prediction of future environments. In particular, people can imagine themselves
within future environments and consider simultaneously what would happen if we did
that, what would we think about it, and what would other people think about it [126–128].
Accordingly, generative models are relevant to participatory design of public spaces for
urban agriculture [129].
6.2. Practical Implications
Agent-environment systems theory can provide a unifying framework for physical
actions, digital twins of physical actions, and interactions between them in development
projects. Importantly, joint agent-environment systems theory frames sustainable devel-
opment as being dependent on only one goal, which is reciprocal synchronous generative
development. Focusing on this one overarching goal can provide a more straightforward
starting point for the development projects than trying to align with 17 Sustainable De-
velopment Goals that are, to some extent, in conﬂict with each other. In addition, key
constructs in agent-environment systems’ theory are applicable to the formulation and op-
eration of digital twins. Those key constructs are complexity, accuracy, risk, and ambiguity.
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 18 of 23
In particular, digital twins’ complexity and their predictive accuracy should be balanced
during the formulation of digital twins. During their operation, digital twins should be
focused on minimizing risk to physical processes and on minimizing the ambiguity of data
collected from the physical processes. Furthermore, agent-environment systems theory
and its underlying physics of life principles bring together information-theoretic entropy
and thermodynamic entropy, both of which are applicable to physical actions and digital
twins of physical actions. Thus, agent-environment systems theory can provide a starting
point for addressing situated entropy in physical actions, digital twins, and interactions
between them.
6.3. Future Research
As summarized in Tables 4 and 5, complexity can arise from human-driven biosocial-
technical systems, such as digital twins, even when they are compatible with synchronous
generative development. Accordingly, future research should focus on addressing this
potential for complexity that can undermine efforts to minimize risk. Such research should
recognize from the outset that digital twins have the potential to introduce new sources of
situated entropy. For example, their functioning can be affected negatively by the vulner-
ability of sensors and actuators to physical disorder that brings information uncertainty
that can lead to unproductive energy expenditure. Moreover, digital twins can provide
analysis results that are accurate, but which are in conﬂict with human generative models
that are governed by commitment to course of action irrespective of sensory inputs. It is
important to address these sources of complexity because they can inadvertently lead to
situated entropy that reduces the energy available for synchronous generative development.
Accordingly, an interesting direction for future research is to investigate the practicality of
designing digital twins in accordance with the human ability to generate accurate inferences
from very few sensory inputs [130]. Such research can draw upon the latest ﬁndings from
neuroscience and from machine learning, both of which indicate that simple models have
the potential to be as accurate as complex models [ 42,118]. An example of this is model
reduction in which redundant model parameters are removed to prevent model over-ﬁtting
and promote selection of the most parsimonious model that can successfully account for
previous observations [42]. A related direction for further research is participative design of
digital twins. For example, consideration could be given to the use of multimodal symbol
systems to facilitate the development of mutual knowledge among participants who have
different backgrounds and languages that can introduce information-theoretic entropy into
the design process [131].
Funding: The research was funded by the Digilogic project (European Commission grant number
101016583).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The author thanks Karl Friston and Ryan Smith for informative discussion of
theoretical constructs.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Rhodes, C.J. The whispering world of plants: The wood wide web. Sci. Prog. 2017, 100, 331–337. [CrossRef]
2. Giovannetti, M.; Avio, L.; Fortuna, P .; Pellegrino, E.; Sbrana, C.; Strani, P . At the root of the wood wide web: Self recognition and
nonself incompatibility in mycorrhizal networks. Plant Signal. Behav. 2006, 1, 1–5. [CrossRef]
3. Prashar, P .; Shah, S. Impact of fertilizers and pesticides on soil microﬂora in agriculture. In Sustainable Agriculture Reviews ;
Lichtfouse, E., Ed.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2016; Volume 19, pp. 331–361.
4. Sharma, N.; Singhvi, R. Effects of chemical fertilizers and pesticides on human health and environment: A review. Int. J. Agric.
Environ. Biotechnol. 2017, 10, 675–680. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 19 of 23
5. Affognon, H.; Mutungi, C.; Sanginga, P .; Borgemeister, C. Unpacking postharvest losses in sub-Saharan Africa: A meta-analysis.
World Dev. 2015, 66, 49–68. [CrossRef]
6. Swai, J.; Mbega, E.R.; Mushongi, A.; Ndakidemi, P .A. Post-harvest losses in maize store-time and marketing model perspectives
in Sub-Saharan Africa. J. Stored Prod. Postharvest Res. 2019, 10, 1–12.
7. Ulanowicz, R.E.; Goerner, S.J.; Lietaer, B.; Gomez, R. Quantifying sustainability: Resilience, efﬁciency and the return of information
theory. Ecol. Complex. 2009, 6, 27–36. [CrossRef]
8. Fox, S.; Kotelba, A. An information-theoretic analysis of ﬂexible efﬁcient cognition for persistent sustainable production. Entropy
2020, 22, 444. [CrossRef]
9. Patton, A.I.; Rathburn, S.L.; Cfapps, D.M. Landslide response to climate change in permafrost regions. Geomorphology 2019, 340,
116–128. [CrossRef]
10. Boer, M.M.; de Dios, V .R.; Bradstock, R.A. Unprecedented burn area of Australian mega forest ﬁres.Nat. Clim. Chang. 2020, 10,
171–172. [CrossRef]
11. Knolle, K.; Alkousaa, R. Germany Counts Cost of Floods as Hopes of Finding Survivors Fade. Reuters 21 July 2021. Available
online: https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/no-more-survivors-likely-be-found-german-ﬂood-zone-relief-ofﬁcial-2021
-07-21/ (accessed on 19 November 2021).
12. Hickel, J. The contradiction of the sustainable development goals: Growth versus ecology on a ﬁnite planet. Sustain. Dev. 2019,
27, 873–884. [CrossRef]
13. Zeng, Y.; Maxwell, S.; Runting, R.K.; Venter, O.; Watson, J.E.M.; Carrasco, L.R. Environmental destruction not avoided with the
Sustainable Development Goals. Nat. Sustain. 2020, 3, 795–798. [CrossRef]
14. Bruineberg, J.; Rietveld, E. Self-organization, free energy minimization, and optimal grip on a ﬁeld of affordances. Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 2014, 8, 599. [CrossRef]
15. Bruineberg, J.; Rietveld, E.; Parr, T.; van Maanen, L.; Friston, K.J. Free-energy minimization in joint agent-environment systems: A
niche construction perspective. J. Theor. Biol. 2018, 455, 161–178. [CrossRef]
16. Gelernter, D.H. Mirror Worlds: Or the Day Software Puts the Universe in a Shoebox—How It Will Happen and What It Will Mean ; Oxford
University Press: Oxford, UK; New York, NY, USA, 1991.
17. Kumar, V .S.; Aggour, K.S.; Cuddihy, P .; Williams, J.W. A federated, multimodal digital thread platform for enabling digital twins.
Nav. Eng. J. 2020, 132, 47–56.
18. Ng, A.K.; Mahkeswaran, R. Emerging and disruptive technologies for urban farming: A review and assessment. J. Phys. Conf. Ser.
2021, 2003, 012008. [CrossRef]
19. Siegner, A.B.; Acey, C.; Sowerwine, J. Producing urban agroecology in the East Bay: From soil health to community empowerment.
Agroecol. Sustain. Food Syst. 2020, 44, 566–593. [CrossRef]
20. Wezel, A.; Bellon, S.; Doré, T.; Francis, C.; Vallod, D.; David, C. Agroecology as a science, a movement and a practice. A review.
Agron. Sustain. Dev. 2009, 29, 503–515. [CrossRef]
21. Tomich, T.P .; Brodt, S.; Ferris, H.; Galt, R.; Horwath, W.R.; Kebreab, E.; Yang, L. Agroecology: A review from a global-change
perspective. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 2011, 36, 193–222. [CrossRef]
22. Ahmed, B. Environmental governance and sustainable development in Bangladesh: Millennium development goals and
sustainable development goals. Asia Pac. J. Public Adm. 2019, 41, 237–245. [CrossRef]
23. World Commission on Environment and Development. Our Common Future; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 1987.
24. Meadows, D.H.; Meadows, D.L.; Randers, J.; Behrens, W.W. The Limits to Growth: A Report for the Club of Rome’s Project on the
Predicament of Mankind; Universe Books: New York, NY, USA, 1972.
25. Herrington, G. Update to limits to growth: Comparing the World3 model with empirical data. J. Ind. Ecol. 2020, 25, 614–626.
[CrossRef]
26. Georgescu-Roegen, N. The Entropy Law and the Economic Process; Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1971.
27. Ayres, R.U. On the practical limits to substitution. Ecol. Econ. 2007, 61, 115–128. [CrossRef]
28. Steinborn, W.; Svirezhev, Y. Entropy as an indicator of sustainability in agro-ecosystems: North Germany case study.Ecol. Model.
2000, 133, 247–257. [CrossRef]
29. Lucia, U.; Grisolia, G. Irreversible thermodynamics and bioeconomy: Toward a human-oriented sustainability. Front. Phys. 2021,
9, 154. [CrossRef]
30. Liang, X.; Si, D.; Xu, J. Quantitative evaluation of the sustainable development capacity of hydropower in China based on
information entropy. Sustainability 2018, 10, 529. [CrossRef]
31. Lin, Z.; Xia, B. Sustainability analysis of the urban ecosystem in Guangzhou City based on information entropy between 2004 and
2010. J. Geogr. Sci. 2013, 23, 417–435. [CrossRef]
32. Zhang, M.; Zhou, J.; Zhou, R. Evaluating sustainability of regional water resources based on improved generalized entropy
method. Entropy 2018, 20, 715. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Wang, X.; Gao, P .; Song, C.; Cheng, C. Use of entropy in developing SDG-based indices for assessing regional sustainable
development: A provincial case study of China. Entropy 2020, 22, 406. [CrossRef]
34. Shi, W. Entropy analysis of the coupled human–earth system: Implications for sustainable development. Sustainability 2017,
9, 1264. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 20 of 23
35. Mayer, A.L.; Donovan, R.P .; Pawlowski, C.W. Information and entropy theory for the sustainability of coupled human and natural
systems. Ecol. Soc. 2014, 19, 11. [CrossRef]
36. Friston, K. Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 2013, 10, 20130475. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Friston, K.J.; Da Costa, L.; Parr, T. Some interesting observations on the free energy principle.Entropy 2021, 23, 1076. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
38. Fox, S. Multiscale free energy analysis of human ecosystem engineering. Entropy 2021, 23, 396. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Fox, S. Accessing active inference theory through its implicit and deliberative practice in human organizations. Entropy 2021, 23,
1521. [CrossRef]
40. Calvo, P .; Friston, K. Predicting green: Really radical (plant) predictive processing.J. R. Soc. Interface 2017, 14, 20170096. [CrossRef]
41. Rubin, S.; Parr, T.; Da Costa, L.; Friston, K. Future climates: Markov blankets and active inference in the biosphere. J. R. Soc.
Interface 2020, 17, 20200503. [CrossRef]
42. Smith, R.; Schwartenbeck, P .; Parr, T.; Friston, K. An active inference approach to modeling structure learning: Concept learning
as an example case. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 2020, 14, 41. [CrossRef]
43. Schluse, M.; Atorf, L.; Rossmann, J. Experimentable digital twins for model-based systems engineering and simulation-based
development. In Proceedings of the 2017 Annual IEEE International Systems Conference (SysCon), Montreal, QC, Canada, 24–27
April 2017; pp. 1–8.
44. Da Costa, L.; Parr, T.; Sajid, N.; Veselic, S.; Neacsu, V .; Friston, K. Active inference on discrete state-spaces: A synthesis.J. Math.
Psychol. 2020, 99, 102447. [CrossRef]
45. Fox, S. Active inference: Applicability to different types of social organization explained through reference to industrial
engineering and quality management. Entropy 2021, 23, 198. [CrossRef]
46. Siepielski, A.M.; Dibattista, J.D.; Evans, J.A.; Carlson, S. Differences in the temporal dynamics of phenotypic selection among
ﬁtness components in the wild. Proc. R. Soc. B Boil. Sci. 2010, 278, 1572–1580. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Maslow, A.H. The Farther Reaches of Human Nature; The Viking Press: New York, NY, USA, 1971.
48. McConnell, D.J. The Forest Farms of Kandy and Other Gardens of Complete Design; Ashgate: Farnham, UK, 2003.
49. Holmström, B.; Roberts, J. The boundaries of the ﬁrm revisited. J. Econ. Perspect. 1998, 12, 73–94. [CrossRef]
50. Altieri, M.A. Fatal harvest: Old and new dimensions of the ecological tragedy of modern agriculture. J. Bus. Adm. Policy Anal.
2002, 31, 239–264.
51. Horrigan, L.; Lawrence, R.S.; Walker, P . How sustainable agriculture can address the environmental and human health harms of
industrial agriculture. Environ. Health Perspect. 2002, 110, 445–456. [CrossRef]
52. Carson, R. The Silent Spring; Houghton Mifﬂin: Boston, MA, USA, 1962.
53. Eklöf, J.S.; De la Torre-Castro, M.; Gullström, M.; Uku, J.; Muthiga, N.; Lyimo, T.; Bandeira, S.O. Sea urchin overgrazing of
seagrasses: A review of current knowledge on causes, consequences, and management. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci. 2008, 79, 569–580.
[CrossRef]
54. Ibáñez, J.; Martínez, J.; Schnabel, S. Desertiﬁcation due to overgrazing in a dynamic commercial livestock–grass–soil system. Ecol.
Model. 2007, 205, 277–288. [CrossRef]
55. Smith, C.C. The effect of overgrazing and erosion upon the biota of the mixed-grass prairie of Oklahoma. Ecology 1940, 21,
381–397. [CrossRef]
56. Hovorka, A.J. Women/chickens vs. men/cattle: Insights on gender–species intersectionality. Geoforum 2012, 43, 875–884.
[CrossRef]
57. Cano, W.; Ibarra, A. Maize as a cultural element of identity and as a biological being. InClimate Change and Sustainable Development;
Wageningen Academic Publishers: Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2012; pp. 431–435.
58. Addiscott, T.M. Entropy and sustainability. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 1995, 46, 161–168. [CrossRef]
59. Prigogine, I.; Lefever, R. Theory of Dissipative Structures; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 1973.
60. Korte, S.M.; Olivier, B.; Koolhaas, J.M. A new animal welfare concept based on allostasis. Physiol. Behav. 2007, 92, 422–428.
[CrossRef]
61. Arumugam, R.; Dutta, P .S.; Banerjee, T. Environmental coupling in ecosystems: From oscillation quenching to rhythmogenesis.
Phys. Rev. E 2016, 94, 022206. [CrossRef]
62. Kreitzman, L.; Foster, R.Seasons of Life: The Biological Rhythms that Enable Living Things to Thrive and Survive; Proﬁle Books: London,
UK, 2010.
63. Allan, K. Getting a grip on context as a determinant of meaning. In Further Advances in Pragmatics and Philosophy; Springer: Cham,
Switzerland, 2018.
64. Maynard Smith, J.; Harper, D. Animal Signals; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2003.
65. Caryl, E.; Agnew, C.; Arriaga, X.; Higgins, A.K.; Tory, E. The investment model of commitment processes. Handb. Theor. Soc.
Psychol. 2011, 4, 218–231.
66. Verbeek, P .P . Expanding mediation theory. Found. Sci. 2012, 17, 391–395. [CrossRef]
67. Fox, S. Psychomotor predictive processing. Entropy 2021, 23, 806. [CrossRef]
68. Miller, M.; Clark, A. Happily entangled: Prediction, emotion, and the embodied mind. Synthese 2018, 195, 2559–2575. [CrossRef]
69. Bazerman, M.; Neale, M. Nonrational escalation of commitment in negotiation. Eur. Manag. J. 1992, 10, 163–168. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 21 of 23
70. Beamer, G.; Lewis, D.E. The Irrational Escalation of Commitment and the Ironic Labor Politics of the Rust Belt. Enterp. Soc. 2003,
4, 676–706. [CrossRef]
71. Ji-Hyland, C.; Allen, D. What do professional drivers think about their profession? An examination of factors contributing to the
driver shortage. Int. J. Logist. Res. Appl. 2020. [CrossRef]
72. Hamido, S.; Hamamoto, R.; Gu, X.; Itoh, K. Factors inﬂuencing occupational truck driver safety in ageing society. Accid. Anal.
Prev. 2021, 150, 105922. [CrossRef]
73. Stone, T. Truck hijacking is big business perspectives. Transp. World Afr. 2011, 9, 6–7.
74. Lalla-Edward, S.T.; Fischer, A.E.; Venter, W.F.; Scheuermaier, K.; Meel, R.; Hankins, C.; Vos, A.G. Cross-sectional study of the
health of southern African truck drivers. BMJ Open 2019, 9, e032025. [CrossRef]
75. Seyfarth, R.M.; Cheney, D.L. Signalers and receivers in animal communication. Ann. Rev. Psychol. 2003, 54, 145–173. [CrossRef]
76. Sobel, J. Signaling games. In Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science; Meyers, R., Ed.; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2009;
pp. 8125–8139.
77. Nesse, R. (Ed.) Evolution and the Capacity for Commitment; Russell Sage Foundation: New York, NY, USA, 2001.
78. Gilroy, S.P .; Hantula, D.A. Inherently irrational? A computational model of escalation of commitment as Bayesian updating.
Behav. Processes 2016, 127, 43–51. [CrossRef]
79. Kruglanski, A.W.; Jasko, K.; Friston, K. All thinking is ‘wishful’ thinking. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2020, 24, 413–424. [CrossRef]
80. De Krom, M.P .; Muilwijk, H. Multiplicity of perspectives on sustainable food: Moving beyond discursive path dependency in
food policy. Sustainability 2019, 11, 2773. [CrossRef]
81. Burnham, T.A.; Frels, J.K.; Mahajan, V . Consumer Switching Costs: A Typology, Antecedents, and Consequences.J. Acad. Mark.
Sci. 2003, 31, 109–126. [CrossRef]
82. Burnes, B.; Cooke, B. Kurt Lewin’s Field Theory: A review and re-evaluation. Int. J. Manag. Rev. 2013, 15, 408–425. [CrossRef]
83. Solé, R.V .; Alonso, D.; Saldaña, J. Habitat fragmentation and biodiversity collapse in neutral communities.Ecol. Complex. 2004, 1,
65–75. [CrossRef]
84. Famiglietti, J.S. The global groundwater crisis. Nat. Clim. Chang. 2014, 4, 945–948. [CrossRef]
85. Scoones, I. Coping with drought: Responses of herders and livestock in contrasting savanna environments in southern Zimbabwe.
Hum. Ecol. 1992, 20, 293–314. [CrossRef]
86. Konikow, L.F.; Kendy, E. Groundwater depletion: A global problem. Hydrogeol. J. 2005, 13, 317–320. [CrossRef]
87. Almuhaylan, M.R.; Ghumman, A.R.; Al-Salamah, I.S.; Ahmad, A.; Ghazaw, Y.M.; Haider, H.; Shaﬁquzzaman, M. Evaluating the
Impacts of Pumping on Aquifer Depletion in Arid Regions Using MODFLOW, ANFIS and ANN. Water 2020, 12, 2297. [CrossRef]
88. Cregan-Reid, V . Primate Change: How the World We Made Is Remaking Us; Cassell: London, UK, 2018.
89. Chersich, M.F.; Wright, C.Y.; Venter, F.; Rees, H.; Scorgie, F.; Erasmus, B. Impacts of climate change on health and wellbeing in
South Africa. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 1884. [CrossRef]
90. Altieri, M.A. Agroecology: The Science of Sustainable Agriculture; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2018.
91. Tharakan, J. The Songhai Agroecological Sustainable Development Model: Synergy, Symbiosis, Collaboration, and Complemen-
tarity. In Regional Development in Africa; Edomah, N., Ed.; IntechOpen: London, UK, 2019; pp. 69–82.
92. Bijaoui, I. From necessity to business entrepreneurship: The case of the Songhai center, Porto Novo, Benin. Afr. J. Bus. Manag.
2012, 6, 5872–5878.
93. Agbo, B.; Tokannou, R. Songhai—An attractive model that needs scaling up. Rural 2009, 20–21. Available online: https:
//www.rural21.com/ﬁleadmin/_migrated/content_uploads/R21_SONGHAI_0309.pdf (accessed on 4 January 2022).
94. Yami, M.; Feleke, S.; Abdoulaye, T.; Alene, A.D.; Bamba, Z.; Manyong, V . African rural youth engagement in agribusiness:
Achievements, limitations, and lessons. Sustainability 2019, 11, 185. [CrossRef]
95. Saxe, G.N.; Calderone, D.; Morales, L.J. Brain entropy and human intelligence: A resting-state fMRI study. PLoS ONE 2018,
13, e0191582. [CrossRef]
96. Shi, L.; Beaty, R.E.; Chen, Q.; Sun, J.; Wei, D.; Yang, W.; Qiu, J. Brain entropy is associated with divergent thinking.Cereb. Cortex
2019, 30, 708–717. [CrossRef]
97. Fontana, W.; Buss, L.W. “The arrival of the ﬁttest”: Toward a theory of biological organization. Bull. Math. Biol. 1994, 56, 1–64.
98. Wagner, A. Arrival of the Fittest: Solving Evolution’s Greatest Puzzle; Penguin: London, UK, 2014.
99. Koutsoyiannis, D.; Sargentis, G.-F. Entropy and Wealth. Entropy 2021, 23, 1356. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Conant, R.C.; Ashby, R.W. Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that system. Int. J. Syst. Sci. 1970, 1, 89–97.
[CrossRef]
101. Baltieri, M.; Buckley, C.L. An active inference implementation of phototaxis. In Proceedings of the ECAL 2017: The 14th European
Conference on Artiﬁcial Life; Knibbe, C., Beslon, G., Parsons, D., Misevic, J.R.-C., Bredèche, N., Hassas, S., Simonin, O., Soula, H.,
Eds.; MIT Press: Cambridge, UK, 2017; pp. 36–43.
102. Altieri, M.A.; Nicholls, C.I. Urban Agroecology: Principles and Applications. In The Routledge Handbook of Urban Ecology ;
Douglas, I., Anderson, P .M.L., Goode, D., Houck, M.C., Maddox, D., Nagendra, H., Yok, T.P ., Eds.; Routledge: London, UK, 2020;
pp. 532–542.
103. Sreedevi, T.R.; Kumar, M.S. Digital Twin in Smart Farming: A categorical literature review and exploring possibilities in
hydroponics. In Proceedings of the 2020 Advanced Computing and Communication Technologies for High Performance
Applications (ACCTHPA), Cochin, India, 2–4 July 2020; pp. 120–124.
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 22 of 23
104. Ahmed, A.; Zulﬁqar, S.; Ghandar, A.; Chen, Y.; Hanai, M.; Theodoropoulos, G. Digital Twin Technology for Aquaponics: Towards
Optimizing Food Production with Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems. In Methods and Applications for Modeling and
Simulation of Complex Systems ; Communications in Computer and Information Science Book, Series; AsiaSim, 2019; Tan, G.,
Lehmann, A., Teo, Y., Cai, W., Eds.; Springer: Singapore, 2019; Volume 1094, pp. 3–14.
105. Monteiro, J.; Barata, J.; Veloso, M.; Veloso, L.; Nunes, J. Towards Sustainable Digital Twins for Vertical Farming. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Information Management (ICDIM), Berlin, Germany, 24–26 September
2018; pp. 234–239.
106. Johannsen, C.; Senger, D.; Kluss, T. A digital twin of the social-ecological system urban beekeeping. In Advances and New Trends in
Environmental Informatics; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2021; pp. 193–207.
107. Edmondson, J.L.; Davies, Z.G.; Gaston, K.J.; Leake, J.R. Urban cultivation in allotments maintains soil qualities adversely affected
by conventional agriculture. J. Appl. Ecol. 2014, 51, 880–889. [CrossRef]
108. Verdouw, C.; Tekinerdogan, B.; Beulens, A.; Wolfert, S. Digital twins in smart farming. Agric. Syst. 2021, 189, 10304. [CrossRef]
109. Heitlinger, S.; Bryan-Kinns, N.; Comber, R. Connected seeds and sensors: Co-designing internet of things for sustainable smart
cities with urban food-growing communities. In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference: Short Papers, Situated
Actions, Workshops and Tutorial-Volume 2, Hasselt/Genk, Belgium, 20–24 August 2018; pp. 1–5.
110. Ham, Y.; Kim, J. Participatory sensing and digital twin city: Updating virtual city models for enhanced risk-informed decision-
making. J. Manag. Eng. 2020, 36, 04020005. [CrossRef]
111. Ajates, R.; Hager, G.; Georgiadis, P .; Coulson, S.; Woods, M.; Hemment, D. Local Action with Global Impact: The Case of the
GROW Observatory and the Sustainable Development Goals. Sustainability 2020, 12, 10518. [CrossRef]
112. Benyei, P .L.; Aceituno-Mata, L.; Calvet-Mir, J.; Tard ío, M.; Pardo-de-Santayana, D.; Garc ía-del-Amo, M.; Rivera-Ferre, M.;
Molina-Simón, M.; Gras, A.; Perdomo Molina, A.; et al. Seeds of change: Reversing the erosion of traditional agroecological
knowledge through a citizen science school program in Catalonia, Spain. Ecol. Soc. 2020, 25, 19. [CrossRef]
113. Fritz, S.; See, L.; Carlson, T.; Haklay, M.M.; Oliver, J.L.; Fraisl, D.; Mondardini, R.; Brocklehurst, M.; Shanley, L.A.; West, S.; et al.
Citizen science and the United Nations sustainable development goals. Nat. Sustain. 2019, 2, 922–930. [CrossRef]
114. Beck, S.; Jasanoff, S.; Stirling, A.; Polzin, C. The governance of sociotechnical transformations to sustainability.Curr. Opin. Environ.
Sustain. 2021, 49, 143–152. [CrossRef]
115. Ashraf, M.A. What drives and mediates organic food purchase intention: An analysis using bounded rationality theory. J. Int.
Food Agribus. Mark. 2021, 33, 185–216. [CrossRef]
116. Cox, M.; Arnold, G.; Tomás, S.V . A review of design principles for community-based natural resource management.Ecol. Soc.
2010, 15, 38. [CrossRef]
117. Simeonidou, M.; Paschos, I.; Gouva, E.; Kolygas, M.; Perdikaris, C. Performance of a small-scale modular aquaponic system.
Aquac. Aquar. Conserv. Legis. 2012, 5, 182–188.
118. Haris, I.; Fasching, A.; Punzenberger, L.; Grosu, R. CPS/IoT ecosystem: Indoor vertical farming system. In Proceedings of the
2019 IEEE 23rd International Symposium on Consumer Technologies (ISCT), Ancona, Italy, 19–21 June 2019; pp. 47–52.
119. Rego, L.; Guanaes, F. Urban vegetable production for sustainability: The Riortas Project in the city of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Habitat Int. 2014, 44, 510–516. [CrossRef]
120. Rudin, C. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead. Nat.
Mach. Intell. 2019, 1, 206–215. [CrossRef]
121. Klerkx, L.; Jakku, E.; Labarthe, P . A review of social science on digital agriculture, smart farming and agriculture 4.0: New
contributions and a future research agenda. NJAS-Wagening. J. Life Sci. 2019, 90, 100315. [CrossRef]
122. Deren, L.; Wenbo, Y.; Zhenfeng, S. Smart city based on digital twins. Comput. Urban Sci. 2021, 1, 1–11. [CrossRef]
123. Giraldo, O.F.; Rosset, P .M. Agroecology as a territory in dispute: Between institutionality and social movements.J. Peasant Stud.
2018, 45, 545–564. [CrossRef]
124. Navarrete, J.M.; Ioris, A.A.R.; Granados, J. Water Sustainability and Politics–Examples from Latin America and Implications for
Agroecology. In Integrating Agriculture, Conservation and Ecotourism: Societal Inﬂuences; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands,
2012; pp. 227–277.
125. Heitlinger, S.; Foth, M.; Clarke, R.; DiSalvo, C.; Light, A.; Forlano, L. Avoiding ecocidal smart cities: Participatory design
for more-than-human futures. In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference: Short Papers, Situated Actions,
Workshops and Tutorial-Volume 2, Hasselt/Genk, Belgium, 20–24 August 2018; pp. 1–3.
126. Hesp, C.; Tschantz, A.; Millidge, B.; Ramstead, M.; Friston, K.; Smith, R. Sophisticated affective inference: Simulating anticipatory
affective dynamics of imagining future events. In International Workshop on Active Inference; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany,
2020; pp. 179–186.
127. Friston, K.; Da Costa, L.; Hafner, D.; Hesp, C.; Parr, T. Sophisticated inference. Neural Comput. 2021, 33, 713–763. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
128. Ondobaka, S.; Kilner, J.; Friston, K. The role of interoceptive inference in theory of mind. Brain Cogn. 2017, 112, 64–68. [CrossRef]
129. Dubbeling, M.; Bracalenti, L.; Lagorio, L. Participatory Design of Public Spaces for Urban Agriculture, Rosario, Argentina; Open House
International: Bingley, UK, 2009; Volume 34, pp. 36–49.
Entropy 2022, 24, 89 23 of 23
130. Lake, B.B.M.; Salakhutdinov, R.; Tenenbaum, J.J.B. Human level concept learning through probabilistic program induction.Science
2015, 350, 1332–1338. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Fox, S.; Moreno, M.; Vahala, P . Innovation symbol system: Multimodal grammars and vocabularies for facilitating mutual
innovation knowledge. J. Innov. Knowl. 2019, 4, 12–22. [CrossRef]