 
Annuaire du Collège de FranceCours et travaux du Collège de France 
108 | 2008
Annuaire du Collège de France 2007-2008
A Free energy principle for the brainRésumé des conférences du Collège de France (2007-2008)
Karl Friston
Electronic version
URL: https://journals.openedition.org/annuaire-cdf/296
DOI: 10.4000/annuaire-cdf.296 
ISBN: 978-2-7226-0136-9
ISSN: 2109-9227
Publisher
Collège de France
Printed version
Date of publication: December 1, 2008
Number of pages: 927-929
ISBN: 978-2-7226-0082-9
ISSN: 0069-5580
 
Electronic reference
Karl Friston, “A Free energy principle for the brain”, L ’annuaire du Collège de France [Online], 108 | 2008,
Online since , connection on 09 November 2024. URL: http://journals.openedition.org/annuaire-cdf/296
; DOI: https://doi.org/10.4000/annuaire-cdf.296 
The text and other elements (illustrations, imported files) are “All rights reserved”, unless otherwise
stated.
 RÉSUMÉS DES COURS ET CONFÉRENCES  927
relative chronology of his poems, for the lexicographical problems they pose, and 
for assessing the connection of his poetic with his religious thought. For a broader 
perspective on of what this all amounts to (and I confess feeling still too close to 
the data to have a desirable perspective), I look forward to the reactions and 
insights to be provided by the discussion.
M. Karl F
Professeur, University College London (Grande Bretagne)
A Free energy principle for the brain
Thursday May 29 th : Action, perception and free-energy
Value-learning and perceptual learning have been an important focus over the 
past decade, attracting the concerted attention of experimental psychologists, 
neurobiologists and the machine learning community. Despite some formal 
connections; e.g., the role of prediction error in optimising some function of 
sensory states, both fields have developed their own rhetoric and postulates.  In 
work, we show that perceptual learning is, literally, an integral part of value 
learning ; in the sense that perception is necessary to integrate out dependencies 
on the inferred causes of sensory information. This enables the value of sensory 
trajectories to be optimised through action. Furthermore, we show that acting to 
optimize value and perception are two aspects of exactly the same principle; namely 
the minimisation of a quantity [free energy] that bounds the probability of sensory 
input, given a particular agent or phenotype. This principle can be derived, in a 
straightforward way, from the very existence of agents, by considering the 
probabilistic behaviour of an ensemble of agents belonging to the same class.
This treatment unifies value and perceptual learning and suggests that value is 
simply the probability of sensory input expected by an agent. This means that 
acting to maximise value is the same as acting to minimise surprise; in other words, 
sampling the environment so that is conforms to our expectations. In this way, 
exchange or interactions with the environment are maintained within bounds that 
preserve the integrity of the agent. Clearly, the surprise of a sensory exchange 
depends on some representation or perceptual model of that exchange. We show 
that this model emerges naturally as the internal states of the agent optimise the 
free energy bound above.
This formulation is important because it places the mechanisms of value-learning 
and reinforcement in the larger context of perceptual learning. For example, 
conditioning paradigms (both classical and operant) can be regarded as introducing 
928 RÉSUMÉS DES COURS ET CONFÉRENCES 
statistical regularities into the sensorium. These are learned in the same way we 
learn the causal structure of sensory contingencies. In this view, rewards are simply 
predictable stimuli (and aversive stimuli are, be definition, surprising). Furthermore, 
the neurobiological substrates of value-learning become accountable to the larger 
problem of perceptual inference in the brain. For example, dopamine may not just 
signal reward but have a much more generic and role encoding the conditional 
certainty or precision of our predictions. This is consistent with a role in modulating 
the balance between bottom-up sensory information and top-down empirical 
priors, during perpetual inference.
Friday May 30th : (NeuroSpin) : Variational filtering and inference
We present a variational treatment of dynamic models that furnishes the time-
dependent conditional densities of a system’s states and the time-independent 
densities of its parameters. These obtain by maximising the variational free energy 
of the system with respect to the conditional densities. The ensuing free energy 
represents a lower-bound approximation to the models marginal likelihood or log-
evidence required for model selection and averaging. This approach rests on 
formulating the optimisation of free energy dynamically, in generalised co-ordinates 
of motion. The resulting scheme can be used for online Bayesian inversion of 
nonlinear dynamic causal models and eschews some limitations of existing 
approaches, such as Kalman and particle filtering. We refer to this approach as 
dynamic expectation maximisation ( DEM).
Monday June 1st : Perceptual inference and learning
This talk summarizes our recent attempts to integrate action and perception 
within a single optimization framework. We start with a statistical formulation of 
Helmholtz’s ideas about neural energy to furnish a model of perceptual inference 
and learning that can explain a remarkable range of neurobiological facts. Using 
constructs from statistical physics it can be shown that the problems of inferring 
what cause our sensory inputs and learning causal regularities in the sensorium can 
be resolved using exactly the same principles. Furthermore, inference and learning 
can proceed in a biologically plausible fashion. The ensuing scheme rests on 
Empirical Bayes and hierarchical models of how sensory information is generated. 
The use of hierarchical models enables the brain to construct prior expectations in 
a dynamic and context-sensitive fashion. This scheme provides a principled way to 
understand many aspects of the brain’s organization and responses.
Here, we suggest that these perceptual processes are just one aspect of systems 
that conform to a free-energy principle.  The free-energy considered here represents 
a bound on the surprise inherent in any exchange with the environment, under 
expectations encoded by its state or configuration. A system can minimize free-
energy by changing its configuration to change the way it samples the environment, 
or to change its expectations. These changes correspond to action and perception 
 RÉSUMÉS DES COURS ET CONFÉRENCES  929
respectively and lead to an adaptive exchange with the environment that is 
characteristic of biological systems. This treatment implies that the system’s state 
and structure encode an implicit and probabilistic model of the environment and 
that its actions suppress surprising exchanges with it. Furthermore, it suggests that 
free-energy, surprise and [negative] value are all the same thing. We will look at 
models entailed by the brain and how minimization of free-energy can explain its 
dynamics and structure.
M. David W
Professeur à l’Université d’Alabama, Birmingham (États-Unis)
Stroke, CV Disease and Chronic Kidney Disease
The incidence of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) is increasing in the United 
States (US) population USRDS, and the prevalence of chronic kidney disease also 
appears to be increasing, in parallel with increased surveillance, routine reporting 
of estimated glomerular filtration rates (eGFR) with the MDRD equation, as well 
as increasing prevalence of hypertension and diabetes in the general population. 
These same etiologic factors are also increasing at the global level; the increasing 
prevalence of CKD in the US population mirrors what is happening at the global 
level.
There is an increasing realization that CKD is associated with cardiovascular 
outcome events, and that this association is more marked with more advanced 
CKD. This association has been described with short-term outcomes in patients 
with acute myocardial infarction, as well as longer term outcome measures, 
including mortality rates, hospitalization rates and cardiovascular event rates.
Anemia is frequently associated with CKD, and when present, serves as an 
independent risk factor for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality associated.
Abramson et al. reported that CKD and anemia (hemoglobin < 12 gm/dl in 
women, and < 13 gm/dl in men) were independent risk factors for stroke in a 
middle-aged community-based population in the Atherosclerosis Risk in the 
Community (ARIC) study, with a relative risk of 7.49 in those subjects who are 
anemic and had creatinine clearance < 60 ml/min compared to the non-anemic 
participants with creatinine clearances > 60 ml/min. Similarly, the combination of 
anemia and CKD has a significant impact on survival after acute myocardial 
infarction in a study of Medicare recipients in Georgia. There are 3 large samples of 
patients in the US that provide estimates of the prevalence of CKD, with stratification 
according to the degree of impairment of kidney function: a) the Renal REGARDS 
cohort is the focus of our current efforts at the University of Alabama at Birmingham ; 