GallaGherembodied and enactive approaches to Cognition
This Element discusses contemporary theories of embodied 
cognition, including what has been termed the “4Es” 
(embodied, embedded, extended, and enactive cognition). It 
examines diverse approaches to questions about the nature 
of the mind, the mind’s relation to the brain, perceptual 
experience, mental representation, sensemaking, the role 
of the environment, and social cognition, and it considers 
the strengths and weaknesses of the theories in question. It 
contrasts embodied and enactive views with classic cognitivism, 
and discusses major criticisms and their possible resolutions. 
This Element also provides a strong focus on enactive theory 
and the prospects for integrating enactive approaches with 
other embodied and extended theories, mediated through 
recent developments in predictive processing and the free-
energy principle. It concludes with a brief discussion of the 
practical applications of embodied cognition. This title is also 
available as Open Access on Cambridge Core.
about the Series
This series provides concise, authoritative 
introductions to contemporary work 
in philosophy of mind, written by 
leading researchers and including both 
established and emerging topics. It 
provides an entry point to the primary 
literature and will be the standard 
resource for researchers, students, and 
anyone wanting a firm grounding in this 
fascinating field.
Series editor
Keith Frankish 
The University 
of Sheffield
Philosophy 
of Mind
ISSN 2633-9080 (online)
ISSN 2633-9072 (print)
embodied and 
enactive  
approaches to 
Cognition
Shaun Gallagher
Cover image: Baac3nes / Moment / Getty Images
This title is also available as Open Access on  
Cambridge Core at www.cambridge.org/core
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Elements in the Philosophy of Mind
edited by
Keith Frankish
The University of Sheﬃeld
EMBODIED AND ENACTIVE
APPROACHES TO
COGNITION
Shaun Gallagher
University of Memphis and
University of Wollongong
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Shaftesbury Road, Cambridge CB2 8EA, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314– 321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,
New Delhi– 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05– 06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment,
a department of the University of Cambridge.
We share the University’s mission to contribute to society through the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title:www.cambridge.org/9781009209809
DOI: 10.1017/9781009209793
© Shaun Gallagher 2023
This work is in copyright. It is subject to statutory exceptions and to the provisions
of relevant licensing agreements; with the exception of the Creative Commons version
the link for which is provided below, no reproduction of any part of this work may take
place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press & Assessment.
An online version of this work is published atdoi.org/10.1017/9781009209793 under
a Creative Commons Open Access license CC-BY-NC 4.0 which permits re-use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium for non-commercial purposes providing
appropriate credit to the original work is given and any changes made are indicated.
To view a copy of this license visithttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0
All versions of this work may contain content reproduced under license from third
parties. Permission to reproduce this third-party content must be obtained from these
third-parties directly.
When citing this work, please include a reference to the DOI10.1017/9781009209793
First published 2023
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978-1-009-20980-9 Paperback
ISSN 2633-9080 (online)
ISSN 2633-9072 (print)
Cambridge University Press & Assessment has no responsibility for the persistence
or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this
publication and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will
remain, accurate or appropriate.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
Elements in the Philosophy of Mind
DOI: 10.1017/9781009209793
First published online: July 2023
Shaun Gallagher
University of Memphis and University of Wollongong
Author for correspondence:Shaun Gallagher,s.gallagher@memphis.edu
Abstract: This Element discusses contemporary theories of embodied
cognition, including what has been termed the“4Es” (embodied,
embedded, extended, and enactive cognition). It examines diverse
approaches to questions about the nature of the mind, the mind’s
relation to the brain, perceptual experience, mental representation,
sensemaking, the role of the environment, and social cognition, and it
considers the strengths and weaknesses of the theories in question. It
contrasts embodied and enactive views with classic cognitivism, and
discusses major criticisms and their possible resolutions. This Element
also provides a strong focus on enactive theory and the prospects for
integrating enactive approaches with other embodied and extended
theories, mediated through recent developments in predictive
processing and the free-energy principle. It concludes with a brief
discussion of the practical applications of embodied cognition. This title
is also available as Open Access on Cambridge Core.
Keywords: cognition, embodied, embedded, extended, enactive
© Shaun Gallagher 2023
ISBNs: 9781009209809 (PB), 9781009209793 (OC)
ISSNs: 2633-9080 (online), 2633-9072 (print)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Contents
1 Introduction: What Is Embodied Cognition (EC)? 1
2 The Field of EC 2
3 The First E: Embodiment 5
4 The Second E: Embedded Cognition 14
5 The Third E: Extended Cognition 17
6 The Fourth E: Enactive Cognition 30
7 Causation, Constitution, and Free Energy 55
8 Conclusion: Some Practical Implications and Applications63
References 65
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
1 Introduction: What Is Embodied Cognition (EC)?
Generally speaking, theorists of embodied cognition (EC) claim that the body’s
neural and extraneural processes, as well as its mode of coupling with the
environment, play important roles in cognition. Embodied cognition has philo-
sophical roots in phenomenology and pragmatism, but also incorporates
insights from analytic philosophy of mind, and is richly informed by research
in developmental and experimental psychology, the neurosciences, and robot-
ics. Perhaps because of this diversity of disciplines and viewpoints, the concept
of EC is not a settled one. Although EC is usually portrayed as a challenge to
classic Cartesian and cognitivist accounts that have dominated and continue to
dominate theoretical approaches to the mind, this is not always the case.
Embodied cognition includes a variety of approaches ranging from conserva-
tive versions that stay close to standard computational models of the mind, to
more radical, nonrepresentationalist accounts that oppose narrow neurocentric
theories.
To help us map out the theoretical territory encompassed by EC, and its
relation to classic cognitivism (CC), that is, cognitive science approaches that
emphasize internal computational or mental representational processes,
I propose to use a modiﬁed set of questions specially designed for this purpose
by Alvin Goldman and Frederique de Vignemont (2009: 158). They present
a clear challenge to EC theorists to clarify what is meant by embodiment and
embodied cognitive processes. I will refer to them aschallenge questions, and
paraphrase them as follows: Under the selected interpretation of EC:
1. Which notion of embodiment is operative?
2. Which sectors of cognition, or which cognitive tasks, are embodied; and
how fully does each task involve embodiment?
3. What empirical evidence supports speciﬁc embodiment claims?
4. How do the proffered claims depart substantially from CC?
I will add aﬁfth question, closely related to (4).
5. What role do mental or neural representations play in cognition?
Answers to these questions can guide our understanding of both the theoret-
ical and practical stakes involved in different conceptions of EC.
First, however, we need to identify a list of candidate theories that fall under
the broad heading of EC. It is both a help and a hindrance that so many reviews
of EC start by offering a catalog of different approaches. It’s helpful in the sense
that they make some good distinctions among candidate approaches, but it’s
a hindrance in the sense that the lack of consensus about terminology and
principles of classi ﬁcation generates some important ambiguities. Still,
1Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
examining such attempts to characterize the ﬁeld of EC will facilitate our
introductory task by clarifying the scope of the various issues that will concern
us in the following sections. As I review these attempts, and as I map out the
ﬁeld of EC, I’ll return several times to the challenge questions.
2 The Field of EC
Let us start with MargaretWilson’s (2002)early characterization of“six views
of embodied cognition.” These “views” could rightly be thought of as a set of
principles that different approaches to EC might selectively embrace. I’ll label
them W for Wilson, 1– 6.
(W1) cognition is situated (the environment in which it happens plays
a signiﬁcant role)
(W2) cognition is time-pressured
(W3) we ofﬂoad cognitive work onto the environment
(W4) the environment is part of the cognitive system
(W5) cognition is for action
(W6) ofﬂine cognition is body-based.
Different theories of EC will emphasize different subsets of these claims,
while rejecting others. LarryShapiro (2007: 338), accordingly, prefers to call
EC “a research programme, rather than a theory, ... to indicate that the
commitments and subject matters of EC remain fairly nebulous.” He lists
three research goals for EC, which identify three different emphases:
(S1) An emphasis on the contribution of physical bodily processes to the
process of cognition
(S2) An emphasis on the contribution of bodily factors to thecontent of
cognition
(S3) An emphasis on the importance of body– environment coupling for
cognition.
If we divide Wilson’s six by Shapiro’s three, the issues start to multiply: W6 is
clearly related to S2. Both Wilson and Shapiro have in mind the work ofLakoff
and Johnson (1999), who show how ofﬂine, higher-order cognition is grounded in
bodily metaphors, or in body-related brain simulations, as found in the work of
Lawrence Barsalou (1999),A r t h u rGlenberg (2010), and others (seeSection 3.1
for a discussion of these approaches). If there is good agreement on this point,
agreement is less clear on the other claims. Under S3, Shapiro mentions only the
concept of extended mind (Clark & Chalmers 1998). Should it also include
Wilson’s claims about situated (W2) and action-oriented (W5) cognition? It’s
2 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
not clear. It’s also not clear that S1 is covered by any of Wilson’s claims, or that
W2 ﬁts with any of Shapiro’s goals. There are other lists that expand the inventory
of issues to include, for example, robotic bodies and artiﬁcial agents (e.g.,Ziemke
2001).
For our purposes, the point is not to reﬁne these lists, but to notice the wide
variety of themes, issues, and approaches covered by EC. Indeed, rounding out
approximately twenty years of attempts to classify forms of EC,Shapiro and
Spaulding (2021), referencing Wilson, warn that trying to reduce the numbers
“risks generalizing the description of embodied cognition to the extent that its
purported novelty is jeopardized.”
Perhaps the most inﬂuential attempt to deﬁne theﬁeld of EC has been the idea
of 4E cognition ( Menary 2010c; Newen, De Bruin, & Gallagher 2018 ;
Rowlands 2010). The 4E (embodied, embedded, extended, and enactive) con-
cept involves a minor ambiguity, however. On the one hand, it is an attempt to
characterize generally different approaches to EC; on the other hand, it includes
“embodied” cognition as one speciﬁc kind of approach. In addition, it has
become customary to note that there are more than four Es that should be
included in any comprehensive account of the mind; for example, ecological,
emotional, empathic, existential, and so on.
Although no one classiﬁcatory scheme can do full justice to the complexity
involved in EC, for the purposes of the following discussions I adopt the 4E
schema. It is important to note several limitations or qualiﬁcations attached to
this strategy. First, there are many convergence points as well as disagreements
among the 4Es. For example, we canﬁnd principles from ecological psychology
being taken up in all four of the 4E approaches. And although affect or emotion-
related processes are clearly emphasized in theﬁrst E (embodied), they also
play a prominent part in enactive accounts. Likewise, body– environment coup-
ling may be central to embedded, extended, and enactive approaches, even if
deﬁned somewhat differently by each one. Such differences can be important.
For example, an embedded approach would claim that environmental factors
can have only a causal in ﬂuence on cognition; extended and enactive
approaches often claim that in some circumstances environmental factors
contribute constitutively to cognition. This is the difference between Wilson’s
W3, where we ofﬂoad cognitive work onto the environment, allowing the
environment to play a causal role, and W4, where the environment is considered
to be part of the cognitive system.1 In addition, from one E to the next, there is
1 Shapiro and Spaulding (2021: n.p.) point out that the concept of body– environment coupling has
several meanings, but that ecological and enactive approaches share a technical deﬁnition of
coupling expressed in terms of dynamic systems theory.
3Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
no strong consensus on what weight to give to basic concepts such as embodi-
ment or representation.
Moreover, contrary to what is typically assumed, not all EC approaches share
a common opposition to the classic cognitivism model of cognition. This is
a contentious issue. If the standard computational model of cognition trades on
the idea that mental processes are computational processes that operate across
representations, and is committed to the internalist, neurocentric conception
that cognition is always“in the head,” EC in most (but not all) versions rejects
one or both of these commitments and emphasizes the signiﬁcance of bodily
processes, and of interactions with the environment, for cognitive systems.
In addition, different 4E approaches propose different ways in which the
body plays a role in shaping cognition. On one view, the nonneural body
processes information prior to and subsequent to central or neural manipula-
tions (e.g., Chiel & Beer 1997); on another view, minimal, action-oriented
representations do some of the work (Clark 1997; Wheeler 2005); and on still
another conception, the body itself plays a representational role (Rowlands
2006). In contrast, enactive approaches suggest that posture and bodily move-
ment, including sensorimotor contingencies (i.e., how sensory processes
respond to bodily movement;O’Regan & Noë, 2001), and bodily affectivity
(Colombetti 2014) all enter into cognition in a nonrepresentational way. For
some, the idea that the body is dynamically coupled to the environment is
important (Di Paolo 2005; Thompson 2007); for others, the idea that action
affordances are body- and skill-relative is essential (Chemero 2009). These
ideas, to one degree or other, help to shift the ground away from orthodox
cognitive science. In general terms, it’s not just the brain but the brain– body–
environment that is agentive in cognition. Even if this is the broad message of
EC, in some versions of EC the material and structural aspects of embodiment
are discounted, and cognition continues to be characterized in terms of internal
representations, as we’ll see in thenext section.
If these are differences that distinguish the different E-approaches, it is also
important to note that there are also signiﬁcant differences to be found within
each of the Es. Within theﬁrst E, for example, there has been a distinction made
between “weak” embodiment, which stays close to computational and
The behaviors of objects are coupled when the differential equations that describe the
behavior of one contains a term that refers to the behavior of the other.... The co-
occurrence of terms in the equations that describe a dynamical system shows that the
behavior of the objects to which they refer are co-dependent. They are thus usefully
construed as constituents of a single system– a system held together by the interactions
of parts whose relationships are captured in coupled differential equations.
As such, the coupling relation is considered to be constitutive of cognition. I discuss this claim in
Section 7.1.
4 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
representational models, and“strong” embodiment, which rejects those stand-
ard models. Within embedded approaches one can distinguish between
emphases on environmental constraints (where external factors impinge on
the agent) versus ecological relationality (where factors count only in their
tight relation with the agent). Within discussions of extended mind, one can
deﬁne two, three, or even four versions or“waves,” some of which endorse
conceptions of computation and representation; and within enactive
approaches, there are distinctions between autopoietic and radical enactivism,
although they both share an antirepresentationalist approach.
Hence the need for a good map. In the following sections I will explore in
more detail the EC landscape, focusing on the 4Es, and I’ll try to show how each
one answers the challenge questions we started with. Starting inSection 6,I ’ll
focus more closely on enactive approaches to cognition.
3 The First E: Embodiment
Adrian Alsmith and Frederique de Vignemont (2012) distinguish between
“weak” and “strong” embodiment. Strong embodiment endorses a signiﬁcant
explanatory role for the (nonneural) body in cognition; weak embodiment gives
a signiﬁcant explanatory role to body-related or body-formatted (neural) repre-
sentations. Indeed, for weak EC, the body per se– including its anatomical,
postural, kinetic, and more general physical features – is not necessarily
involved in cognitive processes. Rather, all the real and relevant action occurs
in the brain. Except for the brain, this version of EC is strikingly disembodied;
embodiment signiﬁes, at best, the“body in the brain” (Berlucchi & Aglioti
2010; Tsakiris 2010).
3.1 Weak EC
Alvin Goldman, building on research in psychology, neuroscience, linguistics,
and philosophy, has given the most developed account of what he calls
a “unifying and comprehensive” account of EC (2012: 85). On his view,
however, actual bodies play a marginal and perhaps even trivial role in cogni-
tion. Rather, body-formatted (or B-formatted) representations in the brain do
most of the work. Goldman thus rules out aspects of anatomy, sensorimotor
contingencies, and environmental couplings as relevant to cognition, and he
makes it clear that“[t]he brain is the seat of most, if not all, mental events”
(Goldman & de Vignemont 2009: 154). The processes involving B-formatted
neural representations are purely internal to the brain and, asShapiro (2014)
suggests, they could just as well be thought to occupy a well-equipped vat. The
reference here is to a well-known thought experiment, the brain in the vat,
5Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
which, on one interpretation, proposes to show that cognitive function, experi-
ence, and representational content would be the same for a disembodied brain in
a vat, kept alive by chemicals and provided with the appropriate inputs (via
direct neural stimulation), as for a fully embodied subject. Goldman introduces
one careful qualiﬁcation to this sort of claim; namely, that it is“possible (indeed,
likely)” that the contents of such representations will depend on what they
“causally interact with ... . Envatted brain states would not have the same
contents as brain states of ordinary embodied brains” (2014: 104). Body and
environment may thus have some minimal role to play in this.
What precisely are B-formatted representations?Goldman (2012) admits
that, despite frequent mentions of representational formats in cognitive science,
it is not clear what a format is. Representations are classically thought to involve
language-like (propositional) aspects, following distinctive syntactical proced-
ures or rules that may differ across different sensory modalities (Jackendoff
2002). B-formats, however, are nonpropositional, and speciﬁcally they“repre-
sent states of the subject’s own body, indeed, represent them from an internal
perspective” (Goldman 2012: 73). Jesse Prinz suggests that“such representa-
tions and processes come in two forms: there are representations and processes
that represent or respond to the body, such as a perception of bodily movement,
and there are representations and processes that affect the body, such as motor
commands” (Prinz 2009: 420). Goldman suggests that mirror neurons (acti-
vated when the perceiving subject engages in intentional action, and when the
perceiver sees another agent engaged in such action) form B-formatted repre-
sentations. Somatosensory, affective, and interoceptive representations are also
B-formatted, “associated with the physiological conditions of the body, such as
pain, temperature, itch, muscular and visceral sensations, vasomotor activity,
hunger and thirst” (Goldman & de Vignemont 2009: 156). Accordingly, repre-
sentations associated with an interoceptive process or motor task, where the
contents of the representation are“of one’s own bodily states and activities,” are
B-formatted and may involve proprioceptive and kinesthetic information about
one’s own muscles, joints, and limb positions (Goldman 2012: 71). Such
information, which may originate peripherally, is B-formatted only when rep-
resented centrally:“for example, codes associated with activations in somato-
sensory cortex and motor cortex” (2012: 74).
In order to expand the explanatory scope of B-formats beyond cognitive
operations that concern only bodily processes, Goldman adopts Michael
Anderson’s (2010) “reuse hypothesis”; that is, the idea that, within an evolu-
tionary time frame, neural circuits originally established for one use can be
reused or redeployed for other purposes while still maintaining their original
function. For example, mirror neurons start out as motor neurons involved in
6 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
motor control, but through the course of evolution they get exapted and are put
to work in contexts of social cognition– activated not just for motor control, but
also when one agent sees another agent act. Any cognitive task that employs
a B-formatted representation, in either its original function or its exapted/
derived function is, on this deﬁnition, a form of EC.
Goldman provides some good examples of the reuse principle in linguistics.
Pulvermüller’s (2005) language-grounding hypothesis shows that language
comprehension involves the activation of cortical motor areas. For example,
when a subject hears the wordlick, the sensorimotor area for tongue movement
is activated; action words likepick and kick activate cortical areas that involve
the hand and the foot, respectively. Language comprehension thus reﬂects the
reuse of interoceptive, B-formatted motor representations. This suggests that
“higher-order thought is grounded in low-level representations of motor action”
(Goldman 2014: 97). In this regard, Goldman also references work byGlenberg
(2010), Barsalou (1999), and Lakoff and Johnson (1999), showing how, by
simulation or metaphor respectively, one can explain the embodied roots of
abstract thought. Memory, for example, can involve activation of motor-control
circuits (Casasanto & Dijkstra 2010); counting involves activation of motor
areas related to the hand (Andres, Seron, & Olivier 2007). Accordingly, these
cognitive activities should be considered as instances of EC.
Goldman also holds that B-formatted representations play some role in
perception. He references the work of Dennis Profﬁtt, who shows that bodily
states (fatigue, physicalﬁtness), anticipation of bodily effort, and even percep-
tion of one’s own body can modulate perceptual estimations of the distance,
slope, and size of objects in the environment (Profﬁtt 2006; Profﬁtt et al. 1995).
According to weak EC, the brain, which monitors such bodily processes,
integrates perceptual information with B-formatted representations, understood
as internal motor simulations, which, in turn, inform perceptual judgments
about distance, slope, size, and so on. If the perceiver is fatigued or if task
A will take more effort than task B, distance to target will seem longer, judged
“from an‘actional’ perspective” (Goldman 2012: 83).
The subject tries to reenact the cognitive activity that would accompany the
motor activity in question– without actually setting any effectors in motion.
During this series of steps– or perhaps at the end– the energetic or physio-
logical states of the system are monitored. Distance judgments are arrived at
partly as a function of the detected levels of these states. (2012: 83)
Neither Profﬁtt nor Goldman provide details about the internal mechanisms
involved, but they are characterized as a simulation process. The brain’s
simulation detects the levels of ener gy required for the task, informing
7Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
perceptual judgment. Details aside, Goldman ’s point is that this type of
process exempli ﬁes neural reuse where B-formatted representations are
redeployed for various cognitive tasks, in this case, distance perception.
From the perspective of strong embodiment – or EC more generally –
this version of weak EC, which promotes the role of “sanitized”
B-representations, is problematic and, paradoxically, disembodied, espe-
cially if one deﬁnes the body as not including the brain. “Embodiment
theorists want to elevate the importance of the body in explaining cogni-
tive activities. What is meant by‘body’ here? It ought to mean: the whole
physical body minus the brain. Letting the brain qualify as part of the body
would trivialize the claim that the body is crucial to mental life” (Goldman
& de Vignemont 2009: 154). In addition, weak EC removes the body from
the environment in order to focus on“the body (understood literally), not
[as it is related] to the situation or environment in which the body is
embedded” (154). A core claim in other versions of EC, however, is that
the body cannot be uncoupled from its environment. As Randall Beer
(2000) puts it: “Given that bodies and nervous systems co-evolve with
their environments, and only the behavior of complete animals is subjected
to selection, the need for ... a tightly coupled perspective should not be
surprising” (also see Brooks 1991; Chemero 2009, Chiel & Beer 1997).
Without a brain, and without an environment, the literal body would be
literally dead.
As Alsmith and de Vignemont point out, ideas found in weak EC“are but
a hair’s breadth away from the... neurocentric idea that cognitive states are
exclusively realized in neural hardware” (2012: 5). Indeed, weak EC is not
inconsistent with a classic cognitivist (CC) framework. Insofar as it precludes
any signiﬁcant contribution from the body, it ignores the fact that EC more
generally challenges this very framework. AsAlsmith and Vignemont (2012:2 )
acknowledge, “positing body representations actually undermines the explana-
tory role of the body, in the same manner in which positing representations of
the world has been thought to undermine the explanatory role of the environ-
ment.” They contrast this to a stronger view that“certain types of representation
are so closely dependent upon the non-neural body (i.e., the body besides the
brain), that their involvement in a cognitive task implicates the non-neural body
itself.” The fact that weak EC rejects the latter alternative is clear in Barsalou’s
claim that cognition operates on reactivation of motor areas, but“can indeed
proceed independently of the speciﬁc body that encoded the sensorimotor
experience” (2008: 619).
Let’s now apply Goldman and de Vignemont’s challenge questions to their
own version of weak EC.
8 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
1. Which notion of embodiment is operative?Weak EC suggests a minimal
interpretation which reduces relevant body-related processes to sanitized
brain representations.
2. Which sectors of cognition, or which cognitive tasks, are embodied; and how
fully does each task involve embodiment? Goldman and de Vignemont
(2009: 158) focus on social cognition and suggest that EC is unlikely to
generalize beyond that. OnceGoldman (2012)adopts the reuse hypothesis,
however, he thinks EC can generalize and accordingly, can be extended to
a large number of cognitive operations, encompassing interoception, per-
ception, and even higher-order processes.
3. What empirical evidence supports speciﬁc embodiment claims?Empirical
evidence tied to research on mirror neurons, and evidence that lesions
affecting B-formatted representations “interfere with action and emotion
recognition,” support the claims of weak EC (Goldman & de Vignemont
2009: 156).Goldman (2012; 2014) adds empirical evidence from studies by
Pulvermüller, Barsalou, Profﬁtt, and others.
4. How do the proffered claims depart substantially from CC?Although weak
EC seems relatively consistent with CC, the latter never anticipated the
“low-level nature” of B-representations.
5. What role do mental or neural representations play in cognition?Weak EC
is strongly representational. Simulations just are representations, albeit of
the B-formatted kind.
3.2 Embodied Semantics
Although Goldman includes the work of Lakoff and Johnson as an example of
weak EC, I’ll argue that, to the extent they eschew representationalism, they
occupy an intermediate position between weak EC and strong EC. According to
this intermediate position, not only do the structure, composition, and motor
abilities of the body determine how we experience things; they also determine
what we experience, and how we understand the world. Lakoff and Johnson–
drawing primarily on cognitive and experimental linguistics but also cultural
anthropology, psychological, neuroscientiﬁc, and cognitive science research on
mental rotation, mental imagery, gestures, and sign language– have famously
argued that our conceptual life begins in spatial and motor behaviors and derives
meaning from bodily experience. Accordingly, the “peculiar nature of our
bodies shapes our very possibilities for conceptualization and categorization”
(Lakoff & Johnson 1999: 19). For them, the speciﬁc mechanism that bridges
embodied experience and conceptual thought is metaphor.
9Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Metaphors are built on basic and recurring“image-schemas” such as front–
back, in– out, near– far, pushing, pulling, supporting, balance, and so on. Basic
image-schemas are, in turn, generated in bodily experience (Lakoff & Johnson
1999: 36). Thus,“the concepts offront and back are body-based. They make
sense only for beings with fronts and backs. If all beings on this planet were
uniform stationary spheresﬂoating in some medium and perceiving equally in
all directions, they would have no concepts offront and back” (34). Similar
things can be said forup– down, inside–outside, and so forth. These basic image-
schemas then shape, metaphorically, our abstract conceptual thought, as well as
our planning and decision-making. The abstract concept of justice, for example,
is characterized as a kind of balance; virtue is conceived in terms of being
upright, and planning for the future is conceived in terms of up and forward–
“What’s coming up this week?” The in–out image-schema and the containment
metaphor, for example, range over a vast set of concepts, from the close-to-
literal –“ John went out of the room”– to the abstract–“ she ﬁnally came out of
her depression,” or “I don’t want to leave any relevant data out of my argu-
ment”– to the logically abstract, such as the law of the excluded middle
(Johnson 1987). This view has been extended to explanations of mathematical
concepts as well (Lakoff & Núñez 2000).
On the one hand, Lakoff and Johnson endorse some forms of neural simula-
tion. “An embodied concept is a neural structure that is part of, or makes use of
the sensorimotor system of our brains. Much of conceptual inference is, there-
fore, sensorimotor inference” (Lakoff & Johnson 1999: 20). The Lakoff–
Johnson view may also be consistent with a connectionist view, and on one
interpretation (Zlatev 2010) it is not inconsistent with classic cognitivism. Yet,
the fact that Lakoff and Johnson eschew internal representations moves them
closer to strong, even enactivist views of EC.
As we said inPhilosophy in the Flesh, the only workable theory of represen-
tations is one in which a representation is aﬂexible pattern of organism-
environment interactions, and not some inner mental entity that somehow
gets hooked up with parts of the external world by a strange relation called
“reference.” We reject such classic notions of representation, along with the
views of meaning and reference that are built on them. Representation is
a term that we try carefully to avoid. (Johnson & Lakoff 2002: 249– 250)
3.3 Strong EC
In contrast to weak EC, which denies that anatomy and bodily movement are
important factors for cognition, strong EC suggests that anatomy and movement
are nontrivial contributors to the shaping of cognition prior to brain processing
10 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
(preprocessing) and subsequent to brain processing (postprocessing) (e.g.,
Chiel & Beer 1997; Shapiro 2004). Embodiment in this case means that extra-
neural structural features of the body shape our cognitive experience (Gallagher
2005a). For example, the fact that we have two eyes, positioned as they are,
delivers us binocular vision and allows us to see the relative depth of things.
Similar observations can be made about the position of our ears and our ability
to tell the direction of sound. As Shapiro puts it,“the point is not simply [or
trivially] that perceptual processesﬁt bodily structure. Perceptual processes
depend on and includebodily structures” (2004: 190).
Our sensory experiences also depend on the way our heads and bodies move,
as we see in the case of perceptual parallax displacement ( Churchland,
Ramachandran, & Sejnowski 1994). Furthermore, our motor responses, rather
than being fully determined at brain level, are mediated by the design of muscles
and tendons, their degrees ofﬂexibility, their geometric relationships to other
muscles and joints, their complex degrees of freedom, and their prior history of
activation (Berthoz 2000). This sort of evidence motivates the idea that move-
ment is not always centrally planned; it is based on a competitive system that
requires what Andy Clark terms“soft assembly.” The nervous system learns“to
modulate parameters (such as stiffness [of limb or joint]) which will then
interact with intrinsic bodily and environmental constraints so as to yield
desired outcomes” (Clark 1997: 45).
The claims of strong EC are also based on the following kinds of evidence.
Various experiments show that how we are moving or posturing ourselves (e.g.,
pushing something away from our body versus pulling something toward it)
will affect our evaluations of target objects (e.g., Chen & Bargh 1999).
Likewise, in experiments byGlenberg and Kaschak (2002), subjects pressed
a button or pulled a lever to indicate whether action sentences made sense or
not – for example, sentences like“open the drawer” (which involves a pulling
toward the body) or“close the drawer” (which involves pushing away from the
body). Reaction times were shorter when the response motion was in the same
direction as the motion represented by the action sentences (seeVarga 2018for
a review of other experiments like this).
As Shapiro notes:“steps in a cognitive process that a traditionalist would
attribute to symbol manipulation might, from the perspective of [strong] EC,
emerge from the physical attributes of the body” (2007: 340). Still, many of
these results are cast in terms of information processing, and in that respect may
be construed as consistent with the general principles of classic cognitivism.
Even if the body is doing some of the work, cognitivists could easily claim that
preprocessing is in fact feeding the central processing that is truly constitutive of
11Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
cognition, just as postprocessing is to some degree determined by instructions
from the brain as central processor.
More holistic, biological, proprioceptive, and emotion-related processes,
however, may be more challenging to the classic conception. There is long-
standing empirical evidence that such processes have a profound effect on
perception and thinking. For example, vibration-induced proprioceptive pat-
terns that change the posture of the whole body are interpreted as changes in the
perceived environment (Roll & Roll 1988), while postural-proprioceptive
adjustments of the body can help to resolve perceptual conﬂicts (Rock &
Harris 1967). Alterations of the postural schema (e.g., subsequent to bariatric
surgery) can lead to alterations in space perception (Natvik et al. 2019).
Likewise, hormonal changes– changes in body chemistry– as well as visceral
and musculoskeletal processes can bias perception, memory, attention, and
decision-making (Damasio 1994; Gallagher 2005a; Shapiro 2004). The regula-
tion of body chemistry is not autonomous of cognitive processes, and vice versa.
“Body regulation, survival, and mind are intimately interwoven” (Damasio
1994: 123).
Accordingly, it’s not just proprioceptive or motoric processes that play
into cognitive processing. In this respect one notes the importance of
pervasive affective processes, which include emotion and mood, but also
basic bodily processes that pertain to hunger, fatigue, and hedonic sensa-
tions. Somaesthetic factors such as hunger or fatigue delimit our percep-
tion and action possibilities, as well as our cognitive processes. A study
by Danziger, Levav, and Avnaim-Pesso (2011) , for example, reinforces
the idea that hunger can shape, and perhaps even distort, cognitive
processes. Judicial decisions in a court of law are not simply a matter
of the rational application of legal reasons. Whether the judge is hungry
or satiated may play an important role. “The percentage of favorable
rulings drops gradually from ≈65% to nearly zero within each decision
session [e.g., between breakfast and lunch] and returns abruptly to ≈65%
after a [food] break. Our ﬁndings suggest that judicial rulings can be
swayed by extraneous variables that should have no bearing on legal
decisions ” (Danziger et al. 2011: 1). In one sense, such affective factors
appear “extraneous ” only if we think of cognition as disembodied,
although clearly they may be considered extraneous to the formal aspects
of legal reasoning. Still, hunger can have an effect on the jurist’s percep-
tion of the facts, as well as on the weighing of evidence (see Varga
[2018] for the implications of EC for courtroom interactions and for
challenges to juridical legitimacy).
12 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
The experiments by Profﬁtt, cited by Goldman in support of weak EC can be
interpreted as supporting a stronger version of EC.Profﬁtt et al. (1995)show
that fatigue, or more directly, physical burden, for example, can affect percep-
tion; subjects estimate the grade of an incline to be steeper while wearing
a heavy backpack in comparison to when they are wearing none. Typically,
however, this would not be a simple, isolated effect based on a single isolated
affective state. Rather, we typically experience a mélange of affective pro-
cesses. My trek up the mountain results in a perception of the path in front of
me that is informed by a combination of my fatigue, my troubled respiration, my
hunger, my pain, my feelings of dirtiness, and the kinesthetic difﬁculty involved
in climbing. More generally, the mountain path looks quite different and less
challenging after a good night’s sleep, not because the objective qualities of the
path have changed but because of my affective state. As such, affective pro-
cesses may manifest themselves in the impact they have on perception and
action without me knowing it (i.e., prenoetically), despite modulating my
phenomenal consciousness.
Affective factors thus involve a complex motivational dimension that ani-
mates body– world interaction (Colombetti 2014; Stapleton 2013;). Affect is
deeply embodied. It is constrained by the functioning of the circulatory system,
for example. Heartbeat inﬂuences how and whether fear-inducing stimuli (e.g.,
images of fearful faces presented to experimental subjects) are processed
(Garﬁnkel et al. 2014). When the heart contracts in its systole phase, fearful
stimuli are more easily recognized, and they tend to be perceived as more fearful
than when presented in its diastole phase. Likewise, experiments on respiration
show signiﬁcant modulations on cognitive processes, including emotion and
pain perception, with variations in breathing (Varga & Heck 2017; Zelano et al.
2016). Noting the importance of such embodied factors gives us a perspective
that can breathe life into the strong EC account. The fact that we areﬂesh-and-
blood creatures, living bodies equipped with beating hearts, rather than brains in
vats, explains in part why we have just the sorts of affective states and percep-
tual experiences that we do.
Strong EC thus requires that we acknowledge the role of core bio-systemic
processes that range across motoric, interoceptive, affective, autonomic, endo-
crine, and enteric functions. On this reading of EC, the classic thought experi-
ment of the brain in the vat is unworkable because it fails to take into
consideration the contributions of body performances. As several theorists
have pointed out, the vat engineers would have to replicate everything that the
biological body delivers in terms of pre-and postprocessing, precise and time-
constrained hormonal and neurotransmitter chemistry, emotional life, and so on.
As Damasio suggests, this would require the creation of a body surrogate“and
13Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
thus conﬁrm that‘body-type inputs’ are required for a normally minded brain
after all” (1994: 228; also see Cosmelli &Thompson 2007; Gallagher 2005b).
Note, then, that strong EC does not deny the importance of the brain. Our
understanding of brain function, however, depends on the fact that the brain and
the body coevolved– again, something that we have known for a long time, at
least since the time at which distinctions between psychology, physiology, and
philosophy were being initiated:“You must understand the living organism
before you can interpret the function of the brain” (Lewes 1879: 75).
The challenge questions are:
1. Which notion of embodiment is operative?Strong EC suggests that the full
body’s neural and nonneural factors, including a good variety of bodily
systems (motoric, affective, autonomic, etc.), play signi ﬁcant roles in
cognition.
2. Which sectors of cognition, or which cognitive tasks, are embodied, and how
fully does each task involve embodiment?According to the studies we cited,
various aspects of embodiment are fully involved in perception and action
but also in evaluative judgments. Later, we’ll show that bodily (motoric and
affective) processes play an important role in social cognition.
3. What empirical evidence supports speciﬁc embodiment claims?Studies of
kinesthetics, motor control and body schematic processes, perceptual track-
ing, neural synchronization, respiration, and so on, support the idea that
bodily processes play important roles in perception and judgment.
4. How do the proffered claims depart substantially from CC?Strong EC
emphasizes the role of physical extraneural processes that are not well
captured by computational models.
5. What role do mental or neural representations play in cognition?Strong EC
tends to emphasize the role of bodily and environmental physical processes
rather than internal representations. As we’ll see shortly, however, this does
not rule out the idea that external representations may play a signiﬁcant role
in learning, problem-solving, and communication.
4 The Second E: Embedded Cognition
The general idea of embedded cognition is that in some cases the environment
scaffolds our cognitive processes, or that engagement with environmental
features can shift cognitive load. Robert Rupert explains: “Cognitive pro-
cesses depend very heavily, in hitherto unexpected ways, on organismically
external props and devices and on the structure of the external environment in
which cognition takes place ” (2004: 393). When agents coordinate their
14 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
activity with environmental resources such as external artifacts, cognitive
processes may be productively constrained or enabled by objective features,
or enhanced by the affordances on offer. Examples include using written notes
to reduce demands on working memory, setting a timer as a reminder to do
something, using a map or the surrounding landscape to assist in navigation,
or – since the environment is not just physical, but also social– asking another
person for directions. As Margaret Wilson put it: “rather than attempt to
mentally store and manipulate all the relevant details about a situation, we
physically store and manipulate those details out in the world, in the very
situation itself” (2002: 629). The most straightforward claims in this regard
are based on processes that are pervasive. One can think of learning and
educational practices, the reliance on books, chalk- or whiteboards, the
arrangement of classrooms, interaction with instructors, and so on. One can
also think of how we gain knowledge in science, where passive observation is
less the rule than active manipulation using instruments and labs to reﬁne
discovery and measurement, or the use of diagrams and charts to organize our
conclusions. That such practices scaffold our thinking processes can be seen in
cases where the use of such tools produces new knowledge. For example,
drawing a diagram to demonstrate a result may lead to new realizations, new
diagrams, new experiments, and new knowledge (Bredo 1994).
Under the heading of embedded cognition we can list several different
approaches including situated cognition, distributed cognition, and ecological
cognition. Although the term“situated cognition” is sometimes regarded as
equivalent to EC more generally (Robbins & Aydede 2009), embedded cogni-
tion includes the idea that agents are actively or passively situated in the
environment. On the one hand, situated agents can engage in “epistemic
actions”– actions that actively manipulate the environment to reduce cognitive
load (Kirsh & Maglio 1994). On the other hand, situated cognition may mean
that the environment plays a constraining or enabling role. In this regard,
context matters; physical, social, and cultural contexts may make speciﬁc
forms of cognition possible. Certain environments may facilitate cognition
and learning, while other environments don’t. Embedded/situated cognition
allows for the possibility that a speciﬁc design or rearrangement of an environ-
ment, including virtual (computer-simulated) environments, can facilitate
learning and problem-solving. The concept of cognitive niche construc-
tion, which originates in the ﬁeld of biological evolution, is relevant here
(Sterelny 2010) and is also developed in extended mind contexts ( Clark
2008a; Wheeler & Clark 2008). On this view, organisms (and species) improve
their chances of survival and their ability to solve problems by modifying their
environments, or actively transforming long-term relations with the
15Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
environment. Philosophically, the common message is that cognition does not
happen in thin air, or abstractly in-the-head, but is always, as a phenomenologist
might say, in-the-world, or as Edwin Hutchins might say,“in the wild.”
Hutchins is known for his work in the area of distributed cognition, which is
committed to the idea that the boundaries and mechanisms of the cognitive
system may be distributed in the sense that they may involve (1) coordination
between internal and external (material or environmental) structures; (2) pro-
cesses distributed across time, such that products of earlier events can transform
later events; and (3) the coordinated efforts of members of a team, including
artiﬁcial agents (Hutchins 2000). He develops this idea in his analysis of ship
navigation (Hutchins 1995a). Navigators solve cognitively complex problems
(e.g., calculating the speed of the ship in knots) by working together and using
instruments (such as nomogram and a straight-edge ruler).
It is clear that cognitive work is being done, but it is also clear that the
processes inside the person are not, by themselves, sufﬁcient to accomplish
the computation. A larger unit of analysis must be considered. The skills of
scale reading and interpolation are coordinated with the manipulation of
objects to establish a particular state of coordination between the straightedge
and the nomogram. (Hutchins 2000:8 )
The solution to the problem, the calculation, is achieved by the manipulation
of the artifact, which is something that allows for a more reliable result than
attempting to work it out in one’s head, or even by pencil and paper. Cognitive
work can be accomplished by engaging with collaborative technologies which
support the productive interaction of team members (who play different roles).
In the context of team cognition this has often been framed in terms of shared
external representations, which may be communicated in whole or in part by
various media, examples of which can be found not only in navigational
systems of naval vessels, but in airline cockpits (Hutchins 1995b), and air-
trafﬁc control systems (Halverson 1995). In such contexts weﬁnd cognitive
artifacts that not only augment existing human capabilities, but transform the
task into a different one, “allowing resources to be reallocated into
a conﬁguration that better suits the cognitive capabilities of the problem solver,”
even when that problem solver is a team rather than an individual (Perry 2003:
201; Fiore et al. 2003).
The ecological approach, deriving from James Gibson’s ecological psych-
ology, starts,“in the wild,” with our natural and constructed niches, and explains
how action possibilities are enabled or constrained by environmental structure.
Gibson builds his ecological understanding of embodied action around the
concept of affordances:“The affordances of the environment are what it offers
16 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
the animal, what it provides or furnishes, either for good or ill” (1979: 127).
Gibson was inﬂuenced byMerleau-Ponty (2012), who in turn carried forward
the phenomenological concept of the“I can” (Husserl 1989)o r“ready-to-hand”
(Heidegger 1962) – the idea that we experience the world perceptually in
pragmatic terms of what we can do with the objects that surround us. The
term “affordance” efﬁciently captures these concepts. We’ll have more to say
about ecological views inSection 6, since they help to shape certain enactive
approaches.
How does embedded cognition answer the challenge questions?
1. Which notion of embodiment is operative?Embedded cognition emphasizes
how a perceiving and agentive body engages with the environment, and the
causal role of artifacts, props, technological instruments, and so on, in
cognition.
2. Which sectors of cognition, or which cognitive tasks, are embodied; and how
fully does each task involve embodiment? Learning, memory, problem-
solving, and epistemic actions more generally depend on bodily interaction
with the physical and social environment.
3. What empirical evidence supports speci ﬁc embodiment claims?
Experimental psychology (including experiments in ecological psych-
ology), studies in evolutionary science, and ethnographic studies of speciﬁc
pragmatic and social contexts support a variety of claims made by embedded
cognition.
4. How do the proffered claims depart substantially from CC? Embedded
cognition emphasizes the role of body– environment interactions that are
not usually considered by CC.
5. What role do mental or neural representations play in cognition?Most
embedded cognition theorists share with strong EC an emphasis on the role
of bodily and environmental physical processes rather than internal represen-
tations. Rupert (2011), however, endorses the idea of a“massively represen-
tational mind,” although he conceives of representations in a minimal sense
(see Section 6.2for further discussion). Most generally, from the embedded
cognition view, external representations operate as instruments that can play
a role in learning, problem-solving, and communication.
5 The Third E: Extended Cognition
Both the historical background and the contemporary foreground that inform
the concept of extended mind are complex. In the deep philosophical back-
ground one canﬁnd a preﬁguring of the extended-mind hypothesis (EMH) in
17Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
pragmatists like Charles Sanders Peirce and John Dewey. Peirce, for example,
contends that“it is noﬁgure of speech to say that the alembics and cucurbits of
the chemist are instruments of thought, or logical machines” (1887: 168). He
also suggests that his inkstand can count as part of his thinking apparatus.
A psychologist cuts out a lobe of my brain... and then, when Iﬁnd I cannot
express myself, he says,“You see, your faculty of language was localized in
that lobe.” No doubt it was; and so, if he hadﬁlched my inkstand, I should not
have been able to continue my discussion until I had got another. Yea, the very
thoughts would not come to me. So my faculty of discussion is equally
localized in my inkstand. (Peirce 1958: 366)
Likewise, Dewey afﬁrms a parity between brain processes, the agent’s body,
and various tools and instruments in the thinking process.
Hands and feet, apparatus and appliances of all kinds are as much a part of
[thinking] as changes in the brain. Since these physical operations (including
the cerebral events) and equipments are a part of thinking, thinking is mental,
not because of a peculiar stuff which enters into it or of peculiar non-natural
activities which constitute it, but because of what physical acts and appli-
ances do: the distinctive purpose for which they are employed and the
distinctive results which they accomplish. (Dewey 1916:8 – 9)
Operating more immediately in the background are thinkers like John
Haugeland (1991; 1995), whoClark (1997)draws on to work out whether and
how representationsﬁt with the EMH; EdwinHutchins (1995a), whose notion of
distributed cognition seems a close cousin to extended mind; and RodneyBrooks
(1991), whose robotic designs make material structures do most of the navigational
w o r k .E x t e n d e dm i n di sa l s oi nﬂuenced by connectionism and neural net theory.
By the contemporary foreground I mean the initial reception (or in some
cases the rejection) of the EMH and its continuing development in a series of
theoretical “waves” (Sutton 2010; also seeCash 2013; Kirchhoff 2012; Menary
2010a). Our starting point, however, has to beClark and Chalmers (1998)and
the formation that is sometimes called theﬁrst wave.
5.1 The First Wave
Clark and Chalmers start with a question about location:“Where does the mind
stop and the rest of the world begin?” (1998:7 )– is the mind“in the head,” or
does it extend out into the world? A different way to frame the question is to ask,
not where the mind is, but what we mean by the mind such that it can (or cannot)
be said to extend beyond the traditional boundaries of the skull or even the
body? In answering this question Clark and Chalmers propose the framework of
“active externalism.” On this view, the physical mechanisms (or“vehicles”)
18 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
that underpin cognition include not just neuronal structures, but also extraneural
factors, such as instruments or artifacts in the environment.2 By calling it
“active” externalism, Clark and Chalmers mean to emphasize not just the
environmental resources, but also the idea that the cognitive agent’s activity
(or what Kirsh and Maglio [1994] had called “epistemic action”) plays an
important role. Indeed, theirﬁrst example is about a person who accomplishes
a cognitive task by taking action, that is, by manipulating things in the environ-
ment (or in this case, while playing the game of Tetris, manipulating shapes on
a computer screen). This example leads to a statement of what has become
known as theparity principle. If in playing Tetris, a player physically manipu-
lates the geometric shapes using a rotate button on the computer in order to
ﬁgure out where they willﬁt, this action is said to be functionally equivalent to
activating a connected neural implant to physically rotate the geometric shapes,
or to mentally rotate the shapes by activating neurons. That is, these activities/
activations are doing the same job. Speciﬁcally, there is little difference between
activating neurons and activating a neural implant; moreover,“if the rotation
[using the neural implant] is cognitive, by what right do we count [using the
rotation button] as fundamentally different?” (Clark & Chalmers 1998: 7). This
leads directly to the parity principle.
If, as we confront some task, a part of the world functions as a process which,
were it done in the head, we would have no hesitation in recognizing as part of
the cognitive process, then that part of the world is (so we claim) part of the
cognitive process. (Clark & Chalmers 1998:8 )
Clark and Chalmers emphasize that the brain may in fact come to depend on
speciﬁc types of coupling to environmental factors, but also that it may be the
cognizer’s capacity to couple systematically with a wide variety of elements,
rather than any one speciﬁc tool or environmental factor, that is of greater
importance.
There is a subtle shift in Clark and Chalmers’s essay from claims about
cognitive processes to claims about mental states, such as beliefs. This is
accomplished in a second example, in which they demonstrate that beliefs
may be constituted in part by environmental factors. This purportedly justiﬁes
a stronger claim; namely, that the mind itself extends. The second example is the
story of Otto and Inga, where Otto, having some problems with his biological
memory, uses a notebook where he has written down the location of a museum.
The outcome, his access to his dispositional belief recorded in his notebook, is
2 For the distinction between content and vehicle, seeDennett (1969: 56) andMillikan (1991).
Hurley (2010)distinguishes a variety of externalisms, and associates extended mind with vehicle
or “how” externalism.
19Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
said to be“on a par with” an equivalent belief generated by processes of neural-
based memory in Inga’s head (Clark 2010b: 86; seeWheeler 2019).
Anticipating objections to this strong parity claim, Clark and Chalmers add
three further criteria, which became known as the glue-and-trust criteria (Clark
2010b: 83), to be met by external factors if they are to be included as part of the
cognitive system: reliability, trustworthiness, and accessibility.
1. That the external resource be reliably available and typically invoked.
2. That any information thus retrieved be more-or-less automatically endorsed.
It should not usually be subject to critical scrutiny (unlike the opinions of
other people, for example). It should be deemed about as trustworthy as
something retrieved clearly from biological memory.
3. That information contained in the resource should be easily accessible as and
when required (Clark 2008a: 79).
The ﬁrst critics of the EMH were not appeased by these criteria. They raised
three main objections. Theﬁrst, and perhaps easiest to answer, is thecognitive
bloat objection (Rupert 2004; Rowlands 2009). The EMH runs the risk of
extending cognition too far beyond the traditional notion of cognition, to
include all kinds of technologies (smartphones, the internet, etc.) as part of
the mind. Would we really want to call processes happening in the circuits of my
iPhone or the Google search engine part of my cognitive system? One response
to this worry is simply to reiterate the three criteria we have already mentioned.
If we accept the criteria of reliability, trustworthiness, and accessibility, they
seemingly put the brakes on how far we can go in this direction. Perhaps a better
response, however, is to emphasize the active aspect of active externalism.
Cognition consists of a manipulation by an agent, and the kinds of action that
couple in the right way to the world– namely couplings that involve reciprocal
causal relations where outputs are recycled as inputs (Clark 2008a: 131).
Cognition reaches only as far as this coupling reaches, and without this coupling
there is no claim that cognition extends. This does place real limitations on what
counts as cognitive. We’ll return to this point inSection 6.
A second objection concerningthe mark of the mentalis raised byAdams and
Aizawa (2001: 48) who contend, from the perspective of CC, that only pro-
cesses that involve intrinsic, nonderived intentional (representational) content
can be considered cognitive. Intrinsic content, they claim, is neurally generated
in internal representational processes; as such, it just is the mark of the mental.
In contrast, the manipulation of external factors involves no intrinsic content
outside of the brain. AlthoughClark (2010b)responds by arguing that a mix of
intrinsic content with other nonintrinsic resources constitutes cognitive states,
one might also think that the issue should not be about content, but about the
20 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
processes (or vehicles) that generate or carry content. The question is whether
such processes are exclusively neuronal or can include processes such as
language use, writing in notebooks, or epistemic actions. Clark interprets this
in a functionalist way that may be construed as consistent with CC. That is, an
element is part of a cognitive system based on its function, or the type of
coupling it is capable of, and it is just this which makes it“a candidate for
becoming a proper part of a genuinely cognitive process” (2010b: 85).3
Then what settles the question of whether that part belongs to this cognitive
system, or to that one, or (currently) to no cognitive system at all? It is hard to
see just what, apart from appeal to some kind of coupling, at some time in the
causal-historical chain, could motivate an answer to this subsequent question.
(Clark 2010b: 85)
On a functionalist view, no element or process isintrinsically cognitive –
neither neuronal processes nor the use of a notebook– it is only cognitive
in terms of the role it plays in the system as a whole. In this respect,
Menary (2010b), from the EC perspective, suggests that the insistence on
intrinsic or representational content leads to an impoverished concept of
cognition.
A third objection concerns thecausal coupling-constitution (C-C) fallacy.
This objection zeroes in on the main difference between embedded cognition
and extended cognition. Adams and Aizawa (2001) claim that the EMH
confuses causality (or coupling) with constitution. In their view, Otto’su s e
of, or coupling with his notebook involves a causal relation or enabling
condition. On an embedded cognition view, the notebook can support or
scaffold Otto’s cognition, but it cannot constitute cognition, in the sense of
being an operative part of the cognition process. Clark and Chalmers seem-
ingly ignore the distinction between causality and constitution. Their claim
starts as a functionalist causal one:“[a]ll the components [whether neural or
extraneural] in the system play an active causal role” (1998: 12). Accordingly,
if neural processes, as causal vehicles,constitute cognition, so do extraneural
processes if they play an equivalent causal role. In some way, however, this
nontrivial causality adds up to constitution. Adams and Aizawa’s objection, in
contrast, is based on a strict distinction between causality and constitution.
Since this objection counts equally as an objection to claims made by enactive
approaches, we ’l lf o r e g or e s o l v i n gi th e r e ,a n dr e t u r nt od i s c u s st h e
C-C fallacy inSection 7.1.
3 For detailed discussion of the relationship between functionalism and the extended mind, see
Sprevak (2009); Miyazono (2017); andWadham (2016).
21Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
5.2 The Second Wave
A number of theorists who endorse the idea of the extended mind nonetheless
have raised some friendly criticisms. Some of these criticisms, and some of the
solutions, were anticipated by Clark and Chalmers– speciﬁcally concerning
notions of activity, complementarity, and social extension. From the perspective
of the second-wave theorists, however, the main problem with the original
version of the EMH concerns the parity principle.Clark (2008a)and Michael
Wheeler (2012)defend the parity principle, complemented by the three criteria
of reliability, trustworthiness, and accessibility. According to them, the parity
principle should not be interpreted as requiring anything like a similarity
between inner and outer processes; rather, we should read the principle in
functionalist terms, and as stating a sufﬁcient rather than a necessary condition.
Second-wave theorists, however, view the parity principle as a clandestine
Cartesian supposition, such that internal processes are to be the measure of what
counts as cognitive.John Sutton (2010)argues that cutting ties to the parity
principle is not to deny that in some cases there may be a functional similarity
between inner and outer processes, but there are also many signiﬁcant differ-
ences. This can be seen in a variety of ways, including inHutchins’ (1995a,
1995b) research on distributed cognition where heterogeneous resources are
integrated to accomplish cognitive tasks. In contrast to parity, Sutton defends
complementarity, which includes the idea that“different components of the
overall (enduring or temporary) system can play quite different [functional]
roles and have different properties while coupling in collective and comple-
mentary contributions to ﬂexible thinking and acting” (Sutton 2010: 194).
Degrees of complementarity vary across different cognizers and differences in
particular environments. Individual agents may use different proportions of
external props and instrumentsversus internal processes like memorization,
and the proportions might alter from day to day, situation to situation, as much
as from person to person, as well as across changes or different structures in the
environment. Clark and Chalmers (1998)can easily endorse this view, since
they already suggested that the brain can develop“in a way that complements
the external structures” (12); and that an external resource such as language is
“not a mirror of our inner states but a complement to them” (18). The second
wave refocuses on these ideas.Sutton (2010: 204), drawing on research in
distributed cognition, argues that“the various nonhuman artifacts which scaf-
fold successful performance ” (or what Clark [1997 : 77] had called
a “heterogeneous assembly”) do not“have to be doing the same thing as the
individual participants are, or even storing the same information as might have
been stored in their individual brains.”
22 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Richard Menary (2007; 2010b) emphasizes the second-wave theme of inte-
gration. Integration, in contrast to embeddedness or mere scaffolding, is predi-
cated on reciprocal causal connections activated by active bodily manipulations
of the environment, a form of active coupling. Bodily manipulations involve
sensory-motor processes that shape, and are shaped by, the speciﬁcs of physical
and social environments. According to Menary, such manipulations include,
besides theepistemic actionsmentioned above,biological couplings, described
in terms of sensory-motor contingencies byO’Regan and Noë (2001), self-
correcting actions, that is, the use of language, props, and tools to guide
completion of tasks, andcognitive practices. Menary develops the latter in
greater detail; they involve“the manipulation of external representational and
notational systems according to certain normative practices– as in mathemat-
ics” (2010b: 237). Numbers, diagrams, drawings, maps, charts, and so on are
external representations that allow us to accomplish cognitive tasks. We
manipulate such things using pencils and paper, computers, and reorganizing
spatial arrangements, and we do so following norms that are culturally estab-
lished and learned. These practices are integrated with the internal activities of
our brains and mediated by the movements of our bodies. On this view, this kind
of integration involves not a simple ofﬂoading or scaffolding that simpliﬁes
cognition, but a transformation of cognitive processes such that we can think
and act in new ways through such engagements.
One good example of a cognitive practice is writing.
Stable and enduring external written sentences allow for manipulation, trans-
formations, reorderings, comparisons, and deletions of text that are not avail-
able to neural processes. This is the upshot of second-wave cognitive-
integration-style arguments: bodily manipulations of external vehicles are
different from, but complementary to, internal processes. (Menary 2010b: 240)
In contrast to claims about embedded scaffolding, then, integration is not
a one-way, agent-, or brain-to-world relation. Rather, through our engagements
with tools and artifacts, our brains undergo plastic changes over evolutionary
and developmental timeframes. A world-to-agent relation is captured by
a version of the EMH that emphasizes what our engagement with the material
world does to us. It changes our practices and our brains. Not only our causal
interactions with the material aspects of our environment over time, but also our
cultural practices, as we engage with social and normative aspects of our
surrounding world, result in an integrated metaplasticity, that is, a set of correl-
ated changes in brains, practices, and environments (Malafouris 2013). In this
respect, the properties of the “internal” and the “external” are not ﬁxed
(Kirchhoff 2012). Speciﬁcally in cases of writing and communication, the
23Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
development of different media already shows how the material we use not only
enables cognition, but transforms the very nature of cognition, the possibilities
of joint action and, importantly, our communicative practices.
This point about communicative practices leads to the idea of thesocially
extended mind. Again,Clark and Chalmers (1998:1 7– 18) had anticipated this
idea in suggesting that“my mental states might be partly constituted by the
mental states of other thinkers... . one’s beliefs might be embodied in one’s
secretary, one’s accountant, or one’s collaborator.” In this respect cognition
extends across social dyads, teams, or small groups where coupling is often
direct, active, and mutual. The notion of the socially extended mind, however,
takes this idea further. It suggests that just such practices allow for the estab-
lishment of what I’ve called mental or cognitive institutions (Gallagher 2013).
In this respect, extended mind is not just about the use of handheld notebooks,
iPhones, writing tablets, diagrams, maps, and so on. It’s also about the use of, or
engagement with large-scale institutions, for example, academic, scientiﬁc,
legal, and cultural institutions that enable cognition, and, indeed, as we engage
with them, even constitute speciﬁc types of cognitive accomplishments. The
legal institution is a good example of a set of structures and practices that
includes normatively deﬁned cognitive practices. Institutions like the legal
system, when we engage with them (that is, when we interact with, or are
coupled to them in the right way), are activated in ways that extend our
cognitive processes and help us to solve problems of a particular type. Legal
contracts, for example, embody conceptual schemas that contribute to and
shape some of our cognitive practices. They are themselves products of speciﬁc
cognitive exercises, but they are also used as tools to accomplish certain aims, to
reinforce behavior, and to solve problems. They operate as such, however, only
in the context of a larger and more complex legal institution. Accordingly,
institutions, and the precise way that we use them, not only constrain our
thinking about social arrangements, and about acceptable behavior, but allow
us to think in ways that would not otherwise be possible.
In some instances of the socially extended mind, the glue-and-trust criteria
may be important, but they do not always or necessarily rule. The legal system,
for example, may not be reliably available or easily accessible (this may be
a matter of degree and dependent on issues that involve things like social or
immigration status, or racist practices). When we do engage with it, however, it
can sometimes support and add stability to our decisions or judgments.
Likewise, the kind of critical scrutiny intrinsic to legal proceedings is a kind
of justiﬁed mistrust, which itself involves a reﬂective cognitive process, and
should not disqualify the overall process from being an instance of extended
cognition.
24 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
5.3 The Third Wave
Waves are not always well formed. That sometimes makes them difﬁcult to
count. This is especially true when the latest wave is still in the formation
process. Accordingly, there are different opinions about where the second wave
stops and the third wave commences. MichaelKirchhoff (2012), for example,
suggests that the third wave consists of an emphasis on the dynamical meta-
plasticity of the relation between internal and external, and he lists the socially
extended mind (the concept of cognitive institutions), which I have mentioned
as part of the second wave, as a good example. MasonCash (2013), in relatively
close agreement, also takes the third wave to be based on the socially extended
mind. Fritzman and Thornburg (2016)deﬁne the socially extended mind as
a fourth wave. How we count these things may be somewhat arbitrary at this
point. For our purposes here, I will suggest that the third wave is less continuous
than the ﬁrst and second, and it introduces some new complicating consider-
ations about predictive processing (PP) and how extended cognition is related to
enactive approaches. In this regard, the third wave points us toward the fourth E,
enactive cognition (which we take up inSection 6). Toﬁnish our discussion
here, however, we need to consider a debate within PP accounts of cognition
that mirrors the difference (or, as the case may be, the continuity) between CC
and EC.
One worry that haunts theﬁrst two waves of extended mind is a concern
about what it means to do cognitive science if one is forced to study such
a heterogeneous collection of factors: neurons, notebooks, diagrams, iPhones,
legal institutions, and so on. Such a set of cognitive elements“would seem to
form such a motley collection that theywill not form the basis of any signiﬁ-
cant scientiﬁc theorizing” (Adams & Aizawa 2001 : 63). This challenge
motivates the desire, among some proponents of the extended mind, toﬁnd
am o r eu n iﬁed scientiﬁc approach. Is there some way that cognitive science
could integrate all of these different factors within a uniﬁed explanatory
model? This seems to be precisely what a PP approach promises, as evidenced
in the continuing work of Clark (2016) and his project of linking PP and
extended mind.
More immediately, however, we should consider whether PP canﬁnd a place
within the general framework of EC.
The connection between extended mind and PP runs through Clark’s recent
work, and speciﬁcally his bookSurﬁng Uncertainty(2016). His version of PP,
however, contrasts with the internalist, neurocentric versions, as found in Jakob
Hohwy (2013), for example. The question, then, is whether a fully embodied
and extended version of PP is possible.
25Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Predictive processing has been promoted as an approach to neuroscience that
explains how the brain works in all of its functional aspects. Predictive process-
ing continues a long tradition, going back toHelmholtz (1962/1867), which
understands perception as an inferential process. It models this process in terms
of prediction error minimization (PEM), which begins with the assumption that
the brain lacks access to the external world.
[The brain] must discover information about the likely causes of impinging
signals without any form of direct access to their source... . [A]ll that it
“knows,” in any direct sense, are the ways its own states (e.g., spike trains)
ﬂow and alter. In that (restricted) sense, all the system has direct access to is
its own states. The world itself is thus off-limits. (Clark 2013: 183)
By means of perceptual inference, neuronal processes represent the world by
forming a set of hierarchically arranged probabilistic hypotheses about it based
on an internal Bayesian (statistical) generative model that it constructs informed
by prior knowledge (priors). The prediction structure can be quite complex,
involving a nested cascade of precision-weighted predictive processes in the
brain. The brain’s task is to take“patterns of neural activation and, on that basis
alone, infer properties of the stimulus” (Clark 2016). When the brain receives
speciﬁc sensory input, it treats it as evidence that either conﬁrms or disconﬁrms
its hypotheses. If there is a signiﬁcant mismatch between its predictions and the
sensory input, the brain revises its model and corrects its inferences in order to
minimize prediction errors.
The human brain, PP here suggests, commands a rich, integrated model of the
worldly sources of sensory inputs, and uses that long-term model to generate
on-the-spot predictions about the probable shape and character of current
inputs. The rich, integrated (generative) model takes a highly distributed
form, spread across multiple neural areas that may communicate in complex
context-varying manners. (Clark 2018: 522)
Once the brain generates a prediction that comes close to or matches the
sensory input, it has a good grasp on the world. This grasp will be immediately
challenged as things change and new prediction errors are generated.
The system can follow a different strategy, however, a process termed“active
inference.” In contrast to perceptual inference, active inference maintains its
current model and engages in action that changes the environment, thereby
changing its sensory input to reduce prediction error.
[Active] “inference,” as it functions in the [PP] story, is not compelled to
deliver internal states that bear richly reconstructive contents. It is not there to
construct an inner realm able to stand in for the full richness of the external
world. Instead, it may deliver efﬁcient, low-cost strategies whose unfolding
26 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
and success depend delicately and continuously upon the structure and
ongoing contributions of the external realm itself as exploited by various
forms of action and intervention. (Clark 2016: 191)
There are a lot more technical details to the PP story; for example, that the
system’s predictions are based on Bayesian probability; that it is organized in
layers of hierarchical processing witheach layer attempting to predict activa-
tion of the level below it; and that there is a recursive reliability function that
bestows different precision weights on predictions (i.e., how probable they
are).
Accounts of cognition based on PEM are typically framed in narrow, intern-
alist terms where all of the important action is to be found in brain processes,
reﬂecting a strict boundary between brain and world (deﬁned in mathematical
terms by a formalism termed a Markov blanket; seeFriston 2013). Hohwy
(2013) shows how this kind of account can work as a strictly internalist
explanation of what the brain does, given that it has no direct access to the
external environment. It deals only with sensory inputs, or it employs active
inference to change those inputs. For Hohwy, PEM is primary; active inference
is in service to the central processes that do the real work. To that extent, bodily,
ecological, or environmental factors seem irrelevant to explaining cognition.
PEM should make us resist conceptions of [a mind– world] relation on which
the mind is in some fundamental way open or porous to the world, or on
which it is in some strong sense embodied, extended or enactive. Instead,
PEM reveals the mind to be inferentially secluded from the world, it seems to
be more neurocentrically skull-bound than embodied or extended, and action
itself is more an inferential process on sensory input than an enactive coup-
ling with the environment. (Hohwy 2016: 259)
On such an account, at best, the body plays the role of sensory information
source in a process where descending predictions from the brain are compared
with ascending prediction errors from the sensory periphery in an inferential
process by which the brain models the world.
Clark, however, offers a more optimistic view concerning EC, and especially
the perspectives of extended, and perhaps even enactive cognition.“PP thus
provides, or so I will argue, the perfect neuro-computational partner for recent
work on the embodied mind– work that stresses the constant engagement of the
world by cycles of perceptual-motor activity” (2016: 1). In effect, Clark, in
contrast to Hohwy, emphasizes active inference– active, embodied engagement
that manipulates the environment in order to reduce prediction errors.“The
predictive brain, if this is correct, is not an insulated inference engine so much as
an action-oriented engagement machine” (Clark 2016: 1).
27Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
The important thing about active inference is that it is not just a tool that the
brain might use to test or sample the environment, although this is often the way
that it is portrayed: a process of“sampling the world in ways designed to test our
hypotheses and to yield better information for the control of action itself” (Clark
2016: 7, 290). That would be consistent with Hohwy’s interpretation (see
Hohwy 2013: 79). Rather, for Clark, active inference should be conceived as
involving the agent’s constant world-enacting movement, the kind of action that
modulates the structure of the agent’s social and material environment. Thus,
“[o]ur neural economy exists to serve the needs of embodied action” (2016:
269), rather than the other way around.
Such world-structuring, repeated time and time again, generation by gener-
ation, also enables beings like us to build better and better worlds to think in,
allowing impinging energies to guide ever-more-complex forms of behavior
and enabling thought and reason to penetrate domains that were previously
“off-limits.” (2016:7 )
Speciﬁcally, as Clark suggests (2016: 275ff), we can minimize prediction
errors by designing our environments to be more cognition friendly. Predictive
procesing, in emphasizing active inference, allows for the “integration”
(2016: 9) of the complementary aspects of brain– body– environment sought in
the second wave of extended mind.
Clark describes these integration processes as “rolling cycles” in which
“what we perceive is constantly conditioned by what we do.” In an ongoing
reciprocal causal fashion, top-down predictions entrain actions that“help sculpt
the sensoryﬂows that recruit new high-level predictions (and so on, in a rolling
cycle of expectation, sensory stimulation and action)” (2016: 176). The point of
these rolling cycles, however, is for the experiencing agent to be action ready.
Citing the work ofCisek and Kalaska (2010)on affordance competition, Clark
suggests that“the neural representations involved are... ‘pragmatic’ insofar as
‘they are adapted to produce good control [for a set of possible actions] as
opposed to producing accurate descriptions of the sensory environment or
a motor plan’” (Clark 2016: 180). The process is affordance-based and action-
oriented. This idea, that our perception of the world is“constantly conditioned
by our own‘action repertoire’ ... in interaction with our needs, projects, and
opportunities” comes very close to the enactive view.
An alternative formulation of the third wave involves integrating enactive
and extended approaches, pushing the analysis in a more dynamical direction
(see Dale, Dietrich, & Chemero 2009 ; Menary 2010b; Kirchhoff 2012).
Extended-mind and enactivist views agree that cognition is not constituted as
the result of exclusively neurocentric processes in the head. They disagree,
28 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
however, on two points typically defended by proponents of the EMH: the role
of representation (including action-oriented representation [seeSection 6.2])
and the functionalist downplaying of the importance of the speciﬁcities of the
material body. Accordingly, despite some meeting of the minds, there is resist-
ance on both sides, since enactive approaches reject functionalist and represen-
tationalist solutions as much as extended approaches embrace them. These same
issues promise to derail any easy connections between a representationalist PP
and enactive cognition. We will take up that challenge inSection 7.2.
For Clark, PP is consistent with“intermediate-level” functionalism (a computa-
tional level of processing between neural and behavioral levels) which grounds the
extended mind (2016: 2). In his account one can stillﬁnd a form of parity between
the options of (a) revising predictions and models in order to reduce prediction errors
in the brain’s sensory input, and (b) taking action to manipulate the environment to
accomplish the same trick. Actions“that engage and exploit speciﬁc external
resources” get selected“in just the same manner as the inner coalitions of neural
resources themselves” (2016: 260). Accordingly, the“upshot is a dynamic, self-
organizing system to which the inner (and outer)ﬂow of information is constantly
reconﬁgured according to the demands of the task and the changing details of the
internal (interoceptively sensed) and external context” (2016:3 ) .
If Hohwy’s version of PP reﬂects all the hallmarks of CC– computational
inference, mental representations, and a disembodied, neurocentric functional-
ism that discounts any essential role for the body, Clark dials back on these
ideas. So, although on the one hand, Clark considers factors associated with
anatomical determination and embodied semantics to be“trivial and uninterest-
ing” rather than deeply“special” (2008b: 38), reﬂecting a functionalist perspec-
tive, on the other hand, he defends the notion that the body plays an important
role as part of the extended mechanisms of cognition. As he puts it,“the larger
systemic wholes, incorporating brains, bodies, the motion of sense organs, and
(under some conditions) the information-bearing states of non-biological props
and aids, may sometimes constitute themechanistic supervenience base for
mental states and processes” (2008b: 38).
How does extended cognition answer the challenge questions? I’ll formulate
some general responses without trying to differentiate the different theoretical
waves.
1. Which notion of embodiment is operative?Extended cognition, like embed-
ded cognition, emphasizes how a perceiving and agentive body couples with
the environment. In contrast to embedded cognition, however, extended
cognition claims a constitutive role for the body– environment, and various
artifacts, props, technological instruments, with which we engage.
29Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
2. Which sectors of cognition, or which cognitive tasks, are embodied; and how
fully does each task involve embodiment?Memory, belief, problem-solving,
communicative practices, and epistemic actions more generally may depend
on bodily interaction with the physical and social environment.
3. What empirical evidence supports speciﬁc embodiment claims?Research in
experimental and ecological psychology, robotics, neuroscience, and cogni-
tive archaeology supports a variety of claims made by extended cognition.
4. How do the proffered claims depart substantially from CC? Although
extended cognition emphasizes the role of body– environment interactions
that are not usually considered by CC, it also retains concepts of functional-
ism and representation that are not far removed from CC.
5. What role do mental or neural representations play in cognition?A sw e’ll
see in more detail in Section 6.2, extended cognition endorses action-
oriented representations. Action-oriented representations are employed in
navigating and negotiating the environment. They are action speciﬁc and
context dependent, rather than heavy, semantic, content-laden representa-
tions that may be required for higher-order cognition, or whatClark and
Toribio (1994)call “representation-hungry” processes.
We’ll take up some of these issues again in thenext section. For now,Table 1
provides a brief summary of the different interpretations of EC so far.
6 The Fourth E: Enactive Cognition
Enactive views on EC emphasize the idea that perception isfor action, and that
this action orientation shapes most cognitive processes. This approach calls for
a radical change in the way we think about the mind and brain, with implications
for how we do cognitive science.Varela, Thompson, and Rosch (1991), who
ﬁrst deﬁned the enactive approach in their bookThe Embodied Mind, were
inspired and informed by phenomenological philosophy, theoretical biology,
and behavior-based robotics (Brooks 1991), as well as Buddhist philosophy and
psychology. From phenomenology, enactive approaches draw on Husserl’s
pragmatic idea that I perceive things in terms of whatI can do with them,
which shapes our primary experience of the world as a prereﬂective, action-
oriented operative intentionality (Merleau-Ponty 2012), rather than as a reﬂective
intellectual contemplation or observation. These are ideas which led to Gibson’s
notion of affordances (as noted inSection 4), as well as to Hubert Dreyfus’s
critique of artiﬁcial intelligence.4 In addition, in The Embodied Mind both
4 Dreyfus is an importantﬁgure, not only for his early critique of AI but also for his inﬂuence on
enactivism. Under the inﬂuence ofDreyfus (1982), Varela, Thompson, and Rosch (1991)favored
the phenomenologies of Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty, and discounted the views of Husserl.
30 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Table 1Answers to the challenge questions
Interpretation Weak EC
Embodied
Semantics Strong EC Embedded Extended
Sectors of
cognition
Perception, higher-
order, and social
cognition
Higher-order
cognition
Perception,
action
Perception,
learning,
memory,
problem-solving
Perception/action and
higher-order
cognition
Empirical
evidence
Neuroscience (mirror
neurons, lesions),
behavioral studies
Linguistics,
psychology,
neuroscience,
cultural
anthropology
Biology,
experimental
psychology
Experimental and
ecological
psychology,
evolutionary
science,
ethnographic
studies
Experimental and
ecological
psychology,
robotics,
neuroscience, and
cognitive
archaeology
Consistent with
CC
Yes Yes, in part Varies across
researchers
Yes, in part Yes
Representations Yes, strongly
representational,
with B-formats
playing special role
No Varies across
researchers
Varies across
researchers
Yes for
“representation-
hungry” processes;
action-oriented
representations for
perception/action
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
phenomenology and Buddhist practices were thought to offer methodological
insight to ﬁrst-person experience which, for enactive cognitive science, is
integrated with third-person scientiﬁc data, in what FranciscoVarela (1996)
called neurophenomenology.
Varela, working with Humberto Maturana in the 1970s, formulated
a biological theory of autopoiesis which strongly informs the enactive approach.
Autopoiesis explains how a living system autonomously organizes and sustains
itself in a process of self-production.Maturana and Varela (1980/1972: 78)
describe it as involving a pattern of processes which:
(i) through their interactions and transformations continuously regenerate and
realize the network of processes (relations) that produced them; and
(ii) constitute [the living system] as a concrete unity in space in which they (the
components) exist by specifying the topological domain of its realization as
such a network.
In other words, the organism produces the components which continue to sustain
the organized structure that gives riseto these components, and in that process
deﬁnes its own bounded identity. Varela refers to this as operational closure.5
Operational closure means that the system“generates and speciﬁes its own organ-
ization through its operation as a system of production of its own components”
(1980/1972: 79). This does not mean that the organism is causally closed to the
environment, however. Rather, it is structurally coupled to the environment, draw-
i n ge n e r g yf r o mi t ,a n da d a p t i n gt oc h a n g i n gc i r c u m s t a n c e s(Di Paolo 2005).
Adaptivity involves the organism, which isnever in perfect equilibrium, engaging
in a precarious process of regulating itself with respect to maintaining stable,
dynamic viability. This kind of differential engagement with the environment is
considered a form of basic cognition– a form of sense-making capable of register-
ing environmental differences. Autopoietic enactivism thus argues for a strong
continuity between life and mind. The organizational features of life are the same as
the organizational features of mind; mind, in this sense, is a particular form of life
(Thompson 2007).
Basic cognition, accordingly, is deﬁn e da sa no r g a n i s m’s response to, or its way
of adaptively coupling to the environment. Cognition, in this case, is fully
embodied, and depends on the speciﬁc kind of body involved to specify structures
and properties in the environment that bear on the organism ’s existence.
They later came to regard Husserl’s work on the notion of the lived body and temporality as
important for enactive philosophy (see e.g.,Varela 1999; Thompson 2007).
5 Varela used the term“organizational closure” when writing with Maturana and in his early papers;
he shifts to“operational closure” in his later work. Evan Thompson suggests that operational
closure is more dynamic (2007: 45).
32 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Accordingly, in the case of human bodies with complex evolved brains and nervous
systems, cognition will be different from cognition in nonhuman animals. An
organism “meets the environment on its own sensorimotor terms,” and brings
forth what counts as meaningful (Thompson 2005: 418); in this sense it enacts its
world. It speciﬁes itsUmweltor lifeworld as relative to its own form of organization.
In a nutshell, the enactive approach consists of two points: (1) perception
consists in perceptually guided action and (2) cognitive structures emerge
from the recurrent sensorimotor patterns that allow action to be perceptually
guided. (Varela et al. 1991: 173)
Thompson and Varela (2001)endorse an additional three points in summary
of the enactive view, based onClark (1999).
(3) Understanding the complex interplay of brain, body, and world requires the
tools and methods of nonlinear dynamical systems theory;
(4) traditional notions of representation and computation are inadequate;
(5) traditional decompositions of the cognitive system into inner functional sub-
systems or modules (“boxology”) are misleading, and blind us to arguably
better decompositions into dynamical systems that cut across the brain– body–
world divisions. (Thompson & Varela 2001: 418; also seeChemero 2009: 29)
For enactivism, then, cognitive processes do not replicate a perceiver- or
agent-independent world by means of a representational mapping or internal
model; rather, cognition is characterized by affordance-related engagements. In
contrast to classic cognitive science, which is often characterized by methodo-
logical individualism and a focus on internal mechanisms, enactive approaches
emphasize the relational and socially situated nature of human cognitive sys-
tems. Enactive approaches also aim to ground higher and more complex cogni-
tive functions not only in sensorimotor coordination, but also in affective and
autonomic aspects of the full body; higher-order cognitive functions, such as
reﬂective thinking and deliberation, are exercises of skillful know-how and are
usually coupled with situated and embodied actions.
In the following sections we’ll discuss each of these principles and along the
way show how enactive views incorporate many of the aspects of embodied,
embedded, and extended approaches, but also reject any tenets that would keep
some of these approaches too close to classic cognitivism.
6.1 Dynamical Integration
Similar to the idea of extended cognition, enactive approaches argue that cognition
is not entirely“in the head,” but distributed across an integrated system of brain,
body, and world, where world involves both physical and social environments. In
33Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
contrast to Clark’s functionalist view, however, enactive theorists claim that
(human) bodily processes shape and contribute to the constitution of consciousness
and cognition in an irreducible and irreplaceable way. Enactive accounts emphasize
bodily capacities, including most of the processes emphasized by strong EC
(Section 3.3) rather than committing to more abstract computational or information-
processing accounts (Hutto 2005). Speciﬁcally, on the enactive view, biological
aspects of bodily life, including organismic and emotion regulation, have
a permeating effect on cognition (Colombetti 2014; Thompson 2007), as do
processes of sensorimotor coupling between organism and environment.
Different versions of enactivism have been motivated by different emphases in
enactive theorists, typically with lines drawn between autopoietic enactivism,
sensorimotor enactivism, and radical enactivism (e.g., Ward, Silverman, &
Villalobos 2017). Indeed, within enactive approaches, as in EC more generally,
or any other philosophically informed research program, one canﬁnd disagree-
ments in every corner. Although such distinctions can clearly be made, the
landscape of enactive approaches seems to me to be more complex, marked
with developments, extensions, and various degrees of integration, all of which
may signal the growing pains of a novel research program. Many of the differ-
ences and disagreements, I’ll argue, are the result of addressing different sets of
issues – in some cases, ontological; in others, methodological; and in still others
phenomenological. In the following sections, then, I’ll note signiﬁcant differ-
ences, but I won’t try to systematize them.
Consider sensorimotorenactivists like AlvaNoë (2004;a l s o ,Hurley 1998;
O’Regan & Noë 2001) who, drawing on some of the same sources as Varela
et al., includingMerleau-Ponty (2012)and Gibson (1979), developed a detailed
account of enactive perception where sensory-motor contingencies and environ-
mental affordances take over some of the work that classic cognitivism had
attributed to neural computations and mental representations. Sensorimotor enact-
ive accounts of perception stress patterns of body– environment interaction and
active motoric engagement in place of internal representations. Perception is
constituted by the exercise of sensorimotor capacities, and in this regard, is
a kind of skillful action. Studies byHafed and Krauzlis (2006), for example,
show that eye movement can help to disambiguate sensory input, enabling per-
ceivers to resolve ambiguity in the retinal signal. For any possible bodily move-
ment, sensory patterns change in lawlike ways, and the agent’s grasp of such
contingencies is an essential part of what constitutes perception. On this view, then,
what the perceiver perceives is a function of relations that hold between patterns of
sensory processes and motor processes, and the perceiver’s attunement to the
environment depends on an implicit attunement to these sensorimotor
dependencies.
34 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Consider a common example of sensorimotor contingency. If I turn my head,
the object in front of me changes its location in my visual ﬁeld. As
Gangopadhyay and Kiverstein (2009)note, these processes of active perception
depend on dynamical feedback in which sensory and motor processes are in
a reciprocal relation– dynamic perception-action-perception cycles that couple
the perceiver with the environment. The perceiver is implicitly attuned to this
kind of systematic contingency. Being attuned to it simply means that I, as
a perceiver, anticipate this will happen; I“keep track” of it (Hurley 1998: 140).
The agentive system’s ability to keep track of such sensory consequences allows
it to distinguish its own self-generated movements from movements that are not
self-generated – an ability to distinguish self and nonself, and part of what forms
a perspectival self-awareness. Having a perspective in this sense is tied to
agency.
At the personal level, having a perspective means that what you experience
and perceive depends systematically on what you do, as well as vice versa.
Moreover, it involves your keeping track, even if not in conceptual terms, of
the interdependence between what is perceived and what is done, and hence
awareness of your own agency. (Hurley 1998: 86)
These processes of keeping track are not necessarily conscious, although they
can become conscious, and, as AlvaNoë (2004) suggests, may even involve
a conceptual knowledge that is not just knowledge about what I see, and a sense
of self, but also knowledge about the world that I experience. This would
suggest a dynamical integration between perception, action, and conceptual-
inferential skills.6 One can see this kind of integration, for example, in how
one’s conscious intention can determine very basic, nonconscious, visual-
motoric saccadic processes. Mark Rowlands (2006) cites Alfred Yarbus’s
(1967) experiments on saccadic eye movements. Yarbus asked subjects to
answer different questions about a painting they were viewing. For example,
judge the age of the people in the painting, guess what the people had been
doing prior to the arrival of the visitor, or remember the clothing worn by the
people depicted in the painting. Each task elicited a different visual saccadic
scan pattern. Likewise,Gangopadhyay and Kiverstein (2009: 71) cite numerous
empirical studies demonstrating that“it is the task the agent is performing that
determines where the agent directs her gaze, not the properties of a scene.”
Saccades are an action system in that they are a visually controlled motor
response. However they are not just this, since their operation controls the
6 This could be read as a difference from an earlier subpersonal nonconceptual view, as inO’Regan
& Noë (2001), but it can also be understood as simply a different emphasis that addresses
“different explanatory purposes” (Ward et al. 2017).
35Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
input visual sampling also. Their involvement with vision takes the form of
a continuously cycling loop, so that vision and cognition can integrate in an
intimate way. (Findlay & Gilchrist 2003:7 )
In other words, such basic eye movements are one way in which a perceiver
dynamically couples to the environment, and this coupling is shaped by the task
or intention of the perceiver.
In addition to sensorimotor contingencies, enactive theorists emphasize the
role of affectivity. Giovanna Colombetti, whose work is highly inﬂuenced by
autopoietic enactivism, argues for an intrinsic link between affectivity, gener-
ally conceived, and cognition. She takes emotions, for example, to be dynamical
patterns, “self-organizing patterns of the organism, best described with the
conceptual tools of dynamical systems theory (DST),” involving “multiple
simultaneous interactions” of brain, body, and world (2014: 53). Emotional
patterns are“context dependent,ﬂexible, and‘loosely assembled’ and yet can
also display stability across contexts” (57). Broadly conceived, affectivity
involves autopoietic processes connected with metabolism, homeostatic, (or
homeodynamic) processes (Colombetti 2014: xv).
The importance of affectivity is not always considered by proponents of
sensory-motor contingency (seeBower & Gallagher 2013for this criticism).
Although affective processes are not reducible to sensorimotor processes,
clearly they are dynamically integrated with such processes. For example,
depressed affect may slow down motor-control processes ( Caligiuri &
Ellwanger 2000). Degenaar and O’Regan (2017), however, suggest that sen-
sorimotor responses to the environment already include affective factors.
According to them, one doesn’t have to look beyond sensorimotor processes
themselves to explain this. It’s not clear, however, that even if an emotion
pattern in part includes sensorimotor processes or action tendencies, other,
nonsensorimotor aspects of emotion, for example, autonomic or evaluative
aspects, do not impact perception. Affectivity, taken in the broadest sense to
include factors such as energy level, fatigue, hunger, pain, emotion, mood, and
so on, impinges on our sensorimotor capabilities (as demonstrated, for example,
by Profﬁtt’s experiments discussed in Sections 3.1 and 3.3). I perceive the
object in front of me as something I can reach and grab, but affectivity may
determine whether I have the interest or inclination or energy to do so, in which
case such affective factors can modulate the sensorimotor processes thatﬁgure
into my action, slowing them down, for example. Pain or fear may even cause
my typical sensorimotor abilities to dissipate. The idea that affective and
sensorimotor factors are tightly and dynamically integrated components of
embodied processes is also shown by Fogel and Thelen (1987). On their
36 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
analysis, emotion patterns emerge from the mutual inﬂuences of various bodily
and environmental processes across different timescales. These include neural,
respiratory, and musculature dynamics that can mutually inﬂuence each other.
6.2 Doing without Representations
A representation, in cognitive science, is most generally conceived as some-
thing that stands in for something else, as a surrogate within a computational
process, explaining why the process is about a particular object or event.
Standard or traditional conceptions claim that a mental or neural representation
has speciﬁc properties, for example, that it bears content that references some-
thing other than itself, that it can be decoupled from a particular context so that it
can represent something that is absent, that it has satisfaction (or truth) condi-
tions, and that it can interact with other representations. It is often thought that
EC approaches, even if they differ among themselves, are united in their
opposition to traditional versions of representationalism. As we have seen in
the previous sections, however, this is clearly not the case. Indeed, disagree-
ments within the EC camp are primarily disagreements about just these issues.
Perhaps one important outcome of the EC debates is that they have moved the
issues about computationalism and representationalism front and center, even in
the minds of those who have taken less-embodied approaches. Thus, there have
been wholesale investigations into the concept of representation (e.g.,Ramsey
2007; Smortchkova, Dolega, & Schlicht 2020), as well as careful and somewhat
defensive explanations of what representation means in analytic philosophy of
mind (e.g., Burge 2010; Crane 2008). On all sides, however, the conceptual
landscape is littered with promissory notes. Speciﬁcally in regard to EC,
Anthony Chemero (2009)makes it clear that it will be important to“scale up”
dynamic systems approaches from the analysis of action and perception to
higher cognitive performance in what are considered to be“representation-
hungry” tasks (Clark & Toribio 1994). “It is still an open-question how far
beyond minimally cognitive behaviors radical embodied cognitive science can
get” (Chemero 2009: 43). This seems especially relevant to enactive accounts
which attempt to banish representations as much as possible (Gallagher 2017;
Hutto & Myin 2013). So far, Chemero suggests, on this score, we have only
a promissory note.
The ﬁrst problem is that more than one concept of representation operates in
cognitive science. Besides the divide (if there is a divide) between mental and
neural representations, the concept ranges from fully semantic, truth-
conditional, propositional structures that serve to specify the way the world is
(Fodor 2008), to minimal action-oriented representations that serve motor
37Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
control (Clark 1997; Millikan 1995), to a variety of deﬂated concepts, including
(1) the idea that representation is a simple co-variance between internal pro-
cesses and environmental stimuli, (2) the idea that representations areﬁctional
but useful tools for scientiﬁc explanation, or (3) the idea of content-free
mechanistic representations. A second problem is that, despite various attempts,
there is no agreed-upon explanation of how representational mechanisms (or
vehicles) actually come to have content– that is, how they capture and carry
meaningful information about things in the world. Hutto and Myin, defending
a radical enactive view of cognition (REC), call this the“hard problem of
content,” and as they put it, cognitive science needs to provide“accounts of
the origin of mental content; how mental contents could be carried by vehicles;
and how mental contents might matter” (2020: 83; see alsoAkins 1996 for
a detailed discussion of related problems). To the extent that such accounts are
lacking, these questions indicate some important promissory notes on the
representationalist side.
Although it will not be possible to review all of the arguments for or against
representations in this section (for such arguments see Ramsey 2007 ;
Smortchkova, Dolega, & Schlicht 2020), we will discuss (1) why even minimal
or deﬂated concepts of representation are unacceptable to enactive approaches;
and (2) what a nonrepresentationalist enactive explanation looks like.
We have already discussed the idea of body- or B-formatted representations
in Section 3.1. Here we’ll start with the concept of action-oriented representa-
tion (AOR), proposed as part of the EMH. We noted (inSection 5.3) that AORs
are employed in navigating and negotiating the environment. They are action
speciﬁc and context dependent. They are not the semantically heavy, content-
laden representations that, according to CC, may be required for higher-order
cognition, or“representation-hungry” processes. MichaelWheeler (2005), fol-
lowing Clark (1997: 47ff., 149ff.), suggests that AORs are temporary egocentric
motor maps of the environment, fully determined by the situation-speciﬁc
action required. Action-oriented representations do not represent the object-
ively pre-existing world, or map it out in a neuronal pattern. Rather, they encode
the world in terms of the agent’s possibilities for action (Wheeler 2005: 197);
their action-speci ﬁc representational function enables controlled situated
actions. This sounds like an enactive representation, if there ever were such
a thing.
Clark and Grush (1999)offer a model of anticipatory motor-control processes
that involve AORs instantiated in the“internal” neural circuitry of a forward
model or emulator, that is, a mechanism that predicts sensory feedback resulting
from an action. The circuitry forms a “decouplable surrogate,” that is,
a representation that stands in for a future state of some extraneural aspect of
38 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
a particular movement; the representation of either an impending just-about-to-be
-accomplished body position, or the expected proprioceptive feedback connected
with such movement. For example, the AOR may represent the trajectory of an
outﬁelder’s reach as she prepares to catch a ball that is coming toward her. Since
the emulator represents or stands in for some motor state that is not yet actualized,
it is in some sense ofﬂine or decoupled from the current state of movement. Clark
and Grush explain that this AOR, which they call a“minimal robust representa-
tion” is an inner state that does not depend“on a constant physical linkage”
between it and the extraneural bodily states which it is about. Thus,“emulators
seem to be a nice, biologically detailed example of the sort of disengagement that
Brian CantwellSmith (1996)... argued to be crucial for understanding represen-
tation” (Clark & Grush 1999: 7). Smith, however, thinks it’sv e r yd i fﬁcult to
conceive of egocentric representations as disengaged or context independent
since they are“closely related to our sense of self, to our personal identity”
(Smith 1996:2 4 8 ) .
I’ll return to the point about how they relate to self. Concerning context
independence, however, Smith suggests that representations can be con-
sidered context independent only as a matter of degree: “the idea of
a completely context-independent or ‘non-deictic’ representation is
a ﬁction” (1996:2 4 8 ) .I n d e e d ,i ti sd i fﬁcult to see how an aspect of motor
control, a constitutive part of the action, can be considered decoupled from the
moving body it is tracking, or, for that matter, from the action and action
context. Isn’t the kind of anticipatory process Clark and Grush describe fully
situated in the action context? In the case of catching a ball, for example,
anticipations of where the ball will be in the next second, and where my hand
needs to be to catch it, require reference to the present state of the system,
including the current motor command (or efference copy in the forward
model) – informed and updated by ongoing perception and proprioceptive
feedback about the current location of the ball and of my hand, respectively.
Just as we can perceive the ball’s trajectory, so we can feel in kinesthetic terms
the temporal and spatial trajectory of our action. In what sense do such
processes involve a disengagement or decoupling, rather than a dynamical
physical linkage – relying on the physical processes of my eyes tracking the
ball, activating extraocular muscles and kinesthetic sense, and my hand
already in movement, generating its own proprioceptive/kinesthetic feed-
back? Clark and Grush seem to allow for this interpretation:“The case of
basic motor emulation does indeed fall short of meeting this stricter criterion
[of decoupleability] ... the surrogate states are not fully decoupleable from
ongoing environmental input.” Instead, they instantiate“ak i n do fﬁne tuning
for environmentally coupled action” (1999:1 0 ) .
39Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
To the extent that AORs do notﬁt standard deﬁnitions of representations,
which include the idea that they can be decoupled, why not take
a nonrepresentationalist view in regard to the sort of example that Clark and
Grush discuss? In fact,Clark (2008b)moves closer to an ecological-enactive,
nonrepresentational account that involves a direct sensing.
Sensing here acts as a constantly available channel that productively couples
agent and environment rather than as a kind of“veil of transduction” whereby
world-originating signals must be converted into a persisting inner model of
the external scene ... . [T]he point is simply that the canny use of data
available in the opticﬂow enables the catcher to sidestep the need to create
a rich inner model to calculate the forward trajectory of the ball. In such cases,
as Randall Beer puts it,“the focus shifts from accurately representing an
environment to continuously engaging that environment with a body so as to
stabilize appropriate co-ordinated patterns of behavior” (2000: 97). (Clark
2008a:1 5– 16)
The often-referenced outﬁelder who successfully catches the ball does so, not
by representing or computing the ball’s trajectory, but by running to keep the
position of the ball stationary in her line of sight (Clark 2015; Fink, Foo, &
Warren 2009). The alternative enactive account rejects AORs in favor of action-
oriented bodily engagements describable in dynamical terms.
In their enactivist critique of the concept of representation,Hutto and Myin
(2020) focus on the notion of representational content. They repeat an often-
repeated complaint that standard representational concepts of mind have never
adequately explained how representational vehicles actually carry content, that
is, how they have meaningful reference or intentionality (Clapin 2002; Smith
1996). This is the hard problem of content again (Hutto & Satne 2015).
Deﬂationary accounts of representation may count as offering an alternative
that escapes this hard problem. Deﬂationary claims tend to move away from or
downplay any strong claims about content. Representations may consist of just
the mechanistic (vehicle) processes, which is all one needs for explanatory
purposes (Chomsky1995); or they may just be scientiﬁc ﬁctions that pragmat-
ically facilitate our explanations, but have no ontological existence.
Consider, for example, FrancesEgan’s( 2 0 1 4 )deﬂationary view which, with
some nuance, banishes semantic (or cognitive) content but posits a mathematical
content. We can think of mathematical content as the algorithm, or computational
(purely syntactical) function that a system follows in processing information
related to a speciﬁc task. Egan claims that the computational process introduces
mathematical content instantiated in neural representational vehicles. What we
typically think of as cognitive or semantic content is what we attribute to the
representation in light of the role it plays in a particular cognitive task. According
40 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
to Egan, however, this cognitive content is nothing more than an“intentional
gloss”– an interpretation made by an observer of the system. It may be helpful for
developing an explanation, but the mathematical content, rather than the cogni-
tive content, does the actual work.
Cognitive contents ... are not part of the essential characterization of the
device, and are not fruitfully regarded as part of the computational theory
proper. They are ascribed to facilitate the explanation of the cognitive cap-
acity in question and are sensitive to a host of pragmatic considerations.
(Egan 2014: 128).
In contrast toRamsey (2020), who counts both types of content (mathemat-
ical and cognitive) as essential, and who wants to push Egan toward a realist
position on cognitive content,Hutto and Myin (2020)push the other way. They
note that, according to Egan, mathematical content is essential (or intrinsic),
context neutral, and abstract. As such, it serves a“variety of different cognitive
uses in different contexts” (Egan 2014: 122).7 Egan’s account avoids what is
typically considered a problem– the intensional indeterminacy of cognitive
content (the idea that it’s difﬁcult to say whether a particular neural state
represents some object, some time-slice of the object, some property of the
object, or some related event). For Egan, this is a pragmatic or hermeneutical
problem of simply getting the intentional gloss right. What really counts is the
mathematical characterization. Hutto and Myin relate this to a PP model. They
cite Clark’s characterization of generative models, which at some level capture
not how the world is in a way that matters to the agent, but simply“precision-
weight estimates ... that drive action,” in ways that are not understandable
“using the vocabulary of the ordinary daily speech” (Clark 2016: 292; cited in
Hutto & Myin 2020: 93). Likewise, Karl Friston, who in some cases seems to
support a narrow internalist version of PP (e.g.,Hohwy, Roepstorff, & Friston
2008), and in other cases, a more extended version (Constant, Clark, & Friston
2021), and in even other cases an enactive version of PP (Allen & Friston 2018),
has indicated that for him the important issue concerns, not the philosophical
interpretations, but getting the mathematical models right (private communica-
tion). Thus, in the most basic sense, in these PP contexts it’s the mathematical
content that is important.
7 One argument is that the mathematical content is essential to the representational process because
it can remain the same from one context to another while the cognitive content would change with
each context. On this view, a representation isessentially syntactical; how it connects to meaning
or semantics depends on an external and variable interpretation.Bechtel and Huang (2022: 61)
point out that this argument is of the same type as Searle’s Chinese Room argument in the context
of AI.
41Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Hutto and Myin suggest two problems that still haunt such deﬂated accounts.
First, as Egan admits, “it is not likely that mathematical content could be
naturalized” (2014: 123), since it is instantiated in purely formal operations
that are independent of any external or internal environment and neutral with
respect to any material process. This, according to Hutto and Myin, is just the
hard problem of content once again. Second, such accounts lead Egan and Clark
to think of mathematical content as having causal power– the mathematical
content is doing some work.“Yet, to this day it is unclear how contents qua
contents ... can inﬂuence the behavior of states of a system so as to causally
explain what the system does” (Hutto & Myin 2020: 95). This is Jaegwon Kim’s
causal exclusion problem: Simply put, if the neuronal mechanisms are doing the
causal work, awarding causal power to content of any sort would be redundant.
If, then, we assume that the mathematical contents are not playing a causal role,
it’s not clear what explanatory gain they provide beyond another heuristic gloss,
and in that case they would not be essential to cognition.
To clarify this argument, consider Smith’s example of a robot designed to
pick up Coke cans. He considers that this may involve an internal memory
representation, but one that could be interpreted as an AOR, since it is guiding
the robot’s action. If the robot sees a Coke canx feet in front of it andy feet to the
right, it registers <x,y>. It then moves toward the can until it reaches <o, o>. It
then scoops up the can. The question, as Smith speciﬁes, is what precisely the
representational content is, and he provides some alternatives.
(1) It egocentrically represents aparticular place: that stable point on theﬂoor
x feet in front andy feet to the right of the robot’s current position.
(2) It egocentrically representsthe Coke canlying at that position. The memory
register is only used when there is a Coke can there, after all, and it is Coke
cans, not positions, toward which the overall behavior of the system is
directed.
(3) Rather than egocentrically representing the position of either a place or
a can, it allocentrically represents the position of the robot with reference to
the position of the Coke can... .
(4) Rather than having any particular content, in terms of speciﬁc individuals
or places, it instead represents the generic property of beingx feet in front
and y to the right.
(5) It is not a representation at all, and so has no content. Rather, it is a simple
control state in a digital servo mechanism. (Smith 1996: 51)
As Smith suggests, without more information we can’t say which of these
interpretations is correct. Adopting any one of them seems arbitrary. We can
think, however, that (4) picks out the mathematical content. As stated, however,
42 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
it is incomplete. One would need to say not just that it“represents the generic
property of beingx feet in front andy to the right,” period, but more speciﬁcally,
“x feet in front andy to the rightof the robot.” Perhaps this is already implicit in
the egocentric terms of (4). Smith speaks of the representation as being prag-
matically actionable,“in the sense of being more easily converted into motor
signals” (1996: 248). Without reference to what we might call self-location
(even if, in the robotic example, this is not a sense of self or personal identity),
(4) would not be very useful. In that case, the particularity involved in (1) would
be a more appropriate interpretation; this would be a minimal basis for saying
that such a representation is narcissistic, as KathleenAkins (1996)puts it, in the
sense that its purpose is not to represent the world, but rather to represent how
the world is relevant to the agent’s action. Moreover, we may prefer (2) if the
robot is going to do the work we want it to do. One could argue here that,pace
Hutto and Myin, even if the robotic mechanisms are doing the causal work, the
mathematical content is surely assisting, guiding the robot to the Coke can. With
(2), however, we are back to the Clark– Grush conception of AOR, and we can
ask again, going with something like option (5), why we should consider this
a representation at all, rather than an action-oriented physical engagement
describable in dynamical terms, as oneﬁnds in Rodney Brook’s robots that
use the world rather than an internal representation to navigate. Indeed, Clark
and Grush admit that“the emulator circuitry can also and simultaneously be
viewed simply as a smaller dynamical system linked to the one that hooks
directly into the real-world” (1999: 8). In this respect, however, they opt to
address a pragmatic question:“The question is, which of these descriptions is
most useful for Cognitive Science?” Their answer loops back to Egan’s idea,
and Hutto and Myin’s objection, that talk of representation here is, as Clark and
Grush themselves say,“a representational gloss” (Clark & Grush 1999: 8). They
nonetheless want to hold that the forward (emulator) processes in motor control
involve something real and that the representational gloss captures it. Even if
the robot goes straight for the Coke can, we seem to be going in (theoretical)
circles.
If we are to move beyond this impasse in whatConstant, Clark, and Friston
(2021) have characterized as the“representation wars,” it is important to say
what enactivism offers as the alternative to representational explanations. When
one looks for this alternative, oneﬁnds a different vocabulary– not “represen-
tation,”“ content,”“ information processing,” or “computational coding,” but
rather “attunement,”“ embodied engagement,”“ dynamical coupling,”“ sen-
sory-motor contingencies,” and “affordance.” Behind this shift in vocabulary
there is, importantly, a shift in assumptions, including assumptions about what
constitutes an explanation. If we start by framing the problem in internalist
43Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
terms that characterize the brain as the exclusive seat of cognition, or in strict
functionalist terms where, on the principle of multiple realizability, any physical
state or process capable of implementing or realizing the relevant functional
requirements will do, then a representationalist account may seem to be the only
game in town. In contrast, if we characterize the problem in a way that takes the
brain– body– environment as the explanatory unit, and if we maintain that the
biological and extended nature of the system makes a signiﬁcant difference,
then an account in terms of attunements and affordances seems more relevant.
There are other issues about whether the explanation should be mechanistic-
causal, or whether the kinds of equations derived in dynamical systems theory
count as explanations (Chemero 2001). At some point one might be tempted to
think that we should simply look at the empirical evidence to decide the issue. In
the previous section we cited a good amount of experimental evidence that
would seem to support many of the claims made by EC and by enactive
accounts. The problem with this strategy is that both sides can cite the very
same data but offer different interpretations. In this regard, it’s not that either the
representationalist or the nonrepresentationalist account is nonscientiﬁc (for
discussions about the legitimate use of the concept of representation and its
utility in cognitive science, see Ramsey 2007, and Shea 2018). It’s rather
a matter of the question posed by Clark and Grush:“which of these descriptions
is most useful for Cognitive Science?” (Clark & Grush 1999: 8).
These issues – what terms to use, what’s useful, what counts as scientiﬁc
explanation, and so forth – remain open questions that are driving current
debates. One example, to which we will return inSection 7, is whether PP
can operate as a common ground to sort out these issues. We’ve already seen
that PP accounts shift across internalist and extended versions, and that the
assumptions made by the embodied-extended mind version (involving func-
tionalism and representationalism) are not going to match up with enactive
approaches. The emphasis placed on active inference by Clark, however, may
set the stage for an enactive PP account. The notion of active inference
underscores the importance of embodiment and dynamical interaction
(Friston, Mattout, & Kilner 2011; Kilner, Friston, & Frith 2007). On the
enactive model, active inference is not so much inference as ongoing predictive
engagement – a set of dynamical adjustments in which the brain, as part of and
along with the larger organism, actively responds in ways that allow for the right
kind of ongoing attunement with the environment– an environment that is
physical but also social and cultural. Processes of dynamical adjustment/attune-
ment encompass the whole of the system and are not a mere testing or sampling
that serves better neural prediction (cf.Clark 2016:7 ;Hohwy 2013: 79). Rather,
active engagement is an attuned doing, a worldly engagement – with
44 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
anticipatory and corrective aspects already included. This would be one way to
cash out Merleau-Ponty’s claim: “My body has its world, or understands its
world without having to go through‘representations,’ or without being subor-
dinated to a‘symbolic’ or ‘objectifying function’” (2012: 141).
Enactive approaches argue that the brain is not the operative center of the
system, conducting tests that sample the external world; it’s rather one station or
one complex set of circuits among other stations within a system that includes
body and environment and forms the whole. Neural accommodation occurs via
constant reciprocal interaction between the brain and body, and notions of
adjustment and attunement can be cashed out in terms of physical dynamical
processes that include autonomic and peripheral nervous systems (Gallagher
et al. 2013; Gallagher & Allen 2018). Whether an integration of PP and enactive
theory can work as part of an alternative to representationalist accounts will
depend on some further theoretical and technical considerations. We return to
this point inSection 7.2. First, however, we want to fulﬁll some of the promis-
sory notes that continue to appear in some enactive accounts.
6.3 Intersubjectivity
From the enactive perspective, considerations about intersubjective interaction
are not secondary or peripheral problems relevant just to social cognition and
how we understand others. Rather, issues pertaining to social cognition in
a wide sense, including how we engage with others in intersubjective sense-
making, are regarded as intrinsically relevant to understanding perception,
memory, action, problem-solving, and so forth. Furthermore, in contrast to
standard, overly cognitive approaches (where understanding others is construed
as “mindreading,” based on theoretical inference or simulation, typically called
theory of mind [ToM]), enactivists take intersubjective interactions to be fully
embodied perceptual and motoric processes, involving facial expression, pos-
ture, movement, gestures, vocal intonations, and speciﬁc forms of sensory-
motor couplings in highly contextualized pragmatic and social environments.
Enactivists appeal to developmental studies that show that from early
infancy, humans engage in embodied intersubjective practices, a phenomenon
Colwyn Trevarthen (1979) calls “primary intersubjectivity.” Infants engage
with caregivers in mutual, second-person, back-and-forth responses involving
bodily movements and expressions that reﬂect affectivity and action intention,
a form of“intercorporeity” (Merleau-Ponty 2012), which depends on perceiv-
ing the other person in a way that resonates kinetically and kinesthetically
(Meltzoff et al. 2018). As early as at two months, infants are already attuned
to the other person’s attention; they follow the other’s head movements and gaze
45Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
(Baron-Cohen 1997). They“vocalize and gesture in a way that seems [affect-
ively and temporally] ‘tuned’ to the vocalizations and gestures of the other
person” (Gopnik & Meltzoff 1997: 131). This interactive attunement involves
a mutual alignment that can be speciﬁed in detail in dynamical coordination
studies (Alviar, Kello, & Dale 2023; De Jaegher & Di Paolo 2007; Goodwin
2000; Murray & Trevarthen 1985; Zhang et al. 2020). Mirror-neuron activations
may be part of such processes. In this context, such activations are understood
as part of the neural processes involved in the perception of the other’s motor
intentions, instantiating anticipatory response preparation to perceived action,
rather than a simulation or simple mirroring of mental states (Gallagher 2020).
Importantly, the interactions that compose primary intersubjectivity are not
automatic procedures; Csibra and Gergely (2009)have shown that the infant
is more likely to respond to another person’s actions only if that person is
attending to the infant.
Context and social environment also contribute to“secondary intersubject-
ive” practices starting at nine to twelve months of age (Trevarthen & Hubley
1978). This is when infants are able to engage in joint attention and joint actions,
and they begin to grasp the meaning of the other person’s actions in rich
pragmatic and social contexts.
The deﬁning feature of secondary intersubjectivity is that an object or event
can become a focus between people. Objects and events can be communi-
cated about .... [T]he infant’s interactions with another person begin to have
reference to the things that surround them. (Hobson 2002: 62)
If enactive perception is understood to be primarily“for action,” then in the
intersubjective context, perception is often forinteraction with others, where
perceptually guided interaction becomes a principle of social cognition and
generates meaning in a process of“participatory sense-making” (De Jaegher &
Di Paolo 2007; De Jaegher, Di Paolo, & Gallagher 2010).
To see the difference between a cognitivist approach and the enactive one,
consider the standard false-belief experiments. Proponents of“theory theory,”
who construe social cognition to be a form of folk-psychological inference,
often appeal to these experiments as evidence of a signiﬁcant developmental
change in social cognition. Standard false-belief tests have been administered to
young children aged three toﬁve years. One typical paradigm is to introduce
a story, or a portrayal using toyﬁgures or puppets; for example, a person, call
him Maxi, hides a toy in a box, and then leaves the room (Wimmer & Perner
1983). A second person, call her Mini, moves the toy from the box to a basket,
unbeknownst to Maxi. When Maxi returns, the child is asked by the experi-
menter where Maxi will look for the toy. On average, three-year-olds will say
46 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
that Maxi will look in the basket, where the toy is now located; four-year-olds
will say that Maxi will look in the box where Maxi left the toy, since Maxi does
not know that Mini moved the toy. That is, the four-year-old will recognize that
Maxi has a false belief about where the toy is. This recognition is said to be
a form of mind reading based on a folk-psychological inference about Maxi’s
mental state, that is, about a belief that Maxi has. This test suggests that three-
year-olds, and most children with autism, have not yet gained a ToM and are
unable to understand that someone could have a false belief or a belief different
from their own belief about where the toy is (Baron-Cohen 1997). Evidence
from such standard false-belief tests led some theorists to conclude that at
around four years of age, on average, a theory-of-mind module in the child’s
brain reaches a developmental stage to allow such mind reading (Saxe &
Kanwisher 2003).
On the enactivist view, the standard false-belief test is at best a test for
a specialized practice of third-person understanding that involves taking an
observational standpoint on another’s behavior. That is, the child is not inter-
acting with Maxi, but is asked, somewhat abstractly, to say what Maxi might be
thinking or how Maxi will behave. It shows that the four-year-old, on average, is
able to deal with this challenge, but that the three-year-old is not. Despite the
three-year-old’s difﬁculty in identifying Maxi’s mental state from a third-person
perspective, children of this age typically have no problem understanding the
experimenter with whom they are interacting. They pick up on all kinds of cues
in their engagement with the experimenter– not only vocal communications,
but such things as head nods to direct attention, vocal intonation that signals
a question, turn-taking pauses that signal that it’s the child’s turn to speak, and
so on. This is an embodied engagement with the experimenter that three-year-
old children are quite capable of. They seem to understand what the experi-
menter intends, or at least what he or she expects of them. Perhaps they also
understand that the experimenter is being very nice, cooperative, or friendly, in
contrast to others who might be simply indifferent. The enactivist is suggesting
here that bodily interaction is playing an important role in such second-person
instances of social cognition, in a way that is not at all tested by the false-belief
paradigm, but that nonetheless shows up in the experimental situation.
More recently, evidence from spontaneous-response false-belief tasks shows
that infants as young as thirteen months manifest sensitivity to another’s (false)
beliefs; these tests use behavioral measures (e.g., anticipatory and preferential
gazing, ﬁxation time) rather than the direct questioning used in the standard test
(Baillargeon, Scott, & Bian 2016; Onishi & Baillargeon 2005). Is the infants’
success due to their ToM module maturing earlier than standardly thought
(Carruthers 2013)? Or is it because in these tests real people, rather than toy
47Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
ﬁgures or puppets, are used, and infants have been interacting with real people
throughout theﬁrst year of life? Although these experiments keep the infant in
an observational stance (rather than allowing interaction), the enactivist could
still appeal to a violation of affordance expectation. That is, the infant’s grasp of
the other’s behavior will depend on the infant’s perception of social affordances
(possibilities for interaction) even if the infant is not in a position to act on them.
The more parsimonious explanation will appeal to processes that are closer to
perception and interaction, than to metarepresentational and mentalizing abil-
ities. Indeed, if you adjust some details of the standard false-belief paradigm to
allow for interaction between the child and Maxi, the three-year-old does much
better in providing the right answer (Rubio-Fernández & Geurts 2013). In one
test, where eighteen-month-old infants are able to interact with and assist a real
person looking for the toy, they pass the test withﬂying colors (Buttelmann,
Carpenter, & Tomasello 2009).
One might still ask, however, why the four-year-old is able to do better in the
third-person test? Perhaps, as the standard ToM theorist would have it, at four
years old we shift from second-person interactive strategies to mind reading
when our ToM module is activated. Enactivists disagree. They argue that
primary and secondary intersubjectivity are not stages that we leave behind as
we mature, but that interaction remains the primary way that we engage with
others. That doesn’t mean that we don’t develop more subtle and sophisticated
strategies for understanding others. Besides the direct interaction of primary
intersubjectivity, and the pragmatic contextualized interaction involved in sec-
ondary intersubjectivity, at around three to four years of age children gain
communicative and narrative competencies that allow them to more easily
take third-person perspectives on others ( Gallagher & Hutto 2008 ).
Competency with different kinds of narratives enables us to understand others
in a variety of ways. As Daniel Hutto suggests,“children normally achieve
[folk-psychological] understanding by engaging in storytelling practices, with
the support of others. The stories about those who act for reasons– i.e., folk
psychological narratives – are the foci of this practice. Stories of this special
kind provide the crucial training set needed for understanding reasons” (Hutto
2007: 53). This is what Hutto calls the“narrative practice hypothesis.”
Evidence supporting this hypothesis can be found in developmental studies
that show important links between narrative abilities and our capacity to
understand others (Astington 1990; Dunn 1991; Feldman et al. 1990; Nelson
2007). For example, in storytelling practices, children are actively supported,
perhaps by prompts to answer certain questions, and/or by directing their
attention to certain features of a story, which may include the vocabulary of
folk psychology, that the story character “knows,”“ feels,” or “wants”
48 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
something, and so on. Children learn from stories, as well as from everyday
narratives within a household or school or play setting, how such concepts
behave in relation to each other. Indeed, when children listen to stories, or
engage in play-acting, they become familiarized with what actions are appro-
priate in speciﬁc situations. This helps to shape their expectations about how
people will act, what actions are acceptable and in what circumstances, and
what sorts of events are signiﬁcant. Narratives provide a wide context for such
understanding, so that children learn how and why these attitudes matter.
Reasons for acting in a particular way are put on show, and are taken up by
the child’s own narrative productions.“Children’s ﬁrst narrative productions
occur in action, in episodes of symbolic play by groups of peers, accompanied
by – rather than solely though – language” (Nelson 2003: 28). Indeed, we
should say they occur ininteraction since we learn to form narratives through
interactions with others – for example, when caregivers elicit the child’s
account of actions or events that have recently occurred by questions and
prompts, and when young children around two to three years of age appropriate
the narratives of others for their own (Nelson 2003).
Children further develop language and memory skills around three to
four years of age andﬁne-tune their narrative abilities. Directly connected
with their ability to pass false-belief tests, at around four years of age they
start to represent the views of other people in their narratives, contrasting
what they know about some events with what others know about the events
(Perner 1992). Notably, narrative training has been shown to contribute to
improved performances on false-belief tasks (Garﬁeld, Peterson, & Perry
2001; Guajardo & Watson 2002). Accordingly, when capacities associated
with primary and secondary intersubjectivity are integrated with newly
acquired narrative capacities, young children are ready to understand
things and people in emerging narrative structures. By engaging in such
narrative practices, children learn to make sense of others as acting for
reasons.
6.4 Sense-Making
Sense-making is a basic concept in enactive philosophy, and making sense of
others, andwith others, forms an essential part of sense-making in humans. We
indicated that for autopoietic enactivism cognition is fully embodied and that
the speciﬁc kind of body involved determines the structures and properties in
the environment relevant to the organism’s continued existence. An organism
that meets the environment on its own sensorimotor terms brings forth or enacts
what counts as a meaningful world (Thompson 2005: 418).“Exchanges with
49Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
the world are inherently signiﬁcant for the cognizer and this is the deﬁnitional
property of a cognitive system: the creation and appreciation of meaning or
sense-making in short” (Di Paolo, Rohde, & De Jaegher 2007). In this respect,
cognition in humans with evolved brains and nervous systems, living in envir-
onments with others and with formed social structures, will be different from
cognition in nonhuman animals. In humans, meaning emerges primarily
through coordinated interaction with others.
Hanne De Jaegher and Ezequiel Di Paolo (2007)thus propose that within the
human social context, intersubjective interaction involves“participatory sense-
making” (PSM). “Meaning is generated and transformed in the interplay
between the unfolding interaction process and the individuals engaged in it”
(2007: 485). Participatory sense-making, in this sense, is closely related to the
concept of secondary intersubjectivity. Participatory sense-making addresses
the issue of how our intersubjective interactions enter into meaning constitution,
and most generally the co-constitution of a meaningful world. It provides an
answer to the question: How do we, together, interacting with each other,
constitute the meaning of the world? According toDe Jaegher and Di Paolo
(2007) this addresses issues concerning social cognition, and helps to explain
how we understand others given that we engage with them in a shared context
formed by joint attention and joint action (secondary intersubjectivity).“This
allows us to reframe the problem of social cognition as that of how meaning is
generated and transformed in the interplay between the unfolding interaction
process and the individuals engaged in it” (2007: 485). Speciﬁcally, the problem
is reframed as one that cannot be solved in the standard terms of methodological
individualism, where mechanisms within individuals, like mirror neurons or
ToM modules, are appealed to as the primary explanation. Rather, processes of
interaction, which extend beyond any individual involved, are taken as an
important part of the explanation. Although social interaction involves the
autonomy of each individual agent, it results in“emergent features in the
collective dynamics that are not reducible to the sum of its parts” (Zhang
et al. 2020: 11; seeDe Jaegher et al. 2010). The dynamical aspects of inter-
action, which depend on the participants’ history of coordination, and contrib-
ute to the formation of an identiﬁable communicative pattern, will affect the
way interactors understand each other.
[W]hat arises in the process of coordination (e.g., gestures, utterances and
changes in intonation that are sometimes labelled as back-channeling or turn-
repair, etc.) can have the consequence of steering the encounter or facilitating
(or not) its continuation. And the particular unravelling of these dynamics
itself inﬂuences what kinds of coordination are more likely to happen. (De
Jaegher & Di Paolo 2007: 492)
50 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Ethnographic studies and conversation analysis support the role of inter-
action dynamics in meaning-constituting encounters (e.g.,Goodwin 2000). To
capture the signiﬁcance of these dynamics, one can employ a method of
dynamical analysis proposed byScott Kelso (2014)and his colleagues, called
“coordination dynamics” (Tognoli et al. 2020 ; Tognoli & Kelso 2015 ).
Although much of their work focuses on brain dynamics, their approach
generalizes to any complex dynamical system and can apply to patterns of
interaction which are typically bound together by coordination across different
spatio-temporal scales (Kelso 2009; Zhang et al. 2020). The measuring of
coordination dynamics by recording continuous time-varying processes as
they unfold and then analyzing the dynamical structure of such processes
using time-series analysis allow researchers to get into theﬁne details of the
interactional processes and to develop explanatory models of how they are
ordered. Subjects with autism spectrum disorder, for example, manifest signiﬁ-
cant differences in the coordination dynamics of communicative processes
(Dumas, Kelso, & Nadel 2014; seeGallagher, Varga, & Sparaci 2022). More
generally, “disordered social interactions play a pervasive role in many, if not
all, psychiatric disorders” (Leong & Schilbach 2019: 636).
6.5 Complex Cognition
We mentioned that one promissory note issued by enactivism concerns the
explanation of complex, or what is usually called“higher-order” cognition.
This has been termed the“scaling-up” problem. Enactive approaches are said to
be, at best, in a position to explain only lower-order or basic types of cognitive
processes involving perception and action. But are they able to scale up to
explain “representation-hungry,” higher-order cognitive capabilities, such as
memory, imagination, reﬂective judgment, and so on (e.g.,Chemero 2009;
Clowes & Mendonça 2016)?
Enactive theorists have proposed a number of different approaches to this
issue, focused on imagination, mathematical cognition, and language
(Gallagher 2017; Hutto, Kirchhoff, & Abrahamson 2015 ; Kiverstein &
Rietveld 2021; Van Den Herik 2018; Zahidi & Myin 2016). The common
strategy is to think of complex cognition as continuous with basic cognition,
and as involving the same or similar skills. We can think of skills of conceptual
analysis or rational problem-solving, for example, as involving the manipula-
tion of affordances which may be of a conceptual or linguistic nature. Clearly,
mathematical and scientiﬁc reasoning are examples of complex skillful know-
how. Solving a problem in math, for example, means moving things around–
for example, moving elements from one side of an equation to another, or
51Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
constructing geometrical proofs by literally constructingﬁgures and shapes. In
this respect enactive approaches share an emphasis with extended cognition
approaches on the use of tools and artifacts. Scientiﬁc cognition can also be seen
as continuous with basic cognition, if we think of scientiﬁc models as material
objects we can manipulate, conceptually, or even physically in extended mater-
ial engagement (Rolla & Novaes 2022). In such cases, the representations are
external ones, for example diagrams, charts, andﬁgures, and the manipulations
can be motoric or perceptual, setting one thing beside the other, turning it this
way and that, viewing it by posing one question and then another, and so forth.
This is an affordance-based process, understood“precisely in the ecological
sense ... . [of offering] possibilities of engagement. Exploring these possibil-
ities is a matter of exercising sensorimotor abilities and exploring sensorimotor
regularities” (Rolla & Novaes 2022: 631). We can gain scientiﬁc knowledge
using a variety of equipment in labs or experimental settings. We can create
simulations on the computer and manipulate them to discover results that we
may not be able to grasp with unassisted thinking. Oftentimes we do our
scientiﬁc exploration with others, presenting models and discussing them. In
this regard,“models are somehow materialized inhabitants of the intersubject-
ive ﬁeld of human activity” (Knuuttila & V outilainen 2003: 1487)– the product
of participatory sense-making.
There is, of course, more to scientiﬁc cognition than manipulating models
and the picking-up of affordances, as Rolla and Novaes acknowledge,“for
science typically involves explanations, complex uses of language, very sophis-
ticated inferences and so on ” (2022: 627). Nonetheless, they argue for
a continuum between basic and higher cognition. In this context they discuss
the idea that someone learning about a planetary system may grasp something of
its structure by coming to understandhow orbits work, speciﬁcally by engaging
with or manipulating a model, exploring its affordances and sensorimotor
regularities. Indeed, this is shown in an experiment that employed what Robb
Lindgren and I termed“enactive metaphors” (Gallagher & Lindgren 2015). In
a project entitled “MEteor” we used a wall- and ﬂoor-projected dynamic
simulation of planetary astronomy (planets with gravitational properties that
support orbiting satellites, etc.). Middle-school children interact with MEteor
by using their bodies (kicking and running) to launch an asteroid with a certain
velocity and then predict where the asteroid will move in the context of other
planets and associated forces. This involves an enactive metaphor in the sense
that the child identiﬁes with the meteor and acts out its behavior. Using MEteor,
the children are guided through a progression of ideas and principles in the
physics of how objects move in space (e.g., concepts of gravitational acceler-
ation and Kepler’s laws of planetary motion). Feedback about the child’s
52 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
ongoing predictions is delivered in real-time simulation prompts about adjust-
ing trajectories.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the whole-body enactive engagement for
learning science concepts we compared a strong enactive condition (where
children entered an immersive, room-sized simulated environment and moved
their whole body to manipulate the meteor) to a weak enactive condition (where
children manipulated the simulation on a computer screen using a computer
mouse) in a set of controlled studies of 312 middle-school students (Lindgren &
Bolling 2013; Lindgren & Moshell 2011). The strong enactive condition
resulted in better understanding of astronomy concepts– production of more
dynamical diagrams, less reliance on surface/background features of the simu-
lation, and improvements in scientiﬁc reasoning on tests and dispositional
learning effects.
One might think that this kind of simulation could be internalized and
manipulated mentally. Indeed, enactive theorists have appealed to some version
of internal imaginative simulation that would be more appropriate for propon-
ents of weak EC. EvanThompson (2007), for example, in explaining memory
and imagination, tries to work out a nonrepresentational version of simulation
as a re-enactment of perceptual processes. Memory, for example, may involve
a (re-) activated presentational activity that evokes or brings to presence
something that is absent. One objection is that even if one considers the original
perceptual process to be nonrepresentational, the memory surely looks like
a representation, although it could be considered as such only as a product
that does not involve representational mechanisms in the production process
itself. The simulation would be considered an emulation that“represents an
activity by reenacting it in a circumscribed and modiﬁed way– for example, as
an internal process that models but does not loop through the peripheral sensory
and motor systems” (Thompson 2007: 290– 291).
This still seems uncomfortably close to a representationalist explanation. Too
close for Daniel Hutto, who is more suspicious of the emulator concept since it
is too frequently conceived in terms of representational content. For Hutto’s
radical view (REC), it would be a defeat for enactivist accounts“if emulators
are part of the best explanation of mental imagery and the detailed account of
how they work turns out to involve the manipulation of representational con-
tents” (Hutto 2015: 72). He suggests that the enactive account has to stay closer
to the processes involved in the event that is remembered or imagined. Rather
than scale up to complex processes, one should scale down those processes to
more basic ones. In this respect we can start to think about ways that memory
and imagination are already involved in perception and action. Hutto appeals to
the example of Middle Paleolithic hominin toolmaking capacities in working
53Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
with stoneﬂakes to form instruments. This is a type of material engagement that
requires a close integration of memory, perhaps in the form of motor habit, and
imagination, in the form of anticipating theﬁnished product– both of which are
required to keep track of the process that is being conducted by the hands. In this
practice, seeing, remembering, and imagining are all tightly integrated, and, as
in the case of many skills, there is not much one can provide in terms of
descriptions of how to do it; there is nothing like content or a set of rules that
can be explicated discursively. Nor is there need for something like an internal
representation of the stone. The stone is at hand, the stone-knapper can feel it,
and can see what to do in the speciﬁcs of its size, shape, and weight. The mental
processes, the perception, the imagination, the memory, are integrated with the
action of forming the tool. In this material engagement (Malafouris 2013), the
hands are not isolated from the brain, nor from the objects that they manipulate.
This could count as a starting point from which one would need to build up
such basic memory and imaginative processes into the more complex forms of
cognition. One could argue for a continuity from the basic to the complex. One
could also argue that in the human case, language, communication, and narra-
tive practices push or bootstrap such basic cognitive processes into new and
more complex accomplishments. Given the considerations about social inter-
action and participatory sense-making outlined in the previous sections, enacti-
vists are already in a position to offer an account of cognitive practices that are
more complex than perception and action.
I’ll conclude this section by reviewing once again the challenge questions,
now posed to enactivism.
1. Which notion of embodiment is operative?Enactive EC, like strong EC,
emphasizes that the cognitive system is brain– body– environment, where
body includes the full nonneural organism understood in action-oriented,
dynamical relation to its environments.
2. Which sectors of cognition or which cognitive tasks are embodied, and how
fully does each task involve embodiment?Perception and action are treated
as basic cognitive processes that scale up to more complex forms of sense-
making via intersubjective (social and cultural) practices.
3. What empirical evidence supports speciﬁc embodiment claims?Dynamical
analysis of brain – body– environment systems have been supported by
experimental work in neurobiology and various psychological disciplines.
Enactive approaches also draw on developmental, ethnographic, and phe-
nomenological studies.
4. How do the proffered claims depart substantially from CC? Enactive EC
emphasizes the role of body– environment interactions and rejects models
54 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
that are primarily computational, representational, and information-
theoretic.
5. What role do mental or neural representations play in cognition?Enactive
EC endorses nonrepresentational approaches; REC highlights the hard
problem of content and rejects representational explanations.
7 Causation, Constitution, and Free Energy
In this section I return to some loose ends that need to be tied and tidied up. First,
I’ll consider the strongest objection to both extended and enactive EC, the so-
called causation/coupling-constitution fallacy (mentioned inSection 5.1), and
how extended and enactive EC may make common cause to defend against it.
Second, I’ll consider the viability of ongoing attempts to consolidate extended
and enactive approaches by integrating them in a PP framework that focuses on
the free-energy principle.
7.1 The C-C Fallacy
In line with the original objection to the EMH (Adams & Aizawa 2001), several
philosophers (Aizawa 2007; Block 2005; Prinz 2006) have suggested that
enactive approaches also conﬂate claims about causal contribution with claims
about constitution (the C-C fallacy). For example, Gangopadhyay and
Kiverstein (2009)consider sensory-motor contingencies, like those expressed
in eye movements during perception, to be partly constitutive of perception,
rather than simply causal factors. Speciﬁcally, they argue that such movements
are part of what constitutes perceptual attention. That is, attention, as a cognitive
operation, just is a way of coupling to the environment that is embodied in eye
movements that are correlated to task.
If the capacity to perform eye movements is impaired this disrupts the lawlike
relationships between input and output that determine perceptual content.
This disruption occurs at the level of the perceiver’s sensorimotor coupling
with the environment. Its profound effect on perceptual content establishes
that sensorimotor behaviour can make a truly constitutive contribution to the
contents of experience. (Gangopadhyay & Kiverstein 2009: 72)
Others take a similar tack, allowing for the causal– constitutive distinction,
but arguing, based on empirical evidence, that embodied engagements are
constitutive for cognition since embodied sensorimotor and cognitive processes
are inseparable, and that without such body– environment coupling, some aspect
of the cognitive process would be unavailable to us (e.g.,Clark 2008a). This
argument is not always convincing to the critics since they understand coupling
55Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
to be a causal relation rather than a constitutive one (e.g.,Adams & Aizawa
2010).
A more incisive response to the C-C fallacy claim is to show that the
distinction between causal and constitutive relations is not as strict as the critics
think. In this respect, enactive responses have defended a conception of consti-
tution that involves a speciﬁc kind of causality. To see this, we shouldﬁrst note
that the causality– constitution distinction appealed to by Adams and Aizawa is
derived from the new-mechanist literature (e.g.,Bechtel & Huang 2022; Craver
2007; Craver & Bechtel 2007). The concept of constitution operative in such
mechanist theories is compositional. That is, it can be deﬁned mereologically in
terms of parts that synchronically or contemporaneously make up (constitute)
a whole. On one level, the parts work together causally under certain back-
ground conditions, but the higher-order composition emerges noncausally.
Lower-level properties can realize higher-order properties, and lower-level
processes can implement higher-order processes. This kind of compositional
inter-level constitution of a macro phenomenon at a higher level is noncausal,
even if it involves productive intra-level mechanistic-causal processes at the
lower level. Thus, causal relations areintra-level relations only; constitutive
relations areinter-level noncausal relations (Figure 1).
The diagram shows components X1– X4 at the lower level engaging in causal
processes (φ1-ing – φ4-ing); these components constitute S; the lower-order
processes noncausally implement the higher-order process (ψ-ing). According
to Aizawa (2014: 24), we can think of the mechanism as a whole signifying
“something like” a person solving a problem (Sψ-ing). He suggests,φ1-ing –
φ4-ing could signify subpersonal neural processes or even subpersonal non-
neural processes: “X1φ1-ing might be the eye performing a saccade, where
X4φ4-ing might be writing with a pencil.”
S ψ-ing
X1ϕ1-ing
X2ϕ2-ing
X3ϕ3-ing
X4ϕ4-ing
Figure 1Schema of mechanism(redrawn fromCraver 2007:7 )
56 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
There are two reasons why new-mechanist theorists such as Craver and
Bechtel distinguish between causality and constitution.
1. The relation between part and whole cannot be causal, because causality
involves mereological independence of cause and effect. For example, the
handle of the teacup is part of the teacup, but it does not cause the teacup.
2. Part– whole relations must be contemporaneous relations; causality requires
diachronicity.
A problem with this strict distinction arises when Craver proposes mutual
manipulability (MM) as a criterion that tests for constitutive relations.
My working account of constitutive relevance is as follows: a component is
relevant to the behavior of a mechanism as a whole when one can wiggle the
behavior of the whole by wiggling the behavior of the component and one can
wiggle the behavior of the component by wiggling the behavior as a whole.
The two are related as part and whole and they are mutually manipulable.
(Craver 2007: 152– 153)
The problem is that Craver explains the notion of whole– part mutual wig-
gling in terms of James Woodward’s (2003) interventionist conception of
causality. But this seems to introduce causality into the constitution relation.
Mutual manipulability, as deﬁned on the notion of Woodwardian intervention,
would pick out causal relations, but inter-level constitutional relations are not
supposed to be causal. This complication has motivated a debate within the
new-mechanist literature that we don’t need to rehearse here. It’s enough to
point out that at least one attempt to resolve the confusion has been to allow for
inter-level causal relations by introducing the realistic assumption that the
higher-level constituted phenomenon (Sψ-ing) is itself diachronic, so that an
early lower-level process might in fact be causally related to a later higher-order
process (Krickel 2018). Accordingly, an intervention on one lower-level pro-
cess, X1φ1-ing, for example, may wiggle, not the whole mechanism, but
a temporal part of the Sψ-ing that is diachronically later than X1φ1-ing. This
motivates the idea of a diachronic conception of constitution which would be
perfectly consistent with the test of MM (Kirchhoff 2017).
This diachronic viewﬁts well with an enactivist dynamical conception of
constitution. To the extent that a cognitive process involves an organism engaging
with its environment, the active system is constituted through processes of dynam-
ical coupling, involving causal relations that are not simply linear, or reciprocal, but,
in addition, involve dynamical nonlinear causality where the whole can recursively
inﬂuence the working of the part. Such causal relations may include elements,
properties, relations, and processes that are not internal to the organism, or reducible
57Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
to just the organism. Coupling is indeed causal, but just those coupling relations are
constitutive of the cognitive processes which are distributed across different time-
scales of brain– body– environment (Varela 1999). AnthonyChemero (2009)and
OrestisPalermos (2014)argue that the presence of just such nonlinear relations, or
the continuous mutual interaction loops which entail such causal relations, counts as
an objective criterion of constitution. In effect, enactivism redeﬁnes constitution in
a way that makes it immune to the C-C fallacy.
7.2 The Free-Energy Principle and Enaction
We saw inSection 5.3 a proposed alliance between extended cognition and
predictive processing. Isn’t it possible to integrate PP accounts and enactivism,
as some have suggested (Bruineberg, Kiverstein, & Rietveld 2018; Gallagher &
Allen 2018; Kiverstein 2020; Parr, Da Costa, & Friston 2020; Wiese & Friston
2021)? This clearly involves addressing some terminological and conceptual
differences concerning neurocentric internalism and the concepts of inference,
internal model, and representation (Ramstead et al. 2021). Is it possible for PP to
accommodate enactivist processes of affordance, attunement, and resonance
without undermining its own principles?
Constant, Clark, and Friston (2021), in their article on “representation
wars,” do think it is possible. They propose a truce that would introduce
a division of labor. “[There] is a subtle, yet crucial point, which becomes
apparent when considering the probability distributions involved in various
inference processes in the brain” (2021: n.p.). Here they make the distinction
between (1) the brain predicting expected sensory neural activations matching
the probability of the generative model/belief– a purely internal process– and
(2) the brain ’s prediction about the (hidden) cause of such activations.
“Getting it right” (fulﬁlling truth or success conditions) in the case of (1)“is
about getting it right with respect to one’s own beliefs; e.g., successfully
exploring the state space of one’s own model of the world... . This means
that under active inference, there are two layers of success involved, one
deﬁned over the model, and one deﬁned over the agent-world coupling”
(2021: n.p.).
According to Constant et al., theﬁrst type of PP is representational andﬁts
well with prediction error minimization; the second is dynamical and modeled
on active inference or enactive processes. They explain that the second (non-
representational) process is sufﬁcient for deontic actions– actions guided by
normative constraints, which for them includes habitual actions approaching
automatic behavior. They give the example of stopping at stop signs, which
drivers tend to do automatically.
58 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
[Such actions] do not have success conditionsqua brain processes, but rather
have success conditionsqua agent-world coupling processes. They are sim-
ple observation-action loops; not rich and reconstructive policy selection
loops ... . inferences about states of the world – that admit
a representationalist interpretation – are now replaced by direct action,
without any intervening inference or representation of the consequences of
action. (2021: n.p.)
With respect to deontic actions, what does the work is“a kind of perceptually
maintained motor-informational grip on the world: a low-cost perception-action
routine that retrieves the right information just-in-time for use, and that is not in
the business of building up a rich inner simulacrum” (Clark 2015: 11).
Although Constant et al. (2021)pitch this as a kind of détente, it’s not clear
how it moves beyond older peace negotiations that involved splitting the
difference between higher-order representation-hungry cognition (albeit now
framed in PP terms) and more basic perceptual-motor processes (e.g.,Clark &
Toribio 1994). It’s also not clear how enactive, heedful, or intelligent habitﬁts
this picture, since even with respect to perception-action loops, enactive pro-
cesses are not a matter of automatic, repetitive deontic behavior.
Another attempt at integrating PP and enactive approaches is made by
stepping back from some of these details into a more basic and abstract
framework. As already noted (inSection 6.2), for Friston the important thing
is getting the mathematics (in the statistical models) right, and this informs his
proposal to generalize his model to life itself explained in terms of the free-
energy principle (FEP).8 According to FEP, and the second law of thermo-
dynamics, biological systems are deﬁned by the tendency to resist entropy; to do
otherwise would entail systemic death. To maintain homeostasis and structural
and functional integrity, and to avoid entropy (which in thermodynamic terms
means too much free energy in the system), then the organism should reduce
free energy (the corollary of which is to minimize prediction errors and surprisal
in the PP model) via active inference– that is, by changing its relation to the
environment. The claim is that, in some regards, FEP aligns well with the
concept of autopoiesis, the emergent or self-organizing persistence of an organ-
ism in virtue of its own dynamical structure. Both principles express the
continuous processes of life and mind (Allen & Friston 2018; Ramstead et al.
2021).
8 See Friston (2013). According to FEP, self-organizing organisms resist the natural tendency to
entropy implied by the second law of thermodynamics, in order to“maintain their states and form
in the face of a constantly changing environment” (Friston 2010). Kirchhoff and Froese (2017:1 )
characterize FEP as follows:“organisms act to maintain themselves in their expected biological
and cognitive states... they can do so only by minimizing their free energy given that the long-
term average of free energy is entropy.”
59Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
The strategy here, to put it simply, is that if FEP and autopoiesis can be
understood to be consistent, then there is a good basis for integrating PP and
enactivism. Some enactivists agree that we can mesh the basic FEP version of
predictive active inference models with enactivist principles (e.g.,Bruineberg,
Kiverstein, & Rietveld 2018; Kirchhoff 2018; Kirchhoff & Froese 2017). They
emphasize the embodied action (active inference) that the organism can use to
control its own viability conditions.
So within the free-energy framework, it isaction that does the work of
actually minimizing surprisal. Actions change an organism’s relation to the
environment, thereby changing the sensory states of the organism.
(Bruineberg et al. 2018)
According to Kirchhoff and Froese, a particular version of FEP supports the
nonrepresentationalist, radical enactive view of cognition (REC):
[A]ssuming that information-as-covariance cannot give rise to information-
as-content, and assuming that responding adaptively to information-as-
covariance is an essential property of living and cognitive systems, then
mentality is not in its most basic forms a matter of processing any kind of
[representational] content. (2017: 13).
On this view, action is not something that happens in the brain; it’s not just
providing new sensory input for neural processing, but is rather what the whole
organism does in its interactions with the environment or, under a different
description, what a person does in the world, and this changes the world as much
as it changes the brain. The system priors– that is, the prior knowledge that
informs action – are not (just) assumptions or beliefs that inform inferences;
they includes the know-how of embodied skills, patterns of action-readiness,
and affective dispositions that mesh with an affordance space.
In contrast to attempts to integrate PP and enactivist approaches,Di Paolo,
Thompson, and Beer (2022)identify some deeper (technical and theoretical)
reasons why PP is not compatible with enaction. To put this in its simplest
terms, the technical part of the argument involves contrasting autopoietic
systems with FEP systems. In autopoietic systemsorganization, as an invari-
able, is distinguished fromstructure, as a changeable feature– a distinction not
maintained in the FEP discussion.
The structure is the system’s actual realization, the concrete components that
constitute a system and the actual and concrete relations between them. The
system’s organization is the abstract set of relations that deﬁne the system as
belonging to a class. Autopoiesis is the description of a class of systems, i.e.,
a description of the organization that deﬁnes this class. Concrete autopoietic
systems may be instantiated in a wide variety of structures, and a given
60 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
structure may belong to more than one class of organization... . Structures
also change over time, even if the organization remains invariant. (Di Paolo,
Thompson, & Beer 2022: 12)
Organization and structure signify two different kinds of homeostasis.
According to the FEP, homeostasis refers to structure (the structural integrity
of a system); according to autopoietic theory, homeostasis refers to organiza-
tion. In an autopoietic system, processes undergo transformation in order to
regenerate the conditions of that system’s own production; in an FEP system,
there is no regeneration involved after the initial event– the system simply
endures. “It is unclear in what sense the components of the systems... are
produced by other processes in the system, instead of just being there by
assumption” (Di Paolo, Thompson, & Beer 2022: 13). Accordingly, there is
confusion when FEP systems are equated with autopoietic ones.
Di Paolo, Thompson, and Beer (2022: 24) also note the importance of the
enactive system’s history (its “historicity”). They make this last point more
generally in terms of contrasting conceptions of brain dynamics (hierarchical
comparators in PP , versus enactive conceptions of dynamical “history-
dependence [even] in the most basic neuroscientiﬁc scenario of stimulus process-
ing”). This point has implications for understanding development, plasticity, skill
acquisition, habit formation, and the ability to be cognitivelyﬂexible and creative.
Indeed, one way to cash out these theoretical incommensurabilities in prag-
matic terms is to consider examples of creativity, novelty, or improvisation. In
this regard, Philipp Schwartenbek et al. phrase the question in just the right way.
If our main objective [on predictive models] is to minimize surprise over the
states and outcomes we encounter, how can this explain complex human
behavior such as novelty seeking, exploration, and, furthermore, higher level
aspirations such as art, music, poetry, or humor? (Schwartenbeck et al. 2013:
n.p.)
Schwartenbek et al., however, rather than focusing on art, music, poetry, or
humor, focus on economic decision-making, explained in terms of exploring
alternatives to ﬁxed goal states known to have the highest expected utility.
Referencing Schwartenbeck et al., AndyClark (2018) addresses the problem
directly, admitting, as Schwartenbeck et al. themselves do, that FEP does not
provide a good account of creative, novel, or improvised action that may not be
deﬁned byﬁxed goals.
These prediction-error-minimizing agents exhibit at most a modest and
instrumentally-motivated tendency towards play, exploration, and the search
for novel experiences. These prediction error minimizing agents remain
locked, it seems, into an information-theoretic journey whose guiding
61Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
principle is in some way unacceptably conservative. It is a journey which, if
successful, will be marked only by the attainment of expected goals and meta-
goals. (Clark 2018: 528).
Likewise, as previously suggested, enactive processes are not well captured
by the notion of deontic action, as characterized byConstant, Clark, and Friston
(2021), that is, as unthinking or automatic, normatively guided action. Deontic
action, as they understand it, clearly does not allow for innovation or impro-
visation (Gallagher 2022).
To account for creativity, Clark appeals to environmental and cultural factors,
“ecologically unique, self-engineered contexts of culture, technology, and lin-
guaform exchange.” Still, as he acknowledges, such factors may also limit
possibilities for creativity and novelty.
The skilled pianist has learnt to reduce prediction error with respect to
complex melodies and motor repertoires, and the skilled mathematician
with respect to properties and relations among numbers, theorems, and
other constructs. But the musical and mathematical traditions within which
they operate reﬂect the operation of cultural forces such as practices of
writing, reﬂecting, disseminating, and peer review. (Clark 2018: 531)
Clark argues, however, that it could go either way– environment and cultural
practices may provide limits to, or (somehow) may enable creativity. The
question remains, how does a practice work when it enables creativity?9 And
then, almost as if on cue, he suggests:“These powerful effects are further
explored in work by‘enactivists’ sympathetic to PP– for example, Rietveld
and Kiverstein (2014), Bruineberg et al. (2018), Gallagher et al. (2013)” (2018:
531). That seems exactly right; indeed, the focus on embodiment, affect, and
environmental coupling, actually pushes us away from PP and toward more
enactive accounts, a point reiterated by Di Paolo, Thompson, and Beer.
[Thus], phenomena such as developmental spurts in skill level signal changes
in dynamical conﬁgurations (novel constraints, emergent parameters, chan-
ging variable sets). The variability entailed in changing dynamical conﬁgur-
ations has been postulated as the origin of motor creativity... the very idea of
which is rendered problematic without an account of historical change. (Di
Paolo, Thompson, & Beer 2022: 23).
Motor creativity, for example, essential in the performing arts, reﬂects the
history and skill of the agent. On the enactive view, performers, based on their
9 Michael Wheeler (2018)provides an insightful answer to this question that builds on 3E cognition
(embodied, embedded, and extended), and that emphasizes the role that cognitive niches and
external contexts play in fostering creativity. His explanation makes no mention of either PP or
enactivism, although I would argue it is fully consistent with enactivist views.
62 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
well-trained skills and well-formed habits (which involve a heedfulﬂexibility
rather than automaticity or repetitiveness) are able to move beyond controlled
engagement to the point of not-knowing (embracing a kind of uncertainty or
surprise) about what precisely will happen– letting the system (brain– body–
environment) move in unpredictable, surprising ways– without a prediction of
what happens next. What happens next, on the enactive view, is that brain–
body– environment couple in novel ways– they join forces to enact something
unpredictable – they create cortical patterns, and behaviors, and new affor-
dances that are unique to each event.
8 Conclusion: Some Practical Implications and Applications
Studies of creativity and improvisational performance in the arts have recently
been reframed by approaches that champion 4E cognition. These include
studies of music (Høffding 2019; Krueger 2014; Ryan & Gallagher 2020;
Schiavio & Høffding 2015; Van Der Schyff et al. 2018); dance (He & Ravn
2018; Merritt 2015; Ravn 2016; Ravn & Høffding 2021); theater and ﬁlm
(Gallagher & Gallagher 2020; Gallese & Guerra 2012; Sutton & Tribble
2011; Tribble 2011). The study of performance, however, is just one area that
has seen the impact of EC. To conclude, let me brieﬂy highlight some other
areas (beyond the cognitive sciences) where EC approaches have emerged or
have gained signiﬁcant inﬂuence.
 In theﬁeld ofeducation there have been some general interventions (Hutto &
Abrahamson 2022; Skulmowski & Rey 2018provide a good review), and
some very speciﬁc interventions in, for example, the use of virtual reality and
full-body immersion in learning science concepts (Gallagher & Lindgren
2015), as well as studies supporting, for example, language learning (Aden &
Eschenauer 2020), and mathematics education (Abrahamson & Sánchez-
García 2016; Hutto, Kirchhoff, & Abrahamson 2015; Soto-Andrade 2018).
 Literature and the humanities. There is a growing body of work in this area,
spurred on by recent international conferences and edited volumes on EC,
distributed cognition, and historical literary studies ( Anderson 2015 ;
Anderson, Wheeler, & Sprevak 2019; Cave 2017).
 Architecture. The reorganization of space is not only captured in the objective
measurements of the architectural structures of the built environment, but
also in a way that modulates the lived body and the way that space is
experienced. As Mark Johnson writes, in regard to architecture and embodied
action, “we live in and through our ongoing interactions with environments
that are both physical and cultural. The structures we make are loosely
adapted to the functions we perform... . [We] order our environments to
63Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
enhance meaning in our lives and to open up possibilities for deepened and
enriched experience” (2015: 33; also see, for example,Jäger, Schnädelbach,
& Hale 2016; Jelić et al. 2016; Rietveld & Brouwers 2017).
 Economics. Embodied approaches to economic reasoning have made use of
the EMH (Clark 1996) and, in the context of institutional economics, enactive
and extended views on how cognitive institutions work ( Gallagher,
Mastrogiorgio, & Petracca 2019; Oullier & Basso 2010; Petracca 2021;
Petracca & Gallagher 2020)
 Psychiatry and clinical reasoning . Embodied and enactive approaches
emphasize the integration of the various processes and factors, including
social and cultural factors, that contribute to different patterns of psychiatric
disorders (de Haan 2020; Gallagher 2023). These approaches also have
implications for psychotherapeutic practices ( Fuchs & Röhricht 2017 ;
Hutto & Gallagher 2017; Koch, Caldwell, & Fuchs 2013; Röhricht et al.
2014).
 Medicine and physical therapy.EC contributes to rethinking clinical reason-
ing in the context of physical therapy (Halák & Kříž 2022; Øberg, Normann,
& Gallagher 2015), and emphasizes the importance of organism– environ-
ment coupling in medical practice and education (Costa-Cordella, Reardon,
& Parada 2022).
In all of these areas EC tends to challenge existing paradigms. These appli-
cations are helpful for sorting out the practical implications of EC theory, and
from the EC perspective these are important projects that loop back to inform
the ongoing development of 4E theory.
64 Philosophy of Mind
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
References
Abrahamson, D. & Sánchez-García, R. (2016). Learning is moving in new
ways: The ecological dynamics of mathematics education.Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 25(2), 203– 239.
Adams, F. & Aizawa, K. (2001). The bounds of cognition. Philosophical
Psychology, 14(1), 43– 64.
Adams, F. & Aizawa, K. (2010). Defending the bounds of cognition. In
R. Menary (ed.), The Extended Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.
67– 80.
Aden, J. & Eschenauer, S. (2020). Translanguaging: An enactive-performative
approach to language education. In E. Moore, J. Bradley, & J. Simpson (eds.),
Translanguaging as Transformation: The Collaborative Construction of New
Linguistic Realities. Berlin: De Gruyter, pp.102– 117.
Aizawa, K. (2007). Understanding the embodiment of perception.The Journal
of Philosophy, 104(1), 5– 25.
Aizawa, K. (2014). The enactivist revolution.Avant, (5)2, 1– 24. DOI: http://doi
.org/10.12849/50202014.0109.0002.
Akins, K. (1996). Of sensory systems and the“aboutness” of mental states.The
Journal of Philosophy, 93(7), 337– 372.
Allen, M. & Friston, K. J. (2018). From cognitivism to autopoiesis: Towards
a computational framework for the embodied mind.Synthese, 195(6), 2459–
2482.
Alsmith, A. J. T. & de Vignemont, F. (2012). Embodying the mind and repre-
senting the body.Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 3(1), 1– 13.
Alviar, C., Kello, C. T., & Dale, R. (2023). Multimodal coordination and
pragmatic modes in conversation. Language Sciences 97, 101524. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.langsci.2022.101524.
Anderson, M. (2015). The Renaissance Extended Mind. London: Palgrave
Macmillan. London
Anderson, M., Wheeler, M., & Sprevak, M. (2019). Distributed cognition and
the humanities. In M. Anderson, D. Cairns, & M. Sprevak (eds.),Distributed
Cognition in Medieval and Renaissance Culture. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, pp.1– 17.
Anderson, M. L. (2010). Neural reuse: A fundamental organizational principle
of the brain.Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33(4), 245– 266.
Andres, M., Seron, X., & Olivier, E. (2007). Contribution of hand motor circuits
to counting.Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 19(4), 563– 576.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Astington, J. (1990). Narrative and the child’s theory of mind. In B. K. Britton &
D. Pellegrini (eds.),Narrative Thought and Narrative Language. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum, pp.151– 171.
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R. M., & Bian, L. (2016). Psychological reasoning in
infancy. Annual Review of Psychology, 67, 159– 186.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1997).Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism and Theory of
Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 22, 577– 660.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition.Annual Review of Psychology, 59,
617– 645.
Bechtel, W., & Huang, L. T. L. (2022).Philosophy of Neuroscience. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Beer, R. (2000). Dynamical approaches to cognitive science. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 4, 91– 99.
Berlucchi, G. & Aglioti, S. M. (2010). The body in the brain revisited.
Experimental Brain Research, 200(1), 25– 35.
Berthoz, A. (2000).The Brain’s Sense of Movement. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Block, N. (2005). Review of Alva Noe: Action in Perception. Journal of
Philosophy, 102(5), 259– 272.
Bower, M. & Gallagher, S. (2013). Bodily affectivity: Prenoetic elements in
enactive perception.Phenomenology and Mind, 2, 108– 131.
Bredo, E. (1994). Reconstructing educational psychology: Situated cognition
and Deweyan pragmatism.Educational Psychologist, 29, 23– 35.
Brooks, R. (1991). Intelligence without representation.Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
47, 139– 159.
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is
not a scientist: The free-energy principle from an ecological-enactive
perspective. Synthese, 195(6), 2417– 2444.
Burge, T. (2010). Origins of perception. Paper presented as the First 2010 Jean
Nicod Prize Lecture, Paris, June 14, 2010.
Buttelmann, D., Carpenter, M. & Tomasello, M. (2009). Eighteen-month-old
infants show false belief understanding in an active helping paradigm.
Cognition, 112(2), 337– 342.
Caligiuri, M. P. & Ellwanger, J. (2000). Motor and cognitive aspects of motor
retardation in depression.Journal of Affective Disorders, 57(1– 3), 83– 93.
Carruthers, P. (2013). Mindreading in infancy. Mind & Language, 28(2),
141– 172.
66 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Casasanto, D. & Dijkstra, K. (2010). Motor action and emotional memory.
Cognition, 115(1), 179– 185.
Cash, M. (2013). Cognition without borders:“Third wave” socially distributed
cognition and relational autonomy. Cognitive Systems Research, 25–26,
61– 71.
Cave, T. (2017). Situated cognition: The literary archive.Poetics Today, 38(2),
235– 253.
Chemero, A. (2001). Dynamical explanation and mental representations.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5(4), 141– 142.
Chemero, A. (2009).Radical Embodied Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Chen, S. & Bargh, J. A. (1999). Consequences of automatic evaluation:
Immediate behavior predispositions to approach or avoid the stimulus.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 215– 224.
Chiel, H. & Beer, R. (1997). The brain has a body: Adaptive behavior emerges
from interactions of nervous system, body and environment. Trends in
Neuroscience, 20, 553– 557.
Chomsky, N. (1995). Language and nature.Mind, 104, 1– 61.
Churchland, P. S., Ramachandran, V . S., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1994). A critique of
pure vision. In C. Koch & J. L. Davis (eds.),Large-Scale Neuronal Theories
of the Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cisek, P. & Kalaska, J. F. (2010). Neural mechanisms for interacting with
a world full of action choices.Annual Review of Neuroscience, 33, 269– 298.
Clapin, H. (2002).The Philosophy of Mental Representation. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Clark, A. (1996). Economic reason: The interplay of individual learning and
external structure. In J. Drobak & J. Nye (eds.),The Frontiers of the New
Institutional Economics. Bingley: Emerald Group Academic Publishers, pp.
269– 270.
Clark, A. (1997).Being There. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (1999). An embodied cognitive science? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 3(9), 345–
351.
Clark, A. (2008a).Supersizing the Mind: Reﬂections on Embodiment, Action,
and Cognitive Extension. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2008b). Pressing theﬂesh: A tension on the study of the embodied,
embedded mind.Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 76, 37– 59.
Clark, A. (2010a). Memento’s revenge: The extended mind, extended. In
R. Menary (ed.), The Extended Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.
43– 66.
67References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Clark, A. (2010b). Coupling, constitution, and the cognitive kind: A reply to
Adams and Aizaway. In R. Menary (ed.),The Extended Mind. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, pp.81– 100.
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the
future of cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 36(3),
181– 204.
Clark, A. (2015). Radical predictive processing. The Southern Journal of
Philosophy, 53(S1), 3– 27.
Clark, A. (2016).Surﬁng uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied
Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2018). A nice surprise? Predictive processing and the active pursuit
of novelty.Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 17(3), 521– 534.
Clark, A. & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind.Analysis, 58(1), 7– 19.
Clark, A. & Grush, R. (1999). Towards a cognitive robotics.Adaptive Behavior,
7(1), 5– 16.
Clark, A. & Toribio, J. (1994). Doing without representing?Synthese, 101(3),
401– 431.
Clowes, R. W. & Mendonca, D. (2016). Representation redux: Is there still
a useful role for representation to play in the context of embodied, dynamicist
and situated theories of mind?New Ideas in Psychology, 40, 26– 47.
Colombetti, G. (2014).The Feeling Body: Affective Science Meets the Enactive
Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Constant, A., Clark, A., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Representation wars: Enacting
an armistice through active inference.Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 3798.
Cosmelli, D. & Thompson, E. (2007). Embodiment or envatment? Reﬂections
on the bodily basis of consciousness. In J. Stewart, O. Gapenne, & E. di Paolo
(eds.), Enaction: Towards a New Paradigm for Cognitive Science .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.361– 386.
Costa-Cordella, S., Reardon, E., & Parada, F. J. (2022). Towards a 4E perspec-
tive curricula for health and medical education.PsyArXiv, January 31, 2022.
arXiv: http://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/p2nqm.
Crane, T. (2008). Is perception a propositional attitude?The Philosophical
Quarterly, 59 (236), 452– 469.
Craver, C. F. (2007).Explaining the Brain: Mechanisms and the Mosaic Unity
of Neuroscience. New York: Oxford University Press.
Craver, C. F. & Bechtel, W. (2007). Top-down causation without top-down
causes. Biology and Philosophy, 22, 547– 63.
Csibra, G. & Gergely, G. (2009). Natural pedagogy. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 13, 148– 153.
68 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Dale, R., Dietrich, E., & Chemero, A. (2009). Explanatory pluralism in cogni-
tive science.Cognitive Science, 33(5), 739– 42.
Damasio, A. (1994).Descartes’Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain.
New York: G. P. Putnam.
Danziger, S., Levav, J., & Avnaim-Pesso, L. (2011). Extraneous factors in
judicial decisions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108
(17), 6889– 6892.
Degenaar, J. & O’Regan, J. K. (2017). Sensorimotor theory and enactivism.
Topoi, 36(3), 393– 407.
de Haan, S. (2020).Enactive Psychiatry. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
De Jaegher, H. & Di Paolo, E. (2007). Participatory sense-making: An enactive
approach to social cognition.Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 6,
485– 507.
De Jaegher, H., Di Paolo, E., & Gallagher, S. (2010). Can social interaction
constitute social cognition? Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 14(10),
441– 447.
Dennett, D. (1969).Content and Consciousness. London: Routledge.
Dewey, J. (1916). Essays in Experimental Logic. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Di Paolo, E. A. (2005). Autopoiesis, adaptivity, teleology, agency.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 4, 97– 125.
Di Paolo, E. A., Rohde, M., & De Jaegher, H. (2007). Horizons for the enactive
mind: Values, social interaction, and play. In J. Stewart, O. Gapenne, & E. Di
Paolo (eds.), Enaction: Towards a New Paradigm for Cognitive Science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.33– 88.
Di Paolo, E., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. (2022). Laying down a forking path:
Tensions between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the
Mind Sciences, 3(2), 1– 39.
Dreyfus, H. L. (ed.) (1982).Husserl, Intentionality, and Cognitive Science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dumas, G., Kelso, J. A., & Nadel, J. (2014). Tackling the social cognition
paradox through multi-scale approaches.Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 882.
Dunn, J. (1991). Understanding others: Evidence from naturalistic studies of
children. In A. Whiten, ed., Natural Theories of Mind: Evolution,
Development and Simulation of Everyday Mindreading . Oxford: Basil
Blackwell, pp.51– 61.
Egan, F. (2014). How to think about mental content.Philosophical Studies, 170,
115– 135.
69References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Feldman, C. F., Bruner, J., Renderer, B., & Spitzer, S. (1990). Narrative
comprehension. In B. K. Britton & A. D. Pellegrini (eds.), Narrative
Thought and Narrative Language . Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, pp.1– 78.
Findlay, J. M. & Gilchrist, I. D. (2003)Active Vision: The Psychology of
Looking and Seeing. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fink, P. W., Foo, P. S., & Warren, W. H. (2009). Catchingﬂy balls in virtual
reality: A critical test of the outﬁelder problem.Journal of Vision, 9(13), 1– 8.
Fiore, S. M., Salas, E., Cuevas, H. M., & Bowers, C. A. (2003). Distributed
coordination space: Toward a theory of distributed team process and
performance. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science, 4(3–4), 340– 364.
Fodor, J. A. (2008). LOT 2: The Language of Thought Revisited. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Fogel, A. & Thelen, E. (1987). Development of early expressive and communi-
cative action: Reinterpreting the evidence from a dynamic systems
perspective. Developmental Psychology, 23(6), 747.
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it.Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10
(86), 20130475.
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory?Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2), 127– 138.
Friston, K., Mattout, J., & Kilner, J. (2011). Action understanding and active
inference. Biological Cybernetics, 104(1–2), 137– 160.
Fritzman, J. M. & Thornburg, K. (2016).“I is someone else”: Constituting the
extended mind’s fourth wave, with Hegel. Essays in Philosophy, 17(2),
156– 190.
Fuchs, T. & Röhricht, F. (2017). Schizophrenia and intersubjectivity: An
embodied and enactive approach to psychopathology and psychotherapy.
Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology, 24(2), 127– 142.
Gallagher, S. (2005a). How the Body Shapes the Mind . Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gallagher, S. (2005b). Metzinger
’s matrix: Living the virtual life with a real
body. Psyche, 11(5), 1– 9.
Gallagher, S. (2013). The socially extended mind.Cognitive Systems Research,
25, 4– 12.
Gallagher, S. (2017).Enactivist Interventions: Rethinking the Mind. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Gallagher, S. (2020).Action and Interaction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallagher, S. (2021).Performance/Art: The Venetian Lectures. Milan: Mimesis
International Edizioni.
70 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Gallagher, S. (2022). Surprise! Why enactivism and predictive processing are
parting ways: The case of improvisation.Possibility Studies and Society.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/27538699221132691.
Gallagher, S. (2023).The Self and Its Disorders. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Gallagher, S. & Allen, M. (2018). Active inference, enactivism and the hermen-
eutics of social cognition.Synthese, 195(6), 2627– 2648.
Gallagher, S. & Gallagher, J. (2020). Acting oneself as another: An actor’s
empathy for her character.Topoi, 39(4), 779– 790.
Gallagher, S. & Hutto, D. (2008). Understanding others through primary inter-
action and narrative practice. In J. Zlatev, T. Racine, C. Sinha, & E. Itkonen
(eds.), The Shared Mind: Perspectives on Intersubjectivity. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, pp.17– 38.
Gallagher, S., Hutto, D., Slaby, J. & Cole, J. (2013). The brain as part of an
enactive system (commentary). Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 36(4),
421– 422.
Gallagher, S. & Lindgren, R. (2015). Enactive metaphors: Learning through
full-body engagement.Educational Psychology Review, 27(3), 391– 404.
Gallagher, S., Mastrogiorgio, A. & Petracca, E. (2019). Economic reasoning
and interaction in socially extended market institutions. Frontiers in
Psychology, 10, 1856. DOI:https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01856.
Gallagher, S., Varga, S., & Sparaci, L. (2022). Disruptions of the meshed
architecture in Autism Spectrum Disorder.Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 42(1),
76– 95.
Gallese, V . & Guerra, M. (2012). Embodying movies: Embodied simulation and
ﬁlm studies. Cinema: Journal of Philosophy and the Moving Image, 3,
183– 210.
Gangopadhyay, N. & Kiverstein, J. (2009). Enactivism and the unity of percep-
tion and action.Topoi, 28, 63– 73.
Garﬁeld, J. L., Peterson, C.C., & Perry T. (2001). Social cognition, language
acquisition and the development of the theory of mind.Mind and Language,
16, 494– 541.
Garﬁnkel, S., Minati, L., Gray, M. A. et al. (2014). Fear from the heart:
Sensitivity to fear stimuli depends on individual heartbeats.The Journal of
Neuroscience, 34(19), 6573– 6582.
Gibson, J. J. (1979).The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. London:
Psychology Press.
Glenberg, A. M. (2010). Embodiment as a unifying perspective for psychology.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 1(4), 586– 596.
71References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Glenberg, A. M. & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding language in action.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 558– 565.
Goldman, A. I. (2012). A moderate approach to embodied cognitive science.
Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 3(1), 71– 88.
Goldman, A. I. (2014). The bodily formats approach to embodied cognition. In
U. Kriegel (ed.),Current Controversies in Philosophy of Mind. New York
and London: Routledge, pp.91– 108.
Goldman, A. I. & Vignemont, de F. (2009). Is social cognition embodied?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(4), 154– 159.
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human
interaction. Journal of Pragmatics, 32(10), 1489– 1522.
Gopnik, A. & Meltzoff, A. N. (1997). Words, Thoughts and Theories .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Guajardo, N. R. & Watson, A. (2002). Narrative discourse and theory of mind
development. The Journal of Genetic Psychology, 163, 305– 325.
Hafed, Z. M. & Krauzlis, R. J. (2006) Ongoing eye movements constrain visual
perception. Nature Neuroscience, 9, 1449– 1457.
Halák, J. & Kříž, P. (2022). Phenomenological physiotherapy: Extending the
concept of bodily intentionality.Medical Humanities, 48(4). DOI: https://doi
.org/10.1136/medhum-2021-012300.
Halverson, C. A. (1995). Inside the cognitive workplace: New technology and
air trafﬁc control. (Doctoral dissertation, University of California, San
Diego.)
Haugeland, J. (1991). Representational genera. In W. Ramsey, D. E. Rumelhart,
& S. P. Stich, (eds.),Philosophy and Connectionist Theory. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp.61– 90.
Haugeland, J. (1995). Mind embodied and embedded. In Y .-H. Houng &
J.-C. Ho ( eds.), Mind and Cognition. Taipei: Academia Sinica.
He, J. & Ravn, S. (2018). Sharing the dance: On the reciprocity of movement in
the case of elite sports dancers.Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences,
17(1), 99– 116.
Heidegger, M. (1962).Being and Time, trans. J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson.
New York: Harper and Row.
Helmholtz, H. (1962/1867).Treatise on Physiological Optics, 3rd ed., V ol. III,
trans. J. Southall. New York: Dover.
Hobson, P. (2002).The Cradle of Thought. London: Macmillan.
Høffding, S. (2019). A Phenomenology of Musical Absorption . London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Hohwy, J. (2013).The Predictive Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain.Nous, 50(2), 259– 285.
72 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Hohwy, J., Roepstorff, A., & Friston, K. (2008). Predictive coding explains
binocular rivalry: An epistemological review.Cognition, 108(3), 687– 701.
Hurley, S. (1998). Consciousness in Action . Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Hurley, S. (2010). The varieties of externalism. In R. Menary (ed.), The
Extended Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.101– 153.
Husserl, E. (1989). Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to
a Phenomenological Philosophy – Second Book: Studies in the
Phenomenology of Constitution , trans. R. Rojcewicz & A. Schuwer.
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Hutchins, E. (1995a).Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995b). How a cockpit remembers its speeds.Cognitive Science,
19(3), 265– 288.
Hutchins, E. (2000). Distributed cognition. In M. J. Smelzer & P. B. Baltes
(eds.), International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences.
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.https://arl.human.cornell.edu/linked%20docs/
Hutchins_Distributed_Cognition.pdf .
Hutto, D. D. (2005) Knowing what? Radical versus conservative enactivism.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 4(4), 389– 405.
Hutto, D. D. (2007). The narrative practice hypothesis. In D. D. Hutto ( ed.),
Narrative and Understanding Persons , Royal Institute of Philosophy
Supplement. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.43– 68.
Hutto, D. D. (2015). Overly enactive imagination? Radically re-imagining
imagining. The Southern Journal of Philosophy, 53, 68– 89.
Hutto, D. D. & Abrahamson, D. (2022). Embodied, enactive education. In
S. L. Macrine & J. Fugate (eds.), Movement Matters: How Embodied
Cognition Informs Teaching and Learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
pp. 39– 54.
Hutto, D. D. & Gallagher, S. (2017). Re-authoring narrative therapy: Improving
our self-management tools. Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology, 24(2),
157– 167.
Hutto, D. D., Kirchhoff, M. D., & Abrahamson, D. (2015). The enactive roots of
STEM: Rethinking educational design in mathematics. Educational
Psychology Review, 27(3), 371– 389.
Hutto, D. D., & Myin, E. (2013).Radicalizing Enactivism: Basic Minds without
Content. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hutto, D. D. & Myin, E. (2020). Deﬂating deﬂationism about mental represen-
tation. In J. Smortchkova, K. Dołrega, & T. Schlicht (eds.),What Are Mental
Representations? Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.79– 100.
73References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Hutto, D. D. & Satne, G. (2015). The natural origins of content.Philosophia, 43
(3), 521– 536.
Jackendoff, R. (2002).Foundations of Language: Brain, Meaning, Grammar,
Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jäger, N., Schnädelbach, H., & Hale, J. (2016). Embodied interactions with
adaptive architecture. In N. Dalton, H. Schnädelbach, M. Wiberg, &
T. Varoudis (eds.), Architecture and Interaction . Cham: Springer, pp.
183– 202.
Jelić, A., Tieri, G., De Matteis, F., Babiloni, F., & Vecchiato, G. (2016). The
enactive approach to architectural experience: A neurophysiological perspec-
tive on embodiment, motivation, and affordances.Frontiers in Psychology, 7,
481.
Johnson, M. (1987). The Body in the Mind: The Bodily Basis of Meaning,
Imagination, and Reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Johnson, M. (2015). The embodied meaning of architecture. In S. Robinson &
J. Pallasmaa (eds.),Mind in Architecture: Neuroscience, Embodiment, and
the Future of Design. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.33– 50.
Johnson, M., & Lakoff, G. (2002). Why cognitive linguistics requires embodied
realism. Cognitive Linguistics, 13(3), 245– 263.
Kelso, J. A. S. (2009). Coordination dynamics. In R. A. Meyers (ed.),
Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science. Heidelberg: Springer,
pp. 1537– 1564. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-27737-5_101-3.
Kelso, J. A. S. (2014). Coordination dynamics and cognition. In K. Davids,
R. Hristovski, D. Araújo D. et al. (eds.),Routledge Research in Sport and
Exercise Science. Complex Systems Sport. London: Routledge/Taylor &
Francis, pp.18– 43.
Kilner, J. M., Friston, K. J., & Frith, C. D. (2007). Predictive coding: An account
of the mirror neuron system.Cognitive Processing, 8(3), 159– 166.
Kirchhoff, M. D. (2012). Extended cognition andﬁxed properties: Steps to a
third-wave version of extended cognition.Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences, 11, 287– 308.
Kirchhoff, M. D. (2017). From mutual manipulation to cognitive extension:
Challenges and implications.Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 16
(5), 863– 878.
Kirchhoff, M. D. (2018). Autopoiesis, free energy, and the life– mind continuity
thesis. Synthese, 195(6), 2519– 2540.
Kirchhoff, M. D. & Froese, T. (2017). Where there is life there is mind: In
support of a strong life-mind continuity thesis.Entropy, 19(4), 169.
Kirsh, D. & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic from pragmatic
action. Cognitive Science, 18(4), 513– 549.
74 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Kiverstein, J. (2020). Free energy and the self: an ecological– enactive interpret-
ation. Topoi, 39(3), 559– 574.
Kiverstein, J. & Rietveld, E. (2021). Scaling-up skilled intentionality to linguis-
tic thought.Synthese, 198, 175– 194.
Knuuttila, T. & V outilainen, A. (2003). A parser as an epistemic artifact:
A material view on models.Philosophy of Science, 70(5), 1484– 1495.
Koch, S. C., Caldwell, C., & Fuchs, T. (2013). On body memory and embodied
therapy. Body, Movement and Dance in Psychotherapy, 8(2), 82– 94.
Krickel, B. (2018). Saving the mutual manipulability account of constitutive
relevance. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A, 68, 58– 67.
Krueger, J. (2014). Affordances and the musically extended mind.Frontiers in
Psychology, 4, 1003.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1999).Philosophy in the Flesh: The Embodied Mind
and Its Challenge to Western Thought. New York: Basic Books.
Lakoff, G. & Núñez, R. (2000).Where Mathematics Comes From. New York:
Basic Books.
Leong, V . & Schilbach, L. (2019). The promise of two-person neuroscience for
developmental psychiatry: Using interaction-based sociometrics to identify
disorders of social interaction. British Journal of Psychiatry , 215(5),
636– 638.
Lewes, G. H. (1879). The motor feelings and the muscular sense. In
G. H. Lewes, Problems of Life and Mind. New York: Houghton, Mifﬂin
and Company, pp.312– 328.
Lindgren, R. & Bolling, A. (2013). Assessing the learning effects of interactive
body metaphors in a mixed reality science simulation. InAnnual Meeting of
the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA .
Washington, DC: The American Educational Research Association, pp.
177– 180.
Lindgren, R. & Moshell, J. M. (2011). Supporting children’s learning with
body-based metaphors in a mixed reality environment. InProceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children, Ann
Arbor, MI: ACM, pp.177– 180.
Malafouris, L. (2013).
How Things Shape the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Maturana, H. & Varela, F. (1980/1972). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The
Realization of the Living. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Meltzoff, A. N., Ramírez, R. R., Saby, J. N. et al. (2018). Infant brain responses
to felt and observed touch of hands and feet: An MEG study.Developmental
Science, 21(5), e12651.
75References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Menary, R. (2007).Cognitive Integration: Mind and Cognition Unbounded.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Menary, R. (ed.) (2010a).The Extended Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Menary, R. (2010b). Cognitive integration and the extended mind. In R. Menary
(ed.), The Extended Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.227– 243.
Menary, R. (2010c). Introduction to the special issue on 4E cognition.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 9(4), 459– 463.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (2012).Phenomenology of Perception, trans. D. Landes.
London: Routledge.
Merritt, M. (2015). Thinking-is-moving: Dance, agency, and a radically enact-
ive mind.Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 14(1), 95– 110.
Millikan, R. (1991). Perceptual content and Fregean myth. Mind, 100(4),
439– 459.
Millikan, R. G. (1995). Pushmi-pullyu representations. Philosophical
Perspectives, 9, 185– 200.
Miyazono, K. (2017). Does functionalism entail extended mind?Synthese, 194
(9), 3523– 3541.
Murray, L. & Trevarthen, C. (1985). Emotional regulation of interactions
between 2-month-olds and their mothers. In T. M. Field & N. A. Fox
(eds.), Social Perception in Infants. Norwood, NJ: Ablex, pp.177– 197.
Natvik, E., Groven, K. S., Råheim, M., Gjengedal, E., & Gallagher, S. (2019).
Space perception, movement, and insight: Attuning to the space of everyday
life after major weight loss. Physiotherapy Theory and Practice, 35(2),
101– 108.
Nelson, K. (2003). Narrative and the emergence of a consciousness of self. In
G. D. Fireman, T. E. J. McVay, & O. Flanagan (eds.), Narrative and
Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.17– 36.
Nelson, K. (2007).Young Minds in Social Worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Newen, A. , De Bruin, L. , & Gallagher, S. (eds.). (2018).Oxford Handbook of
4E-Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Noë, A. (2004).Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Øberg, G. K., Normann, B., & Gallagher, S. (2015). Embodied-enactive clinical
reasoning in physical therapy.Physiotherapy Theory and Practice, 31(4),
244
– 252.
Onishi, K. H. & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-old infants understand
false beliefs?Science, 308(5719), 255– 258.
O’Regan, J. K. & Noë, A. (2001). A sensorimotor account of vision and visual
consciousness. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24(5), 939– 973.
76 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Oullier, O. & Basso, F. (2010). Embodied economics: How bodily information
shapes the social coordination dynamics of decision-making.Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 365(1538), 291– 301.
Palermos, S. O. (2014). Loops, constitution, and cognitive extension.Cognitive
Systems Research, 27, 25– 41.
Parr, T., Da Costa, L., & Friston, K. (2020). Markov blankets, information
geometry and stochastic thermodynamics.Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A, 378(2164), 20190159.
Peirce, C. S. (1887). Logical machines.American Journal of Psychology, 1(1),
165– 170.
Peirce, C. S. (1931– 1935, 1958). Collected Papers of C. S. Peirce, eds.
C. Hartshorne, P. Weiss, & A. Burks. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press (abbreviated: CP followed by the conventional “[volume].[page]”
notation).
Peirce, C. S. (1958).Collected Papers of C.S. Peirce. Vol 7. Ed. A. W. Burks.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Perner, J. (1992). Grasping the concept of representation: Its impact on 4-year-
olds’ theory of mind and beyond.Human Development, 35(3), 146– 155.
Perry, M. (2003). Distributed cognition. In J. Carroll (ed.), HCI Models,
Theories, and Frameworks: Toward a Multidisciplinary Science .
Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp.193– 223.
Petracca, E. (2021). Embodying bounded rationality: From embodied bounded
rationality to embodied rationality.Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 710607.
Petracca, E. & Gallagher, S. (2020). Economic cognitive institutions.Journal of
Institutional Economics, 16(6), 747– 765.
Prinz, J. (2009). Is consciousness embodied? In P. Robbins & M. Aydede (eds.),
Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition . Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, pp.419– 437.
Prinz, J. (2006). Putting the brakes on enactive perception.Psyche, 12, 1– 19.
Profﬁtt, D. R. (2006). Embodied perception and the economy of action.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 1(2), 110–
122.
Profﬁtt, D. R., Bhalla, M., Gossweiler, R., & Midgett, J. (1995). Perceiving
geographical slant.Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 2, 409– 428.
Pulvermüller, F. (2005). Brain mechanisms linking language and action.Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 6(7), 576– 582.
Ramsey, W. (2007). Representation Reconsidered. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Ramsey, W. (2020). Defending representation realism. In J. Smortchkova,
K. Dołrega, & T. Schlicht (eds.), What Are Mental Representations?
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.54– 78.
77References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Ramstead, M. J., Kirchhoff, M. D., Constant, A., & Friston, K. J. (2021).
Multiscale integration: Beyond internalism and externalism.Synthese, 198
(1), 41– 70.
Ravn, S. (2016). Embodying interaction in Argentinean tango and sports dance.
In T. DeFrantz & P. Rothﬁeld (eds.),Choreography and Corporeality: Relay
in Motion. London: Palgrave Macmillan pp.119– 134.
Ravn, S. & Høffding, S. (2021). Improvisation and thinking in movement: An
enactivist analysis of agency in artistic practices.Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences 21, 515– 537. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-021-
09756-9.
Rietveld, E. & Brouwers, A. A. (2017). Optimal grip on affordances in archi-
tectural design practices: An ethnography.Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences, 16(3), 545– 564.
Rietveld, E. & Kiverstein, J. (2014). A rich landscape of affordances.
Ecological Psychology, 26(4), 325– 352.
Robbins, P. & Aydede, M. (2009). A short primer on situated cognition. In
P. Robbins & M. Aydede (eds.),The Cambridge Handbook of Situated
Cognition. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, pp.1– 16.
Rock, I. & Harris, C. S. (1967). Vision and touch.Scientiﬁc American, 216(5),
96– 104.
Röhricht, F., Gallagher, S., Geuter, U., & Hutto, D. D. (2014). Embodied
cognition and body psychotherapy: The construction of new therapeutic
environments. Sensoria: A Journal of Mind, Brain & Culture, 10(1), n.p.
Roll, J-P. & Roll, R. (1988). From eye to foot: A proprioceptive chain involved
in postural control. In G. Amblard, A. Berthoz, & F. Clarac (eds.),Posture
and Gait: Development, Adaptation, and Modulation. Amsterdam: Excerpta
Medica, pp.155– 164.
Rolla, G. & Novaes, F. (2022). Ecological-enactive scienti ﬁc cognition:
Modeling and material engagement. Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences, 21(3), 625– 643 DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-020-09713-y.
Rowlands, M. (2006)Body Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rowlands, M. (2009). The extended mind.Zygon, 44(3), 628– 641.
Rowlands, M. (2010).The New Science of the Mind: From Extended Mind to
Embodied Phenomenology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rubio-Fernández, P. & Geurts, B. (2013). How to pass the false-belief task
before your fourth birthday.Psychological Science, 24(1), 27– 33.
Rupert, R. (2004). Challenges to the hypothesis of extended cognition.Journal
of Philosophy101, 389– 428.
Rupert, R. (2011). Embodiment, consciousness, and the massively representa-
tional mind.Philosophical Topics, 39(1), 99– 120.
78 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Ryan, K. & Gallagher, S. (2020). Between ecological psychology and enacti-
vism: Is there resonance?Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 1147. DOI:https://doi
.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01147.
Saxe, R. & Kanwisher, N. (2003). People thinking about thinking people: The role of
the temporo-parietal junction in “theory of mind.” Neuroimage, 19(4),
1835– 1842.
Schiavio, A. & Høffding, S. (2015). Playing together without communicating?
A pre-reﬂective and enactive account of joint musical performance.Musicae
Scientiae, 19(4), 366– 388.
Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T., Dolan, R. J., & Friston, K. (2013)
Exploration, novelty, surprise, and free energy minimization. Frontiers
in Psychology, 4, 710. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00710 .
Shapiro, L. (2004).The Mind Incarnate. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Shapiro, L. (2007). The embodied cognition research programme.Philosophy
Compass, 2(2), 338– 346.
Shapiro, L. (2014). Book review:Radicalizing Enactivism: Basic Minds with-
out Content. Mind, 123(489), 213– 220.
Shapiro, L. & Spaulding, S. (2021). Embodied cognition. The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. E. Zalta. https://plato.stanford.edu/arch
ives/win2021/entries/embodied-cognition/.
Shea, N. (2018). Representation in Cognitive Science . Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Skulmowski, A. & Rey, G. D. (2018). Embodied learning: Introducing
a taxonomy based on bodily engagement and task integration.Cognitive
Research: Principles and Implications, 3(1), 1– 10.
Smith, B. C. (1996). On the Origin of Objects . Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Smortchkova, J., Dołrega, K., & Schlicht, T. (eds.) (2020).What Are Mental
Representations? Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Soto-Andrade, J. (2018). Enactive metaphorising in the learning of mathematics. In
G. Kaiser, H. Forgasz, M. Graven et al. (eds.),Invited Lectures from the 13th
International Congress on Mathematical Education. Cham: Springer, pp.
619– 637.
Sprevak, M. (2009). Extended cognition and functionalism. Journal of
Philosophy, 106(9), 503– 527.
Stapleton, M. (2013). Steps to a “properly embodied” cognitive science.
Cognitive Systems Research, 22– 23, 1– 11.
Sterelny, K. (2010). Minds: Extended or scaffolded?Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, 9(4), 465– 481.
79References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Sutton, J. (2010). Exograms and interdisciplinarity: History, the extended mind
and the civilizing process. In R. Menary ( ed.), The Extended Mind.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.189– 225.
Sutton, J. & Tribble, E. (2011). Cognitive ecology as a framework for
Shakespearean studies.Shakespeare Studies, 39, 94– 103.
Thompson, E. (2005). Sensorimotor subjectivity and the enactive approach to
experience. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 4(4), 407– 427.
Thompson, E. (2007).Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology and the Sciences
of Mind, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Thompson, E. & Varela, F. (2001). Radical embodiment: Neural dynamics and
consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences5(10), 418– 425.
Tognoli, E. & Kelso, J. A. S (2015). The coordination dynamics of social
neuromarkers. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9, 563. DOI: https://doi
.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00563.
Tognoli, E., Zhang, M., Fuchs, A., Beetle, C., & Kelso, J. A. S. (2020).
Coordination dynamics: A foundation for understanding social behavior.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 14, 317. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389
/fnhum.2020.00317.
Trevarthen, C. (1979). Communication and cooperation in early infancy:
A description of primary intersubjectivity. In M. Bullowa (ed.), Before
Speech. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.321– 348.
Trevarthen, C. & Hubley, P. (1978). Secondary intersubjectivity: Conﬁdence,
conﬁding and acts of meaning in theﬁrst year. In A. Lock (ed.),Action,
Gesture and Symbol: The Emergence of Language. London: Academic Press,
pp. 183– 229.
Tribble, E. (2011). Cognition in the Globe: Attention and Memory in
Shakespeare’s Theatre. Berlin: Springer.
Tsakiris, M. (2010). My body in the brain: A neurocognitive model of
body-ownership. Neuropsychologia, 48(3), 703– 712.
Van Den Herik, J. C. (2018). Attentional actions: An ecological-enactive
account of utterances of concrete words. Psychology of Language and
Communication, 22(1), 90– 123.
Van Der Schyff, D., Schiavio, A., Walton, A., Velardo, V ., & Chemero, A.
(2018). Musical creativity and the embodied mind: Exploring the possibil-
ities of 4E cognition and dynamical systems theory.Music & Science, 1,
1– 18, https://doi.org/10.1177/2059204318792319.
Varela, F. J. (1996). Neurophenomenology: A methodological remedy for the
hard problem.Journal of Consciousness Studies, 3(4), 330– 349.
Varela, F. J. (1999) Present-time consciousness. Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 6(2– 3), 111– 140.
80 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991).The Embodied Mind: Cognitive
Science and Human Experience. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Varga, S. (2018). Interpersonal judgments, embodied reasoning, and juridical
legitimacy. In A. Newen, L. de Bruin, & S. Gallagher ( eds.),The Oxford
Handbook of 4E Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.863– 874.
Varga, S. & Heck, D. H. (2017). Rhythms of the body, rhythms of the brain:
Respiration, neural oscillations, and embodied cognition.Consciousness and
Cognition, 56, 77– 90.
Wadham, J. (2016). Common-sense functionalism and the extended mind.
Philosophical Quarterly, 66 (262), 136– 151.
Ward, D., Silverman, D., & Villalobos, M. (2017). Introduction: The varieties of
enactivism. Topoi, 36(3), 365– 375.
Wheeler, M. (2005). Reconstructing the Cognitive World. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Wheeler, M. (2012). Minds, things and materiality. In J. Schulkin (ed.),Action,
Perception and the Brain. Basingstoke: Palgrave-Macmillan, pp.147– 163.
Wheeler, M. (2018). Talking about more than heads: The embodied, embedded
and extended creative mind. In B. Gaut & M. Kieran (eds.),Creativity and
Philosophy. London: Routledge, pp.230– 250.
Wheeler, M. (2019). Breaking the waves: Beyond parity and complementarity
in the arguments for extended cognition. In M. Colombo, L. Irvine, &
M. Stapleton (eds.), Andy Clark and Critics. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp.81– 97.
Wheeler, M. & Clark, A. (2008) Culture, embodiment and genes: Unravelling
the triple helix.Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society Series B,
363, 3563– 3575.
Wiese, W. & Friston, K. (2021). Examining the continuity between life and
mind: Is there a continuity between autopoietic intentionality and
representationality? Philosophies, 6(1), 1– 18.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition.Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 9(4), 625– 636.
Wimmer, H. & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and
constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children’s understanding of
deception. Cognition, 13(1), 103–
128.
Woodward, J. (2003).Making Things Happen: A Theory of Causal Explanation.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Yarbus, A. (1967).Eye Movements and Vision. New York: Plenum Press.
Zahidi, K. & Myin, E. (2016). Radically enactive numerical cognition. In
G. Etzelmuller & C. Tewes ( eds.),Embodiment in Evolution and Culture.
Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, pp.57– 71.
81References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Zelano, C., Jiang, H., Zhou, G. et al. (2016). Nasal respiration entrains human
limbic oscillations and modulates cognitive function. Journal of
Neuroscience, 36(49), 12448– 12467.
Zhang, M., Kalies, W. D., Kelso, J. S., & Tognoli, E. (2020). Topological
portraits of multiscale coordination dynamics. Journal of Neuroscience
Methods, 339, 108672.
Ziemke, T. (2001). Are robots embodied.Modeling Cognitive Development in
Robotic Systems, 85, 701– 746.
Zlatev, J. (2010). Phenomenology and cognitive linguistics. In S. Gallagher &
D. Schmicking (eds.),Handbook of Phenomenology and Cognitive Science.
Dordrecht: Springer,415– 443.
82 References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Philosophy of Mind
Keith Frankish
The University of Sheﬃeld
Keith Frankish is a philosopher specializing in philosophy of mind, philosophy of
psychology, and philosophy of cognitive science. He is the author ofMind and Supermind
(Cambridge University Press, 2004) andConsciousness (2005), and has also edited or
coedited several collections of essays, includingThe Cambridge Handbook of Cognitive
Science (Cambridge University Press, 2012),The Cambridge Handbook of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (Cambridge University Press, 2014) (both with William Ramsey), andIllusionism
as a Theory of Consciousness(2017).
About the Series
This series provides concise, authoritative introductions to contemporary work in
philosophy of mind, written by leading researchers and including both established and
emerging topics. It provides an entry point to the primary literature and will be the
standard resource for researchers, students, and anyone wanting aﬁrm grounding in this
fascinating ﬁeld.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Philosophy of Mind
Elements in the Series
Mindreading and Social Cognition
Jane Suilin Lavelle
Free Will
Derk Pereboom
Philosophy of Neuroscience
William Bechtel and Linus Ta-Lun Huang
The Metaphysics of Mind
Janet Levin
Mental Illness
Tim Thornton
Imagination and Creative Thinking
Amy Kind
Attention and Mental Control
Carolyn Dicey Jennings
Biological Cognition
Bryce Huebner and Jay Schulkin
Embodied and Enactive Approaches to Cognition
Shaun Gallagher
A full series listing is available at:www.cambridge.org/EPMI
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009209793
 Published online by Cambridge University Press