Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  1 of 20
Active tactile discrimination is coupled 
with and modulated by the cardiac cycle
Alejandro Galvez- Pol1,2*, Pavandeep Virdee1*, Javier Villacampa2, James Kilner1*
1Department of Clinical and Movement Neurosciences, Queen Square Institute 
of Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom; 2Psychology 
Department, University of the Balearic Islands, Palma de Mallorca, Spain
Abstract Perception and cognition are modulated by the phase of the cardiac signal in which 
the stimuli are presented. This has been shown by locking the presentation of stimuli to distinct 
cardiac phases. However, in everyday life sensory information is not presented in this passive and 
phase- locked manner, instead we actively move and control our sensors to perceive the world. 
Whether active sensing is coupled and modulated with the cardiac cycle remains largely unknown. 
Here, we recorded the electrocardiograms of human participants while they actively performed a 
tactile grating orientation task. We show that the duration of subjects’ touch varied as a function 
of the cardiac phase in which they initiated it. Touches initiated in the systole phase were held for 
longer periods of time than touches initiated in the diastole phase. This effect was most pronounced 
when elongating the duration of the touches to sense the most difficult gratings. Conversely, while 
touches in the control condition were coupled to the cardiac cycle, their length did not vary as a 
function of the phase in which these were initiated. Our results reveal that we actively spend more 
time sensing during systole periods, the cardiac phase associated with lower perceptual sensitivity 
(vs. diastole). In line with interoceptive inference accounts, these results indicate that we actively 
adjust the acquisition of sense data to our internal bodily cycles.
Editor's evaluation
This important study investigates the relationship between touch perception and the cardiac cycle. 
The authors show that people spend more time touching a surface during cardiac systole, where 
tactile perceptual sensitivity is relatively poor. These findings provide convincing evidence that 
people actively adjust how they sample sensory information based on internal body states.
Introduction
Sensations often arise through the active movement of the sensor apparatus (e.g., fingers and eyes) 
rather than through the passive movement of the stimulus. This notion was already noted by Gibson, 
1962, who in the context of active sensing proposed that active touch refers to what is ordinarily 
called touching (vs. passive touch, or being touched). Also, he proposed that active touch is built upon 
the processing of our own body in space and the stimuli in our environment, that is, proprioception 
and exteroception. Yet, it is now well established that sensations also depend on the internal state 
of the body when the stimuli are processed (i.e., interoception; Al et al., 2020; Azzalini et al., 2019; 
Galvez- Pol et al., 2020a; Garfinkel et al., 2014; Khalsa et al., 2018; Quigley et al., 2021; Salomon 
et al., 2016). Our study aimed to test whether active touch sensing varies a function of phasic changes 
inside the body.
The most studied source of interoceptive signalling is the heart. As an intrinsic oscillator, the heart 
has two phases: in the systole phase the heart ejects the blood, whereas in the diastole phase it refills. 
RESEARCH ARTICLE
*For correspondence: 
a.galvez-pol@uib.es (AG- P); 
pavandeep.virdee.16@ucl.ac. 
uk (PV); 
j.kilner@ucl.ac.uk (JK)
Competing interest: The authors 
declare that no competing 
interests exist.
Funding: See page 16
Preprinted: 10 February 2022
Received: 23 February 2022
Accepted: 11 October 2022
Published: 12 October 2022
Reviewing Editor: J Andrew 
Pruszynski, Western University, 
Canada
   Copyright Galvez- Pol et al. 
This article is distributed under 
the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License, 
which permits unrestricted use 
and redistribution provided that 
the original author and source 
are credited.
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  2 of 20
Both phases together comprise a full cardiac cycle. Previous studies have shown that participants’ 
responses to stimuli vary according to the phase of the cardiac cycle in which exteroceptive stimuli are 
presented. Perceptual sensitivity to painful, visual, tactile, and auditory stimuli are typically reduced 
when they are presented in systole compared with diastole (Al et al., 2020; Edwards et al., 2001; 
Edwards et al., 2007; Grund et al., 2022; McIntyre et al., 2006; Motyka et al., 2019; Pramme 
et al., 2016). It has been proposed that these effects reflect cardiac- related sensory attenuation due 
to the competing allocation of attentional resources (Berntson and Khalsa, 2021; Critchley and 
Garfinkel, 2018; Khalsa et al., 2018) during periods of afferent signalling from the baroreceptors 
in systole (Critchley and Harrison, 2013; Garfinkel et  al., 2014). Overall, the current framework 
proposes that perceptual sensitivity is reduced during the systole phase of the cardiac cycle due to 
concurrent and transient cardiac- related afferent signals, whereas it is heightened during the diastole 
phase of the cycle.
The effects of the cardiac cycle and its phases on the processing of exteroceptive information 
have been shown by presenting brief stimuli to participants. These stimuli are timed to occur during 
the participants’ systole or diastole phases. However, in our everyday lives, exteroceptive stimuli 
are highly unlikely to be presented to us passively in a cardiac phase- dependent manner. Here and 
in our previous work, we have adopted a more ecological approach in which participants actively 
seek information through the movement and control of the sensor apparatus (freely moving to seek 
sense data, i.e., active sensing). In this context, we have recently shown that in an active sampling 
visual paradigm, saccades, and visual fixations are coupled to the systole and diastole phases of the 
cardiac cycle (Galvez- Pol et al., 2020b). These results are consistent with the hypothesis that intero-
ceptive and exteroceptive processing adjust to each other by sampling the environment during the 
most quiescent periods of the cardiac cycle (visual fixations during diastole). In the present study, we 
expand upon this and other work in active vision (Kunzendorf et al., 2019; Ohl et al., 2016) to test 
the prediction that when we move to touch objects, we do so in a manner that reflects the relative 
perceptual sensitives of touching in systole and diastole.
eLife digest Most of what is known about human senses comes from experiments under labo-
ratory conditions where participants stay still and stimuli are presented to them by the scientists. 
However, this approach does not reflect what happens in real life as we move around, changing the 
position of our eyes, heads and hands, to actively sense the world.
Our perception also changes depending on what is going on inside our bodies and minds at any 
one time. For instance, our sensitivity to touch varies during the two phases of our heartbeat: people 
are less perceptive to being touched during systole (when the heart ejects blood), compared to when 
they are touched during diastole (when the heart refills with blood). But it was unclear if this relation-
ship influences how we actively touch and sense objects. For instance, do people seek touch in a 
particular phase of their heartbeat, and how does this change their response to the object?
To investigate, Galvez- Pol et al. traced people’s heartbeats while they actively touched different 
objects. Without looking, the participants had to work out whether the objects had vertical or hori-
zontal grooves. Although they did not start their touches in a specific phase of the heartbeat, their 
hearts did influence their behaviour. If they started the touch during systole, they held their fingers 
over the object for longer. The effect was especially noticeable when it was difficult to discriminate 
the objects’ grooves.
Galvez- Pol et al. reasoned that this was down to participants having to compensate for the loss in 
touch sensitivity during the systole phase of their heartbeat. This suggests that people actively adjust 
how they acquire sensory information, such as touch, based on how their bodily functions alter their 
senses.
These findings provide a starting point for future studies investigating how internal bodily fluc-
tuations impact how we sense and respond to things in real world scenarios. This could potentially 
shed light on the differences between the way neurotypical and neurodivergent individuals sense the 
world.
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  3 of 20
While active touch sensing has been studied in animals and humans (Grant et al., 2014; Olczak 
et al., 2018; Prescott et al., 2011; Schaefer et al., 2009; Vega- Bermudez et al., 1991), no accounts 
of interoceptive signalling originating from the heart have been considered. Here, we tested the 
hypothesis that the timing of active touch sensing would be coupled to the distinct phases of the 
cardiac cycle, and that such coupling would be linked to changes in participants’ responses. To test 
this, we instructed our participants to perform an active tactile discrimination task of grating orienta-
tion. We co- registered the participants’ electrocardiograms (ECGs), the initiation, stationary holds (to 
sense the stimuli), and the end of participants’ touches. Then, we computed the period and phase of 
the cardiac cycle in which each touch occurred, as well as the behavioural consequences of sensing 
the stimuli in the different phases of the cycle.
As previous studies in passive sensing have shown that tactile sensitivity is reduced during the 
systole phase (Al et al., 2021a; Grund et al., 2022; Motyka et al., 2019), we examined whether this 
cardiac- related modulation affects the timing and duration of active touch. Specifically, we tested 
two hypotheses. First, whether the time of onset and/or offset of the touches reflects sampling of the 
stimulus during periods with greater tactile sensitivity. In other words, do subjects preferentially touch 
during the diastole phase of the cardiac cycle? Second, we tested whether the duration of active 
touch is modulated by the phase of the cardiac cycle in which the touch is initiated. The prediction 
was that because of the reduced tactile sensitivity in systole, touches initiated in this phase would be 
longer than those initiated in diastole.
Results
Overview
To test these hypotheses, 46 participants performed the active tactile discrimination task illustrated in 
Figure 1. Participants’ task was to touch a grating with their index finger (one per trial) and determine 
whether the grating was in a vertical or horizontal orientation. The probability of any given orientation 
was 0.5. There were seven levels of difficulty that varied as a function of the gratings’ widths. In addi-
tion, the participants performed a control movement condition with a flat stimulus, to study the simple 
effects of movement. In this condition, they followed the same instructions, but with no need to report 
any orientation at the end of the trials. Participants were free to start, hold, and end the touch when 
they felt like. Throughout the task we recorded the participants’ ECGs.
Figure 1. Task and schematic illustration of one trial with cardiac and tactile events. (A) The participants’ task 
was to touch gratings (one per trial) with the index finger to determine their orientation (vertical or horizontal, 
probability of each orientation = 0.5). There were seven levels of difficulty according to the gratings’ widths. Also, 
there was a movement control condition with a flat stimulus and no orientation judgement required. Participants 
were free to start, hold, and end the touch when they felt like, and their electrocardiograms (ECGs) were co- 
registered. (B) Upper panel: for each touch, we computed the start, stationary hold, and end of touch in degrees 
relative to the entailing heartbeat: for example, for an R–R interval of time tR, where the touch started at time 
tE, we calculated tE/tR × 360. Then, each type of event was subjected to circular averaging. Lower panel: we also 
computed the proportion and duration of touches starting and ending in the systole and diastole phases of the 
cardiac cycle. We used the systole length of each cardiac cycle to define a time window of equal length (to equate 
events’ probability in diastole; see e.g., Al et al., 2020), which we located at the end of the cardiac cycle.
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  4 of 20
To examine the statistical relationship between when participants touched and the cardiac cycle, 
we analysed the data in two different ways. First, circular statistics were employed to exploit the itera-
tive nature of the cardiac cycle. We calculated the start, the mean holding phase, and the end of each 
touch as a function of the whole cardiac cycle. We tested separately whether the participants’ mean 
phase (as a function of the whole cycle) differed from a uniform distribution using Rayleigh tests (e.g., 
Al et al., 2020; Galvez- Pol et al., 2020a; Kunzendorf et al., 2019; Motyka et al., 2019; Ohl et al., 
2016). However, this analysis does not consider the biphasic nature of the cardiac cycle (systole and 
diastole phases). Yet, previous studies have shown that responses to stimuli vary as a function of the 
phase of the cardiac cycle in which information is processed (see e.g., Garfinkel et al., 2014; Al et al., 
2020; Leganes- Fonteneau et al., 2020; Grund et al., 2022). Therefore, we also examined partici-
pants’ responses as a function of the phase of the cardiac cycle. We analysed the proportion of events 
(start and end of touches) in two time windows that encompassed the systole and diastole phases of 
the cardiac cycle (see e.g., Al et al., 2020; Grund et al., 2022; Motyka et al., 2019), as well as the 
duration of touches as a function of the cardiac phase in which they were initiated (see Materials and 
methods for further details).
Descriptive statistics
The proportion of rejected trials (see Methods) comprised 5.5% of the total number of trials, standard 
deviation (SD) = 4% across participants. The mean number of computed heartbeats during partic-
ipants’ touch was 540, SD = ±173. Participants’ mean heart rate was 76 bpm, with a mean time 
between R- peaks of 793 ms and SD = ±110 ms. The percentage of correct responses was 82.7%, SD 
± 6.6%, and the mean duration of participants’ touch in the whole experiment was 1103 ms, SD = 
457.40 ms, Mdn = 999 ms. The mean duration of the systole phase was 342 ms and the SD = 23.4 ms, 
which is the expected duration for the mean heart rate of our sample (Mao et al., 2003).
Figure 2. Duration, correct responses, and touches as a function of the whole cardiac cycle. (A) The mean proportion of correct responses changed as a 
function of task difficulty. Performance in the first four levels of difficulty was similar and significantly greater than in the remaining levels of difficulty (see 
main text). (B) The duration of participants’ stationary holds for the first four levels of difficulty was similar and significantly shorter than in the remaining 
levels of difficulty. The duration of stationary holds in the control movement condition (flat stimulus) was significantly shorter than those of the gratings 
condition (see main text); error bars show standard deviations (SDs). (C) Circular means showing the distribution of the start, holding, and end of touches 
for the grating stimuli across the cardiac cycle (interval between two R- peaks at 0/360°). Points depict subjects’ mean degrees, the central arrows in 
v- shape point to the overall mean degree and its length indicates the coherence of individual means. The grey outer lines depict the circular density of 
individual means. Overall, the start, mean point of stationary hold, and end of touches occurred at 151°, 202°, and 278°; n = 46 (D) Touch data for the 
control movement condition as analysed and depicted in panel C. Here, the start, mean point of stationary hold, and end of touches occurred at 101°, 
168°, and 243°; n = 45.
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  5 of 20
Proportion of correct responses and touch duration
In an initial analysis, we examined whether the participants’ performance was modulated by task 
difficulty in the gratings condition. To do this, we compared the proportion of correct responses for 
each level of difficulty (seven levels) with a repeated measures of analysis of variance (rmANOVA). This 
analysis showed a significant effect of task difficulty on participants’ performance (F(3.34, 150) = 154, 
p < 0.0001, ηp 2 = 0.774). Post hoc comparisons showed that participants’ performance for the first 
four levels of difficulty was fairly similar (all p > 0.086; see Supplementary file 1A, B for all post hoc 
comparisons). Yet, performance in these levels was significantly greater than in the remaining levels of 
difficulty (all p < 0.0001, d > 0.833). Likewise, the proportion of correct responses in difficulty level 5 
was significantly greater than those in difficulty levels 6 and 7 (both p < 0.0001, d > 1.618; Figure 2A).
Next, we examined the length of time that participants spent holding their touch for each level 
of difficulty, that is, time spent sensing gratings with different widths. Here, we took the median of 
participants’ holding touch in milliseconds. There was a significant effect of task difficulty on the time 
spent holding the touch (F(1.70, 76.6) = 25.1, p < 0.0001, ηp2 = 0.358). Post hoc comparisons showed 
that the length of holding time for the first four levels of difficulty was similar (all p > 0.065), as well 
as shorter than in the remaining levels of difficulty (all p < 0.01, d > −0.416). Lastly, we compared 
the length of holding time touching all gratings and the flat stimulus, where no discrimination was 
required. The results show that the holding time for the control movement condition (flat stimulus) 
was significantly shorter than for the gratings across all seven levels of difficulty (p ≤ 0.05, d > −0.416; 
Figure 2B).
Start, holding, and end of touches as a function of the whole cardiac 
cycle
Studies in active sensing have shown the start of movements to acquire sense data occurs during 
the early period of the cardiac cycle, whereas the actual sensing has been observed during the mid 
and later periods (Kunzendorf et al., 2019; Galvez- Pol et al., 2020b). In addition, studies in passive 
sensing have shown greater perceptual sensitivity during these latter periods of the cycle (Al et al., 
2021b; Grund et al., 2022; Motyka et al., 2019). Hence, we predicted that the start of active touches 
would occur in the early period of the cardiac cycle, and the sensing touch (i.e., stationary hold) would 
preferentially occur during the later and more sensitive period of the cardiac cycle. To examine this, 
we analysed the coupling of the participants’ responses (start, mean contact point of the holding 
touch, and end of touch) with their own heartbeats. We computed the circular phase of these tactile 
events as a function of the whole cardiac cycle. Then, we used circular averaging for all trials, as well 
as separately for each level of difficulty.
First, for the gratings condition we pooled the data from touches across all difficulty levels. The 
start of touches occurred on average during the first half of the cardiac cycle at 151°. The phase of the 
initiation of touches in circular space did not differ significantly from a uniform distribution (Rayleigh 
test z = 0.134, p = 0.44; Figure 2C). The mean phase of the holding touches occurred on average 
circa the mid part of the cycle at 202°. Yet, it should be noted that holding touches often spanned 
across more than one cycle. Their distribution did not differ from uniformity (Rayleigh test z = 0.155, 
p = 0.331). Likewise, the distribution of ending touches in circular space, which occurred on average 
during the latter part of the cycle at 278°, did not differ significantly from a uniform distribution 
(Rayleigh test z = 0.243, p = 0.065). Second, we analysed all trials separately for each level of difficulty. 
None of the analyses reached significance after correcting for multiple comparisons using the Holm–
Bonferroni method for the seven comparisons.
Next, we examined the same tactile events when the participants were instructed to touch the 
flat stimulus. Thus, no orientation judgement was required, only movement. In the control movement 
condition, the start of the touches occurred on average during the first half of the heartbeats at 101°. 
The distribution of these touches differed significantly from a uniform distribution (Rayleigh test z = 
0.267, p = 0.039; Figure 2D). Regarding the holding of touches, they occurred on average during the 
mid- part of the cycle at 168° and their distribution differed significantly from a uniform distribution 
(Rayleigh test z = 0.316, p = 0.010). Last, the end of touches occurred on average during the second 
half of the heartbeats at 243°. The distribution was marginally different from a uniform distribution 
(Rayleigh test z = 0.260, p = 0.046).
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  6 of 20
These results indicate that active touches were coupled with the cardiac cycle in the control move-
ment condition. Similar findings have been found in active visual tasks that did not require perceptual 
discrimination (see Kunzendorf et al., 2019; Galvez- Pol et al., 2020a). In a separate analysis of the 
gratings condition, we did not find evidence of coupling when our participants sought to sense and 
discriminate the gratings. Yet, while the present analysis considers the iterative nature of the cardiac 
cycle, it does not reflect its true biphasic physiological nature (the presence of two cardiac phases: 
systole and diastole) nor differences in how participants performed the task. We examined these in 
the following analyses.
Proportion of touches starting and ending in each cardiac phase
To study the coupling between the movement of the sensor to acquire sense data and the cardiac 
phase, we examined whether our participants started and ended their active touches in a specific 
cardiac phase. Based on previous research, we hypothesized a greater proportion of touches starting 
in systole, and a greater proportion of touches ending at the end of diastole; the latter being the 
cardiac phase with greater perceptual sensitivity (Galvez- Pol et al., 2020b; Kunzendorf et al., 2019; 
Ohl et al., 2016; Al et al., 2020; Motyka et al., 2019). Importantly, since the proportion of touches in 
each cardiac phase reflects and depends on the proportion in the other phase (see Data analysis), we 
only analysed the proportion of touches in one phase (in systole). Here, two different set of analyses 
were performed.
First, we compared the proportion of touches that started and ended in each cardiac phase between 
our experimental conditions. Since the control movement condition had no difficulty level (no orien-
tation to- be- discriminated), we compared it against the gratings data collapsed across all levels of 
Figure 3. Proportion of touches, correct responses, and duration as a function of the cardiac phase. (A) In the 
grating and control movement conditions, the proportion of touches starting in systole was greater than that of 
touches ending in systole. Also, the proportion of touches ending in systole was significantly smaller than the 
chance level (0.5, depicted with a dashed line); see main text. Hence, more touches ended in diastole. (B) In the 
gratings condition, the proportion of correct responses was similar regardless the touches were started or ended 
in systole or diastole. (C) In the grating condition, the duration of touches was greater when participants started to 
touch in systole vs. diastole (Mdiastole = 1143, Msystole = 1093). (D) Conversely, for the control condition, the duration 
of touches was similar when participants started to touch during systole and diastole (Mdiastole = 708, Msystole = 
717). Right panels show the difference between the duration of touches (stationary holds) initiated in diastole 
and systole, that is, for each participant, the holding time of touches started in diastole minus touches started in 
systole. Error bars show SDs; n = 46 gratings condition, n = 45 control movement condition; p- values adjusted 
using the Holm–Bonferroni method.
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  7 of 20
difficulty. Here, we performed an rmANOVA with two variables and two levels: experimental condition 
(gratings, control) and event type (starting and ending touches in systole). This analysis showed a 
significant main effect of event type (F(1, 44) = 9.91, p = 0.003, ηp 2 = 0.184), a non- significant effect 
of experimental condition (F(1, 44) = 0.47, p = 0.499, ηp 2 = 0.010), and a non- significant interaction 
between both variables (F(1, 44) = 4.04, p = 0.051, ηp2 = 0.084). However, we found a stronger trend 
for the control movement condition (see Figure  3A). For the gratings, the proportion of touches 
that started in systole was significantly greater than the proportion of touches that ended in systole 
(t(45) = −2.22, p = 0.032, d = −0.327, 95% confidence interval [CI] mean difference [−0.040, −0.002]). 
Likewise, in the control movement condition, the proportion of touches that started in systole was 
significantly greater than that of touches that ended in systole (t(44) = −2.75, p = 0.009, d = −0.410, 
95% CI mean difference [−0.125, −0.019]).
The previous analysis does not test whether the proportion of touches in each cardiac phase is 
different to what would be expected by chance. We examined this by comparing the proportions 
of touches that started and ended in each phase against chance (0.5) using one- sample T- tests. For 
the gratings condition, the proportion of touches starting in systole did not differ from chance level 
(F(1, 45) = 0.19, p = 0.662, ηp2 = 0.004). In contrast, the proportion of touches ending in systole was 
significantly smaller than chance level (F(1, 45) = 6.33, p = 0.015, ηp2 = 0.123). Similarly, in the control 
movement condition the proportion of touches starting in systole did not differ from chance level 
(t(44) = 1.18, p = 0.244, d = 0.176, 95% CI mean difference [−0.015, 0.058]), whereas the proportion 
of touches ending in systole was significantly smaller than chance level (t(44) = −3.67, p = 0.0007, d = 
−0.547, 95% CI mean difference [−0.079, −0.023]).
Last, for the gratings condition, we examined whether the proportion of touches changed as a 
function of task difficulty. We performed two separate one- way ANOVAs (starting and ending touches) 
with seven levels (task difficulty). These analyses showed that the proportion of touches starting and 
ending in each cardiac phase did not vary with task difficulty (F(6, 270) = 1.12, p = 0.349, ηp2 = 0.024) 
and (F(6, 270) = 0.69, p = 0.659, ηp2 = 0.015).
Overall, these results show that our participants did not move to start the touch in a particular 
phase of the cardiac cycle. However, they were more likely to end the touch and subsequent sensing 
in the diastole phase of the cardiac cycle. This is indicated by the smaller proportion of touches ending 
in systole. This effect was observed both during the condition requiring tactile discrimination and the 
simple movement control condition. Thus, based on these results we could not conclude that the 
phase coupling that we observed was related to the perceptual discrimination.
Proportion of correct responses in each cardiac phase
After examining if our participants tended to generate active touches in a specific cardiac phase, we 
examined the proportion of correct responses as a function of the phase. To this end, we calculated 
the proportion of active touches in which participants correctly discriminated the orientation of the 
gratings. Since in passive sensing studies, greater perceptual sensitivity has been found in diastole (Al 
et al., 2020; Motyka et al., 2019), we expected greater performance for trials initiated in this cardiac 
phase.
Here, we performed an rmANOVA with three variables: cardiac phase (systole, diastole), event 
type (start, end of touch), and task difficulty (one to seven levels of difficulty). This analysis showed 
that the effect of cardiac phase (F(1, 45) = 1.40, p = 0.243, ηp 2 = 0.03), the effect of event type (F(1, 
45) = 1.71, p = 0.198, ηp2 = 0.04), and all interactions between these variables were not significant (p 
> 0.340). Overall, these results show that regardless of the cardiac phase in which the touches were 
generated, our participants were equally correct in their responses (Figure 3B). Thus, we could not 
conclude based on these results that phase coupling in active sensing touch confers a perceptual 
advantage for tactile discrimination. Yet, these results only reflect the proportion of correct responses. 
A key parameter to- be- analysed is the time that participants spent holding their touches as a function 
of the cardiac phase in which they initiated them. In the next analysis we tested this.
Duration of touches initiated in each cardiac phase
Active sensing involves moving to seek information, as well as not moving to extract sense data 
(fixating the sensor apparatus, i.e., stationary holds). To examine this, we tested whether the duration 
of stationary holds in active touch sensing depends on the phase of the cardiac cycle in which the 
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  8 of 20
touch is initiated. Specifically, we tested the prediction that if touches were initiated in systole, their 
duration would be greater to counteract the reduced perceptual tactile sensitivity in systole (Al et al., 
2020; Motyka et al., 2019). Conversely, we expected shorter touches when they were initiated in 
diastole.
To test this, we first calculated the length of time that participants spent holding their touches 
when these were initiated in systole or diastole. Then, we compared these durations for the gratings 
and the control movement condition. Since the latter had no difficulty level (no orientation to- be- 
discriminated), we compared its duration against that of the gratings data with all levels of difficulty 
collapsed. This was performed with an rmANOVA, comprising two variables and two levels: experi-
mental condition (gratings, control), and cardiac phase (systole, diastole). The results showed a non- 
significant effect of cardiac phase (F(1, 44) = 3.839, p = 0.056, ηp 2 = 0.001), a significant main effect 
of condition (F(1, 44) = 48.614, p < 0.0001, ηp2 = 0.509), and a significant interaction between cardiac 
phase and condition. For the gratings condition, we compared the duration of touches initiated in 
each phase. A Shapiro–Wilk test indicated a deviation from normality (w = 0.934, p = 0.012). Hence, 
we used a Wilcoxon signed- rank test to show that the duration of touches initiated in systole 1143 ms 
(SD = 486.6) was greater than when touches were initiated in diastole 1093 ms (SD = 443.4), z = 855, 
p = 0.0004, r = 0.582, 95% CI mean difference [18.11, 71.18], Figure 3C. For the control movement 
condition, the equivalent analysis showed no differences in the duration of touches initiated in systole 
(M = 708, SD = 441.7) and diastole (M = 717, SD = 429.4), z = 461.5, p = 0.531, r = −0.108, 95% CI 
mean difference [−25.25, 13.50], Figure 3D.
Then, for the gratings condition, we examined whether the duration of touches started in each 
cardiac phase varied with task difficulty. An rmANOVA with the variable cardiac phase (systole, dias-
tole) and task difficulty (one to seven levels of difficulty) was close but did not reach significance 
(F(3.917, 176.267) = 2.43, p = 0.051, ηp2 = 0.051).
Overall, these results demonstrate that the duration of touches varied as a function of the cardiac 
phase in which these were initiated. Touches initiated in systole were longer than those initiated in 
diastole. Given that tactile sensitivity is greater in diastole than in systole (see e.g., Al et al., 2021a), 
these results suggest that our participants overcome the less sensitive phase (systole) through the 
elongation of the holding touch beyond this phase. Furthermore, and importantly, this modulation 
was only observed when tactile discrimination was required.
Variability and duration of touches initiated in each cardiac phase
Above we show that when participants started to touch the gratings in the systole phase, they touched 
for longer periods (vs. diastole). Importantly, in our task the participants were able to freely start, hold, 
and end their touches. This is reflected in the range of times that participants spent touching the 
stimuli. There was considerable variability in how long participants touched the gratings during the 
task (see Figures 2B and 3C). Some participants held for relatively short periods of time and did not 
modulate their touching duration with task difficulty. In contrast, some participants held for longer 
periods and increased their touching time with task difficulty. In the current analysis, we explore this 
between- subject variance. Specifically, we examined if such variability changed as a function of task 
difficulty and whether it related to the duration of touches initiated in each cardiac phase. Note that 
this was not a planned analysis as we did not expect before data collection that the duration of partic-
ipants’ touches would vary to the degree it did.
To capture this between- subject variance, we calculated for each participant the standard devia-
tion of how long they touched the gratings (i.e., holding time) across all difficulty levels. Next, we ran 
the previous analysis again but with this variable as a between- subject covariate. When adjusting the 
results by this covariate, the main effect of task difficulty in the rmANOVA was still significant (F(2.909, 
127.993) = 3.070, p = 0.032, ηp 2 = 0.065), and the effect of cardiac phase and its interaction with 
task difficulty were not significant (F(1, 44) = 0.923, p = 0.342, ηp 2 = 0.021) and (F(4.089, 179.904) 
= 0.0896, p = 0.469, ηp 2 = 0.020). In addition, there was a significant interaction between task diffi-
culty and touch variability (F(2.909, 127.993) = 41.706, p < 0.0001, ηp2 = 0.487), a significant interac-
tion between cardiac phase and touch variability (F(1, 44) = 17.728, p = 0.0001, ηp 2 = 0.287), and a 
significant interaction between task difficulty, cardiac phase, and touch variability (F(4.089, 179.904) 
= 4.239, p = 0.002, ηp2 = 0.088). In addition, the correlation between participants’ correct responses 
and the variability in the duration of their touches was significant (Pearson’s r = 0.387, p = 0.008; 
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  9 of 20
Supplementary file 1) indicating that participants who varied the duration of their stationary holds in 
the experiment were also those with greater tactile discrimination performance.
Overall, these results demonstrate that touches initiated in systole were held for longer periods 
(vs. touches initiated in diastole). This cardiac- related modulation was particularly exhibited by those 
participants who varied the duration of their touches when sampling the most difficult gratings 
(Figure 4). This is consistent with the known reduced tactile sensitivity during systole and the idea 
that our participants held for longer periods to overcome this.
Cardiac interbeat interval as a function of starting touch
The previous analysis showed that our participants spent more time touching the gratings when these 
were initially touched in systole, during the cardiac phase with reduced tactile sensitivity. In addition, 
Figure 4. Duration and variability of touches initiated in each cardiac phase. (A) Across all levels of difficulty (1 
easiest, 7 most difficult), the duration of touches when initiated in each cardiac phase. (B) Heatmap showing all 
participants ranked as a function of touch variability in the whole experiment. Each row shows one participant and 
each column one level of difficulty (e.g., participants at the top varied the least the duration of their touches). The 
duration of touches changed with task difficulty. (C) Differences between the duration of touches started in diastole 
and systole (Dia. − Syst.) across all levels of difficulty. Each dot represents one participant, and the colouration 
denotes their variability in the whole experiment (e.g., participants who varied the least are shown as dark blue 
dots). (D) Data from panel C are depicted as a heatmap with participants ranked as a function of touch variability 
in the whole experiment. Participants who varied the duration of their touches often spent more time touching in 
systole (vs. diastole) in the higher levels of difficulty (Task difficulty × Cardiac phase × Touch variability: p = 0.002). 
Error bars depict standard errors; n = 46.
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  10 of 20
another mechanism that could facilitate tactile perception would be the lengthening of the cardiac 
cycle as this mostly increases the proportion of the cycle in diastole, which has been associated with 
the greatest tactile sensitivity. To test this, we first examined changes in the duration of the cardiac 
cycle for the start of the touch. Second, we examined whether these changes were due to variations 
in the systole phase or the diastole phase of the cardiac cycle. Accordingly, we calculated the inter -
beat intervals (IBIs) of the cardiac cycle in which participants initiated each touch, as well as of the two 
preceding and subsequent heartbeats (i.e., IBIs relative to heartbeat position).
The rmANOVA comparing the duration of these IBIs between our experimental conditions showed 
a significant main effect of condition (F(1, 44) = 14.3, p = 0.0005, ηp2 = 0.246), a significant main effect 
of IBI position (F(4, 2.164) = 12.5, p < 0.0001, ηp2 = 0.221), and a significant interaction between both 
variables (F(4, 2.841) = 6.37, p < 0.0001, ηp2 = 0.126). Then, we analysed each experimental condition 
separately. In the gratings condition, there was a significant main effect of heartbeat position on the 
duration of the IBIs (F(2.062, 92.788) = 11.65, p < 0.0001, ηp2 = 0.206). Post hoc comparisons showed 
that the duration of the IBI in the starting touch (M = 797.8, SD = 111.7) was significantly longer than 
in the remaining heartbeats (all p < 0.006, all d > 0.502; M − 2 = 784.2, M − 1 = 789.9, M + 1 = 789.8, 
M + 2 = 783.7; adjusted for multiple comparisons). For the control movement condition, the results 
also show a significant main effect of heartbeat position on the duration of the IBIs F(2.595, 114.201) 
= 10.75, p < 0.0001, ηp 2 = 0.196. Post hoc comparisons revealed that the duration of the IBI in the 
starting touch (M = 821.4, SD = 118.6) was significantly longer than in the two previous heartbeats 
(all p < 0.015, all d > 0.473; M − 2 = 802.5, M − 1 = 810.6). See Supplementary file 1C–F for all post 
hoc comparisons.
Then we examined whether the above differences were driven by changes in the length of the 
systole or diastole phase. The results showed that for both stimulus conditions, the duration of systole 
in the preceding and successive heartbeats (relative to the staring touch) did not change (p > 0.235, 
ηp2 < 0.032). Conversely, for the diastole phase, the analyses showed a significant main effect of 
heartbeat position (p < 0.0001, ηp2 > 0.200). The post hoc analysis revealed that the changes that we 
observed in the whole IBIs were due to variations in the diastole phase (Figure 5A, B). Moreover, in 
the gratings condition, these changes covaried with task difficulty; see Supplementary file 1.
These results confirm the deacceleration of the cardiac cycle in anticipation or reaction to salient 
stimuli and the later acceleration after the implementation of a response (Lacey and Lacey, 1977; 
Sandman et al., 1977; Coles and Duncan- Johnson, 1975; Park et al., 2014). Moreover, our results 
show that changes in the duration of the cardiac cycle are due to the lengthening and compression 
Figure 5. Interbeat interval (IBI) before, during, and after the touch of the stimuli. (A) For the gratings condition, the IBI of the heartbeat where the 
touch was initiated (0 on the x- axis) was significantly longer than the preceding and succeeding heartbeats (p < 0.0001). Right panels: with similar 
statistical effects, this difference was driven by the elongation of the diastole phase of the cardiac cycle; n = 46. (B) For control movement condition, 
the IBI of the heartbeat where the touch was initiated was significantly longer than in the two preceding heartbeats (p < 0.015). Right panels: with 
similar statistical effects, these differences were driven by the elongation of the diastole phase of the cardiac cycle; n = 45. All p- values adjusted using 
the Holm–Bonferroni method. The box plots depict the interquartile range (IQR). Given the number of Post Hoc comparissons, see main text and 
Supplementary file 1.
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  11 of 20
of the diastole phase (relative to touch onset). The lengthening of the diastole phase during active 
sensing touch might aid performance.
Discussion
The effect of the cardiac phases upon stimulus processing has previously been observed by time- 
locking the presentation of stimuli to the cardiac phase (e.g., Al et al., 2021b; Critchley and Garf-
inkel, 2018; Garfinkel et al., 2020). However, in our everyday experiences, sensory information is not 
encountered in such a phase- locked manner. Here, we tested the following hypothesis: If the phase 
of the cardiac cycle is an important modulator of perception and cognition, as previously proposed, 
it should modulate the way in which we freely and actively seek information in the world. To test this, 
we recorded the ECGs from human participants while they performed a tactile discrimination task of 
grating orientation. Importantly, they freely initiated, held, and ended the sensing of the stimuli.
From an interoceptive inference framework, studies in passive sensing have shown that tactile 
sensitivity is reduced during the systole phase of the cardiac cycle (Al et al., 2021a; Grund et al., 
2022; Motyka et al., 2019). Hence, to avoid this drop in sensitivity, participants could circumvent the 
sampling of information in systole. This is precisely what the results of the present work suggest. The 
duration of subjects’ touch (stationary holds) varied as a function of the cardiac phase in which they 
initiated it. Touches initiated in the systole phase of the cardiac cycle were held for longer periods of 
time. This is consistent with the idea thar during periods of reduced tactile sensitivity, the participants 
actively sought to acquire sense data for longer periods of time. Furthermore, we show that this effect 
was most evident in those participants who varied the length of their touches as a function of task diffi-
culty. In addition, this modulation in the duration of the touches was associated with improved perfor-
mance. Conversely, while touches in the control condition were coupled to the cardiac cycle, their 
length was not modulated as a function of when in the cycle these were initiated. This latter condition 
only required movement, which seems facilitated during systole (Al et al., 2021a; Galvez- Pol et al., 
2020a; Konttinen et al., 2003; Kunzendorf et al., 2019; Ohl et al., 2016; Palser et al., 2021). In 
addition, we showed that after initiating the touch, participants had a significant deceleration of their 
heart rate. This deceleration was driven by the lengthening of the diastole phase of the cardiac cycle, 
which has been associated with greater perceptual sensitivity. This cardiac modulation may aid partic-
ipants’ performance.
Coupling between active sensing and transient bodily cycles
Increasing evidence suggests that ever- fluctuating interoceptive signals exert a putative effect over 
stimulus processing (Azevedo et al., 2017; Azzalini et al., 2019; Azzalini et al., 2021; Garfinkel and 
Critchley, 2016; Rae et al., 2018). This work is often conceptualized within the predictive coding 
framework (Allen et al., 2019; Friston et al., 2017) to explain how the brain integrates interocep-
tive and exteroceptive information to optimize beliefs about the world. Considering this, prevailing 
models of perception and learning suggest that humans and animals do not only update their beliefs 
with incoming sensory evidence, but also seek information in a way that maximizes the reduction 
of uncertainty (Yang et al., 2016). This is reflected in the way humans and animals purposively seek 
information through the movement and control of the sensor apparatus (e.g., whiskers, eyes, fingers, 
and antennae) in whatever manner best suits the task (Grant et al., 2014; Prescott et al., 2011; Yang 
et al., 2016).
We found that participants’ touch in the control condition was coupled to the cardiac cycle. Yet, 
its length did not vary as a function of when in the cycle was initiated. This is congruent to recent 
evidence showing that during simple hand movements, high corticospinal excitability and desynchro-
nization of sensorimotor oscillations are observed in systole (Al et al., 2021b). However, we reason 
that a fine use of our sensorium might entail the coupling of behaviour and quiescent bodily cycles. 
During the systole phase of the cardiac cycle, pressure sensors located in the carotid sinus, coronary 
arteries, and aortic arch (baroreceptors), detect changes in blood pressure and convey the strength 
and timing of heartbeats to the brainstem through the vagus nerve (Critchley and Harrison, 2013; 
Davos et al., 2002). Then, the arterial baroreflex system through variations in heart rate, vascular 
tone, and stroke volume, buffers blood pressure fluctuations (Vaschillo et al., 2011; Vaschillo et al., 
2012). Simultaneously, the ejected blood exerts pulsations with a direct effect on muscle activity 
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  12 of 20
(Birznieks et al., 2012; Fallon et al., 2004), eliciting small head and eye movements (Debener et al., 
2010; Galvez- Pol et al., 2022; Lauridsen et al., 2019). Altogether, these variations could interfere, 
compete, or block the allocation of attentional and/or representational resources for incoming sensory 
information. Thus, one possibility is that people actively seek more sensory information during the 
reduced presence of these signals.
Early evidence for this account, comes from studies showing that elite rifle shooters pull the trigger 
during diastole, with beginners firing during either phase but with better results during diastole (Helin 
et al., 1987). It has been suggested that this effect is related to the mechanical movement caused by 
the heart’s contraction (Konttinen et al., 2003), which is also one principle suggested in the sampling 
of active visual information during silent cardiac activity (Galvez- Pol et al., 2020b). Relatedly, other 
examples of physiological coupling in humans have been shown in another facet of the cardiovascular 
system, that is, respiration. Perl et al., 2019 showed the alignment of self- initiated cognitive tests with 
the beginning of the inspiratory phase, and recent work by Kluger et al., 2021 has shown respiration- 
locked performance in a near- threshold spatial detection task. In this context, Allen et al., 2022 have 
proposed a predictive coding interpretation of respiratory cycle effects where breathing rhythmically 
modulates neural gain, which in turn optimizes cognitive and affective processing.
Constraints of generality and future work
Here, we consider the constraints of generality proposed by Simons et al., 2017. First, the type of 
tactile discrimination used here (gratings orientation) represents one of the vast spectra of haptic 
behaviours that people use in daily life. For instance, detection, discrimination, and/or identification 
of stimulus’ texture, size, shape, as well as socially relevant affective touch, which has been linked 
to the activation of C- tactile fibres and integration of interoceptive information in the insula (Kirsch 
et al., 2020). Second, while we isolated the sense of touch from other exteroceptive modalities such 
as vision, these and other modalities frequently work together at the sensor and neuronal levels 
(Banati et al., 2000; Galvez- Pol et al., 2020a; Taylor- Clarke et al., 2002; Zhou and Fuster, 2000). 
Third, our stimuli were judged by young adults (18–35 years old) recruited through a university subject 
pool. Thus, we expect the results to generalize to situations in which participants engage with similar 
stimuli. Moreover, we believe the results reported here will be reproducible with young adults from 
similar subject pools serving as participants. However, we do not have enough evidence to state that 
our findings will occur outside of these settings, nor to state which changes could be observed when 
either the stimuli or type of task differ from those reported here. We have no reason to believe that 
the results depend on other characteristics of the participants and materials.
Future research could examine whether the functional coupling of the sensorium with quiescent 
periods of the cardiovascular system interacts with different levels of conscious interoceptive infer -
ences. To this aim, further work could examine how active sensing unfolds in individuals who sense, 
interpret, and integrate to a different extent signals originating from within the body (e.g., interocep-
tive sensibility; e.g., Galvez- Pol et al., 2021; Garfinkel et al., 2015; Palser et al., 2018; Suksasilp 
and Garfinkel, 2022). Likewise, future work in active sensing may include the co- registration of 
neuronal and physiological recordings. This might include, for instance, heartbeat, motor- cortical, and/
or somatosensory- evoked activity (e.g., Al et al., 2020; Galvez- Pol et al., 2018; Galvez- Pol et al., 
2020a; Montoya et al., 1993; Park and Blanke, 2019; Candia- Rivera et al., 2022). As described in 
Kluger et al., 2021, bodily entrained fluctuations in neural activity may represent a mechanism for 
uniting neural and behavioural findings. While evidence for this account has been accumulating in the 
animal literature, specially between the respiratory cycle and different behaviours (Kurnikova et al., 
2017; Moore et al., 2013), the field of active sensing in humans with physiological recordings remains 
largely uncharted. Here, the examination of the heart, an intrinsic oscillator with a faster cycle than 
respiration, might aid to understand the hierarchical organization of neural oscillations (Lakatos et al., 
2005) with bodily rhythms such as those originating from the whole cardiovascular system.
Finally, our results indicate that the previously described effects of the cardiac cycle upon percep-
tion might apply to temporally constrained tasks, for example, those in which the stimuli are presented 
for a brief and equal duration during the distinct cardiac phases. While the findings of those tasks have 
been fundamental to advance the field, we show that in more realistic scenarios, human subjects may 
overcome cardiac- related effects by actively sensing the stimuli in whatever manner best suits the task 
(e.g., sensing for longer periods during the cardiac phase with decreased sensitivity). We believe that 
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  13 of 20
our work posits a stimulating framework for further studies at the intersection between exteroception 
and interoception in more ecological settings.
Materials and methods
Participants
Psychophysiological studies and analyses of cardio- sensory processing usually involve sample sizes 
on the order of 30–50 participants (Al et al., 2020; Galvez- Pol et al., 2020b; Grund et al., 2022; 
Herman and Tsakiris, 2021; Kunzendorf et  al., 2019; Motyka et  al., 2019). Accordingly, we 
recruited 50 healthy adults (32 females; age range = 18–35 years old) who participated in the current 
study. All participants reported normal cardiac condition, volunteered to take part in the experiment, 
gave informed consent, and were reimbursed for the participation. Ethical approval for the study was 
obtained from the UCL research ethics committee. Two participants were excluded due to a faulty 
recording of their responses. Prior to the further analysis, we tested whether the performance of each 
participant was significantly greater than chance. To this end, we tested whether participants’ perfor-
mance at each difficulty level was significantly greater/less than chance using a binomial test with a 
null probability of 0.5 (chance) and a significance level of 0.05. Two participants showed no significant 
difference from the chance level at any difficulty level, even at the easiest difficulty level. These two 
participants were excluded from further analysis. In the control condition, one more participant was 
excluded from the analysis due to a faulty recording of the ECG data. Thus, the data of 46 participants 
were included in the analysis of the main experimental condition, and 45 in the control condition; 
these conditions were analysed separately.
Task and procedure
Participants were seated with the forearm of their dominant hand rested on the top of a table 
in palm- up position. Participants took part in an active touch sensing paradigm where they were 
presented with tactile gratings of different widths (narrow to wider gratings; see Stimuli and appa-
ratus). The participants’ task was to touch the gratings (one per trial) with the index finger of the 
dominant hand to determine their orientation. From the participants’ perspective, half of these 
gratings were horizontal and the other half vertical. Specifically, the grids of the gratings were 
oriented either perpendicular or parallel with the vertical axis of the finger. The gratings were 
randomly presented through a custom- built device by the experimenter, who was seated opposite 
to the participants. To determine the orientation, the participants had to move their index finger 
up, contact the grating, move their finger down, and respond verbally to state the orientation (see 
Instructions). Then, the experimenter keyed the response. The experimenter seated opposite the 
participant and was able to see when the participants started touching, for how long they held 
their touch, and when they finished it. This was visualized as continuous recording, online, and on a 
screen facing only the experimenter. This screen showed the continuous recording of the touches as 
pulses in Spike2 8.10 (Cambridge Electronic Design Limited, Cambridge, UK). The amplitude of the 
pulse departed from zero when a touch was started, and it was maintained for as long as the partic-
ipants held their touch. Then, it went back to zero amplitude when the touch was finalized. If the 
participants answered before the pulse went back to zero amplitude, they had responded before 
releasing the index finger from the tactile stimuli. When this happened, they received feedback, 
and the entailing trial was discarded. Importantly, once the grating was positioned, the participants 
were free to initiate, hold, and finalize the touch (i.e., they started, held, and ended touching when 
they felt like). Therefore, sensation arose through their movement rather than through the passive 
movement of the gratings.
Before the experiment, the participants received instructions (see Methods) and completed one 
practice block of 14 trials. If they did not have further questions, they completed 12 more blocks of 14 
trials while their ECG and responses were recorded. In the last two blocks, no grating was presented 
and instead a flat stimulus of the same diameter was used. The participants were instructed to follow 
the same instructions, but with no need to report any orientation at the end of the trials. This was the 
movement control stimulus.
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  14 of 20
Stimuli and apparatus
We used a custom- built device to present the gratings to the participants. This had two parts: a small 
platform with a rail, and a sliding section that held fifteen gratings (14 gratings with seven widths 
by two orientations, and one flat stimulus). The later section could slide along the former and allow 
presenting one grating at a time through an opening in the centre of the device, above the partici-
pants’ index finger. The sliding section was moved by the experimenter, who presented the gratings 
in random order by following a list generated in MATLAB R2016b (The MathWorks Inc, Natick, MA, 
USA). The device, gratings, and list of gratings to- be- presented were only visible to the experimenter. 
After each trial, the experimenter keyed the participants’ verbal responses in a computer.
The stimuli were made using the Ultimaker- 2 3D printer (Ultimaker, Geldermalsen, NL) and were 
designed using online modelling software (Tinkercad; Autodesk Inc, CA, USA). The gratings consisted 
of two copies of seven gratings with increasing width of 0.4 mm (from 0.412 to 2.8 mm). Each copy 
was positioned in the device either vertically or horizontally. When the participants made contact 
with these stimuli, a continuous pulse at 1000 Hz was sent to a CED Power Unit 1401- 3A. This signal 
was recorded simultaneously with the participants’ ECG in Spike2 8.10 (Cambridge Electronic Design 
Limited, Cambridge, UK). The amplitude of the continuous pulse was set according to the width of 
the presented grating. Therefore, the pulse itself contained the data required to compute the onset, 
duration, difficulty, and offset of participants’ touches.
Instructions to the participants
Here, we explicitly indicate the instructions given to the participants: ‘In this experiment, we will 
present to you small gratings with different widths (from narrow to wider gratings). These gratings 
have two possible orientations: (i) horizontal or (ii) vertical. Here we will randomly present to you one 
grating at a time (one per trial). Your task is to touch these gratings with your index finger and tell us 
whether the grating is oriented vertically or horizontally. In each trial, the experimenter will randomly 
select one of the gratings to be touched. Once the experimenter has placed the grating in position, 
she/he will place both hands on top of the device (this means that the grating is ready and secured). 
Then, feel free to touch the grating whenever you feel like, and for as long as you feel like. Yet do 
not overthink. For this, use your index finger and please produce a single tap (“touching”). Make sure 
you make firm contact with the grating. Once you touch, do not swing, swipe, or turn your finger 
(you should “touch- in and touch- out” by just moving your finger up and down). Once you know the 
orientation, “Touch- out” and only then tell us verbally the orientation of the grating (we will key your 
response). Please tell us the orientation even if you are uncertain. To get familiar with the task, you 
will do a practise block. Next, you will do 12 blocks of ~4 mins each. Do you have any questions?’.
Data preprocessing and ECG recording
The ECG was recorded using a D360 8- Channel amplifier (Digitimer Ltd, Hertfordshire, UK) in Spike2 
8.10; sampling rate 1000 Hz. The ECG electrodes (Skintact Fannin Ltd, Dublin, IE) were placed over 
the right clavicle and left iliac crest according to Einthoven’s triangular arrangement. To investi-
gate whether participants’ touch varied along the cardiac cycle, as well as along the cardiac phases 
comprised in the cycle (systole and diastole), we proceeded to identify the start and end of each 
phase. The start of each cycle and the systole phase were detected by computing the R- peaks of 
the QRS complex in the ECG. To this aim, we filtered the ECG (3–30 Hz) using the HEPLAB toolbox 
implemented in EEGLAB (Delorme and Makeig, 2004; Perakakis, 2019, respectively). We computed 
the local maxima of the ECG by using the findpeaks function in MATLAB with a minimum peak- to- 
peak distance of 550 ms. By doing so, we obtained the timepoints of the R- peaks occurring during 
participants’ touches. Next, we identified the end of the systole phase (start of the diastole phase) for 
each cardiac cycle. The change of phase can be estimated by computing the end of the T- wave in the 
ECG. This was done by locating the T- peak as a local maximum after the QRS complex and calculating 
the area of a series of trapeziums along the descending part of the T- wave. The point at which the 
trapeziums’ area is maximal approaches the end of the systole phase in the ECG (Vázquez- Seisdedos 
et al., 2011). We visually inspected the R- peaks and end of the systoles returned by the algorithm 
and applied small adjustments when required. While it is true that the length of the electrical systole 
in the ECG cannot be fully equated with the mechanical systole (Fridericia, 1921), both are closely 
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  15 of 20
tied under normal conditions (Fridericia, 1921; Boudoulas et al., 1981; Gill and Hoffmann, 2010; 
Motyka et al., 2019).
Trials in which the participants made consecutive contacts (i.e., more than one touch per grating 
and trial), responded verbally to state the orientation of the grating before finalizing the touch, held 
their touch less than 100ms, more than 5000 ms, or were ±3 SD of the individuals’ mean duration, 
were excluded from further analysis. Likewise, given the temporal consistency between R- peaks and 
end of T- waves, trials in which this interval was separated by ± 1.5 × median of the participants’ 
interval in milliseconds were not considered; in total 94.5% of the total number of trials were kept for 
further analyses.
Data analysis
Touch responses as a function of absolute cardiac cycle
To examine whether there was a significant statistical relationship between when participants 
touched and the cardiac cycle, we analysed the data in two different ways. First, circular statistics 
were employed to exploit the repeating nature of the cardiac cycle. We calculated the phase of each 
event of interest (touch initiation, mean contact phase of the touch, and end of touch) as a function 
of the whole cardiac cycle. For instance, for an R–R interval of time t R, where the start of a touch 
occurred at time t E, we calculated t E/tR × 360. This results in values between 0° and 360° for each 
event (0 indicating the start of the cardiac cycle). Then, we calculated the participants’ mean phase 
for each event. As in previous research, we tested separately whether the participants’ mean phase 
differed from a uniform distribution using Rayleigh tests (Al et al., 2020; Galvez- Pol et al., 2020a; 
Kunzendorf et al., 2019; Motyka et al., 2019; Ohl et al., 2016). We performed this analysis for the 
start, mean of the holding touch, and end of all touches, separately for the gratings and the control 
flat stimulus. The mean of holding touch entailed the circular averaging of the whole stationary hold. 
This often spanned across more than one heartbeat. This analysis was subsequently performed for 
each level of difficulty.
Touch responses as a function of cardiac phases
The previous analysis considers the repeating nature of the cardiac cycle, but it does not consider its 
biphasic nature. Previous studies have shown that responses to stimuli vary as a function of the phase 
of the cardiac cycle in which information is processed (i.e., systole and diastole; e.g., Garfinkel et al., 
2014; Al et al., 2020; Leganes- Fonteneau et al., 2020; Grund et al., 2022). In a second analysis, we 
examined participants’ responses as a function of the phase of the cardiac cycle, systole or diastole. 
For each heartbeat we defined systole as the time between the R- peak and the end of the T- wave. 
Then, for the same heartbeat, we used the length of this systole window to define a diastole window, 
which was located at the end of the heartbeat. The length of these windows was used to equate the 
probability of having an event in the two phases of the cardiac cycle. This approach has advantages 
compared to a method with fixed time windows (e.g., defining systole as the 300 ms time window 
following the R- peak) because it accounts for within- and between- subject differences in the length of 
systole and diastole (i.e., the heart rate); see similar implementation in Al et al., 2020; Grund et al., 
2022; Motyka et al., 2019. To determine the end of T- wave, a trapezoidal area algorithm was applied 
in each trial (see Data preprocessing).
We analysed (1) the proportion of events (start and end touches) occurring during time windows 
encompassing the systole and diastole phases of the cardiac cycle, and (2) the duration of touches as 
a function of the cardiac phase in which they were initiated. Note that in the analysis of the proportion 
of touches by cardiac phase, we only analysed the proportion in one phase (i.e., systole). This was 
done to reduce the dependency and redundancy in the analysis. For instance, when comparing the 
proportion of 0.48 touches in systole vs. 0.52 in diastole (adding up to 1) and when comparing these 
proportions against chance level (0.5) Here, it is only necessary to compute one proportion because 
it also denotes the proportion and modulation in the other phase. We computed these analyses 
through rmANOVA and follow- up T- tests for all touches, as well as separately for each level of diffi-
culty according to the gratings’ width. Mauchly’s W was computed to check for violations of sphericity, 
Greenhouse–Geisser adjustments to the degrees of freedom were applied when appropriate, and p 
values were corrected for multiple comparisons using the Holm–Bonferroni method.
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  16 of 20
Data availability and transparency statement
We report t and p values, mean and standard deviations, 95% CIs, and effect sizes, that is, partial 
eta- squared (ηp2) and Cohen’s d. We used in- house and standard code to pre- process and plot our 
data. Specifically, the pre- processing code was implemented in MATLAB R2018a (The MathWorks 
Inc, Natick, MA, USA), and the values for analyses and plots were computed in JASP (JASP Team 
2021, Version 0.16) and in R using the circular package (Version 0.4- 93). The code, anonymized 
data, as well as the resulting analyses are available in the corresponding Open Science Frame-
work repository: https://osf.io/d7x3g/. We report how we determined our sample size, all data 
exclusions, manipulations, instructions given to the participants, and measures in the study (see 
Materials and methods). No part of the study procedures was pre- registered before the research 
was conducted.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all those who participated in and helped to advance this study. This research 
was supported by the Leverhulme Trust – Grant code RPG- 2016- 120, United Kingdom (to J.-M.K.) and 
by the Autonomous Community of the Balearic Islands (CAIB), Postdoctoral grant Margalida Comas 
Ref PD/036/2019 (to A.G.-P .).
Additional information
Funding
Funder Grant reference number Author
Leverhulme Trust RPG-2016-120 James Kilner
Autonomus Community 
of the Balearic Islands, 
Postdoctoral Grant 
Margalida Comas
PD/036/2019 Alejandro Galvez-Pol
The funders had no role in study design, data collection, and interpretation, or the 
decision to submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
Alejandro Galvez- Pol, Conceptualization, Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Supervision, 
Funding acquisition, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, 
Writing - review and editing; Pavandeep Virdee, Data curation, Visualization; Javier Villacampa, 
Formal analysis, Visualization; James Kilner, Conceptualization, Resources, Data curation, Software, 
Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Method-
ology, Project administration, Writing - review and editing
Author ORCIDs
Alejandro Galvez- Pol  
   http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4430-8336
Pavandeep Virdee  
   http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4732-1472
Javier Villacampa  
   http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9971-9004
James Kilner  
   http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6632-6797
Ethics
All participants volunteered to take part in the experiment, gave informed consent, and were reim-
bursed for the participation. Ethical approval for the study was obtained from the University College 
London research ethics committee ID 10857/002.
Decision letter and Author response
Decision letter https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126.sa1
Author response https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126.sa2
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  17 of 20
Additional files
Supplementary files
•  MDAR checklist 
•  Supplementary file 1. Post Hoc comparisons and correlational analysis.
Data availability
All data generated or analysed during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting file. 
Source data files have been provided for all figures in OSF repository: https://osf.io/d7x3g/.
The following dataset was generated:
Author(s) Year Dataset title Dataset URL Database and Identifier
Galvez- Pol A, Kilner J 2022 Active sensing Touch https:// osf. io/ d7x3g/ Open Science Framework, 
d7x3g
References
Al E, Iliopoulos F , Forschack N, Nierhaus T, Grund M, Motyka P , Gaebler M, Nikulin VV, Villringer A. 2020. 
Heart- brain interactions shape somatosensory perception and evoked potentials. PNAS 117:10575–10584. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1915629117, PMID: 32341167
Al E, Iliopoulos F , Nikulin VV, Villringer A. 2021a. Heartbeat and somatosensory perception. NeuroImage 
238:118247. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118247, PMID: 34111514
Al E, Stephani T, Engelhardt M, Villringer A, Nikulin V. 2021b. Cardiac Activity Impacts Cortical Motor Excitability. 
Research Square. DOI: https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-1023617/v1
Allen M, Levy A, Parr T, Friston KJ. 2019. In the Body’s Eye: The Computational Anatomy of Interoceptive 
Inference. bioRxiv. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/603928
Allen M, Varga S, Heck DH. 2022. Respiratory rhythms of the predictive mind. Psychological Review 18:391. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000391, PMID: 35980689
Azevedo RT, Garfinkel SN, Critchley HD, Tsakiris M. 2017. Cardiac afferent activity modulates the expression of 
racial stereotypes. Nature Communications 8:13854. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13854, PMID: 
28094772
Azzalini D, Rebollo I, Tallon- Baudry C. 2019. Visceral signals shape brain dynamics and cognition. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences 23:488–509. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.03.007, PMID: 31047813
Azzalini D, Buot A, Palminteri S, Tallon- Baudry C. 2021. Responses to heartbeats in ventromedial prefrontal 
cortex contribute to subjective preference- based decisions. The Journal of Neuroscience 41:5102–5114. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1932-20.2021, PMID: 33926998
Banati RB, Goerres GW, Tjoa C, Aggleton JP , Grasby P . 2000. The functional anatomy of visual- tactile integration 
in man: a study using positron emission tomography. Neuropsychologia 38:115–124. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1016/s0028-3932(99)00074-3, PMID: 10660224
Berntson GG, Khalsa SS. 2021. Neural circuits of interoception. Trends in Neurosciences 44:17–28. DOI: https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2020.09.011, PMID: 33378653
Birznieks I, Boonstra TW, Macefield VG. 2012. Modulation of human muscle spindle discharge by arterial 
pulsations--functional effects and consequences. PLOS ONE 7:e35091. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
pone.0035091, PMID: 22529975
Boudoulas H, Geleris P , Lewis RP , Rittgers SE. 1981. Linear relationship between electrical systole, mechanical 
systole, and heart rate. Chest 80:613–617. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1378/chest.80.5.613, PMID: 7297154
Candia- Rivera D, Sappia MS, Horschig JM, Colier W, Valenza G. 2022. Effects of Neural Monitoring and Control 
of Visceral Signals on Heart Rate, Respiration Rate, and Frontal Hemodynamics. bioRxiv. DOI: https://doi.org/ 
10.1101/2022.06.02.494474
Coles MGH, Duncan- Johnson CC. 1975. Cardiac activity and information processing: the effects of stimulus 
significance, and detection and response requirements. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human Perception 
and Performance 1:418–428. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.1.4.418, PMID: 1185127
Critchley HD, Harrison NA. 2013. Visceral influences on brain and behavior. Neuron 77:624–638. DOI: https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.02.008, PMID: 23439117
Critchley HD, Garfinkel SN. 2018. The influence of physiological signals on cognition. Current Opinion in 
Behavioral Sciences 19:13–18. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2017.08.014
Davos CH, Davies LC, Piepoli M. 2002. The effect of baroreceptor activity on cardiovascular regulation. Hellenic 
Journal of Cardiology 43:145–155.
Debener S, Kranczioch C, Gutberlet I. 2010. EEG quality: origin and reduction of the EEG cardiac- related 
artefact. Mulert C, Lemieux L (Eds). EEG - FMRI: Physiological Basis, Technique, and Applications. Springer. p. 
135–151. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-87919-0
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  18 of 20
Delorme A, Makeig S. 2004. EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single- trial EEG dynamics including 
independent component analysis. Journal of Neuroscience Methods 134:9–21. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jneumeth.2003.10.009, PMID: 15102499
Edwards L, Ring C, McIntyre D, Carroll D. 2001. Modulation of the human nociceptive flexion reflex across the 
cardiac cycle. Psychophysiology 38:712–718. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/1469-8986.3840712, PMID: 
11446585
Edwards L, Ring C, McIntyre D, Carroll D, Martin U. 2007. Psychomotor speed in hypertension: effects of 
reaction time components, stimulus modality, and phase of the cardiac cycle. Psychophysiology 44:459–468. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2007.00521.x, PMID: 17433098
Fallon JB, Carr RW, Morgan DL. 2004. Stochastic resonance in muscle receptors. Journal of Neurophysiology 
91:2429–2436. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00928.2003, PMID: 14736865
Fridericia LS. 1921. Die systolendauer Im elektrokardiogramm bei normalen menschen und bei herzkranken. 
Acta Medica Scandinavica 54:17–50. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0954-6820.1921.tb15167.x
Friston K, FitzGerald T, Rigoli F , Schwartenbeck P , Pezzulo G. 2017. Active inference: a process theory. Neural 
Computation 29:1–49. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00912, PMID: 27870614
Galvez- Pol A, Calvo- Merino B, Capilla A, Forster B. 2018. Persistent recruitment of somatosensory cortex during 
active maintenance of hand images in working memory. NeuroImage 174:153–163. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.neuroimage.2018.03.024, PMID: 29548846
Galvez- Pol A, Calvo- Merino B, Forster B. 2020a. Revealing the body in the brain: an erp method to examine 
sensorimotor activity during visual perception of body- related information. Cortex; a Journal Devoted to the 
Study of the Nervous System and Behavior 125:332–344. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2020.01.017, 
PMID: 32120169
Galvez- Pol A, McConnell R, Kilner JM. 2020b. Active sampling in visual search is coupled to the cardiac cycle. 
Cognition 196:104149. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2019.104149, PMID: 31786324
Galvez- Pol A, Nadal M, Kilner JM. 2021. Emotional representations of space vary as a function of peoples’ affect 
and interoceptive sensibility. Scientific Reports 11:16150. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-95081-9, 
PMID: 34373488
Galvez- Pol A, Antoine S, Li C, Kilner JM. 2022. People can identify the likely owner of heartbeats by looking at 
individuals’ faces. Cortex; a Journal Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System and Behavior 151:176–187. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2022.03.003, PMID: 35430451
Garfinkel SN, Minati L, Gray MA, Seth AK, Dolan RJ, Critchley HD. 2014. Fear from the heart: sensitivity to fear 
stimuli depends on individual heartbeats. The Journal of Neuroscience 34:6573–6582. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1523/JNEUROSCI.3507-13.2014, PMID: 24806682
Garfinkel SN, Seth AK, Barrett AB, Suzuki K, Critchley HD. 2015. Knowing your own heart: distinguishing 
interoceptive accuracy from interoceptive awareness. Biological Psychology 104:65–74. DOI: https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.biopsycho.2014.11.004, PMID: 25451381
Garfinkel SN, Critchley HD. 2016. Threat and the body: how the heart supports fear processing. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences 20:34–46. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2015.10.005, PMID: 26628111
Garfinkel SN, Gould van Praag CD, Engels M, Watson D, Silva M, Evans SL, Duka T, Critchley HD. 2020. 
Interoceptive cardiac signals selectively enhance fear memories. Journal of Experimental Psychology. General 
150:1165–1176. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000967, PMID: 33180532
Gibson JJ. 1962. Observations on active touch. Psychological Review 69:477. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1037/ 
h0046962
Gill H, Hoffmann A. 2010. The timing of onset of mechanical systole and diastole in reference to the QRS- T 
complex: a study to determine performance criteria for a non- invasive diastolic timed vibration massage system 
in treatment of potentially unstable cardiac disorders. Cardiovascular Engineering 10:235–245. DOI: https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s10558-010-9108-x, PMID: 21113800
Grant RA, Itskov PM, Towal RB, Prescott TJ. 2014. Active touch sensing: finger tips, whiskers, and antennae. 
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 8:1–2. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00050, PMID: 24600364
Grund M, Al E, Pabst M, Dabbagh A, Stephani T, Nierhaus T, Gaebler M, Villringer A. 2022. Respiration, 
heartbeat, and conscious tactile perception. The Journal of Neuroscience 42:643–656. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1523/JNEUROSCI.0592-21.2021, PMID: 34853084
Helin P, Sihvonen T, Hänninen O. 1987. Timing of the triggering action of shooting in relation to the cardiac 
cycle. British Journal of Sports Medicine 21:33–36. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.21.1.33, PMID: 3580727
Herman AM, Tsakiris M. 2021. The impact of cardiac afferent signaling and interoceptive abilities on passive 
information sampling. International Journal of Psychophysiology 162:104–111. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijpsycho.2021.02.010, PMID: 33582219
Khalsa SS, Adolphs R, Cameron OG, Critchley HD, Davenport PW, Feinstein JS, Feusner JD, Garfinkel SN, 
Lane RD, Mehling WE, Meuret AE, Nemeroff CB, Oppenheimer S, Petzschner FH, Pollatos O, Rhudy JL, 
Schramm LP , Simmons WK, Stein MB, Stephan KE, et al. 2018. Interoception and mental health: a roadmap. 
Biological Psychiatry. Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging 3:501–513. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bpsc.2017.12.004, PMID: 29884281
Kirsch LP, Besharati S, Papadaki C, Crucianelli L, Bertagnoli S, Ward N, Moro V, Jenkinson PM, Fotopoulou A. 
2020. Damage to the right insula disrupts the perception of affective touch. eLife 9:e47895. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.7554/eLife.47895, PMID: 31975686
Kluger DS, Balestrieri E, Busch NA, Gross J. 2021. Respiration aligns perception with neural excitability. eLife 
10:e70907. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.70907, PMID: 34904567
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  19 of 20
Konttinen N, Mets T, Lyytinen H, Paananen M. 2003. Timing of triggering in relation to the cardiac cycle in 
nonelite rifle shooters. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport 74:395–400. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
02701367.2003.10609110, PMID: 14768841
Kunzendorf S, Klotzsche F , Akbal M, Villringer A, Ohl S, Gaebler M. 2019. Active information sampling varies 
across the cardiac cycle. Psychophysiology 56:1–16. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13322, PMID: 
30620083
Kurnikova A, Moore JD, Liao SM, Deschênes M, Kleinfeld D. 2017. Coordination of orofacial motor actions into 
exploratory behavior by rat. Current Biology 27:688–696. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.01.013, 
PMID: 28216320
Lacey BC, Lacey JI. 1977. Change in heart period: a function of sensorimotor event timing within the cardiac 
cycle. Physiological Psychology 5:383–393. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03335349
Lakatos P, Shah AS, Knuth KH, Ulbert I, Karmos G, Schroeder CE. 2005. An oscillatory hierarchy controlling 
neuronal excitability and stimulus processing in the auditory cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology 94:1904–1911. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00263.2005, PMID: 15901760
Lauridsen H, Gonzales S, Hedwig D, Perrin KL, Williams CJA, Wrege PH, Bertelsen MF , Pedersen M, Butcher JT. 
2019. Extracting physiological information in experimental biology via eulerian video magnification. BMC 
Biology 17:103. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12915-019-0716-7, PMID: 31831016
Leganes- Fonteneau M, Buckman JF , Suzuki K, Pawlak A, Bates ME. 2020. More than meets the heart: systolic 
amplification of different emotional faces is task dependent. Cognition & Emotion 35:400–408. DOI: https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2020.1832050, PMID: 33073669
Mao S, Lu B, Takasu J, Oudiz RJ, Budoff MJ. 2003. Measurement of the RT interval on ECG records during 
electron- beam CT. Academic Radiology 10:638–643. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/s1076-6332(03)80082-x, 
PMID: 12809417
McIntyre D, Edwards L, Ring C, Parvin B, Carroll D. 2006. Systolic inhibition of nociceptive responding is 
moderated by arousal. Psychophysiology 43:314–319. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2006.00407.x, 
PMID: 16805871
Montoya P, Schandry R, Müller A. 1993. Heartbeat evoked potentials (hep): topography and influence of cardiac 
awareness and focus of attention. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 88:163–172. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0168-5597(93)90001-6, PMID: 7684965
Moore JD, Deschênes M, Furuta T, Huber D, Smear MC, Demers M, Kleinfeld D. 2013. Hierarchy of orofacial 
rhythms revealed through whisking and breathing. Nature 497:205–210. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
nature12076, PMID: 23624373
Motyka P, Grund M, Forschack N, Al E, Villringer A, Gaebler M. 2019. Interactions between cardiac activity and 
conscious somatosensory perception. Psychophysiology 56:1–13. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13424, 
PMID: 31245848
Ohl S, Wohltat C, Kliegl R, Pollatos O, Engbert R. 2016. Microsaccades are coupled to heartbeat. The Journal of 
Neuroscience 36:1237–1241. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2211-15.2016, PMID: 26818511
Olczak D, Sukumar V, Pruszynski JA. 2018. Edge orientation perception during active touch. Journal of 
Neurophysiology 120:2423–2429. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00280.2018, PMID: 30133382
Palser ER, Palmer CE, Galvez- Pol A, Hannah R, Fotopoulou A, Kilner JM. 2018. Alexithymia mediates the 
relationship between interoceptive sensibility and anxiety. PLOS ONE 13:e0203212. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1371/journal.pone.0203212, PMID: 30212484
Palser ER, Glass J, Fotopoulou A, Kilner JM. 2021. Relationship between cardiac cycle and the timing of actions 
during action execution and observation. Cognition 217:104907. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition. 
2021.104907, PMID: 34563865
Park HD, Correia S, Ducorps A, Tallon- Baudry C. 2014. Spontaneous fluctuations in neural responses to 
heartbeats predict visual detection. Nature Neuroscience 17:612–618. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3671, 
PMID: 24609466
Park HD, Blanke O. 2019. Heartbeat- evoked cortical responses: underlying mechanisms, functional roles, and 
methodological considerations. NeuroImage 197:502–511. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019. 
04.081, PMID: 31051293
Perakakis P. 2019. HEPLAB: a matlab graphical interface for the preprocessing of the heartbeat- evoked 
potential. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2649943
Perl O, Ravia A, Rubinson M, Eisen A, Soroka T, Mor N, Secundo L, Sobel N. 2019. Human non- olfactory 
cognition phase- locked with inhalation. Nature Human Behaviour 3:501–512. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41562-019-0556-z, PMID: 31089297
Pramme L, Larra MF , Schächinger H, Frings C. 2016. Cardiac cycle time effects on selection efficiency in vision. 
Psychophysiology 53:1702–1711. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.12728, PMID: 27450530
Prescott TJ, Diamond ME, Wing AM. 2011. Active touch sensing. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
B 366:2989–2995. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2011.0167, PMID: 21969680
Quigley KS, Kanoski S, Grill WM, Barrett LF , Tsakiris M. 2021. Functions of interoception: from energy regulation 
to experience of the self. Trends in Neurosciences 44:29–38. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2020.09.008, 
PMID: 33378654
Rae CL, Botan VE, Gould van Praag CD, Herman AM, Nyyssönen JAK, Watson DR, Duka T, Garfinkel SN, 
Critchley HD. 2018. Response inhibition on the stop signal task improves during cardiac contraction. Scientific 
Reports 8:1–9. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-27513-y, PMID: 29904123
 Research article      
Neuroscience
Galvez- Pol et al. eLife 2022;11:e78126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.78126  20 of 20
Salomon R, Ronchi R, Dönz J, Bello- Ruiz J, Herbelin B, Martet R, Faivre N, Schaller K, Blanke O. 2016. The insula 
mediates access to awareness of visual stimuli presented synchronously to the heartbeat. The Journal of 
Neuroscience 36:5115–5127. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4262-15.2016, PMID: 27147663
Sandman CA, McCanne TR, Kaiser DN, Diamond B. 1977. Heart rate and cardiac phase influences on visual 
perception. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology 91:189–202. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1037/ 
h0077302, PMID: 838914
Schaefer M, Xu B, Flor H, Cohen LG. 2009. Effects of different viewing perspectives on somatosensory 
activations during observation of touch. Human Brain Mapping 30:2722–2730. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
hbm.20701, PMID: 19172650
Simons DJ, Shoda Y , Lindsay DS. 2017. Constraints on generality (COG): a proposed addition to all empirical 
papers. Perspectives on Psychological Science 12:1123–1128. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
1745691617708630, PMID: 28853993
Suksasilp C, Garfinkel SN. 2022. Towards a comprehensive assessment of interoception in a multi- dimensional 
framework. Biological Psychology 168:108262. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2022.108262, PMID: 
35026353
Taylor- Clarke M, Kennett S, Haggard P . 2002. Vision modulates somatosensory cortical processing. Current 
Biology 12:233–236. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00681-9, PMID: 11839277
Vaschillo EG, Vaschillo B, Pandina RJ, Bates ME. 2011. Resonances in the cardiovascular system caused by 
rhythmical muscle tension. Psychophysiology 48:927–936. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2010. 
01156.x, PMID: 21143610
Vaschillo EG, Vaschillo B, Buckman JF , Pandina RJ, Bates ME. 2012. Measurement of vascular tone and stroke 
volume baroreflex gain. Psychophysiology 49:193–197. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2011.01305. 
x, PMID: 22092290
Vázquez- Seisdedos CR, Neto JE, Marañón Reyes EJ, Klautau A, Limão de Oliveira RC. 2011. New approach for 
T- wave end detection on electrocardiogram: performance in noisy conditions. Biomedical Engineering Online 
10:77. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-925X-10-77, PMID: 21906317
Vega- Bermudez F, Johnson KO, Hsiao SS. 1991. Human tactile pattern recognition: active versus passive touch, 
velocity effects, and patterns of confusion. Journal of Neurophysiology 65:531–546. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1152/jn.1991.65.3.531, PMID: 2051193
Yang SCH, Lengyel M, Wolpert DM. 2016. Active sensing in the categorization of visual patterns. eLife 5:e12215. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.12215, PMID: 26880546
Zhou YD, Fuster JM. 2000. Visuo- tactile cross- modal associations in cortical somatosensory cells. PNAS 
97:9777–9782. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.97.17.9777, PMID: 10944237