Vol.:(0123456789)
Biology & Philosophy (2023) 38:1
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-022-09889-4
1 3
Cognitive science meets the mark of the cognitive: putting 
the horse before the cart
Joe Gough1,2 
Received: 4 June 2021 / Accepted: 22 November 2022 / Published online: 17 December 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Among those living systems, which are cognizers? Among the behaviours of, and 
causes of behaviour in, living systems, which are cognitive? Such questions sit at 
the heart of a sophisticated, ongoing debate, of which the recent papers by Corcoran 
et al. (2020) and Sims and Kiverstein (2021) serve as excellent examples. I argue 
that despite their virtues, both papers suffer from flawed conceptions of the point of 
the debate. This leaves their proposals ill-motivated—good answers to the wrong 
question. Additionally, their proposals are unfit to serve the legitimate roles for char-
acterizations of cognition.
Keywords Expected free energy · Mark of the cognitive · Cognition · Cognitive 
science · Counterfactual cognition
Introduction
Among those living systems, which are cognizers? Among the behaviours of, and 
causes of behaviour in, living systems, which are cognitive? Such questions sit at 
the heart of a sophisticated, ongoing debate (e.g., Adams 2019; Barandiaran and 
Moreno 2006; Brancazio et al. 2020; Godfrey-Smith 2016a; Lyon 2020; Van Duijn 
et  al.  2006). It is important that ‘cognition’ be understood correctly in this con-
text. There is a sense of ‘cognition’, subject to much debate, in which there might 
be a natural distinction between cognition and perception; similarly, ‘cognition’ is 
also used in contrast to emotion. Neither is the sense relevant here, however. ‘Cog-
nition’ in this context is a notion that includes at least some examples of emotion 
and perception—indeed for Sims and Kiverstein (2021), affect, given its role in their 
account of allostasis (their preferred mark of the cognitive), is essential to cognition.
 * Joe Gough 
 jg570@sussex.ac.uk
1 University of Sussex (Philosophy), Brighton, UK
2 Philosophy, University of Durham, Durham, UK
 J. Gough 
1 31 Page 2 of 24
Two recent, exemplary papers, one by Corcoran and colleagues (Corcoran et al. 
2020), and one in response by Sims and Kiverstein (2021) integrate this debate with 
the free-energy framework, each proposing a mark of the cognitive couched in free-
energy theoretic terms. In recent years, there have also been several papers consider-
ing the point of this debate—considering what is at stake between different charac-
terizations of cognition, why we need a characterization of cognition at all, and what 
general features we might want a characterization of cognition to have (e.g., Akagi 
2018; Allen 2017; Keijzer 2021; Ramsey 2017; Villalobos and Palacios 2021). It is 
worthwhile to consider the point of the debate not only in order to ensure that we 
are not wasting our time, but also and moreover because it is vital for enabling us to 
make well-informed and well-grounded choices between different proposals. I argue 
that despite their virtues, both proposals suffer from flawed conceptions of the point 
of the debate. This leaves their proposals ill-motivated—good answers to the wrong 
question.
Additionally, their proposals are unfit to serve the legitimate roles for characteri-
zations of cognition. Two closely related issues constitute the core of my case: first, 
they offer characterizations that are undesirably precise (Allen 2017); secondly, they 
offer ‘partisan’ characterizations, each taking a strong position on the long-running 
debate over how widespread cognition is, while I believe that Akagi (2018) is cor -
rect that ‘ecumenical extensional adequacy’ is a key desideratum in a characteriza-
tion of cognition. Precision and partisanship count against the legitimate roles for 
characterizations of cognition—summarising the state of the art, highlighting which 
phenomena are of interest and why, and facilitating intertheoretical and interdisci-
plinary unification, communication, and collaboration (Akagi 2018; Allen 2017; see 
also, e.g., Haueis 2021; Neto 2020).
In Sect.  Counterfactuals or allostasis?, I lay out the dispute between Sims and 
Kiverstein and Corcoran and colleagues. In Sect. Proposals from the papers, I argue 
that their explicit statements about the point of the concept of cognition and of their 
dispute are insufficient for grounding the debate. In Sect.  Cognition and cognitive 
science, I identify some common ground in the debate at large, that cognition is 
the domain of cognitive science. In  Sect.  Counterfactuals and allostasis as target 
domains, I show that this leaves open various key questions, most importantly, 
whether or not the concept of cognition serves as a target domain for cognitive 
science, and suggest that both proposals are best interpreted as suggesting target 
domains. In Sect. Against prescribing a target domain, I argue that cognitive science 
has no need of a target domain. In Sect.  Targetless characterizations of cognition, 
I consider legitimate roles for a characterization of cognition, and argue that these 
count against precision and partisanship. In Sect. Philosophical prescriptions in cog-
nitive science, before concluding, I reflect on the place for philosophical prescrip-
tions in cognitive science.
1 3
Cognitive science meets the mark of the cognitive: putting…
Page 3 of 24 1
Counterfactuals or allostasis?
The recent papers by Corcoran et  al. (2020) and Sims and Kiverstein (2021) are 
among the latest in a sizeable debate about the mark of the cognitive and the nature 
of cognition. Both papers integrate careful discussion of examples, broader biologi-
cal and cognitive theorical frameworks, and the aims of cognitive science, in order 
to reach their conclusions. Both papers are also grounded in the same research para-
digm—active inference and the free-energy principle (FEP; e.g., Friston 2012, 2013; 
Friston et al. 2006; Pezzulo et al. 2015).
Corcoran et al. (2020) argue that the capacity for disengaged, counterfactual cog-
nition, underwritten by a capacity for decoupled representation, and supported by a 
deep hierarchical model of the environment, is what makes a system a true cognizer. 
They situate their argument in relation to Godfrey-Smith’s (1996) environmental 
complexity thesis, according to which cognition is fundamentally a tool for deal-
ing with environmental complexity, notably that introduced by the presence of other 
living systems. They claim that the capacity for counterfactual cognition marks a 
significant discontinuity in the way systems are able to deal with environmental 
complexity, and plausibly maps onto Godfrey-Smith’s (2002a, b, 2016a, 2016b) pro-
posed distinction between true cognition and mere proto-cognition (where ‘proto-
cognition’ is the name for those ways of dealing with environmental complexity 
which resemble, but do not count as, cognition).
Sims and Kiverstein (2021) deny that counterfactual cognition is necessary for 
cognition. They propose instead that a capacity for minimization of expected free 
energy is all that is required for true cognition (they talk variously in terms of ‘cog-
nitive behaviour’ and ‘cognitive causes of behaviour’). Minimization of expected 
free energy requires selection of action policies that minimize expected future sur -
prise (eg, Friston et al.  2015; Parr and Friston 2019; for further discussion see Mil-
lidge et al. 2021). They appear to suggest that minimization of expected free energy 
is the interesting feature of counterfactual cognition from the perspective of the FEP, 
and indeed it is minimization of expected free energy that Corcoran et al. emphasise 
is enabled by counterfactual cognition (e.g., Corcoran et al. 2020, p. 32).
However, Sims and Kiverstein argue for an interpretation of the FEP that does not 
make strong commitments about the representational apparatus of the described sys-
tems, instead claiming that by ‘complementing’ their environments, self-maintain-
ing systems ‘embody’ a generative model of that environment. They then argue that 
on such a construal, minimization of expected free energy is to be found much more 
widely than anything that can obviously be described as a capacity for counterfac-
tual cognition. In particular, minimization of expected free energy is entailed, they 
claim, by the kind of prospective, anticipatory action involved in allostasis. Such 
actions are to be found in systems as simple as single E-Coli bacterium, so they 
argue.
The second part of their objection to Corcoran et  al.’s proposal is that ‘cogni-
tion’ should be understood in a way that is geared towards finding ‘gradations in 
[the] complexity of cognition’, and so that cognition ‘[shades off] into more basic 
biological process’ (Sims and Kiverstein 2021, p. 24). In contrast, they claim that 
 J. Gough 
1 31 Page 4 of 24
Corcoran et al.’s proposal, counter to this aim, is geared towards identifying a ‘sharp 
discontinuity’ between the genuinely cognitive and proto-cognitive. Defining ‘cog-
nition’ so that it lines up with such a sharp discontinuity has two disadvantages, they 
claim: first, it means that apparently cognitive capacities, such as memory and learn-
ing, might be found in systems classed as noncognitive by dint of falling the wrong 
side of the line; secondly, it entails an ‘over-intellectualisation of cognition’ (ibid.), 
an idea that they flesh out with an appeal to Morgan’s canon (p. 25–26; discussed 
further below).
Sims and Kiverstein do not deny that Corcoran and colleagues latch onto an inter-
esting kind of (cognitive) system, specifically, one with a deep hierarchical model 
that enables a capacity for decoupled representation, and hence the kind of disen-
gaged, counterfactual reasoning that we associate with the most impressive instances 
of human thought (see also Clark and Toribio 1994). In particular, Sims and Kiver -
stein hold that Corcoran et  al.’s proposal identifies cognition with a capacity that 
is too ‘intellectual’ to be correctly identified with cognition, marked by too sharp 
a discontinuity to encourage the search for gradations and shading-off, too exact-
ing to apply to systems that can nevertheless apparently be ascribed such capaci-
ties as memory and learning, and not directly related to any FEP-theoretic capacity 
(although Corcoran et al. claim it is necessary for expected free energy minimiza-
tion, the bulk of Sims and Kiverstein’s argument works towards the denial of this 
claim). Sims and Kiverstein, as such, propose a capacity to be identified with cogni-
tion that is directly lifted from the FEP (expected free energy minimization), shades 
off into more basic biological capacities, and plausibly applies to all living systems 
that can be described as learning or remembering (since it plausibly applies to all 
living systems).
What’s cognition for?
Before I argue against the way the debate currently proceeds, I want to try to find 
some stable ground by clarifying the point of the concept of cognition (for discus-
sion of the points of concepts, see Queloz 2019; Thomasson 2020). Towards the 
very beginning of this paper, I stressed that the notion of ‘cognition’ at play here is 
not the one that gets contrasted with perception or emotion, but the one that includes 
both perception and emotion. I did not, however, consider what the point of this 
notion of cognition is—what it is for.
First, I argue that the explicit discussions of the point of the concept of cognition 
offered by Corcoran et al. (2020) and Sims and Kiverstein (2021) are insufficient on 
their own to tie down the debate (Sect. Proposals from the papers). Next, I argue for 
a key point of common ground, the link between the domain of cognitive science 
and the concept of cognition (Sect. Cognition and cognitive science). Finally, I bring 
out the commonalities and differences between the two proposals under considera-
tion by placing them in a taxonomy of different sorts of view of the link between 
cognitive science, its domain, and the concept of cognition (Sect.  Counterfactuals 
and allostasis as target domains).
1 3
Cognitive science meets the mark of the cognitive: putting…
Page 5 of 24 1
Proposals from the papers
Both Corcoran et al. (2020, p. 32) and Sims and Kiverstein (2021, p. 24) suggest 
that the notion is for explaining the relationship between life and cognition (see also 
Van Duijn et  al. 2006), as well as suggesting that it is for distinguishing between 
cognitive and noncognitive phenomena. However, on their own, these proposals for 
the point of cognition are insufficient.
To say that a concept is for distinguishing those things that fall under it from 
those that do not seems, at best, trivial, since all concepts with extensions play this 
role (cf. Cappelen 2018). At first blush, it does not seem to help much to say that 
the concept of cognition is for explaining how cognition arises from life. Van Duijn 
et al. (2006) propose that cognition should be identified with sensorimotor control; 
Corcoran et al. that it should be identified with counterfactual reasoning; Sims and 
Kiverstein with expected free energy minimization, as indicated by allostasis. None 
appears to deny the existence of the capacity called ‘cognition’ by the others, nor 
that the relationship of each proposed capacity to life is an interesting candidate for 
explanation. It is possible to explain how sensorimotor control, expected free energy 
minimization, and counterfactual reasoning arise from life, and worthwhile to do 
so, whether or not any of these capacities is called ‘cognition’—and furthermore, 
labelling any of these capacities as ‘cognition’ appears to do no explanatory work 
over and above explaining how these capacities arise from life. These issues might, 
however, be solved by embedding the proposals in a broader body of theory, or by 
further specifying what is at stake in distinguishing between the cognitive and the 
noncognitive.
Both papers do embed their proposals for the point of cognition in broader bodies 
of theory, although for reasons I lay out below, I believe that it is not enough to save 
either proposal. Corcoran and colleagues appeal to the environmental complexity 
thesis, and this is an important part of the framing of their paper. Godfrey-Smith 
(1996) sets up the environmental complexity thesis as a theory about the core adap-
tive advantage generally conferred by those capacities we count as ‘cognitive’. He 
later weakens the theory somewhat, dropping the idea that it is the ‘core’ or ‘fun-
damental’ advantage conferred (2002a, b). There are two key points here about the 
way Godfrey-Smith sets up the thesis, both of which are in tension with the way 
Corcoran et al. mobilize the thesis in their paper.
The first is that Godfrey-Smith is setting up a non-trivial, empirical generaliza-
tion about the capacities that we call ‘cognitive’—not  stipulatively defining cogni-
tion as ‘that which is used to deal with environmental complexity’ (see especially 
2002a; for more on the difference, see Sects. Counterfactuals and allostasis as target 
domains, Against prescribing a target domain, Targetless characterizations of cogni-
tion). Secondly, although Godfrey-Smith insists on a distinction between nongenu-
ine, ‘proto-’ cognition and genuine cognition (for criticism, see Lyon 2020), he also 
insists that this boundary is likely to be irredeemably vague, and unhelpful to try to 
precisify (see especially 2002a). Conversely, Corcoran et al. propose to define cog-
nition such that it is a special way of dealing with environmental complexity, largely 
to make the distinction between proto- and genuine cognition precise. This is not 
only in tension with Godfrey-Smith’s views, but also undercuts the empirical nature 
 J. Gough 
1 31 Page 6 of 24
of the thesis—this is not exactly a fatal flaw, but it does render the appeal to God-
frey-Smith somewhat confusing, and does not clarify what Corcoran and colleagues 
see as the point of the concept of cognition. Corcoran et al. (2020, p. 32) do express 
some disagreement with Godfrey-Smith, suggesting that talking of non-cognitive 
(by their lights) systems as cognitive, or as grading into the cognitive, may ‘obscure 
a fundamental discontinuity’ (emphasis in the original), but this surely presupposes 
either that their definition of cognition is correct, or that there can be no significant 
discontinuities between cognitive systems.
The framing of Sims and Kiverstein’s paper centres on an extended appeal to 
Morgan’s canon. In particular, they hold that Morgan’s canon and attendant wor -
ries about animal psychology place a double burden on theorists, the burden of 
avoiding underestimating the complexity of seemingly simple systems like bacteria, 
while also avoiding overintellectualizing their capacities. For them, ‘underestimat-
ing’ a system appears to mean not labelling it as ‘cognitive’ when it ought to be, 
and ‘overintellectualizing’ a cognitive capacity (or ‘cognitive achievement’; 2021, 
p. 25) appears to mean describing its operation in excessively sophisticated terms 
(e.g., describing E-Coli’s anticipatory allostatic behaviour as supported by counter -
factual reasoning). This latter worry does not seem directly to speak to whether or 
not a phenomenon should be labelled cognitive, since it applies only to phenomena 
already acknowledged as cognitive.
The former worry, that it risks underestimating seemingly simple systems to deny 
them ‘cognitive’ status, is more directly relevant. The basic issue is that adopting a 
more restrictive definition of ‘cognition’, and thereby denying the cognitive status 
of, e.g., bacteria, need not ‘underestimate’ bacteria or their achievements. Say a cer-
tain species of bacteria is capable of rudimentary forms of epistemic action. Imagine 
a theorist who claims that only systems capable of consciously undertaking epis-
temic actions are cognitive, denies this kind of bacteria consciousness, and therefore 
denies they are cognitive. This does not mean that the theorist denies ‘underesti-
mates’ this kind of bacteria—the theorist might fully acknowledge, and be whole-
heartedly blown away by, the basic forms of epistemic action that it undertakes. 
They just might also think there are reasons not to label such behaviour—impressive 
though it may be—as ‘cognitive’. They might, for example, think it is amenable to 
saliently different models, or that it belongs to a class of interesting phenomena so 
disparate that cognitive science would dissolve if it were to adopt this class as its 
subject-matter. Analogously, to deny that an extremely sophisticated robot is ‘alive’ 
is not necessarily to deny the impressiveness of its achievements; it might merely 
reflect a theoretical preference for a notion of life according to which it essentially 
arises from protracted processes of natural selection.
Julian Kiverstein is generously serving as a reviewer on this paper. He has but-
tressed this appeal to Morgan’s canon by clarifying two worries that lie behind it. 
One worry is about ‘researchers that take human cognition to be the standard of what 
counts as cognitive relative to which all non-humans fall short.’ The other worry is 
that ‘many researchers assume non-cognitive behaviour to be rigid and inflexible 
whereas this is not the case.’ I share the view that both classes of researcher are 
mistaken.
1 3
Cognitive science meets the mark of the cognitive: putting…
Page 7 of 24 1
The first issue, that many researchers taken human cognition as the standard, is 
a genuine issue in my view, and a genuine problem to be solved, but not a problem 
that can be solved by a mark of the cognitive (see also Sects. Counterfactuals and 
allostasis as target domains; Philosophical prescriptions in cognitive science). Sim 
and Kiverstein’s argument presupposes that the human case is not the standard, and 
argues from that presupposition to a characterization of cognition. If it is intended 
as a refutation of researchers who think that ‘cognition’ is defined in relation to 
humans, it fails, because it begs the question against those researchers.
On to the second issue, that many researchers wrongly assume that noncogni-
tive behaviour is rigid and inflexible. One way to understand this worry renders it 
irrelevant: by this version, there is genuinely noncognitive behaviour that is non-
rigid and flexible, and researchers wrongly assume that it is nonrigid and inflexible. 
This first way of reading the worry seems to me to undercut not support Sims and 
Kiverstein’s argument, since one who wishes to deny cognitive status to bacteria can 
just highlight that there is this oft-neglected category of nonrigid, flexible, yet non-
cognitive behaviour for bacteria to find a home in. This seems especially true where 
their opponents, Corcoran et al., are supporters of the free energy principle (which 
ostensibly identifies a wide domain of flexible, nonrigid capacities and processes), 
but wish to identify cognition with only one small part of this domain. They, surely, 
do not therefore believe that the living world divides up into the cognitive and the 
rigid-and-inflexible.
The second way of reading this worry is as identifying a tension to be solved by 
a liberalized notion of cognition: ‘researchers think that all noncognitive behaviour 
is rigid and inflexible, so let’s call all the nonrigid, flexible behaviour cognitive!’ I 
have a lot of sympathy for this position, as it happens, but if this is the argument, I 
do not think it benefits from being framed as offering a mark of the cognitive (see 
also Sect. Philosophical prescriptions in cognitive science). Most of the paper, if this 
is the argument, is rendered confusingly irrelevant.
In sum, I am not convinced that either paper offers sufficient resources to assess 
their proposals without further constraints. This in itself is not intended as any great 
criticism of the papers, since I believe that their arguments proceed by presupposing 
a widely-held view of the point of the concept of cognition.
Cognition and cognitive science
This brings us to a point of fairly widespread agreement in the debate, which 
I believe can be used as a fixed point to explore these proposals: cognition is for 
demarcating the domain of cognitive science (Akagi 2018; Allen 2017; Keijzer 
2021; Ramsey 2017). There are historical reasons to suspect that the notion of cog-
nition in play is that which is defined in relation to cognitive science—as Boden 
(2006) points out, prior to the founding of cognitive science, cognition was defined 
to exclude emotion and affect. Cognitive science, as a self-conscious, interdiscipli-
nary exercise, arose in the 1950s, although it grew in part out of the cybernetics 
of the 1940s. Cognitive science, however, was not yet called ‘cognitive science’—
much of the work in 1950s went under the simple name ‘computer simulation’, until 
 J. Gough 
1 31 Page 8 of 24
later the term ‘cognitive studies’ took hold in the early 1960s, before gradually mor-
phing into ‘cognitive science’ by the mid-1970s (Boden 2006).
There are a few main reasons that the term ‘cognitive’ took off, according to 
Boden (2006), based on the account of those primarily responsible. Although the 
term was, at the time, defined to exclude emotion and affect, no-one wanted to 
exclude those things from being part of the domain of cognitive science. Instead, 
they wanted to mark a contrast with behaviourism, and offer a characterization of 
the new psychology’s subject-matter that seemed less trivial and redundant than 
‘mental’. In the context of the early 1960s, where many cognitive scientists were 
focussing on cognition (in the narrow sense of perception, language, memory, and 
problem solving), the term seemed a natural fit (Boden 2006). Through these his-
torical accidents, the term ‘cognition’ came to be associated with a new concept, 
one whose point is to pick out the subject-matter of cognitive science.
Beer (2021) recently discussed the origin of the phrase ‘minimal cognition’, a 
bastardization of his ‘minimally cognitive behavior’. When offering a putatively 
representation-free account of certain organism-level behaviours, Beer found to his 
frustration that his work was often viewed by cognitive scientists as irrelevant. His 
work was perceived as irrelevant for reasons best captured by Clark and Toribio 
(1994)—the worry was that the behaviours he modelled were too importantly dis-
analogous from, and too simple compared with, paradigmatic, ‘genuine’ cognition 
to be relevant to cognitive scientific debates over representation. The phrase ‘mini-
mally cognitive behavior’ was intended by Beer to get around this problem, and to 
capture the idea of ‘the simplest behaviour deemed worthy of a cognitive scientist’s 
attention’.1 This vignette contains, I think, a deep truth about the concept of cogni-
tion—that it is used, at the most abstract level, to demarcate the domain to which 
cognitive scientists ought to pay attention.
Counterfactuals and allostasis as target domains
Even accepting that the concept of cognition is for demarcating the domain of cog-
nitive science, this leaves two key background issues unsolved. The first is this the 
issue of what might be called the ‘direction of fit’ (Anscombe 1957; Platts  1979, p. 
257). Some proposals are based on the idea that it is up to cognitive science to grad-
ually determine and discover its proper domain, 2 and that the concept of cognition 
is defined to refer to this to-be-revealed domain whatever it may turn out to be (e.g., 
Allen 2017; Figdor 2017, 2018; Newen 2017; see also Peirce 1878). I will refer to 
this class of proposals as ‘targetless’, and the other class as ‘target-driven’. Unlike 
1  This is not to say that I think that Beer’s attempt to get around the problem was successful, an issue on 
which I do not have a strong view for reasons that will become apparent.
2 I say ‘determining/discovering’ because although I think that from an internal perspective (see, e.g., 
Lakatos 1971), the research programmes of cognitive science are best understood as discovering the 
domain of cognitive science, I also think that from a more sociological perspective, they can be under -
stood as determining our use of ‘cognition’.
1 3
Cognitive science meets the mark of the cognitive: putting…
Page 9 of 24 1
targetless proposals, target-driven proposals identify a target domain, containing all 
and only the things that cognitive science ought to study.3
Targetless proposals see cognitive science as gradually expanding or shrinking 
its current remit through the interaction of, at least, the goals of cognitive science, 
the scope of its models and methods, the original pretheoretic area of interest, the 
paradigm cognitive capacities that cognitive science originally set out to explain, 
and perhaps paradigm cognitive systems (normally humans; e.g., Rupert 2013; cf. 
Figdor 2018; Lyon 2006). Importantly, targetless proposals need not be so flat footed 
as to claim that anything that the tools of cognitive science can explain forms part of 
its domain (cf. Ramsey 2017).
Although there are key differences, many targetless views of cognitive science 
see it as proceeding by working outwards from certain paradigmatically cognitive 
capacities and systems, incorporating more capacities depending on certain sorts of 
salient similarity to these paradigmatically cognitive capacities, and incorporating 
more systems depending on whether they instantiate these capacities (e.g., Allen 
2017; Figdor 2017, 2018; Lyon 2015; Newen 2017). Paradigmatically cognitive sys-
tems and capacities do not constitute a ‘target domain’ because it is essential to the 
way that ‘targetless’ cognitive science proceeds that this class, the ‘paradigmatically 
cognitive’, be used also to identify potential new targets of explanation. ‘Working 
outwards’ from the paradigmatically cognitive is guided and heavily informed by 
amenability to similar models and methods, relevance to the core interests of cogni-
tive science, and other dimensions of salient similarity. A core idea of such views is 
often that we should let ‘the productivity of research programs in cognitive science 
guide the extension of language to new contexts’ (Allen 2017, p. 4240).
A brief tangent is required here. One might worry that acknowledging ‘paradigm’ 
cognitive systems, especially if this is set partly in deference to the actual histori-
cal remit of early cognitive science, because the question in favour of ‘anthropo-
centric’ and against ‘biogenic’ approaches to cognition. It does not. Importantly, it 
would not mean humans are ‘more’ cognitive, but rather that they are more useful 
in judging whether another system is ‘cognitive’. Of course, it is possible to deny 
that humans are the paradigmatic cognitive systems, and that there are paradigmatic 
cognitive systems (e.g., Figdor 2018). However, there may be methodological justi-
fications for treating humans as the paradigm case, for example, a special interest in 
explaining human capacities (e.g., Heyes 2014, 2015; Wundt 1907). Even conceding 
that humans are the paradigm cognitive systems and that they have a special place 
in the goals of cognitive science does not guarantee an anthropocentric approach. 
Indeed, without treating humans as the paradigm case, it is hard to understand many 
of the key arguments for the biogenic approach. For example, Lyon (see especially 
2022) argues that there are ‘basal’ cases of cognition in extremely simple biological 
3 One major problem in much of the debate so far, in my view, has been the failure to distinguish 
between these two types of proposal, often leading those offering one type of proposal to see rival pro-
posals as silly or clearly wrong. One thing I hope comes out of this section and Sect.  Against prescribing 
a target domain is that I think target-driven proposals, while wrong, are far from silly, and fail in fairly 
subtle ways. This is partly autobiographical: a previous draft of this paper failed to draw the distinction.
 J. Gough 
1 31 Page 10 of 24
systems by arguing that these basal cases are salient similarity to human cases, espe-
cially in being amenable to similar models, and most of all on their relevance in 
explaining the human case. The relevance of such concerns presupposes and hinges 
on Lyon treating humans as paradigm cognitive systems in the relevant sense.
Conversely, target-driven proposals are based on the idea that the concept of cog-
nition provides a target at which cognitive science ought to aim. Ramsey (2017, p. 
4207) expresses the core idea of such proposals: that cognitive science and cognition 
should be defined ‘in terms of its relevant explananda, in terms of what it is we want 
explained’. This latter class of proposals faces a second issue. Some are presented 
as nonrevisionary, and see the concept of cognition as at least roughly the same as 
the intuitive folk concept of mind: on such a view, cognitive science ought to aim to 
explain those phenomena that intuitively count as ‘mental’ or ‘psychological’.
For example, Ramsey (2017) articulates a nonrevisionary target-driven proposal 
according to which cognitive science requires a target domain. In particular, he 
claims that cognition is best understood ‘as a crudely defined cluster of capacities 
and mental phenomena’, and that ‘[a] theory is a cognitive theory if it helps us to 
understand a capacity or process or phenomenon that we are pre-disposed to regard 
as psychological in nature’ (p. 4208). Here, Ramsey appears to treat ‘mental’, ‘cog-
nitive’, and ‘psychological’ as synonymous. Another proposal along these lines is 
offered by Clark (2011).
Other target-driven proposals are presented as revisionary: the intuitive con-
cept of mind is seen as an inappropriate target domain, and a new, more appropri-
ate target domain is offered. These revisionary target-driven proposals have some 
similarities with targetless proposals: they tend to be informed by trends in cognitive 
science, views about the possible range of its models, and so on. Even so, they ulti-
mately aim to set a target domain for cognitive science, rather than primarily seeing 
the proper domain of cognitive science as something to be revealed as cognitive sci-
ence progresses and matures.
For example, Keijzer (2021) articulates a proposal that like Ramsey’s is target-
driven, claiming that it is desirable that cognitive science have a ‘clear and stable’ 
target domain (p. 137), but differs on the proper target domain. His proposal is 
offered as revisionary, claiming that initially, the target domain of cognitive science 
was the mind, or at least ‘remained intrinsically bound up with the pre-existing and 
long-standing notion of the mind’ (p. 138). The term ‘cognition’, he claims, was 
adopted because it ‘provided a scientific, naturalistic phrase that stressed a modern 
non-dualistic view on the mind that could be articulated in terms of information pro-
cessing and computation’ (ibid.).
However, he thinks that the domain of cognitive science should be tied to an 
‘empirical scientific concept’ that can be ‘adapted to scientific findings and theoriz-
ing’ (p. 146). Additionally, he thinks that so long as cognition is tied to mind, it can-
not play this role because ‘[m]ind is a key concept within our culture that is central 
for many topics ranging from responsibility, free will, using reasons, being rational, 
and so on’. He thinks that the intuitive concept of mind therefore frustrates the abil-
ity of cognitive science to acquire a stable target domain (see also Clark 2010). His 
proposal is therefore to set cognition free, and untether it from mind.
1 3
Cognitive science meets the mark of the cognitive: putting…
Page 11 of 24 1
Even so, he proposes a new target domain for cognitive science—cognitive sci-
ence, in Keijzer’s view, ought to study all living systems, and in particular, it ought 
to focus on studying ‘cobolism’, ‘the systematic ways in which each living system 
encompasses structures, processes and external events that maintain the fundamen-
tal metabolic processes that constitute the core of each living system’ (2021, p. 
137). Rather than approaching the life-cognition boundary by aiming to distinguish 
between living and cognitive systems, as Corcoran and colleagues do (see Sect. Pro-
posals from the papers), Keijzer’s approach is to focus on the distinction between 
cognition and metabolism as aspects of living systems. This approach is also prec-
edented in the work of Godfrey-Smith (see especially 2016b).
There is another important distinction among target-driven proposals. Strongly 
target-driven proposals specify a target domain for cognitive science which is also 
supposed to be its ultimate domain. This tends to be tied to the view that cognitive 
science is (or at least ought to be) the study of some currently-specifiable natural 
kind (e.g., Adams 2018). 4 It is this kind of view that Allen (2017, p. 4234) accuses 
of proceeding by ‘definitional fiat’, and that Keijzer (2021, p. 147) accuses of ‘con-
ceptual stipulation’.
Weakly target-driven proposals give up on the idea that the current target domain 
of cognitive science should also be presented as the ultimate domain of cognitive 
science. Instead, target domains are understood as at least somewhat provisional 
and revisable in light of empirical discoveries. Keijzer sees such target domains as 
part of ‘[a] standard scientific bootstrapping process where theorizing and empirical 
work coevolve’ (2021, p. 147).
I believe that Sims and Kiverstein’s (2021) proposal is best understood as an elab-
oration of Keijzer’s (2021) position, and hence as a revisionary, weakly target-driven 
proposal, offering a target domain for cognitive science. The link between Sims and 
Kiverstein’s account, and that of Keijzer, is confirmed by Kiverstein in his role as a 
reviewer on this paper. Sims and Kiverstein offer a formal elaboration of the nature 
of Keijzer’s ‘cobolism’, by offering a formal elaboration in free-energy theoretic 
terms of the nature of allostasis (as minimization of expected free energy), where 
allostasis is among the most fundamental and most important forms of cobolism 
(see also their footnote 9).
The view of Corcoran et  al. (2020) is not so obviously tied to any of the 
approaches discussed above. I do not think that it is charitable to interpret their pro-
posal as targetless, largely for reasons I discuss in Sect.  Targetless characterizations 
of cognition. Additionally, I am not sure how one might justify their proposed mark 
of the cognitive on such a view. The best option I can think of is that one might 
think that cognitive science will stop at the first major discontinuity (in ways of 
dealing with environmental complexity) that one reaches as one moves away from 
what they see as the paradigm cognitive system, humans. According to Corcoran 
4 For various reasons, I minimize my mentions of ‘natural kinds’ in this paper, partly because accord-
ing to some accounts, the subject-matter of any  well-ordered science will by definition be a natural kind 
(e.g., Spencer 2016), and partly because ‘natural kind’ is so poorly and variously defined as to confuse 
more than it clarifies matters (e.g., Hacking  2007).
 J. Gough 
1 31 Page 12 of 24
and colleagues, this is the discontinuity between systems with hierarchical architec-
tures, and systems with architectures that support counterfactuals. Absent a reason 
that cognitive science ought or is likely to stop at this discontinuity though, such a 
proposal would be unmotivated.
Taking their proposal as target-driven, I think that it is clearly revisionary. Their 
definition of cognition is too restrictive to align with any intuitive notion of mind or 
mentality—disengaged counterfactual cognition is a small part of our ‘mental’ lives, 
and describes the activity of very few of our ‘mental’ capacities. Its closest link to 
an intuitive notion of mind is to the idea of ‘having a mind’. Relatedly, they are 
particularly interested in demarcating which systems are cognitive (see especially 
the first paragraph of p. 32, and the appeal to Godfrey-Smith therein). Even here, 
the intuitive notion of having a mind does not line up precisely with their technical 
notion of being a cognitive system, since they are willing to deny cognitive status to 
systems capable of ‘learning, memory, and decision-making’ (p. 31; this is critiqued 
by Sims and Kiverstein, p. 25). Even so, one might think (along the lines of Kei-
jzer) that having a mind is not a useful scientific notion. One might, on such a view, 
see Corcoran et al.’s proposal as identifying the scientifically interesting category of 
systems closest to the ‘folk’ notion of having a mind. It is not clear to me whether 
their proposal is weakly or strongly target-driven, but I will dismiss both kinds of 
approach in Sect.  Against prescribing a target domain.
In this section, I have tried to find some common ground from which to assess the 
two proposed marks of the cognitive. In Sect.   Proposals from the papers, I argued 
that neither Sims and Kiverstein, nor Corcoran and colleagues, explicitly offer a sat-
isfactory account of the point of the concept of cognition, and therefore of the stakes 
of the debate. In Sect.  Cognition and cognitive science, I argued that the core point 
of the concept of cognition is demarcating the domain of cognitive science. In this 
section, Sect. Counterfactuals and allostasis as target domains, I considered two fur-
ther background issues (the direction of fit between the domain of cognitive science 
and the concept of cognition, and the relationship between the concept of cognition 
and the concept of mind), in order to better flesh out the nature of the two proposed 
marks of the cognitive. I suggest that both are both understood as revisionary target-
driven proposals, trying in an empirically and theoretically informed manner to find 
relatively stable target domains for cognitive science, severing the link between cog-
nition and the intuition-governed folk notion of mind.
It is worth noting that the distinction between targetless, weakly target-driven, 
and strongly target-driven proposals crosscuts the question of whether there is a 
mark of the cognitive. Strongly target-driven proposals identify a mark of the cogni-
tive that characterizes both the target-domain of cognitive science, and the ultimate 
domain of cognitive science. One way to look at weakly target-driven proposals and 
targetless proposals is as denying that there is a mark of the cognitive because they 
deny that any characterization should play both  roles. A more liberal understanding 
of the ‘mark of the cognitive’ might identify the mark of the cognitive with whatever 
characterization fulfils just one of these roles. One could then construe the charac-
terizations of provisional target-domains as provisional marks of the cognitive.
Alternately, one could construe the mark of the cognitive as being whatever cog-
nitive-scientific properties demarcate the ultimate domain of cognitive science. For 
1 3
Cognitive science meets the mark of the cognitive: putting…
Page 13 of 24 1
a supporter of targetless proposals, this is the only kind of ‘mark’ that might exist. 
Here, there is room for disagreement among proponents of targetless proposals, and 
among proponents of weakly target-driven proposals: the positions as I have char -
acterized them do not obviously have any entailments regarding the existence of a 
mark of the cognitive in this sense. They do, however, entail that if there is a mark of 
the cognitive, it cannot be known to us presently, since we cannot know the ultimate 
boundaries of the domain of cognitive science without first answering all the empiri-
cal and practical questions that appropriately inform the placement of this boundary. 
The mark of the cognitive, in this sense, can only follow along behind the practice of 
cognitive science, it cannot take the lead.
What’s the point of characterizing cognition?
If the above is correct, then the two proposed marks of the cognitive represent two 
diametrically opposed revisionary target-driven proposals, each couched in free-
energy theoretic terms. Sims and Kiverstein (2021) follow Keijzer (2021) in sug-
gesting a broadening of the target domain compared with the folk notion of mind, 
while Corcoran et al. (2020) suggesting a narrowing of the target domain. Each set-
tles on a theoretically interesting target domain, that ties in interesting ways into the 
life sciences more generally and especially evolutionary theory.
I may be wrong in this. However, it does not matter to my argument. I prefer 
to see these proposals as target-driven, suggesting target domains for cognitive sci-
ence because, if this is their aim, then they have many features that are virtuous in 
such proposals. However, as I will argue below, this is an illicit aim (Sect.  Against 
prescribing a target domain). Given this, many of the features of these proposals are 
serious vices in my view (Sect.  Targetless characterizations of cognition). It does 
not matter if I am wrong about the intended direction of fit because even if I am, the 
proposals have features that are undesirable for targetless proposals. In Sect.  Philo-
sophical prescriptions in cognitive science, I clarify that my opposition to target-
driven characterizations of cognition is not allied to an opposition towards philo-
sophical prescriptions for cognitive science, before concluding.
Against prescribing a target domain
One possible role for characterizations of cognition (of which I see ‘marks’ of cog-
nition as a special case) is to specify the target domain that cognitive scientists ought 
to study—that is, a characterization of cognition may specify the content of a target-
driven proposal about the concept of cognition. Such characterizations might rea-
sonably be expected to be clear and precise, and to pick out a category of reason-
able scientific and broader theoretical interest. 5 If their goal is to find a suitable, 
5 It is worth noting that some of those who do believe in prescribing a target domain to cognitive science 
do not believe that that target domain can be interestingly characterized, since they believe our ascrip-
tions of mind and cognition should be intuitive and may be ineffable (e.g., Clark 2011; Ramsey 2017 is 
somewhat in this vein).
 J. Gough 
1 31 Page 14 of 24
principled target domain that might be assigned to cognitive science, then I believe 
that the papers by Sims and Kiverstein and Corcoran and colleagues do about as 
good a job as possible at this task. 6 Each identifies an interesting category of inter -
related phenomena that are closely related to the paradigm cases in cognitive sci-
ence’s remit. However, I do not believe that this task ought to be performed—I do 
not believe in prescribing cognitive science with a target domain, provisional or not, 
and so I do not believe that characterizations ought to be used to play this role.
I will first dismiss Ramsey’s (2017) argument for prescribing cognitive science a 
target domain, before offering two brief arguments against doing so. Ramsey’s argu-
ment is especially significant because it is the basis for Keijzer’s claim that ‘to get 
started, a target domain must be chosen’ (2021, p. 147; see also p. 139). The argu-
ment Ramsey (2017) offers for holding that cognitive science and cognition should 
be understood in terms of a given domain of target phenomena and capacities in 
need of explanation is that this is ‘the standard way sciences are defined’ (p. 4207). 
He offers the example of geology, which he sees as studying ‘[roughly] the forma-
tion of mountains and rocks and minerals and so on.’
Interestingly, he also mentions chemistry, claiming that it deals with a very dif-
ferent, albeit overlapping, set of phenomena to geology. He does not specify the 
subject-matter of chemistry. I think he would have a great deal of trouble if he were 
to try to do so in similar terms. He would, I think, have a similar amount of trouble 
trying to specify the subject-matter of physics. The problem, compellingly identi-
fied by Hempel (1969) in a rather different context, is that the correct, final domain 
for physics, and its current domain, come significantly apart. The history of physics 
is littered with disputes about what physical phenomena there are and what phe-
nomena are physical, as well as discoveries of new physical phenomena, and radical 
changes in our conception of the domain of physics (see Chomsky 2002; Wilson 
2006). The same is true of chemistry, especially given its interactions and boundary 
disputes with physics (Chomsky 2002). Indeed, a major milestone in the matura-
tion of physics was the abandonment of a target-driven view of its domain as the 
‘material’, understood as comprising mechanisms that operated on principles of 
motion and contact (one might think that cognitive science is undergoing a similar 
development).
Saliently, psychology has not operated by taking a target domain according to 
many historians of psychology, instead progressing in a disorderly manner as tech-
niques, interests, and practical goals develop (Danziger 1990, 1997; Leahey 2018; 
Rose 1985; Smith 1988). Even more worrying for Ramsey’s account, it does not 
appear that even geology functions with a set target domain. As geology progressed 
over time, it accrued techniques in service of answering certain questions (particu-
larly the origin of the Earth), and its domain apparently shifted when other pressing 
questions came along which these techniques could help with (for example, how to 
find valuable minerals, and later oil). Hemeda (2019, p. 2) characterizes geology as 
‘the study of the character and origin of the Earth, its surface features and internal 
6 If Andrews (2021) is correct, then I am probably wrong about this, since they argue that the FEP is 
simply not in the business of demarcating categories or domains.
1 3
Cognitive science meets the mark of the cognitive: putting…
Page 15 of 24 1
structure’ but highlights as advantageous that this characterization has allowed geol-
ogy the flexibility more recently to consider ‘the atmosphere, biosphere and hydro-
sphere’ as (partly) geological phenomena (see also Sect. Targetless characterizations 
of cognition). Additionally, according to one popular understanding of the history 
of geology, the Moon and its craters became securely ‘geological’ phenomena when 
it was discovered that they were amenable to geological, in particular stratigraphic, 
analysis (Hemeda 2019). The point here is that even if some sciences are defined 
with respect to a target domain, this is far from standard practice, and for many 
mature sciences is simply not the case (see also Allen  2017). Ramsey’s argument 
from standard practice therefore fails.
There are two further reasons not to believe that cognitive science proceeds by 
targeting a set domain of phenomena. The first, highlighted by Newen (2017) and 
Miller (2003), is that core ‘cognitive’ phenomena like human memory, planning, 
and perception are also studied by other sciences, such as molecular biology, eco-
nomics, sociology, and the medical sciences. It is not merely that there is a small 
overlap between the (uncontroversial) domain of cognitive science and the domains 
of other sciences, as between geology and chemistry. Instead, the domain of cogni-
tive science is almost completely shared with other disciplines, distinguished from 
cognitive science primarily—contra Ramsey—by their approach to that domain.7
The second reason is that the domain of cognitive science has in fact been hugely 
unstable, and has expanded through discoveries of salient similarity between phe-
nomena that were at the time uncontroversially part of the domain of the discipline, 
and those that were not uncontroversially part of its domain (including amenabil-
ity to similar models and methods, and relevance to some of the practical goals of 
cognitive science). Consciousness, emotion, affect, allostasis, and the contemporary 
notion of stress were not uncontroversially part of the domain of cognitive science 
at its inception. In fact, they were discussed barely if at all. Even so, emotion and 
consciousness became an uncontroversial part of its domain as the science pro-
gressed, the range of models expanded, and these phenomena and their similarities 
to core cognitive phenomena became better understood (e.g., Akagi 2018; Boden 
2006; Clark 2013; Damásio 1994; Hetmański 2018). Affect, allostasis, and stress, 
although still not entirely uncontroversially part of the domain of cognitive science, 
are widely discussed within cognitive science, and frequently modelled by cognitive 
scientists. One needs to offer a compelling argument that it is somehow harmful for 
cognitive science to proceed this way, if one believes that this way of proceeding has 
been or has become a mistake—as perhaps Ramsey (2017) and some of those offer -
ing highly conservative definitions of cognition (e.g., Adams and  Aizawa 2001) do.
I have a third, weaker, argument against characterizing cognition by specifying a 
prescribed target domain: I agree with Keijzer (2021) that mind is an inappropriate 
target domain for cognitive science, but I see no way of settling the dispute between 
7 I think that the idea of a characteristic approach is compatible with the interdisciplinarity of cognitive 
science; it means only that this approach must be, among other things, interdisciplinary, and therefore 
dependent on expertise and techniques currently house in different disciplines, especially as these forms 
of expertise and techniques interact with one another.
 J. Gough 
1 31 Page 16 of 24
revisionary target-driven proposals without undercutting the motivations for offering 
a target-driven proposal in the first place. So far as I can see, both Sims and Kiver -
stein (2021) and Corcoran et al. (2020) describe categories of phenomena that could 
support orderly, interesting sciences. Sims and Kiverstein (2021) argue that Corco-
ran et al.’s (2020) proposal is ‘not unprincipled, [but] nevertheless unwarranted, and 
certainly not implied by the FEP’ (2021, p. 24); I see no reason that Corcoran and 
colleagues could not say exactly the same of Sims and Kiverstein’ proposal. Both go 
to great lengths to show in a principled way that their proposals are tied to a scien-
tifically and theoretically interesting FEP-theoretic category, but this is not enough 
to draw a conclusion about what cognitive science ought to study—a question about 
which the FEP has no direct implications.
The only way that I can imagine the dispute being settled is by considering more 
directly what it is useful, feasible, and interesting for cognitive science to study 
given its models, methods, goals, and pretheoretic aims: exactly the sort of concerns 
that drive targetless accounts of cognition and cognitive science. It is here, if any -
where, that I believe that the FEP has the most direct implications for the concept of 
cognition and the direction of cognitive science. If nothing else, the FEP provides 
formal tools that make it feasible for cognitive science to study a broader range of 
phenomena, because it uses models and tools that are not too alien to cast phenom-
ena like allostasis and homeostasis as interestingly similar to paradigm cases of cog-
nition. However, this is only one consideration among many for determining what it 
is presently a good idea for cognitive scientists to study.
Targetless characterizations of cognition
If I am right, and we ought not to be looking for a target domain that can reasonably 
be prescribed to cognitive science, then this removes one significant possible role 
for a characterization of cognition. This does not, however, mean that there is no 
interesting role for a characterization of cognition on the targetless view (see also 
Akagi 2018; Allen 2017). One possible role for a targetless characterization of cog-
nition, which I raise mainly to dismiss, is to put forward one’s best guess about the 
final subject-matter of cognitive science. The problem with this proposal is that it 
is, I hope, clear that if targetless proposals are correct and cognitive science leads 
the way on setting its domain, no-one is in a remotely good position to make such a 
guess about its ideal, eventual endpoint at the current time.
Characterizations of cognition can be useful without being target-driven and 
without guesswork. For example, Allen (2017) suggests that characterizations of 
cognition should play such roles as ‘orienting newcomers to phenomena of potential 
interest’, for which they need be neither precise nor exceptionless—he goes through 
the example of the characterization of cognition as ‘adaptive information process-
ing’, a characterization as imprecise as ‘cognition’, and arguably with exceptions, 
1 3
Cognitive science meets the mark of the cognitive: putting…
Page 17 of 24 1
such as the maladaptive elements of human psychology. 8 Such a characterization 
helps to highlight the general range of things that cognitive scientists are interested 
in, and also to highlight why they are interested in those things. The imprecision of 
this characterization actually helps it to play its job. For example, ‘adaptive informa-
tion processing’ is imprecise enough that it can be stretched to cover new kinds of 
case, especially by taking liberal views of ‘adaptive’ or ‘information processing’. 
This affords more possibilities for creative work that highlights hitherto-overlooked 
similarities between uncontroversially cognitive capacities and other capacities not 
(yet) considered cognitive.
There are other, more general reasons that characterizations of cognition benefit 
from imprecision. In very general terms, cognitive science is interdisciplinary and 
expansive, and because of this, at risk of disintegration and dissolution if its subsidi-
ary disciplines cease to interact appropriately (as acknowledged by Allen 2017). In 
light of this, working characterizations of key concepts might also serve to facili-
tate intertheoretical integration, communication, including communication of differ-
ent theoretical perspectives, and other ‘bridging’ roles that form productive links 
between disciplines in order to resist disintegration. Importantly, many of these roles 
are in fact better played by imprecise concepts (Haueis 2021; Neto 2020). The rea-
son for this is that imprecision gives space for different researchers and disciplines 
to conceive of their subject-matter in significantly different ways, while still seeing 
each other as studying ‘the same thing’ (and therefore worth talking to).
However, to play these roles—conveying the general idea of what cognitive sci-
entists are interested in and why to newcomers, and helping unify the discipline—it 
is clearly possible for a characterization to be too  imprecise. If a characterization 
is too imprecise, it will not be informative, and it may either fail to clearly apply to 
paradigm cases of cognition, or be so broad as to be stretched to cover cases that are 
clearly not cases of cognition. This will not serve to orient newcomers, nor help to 
integrate the discipline. Ideally, then, what we want is a characterization of cogni-
tion with just the right amount of imprecision.
Akagi (2018) offers a proposal for how to characterize cognition (albeit, not a 
characterization of cognition) that can help to solve this problem. Akagi agrees with 
Allen that characterizations of cognition are of limited use to working cognitive sci-
entists. Instead, Akagi thinks that the main benefits of characterizing cognition are 
epistemological benefits for others, including philosophers and the public. In par -
ticular, Akagi thinks that a characterization of cognition should make explicit cur -
rent implicit consensus among cognitive scientists about their domain.
This is, of course, difficult in the face of wildly different views of which sys-
tems, capacities, and phenomena are cognitive. To preempt this worry, Akagi 
suggests that characterizations of cognition should be ‘ecumenical’—that is, they 
should capture the dispute, rather than try to gloss over it and take a side. The 
problem with any ‘partisan’ proposal that takes a side, in Akagi’s view, is that it 
8 Following Neto (2020), I use the term ‘imprecise’, where Allen (2017) uses the term ‘vague’, because 
I wish to remain neutral about whether the kind of imprecision here is properly classed as vagueness (see 
also Akagi 2018; Haueis 2021).
 J. Gough 
1 31 Page 18 of 24
represents as uncontroversial and established what is in fact highly controversial and 
not-yet-established.9
Instead, Akagi claims, a characterization of cognition should apply exactly as 
clearly and uncontroversially to any given case as that case is, in fact, a clear and 
uncontroversial instance of cognition—an ecumenical characterization should apply 
entirely uncontroversially to a paradigm case of cognition, and highly controver -
sially to a highly controversial case of cognition. It should, in this way, reflect the 
current state of the art by capturing the nature of the disputes.10
It should, I think, be obvious at this stage that the characterizations of cognition 
offered by Sims and Kiverstein, and Corcoran and colleagues, do not stack up well 
against the desiderata on targetless characterizations of cognition. Between humans 
and E. coli, most living systems are highly controversial as instances of cognition, 
and therefore ought to be part of the penumbra of an imprecise characterization of 
‘cognition’. Both proposals significantly reduce the penumbra, and decide one way 
or the other on these controversial cases (they might, in this sense, be understood 
as precisifying proposals; Fine  1975). They offer proposals that are partisan, and 
unduly precise, if they are understood as targetless characterization of cognition—
although as I have already stated, I think they are better interpreted as target-driven 
characterizations, and as failing because cognitive science is in no need of such 
characterizations.
Philosophical prescriptions in cognitive science
In this closing section, I wish to consider two interrelated objections. The first is that 
a mark of the cognitive is required for settling disputes that are strictly internal to 
cognitive science, and held among cognitive scientists. The second is that my posi-
tion is wrongly in tension with or opposed to philosophers offering prescriptions or 
guidance to cognitive science.
Let us begin with the idea that a mark of the cognitive is required for settling 
genuine and legitimate disputes within cognitive science. The idea is that there are 
many disputes internal to cognitive science over whether phenomena are cognitive, 
such as the question of the boundaries of cognitive systems, and of the potential 
cognitive status of simple living creatures. Generally, the way such arguments pro-
ceed is by showing that present methodological concerns and empirical findings 
currently underdetermine the placement of some boundary between the cognitive 
and the noncognitive (see especially Varga 2018). They then appeal to a charac-
terization of cognition. The characterizations offered are generally justified by an 
appeal to philosophical analyses and intuitions (Adams and Aizawa 2010; Aizawa 
and Adams 2005), or to the potential explanatory role and other theoretical benefits 
9 For this criticism to apply, of course, the proposal must be understood as targetless rather than target-
driven. See also footnote 3.
10 While Akagi’s 2018 paper does not offer a characterization, Akagi (2021) later argues that these 
desiderata are met by the characterization of cognition as the sensitive management of an agent’s behav -
ior.
1 3
Cognitive science meets the mark of the cognitive: putting…
Page 19 of 24 1
of the category/construct/property identified by the proposed characterization (Cor -
coran et al. 2020; Sims and Kiverstein 2021).
My proposal is revisionary with respect to the current practice of cognitive sci-
ence in pretty much only one way: I think that this process is wrongheaded, and 
unable to legitimately settle the disputes. Any appearance of settling the disputes 
is entirely spurious. Allen (2017) and Akagi (2018) focus on criticising the more 
‘philosophical’ proposals and approaches. Appealing to the explanatory and theo-
retical benefits also fails because cognition is a subject-matter term, that like psy -
chological, chemical, biological, geological, and physical, we should not expect to 
have any great explanatory role—it is a mistake, owed to the general overempha-
sis on explanatory terms in historical views and philosophies of science, to try to 
treat every legitimate scientific concept as playing such an explanatory role (Spencer 
2016). To put the issue informally, demarcating a subject-matter is a big and impor -
tant enough job that we should not overload the concept with further roles, that will 
inevitably place competing demands on it.11
Of course, it is by placing further demands on the concept, whether these are 
reached by philosophical analysis or scientific-explanatory work, that we get the 
constraints required to settle the motivating disputes. This is why trying to impose 
further constraints is tempting: it makes us able to generate something that looks 
like an answer. However, these further constraints are not actually relevant con-
straints on the concept of cognition as it is used to demarcate the subject-matter of 
cognitive science.
One reason I am highly suspicious of this process of seeking and imposing fur -
ther constraints on the concept in order to settle the dispute is that both  sides of any 
given dispute are generally equally able to justify their position, because there is no 
principled basis in these disputes regarding where to find these constraints. This is 
why some authors feel entitled find their further constraints in traditional philosoph-
ical analyses, others in evolutionary theory, and others in undesirable cultural views 
of plants. Nothing in the process precludes a post hoc grab-bag of principles picked 
to justify one’s already-chosen answer to the dispute in question.
The solution is patience, and a tolerance for uncertainty. Many of these ‘disputes’ 
represent a divergence between research programmes with competing commitments 
and interests. Surely, the thought seems to go, only one of them can be right, and 
we should try to work out which. The problem is that we do not know ahead of time 
which is right—or even that only one is, since the appearance of competition may 
turn out to be spurious. We cannot generally determine which is the correct research 
programme ahead of time, and have to pursue those competing research programmes 
to settle (and normally also recast) the disputes between them (e.g., Chang 2004, 
2012, 2017). These disputes therefore look underdetermined by the practicalities of 
cognitive science and our current empirical and theoretical knowledge because they 
are in fact underdetermined. Adding arbitrary constraints that let us generate precise 
11 My position is arguably revisionary in that the concept has already been assigned some such roles, but 
I believe that we can identify a central role for the concept (Sect.  Cognition and cognitive science), and 
should attempt to ensure that it can play that role well (see also Queloz 2019).
 J. Gough 
1 31 Page 20 of 24
‘answers’ to these disputes is not settling these disputes but obscuring their exist-
ence and their nature.
Of course, some research programmes are unmotivated, illicitly motivated, obvi-
ously hopeless, irrelevant to the goals of cognitive science, or deeply impractical. I 
am not against cognitive scientists or philosophers pointing this out, 12 and I think 
that often philosophers are the best-placed researchers to do so (Schliesser  2019). 
Offering a ‘mark of the cognitive’ is not a good way of offering such guidance: this 
is, in many ways, the most important claim in this paper. Identifying a mark of the 
cognitive requires prescribing a target domain and/or making a guess about the ulti-
mate future of cognitive science; when arguing about what cognitive science should 
study, totalizing top-down prescriptions and Oracle-style guesses about the ultimate 
future of cognitive science are probably irrelevant distractions, and definitely need-
lessly more complicated than the question of what we ought presently to study.
My basic position on many discussions of the mark of the cognitive is that 
they are attempts to offer legitimate guidance to cognitive science, but framed in 
an unhelpful and incorrect manner. Consider, for example, one of the more recent 
disputes between Clark (2010) and Adams and Aizawa (2010). There, Adams and 
Aizawa argue that cognitive science should limit itself to what’s within the skin on 
pain of having a subject-matter so broad that the discipline falls apart. Many of their 
past arguments have been framed in terms of core, and according to them essential, 
features (in particular, underived intentionality) of what they claim are the true tar -
get phenomena of cognitive science. The issue they raise in 2010, however, is a more 
practical one—it is an attempt to warn cognitive scientists from making what they 
see as a mistake that might eventually undermine their discipline’s very existence. 
This latter, practical worry is ‘laundered’ through a dubious philosophical analysis, 
thus obscuring the practical point by burying it under a needlessly complicated and 
contentious theoretical edifice.
This more ‘practical’ understanding of the debate over the boundaries of cog-
nition also suggests a more practical interpretation of Clark and Chalmers’ (1998) 
original argument: that there is no principled reason for cognitive science not to 
expand its domain beyond the skin, and several potential benefits if it does so. Like-
wise, Sims and Kiverstein’s proposal can perhaps, in a certain light, be understood 
as claiming that there is no principled reason from the FEP for cognitive science to 
limit the living systems that it studies to those capable only of explicit counterfac-
tual reasoning.
Separating prescriptions and characterizations
I have argued that characterizations of cognition, understood as the subject-matter 
of cognitive science, ought not to aim to specify what cognitive science should 
study—they ought not to try to specify a target domain for cognitive science, includ-
ing by trying to settle as-yet-unsettled disputes in cognitive science. While Corcoran 
12 Indeed, this is precisely what I take Allen (2017) to be doing.
1 3
Cognitive science meets the mark of the cognitive: putting…
Page 21 of 24 1
et al. (2020) and Sims and Kiverstein (2021) offer principled arguments for interest-
ing potential target domains for cognitive science, cognitive science does not need 
a target domain. Instead, the proper domain of cognitive science will be gradually 
revealed by the progress of cognitive science.
This does not mean that there is no role for characterizations of cognition: they 
can play high-level roles in intertheoretic integration, highlighting phenomena of 
interest, and summarizing the state of the art. For each of these roles, however, they 
are well-served by being imprecise and nonpartisan: features that the proposals of 
Corcoran and colleagues and Kiverstein and Sims lack.
Importantly, an insistence on targetless characterizations of cognition is not allied 
to a blanket ban on offering prescriptions to cognitive science. Instead, it suggests 
that prescriptions should be more fine-grained, more practical, and often more short 
term. Prescriptions for cognitive science are simply not best expressed as characteri-
zations of cognition.
Acknowledgments With thanks to Andy Clark and my reviewers, Julian Kiverstein and Colin Allen, for 
invaluable feedback on earlier versions of this piece.
Funding N/a.
Data availabilty N/a.
Code availabilty N/a.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest N/a.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is 
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission 
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen 
ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
Adams F (2018) Cognition wars. Stud History Philos Sci Part A 68:20–30
Adams F, Aizawa K (2001) The bounds of cognition. Philos Psychol 14(1):43–64
Adams F (2019) The elusive extended mind: extended information processing doesn’t equal extended 
mind. Andy Clark and his critics. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Adams F, Aizawa K (2010) Defending the bounds of cognition. In: Menary R (ed) The extended mind. 
MIT Press, Cambridge, pp 67–80
Aizawa K, Adams F (2005) Defending non-derived content. Philos Psychol 18(6):661–669. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1080/ 09515 08050 03551 86
Akagi M (2018) Rethinking the problem of cognition. Synthese 195(8):3547–3570. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ s11229- 017- 1383-2
Akagi M (2021) Cognition as the sensitive management of an agent’s behavior. Philos Psychol, pp 1–24. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 09515 089. 2021. 20148 02
 J. Gough 
1 31 Page 22 of 24
Allen C (2017) On (not) defining cognition. Synthese 194(11):4233–4249
Andrews M (2021) The math is not the territory: navigating the free energy principle. Biol Philos 
36(3):30. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10539- 021- 09807-0
Anscombe GEM (1957) Intention, vol 57. Harvard University Press, Harvard
Barandiaran X, Moreno A (2006) On what makes certain dynamical systems cognitive: a minimally cog-
nitive organization program. Adapt Behav 14(2):171–185
Beer RD (2021) Some historical context for minimal cognition. Adapt Behav 29(1):89–92. doi:https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 10597 12320 931595
Boden MA (2006) Mind as machine: a history of cognitive science. Clarendon Press; Oxford University 
Press, Oxford; New York
Brancazio N, Segundo-Ortin M, McGivern P (2020) Approaching minimal cognition: introduction to the 
special issue. Adapt Behav 28(6):401–405
Cappelen H (2018) Fixing language: an essay on conceptual engineering. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford
Chang H (2017) Epistemic iteration and natural kinds: realism and pluralism in taxonomy. Philosophical 
issues in Psychiatry IV: classification of Psychiatric Illness. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 
229–245
Chang H (2004) Inventing temperature: measurement and scientific progress. OUP, USA
Chang H (2012) Is water H2O? Evidence, realism and pluralism. Boston Studies in the Philosophy and 
History of Science
Chomsky N (2002) In: Belletti A, Rizzi L (eds) On nature and language. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge
Clark A (2011) Finding the mind. Philos Stud 152(3):447–461
Clark A, Chalmers D (1998) The extended mind. Analysis 58(1):7–19
Clark A (2010) Memento’s revenge: the extended mind extended. In: Menary R (ed) The extended mind. 
MIT Press, Cambridge, pp 43–66
Clark A, Toribio J (1994) Doing without representing? Synthese 101(3):401–431. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ BF010 63896
Clark A (2013) Mindware: an introduction to the philosophy of Cognitive Science. Oxford University 
Press, USA
Corcoran AW, Pezzulo G, Hohwy J (2020) From allostatic agents to counterfactual cognisers: active 
inference, biological regulation, and the origins of cognition. Biol Philos 35(3):32. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1007/ s10539- 020- 09746-2
Damásio A (1994) Descartes’ error: emotion, reason, and the human brain. Putnam Publishing, New York
Danziger K (1990) Constructing the subject: historical origins of psychological research. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge
Danziger K (1997) Naming the mind: how psychology found its Language. SAGE, London
Van Duijn M, Keijzer F, Franken D (2006) Principles of minimal cognition: casting cognition as sensori-
motor coordination. Adapt Behav 14(2):157–170
Figdor C (2017) On the proper domain of psychological predicates. Synthese 194(11):4289–4310
Figdor C (2018) Pieces of mind: the proper domain of psychological predicates. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford
Fine K (1975) Vagueness, truth and logic. Synthese 30(3–4):265–300
Friston K, Rigoli F, Ognibene D, Mathys C, Fitzgerald T, Pezzulo G (2015) Active inference and epis-
temic value. Cogn Neurosci 6(4):187–214. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 17588 928. 2015. 10200 53
Friston K (2012) A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy 14(11):2100–2121. Retrieved 
from https:// www. mdpi. com/ 1099- 4300/ 14/ 11/ 2100
Friston K (2013) Life as we know it. J Roy Soc Interface 10(86)
Godfrey-Smith P (1996) Complexity and the function of mind in Nature. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge
Godfrey-Smith P (2002a) Environmental complexity and the evolution of cognition. The evolution of 
intelligence. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, Mahwah, pp 223–249
Godfrey-Smith P (2016a) Individuality, subjectivity, and minimal cognition. Biol Philos 31(6):775–796
Godfrey-Smith P (2016b) Mind, Matter, and metabolism. J Philos 113(10):481–506
Godfrey-Smith P (2002b) Environmental complexity, signal detection, and the evolution of cognition. 
Cognit Animal Empirical Theor Perspect Animal Cogn, pp 135–141
Hacking I (2007) Natural kinds: rosy Dawn, Scholastic Twilight. Royal Inst Philos Suppl 61:203–239
1 3
Cognitive science meets the mark of the cognitive: putting…
Page 23 of 24 1
Haueis P (2021) A generalized patchwork approach to scientific concepts. Br J Philos Sci. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1086/ 716179
Hemeda S (2019) A foreword from the editor-in-Chief. J  Geol Res 1(1)
Hempel C (1969) Reduction: ontological and linguistic facets. In: Morgenbesser WSSPM (ed) Philoso-
phy, science, and method: essays in honor of Ernest Nagel. St Martin’s Press, New York
Hetmański M (2018) Archaeology of cognitive science: Michel Foucault’s model of the cognitive revolu-
tion. Roczniki Filozoficzne 66(3):7–32
Heyes C (2014) Submentalizing: i am not really reading your mind. Perspect Psychol Sci 9:131–143
Heyes C (2015) Animal mindreading: what’s the problem? Psychon Bull Rev 22(2):313–327. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 3758/ s13423- 014- 0704-4
Keijzer F (2021) Demarcating cognition: the cognitive life sciences. Synthese 198(1):137–157. 
doi:https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11229- 020- 02797-8
Lakatos I (1971) History of Science and its Rational Reconstructions. In: Buck RC, Cohen RS (eds) PSA 
1970: In memory of Rudolf Carnap proceedings of the 1970 Biennial Meeting Philosophy of Sci-
ence Association (pp.&nbsp;91–136). Springer, Netherlands
Leahey TH (2018) A history of psychology: from antiquity to modernity. Routledge, London
Lyon P (2006) The biogenic approach to cognition. Cogn Process 7(1):11–29. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s10339- 005- 0016-8
Lyon P (2020) Of what is “minimal cognition” the half-baked version? Adapt Behav 28(6):407–424. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 10597 12319 871360
Lyon P (2015) The cognitive cell: bacterial behavior reconsidered. Front Microbiol 6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
3389/ fmicb. 2015. 00264
Lyon P (2022) The study of the mind needs a Copernican shift in perspective | Aeon Essays. Retrieved 
from https:// aeon. co/ essays/ the- study- of- the- mind- needs-a- coper nican- shift- in- persp ective
Miller GA (2003) The cognitive revolution: a historical perspective. Trends Cogn Sci 7(3):141–144. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S1364- 6613(03) 00029-9
Millidge B, Tschantz A, Buckley CL (2021) Whence the expected free energy? Neural Comput 
33(2):447–482. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1162/ neco_a_ 01354
Neto C (2020) When imprecision is a good thing, or how imprecise concepts facilitate integration in biol-
ogy. Biol Philos 35(6):1–21
Newen A (2017) What are cognitive processes? An example-based approach. Synthese 194(11):4251–
4268. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11229- 015- 0812-3
Parr T, Friston KJ (2019) Generalised free energy and active inference. Biol Cybern 113(5):495–513. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00422- 019- 00805-w
Peirce CS (1878) How to make our ideas clear. Popular Sci Monthly 12(Jan):286–302
Pezzulo G, Rigoli F, Friston K (2015) Active inference, homeostatic regulation and adaptive behavioural 
control. Prog Neurobiol 134:17–35. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. pneur obio. 2015. 09. 001
Platts M (1979) Ways of meaning. Linguist Philos 4(1):141–156
Queloz M (2019) The points of concepts: their types, tensions, and connections. Can J Philos 
49(8):1122–1145
Ramsey WM (2017) Must cognition be representational? Synthese 194(11):4197–4214. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1007/ s11229- 014- 0644-6
Rose N (1985) The psychological complex: Social Regulation and the psychology of the individual. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, Chicago
Rupert RD (2013) Memory, natural kinds, and cognitive extension; or, Martians don’t remember, and 
Cognitive Science is not about Cognition. Rev Philos Psychol 4(1):25–47
Schliesser E (2019) Synthetic philosophy. Biol Philos 34(2):19. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s10539- 019- 9673-3
Sims M, Kiverstein J (2021) Is free-energy minimisation the mark of the cognitive? Biol Philos 
36(2):1–27
Smith R (1988) Does the history of psychology have a subject? History Human Sci 1(2):147–177
Spencer Q (2016) Genuine kinds and scientific reality. In: Kendig C (ed) Natural kinds and classification 
in scientific practice. Routledge, London
Thomasson AL (2020) A pragmatic method for normative conceptual work. In: Burgess A, Cappelen H, 
Plunkett D (eds) Conceptual engineering and conceptual ethics. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
pp 435–458
Varga S (2018) Demarcating the Realm of Cognition. J General Philos Sci/Zeitschrift für allgemeine 
Wissenschaftstheorie 49(3):435–450. Retrieved from http:// www. jstor. org/ stable/ 45176 490
 J. Gough 
1 31 Page 24 of 24
Villalobos M, Palacios S (2021) Autopoietic theory, enactivism, and their incommensurable marks of the 
cognitive. Synthese 198(1):71–87. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11229- 019- 02376-6
Wilson JM (2006) On characterizing the physical. Philos Stud 131(1):61–99. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s11098- 006- 5984-8
Wundt W (1907) Lectures on human and animal psychology (J. E. Creighton & E. B. Titchener, Trans.). 
Swan Sonnenschein & Co, London
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.