Physics of creation
Symmetry breaking, (en)active
inference, and unfolding statespaces
Avel Guénin—Carlut
KAIROS Research
avel@  kairos-  research  .org  
Abstract
Physical explanation relies on the description of natural systems through the construct
of “statespaces”, i.e. mathematical representations of the space of their accessible
states. By construction, a statespace representation must account for all determinants
of the target system’s evolution, and any change that it does not represent must be
held as causally irrelevant. Therefore, although statespace representation appears
necessary for formal tractability, it entails the reification of the physical symmetries
underlying the target system.
This is unproblematic if we hold to the Platonic belief in an ordered, legible
universe, whose activity is explained by well-defined  “natural  laws” imposing
observable symmetries onto Nature. However, this idea relates poorly to the life
sciences, where the organization that underlies system activity is clearly history-
ladden and context-sensitive. More precisely, life and mind seem permeated by the
phenomenon of  autopoiesis (or  self-creation),  in which  they  create  their  own
constitutive symmetries.
We discuss here the motivations of law-like explanation, and its intrinsic limitation to
account for “creation” in life and mind. We then draft a formal account derived
from the Free Energy Principle, rearticulated as a “statespace-free” theory of physical
observation  grounded  in  quantum  information  theory.  Finally,  we  discuss  the
implication of this treatment for our role as agents in constructing physical reality.
“No phenomenon is a phenomenon, until it is an observed phenomenon.”
John Archibald Wheeler
“Nothing is true, everything is permitted.”
Hassan-i Sabb hā
Introduction
The self-organization that underlies the existence of life have been the subject of
numerous  investigations  since  the  20th  century,  beginning  with  Schrödinger’s
discussion of life’s apparent ability to reverse the course of the second  law of
thermodynamics  by  maintaining  themselves  into  existence  (Schrodinger  1944).
Informally,  the  second  law  states  that  any  closed  system  can  only  (modulo
infinitesimal quantum / thermal fluctuations) become more disorganized with time. In
other words, they must therefore converge toward  configuration of maximal entropy
given their boundary conditions –  i.e. configurations that are incompatible with the
transient structure of life. The problem is dissolved by the realization that living
systems are open systems, which happen to maintain their structure ( i.e. maintain a
high  level  of  organization) by  dissipating  thermodynamic  gradient  in  their
environment. Perhaps dissipative structure exist precisely in virtue of their ability to
dissipate gradients efficiently, and the existence of convection cells, reaction-diffusion
processes, mind and life alike can be grounded in the principle of maximal entropy
production (Nicolis and Prigogine 1977; Swenson and Turvey 1991).
However productive they may be, these thermodynamical approaches miss by far the 
target of explaining mind and life. Unlike the kind of systems typically studied by 
physicists, living/cognitive systems show an intricate, multiscale structure whose 
sensibility to context abstract away from general regularities (Mitchell 2003). Most 
importantly, they continuously redefine their own structure and the way they couple 
with the world through a process of self-creation (or autopoiesis) (Maturana and 
Varela 2012). In other words, they do not operate within a given space of 
possibilities, but instead actively define and realize a space of “adjacent possibles” 
entailed by their constitutive symmetries and their modes of environmental coupling 
(Kauffman 2019). It has been argued this feature makes them inaccessible to physical 
representation, which is on the contrary based on the articulation of a statespace - 
i.e. a predefined set of variables which is to account for the evolution of the target 
system (Longo and Montévil 2013; Longo, Montévil, and Kauffman 2012). In other 
words, the creative nature of life and cognition cannot be consistently represented in 
a given mathematical space, and much less explained in a lawful, physics-like 
manner.
The Free Energy Principle (FEP), a recent attempt to formalize the dynamics of life 
and cognition (Friston 2010, 2012, 2019), takes a complimentary view by focusing on
the information-theoretic (rather than thermodynamic) properties of self-organizing 
systems. In the latest formulations at the date of writing (Da Costa et al. 2021; 
Friston 2019; Friston et al. 2022), the FEP boils down to a proof of existence of a 
synchronization manifold across any physical interface (formally, any Markov 
Blanket), which grounds a minimal notion of “active inference” where an agent’s 
internal states tracks its environment’s so as to bring about its favored sensorimotor 
states (i.e., those coherent with its continued existence). This set of formal results 
affords a dual understanding of cognition as the dynamical anticipation of 
sensorimotor flow, and life as self-organization toward states that satisfy constitutive 
biological constraints. While some insist Active Inference provides a sufficient account
of autopoiesis (M. Kirchhoff et al. 2018; Kiverstein, Kirchhoff, and Froese 2022), the 
FEP remains at the moment formulated in the same sort of closed statespaces as 
earlier thermodynamic principle, and is therefore structurally incapable to account for
creative evolution.
Prima facie, this argument is the last nail in the coffin of the Free Energy Principle 
as a relevant framework to study mind and life. Indeed, previous arguments against 
the validity of the FEP as a framework to study mind and life only motivated the 
development of its mathematical formulation. For example, its argued lack of 
interactional asymmetry and applicability to linear edge cases (Aguilera et al. 2021) 
could be addressed by relaxing the Markov Blanket construct (Sakthivadivel 2022c), 
and the absence of historicity in its states formulation (Colombo and Palacios 2021; 
Di Paolo, Thompson, and Beer 2021) may be addressed in the near future by the 
development of its path-integral formulation (as proposed in Ramstead et al. (2022)). 
What in at stake in the present account is the very possibility of meaningfully 
representing living/cognitive systems within dynamical systems theory – or any other 
mathematical representation in a “closed” statespace. However, I suggest that the 
duality between informational and structural properties of complex systems which 
have recently been formalized in terms of an entropic and free-energy functional 
(Ramstead et al. 2022; Sakthivadivel 2022b) affords a mathematical theory of 
statespace unfolding as symmetry construction, understood as an expression of the 
target system’s agency.
If this argument is warranted, the FEP provides a sufficient account of the grounding
of autopoiesis in physical formalism. The process by which complex adaptive systems 
integrate and enact expectations about their perceived reality simply circles back to 
recreate the symmetries that constitute them. However, this result is not specific to 
biological and cognitive statespaces, and can arguably ground a minimal cosmology 
underlying the unfolding of physical symmetries more generally (in the line of 
Alexander et al. (2021) – which could be more accurately renamed “the Autopoietic 
Universe”). The postulated role of cognitive agency in statespace construction outlines
a new physics of creation, conflicting radically with the Platonic intuition of a legible
universe and with the corresponding “lawful” model of scientific explanation. In 
particular, this radical new approach commits us to a specific epistemological and 
ontological view named “participatory realism” (Froese 2022; Fuchs 2017), entailing 
that physical reality is constructed by the processes of observation by which it 
appears to observers (human or otherwise). Importantly, while this account originates
from the discipline of cognitive science, it cannot be dismissed as a simple 
panpsychist or anthropomorphic projection as it emerges naturally from the role of 
the observer in cosmological evolution.
I first discuss the meaning of creation as symmetry unfolding/statespace construction,
and its principled opposition to a cosmological belief in a legible universe. Then, I
will expose the confusions underlying the attempt to account for creative dynamics in
living/cognitive systems using lawful explanations, as exemplified by the Critical
Brain/Life  Hypothesis.  I  then  show  how  the  Free  Energy  Principle  affords  a
conceptual understanding of symmetry unfolding in life and mind, while falling short
of translating this understanding into formal results. I thereafter discuss the possibility
of reformulating the Free Energy Principle as a sufficient and self-coherent account of
creation in physics, in line with existing results in quantum physics and cosmological
evolution. Finally, I expose the meaning of such a theory for our understanding of
physical reality, life, mind, and  –  crucially –  of our own knowledge. Those
arguments will collectively bear doubt over the very coherence of the scientific
enterprise, at least in the disembodied conception we have inherited from the modern
era. They should nonetheless be considered, as they constitute a necessary first stone
toward the articulation of a purely naturalistic and integrated understand of physical
reality.
1 – Explaining creation away: scientific laws
and unfolding symmetries
Our aim here is to define the target of the article by  exposing in what sense
“creation” is a key property of  biological / cognitive systems, and to establish why
the classical physicalist program of lawful explanation is structurally incapable of
explaining (or even, as we will argue, of representing) it. Indeed, biological /
cognitive systems are precisely defined by their ability for self-creation, which enables
them to escape the framing of natural laws and closed mathematical representations.
We argue that core features of mind and life are not accessible to the program of
lawful explanation, which necessitates a shift in our approach to mathematical
representation – what we call a physics of creation. We will reflect critically on the
cognitive patterns that have shaped Western history to demonstrate why the framing
of lawful explanation is prevalent in contemporary science, and why it  is by
construction inadequate for the purpose of formally accounting for creation in mind
and life. This account will serve to ground the notion of “creation” that the present
article aims to account for, as well as the basic epistemological framework in which
this question is articulated.
What we hereby call “lawful explanation” is an consequence of a more fundamental 
belief in an ordered, legible cosmos. This dual system of belief and inference seems 
to have emerged in Ancient Greek societies, as an extension of the Indo-European 
cosmology (Lent 2017)). The core idea is that, if all natural phenomena exist in 
virtue of basic principles that underlie all things, then we can call upon “natural 
laws” to explain them. Trivially, defending or using lawful explanation entails two 
grounding positions without which the approach is entirely incoherent: 1) that there 
exist robust, acontextual, measurable regularities in nature that can be accounted for 
in terms of laws; 2) that the statement of those laws is genuinely explanatory of the 
observable facts entailed by the regularity. Both can be attacked independently: there
could be no acontextual regularity to call upon for explaining natural phenomena (as 
was famously argued by Hume (Henderson 2020)), or those regularities can lack the 
relevant properties to be properly explanatory.
The generic category of lawful explanation has been formalized recently in the 
context of the logical empiricist movement as the “deductive-nomological” model of 
scientific explanation. It essentially reduces to the explanation of individual facts by 
deducing them from general laws (as inferred either from first principle or from the 
observation of aforementioned facts) (Woodward 2021). This is a good illustration of 
how the physical sciences generally operate. We look for guiding regularities in the 
organization of matter, we try to formulate them as natural laws in an unambiguous 
scientific language, and then we predict observable facts from those laws. It is critical
to emphasize that this framework must conceive of laws as “natural facts” for them 
to be properly explanatory: they cannot reduce to simple heuristics, but need to be 
actual preexisting constraints in virtue of which observable phenomenon take the 
form they do. We are therefore supposed to revise them any time we observe some 
event that contradicts their predictions - unless we can conclude that our predictions 
were not, in fact, entailed by the relevant law (as discussed in the debates over 
falsification, see Chalmers (2013) for a contextualized discussion).
It is now generally accepted by epistemologist and practitioners alike that this model 
of explanation applies poorly to biological / cognitive systems. We do not expect to 
find any “law of eels” under which all eel behavior would fall. Instead, we study 
biological and cognitive mechanisms which can explain some regularities in eel 
behavior (Boone and Piccinini 2016). This strategy is developed under the umbrella of
structural-mechanistic explanation, which attribute regularities in the activity of 
biological / cognitive systems to the particular structure that produces it in the 
specific context that it does (Bechtel 2009; Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2005) rather than
to preexisting scientific laws (Mitchell 2003, chap. 5). For example, we do not 
explain the fact cognitive agents tend to follow course of actions that are statistically 
associated to reward by calling upon a “law of reinforcement” but by calling upon 
the integrated activity of brain dynamics (and most specifically of the Default Mode 
Network (Dohmatob, Dumas, and Bzdok 2020)). The question underlying scientific 
explanation therefore shifts from the articulation of laws held to meaningfully capture
existing constraints to the discovery and cartography of the structure of the target 
system and of its context of activity (Bechtel 2008; Mitchell 2003). 
Importantly, the dichotomy between deductive-nomological and structural-mechanistic
explanation can be reframed in terms of the ontological status we grant to the
relevant  physical symmetries . Formally, symmetries are defined with regard to a
transformation  group.  By  construction,  a  transformation  group  is  a  set  of
transformation which contains the inverse of every member transformation, the
chained composition of any series of components, and a neutral element that is the
result of any transformation chained to its inverse. A physical or mathematical system
is said to be symmetric relative to a given transformation group if and only if it is
invariant under any transformation in this group.  For example, Newton’s laws of
motion are symmetric under Galilean transformation - which means that their
application gives the same trajectory in any set of reference frames that differ only
by constant relative motion. Although this is an extension of the mathematical
concept, biological structure entails invariance with regard to some transformation
groups. Trivially, the relevant structure must be invariant throughout the time of the
studied phenomenon, and the system trajectory must be invariant with regard to the
set of transformation which conserve structure (e.g. permutation of functionally
identical molecules).
Interestingly, Noether’s theorem, a central result in physical mathematics, associates
any continuous symmetry in a conservative system to a law of conservation for a
given quantity. In other words, natural laws expressed in closed systems can in most
cases be derived from the existence of an underlying symmetry group. For example,
explanations calling onto conservation of energy implicitly call onto time invariance
of their system’s equations of motion, which underlies the conservation of energy.
This allow us to relate the success of deductive-nomological explanation as an
epistemic strategies to the existence of actual physical constraints. In the same way,
explanations calling onto the structure of the ear drum implicitly call onto the
invariance of its structure against time translations or transformations which do not
affect said structure. Therefore, structural-mechanistic explanation also implicitly call
upon the existence of underlying symmetries, although symmetries of a different kind.
While  physical  symmetries  are  generally  understood  to  preexist  any  singular
instantiation, biological symmetries are clearly tied to the specific structure and
history of the target system. In other words, while deductive-nomological explanation
calls upon symmetries that are pre-physical universal facts, structural-mechanistic
explanation calls onto symmetries that are constructed through a system’s activity.
The structural-mechanistic kind of explanation is therefore essentially entailed by the 
nature of biological / cognitive systems. Physical explanation under the deductive-
nomological model of explanation critically relies on a predefined “statespace” which
encompasses all relevant variables for representing the system activity. This statespace
enables the definition of physical symmetries as a mathematical construct, but also 
necessitates by construction that the target system be symmetric under any 
transformation that maintains the statespace representation. However, biological / 
cognitive systems are precisely characterized by the fact their constitutive symmetries 
(i.e. biological constraints) are continuously reconstructed by metabolic activity as 
canalized by the aforementioned symmetries themselves (Montévil and Mossio 2015; 
Moreno and Mossio 2015). In other words, life is defined by the phenomenon we 
have called “creation” – i.e. by the fact that it actively escapes from statespace 
representation, as its symmetries are continuously unfolding under its own activity. 
Because deductive-nomological explanations can only be articulated within a given 
statespace, the phenomenon of creation falls by construction outside its realm, which 
negates the possibility of explaining the specific properties of biological / cognitive 
systems under entailing laws (Kauffman 2019; Longo, Montévil, and Kauffman 2012). 
Of course, it does not follow that there can be no universal regularities of 
biological / cognitive organization, or that general statements cannot have any 
explanatory value whatsoever. However, this explanatory value is essentially limited 
to constraining the space of structural-mechanistic possibilities (Green and Jones 
2016), rather than directly entailing system activity as they are conceived to do 
under the physics-oriented deductive-nomological model of explanation. In systems 
that continuously redefine their own structure and the activity they produce, 
regularities are to be considered a target rather than a source of explanation. Most 
importantly, such constraining principles fall very short of explaining the key aspect 
of biological / cognitive systems, i.e. self-creation, for the very reasons exposed 
above. We will turn to illustrate this point in the example of the physical formalism 
of “criticality”, under the banner of which some have tried to formalize the creative 
aspect of life and cognition under the (Aguilera and Bedia 2018; Bullmore and Sporns
2009; Hesse and Gross 2014; Longo and Montévil 2013; Safron, Klimaj, and Hipólito 
2022; Shew and Plenz 2013) – a state of near-chaos that matter display near 
continuous phase transition.
2 – The Critical Brain Hypothesis: a case
study
Let us first explain how “criticality”, a concept emanating from the study of phase
transitions in material science, came to a prominent role in biology and neurology.
Phase  transition  is  the  process  by  which  systems  change  their  macroscopic
organization as represented by an “order parameter” in response to a shift in a
macroscopic variable known as “control parameter”. The simplest, most analytically
tractable  case study of phase transition  is the Ising model, meant to model the
behavior of a ferromagnetic material. Below its so-called Curie temperature, the spins
of a ferromagnetic material are aligned and it produces an observable electromagnetic
field. Above that threshold, the spins are random, and their influence average out so
that the material does not produce any field. Therefore, an order parameter (spin
alignment) displays discontinuity in function of a control parameter (temperature)
with observable macro manifestations (electromagnetic field production). The Ising
model (as well as the ferromagnetism it aims to represent) is a case of continuous
phase transition, i.e. one where free energy is continuous in function of the control
parameter. This is in contrast to cases where a discrete amount of energy must be
injected into  the system at the transition threshold, as for example in water
solidification / liquefaction at atmospheric pressure.
Near a continuous phase transition, physical systems display a set of features 
collectively known as “criticality”. In short, criticality occurs when an ordering force
(e.g. coupling) and a disordering force (e.g. thermal diffusion) are exactly balanced. 
In this regime, local fluctuations are not suppressed (as in the ordered case) or 
inconsequential (as in the disordered case), but they are amplified through system 
activity. This extreme susceptibility to (internal or external) perturbations causes 
massive switches in the system organization called “avalanches”, which lead the 
system to organize into fractal substructures. As the typical mean-field (Landau) 
approach averages out local fluctuations, physicist had to develop the multi-scale 
renormalization group methodology to correctly predict the behavior of system near 
critical transitions (Wilson 1975, 1983). In particular, they noted that those displayed 
self-similar scaling (i.e. long range power-law patterns of temporal and spatial 
correlations, also know as fractality) with universal coefficient across large classes of 
system (Christensen and Moloney 2005; Stanley 1999). Consequently, physicist Per 
Bak and his colleagues proposed to explain the ubiquity of self-similar scaling in the 
universe by calling onto the self-organization of physical system toward critical phase
transitions (Bak and Chen 1989, 1991; Bak, Tang, and Wiesenfeld 1987).
The paradigmatic example of self-organized criticality is the avalanche phenomenon 
(Christensen and Moloney 2005, chap. 3), where some potential is accumulated by 
the system and randomly dissipated through large (power-law distributed) 
fluctuations. In other words, avalanche models are dissipative systems displaying 
critical phase transition, whose control parameter is driven by an externally imposed 
potential flow and whose order parameter reflects the expected speed of potential 
dissipation. As near-zero dissipation below the criticality threshold allow potential to 
build up gradually and finite dissipation above this threshold drives it down quickly, 
such systems are trivially attracted toward their critical transition – hence the name 
of Self-Organized Criticality. Interestingly, this family of models include the stylized 
sandpile and forest fire model (where the control parameter is the number of 
elements within a set, and dissipation is driven by the density of set elements), but 
also relatively realist percolation model of brain activity with adaptive susceptibility. 
This enabled scientists to articulate Self-Organized Criticality as a candidate theory to
explain the self-similar distribution of neuronal “avalanches” characteristic of brain 
activity (Beggs and Plenz 2003; D. R. Chialvo and Bak 1999; Dante R. Chialvo 2004, 
2010; Stassinopoulos and Bak 1995). The Critical Brain Hypothesis was born.
Scientists began to suggest that criticality in the brain may not only explain the self-
similar pattern of brain dynamics, but also their adaptive features themselves (Beggs 
2008; Gautam et al. 2015; Kinouchi and Copelli 2006; Safron, Klimaj, and Hipólito 
2022; Shew et al. 2009, 2011; Shew and Plenz 2013). Indeed, dynamical complexity 
and discriminative sensibility to stimuli are trivially maximized near a critical 
transition. Let us take a percolation model of brain activity, which models neuronal 
activity as binary states propagating from a given point. If the average number of 
neurons triggered by a given neuron firing is well below one, no patterns of 
activation can be triggered by small events or maintained through time. If it is well 
above one, all neurons fire all the time (in the limit of physiological constraints) 
regardless of stimuli. Therefore, the brain must maintain an average susceptibility 
close to one to be able to selectively respond to stimuli or maintain a given pattern 
of activity. Since percolation is an instance of continuous phase transition with regard
to connection density, it must in other words remain poised in a critical regime.
Let us note that the complex phenomenology of critical systems affords a richer 
characterization in terms of unfolding symmetries. Both above and below a critical 
transition, system dynamics are symmetric with regard to the permutation of any 
component or regions. In the ordered case, all component or regions have the same 
spin; in the disordered case, the spin may vary at the individual scale but the 
average spin within any region remains 0 regardless of perturbation. But in the 
critical region, any permutation between components or regions that do strictly have 
the same makeup may lead to a catastrophic avalanche at any given scale. Therefore,
the permutation symmetry holds only within coherent regions. In addition to this, the
contour of coherent regions is contingent on the reorganization of the system during 
permutations or avalanches, and therefore the system’s symmetry is itself contingent 
on its evolution. In other words, the critical system’s symmetries are themselves 
defined by its endogenous fluctuations rather than being predefined. This pattern of 
multi-scale symmetry unfolding is the core motivation behind the renormalization 
methodology, which captures statistical invariants of the underlying process.
Some scholars noted that this enables the interpretation of criticality as a basic 
physical model for biological autopoiesis. Aguilera and Di Paolo (2021) insists for 
example that criticality “can capture cognitive relevant properties” such as agent-
environment asymmetry, robust adaptiveness, and most importantly a high level of 
integrated information (a proposed measure of cognitive ability consciousness), and 
therefore bears a stronger relation with cognitive processes than a simple analogy. 
But some authors presented the even stronger argument that biological organization 
was itself an instance of critical phenomenon (Aguilera and Bedia 2018; Aguilera and 
Di Paolo 2021; Longo and Montévil 2013; Longo, Montévil, and Pocheville 2012). As 
Buiatti and Longo (2013) put it: “[An organism] is critical in the sense, in particular,
that it continually changes symmetries by breaking existing symmetries and 
constructing new ones”. As the citation illustrates, this literature generally redefines 
criticality as symmetry unfolding, then calls onto it as an a priori nomological 
explanation for all such instances (see e.g. (Aguilera and Di Paolo 2021; Longo and 
Montévil 2013; Mora and Bialek 2011; Muñoz 2018)).
However, even early proponents of the Critical Brain Hypothesis agree that criticality 
has a specific physical meaning distinct from critical-like phenomenology (Beggs and 
Timme 2012). Criticality is by construction a distinct phenomenon, produced by a 
continuous phase transition with well-defined control and order parameters. However,
it is dubious whether we could identify an integrated control parameter in the form 
of coupling strength 1.  Critical-like susceptibility and scale-invariance 2 in the brain 
may be explained by multiple other mechanisms than critical transition (Markovi  ć
and Gros 2014; Mitzenmacher 2004; Newman 2005; Stumpf and Porter 2012) - such 
as such as correlated noise, variants of rich-get-richer mechanisms (Barabàsi and 
Bonabeau 2003; Sornette 1998), structural constraints (Savage et al. 2004), scale 
separation (Proekt et al. 2012), uncorrelated chaos (Touboul and Destexhe 2017) or 
1 Shew et al. (2009, 2011) does suggest a strong candidate for a control parameter by showing that 
brain activation could be manipulated through the balance of excitatory vs inhibitory connections. 
However, this hypothesis could not be meaningfully traduced within a computational model. See 
Muñoz (2018), sec. IV.A for a discussion of several interpretations of phase transitions in neural 
systems - most are informal and lack an association to a well-defined control parameter, in the 
image of Kauffman’s reappropriation of the “edge of chaos”.
2 Assuming that patterns of neuronal activations are indeed scale-invariant, which is itself debated 
(Beggs and Timme 2012; Markovi  and Gros 2014, sec. 5.2; Touboul and Destexhe 2010)ć .
network optimization (Carlson and Doyle 1999, 2000; Markovi  and Gros 2014)ć  (e.g. 
instantiated by Hebbian learning (Levina, Herrmann, and Geisel 2007, 2009; Uhlig et 
al. 2013)). Most importantly, activation density (the suggested order parameter for the
brain) is not in itself the explanatory target, but is only a precondition to adaptive 
information processing. Therefore, criticality is at best a non-explanatory nomological
account of symmetry unfolding in the brain, and only obscures its far-from-
equilibrium, organized nature.
Indeed, unfolding symmetries in critical systems are a result of the contingent 
multiscale amplification of local perturbations. On the contrary, the complex 
fluctuations of living and cognitive systems participate to the active maintenance and 
(re)production of the system’s structural identity. It is true that criticality theory 
provides a useful statistical model of symmetry unfolding, as well as the powerful 
renormalization group methodology to study this phenomenon analytically and 
empirically. However, it only predicts a very simple regularity: the wild patterns of 
fluctuations displayed by critical systems. Biological and cognitive systems do display 
such wild fluctuations, but unlike in critical systems those fluctuations are constrained
by their underlying organization so as to preserve their existence. In other words, 
reproducing the wild statistical patterns of biological and cognitive systems in simpler
models is not sufficient to explain symmetry unfolding in life and mind, we must 
also and above all study how they harness such patterns into maintaining their own 
organization - in other words, why is there ordo ab chaos. We will therefore turn to 
a theory that addresses just this question by formulating a formal account of the 
emergence of form and meaning in far-from-equilibrium dynamical systems: the Free 
Energy Principle.
3 – Of constraints and semantics: introducing
the Free Energy Principle
The Free Energy Principle (FEP), and the related Active Inference Framework (ActInf),
emerged recently from the study of the mechanisms of cognition and their underlying
physics. Both stem from a variational method for approximate Bayesian inference, 
based on the minimization of Variational Free Energy (VFE) given a model of / 
constraint over the posterior distribution. It was postulated that the brain functions 
through a similar process of error minimization over prediction of the sensorimotor 
flow (Friston 2010), which motivated the development of a mechanical model of 
neurocognitive inference (ActInf) (Friston et al. 2016). ActInf formalists thereafter 
attempted to demonstrate from first principle that Active Inference is entailed by the 
physics of self-organization in any far-from-equilibrium dynamical system, leading to 
the development of the mathematical framework of the FEP (Friston 2012). More 
precisely, the FEP aims to describe how every single “thing” (understood as a system
with a stable structure and interface) implicitly entails a variational model of its 
environment (Friston 2018), and therefore “creates meaning” through the statistics of
the dynamical attractor of its coupled agent-environment dynamics.
Let us introduce two closed physical systems A and E, each characterized by a set of 
stochastic differential equations. Trivially, both admit attracting distributions pA/E in 
the form of solution to their respective Fokker-Planck equations, and pA/E is 
statistically independent with regard to pE/A - they are symmetric with regard to any 
operator affecting the other only. Let us now introduce B, a physical interface 
between A and E which mediate interaction between the two 3. Given the interaction,
both pA and pE remain statistically independent from each other, but as conditioned 
on pB 4. This introduces the concept of a Markov blanket as a “real” physical entity,
as generally discussed in the FEP literature. Trivially, the introduction of a physical 
interface entails symmetry breaking as pA/E need remain symmetric only for 
transformations over pE/A that do not translate into changes in pB. In the latest 
canonical treatment of the FEP to date, symmetry breaking was demonstrated to 
entail the emergence of a synchronization manifold which associate to each state in B
the expected corresponding states in A/E (Da Costa et al. 2021).
3 It is not trivially adequate to postulate a priori the partition between A and E, as the FEP entails 
the emergence of the partition from patterns of statistical independence in a system’s attracting 
distribution. However, it is most consistent with the interpretation of the FEP as a theory of 
physical observation developed in Fields et al. (2021), which will ground the discussion of 
statespace construction in part. 4.
4 Crucially, condition independence in this scenario is verified by attracting distribution, but not by 
individual states or trajectories. See (Parr et al. 2021).
This synchronization manifold and the underlying dynamics constitute the formal core
of the FEP. Indeed, it underlies the emergence of an “information geometry” where 
every possible state of the agent meaningfully entails a statistical distribution over 
states of environment, which entail a Bayesian belief about the causes of their 
perceivable blanket states (Parr, Da Costa, and Friston 2020). More specifically, the 
states in A minimize an information-theoretic value known as “variational free-
energy” (VFE) over states in B, hereby performing variational Bayesian inference (Da 
Costa et al. 2021). This entails a form of optimal (Bayesian) inference given 
approximations of the process underlying data generation, approximations which are 
generally understood to represent intrinsic limits in the agent’s computational 
abilities. Partitioning further B states between sensory states (that are influenced only
by states in E) and active states (that are influenced by states in A), it appears that 
the agent’s internal states (A) and B’s active states together minimize variational free 
energy over B’s sensory states (Da Costa et al. 2021). This means that the agent does
not passively infer probable causes over its sensory states, but actively samples 
sensory states in a way that enforces conformity with its expectations in a process 
described as “self-evidencing”.
Crucially, this form of inference has little to do with the explicitly representational 
cognitivist model of inference, as it corresponds to the active demarch by the 
blanketed system to maintain a sensorimotor flow consistent with the expectations 
implicitly entailed by its structure (Bruineberg, Kiverstein, and Rietveld 2018; Inês 
Hipólito et al. 2021; Nave et al. 2020; Ramstead, Kirchhoff, and Friston 2020). More 
precisely, self-evidencing corresponds to the attraction of the coupled system toward 
the region of the synchronization manifold as a result of a dissipative gradient 
descent on variational free energy. Because the internal section of the manifold is 
equipped with an information metric, and since each internal state implicitly encodes
a variational distribution over external states, states within the internal manifold can 
be interpreted as Bayesian belief over external states (Friston et al. 2022). This 
motivates a minimal theory of cognitive meaning grounded on biological normativity 
(Allen and Friston 2018; Constant, Clark, and Friston 2021; Kiverstein, Kirchhoff, and
Froese 2022; Ramstead, Friston, and Hipólito 2020) – i.e. the ability of the blanketed
system to regulate dynamical flows so as to maintain its constitutive identity (in the 
form of the validity of the expectations implicitly entailed by its structure).
To fully understand the meaning of this theory, we need to delve into its most recent
formalization in Sakthivadivel (2022b, 2022a). To simplify, the FEP can be formalized
as a least action principle in the sense that any modal trajectory of the coupled 
system must minimizes the integral of the VFE functional (Friston et al. 2022). This 
enables the formulation of a corrective “gauge” force (Ramstead et al. 2022; 
Sengupta et al. 2016), which appears to extrinsically enforce the intrinsic symmetries 
of the VFE within statespaces that do not account for those symmetries. This is 
similar, for example, to the way the electromagnetic force emerges as a corrective 
term in statespaces that do not translate local phase symmetry in Schrödinger’s 
equation. This gauge force, by construction, traduces the effects of the “beliefs” (or 
expectations) entailed by the synchronization manifold and the information metric it 
is equipped with. Most interestingly, those forces can be mapped onto structural 
constraints over system viability, providing a natural grounding for earlier 
theorizations of the continuity between mind and life under the FEP (M. Kirchhoff et 
al. 2018; M. D. Kirchhoff and Froese 2017).
However impressive these results are, the debate on whether they constitute a 
meaningful grounding of cognitive meaning in biological autonomy is still alive and 
well. So far, most criticism has focused on the lack of historicity in the FEP (Di 
Paolo, Thompson, and Beer 2021), as well as as the adequacy of the Markov blanket 
construct to account for the coupling between biological / cognitive systems and their
environment (Aguilera et al. 2021; Raja et al. 2021). However, this line of criticism 
could be addressed without any major problem by highlighting that the FEP also 
applies to system with historically contingent trajectories (Da Costa et al. 2021; Parr 
et al. 2021), and calling for the development of its path-integral formulation (as 
foreshadowed in Ramstead et al. (2022)). More problematic is the fact that the ActInf
notion of meaning and biological autonomy are directly entailed by the properties of 
the attracting distributions, and therefore by the equations defining a priori the target
dynamical system. Therefore, the FEP currently fails to account for the fact that 
biological constraints and cognitive meaning are not fixed by the system’s structure, 
but continuously unfolding under its active (re)production of the underlying 
organization 5. 
The debate over the adequacy of the FEP to formally account for the properties of 
biological autonomy and cognitive meaning has elicited an interesting answer in 
ActInf theorists. While a minority still holds that the FEP actually represents those 
phenomena (Kiverstein, Kirchhoff, and Froese 2022), most have retreated to some 
variant of a non-realist interpretation of the theory, in which the target system either
does not actually follow the required conditions or does so only as an instrumental / 
a posteriori characterization of their behavior (Andrews 2020; Baltieri, Buckley, and 
Bruineberg 2020; Constant 2021; van Es 2020; van Es and Hipolito 2020; Friston, 
Wiese, and Hobson 2020; Ines Hipólito 2019; Ramstead, Friston, and Hipólito 2020). 
This body of work is characterized by the claim that systems behave as if minimizing
VFE – see Ramstead, Sakthivadivel, and Friston (2022) for an articulation of the 
5 Although this specific issue may very well be addressed by ongoing work on relaxing the Markov 
blanket construct (Sakthivadivel 2022c), the meaning we can represent remains constrained by the 
embedding statespace in which we represent the system. The underlying problem therefore applies,
up to consideration that will be detailed part. 4.
state-of-the-art position. While easily defensible, this instrumentalist interpretation 
hardly ground the widespread claim that the FEP constitutes a meaningful 
explanation to the activity of living and cognitive systems – much less the 
mathematical proof of existence of an actual physical force. To some extent, the 
discussion is confused by the fact the FEP is not a model of any given physical 
system, but a first principle / physical imperative: much like the least action 
principle, it necessarily holds true – if we can identify an appropriate statespace to 
model the target system.
Therefore, the FEP may provide a mathematically motivated theory of cognitive 
meaning, but the statespace problem still applies - much like it does for any 
nomological or structural-mechanistic explanation. Whether or not the FEP applies to 
life and mind, it may only explain the behavior states or trajectories within a given 
statespace. The way life and mind endogenously redefine their constitutive 
symmetries is at worst ignored and at best held to be entailed by the primordial 
statespace of the universe. Again, the problem is framed by presupposing a fixed 
landscape of possibilities, and creation is explained away. However, a key difference 
exists between the FEP and any other physical principle: its core construct (VFE) is 
not defined as a function of objective observables of the target system (such as their 
energy, position, or momentum), but of the meaning they project onto their reality. 
This property may be used directly to claim that the FEP grounds the notion of 
cognitive meaning, but it may also be turned on its head so as to ground statespace 
construction into the subjective experience of a physical agent. We will now follow 
this path to articulate the FEP as a candidate first principle for a new physics of 
creation. 
4 – Toward a physics of creation: statespace
unfolding under the Free Energy Principle
Although the formal content of the FEP does not account for the contingency of 
biological organization and cognitive meaning, it would be misleading to claim that it
ignores symmetry unfolding. VFE minimization was initially introduced in 
neuroscience to help infer the causal structure underlying the notoriously wild brain 
dynamics. The most recent approach that FEP theorists have developed to address the
transient structure of brain fluctuation, as discussed in K. J. Friston et al. (2020), 
explicitly borrows the renormalization methodology we discussed part. 2 in relation 
to criticality theory. Roughly speaking, the partition between particles equipped with 
internal and blanket states is inferred from patterns in endogenous brain fluctuations 
measured in experimental settings as well as prior knowledge in structural brain 
connections. The dynamical coupling within and between particles is then inferred. 
The operations are then reiterated with a renormalized statespace reduced to each 
particle and their dominant dynamical mode, until a given scale finally captures a 
dynamical structure capable to produce wild dynamics (here, positive Lyapunov 
coefficients) The dynamical structure hereby inferred is taken to be explanatory of the
integrated behavior of the brain, and of associated biological / cognitive dynamics.
The key fact of relevance here is inferring the actual Markov blankets as defined in 
part. 3 would necessitate to measure the “actual” attracting distribution of brain 
dynamics, which agglomerates information about all their possible dynamical modes. 
However, since brain dynamics are transient, we can only infer the partition given 
the realization of a given dynamical mode (or set thereof) that happens to be enacted
at the time of the experiment. This could easily be written off as a simple 
experimental limitation, that will progressively dissolve with the methodological 
development of fine-grained, long-term, in eco brain imagery (see Guénin--Carlut 
(2020) for further discussion). However, this would only displace the underlying 
problem. If Markov blankets are taken to be the physical interface enabling 
sensorimotor coupling in biological and cognitive systems, then they are constructed  
by the activity of the system itself rather than predefined by its structure. This 
naturally entails the condition of interactional asymmetry in agency, as well as the 
role of attention in modulating sensorimotor coupling so as to accommodate different
tasks 6. I argue hereby that Markov Blankets should accordingly be understood as the
expression of transient dynamical modes, and that the underlying mathematics would 
allow us to draft a solution to the statespace problem. 
6 See e.g. Parr and Friston (2019) for an active inference account of attention 
Let us reframe the argument formally. If the posterior distribution q parametrized by 
the agent’s internal states is held to formalize cognitive meaning, then it has to be 
defined over states the agent makes sense of (i.e. that it observes so as to decide of 
its course of action (Fields and Levin 2020)). Such observation entails by construction
physical measurement, i.e. the transfer of information from external to internal states,
and vice-versa. By Landauer’s principle, it must therefore dissipate a given amount of
free energy. In other words, for any given information to affect an agent’s behavior, 
some other information must become unobservable as it is burned as fuel. Assuming 
we operate within a physically closed statespace, this means that the partition of 
states where q is defined (i.e. that can affect the agent’s behavior) is constructed by 
the history of its interactions with the environment, and with it the synchronization 
manifold that underlies cognitive meaning. Assuming on the contrary that we operate
within a statespace that is constructed to include cognitively relevant states only, 
then it is the statespace itself that must be constructed by the system’s history.
This motivates a focus switch from the dynamics in an abstracted statespace to the 
physical process of measurement itself, as formalized in quantum information theory 
by Fields et al. (2021) 7. Assuming an isolated quantum system that is partitioned 
between separable 8 subparts A and E, the physical interaction at the interface 
reduces to a sum of binary questions. Agent-environment asymmetry emerges here as 
a subsystem (say A)’s internal dynamics break the symmetry of the physical interface 
by dictating which boundary states drive meaningful information, which are burned 
as fuel, and which encode a coarse-grained classical memory – effectively dictating 
the terms of the interaction. Each question asked by A entails the preparation of the 
target states within a given quantum reference frame as conditioned by the agent’s 
internal dynamics (e.g. by individuating the states it aims to measure). This 
progressively drives the alignment between A and E’s reference frames, which 
therefore become mutually entangled. In this context, the FEP can be reframed as the
statement that interacting quantum systems are driven toward mutual entanglement 
and therefore their disappearance as separable systems.
We must note here that there is a clear conflict with the classical formulation of the 
FEP, where separability (as entailed by MB coherence) is on the contrary a property 
of the attracting set of the system. But assuming that the FEP is self-standing account
of physical measurement (understood here as the semantic embedding of physical 
interaction), the distinction dissolves immediately. Indeed, any observable states must
then be encoded in the synchronization dynamics through a Markov Blanket (more 
precisely, within the information geometry of the synchronization manifold it entails).
7 See also Tegmark (2012) and Fields and Glazebrook (2020) for earlier treatments unrelated to the 
FEP.
8 “Separable” means here that they are not entangled, i.e. that their physical states can in principle
be measured independently.
Therefore, all functionally significant states of a system are somehow entailed by the 
information available at its interface with the wider world (consistently with the 
holographic principle, see Fields et al. (2021) sec. 2.3). Therefore, the existence of 
individuated states or trajectories can be relaxed, and we fall back to the quantum 
information formulation. In this framework, the observable dynamics of the system 
depend on the reference frames/information geometry it develops in its coupling with
the wider world. But as those are themselves constructed by the system’s internal 
dynamics, we are left with only one possible basis to construct our physical ontology:
the synchronization dynamic itself.
This substantiates a variant of Markov monism, as developed in (Friston, Wiese, and 
Hobson 2020), where generalized synchronization (as described by the FEP) grounds 
the construction of physical symmetries 9. As systems synchronize across a given 
physical interface, entanglement/synchronization destroys their ability to observe 
states inconsistent with their shared information geometries. The states it entails then
emerges as a proper physical observable with locally defined quantum fields, which 
topology and coupling with other observables are defined by the structure of 
observation itself. Crucially, this process grounds the emergence of subjective time as 
the system’s entropy rises at each observation cycle and the agent progressively 
becomes unable to differentiate itself from its environment (Fields et al. 2021, sec. 
2.2). Therefore, it constitutes a candidate explanation for the cosmological evolution 
of spacetime itself, in line with earlier work relating the physics of learning agents to
the formalism of quantum gravity / gauge fields (Alexander et al. 2021; Tegmark 
2012) 10. We should note that the present approach shares with both established 
theories of quantum gravity a basic commitment of modeling spacetime as a 
discretized topology emerging from basic proto-physical processes 11.
9 Please note that the present account means relaxing the hypothesis of an embedding statespace, 
and instead explaining the existence of physical observable themselves as a consequence of the 
FEP. It is therefore much more radical than Friston’s favored reductive physicalist interpretation. 
As observation is classically understood as a manifestation of consciousness, it is closer to what K. 
J. Friston, Wiese, and Hobson (2020) defines as panprotopsychism.
10 See also Lin, Tegmark, and Rolnick (2017) for a discussion of the structural analogy between 
neural networks and physical symmetries.
11 To be more specific, both major approaches to quantum gravity traduce different aspect of the FEP
as presented here.
Indeed, string theory constitutes a derivation of the AdS/CFT correspondence, which reduces the 
geometry of gravitational field to this of lower dimensional, topologically Euclidian “slices” 
(Maldacena 1999; Witten 1998). It describes the emergence of spacetime as an holographic 
projection of the resonance between protophysical vibrational modes, which directly traduces the 
reductive physicalist interpretation of statespace emerging from synchronizing dynamical systems. 
Additionally, recent extensions shows that string theory affords a purely geometrical account of 
physical interaction (Arkani-Hamed and Trnka 2014), which is broadly consistent with the present 
geometrical account of physical symmetries.
On the other hand, loop quantum gravity theory posits that spacetime is constructed as a 
dynamical network of connections (a spin network) entailed by the representation of a background 
Although articulating a formal account of the physics of creation is well beyond the 
scope of the present paper, we can define a general direction in which to orient the 
development of an adequate mathematical framework. The key focus of our approach
is on the dynamical relation between an intrinsic and extrinsic information geometry 
(respectively probabilistic constraints over the internal states of the agent, and 
Bayesian belief over its external states) (Friston, Wiese, and Hobson 2020). Those 
information geometries need to be formalized as contingent modes of synchronization,
which are mutually constructed through transient modes of coupling (i.e. Markov 
blankets, reformalized as reference frames). As their symmetries determine the states 
relevant for the system and their dynamical flow, their description can be leveraged 
to reconstruct an embedding statespace from the states imbued with meaning by the 
information geometry. The key difficulty of this treatment is formalizing how an 
agent’s intrinsic information geometry determines its choice of Markov blanket / 
reference frames 12, and how the resulting extrinsic information geometry shapes in 
return its intrinsic geometry. Given such a formalism, we can model the construction 
of physical symmetries as observables emerge from the synchronization of learning 
proto-agents 13 - as outlined in Alexander et al. (2021).
Even assuming that the processes described above govern the construction of physical
laws, one may remain unconvinced that they have anything to say about biological 
organization or cognition. The idea that psychological activity has anything to do 
with quantum processes is indeed considered with healthy skepticism, based on the 
argument that the brain is too hot and noisy to enable quantum coherence at the 
relevant timescales (in line with Tegmark (2000)). However, the same calculations 
corrected for an array of biological mechanisms appear to allow for quantum 
computation in the brain (Hagan, Hameroff, and Tuszy ski 2002)ń  14, and most 
importantly the efficiency of biological computation appears simply too efficient to be
explained by classical information processing alone (Fields and Levin 2021). The 
impossibility of quantum computation in biological systems is therefore anything but 
independent gauge theory as a set of gauge invariant loop operators (the eponymous quantum 
loops) (Smolin 2004). This is most consistent with the panprotopsychist intuition of spacetime as an
emergent topology, entailed by the information geometry resulting from the historical trajectory of 
mutual observation between basic proto-agents.
12 While this dependence is a central element of the quantum information of the FEP described in 
Fields et al. (2021), it is not imbued with a generative model or even formally constrained.
13 Although no result can be derived prior to formalization, it is relevant to note that such an 
approach makes physical aberrations such time-reversal in antimatter (Ryder 1994) or spontaneous 
emergence of negative mass (Farnes 2018) a priori unproblematic as there is no reason that all 
physical observers couple to the same field in the same way. In other words, it dissolves the 
necessity for “natural laws” as defined in part. 1, as it considers physical phenomena as the result
of contingent organization.
14 See also Hameroff and Penrose (2014) for a recent review of “Orch OR” theory. See also recent 
results showing unexpectedly large domains of quantum coherence in carbon (Lee et al. 2011) and 
water structure (Marchettini et al. 2010). 
an established fact. A deeper problem of the present account is that it seems to 
negate entirely the possibility of objective knowledge, as the act of observation itself 
participates in constructing the observed phenomenon. As we will see, this is 
absolutely correct, but also entirely unproblematic and even necessary for the 
articulation of a radically naturalistic demarch.
5  –  Science  without  laws:  naturalistic
explanation and participatory realism
In the discussion above, we have first highlighted the inadequacy of nomological-
deductive explanations to account for the contingent, self-creative symmetries 
characteristic of living systems. By recreating a physical framework aimed to describe
and explain such unfolding symmetries, we have however dissolved the core 
assumption underlying the very concept of nomological-deductive explanation: the 
idea of an order, legible cosmos. Indeed, if the existence of any physical symmetry is
constructed by its very observation, we simply lack the kind of universal, entailing 
laws that physics typically supposes. The agency of observing systems, whether or not
they are conceptualized as “mindful” or “biological”, is simply what underlies the 
construction of physical statespaces – i.e. creation. On a cosmological level, this 
statement should only antagonize the most convinced Platonists: after all, if we agree
the existence of woodlice and men is the contingent result of a specific cosmological 
history, the same can go for the scalar nature of the Higgs field or the structure of 
spacetime. But on an epistemological level, the key role we lend to observation in 
statespace construction negates the very existence of any natural fact prior to 
observation. Therefore, it dissolves the classical understanding of scientific 
explanation of natural phenomenon.
This understanding is thoroughly grounded in a naturalistic demarch, which does not 
correspond any specific philosophical position but can still be unambiguously tied to 
specific positions on explanation. Naturalism is usually defined as a broad movement 
sharing a general commitment to the ontological position of a causally integrated 
natural realm, and the methodological / epistemological demarch of grounding of 
science and philosophy in the entities that compose this realm (Papineau 2021). 
Therefore, a naturalistic explanation of a given phenomenon is one that is grounded 
on the natural structure that produces it, itself understood as a component of nature.
This should recall the link we have drawn part. 1 between explanatory strategies and
the actual nature of physical symmetries. In other words, naturalistic explanation 
entails a commitment to a specific causal ontology, aiming to reflect the actual 
organization of the target system (Sperber 2011)) – which is itself accessible to 
naturalistic explanation. Although naturalism is historically associated to the 
deductive-nomological model of explanation through the positivist and modal 
empiricist movements, we can observe a tension between the two: “natural laws” are
understood to preexist to any given phenomenon, and are therefore removed from 
the realm of causal influence (i.e. nature).
A properly naturalized ontology should therefore disregard laws as a natural kind, 
and instead focus on the underlying symmetries as the locus of scientific explanation.
The question of what kinds of explanation we can mobilize therefore reduces to what
kinds of symmetries exist in nature, and where they come from. If there exist 
universal, embedding symmetries, then we can rearticulate the program of deductive-
nomological explanation by simply switching the explanatory load from reified 
“natural laws” to the underlying symmetries. This should not pose any problem to 
the reader: indeed, we do not fall because we obey a universal “law of attraction”, 
we fall because of the local curvature of space-time. Since laws cannot be the locus 
of naturalistic explanation to begin with, their dissolution need not change much our 
explanatory strategies. If the symmetries underlying a system’s activity are contingent
on a given context and a given cosmological, evolutionary or developmental history, 
then we have to acknowledge this contingency and investigate its determinants. In 
any case, we still have to formalize the symmetries embedded in our system of 
interest, and derive what kind of activity they entail. 
The issue emerges when we become interested in how observation itself participate in
constructing the symmetries underlying the physical universe. By construction, 
naturalism commits the scientist to some variant of structural realism, i.e. to the 
notion that scientific ontology must reflect the structure of natural entities (see 
Ladyman (2020) for a contextualized definition). This is prima facie inconsistent with 
the physics of creation, which entails that targets of scientific explanation lack a 
well-defined structure which is invariant with regard to observation. However, this 
apparent inconsistency dissolves under a closer investigation. Indeed, any given 
scientific explanation is intrinsically structural – it describes relations between the 
objects it postulates. Therefore, there is no need for a scientist to commit to the 
ground truth of its causal ontology, only to its coherence with background knowledge
and empirical observation of the target system (Colombo, Hartmann, and van Iersel 
2015). Therefore, a naturalist can insist that all there is to the world is structure, 
understood as the relations between natural entities (Ladyman 1998; Ladyman et al. 
2007). Naturalistic explanation can therefore be abstracted away from the 
correspondence of their ontology to “natural entities” as such, and instead focus on 
the description of symmetries that are invariant with regard to observation. 
Critically, similar considerations emerge from the study of the role of observers in 
quantum mechanics. Indeed, observation of a quantum system is demonstrably related
to a loss of quantum coherence, where the apparent behavior of the system reduces 
to this of a pure (classical) state which corresponds to the outcome of the observation
(Bacciagaluppi 2020). This phenomenon is classically understood as a “collapse” of 
an objective wavefunction which represents the real state of the system. This 
assumption entails an array of conceptual issues: How can wavefunction collapse 
propagate in space instantaneously (therefore faster than light)? How can system 
entropy spontaneously disappear? Most importantly, what kind of interactions entail 
wavefunction collapse in the first place? One way to solve (or more precisely, 
dissolve) the issue is the commitment to so-called “unitary” quantum mechanics, i.e.
the view that decoherence is an outcome of quantum evolution under the Schrödinger
equation rather than an objective wavefunction collapse. Observation is therefore 
understood as a physical process in which the observer becomes entangled with its 
target system, and therefore produce decoherence by constraining the outcomes of its
future observations to states consistent with its history (Griffiths 2019).
Although it sustains a number of interpretations regarding what’s actually out there 
(the most famous one being Everett’s multiverse theory), unitary quantum mechanics 
can ground a consistently naturalistic and observer-centered cosmology. As per the 
development in part. 4, observation can be taken to entail the construction of 
physical symmetries. This construction does not alter, however, the “ground reality” 
from which it developed as the space of physical states that are in principle 
accessible (i.e. the embedding statespace) remains unaltered throughout the process. 
What is altered however is the physical states that are accessible to the observer, 
which is constrained by nature of the synchronization dynamic. In other words, the 
universe may evolve in a pure quantum state, while the world we agents live in (i.e.
the states we can access) is constrained by our history of observations. The separation
between those states that we observe and those that we discard enables an elegant 
explanation of why we seem to live in a well-structured universe (without calling 
onto intelligent design, or the necessity of such an universe for observer to exist in 
the first place): it just so happens that observation produces structure, and therefore 
constrain entropy for those states that we observe (Tegmark 2012).
The symmetries we produce through observation (or agentive engagement) are in this
sense objective, observable parts of the universe. But they are at the same time 
subjective manifestations of situated belief systems. Physical statespaces are therefore 
understood as the embedding space of specific interactions, as structured by the 
gauge symmetries entailed by the agent’s beliefs and/or structural constraints. This 
view seem to traduce one of the most extreme interpretation of unitary quantum 
mechanics: Quantum Bayesianism, or QBism. This approach holds quantum 
wavefunctions to traduce nothing more than subjective beliefs about outcomes of 
observations (Timpson 2008). Qbists’ skepticism about any given statespace is not a 
negation of the actual existence of the natural world, and aims on the contrary to 
help us identify the actual invariants of physical theories (i.e. “reality”, in a 
structural sense), and therefore the “ultimate building block” of physical reality. It 
just so happens that particular observers participate in defining the form adopted by 
these blocks, and therefore construct physical reality – hence the characterization of 
their position as «participatory realism» (Fuchs 2017). An important limitation to 
QBism as a physical theory appears quite straightforwardly: if agents can simply 
make up their own physical reality, what exactly constrains (or explains) cosmological
evolution?
The formalism we have articulated here answers this question by relating QBism to 
another brand of participatory realism, emanating from cognitive science in the 
enactive tradition (Froese 2022). Let us think of the way humans understand their 
world: their coupling with their niche of ultra-collaborative hunters attuned our 
ancestors to each other’s intentional states through both bodily synchronization and 
material cues (Shilton et al. 2020; Veissière et al. 2020). Because those intentions are
directly perceived and acted upon, they are perceived as “real” by human agents. 
But as the collective abilities to represent the world expend (both through evolution 
of the cultural and material niche), aspects of the world we could not previously 
observe become understood and acted upon. This entire process is still constrained 
and constructed by our baseline cognition, although it undeniably entails the 
expansion of the space of our possibilities. A change in the Markov Blanket and/or 
the agent’s internal dynamics (i.e. the mode and interface of the coupling) enables 
the unfolding of physical symmetries embedded in the agent-environment 
synchronization manifold, and therefore the construction of a new statespace. In 
others words, subjective perception by emerging agents entails the gauge forces which
bring about, or «create», the structure of the universe.
  
Conclusion
The present work has related two problems underlying natural science: the program 
of lawful explanation which implicitly underlies it, and the difficulty of satisfyingly 
accounting for creation (i.e. open-ended evolution) in biological and cognitive 
systems. Quite straightforwardly, this is because lawful explanation relies on a 
reification of natural symmetries, while creation entails by construction the unfolding 
of such symmetries. Based on this statement, scientific explanation must to some 
extent recognize that the symmetries it relies on are historical and contextual 
products of system explanation. This is in no way problematic, as the program of 
structural-mechanistic shows that the description of biological and cognitive structure 
provides a satisfying ground for scientific explanation. We must simply relax the 
explanatory role of «natural laws», understood as systematic or statistical relations 
between observables, to focus instead on the physical symmetries which underlie such
laws. This shift in focus is anyway required to articulate a naturalistic demarch, 
which is by definition grounded in the study and characterization of natural entities 
– “actual” physical objects which are object and subject to causal influence.
The real difficulty begins when we try to account for the phenomenon of creation 
itself. By construction, the mathematical representation of any natural system relies 
on a “statespace”, i.e. a predefined representation of all the possibilities accessible to
the system. This construct makes it structurally impossible for the physicist to 
meaningfully account for open-ended evolution, or for the emergence of an “adjacent
possible” (as described by Kauffman (2019)). More problematically, and in addition to
the properties that could emerge of the postulated dynamics within the statespace, its
definition implicitly entails a system-wide symmetry with regard to any 
transformation which leaves the statespace unchanged. This means not only that 
creation is in itself inaccessible to statespace representation, but also that creative 
systems (i.e. systems that redefine their constitutive symmetries) seem themselves 
beyond mathematical representation. This leaves us unable to account for the known 
creative aspect of mind and life, but also to thoroughly ground cosmological 
evolution in a naturalistic demarch. Indeed, in the absence of a physics of creation 
(i.e. a formal account of how new possibilities emerge in the natural world), we need
to rely on a predefined embedding statespace which register all physical possibilities 
and whose structure is itself beyond causal influence.
We have hereby reviewed the two main candidate formalisms for representing 
creation: Self-Organized Criticality, and the Free Energy Principle. While both capture
key aspects of creation, both the former and dominant formulations on the later 
ultimately fail to satisfyingly account for this process. Criticality theory is grounded 
in the physics of phase transition, where it describes the state of extreme 
susceptibility and fractal structure that emerges in continuous phase transition. While 
this does reproduce the wild phenomenology of brain dynamics, it fails to properly 
explain it or account for its role in the maintenance and construction of biological / 
cognitive organization. Ultimately, it is an adequate illustration of the inherent 
limitations of nomological explanation of mind and life. In conttrast, the FEP does 
account for how biological / cognitive systems construct new physical symmetries 
through the integrated activity entailed by their constitutive constraint, understood as
synchronization across a physical interface. It is however limited by its mathematical 
formulation in dynamical systems theory, which constrains it to only describe systems
with a predefined statespace and therefore overlook creation. But if we look at the 
foundations of the FEP, this limitation takes another nature: it is not clear whether 
the statespace in question is an embedding space predating the synchronization, or is
itself constructed through cognitive activity.
Following the second road takes us a speculative but productive road to ground the 
physics of creation. Indeed, observation is by Landauer’s principle an irreversible 
process, and the space of observable states (i.e. over which the belief distribution is 
defined) is therefore constructed by a system’s history. The internal dynamics of the 
agent under study therefore construct not only dynamics within the postulated 
statespace, but also the statespace itself. In turn, the measurable parameters of the 
internal dynamics are themselves constrained by what can be observed by the 
environment. Physical measurement is therefore not a simple entailment of the 
intrinsic properties of either the agent or its environment, but should instead be 
understood as an autonomous, open process capable to ground statespace 
construction. To translate this understanding, we can reframe the FEP around the 
construct which stands in for the intrinsic geometry of measurement itself, i.e. the 
synchronization manifold, and try to reconstruct the embedding space from this 
ground. Although it constitutes an abstraction from a classical statespace formulation,
it is a necessary step toward the formalization of the constructive role agency plays 
in the evolution of social systems, life, as well as the physical structure of the 
universe.
This framework has deep implications on what we understand of our universe, as 
well as on our reflexive attitude regarding our own knowledge. First, it opens up the
mathematical possibility to represent unfolding statespaces, i.e. the creation of new 
physical possibilities by a system of interest. This creation is qualitatively understood 
as an entailment of the belief system of the agent, which affords a robust intuitive 
understanding of the subject. For example, we can take an interest in how the 
cognitive activity of States constrain the ecological information they can process, 
leading to the construction of legible landscapes and social systems alike (Guénin--
Carlut 2021). In addition, by reduction, a theory of statespace unfolding would give 
us a mean to represent cosmological evolution without an embedding space (much 
like loop quantum gravity), or more precisely to represent the evolution of the 
embedding space itself. This enables the explanation of the most fundamental 
physical object, and therefore the grounding of a fully naturalistic picture of the 
universe. However, framing measurement itself as a core element of reality 
construction brings the observer to play an active role in the phenomenon it tries to 
observe, therefore dissolving the classical view of physical reality as an objective fact
preexisting our attempts to navigate and understand it.
This statement ultimately does not threaten our basic commitment to naturalism, as 
there is no difficulty in admitting there exist a natural world and that we contribute 
to constructing it. Much like our activity constructs our cognitive and material niche 
by producing new structure from preexisting constraints, our observation of the 
physical world bring about new symmetries from the background of preexisting 
physical processes. Therefore, the challenges of the present approach are formal 
rather than conceptual in nature. We have shown that the physics of measurement 
enable in principle a mathematical account of symmetry construction / statespace 
unfolding, consistently with dynamical accounts of cognitive agency. However, the 
work presented here constitute an early, informal presentation of what would 
constitute a physics of creation and what are its implications. An actual formalization
is yet to articulate, and it must address an array of open questions – most 
importantly, how to represent the geometry of measurement prior to the existence of 
an embedding space? As I have shown this question to be a central knot in the 
structure of physical theory, and it joins earlier lines of formalization in quantum 
loop and category theory, I am confident we will work toward a principled answer in
the foreseeable future.
Acknowledgement
The present article is the culmination of 6 years of research and reflections on how 
to formalize the basic intuition that a natural object or property must be observable 
in order to exist, properly speaking. If I were to acknowledge all the indirect 
contributions to this paper, this section would start looking like a detailed 
autobiography augmented with an history of the role of Buddhist philosophy in 
shaping contemporary quantum physics and cognitive science. Since the convention 
insists that the acknowledgment section must be shorter than the article, and since I 
wish not to spend an additional 6 years writing it, let us focus on direct 
contributions.
To the Active Inference Institute, thanks for proving that a decentralized, 
collaborative approach to science is viable as a way to build knowledge. To Kairos 
Research, helping us mere biologically constrained agents to augment our experience 
of reality by reflecting on how our cognitive activity build our world, both through 
the construction of our niche and of the models through which we perceive it. In 
particular, thanks to Maxwell Ramstead, Manon Job, Lorena Sganzerla, Yseult Héjja-
Brichard and Alexis Rozansky for their thorough proofreading, and for the discussions
that helped weave the line of investigation I have exposed here.
To Maxwell Ramstead and Dalton Sakthivadivel, thanks for your support in pushing 
the math underlying the Free Energy Principle to their breaking point. Even if none 
of the following people have ever heard of me or my project, thanks to John 
Archibald Wheeler, Lee Smolin, Christopher Fuchs, Chris Fields, Stephon Alexander 
and their colleagues for doing the same with the Platonic view of physics. And of 
course, thanks to Humberto Maturana, Francisco Varela, Andy Clark, Stuart 
Kauffman, Giusippe Longo, Maël Montévil, Matteo Mossio, Alvaro Moreno and the 
countless others who brought into being an integrated view of life and cognition.
To cosmological evolution, geothermal springs, cyanobacteria, collaborative sense-
making, the Holocene glacial retreat, social security and smartphones, thanks for 
creating a niche where I can live to understand more things.
Bibliography
Aguilera, Miguel, and Manuel G. Bedia. 2018. ‘Adaptation to Criticality through 
Organizational Invariance in Embodied Agents’. Scientific Reports 8(1): 7723.
Aguilera, Miguel, and Ezequiel A. Di Paolo. 2021. ‘Critical Integration in Neural and 
Cognitive Systems: Beyond Power-Law Scaling as the Hallmark of Soft 
Assembly’. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 123: 230–37.
Aguilera, Miguel, Beren Millidge, Alexander Tschantz, and Christopher L. Buckley. 
2021. ‘How Particular Is the Physics of the Free Energy Principle?’ 
arXiv:2105.11203 [q-bio]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2105.11203 (May 25, 2021).
Alexander, Stephon et al. 2021. ‘The Autodidactic Universe’. arXiv:2104.03902 [gr-qc,
physics:hep-th, physics:physics, physics:quant-ph]. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.03902 (August 2, 2021).
Allen, Micah, and Karl Friston. 2018. ‘From Cognitivism to Autopoiesis: Towards a 
Computational Framework for the Embodied Mind’. Synthese 195(6): 2459–82.
Andrews, Mel. 2020. ‘The Math Is Not the Territory: Navigating the Free Energy 
Principle’. http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/18315/ (January 13, 2021).
Arkani-Hamed, Nima, and Jaroslav Trnka. 2014. ‘The Amplituhedron’. Journal of 
High Energy Physics 2014(10): 30.
Bacciagaluppi, Guido. 2020. ‘The Role of Decoherence in Quantum Mechanics’. In 
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. Edward N. Zalta. Metaphysics 
Research Lab, Stanford University. 
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2020/entries/qm-decoherence/ (October 3, 
2021).
Bak, Per, and Kan Chen. 1989. ‘The Physics of Fractals’.
———. 1991. ‘Self-Organised Criticality’.
Bak, Per, Chao Tang, and Kurt Wiesenfeld. 1987. ‘Self-Organized Criticality : An 
Explanation of 1/f Noise’.
Baltieri, Manuel, Christopher L. Buckley, and Jelle Bruineberg. 2020. ‘Predictions in 
the Eye of the Beholder: An Active Inference Account of Watt Governors’. In 
The 2020 Conference on Artificial Life, , 121–29. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11495 (August 11, 2022).
Barabàsi, Albert-Làsilò, and Eric Bonabeau. 2003. ‘Scale-Free Networks’. Scientific 
American 288(5): 60–69.
Bechtel, William. 2008. Mental Mechanisms: Philosophical Perspectives on Cognitive 
Neuroscience. Taylor & Francis.
———. 2009. ‘Looking down, around, and up: Mechanistic Explanation in 
Psychology’. Philosophical Psychology 22(5): 543–64.
Bechtel, William, and Adele Abrahamsen. 2005. ‘Explanation: A Mechanist 
Alternative’. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in 
History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 36(2): 421–41.
Beggs, John M. 2008. ‘The Criticality Hypothesis: How Local Cortical Networks Might
Optimize Information Processing’. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 366(1864): 329–43.
Beggs, John M., and Dietmar Plenz. 2003. ‘Neuronal Avalanches in Neocortical 
Circuits’. Journal of Neuroscience 23(35): 11167–77.
Beggs, John M., and Nicholas Timme. 2012. ‘Being Critical of Criticality in the 
Brain’. Frontiers in Physiology 3. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphys.2012.00163/full (September 9,
2020).
Beni, Majid D. 2021. ‘A Critical Analysis of Markovian Monism’. Synthese. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-021-03075-x (February 18, 2021).
Beni, Majid Davoody. 2017. ‘Structural Realism, Metaphysical Unification, and the 
Ontology and Epistemology of Patterns’. International Studies in the Philosophy
of Science 31(3): 285–300.
Boone, Worth, and Gualtiero Piccinini. 2016. ‘The Cognitive Neuroscience 
Revolution’. Synthese 193(5): 1509–34.
Bruineberg, Jelle, Krzysztof Dolega, Joe Dewhurst, and Manuel Baltieri. 2021. ‘The 
Emperor’s New Markov Blankets’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences: 1–63.
Bruineberg, Jelle, Julian Kiverstein, and Erik Rietveld. 2018. ‘The Anticipating Brain 
Is Not a Scientist: The Free-Energy Principle from an Ecological-Enactive 
Perspective’. Synthese 195(6): 2417–44.
Buiatti, Marcello, and Giuseppe Longo. 2013. ‘Randomness and Multilevel Interactions
in Biology’. Theory in Biosciences 132(3): 139–58.
Bullmore, Ed, and Olaf Sporns. 2009. ‘Complex Brain Networks: Graph Theoretical 
Analysis of Structural and Functional Systems’. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 
10(3): 186–98.
Carlson, J. M., and John Doyle. 1999. ‘Highly Optimized Tolerance: A Mechanism for
Power Laws in Designed Systems’. Physical Review E 60(2): 1412–27.
———. 2000. ‘Highly Optimized Tolerance: Robustness and Design in Complex 
Systems’. Physical Review Letters 84(11): 2529–32.
Chalmers, Alan F. 2013. What Is This Thing Called Science? Hackett Publishing.
Chialvo, D. R., and P. Bak. 1999. ‘Learning from Mistakes’. Neuroscience 90(4): 
1137–48.
Chialvo, Dante R. 2004. ‘Critical Brain Networks’. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics 
and its Applications 340(4): 756–65.
———. 2010. ‘Emergent Complex Neural Dynamics’. Nature Physics 6(10): 744–50.
Christensen, Kim, and Nicholas R. Moloney. 2005. Complexity and Criticality. World 
Scientific Publishing Company.
Colombo, Matteo, Stephan Hartmann, and Robert van Iersel. 2015. ‘Models, 
Mechanisms, and Coherence’. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
66(1): 181–212.
Colombo, Matteo, and Patricia Palacios. 2021. ‘Non-Equilibrium Thermodynamics and
the Free Energy Principle in Biology’. Biology & Philosophy 36(5): 41.
Constant, Axel. 2021. The Free-Energy Principle: It’s Not about What It Takes, It’s 
about What Took You There.
Constant, Axel, Andy Clark, and Karl Friston. 2021. ‘Representation Wars: Enacting 
an Armistice Through Active Inference’. Frontiers in Psychology 11: 3798.
Da Costa, Lancelot, Karl Friston, Conor Heins, and Grigorios A. Pavliotis. 2021. 
‘Bayesian Mechanics for Stationary Processes’. arXiv:2106.13830 [math-ph, 
physics:nlin, q-bio]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.13830 (July 7, 2021).
Di Paolo, Ezequiel, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer. 2021. ‘Laying down a 
Forking Path: Incompatibilities between Enaction and the Free Energy 
Principle’. https://psyarxiv.com/d9v8f/ (April 19, 2021).
Dohmatob, Elvis, Guillaume Dumas, and Danilo Bzdok. 2020. ‘Dark Control: The 
Default Mode Network as a Reinforcement Learning Agent’. Human Brain 
Mapping n/a(n/a). https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/hbm.25019 
(June 6, 2020).
van Es, Thomas. 2020. ‘Living Models or Life Modelled? On the Use of Models in the
Free Energy Principle’. Adaptive Behavior: 1059712320918678.
van Es, Thomas, and Ines Hipolito. 2020. ‘Free-Energy Principle, Computationalism 
and Realism: A Tragedy’. http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/18497/ (February 14, 
2021).
Farnes, J. S. 2018. ‘A Unifying Theory of Dark Energy and Dark Matter: Negative 
Masses and Matter Creation within a Modified $\Lambda$CDM Framework’. 
Astronomy & Astrophysics 620: A92.
Fields, Chris, Karl Friston, James F. Glazebrook, and Michael Levin. 2021. A Free 
Energy Principle for Generic Quantum Systems. arXiv. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.15242 (June 4, 2022).
Fields, Chris, and James F. Glazebrook. 2020. ‘Representing Measurement as a 
Thermodynamic Symmetry Breaking’. Symmetry 12(5): 810.
Fields, Chris, and Michael Levin. 2020. ‘How Do Living Systems Create Meaning?’ 
Philosophies 5(4): 36.
———. 2021. Metabolic Limits on Classical Information Processing by Biological 
Cells. arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2103.17061 (June 9, 2022).
Friston, Karl. 2010. ‘The Free-Energy Principle: A Unified Brain Theory?’ Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience 11(2): 127–38.
———. 2012. ‘A Free Energy Principle for Biological Systems’. Entropy 14(11): 2100–
2121.
———. 2016. ‘Active Inference: A Process Theory’. Neural Computation 29(1): 1–49.
———. 2018. ‘Of Woodlice and Men: A Bayesian Account of Cognition, Life and 
Consciousness’. https://www.aliusresearch.org/bulletin02-fristoninterview.html 
(March 13, 2021).
———. 2019. ‘A Free Energy Principle for a Particular Physics’. arXiv:1906.10184 [q-
bio]. http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.10184 (April 22, 2021).
———. 2020. ‘Parcels and Particles: Markov Blankets in the Brain’. arXiv:2007.09704
[q-bio]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.09704 (February 18, 2021).
———. 2022. ‘The Free Energy Principle Made Simpler but Not Too Simple’. 
arXiv:2201.06387 [cond-mat, physics:nlin, physics:physics, q-bio]. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.06387 (January 20, 2022).
Friston, Karl, Wanja Wiese, and J. Allan Hobson. 2020. ‘Sentience and the Origins of
Consciousness: From Cartesian Duality to Markovian Monism’. Entropy 22(5): 
516.
Froese, Tom. 2022. ‘Scientific Observation Is Socio-Materially Augmented Perception: 
Toward a Participatory Realism’. Philosophies 7(2): 37.
Fuchs, Christopher A. 2017. ‘On Participatory Realism’. In Information and 
Interaction: Eddington, Wheeler, and the Limits of Knowledge, The Frontiers 
Collection, eds. Ian T. Durham and Dean Rickles. Cham: Springer International 
Publishing, 113–34. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-43760-6_7 (June 13, 
2022).
Gautam, Shree Hari et al. 2015. ‘Maximizing Sensory Dynamic Range by Tuning the 
Cortical State to Criticality’. PLOS Computational Biology 11(12): e1004576.
Green, Sara, and Nicholaos Jones. 2016. ‘Constraint-Based Reasoning for Search and 
Explanation: Strategies for Understanding Variation and Patterns in Biology’. 
Dialectica 70(3): 343–74.
Griffiths, Robert B. 2019. ‘The Consistent Histories Approach to Quantum Mechanics’.
In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. Edward N. Zalta. Metaphysics 
Research Lab, Stanford University. 
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2019/entries/qm-consistent-histories/ 
(June 30, 2022).
Guénin--Carlut, Avel. 2020. ‘Cognition in Eco & Cognition in Vitro : Can Cognitive 
Science Explain Ecological Behaviour ?’ https://osf.io/ercz6/ (October 31, 2020).
———. 2021. ‘Thinking like a State - Embodied Intelligence in the Deep History of 
Our Collective Minds’. https://osf.io/dxnzt/ (September 20, 2021).
Hagan, S., S. R. Hameroff, and J. A. Tuszy ski. 2002. ‘Quantum Computation in ń
Brain Microtubules: Decoherence and Biological Feasibility’. Physical Review E 
65(6): 061901.
Hameroff, Stuart, and Roger Penrose. 2014. ‘Consciousness in the Universe: A Review
of the “Orch OR” Theory’. Physics of Life Reviews 11(1): 39–78.
Henderson, Leah. 2020. ‘The Problem of Induction’. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, ed. Edward N. Zalta. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford 
University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2020/entries/induction-
problem/ (August 11, 2022).
Hesse, Janina, and Thilo Gross. 2014. ‘Self-Organized Criticality as a Fundamental 
Property of Neural Systems’. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 8. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnsys.2014.00166/full (September 9,
2020).
Hipólito, Ines. 2019. ‘A Simple Theory of Every “Thing”’. Physics of Life Reviews 
31: 79–85.
Hipólito, Inês, Manuel Baltieri, Karl Friston, and Maxwell James Ramstead. 2021. 
‘Embodied Skillful Performance: Where the Action Is’. Synthese. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02986-5 (February 5, 2021).
John, Yohan. 2015. ‘How Informative Is the Concept of Biological Information?’ 3 
Quarks Daily. https://3quarksdaily.com/3quarksdaily/2015/05/how-informative-
is-the-concept-of-biological-information.html (April 9, 2022).
Kauffman, Stuart A. 2019. A World Beyond Physics: The Emergence and Evolution of 
Life. Oxford University Press.
Kinouchi, Osame, and Mauro Copelli. 2006. ‘Optimal Dynamical Range of Excitable 
Networks at Criticality’. Nature Physics 2(5): 348–51.
Kirchhoff, Michael et al. 2018. ‘The Markov Blankets of Life: Autonomy, Active 
Inference and the Free Energy Principle’. Journal of The Royal Society 
Interface 15(138): 20170792.
Kirchhoff, Michael D., and Tom Froese. 2017. ‘Where There Is Life There Is Mind: In
Support of a Strong Life-Mind Continuity Thesis’. Entropy 19(4): 169.
Kiverstein, Julian, Michael D. Kirchhoff, and Tom Froese. 2022. ‘The Problem of 
Meaning: The Free Energy Principle and Artificial Agency’. Frontiers in 
Neurorobotics 16. https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnbot.2022.844773
(June 24, 2022).
Ladyman, James. 1998. ‘What Is Structural Realism?’ Studies in History and 
Philosophy of Science Part A 29(3): 409–24.
———. 2007. Every Thing Must Go: Metaphysics Naturalized. Clarendon Press.
———. 2020. ‘Structural Realism’. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. 
Edward N. Zalta. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2020/entries/structural-realism/ (October 
3, 2022).
Lee, K. C. et al. 2011. ‘Entangling Macroscopic Diamonds at Room Temperature’. 
Science 334(6060): 1253–56.
Lent, Jeremy. 2017. The Patterning Instinct: A Cultural History of Humanity’s Search 
for Meaning. Prometheus Books.
Levina, Anna, J. Michael Herrmann, and Theo Geisel. 2007. ‘Dynamical Synapses 
Causing Self-Organized Criticality in Neural Networks’. Nature Physics 3(12): 
857–60.
———. 2009. ‘Phase Transitions towards Criticality in a Neural System with Adaptive
Interactions’. Physical Review Letters 102(11): 118110.
Lin, Henry W., Max Tegmark, and David Rolnick. 2017. ‘Why Does Deep and Cheap 
Learning Work so Well?’ Journal of Statistical Physics 168(6): 1223–47.
Longo, Giuseppe, and Maël Montévil. 2013. ‘Extended Criticality, Phase Spaces and 
Enablement in Biology’. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 55: 64–79.
Longo, Giuseppe, Maël Montévil, and Stuart Kauffman. 2012. ‘No Entailing Laws, but
Enablement in the Evolution of the Biosphere’. In Proceedings of the 14th 
Annual Conference Companion on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, 
GECCO ’12, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 1379–
92. https://doi.org/10.1145/2330784.2330946 (March 8, 2021).
Longo, Giuseppe, Maël Régis Montévil, and Arnaud Pocheville. 2012. ‘From Bottom-
Up Approaches to Levels of Organization and Extended Critical Transitions’. 
Frontiers in Physiology 3. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphys.2012.00232/full (April 23, 
2021).
Maldacena, Juan M. 1999. ‘The Large N Limit of Superconformal Field Theories and 
Supergravity’. International Journal of Theoretical Physics 38(4): 1113–33.
Marchettini, Nadia, Emilio Del Giudice, Vladimir Voeikov, and Enzo Tiezzi. 2010. 
‘Water: A Medium Where Dissipative Structures Are Produced by a Coherent 
Dynamics’. Journal of Theoretical Biology 265(4): 511–16.
Markovi , Dimitrije, and Claudius Gros. 2014. ‘Power Laws and Self-Organized ć
Criticality in Theory and Nature’. Physics Reports 536(2): 41–74.
Maturana, H. R., and F. J. Varela. 2012. Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization 
of the Living. Springer Science & Business Media.
Mitchell, Sandra D. 2003. Biological Complexity and Integrative Pluralism. Cambridge
University Press.
Mitzenmacher, Michael. 2004. ‘A Brief History of Generative Models for Power Law 
and Lognormal Distributions’. Internet Mathematics 1(2): 226–51.
Montévil, Maël, and Matteo Mossio. 2015. ‘Biological Organisation as Closure of 
Constraints’. Journal of Theoretical Biology 372: 179–91.
Mora, Thierry, and William Bialek. 2011. ‘Are Biological Systems Poised at 
Criticality?’ Journal of Statistical Physics 144(2): 268–302.
Moreno, Alvaro, and Matteo Mossio. 2015. ‘Biological Autonomy. A Philosophical and
Theoretical Enquiry’. 
https://www.academia.edu/12363315/Biological_Autonomy_A_Philosophical_and
_Theoretical_Enquiry (November 25, 2020).
Muñoz, Miguel A. 2018. ‘Colloquium: Criticality and Dynamical Scaling in Living 
Systems’. Reviews of Modern Physics 90(3): 031001.
Nave, Kathryn, George Deane, Mark Miller, and Andy Clark. 2020. ‘Wilding the 
Predictive Brain’. WIREs Cognitive Science 11(6): e1542.
Newman, MEJ. 2005. ‘Power Laws, Pareto Distributions and Zipf’s Law’. 
Contemporary Physics 46(5): 323–51.
Nicolis, Grégoire, and Ilya Prigogine. 1977. ‘Self-Organization in Nonequilibrium 
Systems: From Dissipative Structures to Order through Fluctuations’.
Papineau, David. 2021. ‘Naturalism’. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed.
Edward N. Zalta. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2021/entries/naturalism/ (October 1, 
2022).
Parr, Thomas et al. 2021. ‘Memory and Markov Blankets’. Entropy 23(9): 1105.
Parr, Thomas, Lancelot Da Costa, and Karl Friston. 2020. ‘Markov Blankets, 
Information Geometry and Stochastic Thermodynamics’. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering 
Sciences 378(2164): 20190159.
Parr, Thomas, and Karl Friston. 2019. ‘Attention or Salience?’ Current Opinion in 
Psychology 29: 1–5.
Proekt, Alex, Jayanth R. Banavar, Amos Maritan, and Donald W. Pfaff. 2012. ‘Scale 
Invariance in the Dynamics of Spontaneous Behavior’. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 109(26): 10564–69.
Raja, Vicente et al. 2021. ‘The Markov Blanket Trick: On the Scope of the Free 
Energy Principle and Active Inference’. Physics of Life Reviews 39: 49–72.
Ramstead, Maxwell James et al. 2022. On Bayesian Mechanics: A Physics of and by 
Beliefs. arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11543 (June 2, 2022).
Ramstead, Maxwell James, Karl Friston, and Inês Hipólito. 2020. ‘Is the Free-Energy 
Principle a Formal Theory of Semantics? From Variational Density Dynamics to
Neural and Phenotypic Representations’. Entropy 22(8): 889.
Ramstead, Maxwell James, Michael D Kirchhoff, and Karl Friston. 2020. ‘A Tale of 
Two Densities: Active Inference Is Enactive Inference’. Adaptive Behavior 28(4):
225–39.
Ramstead, Maxwell James, Dalton A. R. Sakthivadivel, and Karl Friston. 2022. ‘On 
the Map-Territory Fallacy Fallacy’. http://arxiv.org/abs/2208.06924 (August 31, 
2022).
Ryder, Lewis H. 1994. ‘Matter-Antimatter Asymmetry in the Early Universe and 
Violation of Time Reversal Symmetry’. Contemporary Physics 35(3): 151–63.
Safron, Adam, Victoria Klimaj, and Inês Hipólito. 2022. ‘On the Importance of Being 
Flexible: Dynamic Brain Networks and Their Potential Functional Significances’.
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 15. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnsys.2021.688424 (June 11, 2022).
Sakthivadivel, Dalton A. R. 2022a. ‘A Constraint Geometry for Inference and 
Integration’. arXiv:2203.08119 [cond-mat, physics:math-ph]. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.08119 (March 16, 2022).
———. 2022b. ‘Towards a Geometry and Analysis for Bayesian Mechanics’. 
arXiv:2204.11900 [cond-mat, physics:math-ph, physics:nlin, physics:physics]. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.11900 (May 1, 2022).
———. 2022c. ‘Weak Markov Blankets in High-Dimensional, Sparsely-Coupled 
Random Dynamical Systems’. https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.07620v1 (July 19, 
2022).
Savage, V. M. et al. 2004. ‘The Predominance of Quarter-Power Scaling in Biology’. 
Functional Ecology 18(2): 257–82.
Schrodinger, Erwin. 1944. ‘What Is Life’.
Sengupta, Biswa et al. 2016. ‘Towards a Neuronal Gauge Theory’. PLOS Biology 
14(3): e1002400.
Shew, Woodrow L. et al. 2009. ‘Neuronal Avalanches Imply Maximum Dynamic 
Range in Cortical Networks at Criticality’. Journal of Neuroscience 29(49): 
15595–600.
———. 2011. ‘Information Capacity and Transmission Are Maximized in Balanced 
Cortical Networks with Neuronal Avalanches’. Journal of Neuroscience 31(1): 
55–63.
Shew, Woodrow L., and Dietmar Plenz. 2013. ‘The Functional Benefits of Criticality 
in the Cortex’. The Neuroscientist 19(1): 88–100.
Shilton, Dor, Mati Breski, Daniel Dor, and Eva Jablonka. 2020. ‘Human Social 
Evolution: Self-Domestication or Self-Control?’ Frontiers in Psychology 11. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00134/full?
utm_source=F-
AAE&utm_medium=EMLF&utm_campaign=MRK_1254058_69_Psycho_20200225_
arts_A (July 23, 2020).
Smolin, Lee. 2004. ‘An Invitation to Loop Quantum Gravity’. In Quantum Theory and
Symmetries, WORLD SCIENTIFIC, 655–82. 
https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/9789812702340_0078 (July 13,
2022).
Sornette, Didier. 1998. ‘Multiplicative Processes and Power Laws’. Physical Review E 
57(4): 4811–13.
Sperber, Dan. 2011. ‘A Naturalistic Ontology for Mechanistic Explanations in the 
Social Sciences’. Analytical sociology and social mechanisms: 64–77.
Stanley, H. Eugene. 1999. ‘Scaling, Universality, and Renormalization: Three Pillars 
of Modern Critical Phenomena’. Reviews of Modern Physics 71(2): S358–66.
Stassinopoulos, Dimitris, and Per Bak. 1995. ‘Democratic Reinforcement: A Principle 
for Brain Function’. Physical Review E 51(5): 5033–39.
Stumpf, Michael P. H., and Mason A. Porter. 2012. ‘Critical Truths About Power 
Laws’. Science 335(6069): 665–66.
Swenson, R., and M.T. Turvey. 1991. ‘Thermodynamic Reasons for Perception–Action
Cycles’. Ecological Psychology 3(4): 317–48.
Tegmark, Max. 2000. ‘Importance of Quantum Decoherence in Brain Processes’. 
Physical Review E 61(4): 4194–4206.
———. 2012. ‘How Unitary Cosmology Generalizes Thermodynamics and Solves the 
Inflationary Entropy Problem’. Physical Review D 85(12): 123517.
Timpson, Christopher Gordon. 2008. ‘Quantum Bayesianism: A Study’. Studies in 
History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics 39(3): 579–609.
Touboul, Jonathan, and Alain Destexhe. 2010. ‘Can Power-Law Scaling and Neuronal 
Avalanches Arise from Stochastic Dynamics?’ PLOS ONE 5(2): e8982.
———. 2017. ‘Power-Law Statistics and Universal Scaling in the Absence of 
Criticality’. Physical Review E 95(1): 012413.
Tschacher, Wolfgang, and Hermann Haken. 2007. ‘Intentionality in Non-Equilibrium 
Systems? The Functional Aspects of Self-Organized Pattern Formation’. New 
Ideas in Psychology 25(1): 1–15.
Turing, A. M. 1953. ‘The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis’. Bulletin of Mathematical
Biology 52(1): 153–97.
Uhlig, Maximilian, Anna Levina, Theo Geisel, and J. Michael Herrmann. 2013. 
‘Critical Dynamics in Associative Memory Networks’. Frontiers in 
Computational Neuroscience 7. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fncom.2013.00087/full (October 6, 
2020).
Veissière, Samuel P. L. et al. 2020. ‘Thinking through Other Minds: A Variational 
Approach to Cognition and Culture’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 43. 
https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/behavioral-and-brain-sciences/article/
thinking-through-other-minds-a-variational-approach-to-cognition-and-culture/
9A10399BA85F428D5943DD847092C14A (October 7, 2020).
Wilson, Kenneth G. 1975. ‘The Renormalization Group: Critical Phenomena and the 
Kondo Problem’. Reviews of Modern Physics 47(4): 773–840.
———. 1983. ‘The Renormalization Group and Critical Phenomena’. Reviews of 
Modern Physics 55(3): 583–600.
Witten, Edward. 1998. ‘Anti De Sitter Space And Holography’. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9802150 (September 12, 2022).
Woodward, James. 2021. ‘Scientific Explanation’. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, ed. Edward N. Zalta. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford 
University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2021/entries/scientific-
explanation/ (March 31, 2021).