On Embedded Normativity
An Active Inference account of agency beyond
flesh
Avel Gu´ enin–Carlut1,3,4 and Mahault Albarracin2,5
1 University of Sussex, Department of Engineering and Informatics
2 VERSES Lab, Los Angeles, CA, USA
3 Kairos Research https://kairos-research.org
4 Active Inference Institute
5 Universite du Quebec a Montreal, Departement d’informatique
Abstract. We introduce and motivate the concept of embedded norma-
tivity to account for the externalization of social norms in the material
environment through human social activity. We ground this notion in the
Active Inference framework, and more specifically through the derived
Skilled Intentionality framework of ecological perception and action. This
framework considers that skilled agent experience the world as a land-
scape of affordances, or opportunities for action. This landscape is inher-
ently normative, as its experience is tied to the agent’s anticipations over
its own behaviour (and therefore, indirectly, to its motivations). We em-
phasize that given this framework, normativity does not exist inside or
outside the agent’s boundaries, but is brought about by its engagement
with the world. We discuss the dynamics of internalization and exter-
nalization by which agents come to project normativity onto elements of
their environment, and experience this normativity as a simple attraction
toward favoured states. Given this account, we revisit earlier descriptions
of the shared material and sociocultural niche enable the broadcasting
and integration of norms. Finally, we discuss how embedded normativity
can be brought into existence by the perception of humans, and relate
our discussion to the ontological stance of participatory realism.
Keywords: Embodied cognitive science · Skilled intentionality · Active
Inference · Cognitive niche construction · Participatory realism
1 Introduction
Cognitive science has traditionally attempted to explain human behaviour by
calling onto computational processes happening in the brain. By construction,
this approach abstracts the role of the material and sociocultural environment in
the construction of human behaviour. Yet, interindividual coordination entails
participation in the set of (implicit or explicit) norms and rules which underlie
social activity. Basic examples could be the simple rules of the game of catch, the
use of a specific language, or the distribution of speech in a conversation. Failure
2 A. Gu´ enin–Carlut and M. Albarracin.
to respect those norms typically means failure to coordinate. However, the way
we understand those norms is inherently reconstructive. The correct actions in
a given context are not inherently known to us; instead, we construct them
through trial and error throughout our development. In Wittgensteinian terms,
we could claim that human social behaviour is influenced by the participation
in a collective ”form of life” [46], an expression which (while never properly
defined by the philosopher) emphatically highlights the constructive aspect of
the structure underlying social activity.
We propose to account for the co-construction between encultured cognition
and the environment in which it is embedded through the way social normativity
becomes integrated and externalized within a given social and material niche,
for which we coin the term embedded normativity. This process of attunement,
where organisms change their structure (through learning and perception) and
the structure of the world (through action), leads to a consistency with the
preferences and expectations about the world that constitute the generative
model. In so doing, the generative and recognition models become attuned to
the statistical structure of the environment from whence they emerged (i.e., the
generative process) [5].
The concept of embedded normativity was recently mobilized in cognitive
archaeology to defend the possibility of inferring the structure of social organi-
zations from the material traces of past societies [30, 27]. The argument goes as
follows: if normativity is indeed embedded in the material and social environ-
ment one experiences, rather than in the architecture of the brain, maybe we
can reconstruct from the archaeological landscapes we investigate the norms and
values of the agents that experienced (and shaped) that landscape. We intend to
hereby present this notion in a more focused and systematic manner, exposing
its formal grounding as well as the conceptual questions it raises. In particular,
we argue that embedded normativity is not present outside the perspective of
a situated agent, but precisely emerges from the multiscale integration of social
and cognitive constraints occurring through engagement with the world.
The account we propose is based on the Active Inference framework (Act-
Inf), a neurocomputational theory positing that cognition works through the
systematic prediction of expected sensorimotor states and the minimization of
prediction error [33, 37]. Active Inference affords a rich conceptual model of how
humans integrate and enact cultural norms and values, as developed for example
in [39, 45, 35, 34]. Perhaps most importantly, it emerges as a special case of the
Free Energy Principle (FEP), a mathematical framework describing how biologi-
cal systems resist disorder and maintain their existence through minimizing free
energy by constructing cognitive meaning (formally speaking, Bayesian belief
distributions) from dynamical self-organisation [41, 11]. More precisely, the FEP
accounts for cognition as a process of dynamical individuation as a well-defined
system ongoing simultaneously at many nested scales of analysis [32, 31, 40, 38] -
and not only within the brain, but wherever we can identify well-defined systems
with measurable statistical regularities.
On Embedded Normativity 3
Under the FEP, the organism’s internal states do indeed garner and encode
exploitable, action-guiding dynamics about environmental states. However, they
are established and maintained through active inference, that is, through pat-
terns of adaptive action. This suggests that cognition is not a passive process of
receiving information from the environment, but an active process of engaging
with and shaping the environment. If we take this picture seriously, meaning
emerges through the process of engagement with the world, while affording the
multi-scale integration of nested boundaries of cognitive individuation [38]. In
this light, we clarify that embedded normativity does not exist inside or outside
the brain, but rather in the statistical properties of engagement with the world
by cultural agents.
2 Encultured cognition as Active Inference
The Free Energy Principle (FEP) is a theoretical framework that first emerged
as a description of the mechanics of the human brain [18], and was then ex-
tended to describe the behavior of living systems [20, 21] and more generally
self-organization in dynamical systems [19]. At its core, the FEP posits that all
cognitive agents strive to minimize their variational free energy, a measure of
surprise or uncertainty about their sensory inputs and motor outputs 6. This is
achieved by improving their internal model of the world to better predict sensory
inputs, and by acting on the world to bring about sensory inputs that conform
to their predictions. This process of minimizing free energy is thought to under-
lie perception, learning, and action [3, 33], but also the biological processes of
development and evolution [36]. The FEP therefore provides a mathematical for-
mulation of the tendency of living systems to maintain themselves in a restricted
set of states while embedded in a fluctuating, partially observed environment,
and this at multiple nested scales of analysis [40, 31]. Although the references
discussed here may look esoteric, and that their accessibility is comprised by
the shift in the meaning of key concepts over time, we may redirect the reader
toward accessible discussion of the underlying theory in its latest articulation
[37].
In the context of the human brain, the FEP motivates Active Inference [22],
a mechanical theory of the dynamics of the mind drawing heavily from predictive
processing. The core idea of this line of research is that the brain produces pre-
dictions (or, more minimally, anticipation) of the upcoming sensory states, and
”perceives” this world of imagination. Predictive processing constitutes a very
powerful family of theories, which easily explains the uncanny computational
power of the mind, its ability to function with very limited data, the impression
we have to experience a continuous environment even though our sensations are
architecturally limited in scope and features, and the prevalence of top-down
neuronal connections even in regions of the brain which are associated with
6 Formally, Variational Free Energy constitutes an upper bound over the surprise.
However, we do not need to focus on the specifics of the formalism in the present
article
4 A. Gu´ enin–Carlut and M. Albarracin.
sensory processing [9]. Active Inference is distinctive by two principal features:
first, it postulates that the brain optimizes its internal (generative) model of
the world specifically by minimizing variational free energy (which means per-
forming approximately Bayes-optimal inference over sensory and motor states);
second, it considers that motor commands themselves are subject to predic-
tions/anticipations, and are in fact produced by those predictions/anticipations.
In other words, action is modeled as a self-fulfilling prophecy, where agents pre-
dict their own actions and then generate evidence for these predictions through
their actions. This enables the implementation of very rich patterns of regula-
tion in behavior agents interact with their environment, gather information, and
update their beliefs based on new data in a nearly optimal way. This is to be
contrasted with the more classical picture that the course of action is computed
only after perception then enacted, which could only enable online adaptive reg-
ulation at a prohibitive computational cost [33]. Given those considerations, we
consider that Active Inference is essentially correct in identifying and formalizing
the general design principles that power human cognitive architecture.
In the general case, Active Inference may be considered as a process of at-
tunement between an agent and the environment it inhabits, as both (or more
precisely, their statistics) become predictive of each other. This affords directly
an interpretation in terms of niche construction [13], as the agent de facto re-
cruits its environment in producing the statistical regularities which underlie its
existence. For example, the traces the mammal leaves when foraging may leave
a path they will consequently use to assist (and to some extent perform in their
stead) the function of spatial navigation. In Active Inference terms, the tunnel
”predicts” the states that enable the continued existence of the mammal, and
conversely it provides a regular niche for the mammal to predict. A more com-
pelling example may be the act of writing to remember things, or to compute
complex calculations. Just like regular niche construction can be understood as
an extension of the phenotype, cognitive niche construction can be understood
as an extension of the mind [12]. The idea that the relevant cognitive process
may rely on external states is entirely unproblematic, as (from the perspective
of Active Inference) cognition is performed by the dynamical flow of the coupled
agent-environment system, and not by any of its subparts [38].
These considerations provide a straightforward account of encultured cogni-
tion, acknowledging that the human niche includes other humans and their cul-
tural practices. Indeed, Active Inference suggest that if humans belong to each
other’s environments, the process of trying to predict each other’s actions (and
what they would do in a situation such as ours) lead to the active construction of
shared goals and narratives in interaction with others through a process known
as ’Thinking Through Other Minds’ (TTOM). It affords the transmission of cul-
tural representations, such as the meanings of specific symbols or the content of
social norms, but also the integration of those representation in our expectations
and our actions, as well the participative construction of their meaning. Criti-
cally, the content of representations or norms is not an information that an agent
may rationally decide to acknowledge or ignore. The integration of representa-
On Embedded Normativity 5
tions is traduced in the very flow of the expectations by which we understand
and act in the world, and therefore in the opportunity for actions we experience
[39, ?,45]. What we actually do is determined not by reason or passion, but by
the flow of expectations which generates our perceptions, actions and cognitive
attitudes [7]. Of course, this is strongly coupled to (and constrained by) our
social identity [26], as well as (implicit or explicit) social norms [1]. For example,
an agent that would perceive themselves as a parent and believe that parents
care for their children would not experience a choice in whether or not to care
for their children. They would care for their children simply because they expect
themselves to do (or they would need to revise their identity as a parent, or
the belief they have about what parents do). In that context, the relevant scale
to explain the behaviour of the agent would be the shared cultural niche which
led to the development of its identity and the norms it embeds, rather than the
individual attitudes of the agent.
3 The skilled intentionality framework and embedded
normativity
The Skilled Intentionality Framework (SIF) is a theoretical approach that aims
to integrate the Active Inference Framework presented above with the earlier
approach of ecological psychology. Ecological psychology, unlike the early pro-
gram of cognitive science, focused on the process of direct engagement with the
world, independently from representation and higher-order ”computation”. A
core notion of ecological psychology is the notion of affordance, which refers to
the possibilities for action that a given environment affords to a given agent [25].
For example, a chair affords sitting while a lamp does not, and a lamp affords
lighting while a chair does not. Critically, while an affordance constitutes a di-
rect relationship between the structure of an organism and this of an object,
their perception entails a direct invitation (or, to use the contextually relevant
terminology, solicitation) for action. Given those consideration, the notion of
skilled intentionality aims to capture the way agents systematically maintains
themselves in a metastable zone where they are able to recognize the structure
of their environment, and act selectively on the affordances which enable them
to continue this process [6]. The authors argue that this ecological perspective
is compatible with the Active Inference paradigm, as the tendency for skilled
agents to strive toward an ’optimal grip’ on their environment can be described
as a process of minimizing surprise or prediction error, thereby maximizing pre-
dictability. In the words of the authors : ”a skilled climber is anticipating the
affordances ahead; she does not just get a grip on the next hold in climbing,
say, but also anticipates that she needs to be able to move on after that. [...]
One can see again that in such a metastable state, one is flexibly able to switch
between different movement regimes and better fit to adapt to the specific de-
tails of the environmental aspects”. Most importantly, perhaps, Active Inference
provides an explanation of how the perception of the world as a landscape of
affordances emerges: it is through a process of predictive coding, where the brain
6 A. Gu´ enin–Carlut and M. Albarracin.
generates and updates predictions about the causes of sensory inputs, that the
agent anticipates and engages in the perception-action cycle [44].
We will be interested here in how this regime of skilled intentionality feels
like for the agent. Yet again borrowing from [6] : ”For an expert boxer the
zone of optimal metastable distance will solicit moving toward, because this
zone offers a wide range of action opportunities and the possibility to flexibly
switch between them in line with what the dynamically changing environment
demands or solicits”. In other words, the skilled agent described by the SIF does
not experience the states of the world as a given set of perceptual states, on
which they compute then enact plans of action to reach their goals. Rather,
the skilled agent experiences its world as a stream of invitations for action, on
which they can act seamlessly. This can be related to the phenomenology of the
state of flow described by positive psychology [15], or to the wei wu wei (”action
without action”, or ”action without effort”) of ancient Chinese philosophy [43].
7 For the skilled agent, intentionality does not feel like an intervention of the
Self or the Will, but on the contrary it feels like an attuned synergy to the flow
of sensory signal. In consequence, the norms and values that guide behaviour
are not experienced as individuated principle which support decision, but as a
simple gradient in the valence of anticipated flow. For the most part, normativity
is experienced as coming from outside, in the realm of sensations which elicit
anticipations and actions. However, these norms are not simply imposed from
the outside. Rather, they arise from the agent’s own predictive models, which
are shaped by both their individual history and the cultural and social norms of
their environment [12].
To be clear, there are many nuances to be included in that statement. To
begin with, the sensations that guide behaviour are not limited to so-called ”ex-
teroception” sensation which inform us of the states of the outside world. They
also include interoceptive and proprioceptive sensations, all of which contribute
to the generation of anticipations. The normativity embedded in proprioception
would feel like it comes from inside, given that the agent is capable to discrim-
inate the boundary of its self, and this process indeed grounds the agent’s self-
attribution of emotions [42]. Additionally, an agent may formulate an explicit
plan of action and then strive to follow it, corresponding to what is classically
understood as an act of will. However, words may as well be considered as an
anchor for cognition which enables the agent to ”write” their intentions in lan-
guage, or in other as an artificial space of sensations which the agent constructs
to extend its ability for recalling memories and past decisions [8]. Therefore, they
constitute a simple extension of the domain of agency as we described it here,
rather than the basis a parallel system of decision making. Our central point re-
mains: to the skilled agent, intentionality feels like attunement between actions
and sensations. However, normativity is not just experienced as a property of
7 However, these states of effortless action are not always the norm or the goal, and
conscious effort in planning and decision-making processes” [ ?]. Rather, they repre-
sent particular modes of engagement that can emerge when an agent is highly skilled
and the conditions are right [9].
On Embedded Normativity 7
perceptions but also as a property of the self, as the self, as an agent, has the
ability to set and pursue goals [40]. We hereby propose, in line with [27] and [30]
to account for that phenomenon through the concept of embedded normativity.
The role that embedded normativity plays in the argument of [30] is two
fold. First, it constitutes an ontological statement that the processes underlying
agency cannot be quite pinned down to inside or outside. Indeed, the picture that
the active inference framework paints is that normativity arises not just from
the internal structure of an organism but also from the interaction between the
organism and its environment (see for example [2] for a thermodynamical view,
or [4] for the classical enactive treatment of the question). Here, the domain of
normativity is extended to represent how the structure of the environment of
the organism shapes the norms enacted by the agent 8. This is in line with the
classical Active Inference picture of individuation, cognitive niche construction,
and enculturation, as was presented in part 2. Second, it entails an epistemo-
logical shift from a focus on an agent’s structure and cognitive attitudes to a
focus on the constraints applying on the agent’s behaviour. Normativity is con-
sidered not just as a property of the landscapes that agents experience but also
as a property of the agents themselves, arising from their ability to set and pur-
sue goals. The authors insist that human societies may participatively construct
and enact regimes of embedded normativity which ”extrinsically regulating the
intrinsic metabolic and modulatory normativity of an autonomous agent, and
organizing the way human agents acquire norms”. Taken together, those notions
paint a radically counter-intuitive picture. Most person would admit that social
norms indeed exist, and that to exist they must somehow be inferred from one’s
environment. But they unambiguously supervene one individual behaviour and
attitudes. A question remains: in what sense can normativity exist in a shared
social and material niche, if it can only manifest through the activity of our
individual minds?
4 Externalization and internalization: bringing about our
world
The answer to that puzzle is deceptively simple. There is no problem with the
idea that normativity can act fromoutside while existing inside if we don’t admit
that outside versus inside constitutes a meaningful dichotomy to begin with. In
the context of this discussion, the proper boundary between inside and outside
unambiguously refers to the boundaries of the cognitive agent. But there does not
seem to be a simple way to define the boundary of a cognitive agent. Classically,
the brain was considered as the subject of cognition, with the rest of the world
being its object. But the notion that cognition must end at the boundary of
8 Note that enactive theorists would typically agree that enculturation plays a role in
the generation of normativity (see eg [16]. However, norms are still conceived as a
property of the organism, which may or may not be influenced from out there. The
concept of embedded normativity, on the contrary, suggests that there is normativity
acting from out there.
8 A. Gu´ enin–Carlut and M. Albarracin.
the skull can easily be fended off through the parity principle, as formulated
by the seminal article for the Extended Mind program: “If [. . . ] a part of the
world functions as a process which, were it done in the head, we would have no
hesitation in recognizing as part of the cognitive process, then that part of the
world is [. . . ] part of the cognitive process” [10]. Whether one defines cognition
in terms of computation, information processing, or dynamical system theory, it
is hard to deny that if an object performs a cognitive function, then it is part of a
cognitive process. If we relax the brain-cognition identity and adopt an enactive
perspective on cognition, which views cognition as a process that extends beyond
the brain to include the body and the environment, then any system outside that
is recruited by a cognitive agent to guide its behaviour can be considered part of
the cognitive process. This argument challenges the coherence of the dichotomy
between inside and outside, and invites us to construct an integrated picture of
the many forces underlying the cognitive landscape encountered by the agent.
Rather than projecting an excessive meaning to the dichotomy in and of it-
self, we would rather focus on the processes which cause an object or process
to be experienced as inside or outside. As discussed above, the FEP describes
cognition as a process of attunement through the dynamical flow of the coupled
agent-environment system. This framework blurs the traditional dichotomy be-
tween inside and outside, suggesting that the cognitive landscape encountered
by the agent is determined both from outside (through the structure of the en-
vironment) and from inside (as part of the agent’s internal model of the world)
[21]. We should highlight that it does not afford an unambiguous separation be-
tween well-individuated domains of ”inside” and ”outside”. Indeed, defining a
partition between agent and environment only requires that the statistics of both
subsystem be independent of each other, given those of the boundary between
the two, which allows for the definition of agent boundaries at many nested scales
of analysis [38]. For example, given a given state of the world, we may consider
as an agent a single neuron within a brain, this brain within a human body, the
human’s brain-body system within the world, the same human plus an exter-
nal tool like binoculars, or all of the world expect for the agent. The question
of whether a given system, for example the binoculars, is inside or outside the
relevant scale to define agency is therefore outside the scope of this framework.
A simple criterion may be articulated by outlining, to borrow the terminology
of [28], that cognitive agent learn about the world by ”asking questions” about
the states which are of interest to it. This notion is naturally accounted for
in Active Inference, as agents under ActInf allocate attention in a near Bayes-
optimal way to gather the necessary information to regulate their behaviour
[17]. Given those considerations, we may simply consider than we experience as
outside what we ask questions about, while we experience as inside what we ask
question with. In other words, we perceive as an external reality those aspects
of the world which we interrogate, while those aspect of the world which enable
our inquiry by integrating our embodied engagement with the world become
as transparent as are our eyes and ears. [24] describes the process by which
agents construct the boundaries of what they experience as an external reality.
On Embedded Normativity 9
As agents engage with their environment and progressively master their tools,
the means through which they perceive reality become transparent. They stop
being experienced as external objects which serves to gather information, and
simply become the new mode by which we interface with the external world. In
the same process, the outcome of our perception stops being experienced as the
product of our own activity, and become objective features of the outside world.
Imagine a human using binoculars to perceive details of a far away landscape. If
the binoculars are a new object to them, or are poorly adjusted, they will have
to treat it as an external object which they observe and manipulate. But as soon
as they can see through it, they feel like they perceive the landscape outside
them, and do not perceive the way the binoculars shape their perception as an
external object. In the words of the author, “during these successful perceptual
processes, the quality of the agent–environment interaction is transformed; the
agent’s grip on a specific aspect of the world is improved, and this allows that
aspect to be grasped as a distal object. From this point of view, the local activity
is still a necessary part of the process, but its role is fundamentally different: it
no longer serves as the input for the internal construction of a putative object,
but rather becomes part of the coupling through which the object is disclosed to
experience”. We may reframe this dynamic as a dual process of externalization
of the target of perception and of internalization of the means by which it is
perceived.
The same logic applies to the perception of normativity in sociocultural land-
scapes. As one learns to navigate a given society, they will have to go through the
process of understanding the norms and symbols which shape information, and
perceive them as an external object to observe and manipulate. But as they ex-
pertise grow, they will come to internalize those norms and symbols, and simply
perceive the world through their lenses. One of us recently had the opportu-
nity to visit the Sierra de Barbanza described in [14]. There, small rock edifices
mark segments of the optimal travel path for travellers crossing the Sierra. To an
unaware traveller, those edifices would be a feature of the environment among
many, which (if they even notice those) they may choose to investigate or not.
But to the experienced travellers, those edifices simply constitute direct instruc-
tions regarding the path they should follow. While the edifices were most likely
built with the explicit intent to mark the way, the fact their efficacy as norms
depends on the agent’s skill should highlight a core aspect of our treatment.
Embedded normativity does not exist inside or outside the agent, it’s brought
about by specific environmental cues which the agent experiences as carrying
normative significance. This perspective aligns with the concept of participatory
realism, which posits that our perceptions are actively constructed by our active
engagement with the world, rather than being objective aspect of the external
world which our internal cognitive processes happen to capture [24]. Participa-
tory realism accounts for the regime of existence of embedded normativity, which
unambiguously exert causal power over the way we navigate the world, but not
in a way that can be tied to specific physical states independently from the pat-
terns of our perception. To quote [28] : ”the perceptions we have of the world (up
10 A. Gu´ enin–Carlut and M. Albarracin.
to scientific knowledge) are not either a neutral representation of what’s there, or
a simple illusion projected onto physical reality. They fully participate to bring
about physical reality by shaping the causal relations between the perceiving
agent and the world they navigate”.
5 Conclusion
This paper has explored the concept of embedded normativity, a regime of nor-
mativity where the norms and value underlying an agent’s actions are somehow
embedded into its environment. We account for this phenomenon through the
Active Inference framework, and more specifically through the derivative frame-
work of Skilled Intentionality. In this picture, agents experience their environ-
ment as a landscape of affordances, or in another words as a space of opportu-
nities for action. Because the perception of affordances elicits the expectation
of action, and therefore (under Active Inference) motivate it, the perception of
affordances constitute an inherently normative phenomenon. In this sense, the
constraints of the agent’s environment are as meaningfully carriers of normativ-
ity as the constraint’s of the agent’s organism.
We address the main apparent limitation of the concept of embedded nor-
mativity, i.e. the apparent suggestion that norms may exist outside the domain
of cognition. In our account, agents may fluidly internalize (integrate in their
own organization) or externalize (instrument as an element of the world) spe-
cific systems. The intrinsic normativity of cognitive agents may be externalized
by creating traces in the material landscape around them, for example a path
marking their most frequent itineraries. Consequently, the same agents may in-
ternalize the normative load of those traces by ”forgetting” that they are states
of the external world which happen result from their own actions as they learn
to treat them as direct instruction to modulate their own behaviour. Critically,
both the construction, the integration, and the enaction of embedded normativ-
ity require the active participation of the agent in perceiving and acting on its
material niche.
The concept of embedded normativity becomes especially interesting when
we consider how the construction of affordances is, at least in humans, a so-
cial activity influenced by (and constitutive of) cultural norms and values. The
shared material, social and cultural niche serves as a way to broadcast normativ-
ity through material symbols such as word and road signs, as well as through the
production of direct constraints over perception and action. In turn, the shared
niche serve to scaffold the development of complex cognition and coordination
in mature humans, and (to some extent) to externalize the cognitive load it
entails. In other words, human participatively construct the social constraints
which constitutes the structure of their societies (see figure 1).
In this perspective, cultural agents can be understood as active participants in
the construction of a shared reality. This produce a novel problem for embedded
normativity, namely the difficulty of account for objects or property that do
not exist inside or outside the boundaries of the agent but in the terms of the
On Embedded Normativity 11
interaction itself. In order to solve that difficulty, we point toward the more
general position of participatory realism which entails that cognitive agents (or,
in other contexts, physical observers) construct reality by their very activity of
engaging with the world in order to understand it. Normativity constitutes a
very straightforward example of this regime of existence, which may be used to
specify and formalize further the framework.
More generally, we argue embedded normativity provides a rich landscape of
possibilities for future research. We could explore how this concept may be inte-
grated with preexisting theories of cognition and perception to provide a more
comprehensive understanding of human behavior and experience. For instance,
how does embedded normativity interact with other cognitive processes such
as memory, attention, and decision-making? Since those process are embedded
in complex social interactions and cultural phenomena, can we really attribute
them to single agents? Perhaps most importantly, we could apply this line of
research to artificial intelligence and robotics. By integrating the scales of analy-
sis which underlie the construction, integration, and enaction of cultural norms,
embedded normativity provide a natural operational concept for the study of
social and ecological robotics across scales of activity - in particular through the
”ecosystem of intelligence” approach outlined by the recent work of VERSES
Lab [23].
Fig. 1.The participative construction of sociocultural landscapes. From [29]
12 A. Gu´ enin–Carlut and M. Albarracin.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Andy Clark for his feedback on the previous publication
in which we introduce the notion of embedded normativity, which motivated the
present article. We also thank Axel Constant for our discussion on the many
variants of cognitive externalization and their grounding in Active Inference.
This work was financed by the XSCAPE project (Synergy Grant ERC-2020-
SyG 951631).
References
1. Albarracin, M., Constant, A., Friston, K., Ramstead, M.J.: A variational approach
to scripts . https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/67zy4, https://psyarxiv.com/67zy4/
2. Allen, J.W., Bickhard, M.H.: Normativity: A Crucial Kind of Emergence: Com-
mentary on Witherington 54(2), 106–112, https://www.jstor.org/stable/26764995
3. Badcock, P.B., Friston, K., Ramstead, M.J.: The hierarchi-
cally mechanistic mind: A free-energy formulation of the hu-
man psyche 31, 104–121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2018.10.002,
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1571064519300028
4. Barandiaran, X., Di Paolo, E., Rohde, M.: Defining Agency: In-
dividuality, Normativity, Asymmetry, and Spatio-temporality in
Action 17(5), 367–386. https://doi.org/10.1177/1059712309343819,
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059712309343819
5. Bruineberg, J.: Active Inference and the Primacy of the ?I Can? In: Metzinger, T.,
Wiese, W. (eds.) Philosophy and Predictive Processing, p. 5
6. Bruineberg, J., Rietveld, E.: Self-organization, free energy minimization, and op-
timal grip on a field of affordances 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00599,
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00599/full
7. Clark, A.: Beyond Desire? Agency, Choice, and the Predictive
Mind 98(1), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/00048402.2019.1602661,
https://doi.org/10.1080/00048402.2019.1602661
8. Clark, A.: Language, embodiment, and the cognitive niche
10(8), 370–374. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.06.012,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364661306001628
9. Clark, A.: Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind. Ox-
ford University Press
10. Clark, A., Chalmers, D.: The Extended Mind 58(1), 7–19,
https://www.jstor.org/stable/3328150
11. Constant, A., Clark, A., Friston, K.: Representation Wars: Enacting an Armistice
Through Active Inference 11, 3798. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.598733,
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.598733
12. Constant, A., Clark, A., Kirchhoff, M., Friston, K.: Ex-
tended active inference: Constructing predictive cognition be-
yond skulls n/a(n/a). https://doi.org/10.1111/mila.12330,
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/mila.12330
13. Constant, A., Ramstead, M.J., Veissi` ere, S.P.L., Campbell,
J.O., Friston, K.: A variational approach to niche construc-
tion 15(141), 20170685. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0685,
https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/full/10.1098/rsif.2017.0685
On Embedded Normativity 13
14. Criado-Boado, F., Villoch V´ azquez, V.: La monumentalizaci´ on del paisaje: Per-
cepci´ on actual y sentido original en el Megalitismo de la Sierra de Barbanza (Gali-
cia)
15. Csikszentmihalyi, M.: The flow experience and its significance for human psychol-
ogy. In: Optimal Experience: Psychological Studies of Flow in Consciousness, pp.
15–35. Cambridge University Press
16. Cuffari, E.C., Di Paolo, E., De Jaegher, H.: From participatory sense-making to
language: There and back again14(4), 1089–1125. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-
014-9404-9, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-014-9404-9
17. Fields, C., Levin, M.: How do Living Systems Create Meaning? 5(4),
36. https://doi.org/10.3390/philosophies5040036, https://www.mdpi.com/2409-
9287/5/4/36
18. Friston, K.: The free-energy principle: A unified brain
theory? 11(2), 127–138. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787,
https://www.nature.com/articles/nrn2787/boxes/bx1
19. Friston, K.: A free energy principle for a particular physics,
http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.10184
20. Friston, K.: A Free Energy Principle for Biological Systems 14(11), 2100–
2121. https://doi.org/10.3390/e14112100, https://www.mdpi.com/1099-
4300/14/11/2100
21. Friston, K.: Life as we know it 10(86), 20130475.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475, https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/full/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
22. Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., Pezzulo, G.: Active Infer-
ence: A Process Theory 29(1), 1–49. https://doi.org/10.1162/NECOa00912, https:
//doi.org/10.1162/NECO a00912
23. Friston, K.J., Ramstead, M.J.D., Kiefer, A.B., Tschantz, A., Buckley, C.L., Albarracin,
M., Pitliya, R.J., Heins, C., Klein, B., Millidge, B., Sakthivadivel, D.A.R., Smithe,
T.S.C., Koudahl, M., Tremblay, S.E., Petersen, C., Fung, K., Fox, J.G., Swanson,
S., Mapes, D., Ren´ e, G.: Designing Ecosystems of Intelligence from First Principles.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2212.01354, http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.01354
24. Froese, T.: Scientific Observation Is Socio-Materially Augmented Perception: To-
ward a Participatory Realism 7(2), 37. https://doi.org/10.3390/philosophies7020037,
https://www.mdpi.com/2409-9287/7/2/37
25. Gibson, J.J.: The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Houghton Mifflin
26. Gu´ enin-Carlut, A.: The Clothes of the Empire : An Active Inference account of identity
capture https://kairos-research.org/clothes-of-the-empire
27. Gu´ enin-Carlut, A.: Creating material and cultural landscapes - A constraints ontology
for multiscale socio-historical dynamics
28. Gu´ enin-Carlut, A.: On participatory realism https://kairos-research.org/on-
participatory-realism
29. Gu´ enin-Carlut, A., Brenac, I.: Social Constraints - Graphic https://osf.io/chwxm/
30. Gu´ enin-Carlut, A., White, B., Sganzerla, L.: The cognitive archeology of sociocultural
lifeforms. https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/qxszh, https://osf.io/qxszh/
31. Hesp, C., Ramstead, M.J., Constant, A., Badcock, P., Kirchhoff, M., Friston, K.: A
Multi-scale View of the Emergent Complexity of Life: A Free-Energy Proposal. In:
Georgiev, G.Y., Smart, J.M., Flores Martinez, C.L., Price, M.E. (eds.) Evolution, De-
velopment and Complexity. pp. 195–227. Springer Proceedings in Complexity, Springer
International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-00075-27
32. Hip´ olito, I.: A simple theory of every ‘thing’ 31, 79–85.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2019.10.006, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1571064519301575
14 A. Gu´ enin–Carlut and M. Albarracin.
33. Hip´ olito, I., Baltieri, M., Friston, K., Ramstead, M.J.: Embodied skillful per-
formance: Where the action is . https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02986-5,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02986-5
34. Hip´ olito, I., family=Es, given=Thomas, p.u.: Enactive-Dynamic Social Cogni-
tion and Active Inference 13, 855074. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.855074,
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9102990/
35. Hip´ olito, I., Hutto, D.D., Ilundain-Agurruza, J.: Culture in Mind -An
Enactivist Account: Not Cognitive Penetration But Cultural Permeation
https://www.academia.edu/34952478/CultureinMindAnEnactivistAccountNotCognitiveP enetrationButCulturalP ermeation
36. Kuchling, F., Friston, K., Georgiev, G., Levin, M.: Morphogenesis as Bayesian inference:
A variational approach to pattern formation and control in complex biological systems
33, 88–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2019.06.001
37. Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., Friston, K.: Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind,
Brain, and Behavior. MIT Press
38. Ramstead, M., Kirchhoff, M.D., Constant, A., Friston, K.J.: Multiscale integration:
Beyond internalism and externalism 198(1), 41–70. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-
019-02115-x, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02115-x
39. Ramstead, M., Veissi` ere, S.P., Kirmayer, L.J.: Cultural affordances: Scaffolding local
worlds through shared intentionality and regimes of attention 7, 1090
40. Ramstead, M.J., Constant, A., Badcock, P.B., Friston, K.: Variational ecology and the
physics of sentient systems 31, 188–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2018.12.002,
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S157106451930003X
41. Ramstead, M.J., Friston, K., Hip´ olito, I.: Is the Free-Energy Principle a Formal Theory
of Semantics? From Variational Density Dynamics to Neural and Phenotypic Represen-
tations 22(8), 889. https://doi.org/10.3390/e22080889, https://www.mdpi.com/1099-
4300/22/8/889
42. Seth, A.K.: Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embod-
ied self 17(11), 565–573. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.007,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364661313002118
43. Slingerland, E.: Trying Not to Try: The Ancient Art of Effortlessness and the Surprising
Power of Spontaneity. Canongate Books
44. Tison, R.: The fanciest sort of intentionality: Active inference, mindshaping
and linguistic content 0(0), 1–41. https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2022.2062315,
https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2022.2062315
45. Veissi` ere, S.P.L., Constant, A., Ramstead, M.J., Friston, K., Kirmayer,
L.J.: Thinking through other minds: A variational approach to cogni-
tion and culture 43 (2020/ed). https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X19001213,
https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/behavioral-and-brain-
sciences/article/thinking-through-other-minds-a-variational-approach-to-cognition-
and-culture/9A10399BA85F428D5943DD847092C14A
46. Wittgenstein, L.: Philosophical Investigations. Macmillan