Vol.:(0123456789)
Sports Medicine (2022) 52:2023–2038 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-022-01689-w
REVIEW ARTICLE
An Active Inference Account of Skilled Anticipation in Sport: Using 
Computational Models to Formalise Theory and Generate New 
Hypotheses
David J. Harris1  · Tom Arthur1 · David P . Broadbent2 · Mark R. Wilson1 · Samuel J. Vine1 · Oliver R. Runswick3
Accepted: 6 April 2022 / Published online: 3 May 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Optimal performance in time-constrained and dynamically changing environments depends on making reliable predictions 
about future outcomes. In sporting tasks, performers have been found to employ multiple information sources to maximise 
the accuracy of their predictions, but questions remain about how different information sources are weighted and integrated 
to guide anticipation. In this paper, we outline how predictive processing approaches, and active inference in particular, 
provide a unifying account of perception and action that explains many of the prominent findings in the sports anticipation 
literature. Active inference proposes that perception and action are underpinned by the organism’s need to remain within 
certain stable states. To this end, decision making approximates Bayesian inference and actions are used to minimise future 
prediction errors during brain–body–environment interactions. Using a series of Bayesian neurocomputational models based 
on a partially observable Markov process, we demonstrate that key findings from the literature can be recreated from the 
first principles of active inference. In doing so, we formulate a number of novel and empirically falsifiable hypotheses about 
human anticipation capabilities that could guide future investigations in the field.
 * David J. Harris 
 D.J.Harris@exeter.ac.uk
1 School of Sport and Health Sciences, College of Life 
and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, St Luke’s 
Campus, Exeter EX1 2LU, UK
2 Division of Sport, Health and Exercise Sciences, Department 
of Life Sciences, Brunel University London, London, UK
3 Department of Psychology, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology, and Neuroscience, King’s College London, 
London, UK
Key Points 
Predictive processing approaches to the brain are becom-
ing increasingly influential neuroscientific theories for 
understanding perception and action.
We outline how active inference, a predictive process-
ing approach, may be a fruitful theory for understanding 
expert anticipation in time-constrained tasks.
A series of computational models were used to illustrate 
how active inference parsimoniously accounts for previ-
ous empirical findings of sport anticipation.
1 Introduction
During tasks such as ball-striking sports, aviation or car 
driving, rapidly changing visual scenes may preclude the use 
of a purely reactive response strategy [1 –3]. Consequently, 
effective performance depends on anticipating future out -
comes [4]. Research into anticipatory behaviour has identi-
fied that during temporally constrained tasks, skilled indi-
viduals make better use of multiple sources of probabilistic 
information to anticipate future outcomes [5 –9]. However, 
a number of fundamental questions remain about when 
different information sources become available, the rela-
tive weighting afforded to each source, and how they are 
integrated in an efficient and effective manner [6 , 8, 10]. 
Answers to these questions may require looking beyond 
the traditional anticipation literature to more fundamental 
research into how the brain uses internal models to make 
predictions [11– 14]. In the present work, we outline how 
active inference, a unifying account of how predictive mod-
els guide perception and action [15–17], can account for key 
findings in the sports anticipation literature and may provide 
a framework for future work in this area [14].
2024 D. J. Harris et al.
1.1  Anticipation in Sport
Rather than waiting passively for stimulation, human brains 
are thought to continuously generate expectations about sen-
sory input, future states of the body and the surrounding 
environment [11, 18]. Making predictions facilitates better 
information pick-up [19], helps to disambiguate the noise 
present in the environment and our neural system [20], and 
assists perception and cognition by pre-sensitising repre -
sentations, leading to faster recognition and interpretation 
of stimuli [ 21]. The need for prediction is no more starkly 
illustrated than by the perceptual challenge of attempting to 
intercept a moving object, such as a tennis serve or baseball 
pitch [22]. Inherent visual processing delays mean that mov-
ing objects often cannot just be monitored. Instead, their 
future states must, in part, be predicted based on current 
states and internal models of likely trajectories [22–24]. This 
is the predictive challenge that faces elite athletes and has 
driven research interest into superior anticipation in time-
constrained tasks.
Previous work on sporting anticipation has illustrated that 
effective predictions can be made by attending to sources 
of current sensory information that provide early cues to 
likely outcomes. These include postural information such as 
the non-kicking leg of a penalty taker in soccer [ 25], rela-
tive motion between players in team sports [26], ball flight 
motion [27] and even auditory cues from racquet-ball con-
tact [28]. Predictions can be further improved by combin-
ing current sensory information with relevant probabilistic 
knowledge generated from contextual information, such as 
game score [29], or the playing tendencies [30] and location 
[31] of an opponent. Researchers have, however, called for 
a more detailed understanding of how various information 
sources are integrated, weighted and utilised over time [2 , 
6, 9, 10].
Initial research has supported the role of Bayesian prob-
ability computations in performing these information inte -
gration functions. Bayesian brain approaches contend that 
human perceptual computations are based on representing 
information sources as conditional probability density func-
tions (i.e. a distribution of possible values with a mean and 
variance), which are then combined according to their cer -
tainty or reliability [32]. For example, in a handball penalty 
kick task, Helm et al. [33] found that trained novice par -
ticipants integrated information sources (opponents’ kine-
matic information and action tendencies) according to their 
relative reliability, such that more informative action cues 
dominated over other ambiguous information. While this 
recent work provides compelling evidence that performers 
may employ Bayesian reliability-based strategies (for review, 
see Gredin et al. [8 ]), it has largely neglected to account 
for the dynamic interaction between the anticipator and the 
opponent [6 ]. This is partly owing to the frequent use of 
video stimuli in experiments, which have provided an impor-
tant foundation for anticipation research, but allow very lit-
tle interaction between the anticipator and the environment. 
Therefore, to begin to understand how more dynamic inter-
actions between the anticipator and their surrounding envi-
ronment shape anticipation, we require an alternative theo-
retical approach that is built on Bayesian inference principles 
but also explains more active and interactive anticipation-
enhancing behaviours.
1.2  Active Inference
Bayesian predictive processing models of the brain [15, 
34] portray perception as a process of continually making 
and revising hypotheses about the most likely causes of 
any incoming sensory stimulation (i.e. the hidden states of 
the world that are not sensed directly). Within a predictive 
processing approach, hypotheses or beliefs about the likely 
causes of sensations (e.g. the object from which a certain 
light pattern originates) are constantly revised by the sen-
sory prediction errors that occur when predictions do not 
fully account for sensations [35]. Predictions are based on 
an internal or ‘generative’ model of the world that encodes 
beliefs about uncertain environmental states and the hidden 
causal relationships that underpin dynamic sensory inter -
actions [20, 34]. Crucially, internal models can be used to 
predict new sensory data (e.g. the feedback expected when 
executing an action [36]), or can work backwards to infer 
the hidden states that likely caused some observation [37] 
(known as model inversion).
Active inference is an extension of this predictive pro-
cessing approach, applied to the use of action to minimise 
prediction errors. Active inference is rooted in the idea that 
the brain is a self-organising dynamical system (e.g. see 
Friston [20]) and must be understood as a product of its 
interactions with its surrounding environment. As a self-
organising system, the brain interacts with the environ-
ment in such a way as to remain within certain preferred 
stable states (e.g. homeostasis). This is achieved by seeking 
to minimise prediction errors from the environment [20], 
with computationally surprising observations indicating 
the system has deviated away from a preferred stable state. 
Crucially, active inference proposes that surprisal can be 
minimised by either revising the generative model following 
a prediction error (i.e. to improve future predictions) [35] or 
by actively changing the world into the expected state—the 
exact element that has been missing from much of the sport 
anticipation literature (Table 1). Active inference, therefore, 
is the extension of predictive processing to the use of actions 
to minimise future surprisal [14].
2025
Active Inference Anticipation
Optimising predictions about the world (to minimise pre-
diction error) requires integrating observed information with 
prior beliefs, according to their reliability or precision, in a 
continuous and dynamic manner. The implication for sport 
anticipation is that prior probabilistic knowledge (i.e. con -
textual information) and current sensory information will 
both be used wherever they are informative but weighted 
according to the expected precision of each. For instance, 
Gray and Cañal-Bruland [38] demonstrated that when base-
ball batters were provided with prior probabilistic informa-
tion about the likelihood of different pitch types, they altered 
swing kinematics in response to cue reliability. Crucially, 
information about the prior probability of the pitch types 
was relied upon more heavily when online visual informa-
tion was occluded to a greater degree (i.e. was known to be 
less precise). However, further empirical scrutiny is required 
to examine whether these context-sensitive actions repre-
sent Bayes-optimal processing in the human sensorimotor 
system.
1.3  Present Work
The extensive sport anticipation literature has recently been 
reviewed and summarised within the Model of Information 
Use During Anticipation in Striking Sports (MIDASS) by 
Runswick and colleagues [6 ]. Runswick et al. synthesise 
a range of empirical anticipation literature to outline how 
various information sources are integrated during skilled 
anticipation in striking sports, such as tennis or baseball. In 
doing so, they identify seven key principles for how prior 
probabilistic knowledge and current sensory cues are used; 
some have extensive empirical support, while others require 
future testing. Here, we used these seven principles as a 
guide to the main empirical results that a plausible theory of 
anticipation would need to account for. Therefore, we outline 
each of the principles identified in the Model of Informa-
tion Use During Anticipation in Striking Sports framework 
and simulate the corresponding Bayes-optimal anticipatory 
behaviour within a computational model (see Fig.  1). We 
used this as a way of discussing the core principles of active 
inference and how they can be applied to sport anticipation. 
While there has been much empirical research in this area, 
it perhaps lacks an underpinning neuroscientific theory. Our 
aim is not to provide detailed models of specific tasks or to 
prove these seven principles, indeed, they are already sup-
ported by extensive empirical work, instead, we aim to dem-
onstrate the utility of active inference for understanding why 
and how these patterns of anticipatory behaviours emerge. 
As a development of existing theory, we also describe how 
an active inference scheme leads to additional predictions 
about anticipatory behaviour. These new predictions, gener-
ated from synthesising frameworks from sport science and 
neurocomputational psychology, present new hypotheses 
that can be examined in future empirical work.
2  Methods
Computational models that simulate the Bayes-optimal 
behaviour of hypothetical observers have been used 
widely in the active inference literature and applied to 
areas such as language, interoception and visual illusions 
[39–41]. The aim of this simulation modelling approach 
is to demonstrate what Bayes-optimal behaviour is like 
(under plausible constraints), how it relates to observed 
human behaviour and how active inference can account 
for empirical findings. Crucially, this is not a mechanis-
tic claim that humans employ exact Bayesian inference 
[42, 43]. Rather, it is an illustration of how human behav -
iour may approximate Bayesian inference under different 
environmental constraints. Bayesian modelling approaches 
have previously been criticised as unfalsifiable on the basis 
that the free parameters of such models enable them to 
fit almost any behaviour. However, this is not a uniquely 
Bayesian issue, as computational models of all varieties 
are similarly flexible [42]. More importantly, the point of 
this approach is to better understand the perceptual prob-
lem and generate testable hypotheses about how human 
Table 1  Definitions for active inference-related terminology
Dynamical system A system whose state evolves over time according to a fixed rule, i.e. the values of key variables in a dynamical 
system can be modelled as functions of those same variables at earlier timepoints
Free energy A measure derived from information theory that provides an upper bound on the surprisal of some data. Under 
simplifying assumptions, free energy is equivalent to the sum of prediction errors
Posterior The updated belief after combining a prior belief and some newly observed information
Precision The expected confidence or reliability of a piece of information, formally, the reciprocal of the variance of its 
probability distribution
Prior A probability distribution that would express one’s beliefs about a hidden state or parameter
Self-organisation A process whereby overall order arises from the local interactions between parts of a system
Sensory prediction errors The computed difference between predicted and actual sensory input
Surprisal A measure of the unexpectedness of a stimulus. Mathematically, the negative log-probability of the event outcome
2026 D. J. Harris et al.
observers solve that problem, rather than for the models 
themselves to provide empirical evidence.
Here, we used this simulation approach as a method to 
demonstrate the basic principles of active inference and how 
they may play out during a sport anticipation task. We pre-
sent a simple scenario, commonly used in previous empirical 
research, in which a performer must intercept a moving ball 
that has a number of different possible speed and flight pro-
files [27, 38]. This could apply to the delivery of a fastball 
or curveball in baseball, or a normal speed vs a slower ball 
in cricket (where unexpectedly slower deliveries are often 
missed or shots are mistimed). We model the situation where 
an observer is required to anticipate and intercept a ball that 
has one of two possible trajectories, referred to as ‘normal’ 
and ‘change-up’ hereafter. Accordingly, we also draw on 
examples from cricket and baseball to illustrate many of the 
effects.
2.1  Model Simulations
The partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) 
modelling approach used here is based on a Bayesian gener-
ative model of perception derived from the Markov decision 
process formulation of active inference [17]. The POMDP 
models assume the Markov property in the sense that the 
generative model operates entirely on local information, as 
all previous states are encoded within current beliefs. Within 
the POMDP model, prior beliefs about hidden states such 
Fig. 1  Bayesian network representation of the partially observable 
Markov decision process model. Note. The network (top) depicts the 
vectors and matrices that are used to model anticipatory behaviour. 
Circles (‘nodes’) within the network correspond to the following 
variables: s = hidden state to be inferred, o = observations, π = possi-
ble action choices, G = expected free energy. Squares indicate factors 
mediating conditional relationships, which take the form of matri-
ces in the model: A = likelihood mapping between hidden states and 
observations (i.e. (o τ|sτ)), D = priors over hidden states (i.e. (s 1)), 
B = state transition matrices encoding beliefs about how hidden states 
evolve over time (i.e. (sτ+1|sτ,)). Observation and state subscripts indi-
cate timepoints within a trial (τ). When τ > 1, the B matrix from τ − 1 
acts as an empirical prior (as D vector at τ = 1). C = matrices encod-
ing prior preferences over particular observations and behavioural 
states. Arrows connecting nodes indicate dependencies between vari-
ables. The lower elements of the figure depict Bayes theorem, which 
specifies how a prior belief is updated via observed instances to form 
the posterior belief
2027
Active Inference Anticipation
as contextual information (s τ: which ball is more likely?) 
take the form of categorical probability distributions that are 
updated through integrating beliefs about past states (s τ−1: 
which ball have I just faced?), current sensory information 
(oτ: what ball do kinematic cues indicate?) and beliefs about 
future states (sτ +1 : which ball is likely to come next?). When 
the observer influences outcomes with their actions (π), tran-
sitions between states (B τ) become conditional on actions, 
which means future prediction errors are being minimised 
through action (i.e. active inference). See Table 2 for a sum-
mary of the computational terms.
An observer’s beliefs about the utility of action policies 
(i.e. its expected value) depends on the negative log evidence 
it expects to obtain for each policy, that is, the expected free 
energy (denoted G). G is calculated from expected outcomes 
(and their precision) but also from preferred outcomes (or 
prior preferences, specified in the C matrix). The POMDP 
model proceeds to estimate the posterior over states via an 
optimisation routine (based on gradient descent) that aims to 
minimise free energy in the model. This routine determines 
what a Bayes-optimal integration of probabilities would be, 
given the starting conditions, and therefore the actions of 
the observer.
We present models of two general anticipation scenarios: 
a ‘simple scenario’ and a ‘trade-off scenario’. In both, the 
observer is required to anticipate and respond to the ‘nor -
mal’ or ‘change-up’ ball. In the simple scenario, the observer 
receives sensory information in the form of a cue early in 
each trial, which provides information about the most likely 
outcomes (akin to observing early kinematic cues from the 
opponent delivering the ball). However, the informational 
properties of the cue and the observer’s prior beliefs (i.e. 
contextual information related to whether ‘normal’ balls 
are more or less likely) are manipulated across the differ -
ent examples to illustrate the effect this has on anticipation. 
In the trade-off scenario, the sensory information is only 
observable later, relative to action initiation, such that wait-
ing for the new information incurs a cost to the value of the 
outcome. This is modelled by a lower expected reward value 
(i.e. a reduced preference for the outcome), to simulate the 
impairment that can occur in dynamic tasks if actions are 
initiated too late. Consequently, this scenario trades off the 
benefit of early predictions with greater certainty about out-
comes. See Smith et al. [44] for further explanation of the 
mathematical formalism of these models, or the additional 
detail in the Electronic Supplementary Material [ESM] 
(https:// osf. io/ 8bpkr/) or the MATLAB code available from 
the ESM (https:// osf. io/ vuy8e/).
3  Results
In this section, we present the simulations of anticipatory 
behaviour when Bayes-optimal observers acted to intercept 
a series of ‘normal’ or ‘change-up’ balls with variation in the 
reliability of current sensory cues (e.g. ball flight, postural 
Table 2  Description of computational elements for generative model
Model variable General definition Model-specific definition
τ Timepoint within a trial In both scenarios (‘simple’ and ‘trade-off’), there are three 
timepoints: start state, seeing the cue (sensory informa-
tion), and finally anticipating the ball and observing the 
outcome
oτ Observable outcomes at time τ 1. Ball with normal trajectory
2. Ball with change-up trajectory
sτ Hidden states at time τ 1. Normal ball
2. Change-up ball
A matrix (p(oτ|sτ)) Matrix encoding beliefs about the relationship between hid-
den states and observable outcomes (i.e. the likelihood)
Beliefs about the relationship between observed sensory 
information and hidden state of ball trajectory. Addition-
ally, beliefs about the likelihood of being correct
B matrix (p(sτ+1|sτ)) Matrix encoding how beliefs about states will evolve over 
time
Encodes the prior belief that either a normal or change-up 
ball would occur on each trial (i.e. contextual information)
D vector (p(sτ = 1)) Matrix encoding beliefs about initial hidden states Starting prior belief about the prevalence of normal and 
change-up balls (i.e. contextual information)
π Action policy probabilities Prior distribution over policies (anticipate normal or change-
up), made up of preferences for particular policies (not 
used here) and the expected free energy (G) of each policy
G Expected free energy Evaluates the value of anticipating normal or change-up 
based on the preferred and expected observations for each 
policy
C Preferred outcomes A matrix encoding the ‘reward’ or ‘loss’ value (i.e. prior 
preference) for each possible outcome
2028 D. J. Harris et al.
information) and prior probabilistic knowledge (e.g. previ-
ous encounters with the pitcher). In the models, we refer to 
‘free energy’, an information theoretic concept that relates 
to the surprisal of the data (see Table 1 for definitions). For 
current purposes, free energy can be understood as a pre-
diction error, and the selections of actions by the observers 
in the model are driven by the need to minimise future or 
expected free energy with their action choices. We modelled 
a simple scenario where the observer could make an antici-
patory action (e.g. movement towards the ball) that would 
enhance their chances of success, provided they had antici-
pated correctly. Simple adaptations to the starting conditions 
of the models generated a range of anticipatory behaviours 
that corresponded closely with previous empirical findings 
and the main anticipation principles outlined by Runswick 
et al. [6].
3.1  Principle 1
“Both contextual and current sensory information can influ-
ence anticipation performance directly, but this effect is 
neutral (chance level) until knowledge of the relationships 
between information sources and event outcomes is devel-
oped by a performer” (Runswick et al. [6], p. 204).
This principle is based on studies that have shown task 
experts, with their extensive domain knowledge, are better 
able to make use of both prior knowledge of context and cur-
rent sensory information during anticipation [45, 46]. Active 
inference explains this effect through the more developed 
Fig. 2  Partially observable Markov decision process simulations of 
action choices (left), anticipation success % (middle), and prior and 
posterior beliefs about p(change-up) [right] for 50 observers across 
50 consecutive trials. Note: plots on the left represent the mean (yel-
low line) proportion of actions that were made to anticipate the nor -
mal ball (light blue 95% confidence intervals). The white dotted line 
represents the veridical probability in the left column, and the shift 
point in the middle column. Beta density plots in the right column, 
which describe the density (y-axis) of a continuous probability distri-
bution defined over the interval [0, 1] (x-axis), indicate the mean prior 
and posterior beliefs over the 50 simulated observers
2029
Active Inference Anticipation
state of the expert performer’s generative model, which is 
better able to make predictions from the context and inter -
pret sensory information [37]. Without existing knowledge, 
prior beliefs about the context or sensory information will 
equate to a flat probability distribution (e.g. Fig.  3A) and 
will have little influence on action selection [32].
The POMDP model simulations (Fig. 2) illustrated that in 
our simple anticipation scenario, preventing learning about 
either prior context or the relevance of sensory informa-
tion (any early cues) led to random guessing about the most 
appropriate actions by simulated observers. When prior 
context or sensory cue learning was enabled, performance 
improved over time as informative beliefs developed. Results 
(Fig. 2) show that using either the sensory information or 
the known context can aid performance, but only after the 
generative model has been developed, as has been observed 
from empirical work [45, 46]. The simulations also suggest 
that prior context and current sensory cues may differentially 
affect the speed with which observers are able to respond to 
environmental changes (e.g. the contrasting effect of revers-
ing the frequency of normal and change-up balls [i.e. context 
reversal] in Fig. 2C, D).
3.2  Principle 2
“Contextual information is available before current sen-
sory information. Earlier judgements are therefore based 
predominantly on context. Information available later 
(e.g. postural cues or ball-flight) will be used to confirm, 
update, or override original judgements” (Runswick et al. 
[6], p. 204).
As active inference is based on Bayesian probabilistic 
integration, the relative influence of contextual information 
and current sensory information at different timepoints is 
a direct result of the expected precision of the respective 
information sources, i.e. how reliable it is believed to be 
[8, 15, 32]. Hence, sensory information that is evaluated as 
more reliable or precise will overwhelm an imprecise prior 
belief about contextual information to dictate the posterior, 
and subsequently action selection (see Fig. 3A).
Figure 3B, C illustrate this effect for two single-trial sim-
ulations where beliefs about the more likely hidden state 
(normal or change-up) are updated across timepoints within 
a single trial according to the precision of each informational 
source, resulting in different action selections. These simula-
tions correspond closely with many empirical findings in the 
Fig. 3  Illustrative probability distributions during belief updating (A), 
and plots of fluctuating beliefs within single trials from a partially 
observable Markov decision process model (B, C). Note: plots in B 
and C show the strength of posteriors over hidden states at the end 
of a single trial (i.e. what the observer believed at each timepoint τ, 
when at the last time point t): τ = 1 is the starting state, τ = 2 is when 
the sensory information is observed, and τ = 3 is after the observer 
has seen the true outcome. In the plots, darker squares indicate 
higher probability values for beliefs about states (top) or likelihood 
of selecting actions (bottom), and the cyan dots denote the true states. 
The ‘hidden states’ box displays the observer’s beliefs about the ball 
and the ‘action choice’ box shows the most likely (darker squares) 
and actual (i) anticipatory actions the observer selected. In B, the 
observer began with a strong prior belief about contextual informa-
tion (that normal was more likely), but the subsequent sensory infor -
mation was uncertain. Hence, observing sensory information that 
indicates the change-up was coming was insufficient to revise their 
belief, and they still acted to anticipate the normal ball. Even after 
clearly observing the change-up ball, their belief about the true con-
textual information remained uncertain (grey squares at τ = 3 in B). In 
C, the observer begins with a less precise prior belief that normal is 
the true context and receives more precise sensory information. Con-
sequently, beliefs are revised at τ = 2 when the sensory information 
is observed and the observer acts to anticipate the change-up ball. 
In effect, under a strong prior belief about contextual information 
(B) the sensory information had little impact on beliefs and action 
choices, but when the current sensory information was more certain 
(C) beliefs were adjusted during the trial and a different action was 
selected
2030 D. J. Harris et al.
sport anticipation literature [33, 38, 47, 48]. For instance, 
Runswick et al. [46] found participants relied heavily on 
game context information when the delivery of a cricket ball 
was occluded at an early stage, but increasingly employed 
current sensory information for later occlusions, as the preci-
sion of the kinematic cues (e.g. bowler’s action) increased 
(see also [47]).
3.3  Principle 3 [and 4]
“When information is congruent [incongruent] with the 
event outcome, this will enhance [impair] anticipation per -
formance and the greatest positive [negative] impact on 
performance will occur when all sources of contextual and 
sensory information are congruent [incongruent] with the 
event outcome” (Runswick et al. [6], p. 205).
3.4  Principle 6
“The opponent can deliberately manipulate information 
sources to his/her advantage to decrease anticipation accu-
racy. This effect occurs by deliberately developing incongru-
ent relationships between contextual information, sensory 
information, and event outcome” (Runswick et al. [6 ], p. 
206).
These three principles, which all relate to the congruency 
of available information with the true outcome, describe how 
knowledge of prior contextual information and current sen-
sory information can influence performance either positively 
or negatively, depending on their truth [49]. The congruency 
of information sources can vary naturally (e.g. an attempted 
curveball of a baseball pitcher still goes straight) or can be 
deliberately manipulated by an opponent as an attempt to 
gain an advantage (e.g. when the pitcher disguises their cur-
veball). For instance, following a training phase in which 
they learned the likely throwing direction of an opponent, 
handball goalkeepers were more accurate at anticipating 
throwing direction when it was congruent with their train-
ing experience, and vice-versa [30]. Similarly, Jackson et al. 
[50] demonstrated this congruency effect for deceptive ‘ste-
pover’ actions in soccer, which were more likely to deceive 
the observer when congruent with known high-probability 
outcomes. Within active inference and predictive processing 
schemes, beliefs are the product of integrating information 
sources according to their precision [32]. Hence, if either 
is incongruent with the true outcome, but believed to be 
accurate, expectations about likely outcomes will initially 
be skewed by the inaccurate information source, until they 
are learnt to be imprecise.
The POMDP simulations (see Fig.  4) using the same 
scenario as for principle 1 illustrated that anticipation was 
indeed more accurate when observers were provided with 
a congruent source of information, and even better when 
both online sensory and prior contextual information were 
congruent, as observed in studies of anticipation [51, 52]. 
The results also suggest that incongruent information will 
negatively affect anticipation initially, but the effects should 
diminish over time as the generative model adapts, or as 
skill levels increase. From the perspective of the opponent, 
deceptive cues may, therefore, only result in a temporary 
advantage when other reliable information is also available.
3.5  Principle 5
“Congruent and incongruent information can act simultane-
ously; the overall anticipation performance will depend on 
how the anticipator prioritises information and the reliability 
of information sources and the point of time in the anticipa-
tion process” (Runswick et al. [6], p. 206).
This principle relates closely to those above (3/4 and 6) 
but highlights the importance of how different informational 
sources are weighted during anticipation. Active inference 
and related Bayesian approaches identify expected precision 
as the key determinant of how informational sources will be 
weighted [15, 32, 34]. Either prior contextual information 
or current sensory information can be prioritised depend -
ing on their reliability, which is realised through modulat-
ing the strength of neuronal error signals [35]. Studies of 
anticipation have shown that performers do not always use 
all available information [53, 54]. For instance, in a simu-
lated handball task, Helm et al. [33] found that observers 
relied more heavily on prior contextual information when 
current sensory information was more uncertain because of 
disguised actions.
The POMDP simulations in Fig.  5A illustrate this effect 
for the simple scenario when contextual information and 
sensory information were placed in conflict, i.e. prior beliefs 
about contextual information favoured one ball type and 
current sensory information indicated the converse. Here, 
observers aligned their anticipatory behaviour with which-
ever source was believed to be more reliable, much as in the 
single-trial simulations in Fig.  3. In addition to integrating 
information sources according to expected precision, active 
inference also predicts that action selection will be based on 
the expected precision of free energy over action policies. 
This means actions will be favoured when the observer is 
able to accurately predict their effects, but habitual responses 
(i.e. reliable actions that are low in uncertainty) will be 
favored when the precision of alternatives is low. As a result, 
the observer may not always act precisely in line with their 
beliefs about the most likely outcome, they will also act 
according to how well they can predict the effects of their 
action. Simulations in Fig.  5B illustrate this effect within a 
POMDP model of the trade-off scenario, where the observer 
opted to anticipate early when they were certain about the 
2031
Active Inference Anticipation
effects of their actions but waited for additional sensory cues 
when they were unsure.
3.6  Principle 7
“The responder can deliberately manipulate situations to 
his/her advantage and increase anticipation accuracy” (Run-
swick et al. [6], p. 207).
An issue that has so far received limited attention in the 
sports anticipation literature is how performers can delib-
erately manipulate situations to enhance predictions by 
increasing the likelihood of certain outcomes. This lack of 
focus on the interaction between performer and environ-
ment may be due to the traditional experimental paradigm 
of responding to video clips, where action choices have no 
influence on outcomes. Indeed, to move research in this area 
forward, it would be useful to incorporate more continuous 
Fig. 4  Partially observable Markov decision process model results 
showing anticipatory action choices (left in each panel) and perfor -
mance (right in each panel) for congruent and incongruent informa-
tion sources using 50 simulated observers over 100 consecutive trials 
in the simple scenario. Note: the left-hand plot of each panel A–D 
shows the proportion of actions that were made to anticipate the nor -
mal ball (white dotted line represents the veridical probability), and 
the right-hand plot of each panel shows the mean proportion of suc-
cesses (yellow horizontal line is chance performance). The plotted 
yellow line indicates the mean (light blue 95% confidence intervals). 
When both information sources are congruent, performance is good 
and responses are close to the true outcome (A). When the sensory 
information source is incongruent but the contextual information is 
congruent (B), the observer is initially biased by the incorrect sen-
sory information. However, as the observer learns that the sensory 
information is either unreliable or might even specify the opposite 
outcome, action selection comes to be dominated by the more reli-
able contextual information and observers rigidly stick to predicting 
the normal ball only. When the contextual information is incongruent 
(C), and more precise than the sensory information, responses are ini-
tially heavily biased towards the wrong outcome, which appears to be 
the optimal choice, but this is quickly unlearnt (although depends on 
the strength of the contextual information). Finally, when both infor -
mation sources are incongruent with the true state (D), performance 
is worse than guessing but begins to improve as the observer unlearns 
their beliefs about the contextual and sensory information through 
observing the true outcomes. Indeed, their performance will continue 
to improve over further trials as they learn the true mappings of the 
information. Where there was at least one incongruent source, perfor -
mance was initially very poor, but improved over trials as the incon-
gruent information was learnt to be unreliable (i.e. low precision) 
and came to be down weighted in posterior beliefs. This learning was 
much slower when both information sources were incongruent (as 
in Jackson et  al. [50]]). Incongruent sensory information appeared 
to cause a more permanent disruption, as beliefs about contextual 
information were quickly adjusted (C) but incongruent sensory infor -
mation caused a lasting decrement (B). The lower plots summarise 
the overall performance and the total free energy in each condition 
(where more negative is greater)
2032 D. J. Harris et al.
Fig. 5  Partially observable Markov decision process simulations illustrating the effect of the precision of prior beliefs about contextual information and current sensory information (A) and the 
precision of beliefs about action outcomes (B). Note: in the simple scenario (A), the true occurrence of normal and change-up balls was set at 50/50. Fifty observers held a prior belief about the 
contextual information that ‘normal’ balls were more likely, but current sensory information always indicated that ‘change-up’ was more likely than ‘normal’. The ratio of beliefs about the con-
flicting sources remained the same across the two conditions (four to one), but the precision changed, such that in the top scenario the stronger beliefs about the informational value of the sen-
sory information dominated action choices, and vice versa in the bottom left. Beta density plots (left) show the strength of the prior and posterior for the two simulations, and the action choices 
plots show the proportion of anticipatory actions favouring the normal vs the change-up ball. For the trade-off scenario in (B), the plots show the actions that were chosen by the observer (blue 
dots) along with the probability of those actions being selected (i.e. the action probability; darker squares indicate higher probability). Here, prior beliefs about contextual information or sensory 
information do not vary, but the precision of beliefs about expected free energy for different action policies (G in the network model; Fig.  1) decreases over the four conditions (B1–B4). When 
beliefs were more certain (B1), the observer chose to anticipate early to maximise the reward value of their action. However, when the precision of G was lower (B4), the observer was informa-
tion seeking and chose to wait for later sensory information. In the middle panels (B2 and B3), the observer shows a mix of waiting and predicting early, as they learn the most effective strategy
2033
Active Inference Anticipation
Fig. 6  Single observer simulations across trials in the trade-off sce-
nario (A) for low (A1), medium (A2), or high (A3) reward values, 
and the effect of a volatile environment on free energy (B). Note: in 
the trade-off scenario in (A), each plot shows the actions that were 
chosen by the observer (blue dots) along with the probability of those 
actions being selected (i.e. the action probability; darker squares indi-
cate higher probability). The observer has the option to wait for the 
sensory information or execute an early anticipatory action. In all 
three scenarios, the observer starts with a weak prior belief that the 
contextual information is 50/50 (true context is 80/20) and veridical 
knowledge of the relationship between the sensory information and 
hidden states. The observer is clearly information seeking in A1, 
when rewards are low, and reward seeking in A3 when rewards are 
high. Crucially, in A2, the observer initially waits for the sensory 
information (and guesses a little), but switches to predicting the nor -
mal ball after they have learned about the 80/20 contextual informa-
tion. B Illustrates the effect of a volatile trial order on free energy in 
the simple scenario. Here, a ‘hierarchical’ model was used to illus-
trate the effect of contextual volatility. In addition to perceiving nor -
mal and change-up balls as depicted in the model in Fig.  1, a higher 
level was added that recognised the stability of the wider context 
(i.e. how changeable the trial order was). Hence, the probability of 
‘normal’ and ‘change-up’ was encoded at the lower level while the 
changeability of the environment was encoded at the higher level. 
When comparing the predictable (stable) with the unpredictably 
changeable (volatile) trial orders, observers (n = 50) had equivalent 
beliefs about the likelihood of change-up balls (note similar posteri-
ors in the ‘lower’ plots) and similar levels of free energy, as the mar -
ginal likelihood of normal/change-up balls was matched. However, 
expectations about stable contextual information (i.e. sequences of 
normal/change-up balls) at the higher level produced high levels of 
free energy when trial order was unpredictable. Under active infer -
ence, these greater prediction errors should lead to a greater weight-
ing of recent information when making decisions in a more uncertain 
environment (see Arthur and Harris [63] for an example)
2034 D. J. Harris et al.
interactions between the performer and environment in 
experimental designs, whether that is through more inter -
active video-based paradigms, virtual reality or field work. 
From an active inference perspective, how actions interact 
with the environment is a crucial component of anticipation 
because action is one way to resolve uncertainty [16, 55]. 
In essence, uncertainty can be minimised by: (i) choosing 
to wait for additional information or (ii) acting in a way that 
biases the situation towards more predicted outcomes [56].
At one level, performers can manipulate the situation 
by adapting a motor action to avoid prediction errors. For 
instance, in a study of cricket batters, Sarpeshkar et al. 
[57] report that when balls with a straight trajectory were 
interleaved with those with a curvilinear (i.e. swinging) 
trajectory “the uncertainty created by ball-swing signifi-
cantly altered movement behaviour …, with batters mov -
ing closer to the ball and hitting it earlier” (p. 98), thereby 
minimising prediction error. Alternatively, actions can 
be used to deliberately bias the behaviour of another per -
former, such as making space for an opponent to move 
into (to confirm the observer’s predictions) or closing 
down space to force them into a decision (disambiguat -
ing between uncertain hidden states). In summary, the 
interacting role of the performer and environment during 
skilled anticipation is not well understood, but may be one 
of the key methods that performers resolve uncertainty and 
maximise their predictive abilities. While the modelling of 
complex multi-person interactions is beyond the scope of 
the current paper, the principles of prediction error mini-
misation, maximisation of preferred outcomes and preci-
sion weighting of information that we have described will 
also guide action choices in these situations.
3.7  Additional Hypotheses About Anticipatory 
Behaviour Derived from Active Inference 
Modelling
3.7.1  Reward Value and Loss Aversion
During active inference, the calculation of expected free 
energy is driven not only by uncertainty minimisation (i.e. 
epistemic value) but also maximising ‘reward value’ (i.e. 
pragmatic value) [55, 58]. As active inference is a belief-
based system, reward refers to achieving preferred outcomes 
and observations, rather than some objective value func-
tion as conceptualised within reinforcement learning (see 
Sajid et al. [56]). This means actions are information seeking 
under uncertainty, but reward seeking when confidence in 
beliefs is already high (i.e. when there is no more uncertainty 
to resolve) [58]. Consequently, anticipatory behaviours will 
be influenced by preferred, as well as likely, outcomes. Sup-
portive findings have been observed in motor control tasks 
[59], as well as sporting anticipation, where cricket batters’ 
estimates of ball direction were biased towards the stumps 
[52], which could reflect the weighting of predictions by the 
potential loss incurred if the ball hit the stumps (see also 
Gredin et al. [60] in soccer).
Simulations of the trade-off scenario with varying reward 
values (see Fig. 6) illustrate this effect of preferred outcomes 
on action selection, where lower reward values led to wait-
ing for the sensory information (resolving uncertainty; Panel 
A) but higher reward led to riskier early predictions (seeking 
reward; Panel C). Figure 6B illustrates how observers may be 
information seeking initially and wait for later onset sensory 
information but search out preferred outcomes once they are 
more certain in their ability to make predictions from contex-
tual information alone. In sporting terms, this could equate 
to initially conservative swing selection by baseball batters 
to ensure a hit against an unpredictable pitcher, compared to 
seeking out higher rewards (but at greater risk) when they 
become more familiar with the pitching style (i.e. looking 
for home runs). The weighting of such rewards will therefore 
depend on individual preferences for particular outcomes and 
tendencies toward reward seeking or loss aversion.
3.7.2  Changing Probabilistic Contexts
Another factor that has received limited attention in the antici-
pation literature is the changeability of probabilistic contextual 
information. The simulations presented here, and in previous 
studies in this area [38], have mostly examined changes in 
the marginal probability of different outcomes (e.g. a more 
or less likely fast ball in baseball). This is known as expected 
uncertainty; a form of uncertainty that arises from probabilistic 
relationships that exist in the world (e.g. the outcome of a dice 
is more uncertain than a coin toss) [61]. However, probabilis-
tic relationships between a stimulus and an outcome can also 
be more, or less, changeable. This is known as unexpected 
uncertainty or volatility [ 61, 62]. Active inference predicts 
that unexpected shifts in probabilistic relationships creates 
additional uncertainty, which leads to greater weight being 
placed on more recent information. Simulations in Fig.  6B 
illustrate results from a hierarchical POMDP model where 
beliefs about the stability/volatility of the environment (i.e. 
how changeable trial order sequences are) are encoded at a 
higher level, while beliefs about the marginal likelihood of 
normal/change-up balls (contextual information) are encoded 
at a lower level. Here, expectations of stable contextual infor-
mation related to trial order produced high levels of prediction 
error (free energy) when that expectation was violated, which 
should induce additional uncertainty about predictions. This 
effect has recently been illustrated in an interceptive motor task 
[63] where anticipatory eye movement profiles were adjusted 
according to the volatility of ball elasticity changes over time. 
2035
Active Inference Anticipation
A functionally increased learning rate was also observed when 
recent contextual information was more changeable. While 
these effects are likely to be subtle in comparison to changes 
in marginal probabilities, the changeability of probabilistic 
contextual information may be an important route for future 
work in anticipation.
4  Discussion
Two broad sources of information, prior contextual informa-
tion and current sensory information, enable performers to 
predict future outcomes in dynamic tasks when processing 
latencies prevent a purely reactive response strategy [5, 6, 8, 
9]. However, key questions remain about how these sources 
of information are integrated and when each is prioritised 
[10]. Here, we have presented a series of computational 
models that not only provide a framework for answering 
these questions, but can also be used to generate new, theo-
retically driven hypotheses for research in this area. This 
modelling approach demonstrates the effectiveness of active 
inference for explaining the neurocomputational mecha-
nisms behind the anticipatory behaviours observed in pre-
vious empirical work. These statistically driven conceptions 
of human behavior could unify wide-ranging theories of 
sporting performance, in a manner that is both biologically 
plausible and potentially valuable for applied practitioners.
The simulations demonstrated that the key principles 
arising from the skilled anticipation literature, as recently 
described by Runswick et al. [6 ], were accounted for by 
simple active inference models. This was largely achieved 
by varying the precision of available information sources 
(e.g. Fig. 5). We were also able to demonstrate the negative 
effect that incongruent information, from prior contextual 
information or current sensory information, would have on 
anticipation performance and how the reliability of such 
information can be learned and un-learned (e.g. Figs.  3, 4). 
It is important to note that the models presented are generic 
models that could be applied to numerous anticipation (or 
other decision-making) scenarios, which illustrates the flex-
ibility and applicability of this approach to many behaviours. 
Crucially, these results illustrate that the key empirical find-
ings about skilled anticipation fit neatly within an active 
inference framework.
As discussed, active inference is based on the assumption 
that individuals seek to maximise the predictive power of 
their model of the world, via minimising prediction error 
(free energy) [20, 55]. One way to do so, is to act on the 
world so as to minimise the surprisal of observations, such 
as hitting a ball earlier to minimise the possibility of a devi-
ation [57], or waiting to collect more information before 
acting (as in Fig.  6A). This idea can significantly expand 
research into skilled anticipation to investigate how actions 
are used to maximise predictions, an issue that has been 
largely overlooked to date [6]. Moreover, this principle may 
also help us to understand other aspects of expertise. For 
instance, predictive visual behaviours are also an ‘action’ 
that aims to minimise surprisal through information sam-
pling that either confirms predictions or disambiguates 
between possible outcomes [64]. An additional benefit of 
active inference is that it flexibly accounts for individual 
differences in anticipation that have been observed [65] via 
different prior beliefs and subjective expectations of preci-
sion. Therefore, adopting an active inference approach in 
future work could make a considerable contribution to our 
understanding of anticipation and sporting expertise more 
generally. Specifically, there are several reasons to suggest 
active inference can be a useful framework for future work:
1. Key Findings in the Skilled Anticipation Litera-
ture Are All Direct Predictions of Active Inference 
Accounts of Perception and Action Not only is active 
inference able to retrospectively account for many of 
the key findings in this area (as we have shown), but 
someone with no knowledge of the anticipation litera-
ture could most likely predict these findings if equipped 
with only a knowledge of the first principles of active 
inference. The true test of this approach, however, will 
be whether subsequent predictions derived from active 
inference (e.g. as we outline above) continue to be sup-
ported.
2. Active Inference is Biologically Plausible Active infer-
ence is not just a higher level conceptual framework, it 
is also realised in neuronal encoding [15 ]. Predictive 
coding models that describe how the sensory cortex 
makes inferences about sensory inputs [ 15, 34] can 
be implemented using simple computational elements 
and therefore could plausibly be performed by biologi-
cal networks of neurons [66 ]. Indeed, there is growing 
evidence that populations of neurons enact the type of 
belief updating described in active inference and predic-
tive coding theories [35] as well as modulate neuronal 
signal strength (gain) in proportion to signal preci-
sion [15, 66]. Those adopting a strong active inference 
position have even suggested that the organisation of 
descending connections in the motor cortex indicates 
that movements are not the result of motor commands, 
but are the fulfillment of motor predictions [35, 67].
3. People Behave in a Qualitatively Bayes-Optimal Way 
in Many Tasks A primary source of support for Bayes-
ian brain approaches comes from empirical findings 
that illustrate human observers act in a manner consist-
ent with Bayes-optimal models of behaviour [32]. For 
instance, during sensorimotor control [36], visual illu-
sions [68] and associative learning [69], humans are near 
2036 D. J. Harris et al.
optimal in weighting the uncertainties that characterise 
prior beliefs and sensory inputs.
4. Active Inference Provides a Unifying Framework 
and Generates Testable Predictions Work by Friston 
and colleagues [15, 16, 58] extending predictive coding 
into the domain of action has created a deeply unified 
account of perception, cognition and action. An account 
that is rooted in the idea of the brain as a self-organising 
dynamical system and that highlights the importance of 
person-environment interactions [11]. However, perhaps 
the most compelling argument for adopting an active 
inference approach is that it provides clear testable pre-
dictions (especially when based on computational mod-
els), which is an ideal starting point for hypothesis test-
ing. Outlining testable predictions was the primary aim 
of the Model of Information Use During Anticipation in 
Striking Sports [6], but the extension to active inference 
places these predictions on a more formal footing. As 
Griffiths et al. [42] note, the power of Bayesian frame-
works may not even lie in their ‘truth’ but their potential 
for generating new predictions.
  An important caveat for the present approach is that 
the correspondence of computational models with 
observed data does not necessitate that observed behav-
iours were generated from the same computations. 
Indeed, Bayesian models of the brain do not necessarily 
claim that the human perceptual system is ‘optimal’, nor 
that it calculates probabilities in the same way as a com-
putational model [42]. Rather, human behaviour may be 
Bayes-optimal with respect to a number of assumptions 
or constraints [11].
5  Conclusions
In summary, we have demonstrated that active inference 
can account for various well-established findings within 
the sport anticipation literature via a few simple principles 
(e.g. prediction error minimisation and precision-weighted 
inference). While previous work has suggested anticipatory 
information may be integrated in a Bayesian manner [8 ], 
active inference extends this idea to the use of actions that 
minimise uncertainty and fulfil expected and/or preferred 
outcomes. This generates supplementary predictions: that 
anticipatory behaviour will be influenced by outcome prefer-
ences and a changing probabilistic context. Indeed, studies 
have begun to show how very specific predictions derived 
from active inference readily emerge during dynamic antici-
pation tasks [63]. Crucially, researchers do not need to adopt 
modelling approaches to work within this framework; a suc-
cessful application of active inference would be to generate 
and test new hypotheses about skilled anticipation that are 
driven by fundamental theories about the predictive brain.
Declarations 
Funding No funding was associated with the preparation of this article.
Conflict of interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Ethics approval Not applicable.
Consent to participate Not applicable.
Consent for publication Not applicable.
Availability of data and material All relevant data are available online 
from: https:// osf. io/ vuy8e/.
Code availability The code is available online from: https://  osf. io/ 
vuy8e/.
Author contributions All authors contributed to the conception and 
writing of the manuscript. DH performed the analysis.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visithttp:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
 1. Duma GM, Mento G, Manari T, Martinelli M, Tressoldi P. Driv-
ing with intuition: a preregistered study about the EEG anticipa-
tion of simulated random car accidents. PLoS ONE. 2017;12: 
e0170370.
 2. Morris-Binelli K, Müller S. Advancements to the understanding 
of expert visual anticipation skill in striking sports. Can J Behav 
Sci Rev Can Sci Comport. 2017;49:262–8.
 3. Suhir E, Lini S, Bey C, Salotti J-M, Hourlier S, Claverie B. Proba-
bilistic modelling of the concept of anticipation in aviation. Theor 
Issues Ergon Sci. 2015;16:69–85.
 4. Williams AM, Jackson RC. Anticipation and decision making in 
sport. Milton Park: Routledge; 2019.
 5. Loffing F, Cañal-Bruland R. Anticipation in sport. Curr Opin Psy-
chol. 2017;16:6–11.
 6. Runswick OR, Roca A, Williams AM, North JS. A model of infor-
mation use during anticipation in striking sports (MIDASS). J 
Expert. 2020;3:197–211.
 7. Savelsbergh GJP, der Kamp JV, Williams AM, Ward P. Anticipa-
tion and visual search behaviour in expert soccer goalkeepers. 
Ergonomics. 2005;48:1686–97.
 8. Gredin NV, Bishop DT, Williams AM, Broadbent DP. The use of 
contextual priors and kinematic information during anticipation 
in sport: toward a Bayesian integration framework. Int Rev Sport 
Exerc Psychol. 2020;1–25.
2037
Active Inference Anticipation
 9. Williams AM, Jackson RC. Anticipation in sport: fifty years on, 
what have we learned and what research still needs to be under -
taken? Psychol Sport Exerc. 2019;42:16–24.
 10. Cañal-Bruland R, Mann DL. Time to broaden the scope of 
research on anticipatory behavior: a case for the role of probabil-
istic information. Front Psychol. 2015;6:1518.
 11. Clark A. Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the 
future of cognitive science. Behav Brain Sci. 2013;36:181–204.
 12. Friston K. Learning and inference in the brain. Neural Netw. 
2003;16:1325–52.
 13. Wolpert DM, Flanagan JR. Motor prediction. Curr Biol. 
2001;11:R729–32.
 14. Robertson I, Kirchoff MD. Anticipatory action: active inference 
in embodied cognitive activity. J Conscious Stud. 2019;27:38–68.
 15. Friston K. A theory of cortical responses. Philos Trans R Soc B 
Biol Sci. 2005;360:815–36.
 16. Parr T, Friston KJ. Generalised free energy and active inference. 
Biol Cybern. 2019;113:495–513.
 17. Da Costa L, Parr T, Sajid N, Veselic S, Neacsu V, Friston K. 
Active inference on discrete state-spaces: a synthesis. 2020. http:// 
arxiv. org/ abs/ 2001. 07203 [Q-Bio]. Accessed 18 Jan 2021.
 18. Seth AK. The cybernetic Bayesian brain: from interoceptive infer-
ence to sensorimotor contingencies: from interoceptive inference 
to sensorimotor contingencies. Open MIND. Theoretical Philoso-
phy/MIND Group–JGU Mainz; 2015. http:// www. open- mind. net/ 
DOI? isbn= 97839 58570 108. Accessed 4 May 2021.
 19. Henderson JM. Gaze control as prediction. Trends Cogn Sci. 
2017;21:15–23.
 20. Friston K. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat 
Rev Neurosci. 2010;11:127–38.
 21. Bar M. The proactive brain: using analogies and associations to 
generate predictions. Trends Cogn Sci. 2007;11:280–9.
 22. Fooken J, Kreyenmeier P, Spering M. The role of eye movements 
in manual interception: a mini-review. Vis Res. 2021;183:81–90.
 23. Hayhoe MM, McKinney T, Chajka K, Pelz JB. Predictive eye 
movements in natural vision. Exp Brain Res. 2012;217:125–36.
 24. Nijhawan R. Visual prediction: psychophysics and neuro-
physiology of compensation for time delays. Behav Brain Sci. 
2008;31:179–98.
 25. Savelsbergh GJP, Williams AM, Kamp JVD, Ward P. Visual 
search, anticipation and expertise in soccer goalkeepers. J Sports 
Sci. 2002;20:279–87.
 26. North JS, Williams AM, Hodges N, Ward P, Ericsson KA. Per -
ceiving patterns in dynamic action sequences: investigating the 
processes underpinning stimulus recognition and anticipation 
skill. Appl Cogn Psychol. 2009;23:878–94.
 27. Croft JL, Button C, Dicks M. Visual strategies of sub-elite cricket 
batsmen in response to different ball velocities. Hum Mov Sci. 
2010;29:751–63.
 28. Cañal-Bruland R, Müller F, Lach B, Spence C. Auditory con -
tributions to visual anticipation in tennis. Psychol Sport Exerc. 
2018;36:100–3.
 29. Runswick OR, Roca A, Williams AM, Bezodis NE, Mcrobert AP, 
North JS. The impact of contextual information and a secondary 
task on anticipation performance: an interpretation using cogni-
tive load theory. Appl Cogn Psychol. 2018;32:141–9.
 30. Mann DL, Schaefers T, Cañal-Bruland R. Action preferences 
and the anticipation of action outcomes. Acta Psychol (Amst). 
2014;152:1–9.
 31. Abernethy B, Gill DP, Parks SL, Packer ST. Expertise and the 
perception of kinematic and situational probability information. 
Perception. 2001;30:233–52.
 32. Knill DC, Pouget A. The Bayesian brain: the role of uncertainty in 
neural coding and computation. Trends Neurosci. 2004;27:712–9.
 33. Helm F, Cañal-Bruland R, Mann DL, Troje NF, Munzert J. Inte-
grating situational probability and kinematic information when 
anticipating disguised movements. Psychol Sport Exerc. 2020;46: 
101607.
 34. Rao RPN, Ballard DH. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a 
functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field 
effects. Nat Neurosci. 1999;2:79–87.
 35. Shipp S, Adams RA, Friston KJ. Reflections on agranular archi-
tecture: predictive coding in the motor cortex. Trends Neurosci. 
2013;36:706–16.
 36. Körding KP, Wolpert DM. Bayesian decision theory in sensorimo-
tor control. Trends Cogn Sci. 2006;10:319–26.
 37. Parr T, Friston KJ. The anatomy of inference: generative models 
and brain structure. Front Comput Neurosci. 2018;12:90.
 38. Gray R, Cañal-Bruland R. Integrating visual trajectory and prob-
abilistic information in baseball batting. Psychol Sport Exerc. 
2018;36:123–31.
 39. Brown H, Adams RA, Parees I, Edwards M, Friston K. Active 
inference, sensory attenuation and illusions. Cogn Process. 
2013;14:411–27.
 40. Friston K, Parr T, Yufik Y, Sajid N, Price CJ, Holmes E. Gen-
erative models, language and active inference. PsyArXiv; 2020. 
https:// psyar xiv. com/ 4j2k6/. Accessed 28 Mar 2021.
 41. Smith R, Kuplicki R, Feinstein J, Forthman KL, Stewart JL, Pau-
lus MP, et al. A Bayesian computational model reveals a failure to 
adapt interoceptive precision estimates across depression, anxiety, 
eating, and substance use disorders. PLOS Comput Biol. 2020;16: 
e1008484.
 42. Griffiths TL, Chater N, Norris D, Pouget A. How the Bayesians 
got their beliefs (and what those beliefs actually are): comment 
on Bowers and Davis (2012). Psychol Bull. 2012;138:415–22.
 43. Kaplan R, Friston KJ. Planning and navigation as active inference. 
Biol Cybern. 2018;112:323–43.
 44. Smith R, Friston K, Whyte C. A step-by-step tutorial on active 
inference and its application to empirical data. PsyArXiv; 2021. 
https:// psyar xiv. com/ b4jm6/. Accessed 20 Jan 2021.
 45. Müller S, Abernethy B, Reece J, Rose M, Eid M, McBean R, et al. 
An in-situ examination of the timing of information pick-up for 
interception by cricket batsmen of different skill levels. Psychol 
Sport Exerc. 2009;10:644–52.
 46. Runswick OR, Roca A, Williams AM, McRobert AP, North JS. 
The temporal integration of information during anticipation. Psy-
chol Sport Exerc. 2018;37:100–8.
 47. Gredin NV, Bishop DT, Williams AM, Broadbent DP. Integrat-
ing explicit contextual priors and kinematic information during 
anticipation. J Sports Sci. 2021;39:783–91.
 48. Simonet M, Meziane HB, Runswick OR, North JS, Williams AM, 
Barral J, et al. The modulation of event-related alpha rhythm dur-
ing the time course of anticipation. Sci Rep. 2019;9:18226.
 49. Güldenpenning I, Kunde W, Weigelt M. How to trick your oppo-
nent: a review article on deceptive actions in interactive sports. 
Front Psychol. 2017;8:917.
 50. Jackson RC, Barton H, Bishop DT. Knowledge is power? Out-
come probability information impairs detection of deceptive 
intent. Psychol Sport Exerc. 2020;50: 101744.
 51. Gredin NV, Bishop DT, Broadbent DP, Tucker A, Williams AM. 
Experts integrate explicit contextual priors and environmental 
information to improve anticipation efficiency. J Exp Psychol 
Appl. 2018;24:509–20.
 52. Runswick OR, Roca A, Williams AM, McRobert AP, North JS. 
Why do bad balls get wickets? The role of congruent and incon-
gruent information in anticipation. J Sports Sci. 2019;37:537–43.
 53. Morris-Binelli K, Müller S, van Rens FECA, Harbaugh AG, 
Rosalie SM. Individual differences and transfer of visual antici-
pation in expert female field hockey goalkeepers. Optom Vis Sci. 
2022;99:150–8.
2038 D. J. Harris et al.
 54. Müller S, Brenton J, Mansingh A. Sources of information pick-
up for anticipation by skilled cricket batsmen. Eur J Sport Sci. 
2021;21:1385–93.
 55. Friston K, Kilner J, Harrison L. A free energy principle for the 
brain. J Physiol Paris. 2006;100:70–87.
 56. Sajid N, Ball PJ, Parr T, Friston KJ. Active inference: demystified 
and compared. Neural Comput. 2021;33:674–712.
 57. Sarpeshkar V, Mann DL, Spratford W, Abernethy B. The influence 
of ball-swing on the timing and coordination of a natural intercep-
tive task. Hum Mov Sci. 2017;54:82–100.
 58. Friston K, Rigoli F, Ognibene D, Mathys C, Fitzgerald T, Pez-
zulo G. Active inference and epistemic value. Cogn Neurosci. 
2015;6:187–214.
 59. Stevenson IH, Fernandes HL, Vilares I, Wei K, Körding KP. 
Bayesian integration and non-linear feedback control in a full-
body motor task. PLOS Comput Biol. 2009;5: e1000629.
 60. Gredin NV, Broadbent DP, Williams AM, Bishop DT. Judgement 
utility modulates the use of explicit contextual priors and visual 
information during anticipation. Psychol Sport Exerc. 2019;45: 
101578.
 61. Bland AR, Schaefer A. Different varieties of uncertainty in human 
decision-making. Front Neurosci. 2012;6:85.
 62. Yu AJ, Dayan P. Uncertainty, neuromodulation, and attention. 
Neuron. 2005;46:681–92.
 63. Arthur T, Harris DJ. Predictive eye movements are adjusted in 
a Bayes-optimal fashion in response to unexpectedly changing 
environmental probabilities. Cortex. 2021;145:212–25.
 64. Friston K, Adams R, Perrinet L, Breakspear M. Perceptions as 
hypotheses: saccades as experiments. Front Psychol. 2012;3:151.
 65. Dicks M, Davids K, Button C. Individual differences in the visual 
control of intercepting a penalty kick in association football. Hum 
Mov Sci. 2010;29:401–11.
 66. Bogacz R. A tutorial on the free-energy framework for modelling 
perception and learning. J Math Psychol. 2017;76:198–211.
 67. Adams RA, Shipp S, Friston KJ. Predictions not commands: 
active inference in the motor system. Brain Struct Funct. 
2013;218:611–43.
 68. Weiss Y, Simoncelli EP, Adelson EH. Motion illusions as optimal 
percepts. Nat Neurosci. 2002;5:598–604.
 69. Yu AJ. Adaptive behavior: humans act as Bayesian learners. Curr 
Biol. 2007;17:R977–80.