121 10( 2)/ 2022 , 1 21–135
 10(2)/2022  ISSN 2300-7648 (print) / ISSN 2353-5636 (online)
Received: May 21, 2022. Accepted: July 17, 2022 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.12775/SetF.2022.020
 
From Charitable Inference 
to Active Credence
PAUL L. HARRIS
Harvard University
paul_harris@gse.harvard.edu 
ORCID: 0000-0003-4907-0539
Abstract. Young children routinely display a   naturalistic understanding of the 
world. When asked for explanations, they rarely invoke supernatural or religious 
explanations even when confronted by puzzling or unexpected phenomena. Nev-
ertheless, depending on the surrounding culture, children are eventually prone to 
accept God as a  creator, to believe in the power of prayer and to expect there to 
be an afterlife. A  plausible interpretation of this dual stance is that children adopt 
two different cognitive routes to understanding: one grounded in empirical obser-
vation and in trusted testimony about the observable world. Based on this route, 
children gradually build up a  common-sense understanding of various natural do-
mains, including the physical, the biological and the psychological. The second 
route is grounded in children’s early emerging ability to engage in shared pretense. 
As members of a  religious community, children will routinely observe community 
members engage in activities, such as prayer, which cannot be readily understood 
in terms of their standard, common-sense framework. Nevertheless, children can 
charitably interpret prayer as special form of communication, directed at an imag-
ined interlocutor . Cumulative exposure to such belief -based activities is likely to 
encourage children to transition from charitable interpreters of religious activities 
to participant believers.
Keywords: cognition, development, belief, religion.
PAUL L.  HARRIS
122  10( 2)/ 2022
Introduction
In recent decades, the study of children’s beliefs has increasingly high-
lighted a  paradox. On the one hand, children are gifted amateur scien-
tists and theoreticians. By the time they go to school, they have a  good 
understanding of various aspects of naïve physics (e.g., an appreciation 
that one solid object cannot pass through another or suddenly come into 
existence); of biological constraints (e.g., an appreciation that organisms 
get older over time and die); and of psychology (e.g., an appreciation that 
agents’ desires and beliefs guide their actions and utterances) (Wellman 
& Ge lman 1 99 2 ) . In addi ti o n to these insigh ts, o rdinarily a cquired via  
observation and inference, rather than any direct instruction, children 
also come to accept notable scientific claims. For example, young chil-
dren of 7 or 8 years accept that the earth is a  spherical planet and that 
mental processes depend on the functioning of the brain. Children pre-
sumably arrive at these conclusions based on other people’s teaching and 
testimony, given the limits to their own observational powers with re-
spect to both the shape of the earth and the functioning of the brain 
(Harris & Koenig 2006).
Alongside this evidence concerning children’s understanding of how 
the world works, there is a  p ar al l e l  b o d y  o f  e vi d e n c e  a tt e s ti n g  t o  th e i r  
preference for naturalistic explanations. Across a  range of situations, 
whether prosaic or unexpected, children are prone to offer physical, bio-
logical or psychological explanation for the outcomes they observe. They 
rarely invoke magical or supernatural forces, contrary to early 20
th cen-
tury theorizing by Piaget (Harris 2012; 2022a).
In sum, a  surprisingly coherent picture has emerged. When children 
reason about, or seek to explain the world and its workings, they dis-
play a competent appreciation of key facts and principles. They are not, 
of course, theoretical physicists or fully-fledged evolutionary biologists. 
Yet they show no spontaneous disposition to invoke supernatural powers 
or possibilities. On the other hand, many children do eventually come to 
endorse the religious claims espoused by their community (Harris & Cor-
riveau 2019). This endorsement does not appear to spring  – as just not-
FROM CHARITABLE INFERENCE TO ACTIVE CREDENCE
123 10( 2)/ 2022
ed – from any natural predilection for supernatural powers. Rather it is 
something that children grow into, as they become increasingly familiar 
with the religious claims of their community. For example, within Chris-
tian communities, 5- and 6-year-olds confidently believe in God (Har-
ris et al. 2006), take God to be the creator of species (Evans 2001), sub-
scribe to the efficacy of prayer (Woolley & Phelps 2001) and expect there 
to be an afterlife (Harris 2018). Accordingly , we arrive at a  paradox and 
an interesting psychological question. How do young children, with their 
strong disposition toward naturalistic thinking, nevertheless end up sub-
scribing to supernatural explanations and phenomena, which frequent -
ly run counter to the causal constraints that they acknowledge in other 
contexts. In attempting to resolve this paradox, I  draw on research from 
a range of disciplines and fields, notably developmental psychology, cog-
nitive science, and social anthropology. 
Before turning to possible explanations for the alleged this paradox, 
it is worth noting three additional findings. First, a  steady stream of re-
search has shown that children express more confidence in the existence 
of various scientific phenomena  – including ordinarily unobservable 
phenomena – as compared to equally unobservable religious phenom-
ena. For example, they are prone to express more confidence in the ex-
istence of germs than of heaven. This differential confidence persists 
into adulthood (Harris & Corriveau 2020). Indeed, adults in a  wide range 
of cultures and countries express more confidence in claims emanating 
from a  scientific as compared to a  religious source (Hoogeveen, Haaf, 
Bulbulia et al.  2022). In short, belief is not evenly distributed across the 
domains of science and religion: scientific phenomena typically enjoy 
greater credence.
Second, when children are presented with a variety of narratives, rang-
ing from the fantastical to the realistic, and asked to categorize them as ei-
ther fictional or factual, they typically make their appraisal based on their 
understanding of everyday causality . More specifically they are prone to 
categorize narratives with magical or fantastical causal elements (a mag-
ic sword, a fairy) as fictional whereas they categorize more prosaic narra-
tives that include only everyday causal sequences as factual (Payir et al. 
PAUL L.  HARRIS
124  10( 2)/ 2022
2021). Here, again, we see a bias toward the naturalistic and a  skepticism 
toward the supernatural or magical. However , that bias is overridden by 
some children in specific contexts. When presented with narratives that 
involve divine intervention (i.e., echoing miracle stories in the Bible), chil-
dren who have had a religious upbringing – as indexed by their enrolment 
in a  parochial school, their family’s participation in church services or 
both – are inclined to accept such narratives as true, factual accounts, un-
like their more secular peers who are more likely to judge them as fiction-
al (Corriveau, Chen & Harris 2015). Similar findings have emerged when 
children engage in thinking about counterfactual possibilities. Asked how 
a negative outcome might have been forestalled, children spontaneously 
invoke plausible, preventive measures that are likely to be available to hu-
man agents. Rarely, if ever, do they spontaneously invoke the possibility 
of divine intervention. In addition, even when children are asked to evalu-
ate the plausibility of preventive measures presented to them by an adult 
rather than generated by their own reflection, they typically endorse the 
efficacy of naturalistic interventions. Nonetheless, religious children, un-
like their secular peers, occasionally endorse the efficacy of divine inter-
vention (Payir et al. 2022). In sum, whether children are asked to assess 
the real-world plausibility of a  sequence of events, or to imagine how it 
might have turned out differently, their primary recourse is to naturalistic 
thinking. Supernatural possibilities are sometimes endorsed, but only by 
children with a religious background.
Finally, a third area of research casts further light on the relative weight 
or confidence attached to the naturalistic as compared to the supernat -
ural stance. Some phenomena  – the origin of species, illness and death, 
for example – can be viewed through either lens (Legare, Evans, Rosen-
gren & Harris 2012). For example, a study targeting the understanding of 
AIDS conducted in South Africa showed that adolescents and adults were 
willing to endorse both viral infection and witchcraft as possible trans-
mission mechanisms; in addition, ethnographic work shows that AIDS 
sufferers are likely to consult both medical practitioners and traditional 
healers in seeking help (Legare & Gelman 2008). Studies of the conceptu-
alization of death in Spain (Harris & Giménez 2005), the USA (Lane, Zhu, 
FROM CHARITABLE INFERENCE TO ACTIVE CREDENCE
125 10( 2)/ 2022
Evans & Wellman 2016), Madagascar (Astuti & Harris 2008) and Vanuatu 
(Watson-Jones, Busch, Harris & Legare 2017) have all shown that claims 
about the sequelae of death diverge markedly depending on the way that 
the death is contextualized. If it is presented in a  secular, and especial-
ly in a medical context, children and adults are likely to affirm that most 
processes, whether mental or bodily, have ceased to function. On the oth-
er hand, if the death is presented within a  religious framework involving 
a priest or funereal ritual, children and adults are more likely to affirm 
the continued functioning of bodily and mental processes in the afterlife. 
Thus, with respect to both illness and death, we observe the co-existence 
of, and recourse to, both naturalistic and supernatural thinking.
To synthesize these wide-ranging findings, there is considerable evi-
dence that the naturalistic stance emerges early in childhood, is affirmed 
with greater confidence across diverse cultures, and is the dominant re-
course in appraising a  sequence of events for their real-world likelihood 
o r  i n  g e n e r a t i n g  c o u n t e r f a c t u a l  a l t e r n a t i v e s  t o  w h a t  h a s  a c t u a l l y  h a p -
pened. Nonetheless, we see local evidence for the power and influence of 
supernatural thinking, especially with respect to phenomena such as ill-
ness and death where such thinking can provide an alternative lens.
How can we account for this balancing act? If children’s dominant or 
default stance is to interpret the world via a  naturalistic stance, how can 
we account for their receptivity to supernatural thinking in particular 
contexts. Stated differently, why are children not resolutely and perva-
sively naturalistic in their thinking, and how do religious communities 
succeed in transmitting their faith in the supernatural across successive 
generations? As a preliminary answer to this conundrum, I  describe two 
overlapping but ultimately distinct routes that children appear to adopt in 
acquiring and consolidating their beliefs: what I will describe as the com-
mon-sense route on the one hand and the charitable route, on the other. 
In the context of the common-sense route, children assimilate incoming 
information to a model of the world that is based on their understanding 
of its ordinary operations. Via this route, children adopt beliefs that are 
based on first-hand, empirical evidence or alternatively on others’ testi-
mony about such evidence. In either case, however, the phenomena end 
PAUL L.  HARRIS
126  10( 2)/ 2022
up being regarded as components of, and causal agents within, the nat-
ural world. In the context of the charitable route, by contrast, children 
assimilate information through their charitable interpretation of beliefs 
and practices that refer to phenomena that defy the ordinary workings of 
the world, as established via the direct route. These two routes and the 
conclusions that they yield can often operate independently. They are de-
ployed in different contexts and to different ends. Sometimes, however, 
they converge on the same phenomenon, offering a different lens. 
1. The Common-Sense Route
As noted earlier, a large volume of research with young children has doc-
umented the readiness with which they arrive at a  common-sense under-
standing of the world. They form expectations about the way that objects 
and people behave. This conceptual apparatus is sufficient to ensure that 
children will construct a  serviceable picture of the way that the world 
works even if their understanding and beliefs are partial or faulty with 
respect to large tracts of science, history and geography.
Children supplement their own conclusions and inferences  – ground-
e d  in  dir e ct  o b s e rva ti o n – with conclusions and inferences supplied to 
them by other people via teaching and testimony. There is a  relatively 
seamless continuity between children’s beliefs grounded in first-hand 
observation and those grounded in other people’s claims because in each 
case, the observable world is the primary touchstone and referent. This 
applies even to phenomena that are not ordinarily observable. For exam-
ple, assertions about germs or electricity invoke phenomena that are not 
directly observable, but such assertions take it for granted that those hid-
den entities are part of the ordinary, causal fabric of the world. They are 
not mysterious, other-worldly forces that intervene in an unpredictable 
or wayward fashion. Thus, the presence vs. absence of germs and of elec-
tricity can be inferred and discussed in terms of their systematic, meas-
u r a b l e  i m p a c t  i n  th e  o r d i n a ry ,  o b s e rv a b l e  w o r l d .  Th i s  m e a n s  th a t  e v e -
ryday discourse about such hidden phenomena is likely to present their 
existence within the common-sense framework that encompasses more 
FROM CHARITABLE INFERENCE TO ACTIVE CREDENCE
127 10( 2)/ 2022
straightforwardly observable phenomena. Thus, according to this pro-
posal, invisible but naturalistic phenomena, such as germs and viruses, 
are not conceptualized in a radically different way from other tiny biolog-
ical agents such as ants or mosquitoes. Electricity, as a  form of energy, is 
not conceptualized in a radically different way from a more readily tangi-
ble form energy, such as heat.
The implication of this analysis is that when children and adults en-
counter a consensual discourse, couched in common-sense terms, with 
respect to the existence and implications of a given naturalistic phenom-
enon, they infer that that consensus is ultimately grounded in ordinary 
reality. Hence, it makes sense to have confidence in the existence of ordi-
narily unobservable scientific phenomena, just as it makes sense to have 
confidence in the existence of dinosaurs or Antarctica. Thanks to the way 
such phenomena are talked about, they end up being taken for granted as 
part of the world’s furniture, whether visible or invisible. Indeed, young 
children in various cultures express confidence in the existence of or-
dinarily invisible phenomena such as germs and vitamins (Harris et al. 
2006; Harris & Corriveau 2020).
As described in the next section, there is an alternative route to belief, 
in which this tether to common-sense reality is suspended.
2. The Charitable Route
Unlike any other species, humans engage in sustained episodes of pretend 
play with each other from a  young age. Pretend re-enactments of previ-
ously observed actions are occasionally seen in great apes, but such re-
enactments are almost invariably carried out in a  solitary fashion (Mat-
zusa wa  20 20 ) .  Th e re  is  n o  in di ca ti o n  tha t  a pe s  e n t e r  a shared, pretend 
world. By contrast, human children, including 2-year-olds, readily en-
gage in episodes of shared pretense  – episodes where the pretend enact-
ment of one partner is understood, accepted, and acted upon by anoth-
er (Harris 2022a). For example, having watched an adult partner ‘pour’ 
make-believe tea from an objectively empty teapot, 2-year-olds will ac-
cept and act on the implied outcome of that pretend action by ‘drinking’ 
PAUL L.  HARRIS
128  10( 2)/ 2022
the make-believe tea. By implication, young children are prepared to in-
terpret someone’s actions in light of a  make-believe premise about the 
state of the world, namely that there was tea in the pot. Any knowledge 
that that premise is objectively false does not stop their active participa-
tion in the shared pretense. W e may reasonably characterize this inter-
pretive response as charitable because it endows an otherwise pointless 
or puzzling action  – namely the lifting and tipping of an empty teapot  – 
with a plausible rationale: insofar as tea is presumed to exist in the empty 
teapot, the partners’ actions make good sense (Harris 2022a).
Arguably, children adopt a  comparable, charitable stance toward re-
ligious actions and claims. Consider, for example, young children who 
regularly witness familiar adults kneel, clasp their hands together, and 
engage either individually or collectively in an act of prayer. In such con-
texts, the addressee is invariably absent, invisible, and silent  – contrary 
to any mode of communication children will ordinarily observe or par -
ticipate in. However, children can make sense of these actions and utter-
ances by charitably supposing them to be directed at an interlocutor, even 
though objective signs of the interlocutor’s existence are not available. 
On this analysis, children are inducted into a  religious community in 
much the same way as they are inducted into a  shared pretense: in both 
cases, they charitably infer and accept the premises that guide the ac-
tions of leading participants and render those actions plausible. Never-
theless, it is evident that this parallelism is, in one key respect, over-stat-
ed. In the context of a  joint episode of pretend play, both partners act on 
shared, make-believe premises whereas in the context of religious activi-
ties, the guiding premises are not generally regarded as make-believe by 
mature participants. Thus, in the context of religious activities, such as 
a baptism, a marriage, or a funeral, believers typically act on the assump-
tion that God exists and is presiding over the activity. Similarly, in the 
case of prayer, believers typically act on the assumption that their prayers 
are heard and understood by God. Hence, a  key developmental question 
is how children might go beyond the invocation of make-believe premises 
and eventually come to adopt a  similar stance to the believers whose ac-
tors and utterances they charitably interpret.
FROM CHARITABLE INFERENCE TO ACTIVE CREDENCE
129 10( 2)/ 2022
Four factors are likely to facilitate children’s progressive transition 
from charitable bystander to believer: (i) the frequency with which chil-
dren are prompted to entertain a  guiding premise; (ii) the pervasive ten-
dency among children  – and indeed adults  – to undergo source amnesia, 
i.e., to lose track of the provenance of a  given idea or belief; and (iii) the 
power of the so-called “availability” heuristic; and (iv) the construction 
of a shared reality. I describe each of these contributory factors in turn.
It is evident that, depending on their family and schooling, children 
will vary in the frequency with which they observe people engaged in re-
ligious activities such as prayer. Some children will do so regularly, others 
only rarely. As a result, children will vary in the frequency with which they 
are prompted to charitably interpret religious activities as being addressed 
to God and to acknowledge God’s special status. Consistent with this pre-
diction, religiously schooled preschoolers are more likely than secularly 
schooled children to know about God, and to acknowledge his special per-
ceptual and cognitive abilities (Lane, Evans & Wellman 2010; 2014).
An increase in the frequency of charitable interpretation is likely to 
h a v e  a n  a d d i t i o n a l  e f f e c t ,  n a m e l y ,  t o  i n c r e a s e  t h e  l i k e l i h o o d  o f  s o u r c e  
amnesia, i.e., the progressive loss of awareness with respect to how an 
idea originally arose. A clear demonstration of such frequency effects was 
provided by Ceci and his colleagues (Ceci et al. 1994). Preschoolers were 
invited to think about highly improbable events. For example, they were 
asked if they had ever gone on a ride in a hot-air balloon with their class-
mates. Initially, children almost invariably denied having had such expe-
riences (consistent with their parents’ report). However, when they were 
asked the same questions repeatedly over several week, there was a steady 
increase in false positives, with half the children eventually claiming that 
they had indeed experienced such extraordinary events  – even though 
they had not. A  p lausib le interpretation of these memory errors is that 
when initially invited to entertain any given improbable event, children 
conjured up a mental representation, arguably a  visual image, of such an 
event. On subsequent occasions, children would likely retrieve that same 
representation, so that following repeated interviews, it would increas-
ingly become subjectively familiar. It is plausible that such growing fa-
PAUL L.  HARRIS
130  10( 2)/ 2022
miliarity gradually persuades children that the source of the represen-
tation is not their own imagination-infused thinking about the question 
when it was initially posed but rather their participation in, and encod-
ing of, an actual event. In sum, the frequent activation of a  representa-
tion tends to increase the likelihood of amnesia with respect to the true 
source of that representation.
We can extend this same line of thinking to children’s interpretation 
of religious rituals, including key activities such as prayer. As noted earli-
er, in making sense of such actions, it is plausible that children charitably 
represent the premise guiding those observed actions  – namely that God 
exists, despite his sustained absence and invisibility. In the wake of re-
peated opportunities to observe religious actions, that representation is 
likely to become more subjectively familiar and more automatic. In con-
sequence, children may end up losing sight of what triggered that repre-
sentation in the first place, namely their own attempt to make sense of 
what adults are doing when they kneel and communicate with an invis-
ible interlocutor. Thus, as such activities become more and more familiar, 
the premise that appears to guide them, namely that such an interlocutor 
exists and hears the prayers that are addressed to him, may become in-
creasingly plausible as an encoding what is actually taking place. On this 
analysis, children will eventually come to think of their representation of 
God’s existence as a familiar and credible assumption about reality rather 
than as a supposition or inference they have charitably generated in order 
to interpret adults’ practices.
The so-called “availability heuristic” is a  third factor that is likely to 
spur the transition from charitable bystander to believer. Based on clas-
sic work in cognitive psychology, we know that estimates of likelihood are 
impacted by mental availability. For example, when adults who have re-
cently read about a plane accident are asked to estimate the future proba-
bility of such an accident, the comparative ease with which they can bring 
that relevant example to mind tends to increase their probability esti-
mate – relative to adults who cannot so readily bring a  relevant instance 
to mind (Tversky & Kahneman 1973). This heuristic is likely to play a role 
in religious belief. More specifically, among children who are repeatedly 
FROM CHARITABLE INFERENCE TO ACTIVE CREDENCE
131 10( 2)/ 2022
prompted to charitably interpret religious activities, the idea of God and 
his existence will be easily brought to mind. That mental availability is 
likely to attenuate any tendency to regard such an idea as improbable.
Finally, research on the construction of a shared reality in the context 
of dialogue points to a fourth factor likely to promote the transition from 
charitable bystander to believer. When adults are invited to share a  giv-
en piece of information with an interlocutor, they are prone to tune their 
message to the predilections of that interlocutor and such tuning impacts 
their subsequent recall. Thus, when adults are asked to recall the origi-
nal information, their recall is prone to bias in the direction they adopted 
when speaking to the interlocutor (Higgins, Rossignac-Milon & Echter-
hoff 2021). Arguably, such shared reality effects operate among children. 
For example, when children are invited by an adult believer  – such as 
a parent, teacher, or priest – to describe a religious activity or to report on 
a passage in the Bible, they are likely to tune their narrative to that inter-
locutor – to make references to God that presuppose his existence rather 
than represent him as a  fictional or imaginary being. Such tuning may 
eventually shape children’s own assumptions about God. 
The above proposals offer a plausible explanation of how children, de-
spite their naturalistic inclinations, are gradually inducted into a  com-
munity of believers. However, the account so far explains the emergence 
of what might be characterized as a  passive belief that God exists. Luhr-
mann and Morgain (2012) offer a persuasive account of how some individ-
uals come to report an experience of God’s presence and not just a  tepid 
be li e f  in  his  exist e n c e .  Th ey  recrui t e d  p arti ci p an ts  fro m  f o ur  evange li -
cal congregations and assigned them to either a  prayer or a  Bible study 
g r o u p .  I n  t h e  p r a y e r  g r o u p ,  p a r t i c i p a n t s  w e r e  g i v e n  r e c o r d e d  p a s s a g e s  
from the Bible, together with instructions to use imagery (e.g., “The Lord 
is my shepherd…see the shepherd before you…see his face…his eyes…the 
light that streams from him”). The recorded passages included pauses in 
which listeners were invited to carry out a  dialogue with the shepherd or 
Jesus, and to imagine his being present as a  comforter during a  past epi-
sode. In the Bible study condition, participants were provided with re-
corded lectures describing how different gospel authors chose to portray 
PAUL L.  HARRIS
132  10( 2)/ 2022
Jesus. Thus, they learned about Jesus but were not prompted to imag-
ine his presence. Participants in both conditions were asked to listen to 
the recordings regularly for one month. Both before and after the inter-
vention, participants answered questions about their understanding of 
prayer, their experience of God interacting with them, as well as spiritu-
al experiences more generally. The post-intervention interview revealed 
notable differences between the two groups. Thus, in comparison to the 
Bible study group, the prayer group were more likely to report that their 
mental images seemed sharper or different, and that they experienced 
God more like a person. Reviewing these findings, Luhrmann argues that 
prayer is an important context in which people can actively train them-
selves to apprehend God’s presence (Luhrmann 2020).
Extending this line of thinking, Luhrmann and her colleagues have 
asked what psychological factors increase the likelihood that any given 
adult will report having religious experiences (Luhrmann et al. 2021). 
Across five cultural settings (the U.S., Ghana, Thailand, China, and Va-
nuatu), two factors proved important. One factor was cognitive in nature. 
Individuals vary in the degree to which they view mental experience as 
‘bounded’ – i.e., private and separate from the external world  – or as ‘po-
rous’ – interconnected with the external world and with other people. 
On the bounded model of mental experience, one person’s thoughts and 
feelings about another person will not ordinarily be expected to have any 
direct impact on that other person. By contrast, on the porous model, 
thoughts and feelings are viewed as potentially transmissible from one 
person to another in a  quasi-telepathic fashion. Across all five cultural 
settings – individuals who more disposed to the porous as opposed to 
the bounded model of the mind – were likely to report more religious ex-
periences. The second factor was a  well-established personality dimen-
sion – “absorption” – the tendency to become fully engaged in an ongo-
ing imaginary or sensory experience, (e.g., becoming absorbed in a novel, 
or listening intently to a  piece of music, or getting immersed in a  novel). 
Across all five cultural settings, individuals more prone to absorption re-
ported more religious experiences. 
FROM CHARITABLE INFERENCE TO ACTIVE CREDENCE
133 10( 2)/ 2022
Conclusions
Taken together, these findings highlight the duality of cognitive develop-
ment. On the one hand, children are budding scientists, apparently wed-
ded to a  common-sense, empirically grounded conception of the world. 
Nevertheless, granted their early-emerging ability to entertain invisible 
agents and phenomena, they can also be inducted into a  religious com-
munity, sharing its beliefs, and potentially having supernatural or reli-
gious experiences.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the John Templeton Foundation grant “De-
veloping the intellectual virtues for research in Science and the Big Ques-
tions in Latin America” (ID#62110). The views expressed are those of the 
author and do not reflect the views of the John Templeton Foundation.
References
Astuti, Rita, and Paul L Harris. 2008.  “Understanding Mortality and the Life of 
the Ancestors in Madagascar.” Cognitive Science 32: 713–740.
Ceci, Stephen J., Mary L. C. Huffman, Elliot Smith, and Elizabeth W. Loftus. 1994. 
“Repeatedly Thinking about Non-events: Source Misattributions among Pre-
schooolers.” Consciousness and Cognition  3: 388–407.
Corriveau, Kathleen H., Eva E. Chen, and Paul L. Harris. 2015. “Judgments about 
Fact and Fiction by Children from Religious and Non-Religious Backgrounds.” 
Cognitive Science 39: 353–382.
Evans, E. Margaret. 2001. “Cognitive and Con textual Factors in the Emergence of 
Diverse Belief Systems.” Cognitive Psychology  42: 217–266.
Harris, Paul L. 2012. “Trusting What You’re Told: How children Learn from Others.” 
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press/Harvard University Press.
Harris, Paul L. 2018. “Children’s Understanding of Death: From Biology to Reli-
gion.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B , 373: 20170266. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb. 2017.0266.
PAUL L.  HARRIS
134  10( 2)/ 2022
Harris, Paul L. 2022. “ Children’s Imagination.” New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Harris, Paul L. 2022a. “Young children Share Imagined Possibilities: Evidence 
for an Early-Emerging Human Competence.” Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B , 377: http://doi/10.1098/rstb.2022.0022.
Harris, Paul L., and Kathleen H. Corriveau. 2019. “Some, But Not All, Children 
Believe in Miracles.” Journal for the Cognitive Science of Religion 5: 21–36.
Harris, Paul L., and Kathleen H. Corriveau. 2020. “Beliefs of Children and Adults 
in Religious and Scientific Phenomena.”  Current Opinion in Psychology 40: 
20–23.
Harris, Paul L., and Marta Giménez. 2005. “Children’s Acceptance of Conflicting 
Testimony: The Case of Death.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 5: 143–164.
Harris, Paul L., and Melissa A. Koenig. 2006. “Trust in Testimony: How Children 
Learn about Science and Religion.” Child Development 77: 505–524.
Harris, Paul L., Elisabeth S. Pasquini, Susanne Duke,  Jessica J. Asscher and Fran-
cisco Pons. 2006. “Germs and Angels: The Role of Testimony in Young Chil-
dren’s Ontology.” Developmental Science 9: 76–96.
Higgins, E. Tory., Maya Rossignac-Milon and Gerald Echterhoff. 2021. “Shared 
Reality: From Sharing-Is-Believing to Merging Minds.” Current Directions in 
Psychological Science 30: 103–110.
Hoogeveen, Suzanne., Julia M. Haaf, Joseph A. Bulbulia et al. 2022. “The Einstein 
Effect Provides Global Evidence for Scientific Source Credibility Effects and 
the Influence of Religiosity.” Nature Human Behaviour  6: 523–535.
Lane, Jon D., Henry M. Wellman, and E. Margar et Evans. 2010. “Children’s under-
standing of ordinary and extraordinary minds.” Child Development 81: 1475–1489.
Lane, Jon D., Henry M. Wellman, and E. Margaret Evans. 2012. “Sociocultur-
al input facilitates children’s developing understanding of extraordinary 
minds.” Child Development  83: 1007–1021. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
8624.2012.01741.x.
Lane, Jon. D., Liqi Zhu, E. Margaret Evans, and Henry M. Wellman. 2016. “Devel-
oping Concepts of the Mind, Body, and Afterlife: Exploring the Roles of Nar-
rative Context and Culture.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 16: 50–82. 
Legare ,  Cristin e  H. ,  E.  Margaret  E vans ,  Kar l  S.  R o se ngre n,  an d  P a ul  L.  Harris .  
2012. “The Coexistence of Natural and Supernatural Explanations across Cul-
tures and Development.” Child Development 83: 779–793.
Legare, Cristine H., and Susan A. Gelman. 2008. “Bewitchment, Biology, or Both: 
The Co-Existence of Natural and Supernatural Explanatory Frameworks 
Across Development.” Cognitive Science 32: 607–642.
FROM CHARITABLE INFERENCE TO ACTIVE CREDENCE
Luhrmann, Tanya M. 2020. “How God Becomes Real: Kindling the Presence of Invis-
ible Others.” Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Luhrmann, Tanya M., and Rachel Morgain. 2012. “Prayer as Inner Sense Culti-
vation: An Attentional Learning Theory of Spiritual Experience.” Ethos 40: 
359–389.
Luhrmann, Tanya M., Kara Weisman, Falicity Aulino, and Rachel E. Smith. 
(2021). “Sensing the Presence of Gods and Spirits across Cultures and Faiths. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118: No. 5 e2016649118. 
Matzusawa, Tetsuro. 2020. “Pretense in chimpanzees.”  Primates 61: 543–555.
Payir, Ayse, Larisa Heiphetz, Paul L. Harris, and Kathleen, H. Corriveau. 2022. 
“What Could Have Been Done? Counterfactual Alternatives to Negative Out-
comes Generated by Religious and secular children.” Developmental Psychol-
ogy 58: 376–391.
Payir, Ayse, Niamh McLoughlin, Yixin Kelly Cui, Telli Davoodi, Jennifer M. Clegg, 
Paul L. Harris, and Kathleen H. Corriveau. 2021. “Children’s Ideas about What 
Can Really Happen: The Impact of Age and Religious Background.” Cognitive 
Science 45: e13054.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1973. “Availability: A  Heuristic for Judg-
ing Frequency and Probability.” Cognitive Psychology  5: 207–232.
Watson-Jones, Rachel E., Justin T . A. Busch, Paul L. Harris, and Cristine H. Le-
gare. 2017. “Does the Body Survive Death? Cultural Variation in Beliefs about 
Life Everlasting.” Cognitive Science 41: 455–476.
Wellman, Henry M., and Susan A. Gelman. 1992. “Cognitive Development: Foun-
dational Theories of Core Domains.” Annual Review of Psychology 43: 337–375.
Woolley, Jacqueline D., and Katrina E. Phelps. 2001. “The Development of Beliefs 
about Prayer. Journal of Cognition and Culture 1: 139–166. 