Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 01 frontiersin.org
Resilience phenotypes derived 
from an active inference account 
of allostasis
Laura A. Harrison 1*, Antonio J. Gracias 1, Karl J. Friston 2,3 and 
J. Galen Buckwalter 1
1 Valor Institute for Neuroscience and Decision Making, Chicago, IL, United States, 2 Queen Square 
Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 3 VERSES AI Research 
Lab, Los Angeles, CA, United States
Within a theoretical framework of enactive allostasis, we explore active inference 
strategies for minimizing surprise to achieve resilience in dynamic environments. 
While individual differences and extrinsic protective factors traditionally account for 
variability in resilience trajectories following stressor exposure, the enactive model 
emphasizes the importance of the physical and social environment, specifically 
the “enactive niche,” which is both shaped by and impacts organisms living in 
it, accounting for variable success in allostatic prediction and accommodation. 
Enactive allostasis infers or predicts states of the world to minimize surprise and 
maintain regulation after surprise, i.e., resilience. Action policies are selected in 
accordance with the inferred state of a dynamic environment; those actions 
concurrently shape one’s environment, buffering against current and potential 
stressors. Through such inferential construction, multiple potential solutions exist 
for achieving stability within one’s enactive niche. Spanning a range of adaptive 
resilience strategies, we propose four phenotypes—fragile, durable, resilient, and 
pro-entropic (PE)—each characterized by a constellation of genetic, epigenetic, 
developmental, experiential, and environmental factors. Biological regulatory outcomes 
range from allostatic (over)load in the fragile and durable phenotypes, to allostatic 
recovery in resilience, and theoretically to increasing allostatic accommodation 
or “growth” in the proposed PE phenotype. Awareness distinguishes phenotypes 
by minimizing allostatically demanding surprise and engenders the cognitive and 
behavioral flexibility empirically associated with resilience. We further propose a 
role for awareness in proactively shaping one’s enactive niche to further minimize 
surprise. We  conclude by exploring the mechanisms of phenotypic plasticity 
which may bolster individual resilience.
KEYWORDS
resilience, allostasis, active inference, free energy principle, phenotype, enactive niche
1 Introduction
The term “resilience” has been aptly described as polysemous (Miller et al., 2022). However 
imprecise its meaning, its scientific and social relevance is widely evident. All-cause mortality 
and morbidity associated with chronic and acute stress are mounting public health concerns 
(Magruder et  al., 2016 ). Diseases associated with chronic stress (heart, cancer, stroke, 
Alzheimer’s, diabetes) are consistently among the top 10 causes of death in the US (Curtin 
et al., 2024a, 2024b; Heron, 2021). Persistent stress without a defining traumatic event, such 
as a toxic work environment, negatively affects well-being ( Friedline et  al., 2021), hurts 
workplace performance (Bui et al., 2021), and increases burnout (Y ates, 2020). The mental 
health impact of natural disasters was consistently negative in a recent meta-analysis (Keya 
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Andrea Caria,  
University of Trento, Italy
REVIEWED BY
Jordan Theriault,  
Northeastern University, United States
Zahra Sheikhbahaee,  
University of Montreal, Canada
*CORRESPONDENCE
Laura A. Harrison  
 lharrison@valorep.com
RECEIVED 08 November 2024
ACCEPTED 21 April 2025
PUBLISHED 09 May 2025
CITATION
Harrison LA, Gracias AJ, Friston KJ and 
Buckwalter JG (2025) Resilience phenotypes 
derived from an active inference account of 
allostasis.
Front. Behav. Neurosci. 19:1524722.
doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
COPYRIGHT
© 2025 Harrison, Gracias, Friston and 
Buckwalter. This is an open-access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The 
use, distribution or reproduction in other 
forums is permitted, provided the original 
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are 
credited and that the original publication in 
this journal is cited, in accordance with 
accepted academic practice. No use, 
distribution or reproduction is permitted 
which does not comply with these terms.
TYPE Hypothesis and Theory
PUBLISHED 09 May 2025
DOI 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 02 frontiersin.org
et al., 2023 ). Meanwhile, combat exposure ( Bricknell et al., 2020 ), 
sexual assault (Dworkin, 2020), and motor vehicle accidents (Marasini 
et al., 2022) are a few of the acute adverse life events with negative 
long-term mental health effects. Despite the ubiquity of stress and 
trauma and their burden, resilience to stress is remarkably common 
and may be the default response to adversity (Bonanno, 2021).
The scientific conceptualization of resilience has evolved over 
time. Early work focused on innate traits (Kobasa, 1979; Kobasa and 
Puccetti, 1983 ), a perspective soon challenged when resilient 
outcomes, mostly defined as the absence of psychopathology, were 
associated with malleable behaviors, psychological constructs (Agaibi 
and Wilson, 2005; Werner, 1999), and social resources (Zautra, 2013). 
More recent formulations continue to focus on good mental health 
after adversity as the outcome of resilience but place its maintenance 
in the context of developmental, multisystem networks including 
communities (Masten et al., 2021), cognitive mechanisms (Kalisch 
et al., 2015), and regulatory flexibility (Bonanno et al., 2023, 2024).
Building on the seminal work of Bonanno et  al. (2011)  that 
identified prototypical resilience trajectories after a potentially 
traumatic event, Bonanno et al. (2023) recently describe prospective 
trajectories (Bonanno et al., 2023) when previous states impact one’s 
resilience trajectory. In Kalisch et al. ’s. (2024) formulation, “stress 
reactivity” is indexed at frequent intervals observing resactivity under 
varying amounts of stress, allowing for identification of causal 
resilience mechanisms and processes. In both accounts, resilience is 
understood as an ongoing, dynamic, complex, biopsychosocial 
process. Building on this foundation, we  propose a theoretical 
framework for the mechanisms that control this dynamic process of 
resilience. In so doing, we will identify phenotypes that are aligned 
with the trajectories of resilience previously identified (Bonanno et al., 
2023), and advance an additional phenotype, namely, 
pro-entropic resilience.
Resilience cannot be described apart from a stressor, which is 
defined as “a stimulus or situation that elicits a stress response” 
(Kalisch et al., 2021). Despite the seeming circularity of this definition, 
we find it offers a path forward in discussing resilience. We accept the 
necessary link between resilience and the stress response, based on an 
understanding that the stress response includes a reaction to a 
stimulus and the potential for accommodation.
We argue this two-stage formulation of a stress response is 
consistent with the theory of allostasis. Allostasis was defined by 
Sterling and Eyer (1988)  as “stability through change, ” allowing 
organisms to maintain stable regulatory systems, e.g., homeostatic 
systems such as osmosis, within dynamic environments. Prediction is 
a requirement for the brain to maintain regulatory efficiency during 
change (Sterling, 2012). Allostasis is the predictive interaction of a 
multisystem biological organism with their environment (Ungar and 
Theron, 2020). In what follows, we advance an enactive formulation 
of allostasis by considering it within the framework of active inference. 
In this context, we use the term enactive allostasis to foreground the 
predictive nature of allostasis and its dependency on the niche. When 
framed as an enactive process, allostasis rests on all of the processes 
entailed by (en)active inference—to be defined throughout—allowing 
for a formal conceptualization of resilient phenotypes.
Developed from the free energy principle (FEP)—an information-
theoretic principle that provides an optimization target by which self-
organizing agents maintain an equilibrium (steady-state) exchange 
within their environment through the minimization of surprise or 
uncertainty (Friston et al., 2006; Friston, 2010)—our model reframes 
resilience within this principle of self-organization. In active 
inference,1 the brain essentially acts as a (Bayesian) prediction-
processing network, where prior beliefs, or predictive models, are 
updated with new sensory information to form posterior beliefs 
through perceptual inference. Importantly, the brain not only reduces 
uncertainty through perception, it also actively samples the world as 
an embodied agent (Friston et al., 2010) and enacts policies to effect 
predictions ( Ramstead et  al., 2020 ). Further, active inference 
presupposes the inferential development of sentient (sense-making) 
processes which places awareness into our enactive model of allostasis.
The totality of all biopsychosocial systems within the 
environment in which an allostatic prediction is made is what 
we call an “enactive niche. ” While our focus is on resiliency in 
active inference, we  find it to be  phenotypic within the entire 
spectrum of allostatic profiles possible in an enactive niche. 
We  propose that a phenotype’s resilience is determined by the 
ability to use predictive processing to actively engage with, adapt 
to, and proactively shape the enactive niche, all for the allostatic 
accommodation necessary to reduce future surprise. In this 
framework, resilience results from features of the niche, broadly 
defined, as well as one’s predictive strategy for exchanging with it. 
It is this phenotypic characterization of resilience that complements 
the existing understanding of resilience as the interaction of 
dynamic biopsychosocial systems. Our model accommodates 
phenotypes that reflect the tendency of complex systems to revisit 
characteristic states ( Ramstead et al., 2018 ), as well as plasticity 
within phenotypes ( Murren et al., 2015 ). This provides a framework 
within which to understand individual differences in resilience. 
Further, within this paradigm, phenotypic plasticity, either toward 
or away from resilience, is explainable as an enactive process, one 
of bi-directional influence between the organism and the 
environment. We focus on the role that awareness—i.e., sensory 
processing, interoceptive inference, and higher level, “top down” 
processing—plays in allowing for growth of the individual, as an 
allostatic system, as part of an enactive niche to highlight strategies 
for individualized change.
This paper aims to offer a tractable and unifying 
multidisciplinary model of resilient phenotypes defined using the 
construct of active inference. While the current outcomes and 
trajectory approaches to resilience conform to the concepts of the 
enactive niche, the proposed approach has the advantage of placing 
resilience within the full spectrum of allostatic responses that are 
inextricably linked with awareness and the status of the organism 
in its physical and social environments. Thus, this formulation 
considers resilient factors, mechanisms, processes and outcomes 
in a single model, where phenotypes emerge from the entirety of 
the predictions made across all these variables that are part of the 
process of enactive allostasis. This approach is also in alignment 
with the NIH Concept Model ( Brown et al., 2023 ), which considers 
the type of stressor, the entire system across molecular, physiologic, 
psychosocial, and environment/community levels and the system’s 
response over time.
1 In all instances where we use the term “active inference,” “enactive inference” 
would also be appropriate.
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 03 frontiersin.org
2 Resilience
This section explores the concept of resilience, its definitions, and 
contributing factors.
2.1 Resilience defined
Some degree of resilience is putatively accepted to be innate in the 
human response to adversity (Bonanno, 2021). Early work defined 
resilience as the absence of psychopathology, often PTSD (Agaibi and 
Wilson, 2005) after trauma. Traumatic events are common worldwide 
with exposure estimates ranging as high as 70% (Benjet et al., 2016). 
Disentangling the prevalence of long-term effects on mental and 
physical health is not yet feasible but lifetime estimates of PTSD are 
around 8% (Gradus, 2017). However, the classic 32-year longitudinal 
study of Kauaian children who had experienced adverse developmental 
conditions found one out of three grew into competent, confident, and 
caring adults ( Werner, 1999 ) suggesting a profound effect of 
developmental chronic stress, along with remarkable resilience. This 
work led to a broader notion of resilience as “good survival, ” or 
adaptation to and recovery from stress (Bonanno and Mancini, 2012; 
Masten, 2001). In good survival, some may even be positively changed 
by this adaptive process ( Boden et  al., 2014 ), through successful 
negotiation and management of the stressors experienced across the 
lifespan (Windle, 2011) to result in what has been described as post-
traumatic growth and psychosocial gains from adversity (Johnson and 
Boals, 2015; Mancini, 2019).
2.1.1 Biopsychosocial contributors to resilience
Support for human resilience exists across multiple 
biopsychosocial systems. We  provide a high-level review of 
such contributors.
2.1.1.1 Genetic and epigenetic effects
Individual differences in allostatic systems and their signaling 
pathways may be borne of genetics, epigenetics, and experience. The 
genetic effects on resilience have been described as undeniable despite 
inconclusiveness about underlying mechanisms (Maul et al., 2020). 
Niitsu et  al. (2019)  review the genetics of the psychological 
manifestation of resilience and report six genes involved in numerous 
biopsychosocial components of resilience, including neuroplasticity, 
emotional regulation and social bonding. This is consistent with the 
complexity operationalizing the genetics of all behavioral factors 
(Madole and Harden, 2023).
Epigenetic modifications change gene expression without altering 
the DNA sequence, with gene expression shown to be altered by both 
positive and negative environmental factors (Schiele and Domschke, 
2018) and to distinguish between vulnerable and resilient when 
confronted with stressors (Smeeth et al., 2021). Epigenetic resilience 
has been proposed to be inheritable, generational, and impacted by 
developmental challenge and protection (ibid).
2.1.1.2 Neuropsychological contributors to resilience
The recognition of individual differences as relevant to resilience 
stems largely from the work of Lazarus. Recognizing variance in how 
individuals interpreted—i.e., appraised—the same stressful situation, 
he attributed these differences to motivational and cognitive variables 
that intervened between a stressor and affective response (Lazarus and 
Eriksen, 1952).
Since this pivotal work, emotion regulation and appraisal has been 
central in the conceptualization of resilience ( Tabibnia, 2020 ). 
Appraisal is most often discussed in the context of changing emotions 
or the usual trajectory of emotions, i.e., mood (Uusberg et al., 2019). 
We  will not explore emotion itself but accept the definition by 
Damasio as “complex programs of actions triggered by the presence 
of certain stimuli, external to the body or from within the body, when 
such stimuli activate certain neural systems” (Damasio, 2011). While 
appraisal is a top-down process, i.e., using awareness to alter the 
emotion, the broader category of emotional regulation employs a 
variety of strategies (Naragon-Gainey et al., 2017) including some that 
do not directly involve the use of awareness of the emotion, such as 
exercise (Bernstein and McNally, 2018) or meditation (Menezes and 
Bizarro, 2015).
There is widespread support for the idea that attention becomes 
focused on the source of stress with a concomitant loss of attention to 
other aspects of the environment (Chajut and Algom, 2003; Schwabe 
et al., 2013). Indeed, stress presents another seeming paradox, with 
distress impairing learning and performance, and the correct amount 
of stress, or eustress, improving performance. Compounding this 
effect, researchers have recognized that beliefs about stress shape its 
impact on learning (Rudland et al., 2020) and health ( Keller et al., 
2012). This relates to the bias that occurs under stress to rely on habit 
(i.e., exploit known solutions), rather than flexibly explore options that 
optimize goal-directed decision-making ( Yu, 2016 ), essential to 
convert distress to eustress.
Stress negatively impacts cognitive flexibility (Alexander et al., 
2007; Goldfarb et al., 2017; Seehagen et al., 2015), more so in men 
than women ( Knauft et  al., 2021 ; Shields et  al., 2016 ). Flexible 
direction of attention is key for cognitive and behavioral flexibility. 
Cognitive flexibility is required to avoid undue bias in decision-
making, which we  argue increases the likelihood of avoiding 
allostatically demanding surprise during environmental change. 
Bonanno et al. (2024) place psychological flexibility as central to stress 
accommodation. Behavioral flexibility is also adaptive and linked with 
resilience (Iacoviello and Charney, 2020); an effect we believe builds 
on cognitive and psychological flexibility. Cognitive flexibility is 
linked to the locus coeruleus (LC) (Sales et al., 2019), which modulates 
arousal and whose functional connectivity with the salience network 
modulates attention (Neal et al., 2023). The LC has long been studied 
as part of the brain’s alerting and stimulus detection system. The LC is 
the major source of the catecholamine norepinephrine in the brain 
(Sales et  al., 2019 ). Phasic responses are short, high frequency 
activations associated with behaviorally relevant, salient stimuli, 
which facilitate a shift to short-term behavioral planning. Meanwhile, 
extremely high levels of tonic LC firing, linked to arousal, are 
associated with behavioral variability and stochastic decision making 
and a shift from exploitation to exploration strategies (Morris et al., 
2020), as well as inhibition of prefrontal functions ( Krystal and 
Neumeister, 2009). Chronic stress has been shown to increase 
responsivity of LC neurons to excitatory stimuli (Morris et al., 2020) 
with chronic stress causing greater cholinergic reactivity (Southwick 
et al., 1999). Acute stress has also been suggested to persistently alter 
LC functioning (Borodovitsyna et al., 2018). More recent formulations 
within predictive processing have suggested LC firing is a correlate of 
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 04 frontiersin.org
prediction error when inferring states for action planning ( Sales 
et al., 2019).
The catecholamine, dopamine, is also released in response to 
stress and related to predictive processing in the brain. Widely studied 
for its role in motivation and reward systems (Wise, 2004), its direct 
role in the stress response is recognized but not well understood. 
Dopamine and norepinephrine are implicated in enhanced vigilance, 
focused attention, and increased SNS activity, raising blood pressure 
and cardiac output ( Beauchaine, 2009). It has been argued that 
dopamine encodes the precision or certainty afforded to responses or 
plans ( FitzGerald et  al., 2015 ; Friston et  al., 2014 ; Friston, 2009; 
Schwartenbeck et al., 2015) rather than simply reward prediction error.
Emotional regulation unites the neuropsychology of resilience 
(Hunter et al., 2018), summarized in a tripartite structure: (1) down-
regulating the negative through appraisal; (2) up-regulating the 
positive through social connections, flexibility and a positive sense of 
self; and (3) transcending the self through spirituality and experiences 
of joy and awe (Tabibnia, 2020). We carry this working framework 
forward in our proposed resilience phenotypes.
2.1.1.3 Social contributors to resilience
As a social species (McCall and Singer, 2012), social stress and 
support inversely impact resilience. Adverse social interactions (e.g., 
interpersonal violence, neglect) are key risk factors for stress disorders, 
while social protective factors (social support and emotional 
connection) are associated with resilience. Generally, positive social 
ties with other individuals, groups, or the larger community offer 
social support (Lin et al., 1979 ). Acute stress response, indexed by 
increases in heart rate, blood pressure, and cortisol, decreased in 
individuals accompanied by a support companion relative to those 
who faced a stressful task unaccompanied ( Kamarck et  al., 1995; 
Kirschbaum et al., 1995). Building on this, a recent study showed that 
active rather than passive support most effectively diminishes the 
subjective experience of and physiological response to pain (Mazza 
et al., 2023).
A recent process explaining relationships’ contribution to 
individual allostasis has been theorized under the rubric of social 
allostasis (Saxbe et al., 2020). Recognizing the conflicting effects that 
relationships can have on allostasis, the authors hypothesize 
relationships serve as regulators where groups strive for homeostatic 
balance and individuals work together to maintain group emotional 
and behavioral baselines.
2.2 Current theories of resilience
Biopsychosocial systems research has demonstrated that resilient 
individuals have identifiable traits and practices, or resilience factors 
that are shaped by genetics (Feder et al., 2009), epigenetics (Smeeth 
et al., 2021; Zannas and West, 2014), culture, social resources (Hobföll, 
1989, 2001), and life circumstances (Armbruster et al., 2012). Some 
argue that stress resilience is distinct from recovery from trauma 
(Richter-Levin and Sandi, 2021), although others argue that the same 
practices that help resilient individuals overcome significant adversity 
provide transferrable protection to coping with stress (Fletcher and 
Sarkar, 2013). We argue that enactive allostasis can explain resilient 
processes and outcomes associated with both trauma and with 
chronic stress.
While relatively static trait and malleable contextual resilience 
factors have been combined to reliably predict the likelihood of 
resilience outcomes at the group level, resilience outcomes are very 
difficult to predict in individuals. This contextual dependence has 
been labeled the “resilience paradox” (Bonanno, 2021).
Similar to the resilience trajectories introduced above (Bonanno, 
2004; Bonanno et al., 2011, 2023; Galatzer-Levy et al., 2018), Kalisch 
et  al. (2024) provide a longitudinal model to enhance the valid 
measurement of resilient processes and resilient outcomes (Kalisch 
et  al., 2021 ). Dubbed the Frequent Stressor and Mental Health 
Monitoring (FRESHMO) paradigm, the ratio of mental health 
reactivity to stress exposure, termed “stress reactivity, ” is calculated 
across time.
Bonanno’s earlier work identifying four prototypical trajectories 
of adjustment following potentially traumatic events (Bonanno, 2004; 
Bonanno et  al., 2011) also comports with the notion of allostatic 
phenotypes. A meta-analysis (Galatzer-Levy et al., 2018) confirmed 
those trajectories: (1) no dysfunction following the event; (2) 
immediate dysfunction with gradual recovery; (3) a delayed trajectory 
with dysfunction increasing over time; and (4) an emerging chronic 
level of dysfunction. Bridging work on trajectories and FRESHMO, 
we propose the resilient outcome of individuals reflects the accuracy 
of the brain’s predictive models that undergird regulatory control 
during and after stress and/or adversity. i.e., enactive allostasis. 
Prediction includes all the biopsychosocial systems associated with 
resilience in a complex, dynamic model from which phenotypes 
emerge. These phenotypes allow for the application of our theoretical 
approach to individuals.
3 Allostasis
To survive, all biological systems must maintain physiological 
stability. Physiologist Cannon (1929) labeled the drive to maintain a 
stable internal milieu (e.g., temperature, blood pressure, blood 
glucose) “homeostasis” and proposed it operated as an automatic 
negative feedback model requiring coordination of multiple local 
organs. Adjustments were thought to be made in response to negative 
internal conditions with the goal of maintaining near constant internal 
conditions (ibid).
The concept of allostasis (‘stability through change’) was first to 
place homeostatic regulation under control of the central nervous 
system (Sterling and Eyer, 1988). For the brain to efficiently maintain 
regulation during change it must use prediction (Sterling, 2012). As 
noted above, resilience requires a stress response that entails a 
physiological reaction and accommodation. Allostasis further suggests 
that the stress response is predictive, with systems changing from 
baseline conditions to accommodate perceived challenges. Allostatic 
predictions are effected primarily through the autonomic nervous 
system (ANS) and the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA), but 
also through a host of metabolic, inflammatory, neuromodulatory and 
other systems, Korte et al. (2005)  allowing for accommodation to 
perceived stress, both physical and psychological ( Sterling and 
Eyer, 1988).
The degree of the reactive response and the completeness of the 
recovery have the potential to alter allostatic baselines (Schulkin and 
Sterling, 2019; Sterling, 2012; Sterling, 2004; Sterling and Eyer, 1988). 
Allostatic predictions may be  subthreshold and thus not result in 
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 05 frontiersin.org
physiological change. However, the effectiveness of an allostatic 
prediction is evident in the stability, or return to baseline, of the 
systems that are regulated in response to the prediction McEwen 
identified incomplete accommodation as allostatic load (AL), the 
cumulative physiological and psychological burden (“wear and tear 
on the brain and body”) of chronically adapting to stress (McEwen, 
1998; Seeman et  al., 1997 ). Further, when allostasis-induced 
neurophysiological changes exceed the capacity of a person to 
function in the short-term, allostatic overload occurs ( Fava et  al., 
2019). This is clinimetrically defined by overwhelming stress resulting 
in physiological ( Offidani and Ruini, 2012 ), affective, and 
social disruptions.
Chrousos and Agorastos have provided helpful distinctions 
between allostatic outcomes by differentiating the motivating effect of 
eustress from the harmful impact of distress, arguing the former leads 
to hyperstasis (“higher/better) state, ” in which one’s ability to maintain 
homeostasis is improved, while the latter leads to cacostasis (“bad 
state”) or dyshomeostasis (Chrousos, 2009; Agorastos and Chrousos, 
2022). They further identified distress and cacostasis as defining a 
vulnerable phenotype, which we  find aligned to our framing of 
resilient phenotypes, specifically the fragile phenotype. The distinction 
drawn between eustress and distress is helpful but one we  see as 
implicit in allostasis when considering the degree of accommodation. 
For simplicity and continuity with the bulk of the literature, we discuss 
the stress response as an allostatic prediction to a challenge. This 
prediction leads to a physiological reaction and accommodation. With 
complete accommodation, allostasis—as historically defined (stability 
through change)—ensues, which read as resilience. We distinguish 
between this allostasis with recovery, which includes eustress, and 
incomplete allostatic recovery including allostatic load and allostatic 
overload. We  will also explore the possibility of improvement 
following an allostatic prediction or “allostatic growth, ” as a unique 
type of resilience. Further, we recognize the possibility of a range of 
allostatic responses and their short- and long-term effects on 
outcomes. Indeed, within this context, the tendency of complex 
systems to revisit characteristic states, or phenotypes, becomes 
apparent (Ramstead et  al., 2018 ) when considering the range of 
possible patterns of allostatic reactivity and accommodation.
Briefly,2 the ANS is regulated by a complex neural network that 
responds to both internal and external demands. Its basic structure 
provides counter regulatory mechanisms to activate and recover from 
allostatic reactions. The ANS contains two concurrently acting 
systems, the sympathetic (SNS) and parasympathetic nervous systems 
(PNS) (LeBouef et al., 2023). Activation of the SNS prepares the body 
for action while the PNS returns systems to a more sustainable 
baseline. Each consists of discrete functional pathways that may 
be activated independent of one another or in the specific pattern 
needed to maintain homeostasis given the organism’s resources and 
the current environment.
The HPA has been called the central driver of allostasis through 
the glucocorticoid, cortisol ( de Kloet and Joëls, 2023 ). Cortisol 
controls allostasis by a receptor-mediated on-and-off switch, which 
2 We recommend these comprehensive reviews for a broader discussion of 
the neurobiology of resilience (Kalisch et al., 2024; Osório et al., 2017; Russo 
et al., 2012).
regulates the organism to provide the energy required to maintain 
homeostasis. The presence of two distinct receptors, the 
mineralocorticoid (MR) and glucocorticoid receptors (GR), each with 
different affinities for cortisol, allow for organism-specific patterns of 
allostatic activation and accommodation.
The lifelong impact of developmental trauma and stress suggests 
critical periods for brain exposure to HPA activity ( Agorastos and 
Chrousos, 2022). Early trauma, commonly referred to as Adverse 
Childhood Experiences (ACE), show long-term effects on numerous 
physical and mental health outcomes (Sheffler et al., 2020; Wittchen 
et al., 2011). Results have been equivocal on the long-term impact of 
ACE on adult cortisol reactivity, although recent meta-analyses 
concluded there was a blunting effect on cortisol release among adults 
with ACEs during mental stress (Bunea et al., 2017) and on cortisol 
and cardiovascular reactivity during social stress (Brindle et al., 2022).
The adrenal androgen released in response to stress, 
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), and its sulphated ester (DHEA-S), 
provides a mechanism that supports allostatic recovery. It acts as a 
glucocorticoid antagonist to protect the brain, particularly the 
hippocampus, from negative effects of cortisol (Kamin and Kertes, 
2017). It has numerous neuroprotective mechanisms (Maggio et al., 
2015) and is associated with improved emotional regulation (Sripada 
et al., 2013).
While the allostatic system is replete with mechanisms that 
counteract the potential for stress to result in long-term negative 
consequences (Osório et al., 2017), oxytocin may have a unique role 
in resilience. The oxytocin system provides the neurohormonal 
substrate for parental, romantic, and filial attachment ( Feldman, 
2012). The role of oxytocin in attachment and stress modulation 
supports the concept of “affiliative resilience” (Feldman, 2020). Social 
affiliation has long been recognized to have allostatic implications 
(Sterling, 2012).
3.1 Allostatic prediction and resilience
Fundamentally, prediction both anticipates events that may occur 
and prepares the system to maintain regulation before the need arises. 
Predictive allostasis reduces error, matches the capacities of different 
response components, shares resources among systems to reserve 
overall capacity, and integrates past errors to improve future 
predictions (Sterling, 2012). In prediction, the brain develops models 
based on prior experience and traits to allocate resources needed to 
react to stress. Successful allostatic predictions not only indicate an 
ability to predict the internal demands needed to respond to an 
environmental change, e.g., fight or flight, but it also suggests the 
subsequent allostatic accommodation, e.g., rest and recovery. 
Allostatic predictions can result in allostatic responses that ultimately 
lead to chronic homeostatic disruption—e.g., the association of 
diabetes with AL (Steptoe et al., 2014). It is equally plausible to argue 
predictive allostasis can maintain and potentially enhance the 
efficiency of the neuropsychobiological systems that maintain 
homeostasis across time and environmental change.
As elegantly evidenced in the regulation of cortisol (de Kloet and 
Joëls, 2023), stress responses demonstrate that with every activation 
there is a possible recovery mechanism. Stress accommodation is 
situational, determined by interaction with the broad physical and 
affiliative environment, shaped by factors occurring across variable 
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 06 frontiersin.org
time courses and realized across all levels of neurobiological 
expression, genetic to behavioral. Thus, we  argue that allostatic 
predictions are enactive, informed by both the person and their 
environment, where we use the terms enactive and predictive allostasis 
interchangeably. Within this context, a broad range of individual 
differences in predictive allostasis is observed, which are presented 
as phenotypes.
4 Free energy and active inference: a 
review
The FEP is an information-theoretic construct that provides an 
optimization target, the minimization of surprise, by which self-
organizing agents maintain a (far from equilibrium) steady state 
within their dynamic environment (Friston, 2010, 2012). Minimizing 
the long-term average of surprise—reflecting the divergence between 
the organisms’ predicted and observed sensory exchanges with the 
world—allows the organism to minimize the entropy of sensory states 
(Friston, 2010) and, implicitly, disorder in the sensorium (Ramstead 
et al., 2018). This highlights a core distinction between homeostasis 
and allostasis—made under the FEP—that allostasis requires 
predictive models of one’s agency in relation to the external 
environment (Constant et al., 2018; Ramstead et al., 2018, 2021). For 
clarification, we do not distinguish between the terms used to refer to 
this phenomenal sense of self, such as self-consciousness, cognition, 
awareness, etc. and rather arbitrarily use the term awareness.
Beliefs, or predictive models, are evaluated for accuracy against 
relevant external and internal sensory inputs; namely, the differences 
between predictions and sensory inputs; i.e., prediction errors 
(Friston, 2010 ) in perceptual inference. Precision highlights the 
important role of selecting sensory inputs for predictive processing. 
Without complete precision, or reliability, beliefs are updated under 
some degree of uncertainty, with some expectation of surprise. This 
draws a distinction between expected and unexpected surprises that 
we  relate to awareness. Beliefs about intended states of being are 
enacted through policies, or plans of action (c.f., ideomotor theory). 
Policies are inferential and selected to alter the environment in ways 
that will minimize surprise by changing sensory inputs to better align 
with predictive models (Pezzulo et al., 2018). For instance, we pull 
down our visor while driving to deflect the sun. Just as this policy 
allows us to avoid the unwanted surprise of driving blindly, a similar 
selection of policies is used to alter our awareness, including our sense 
of self, again with the goal of decreasing surprise.
Belief updating through active inference samples the world, both 
proprioceptively and exteroceptively, as an embodied agent (Friston 
et al., 2010). Those inferences that alter sensory input—i.e., change 
exteroceptive and or proprioceptive inferences through action—
include inference as the basis of policy selection; namely, inferring 
what one is likely to do next and then engaging motor systems and 
autonomic reflexes to realize the resultant predictions ( Ramstead 
et al., 2020). This places perceptual inference under active inference, 
in the sense that inferred states of the world, i.e., perceptual inferences, 
are used to inform beliefs about acting as an agent on that world. This 
synergism between action and perception optimizes predictive models 
to maintain homeostasis (Badcock et al., 2019 ) through enhanced 
allostatic predictions. We further agree with Ramstead (ibid) that the 
inferential process is quintessentially enactive: each generative model 
couples the individual with their social and physical environment, 
forming an enactive niche.
Our brains constantly predict our internal states in the context of 
our environment and where we are in it: exteroceptive predictions are 
measured against external sensations from the extrapersonal 
environment; proprioceptive predictions are measured from the 
sensation of the body moving in the environment; and interoceptive 
predictions are measured against internal sensations from the body. 
Interoception is the mental process of inferring the internal status of 
our regulatory systems, both homeostatic ( Duquette, 2017 ; 
Fotopoulou and Tsakiris, 2017) and allostatic (Corcoran and Hohwy, 
2018). The role of interoception takes priority in enactive allostasis, as 
well as in affective processing ( Quadt et  al., 2022 ) and resilience 
(Haase et  al., 2016 ). Active inferences are made with priors that 
consider the accuracy of every prior relevant inference, with current 
inferences selected that have the highest probability of minimizing 
surprise, i.e., uncertainty or entropy.
Active inference further presupposes the inferential development 
of sentient (sense-making) processes, including perception (Parr et al., 
2019), interoception ( Corcoran and Hohwy, 2018 ), up to and 
including the deep temporal models that underwrite epistemic 
awareness or sense of self (Friston et al., 2016; Friston K. J., 2018; Seth 
and Friston, 2016; Vilas et al., 2022). Awareness or basic sentience has 
evolved to minimize expected surprise, or uncertainty, over time 
(Nave et al., 2022). The possibility that awareness contributes to the 
organism’s inferential process in ways that alter allostatic systems 
drives our interest in formalizing a role for awareness in active 
inference, which in turn relates to our framework for resilience. Just 
as our belief in our actions and plans becomes strengthened with 
precision, so does our belief in ourselves (Friston et al., 2015), e.g., as 
capable and effective, or ineffective and subject to external forces, or 
somewhere in between.
Central to our understanding of active inference is that awareness 
is an outcome of a policy selection that reduces expected surprise 
(Nave et  al., 2022 ). Predicting and realizing sensory data—in a 
complex physical and social environment—requires integration across 
interoceptive, proprioceptive and exteroceptive sensory modalities, 
under deep temporal models, which underwrites a stable, ideally 
positive sense of self, mental time travel, and cognitive flexibility. The 
implicit role for awareness in allostatic prediction also necessitates 
aspects of perception that can increase AL. Indeed, stress has been 
formulated as an increase in expected free energy (EFE)—i.e., 
uncertainty ( Ueltzhöffer et  al., 2021 )—in an aware decision-
making context.
Enactive allostasis happens within one’s established phenotype. A 
host of genetic, epigenetic, and developmental influences define the 
phenotypic states that the individual returns to with high frequency. 
In a predictive allostatic context, returning to phenotypic, i.e., 
preferred, characteristic, or unsurprising sensory states ( Arnaldo 
et al., 2022), underwrites allostatic accommodation, forming the basis 
of our argument for resilient phenotypes.
4.1 Free energy and active inference: 
formalism
Having a generative model that entails agency, necessarily, 
postulates a model of the consequences of action in any domain (i.e., 
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 07 frontiersin.org
motoric or autonomic). In a minimal sense, this kind of generative 
model—under which the degree of surprise or free energy is defined—
is a model of the self as agent.
To reframe, the brain essentially acts as a prediction-processing 
network, where prior beliefs are updated with new information to 
form posterior beliefs, in the spirit of Bayesian belief updating 3 
(Friston, 2010; Friston et al., 2006). Surprise cannot be quantified but 
is analogous to the variational free energy that systems seek to 
minimize. Beliefs are updated based on their accuracy, or the degree 
to which they correctly predict current sensory information, and their 
precision or reliability over time4 (Friston, 2009). Precision is encoded 
by neurons reporting prediction errors being given higher synaptic 
gain—encoded at fast timescales through neuromodulation of 
synaptic efficacy, and through to neuroendocrine-mediated plasticity 
and learning, and slower structure learning and reconfiguration of 
generative models associated with changes in immune responses 
(Arnaldo et al., 2022).
Technically, EFE, i.e., expected surprise, is reduced through action 
via policy selection (Arnaldo et al., 2022). Acting to optimize preferred 
sensory inputs will pre-emptively minimize the divergence between 
anticipated and sampled sensory input, thereby minimizing expected 
surprise (Friston et al., 2016). Expected surprise can also be reduced 
by updating relevant beliefs to reduce uncertainty. These two aspects 
of minimizing EFE can be  read as epistemic and instrumental or 
pragmatic affordances; in exactly the same way that distinguishes 
between exploration and exploitation. In other words, the single 
imperative to minimize EFE manifests as curious, information-
seeking behavior that is constrained by the prior preferences that 
shape goal-seeking behavior. The relative precision of epistemic and 
instrumental affordances translates into preferences to explore or 
exploit the environment (Caddick and Rottman, 2021; Friston et al., 
2017), and may rest on genetic, epigenetic, and developmental factors.
It is also helpful to decompose EFE into risk, the difference 
between predicted and a priori preferred outcomes in the future, and 
ambiguity, which is the uncertainty associated with future 
observations, given current states (Da Costa et al., 2020). This further 
clarifies the role of exploitative, i.e., risk minimizing (goal-seeking), 
and explorative (information-seeking), ambiguity minimizing, policy 
selection. Da Costa et al. (2020) highlight the crucial role of awareness 
as such: “planning and decision-making, respectively, correspond to 
evaluating the expected free energy of different policies, which scores 
their goodness in relation to prior preferences and forming 
3 Technically, minimizing variational free energy is the same as maximizing 
Bayesian model evidence (a.k.a., marginal likelihood). This means that there is 
a mathematical isomorphism between minimizing surprise and maximizing 
the evidence for generative models – that is sometimes referred to as self-
evidencing (Hohwy, 2016). When we talk about Bayesian beliefs, we refer to 
posterior probability densities encoded by neuronal activity and collectivity—as 
opposed to the propositional beliefs of folk psychology. In other words, 
Bayesian beliefs are a mathematical (subpersonal) construct.
4 Prediction errors that are afforded more precision or confidence have a 
greater effect on posterior beliefs or belief updating, i.e., adjusting priors to 
explain away current prediction error, and by actively selecting sensory inputs 
to better conform with one’s beliefs. This belief updating process conforms 
well with active sensing and perceptual control theory (Parr and Friston, 2018).
approximate posterior beliefs about policies. ” This EFE formulation of 
active inference has also been related to interoceptive control under 
allostasis (Tschantz et  al., 2022), supporting the idea of allostatic 
growth, using the same model as AL.
The enactive process described by Friston et  al. (2021)  as 
sophisticated inference is also essential to our model. Using the 
economic definition of sophisticated as ‘beliefs about beliefs’ , or meta-
beliefs, of either one’s own or others, meta-beliefs are stable, high-level 
beliefs that constrain lower-level beliefs—are foundational for the 
enactive niche construction. Meta-beliefs begin with the assumption 
that the intrinsic value of every action is its epistemic value or 
affordance ( Friston et  al., 2015 ). Under sophisticated inference, 
planning becomes a belief generation strategy. This link introduces 
conditional dependencies between the past for the selection of actions 
in the present and for similar selection of future paths, e.g., mental 
time-travel (Friston et al., 2021). In effect, these meta beliefs reflect 
beliefs states or “what I would believe about what would happen if 
I did that, ” as compared to “what would happen if I did that” as is the 
case when modeling a single belief (Friston et al., 2021).
4.2 Awareness under active inference
Impacting the successful formation of predictions, we consider 
three interacting levels of awareness as consistent with the 
multidisciplinary literature on cognition and psychology and easily 
integrated into active inference: (1) sensory, (2) interoceptive, and (3) 
enactive, or meta, awareness. We  observe overlap in these levels 
similar to the heterarchy, Arnaldo et al. (2022) propose to account for 
the coding of precision of beliefs across timescales. These levels of 
awareness similarly occur across timescales and can feed forward and 
backward to impact awareness in the other levels.
Sensory awareness and processing relate to the rapid 
neuromodulatory and neurotransmitter effects of sensory inputs; in 
subjective terms, what we are hearing, seeing, feeling, smelling, and 
tasting at each given moment. Sensory differences are implicated in 
numerous clinical conditions ( Harrison et  al., 2019 ). Sensory 
awareness predominates in certain enactive strategies, where sensory 
sensitivity and processing disruptions interrupt the development of 
enactive awareness as in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) (Hulle 
et al., 2019). Sensory awareness precedes appraisal in our formulation. 
Conversely, we  argue that when enactive awareness is developed 
through optimization of the enactive niche, sensory awareness 
provides input into all predictive models including epistemic models 
of self as well deep temporal “planning as inference” models.
With heightened sensory sensitivity, overly precise beliefs can 
be developed that override prior beliefs that underwrite intentions and 
agency, resulting in false perceptual inference, e.g., delusions in 
schizophrenia (Friston et al., 2013) or an awareness-enhanced level of 
precision associated with maintenance of negative emotional states 
(Schwartenbeck et al., 2015).
Interoceptive sensations constitute the afferent physiological 
information from the body to the brain and allow the organism to 
be aware of its regulatory status. Interoceptive awareness provides 
feedback on the success of enactive allostasis as inputs provided by the 
viscera (Craig, 2003; Quadt et al., 2022 ) and, in combination with 
sensory awareness and ANS and HPA activation (Schulz and Vögele, 
2015). Providing mental percepts for afferent internal inputs is critical 
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 08 frontiersin.org
to the construction of affective and social experience (Barrett et al., 
2016; Quigley et al., 2021; Seth, 2013). Interoception may influence 
“the dynamic basis to the concept of self ” (Critchley and Harrison, 
2013). These levels of interoceptive awareness also operate under 
active inference to minimize unexpected, energy-consuming surprises 
(Paulus et al., 2019 ). Thus, interoception may not only impact, or 
possibly be, awareness (Seth, 2013); it is also critical in the ability to 
understand others’ intentional and belief states, i.e., theory of mind 
(Ondobaka et al., 2017). Social allostasis extends similar mechanisms 
to group dynamics (Saxbe et al., 2020).
Finally, enactive awareness encompasses what others have 
described as self-awareness ( Friston K., 2018 ) or meta-cognition 
(Fleming and Dolan, 2012), but also includes a nested awareness of 
how one’s actions impact the experience—and construction—of one’s 
environment, again part of the enactive niche. This brings to the fore 
the importance of belief-based behavioral policy selection within an 
enactive niche. Behavioral policies are selected to optimize EFE, which 
requires epistemic (exploration) and pragmatic (exploitation) 
behaviors to reduce uncertainty and to enable reward-seeking, 
respectively (Friston et al., 2016) within the enactive niche. At the 
highest level, enactive behavioral policy selection requires 
sophisticated inference, or nested beliefs about beliefs (Friston et al., 
2021), which can each be  optimized. Because sensory and 
interoceptive errors feed into enactive awareness, the latter includes 
perception and emotion, but also includes higher-order “top-down” 
processes. This allows for direction of attention that impact those 
processes, including cognition, mental time travel, the construction of 
concepts of self and self-esteem, and the construction of social 
representations necessary for empathy and compassion. Deane et al. 
(2024) refer to adaptive narrative control or the ability to model one’s 
own attentional states and how they can be controlled as the mental 
action that allows for affective and physiological regulation. It is 
sophisticated inference that allows for the proactive development of 
enactive awareness and policy selection capable of reducing EFE in 
one’s niches, potentially extending to novel, even chaotic, 
enactive niches.
Within enactive awareness, we include default states or biases 
which stem from a combination of genetics, epigenetics, and 
experience, which can influence one’s beliefs without overt awareness. 
In addition to experience, each organism is imbued with some degree 
of evolutionary determined preferences that underwrite precise 
constraints on enactive beliefs and policies. Be  it explorative or 
exploitive, inhibitory or appetitive, there are core preferences satisfying 
evolutionary demands that influence phenotypic predictive processes. 
Although many predictive models operate independent of awareness, 
e.g., osmotic adjustments and circadian hormonal fluctuations, there 
are also beliefs and policies that through a variety of genetic, 
epigenetic, and learned mechanisms underwrite beliefs that 
inferentially select policies that may or may not use awareness. When 
such beliefs select behavioral policies without the influence of 
awareness, it reflects bias, or the default state of predictive processing.
When sensory attention (i.e., awareness) is decreased, we are more 
likely to rely on prior beliefs (i.e., inductive biases) for policy selection. 
These include such innate policy selections as those imbued by 
personality preferences or learned habits, such as placing one’s keys in 
the same place each time—although this may remain aspirational for 
some. Regardless, biases can be  adaptive or maladaptive. If 
maladaptive, as so often is the ubiquitous confirmation bias (Tversky 
and Kahneman, 1974 ), they can only be  altered with effortful, 
top-down attention.
Predictive processing in the absence of awareness can reduce 
expected surprise in many situations and informs how habits develop 
and are maintained. Such biases can also serve to perpetuate 
uncertainty, a process that may explain associations between 
personality and mental health. Traits associated with low extraversion 
and high neuroticism (Hakulinen et al., 2015) can be argued to reflect 
a lack of emotional regulation and a sense of self indicative of a bias 
that tolerates expected uncertainty (Clark et al., 2018).
Stress directs cognitive resources to limbic vigilance, decreasing 
cognitive attention and flexibility. Stress amplifies bias leading to 
preference for habitual, overlearned solutions without exploring new 
options. We refer to this as belief bias, at least partially distinct from 
the more common emotional and cognitive biases. Belief biases are 
rarely context specific and reflect meta-beliefs that are not fully 
enactive, i.e., do not minimize EFE. Belief biases act as the lens 
through which we process the world, e.g., evolved control parameters 
associated with personality (Safron and Sheikhbahaee, 2023). When 
used in model generation, (meta) belief bias fails to select policies that 
consider the full repertoire of coping or responses—and restrict 
optimally enactive policy selection. Such biases as personality develop 
from characteristic adaptations and evolutionary selection to play a 
role in long-term phenotypic plasticity and adaptation and may also 
play a role in canalization.
4.3 Resilience as predictive allostasis
Reflecting the predictive link shared between allostasis and 
active inference, efforts to frame allostatic resilience were 
previewed by Feldman-Barrett and colleagues who presented 
depression as an allostatic disruption ( Barrett et al., 2016 ). This 
work identified interoception as the signal of allostatic change, 
arguing that if allostasis is central to brain architecture, affect is 
better considered as an aspect of consciousness, not emotion per 
se, and that all perception is a consequence of predictive allostatic 
change represented through interoception. In our terminology, 
these are beliefs, which in the case of depression, result in 
prediction error causing repeated negative interoceptive signals. 
Over time, the net result is a metabolically and statistically 
inefficient internal (i.e., generative) model.
Miller et al. (2022)  suggest three concepts of resilience; (1) 
inertia or the state of being resistant to change, (2) elasticity or 
bouncing back to its setpoints, and (3) plasticity or the ability to 
expand one’s repertoire of good states. Under an active inference 
model, inertia is argued to reflect high precision of prior beliefs, 
although the potential for inflexibility to develop is recognized. 
Elasticity is related to homeostasis and allostasis, and the use of 
temporal models to anticipate the consequences of future actions 
allows for recovery from environmental or prosocial 
perturbations. The notion of optimality is discussed in terms of 
balance between epistemic and instrumental actions, with 
resilience requiring the cognitive flexibility needed to explore 
new hypotheses and then update models in terms of updating the 
relative precision of prior preferences (i.e., biases) that, in turn, 
affect the balance between epistemic and instrumental 
affordances. Finally, plasticity is discussed in terms of degeneracy, 
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 09 frontiersin.org
or useful redundancy. While redundant systems are less efficient, 
degenerate models afford the opportunity to seek out surprises 
that are likely to provide maximal information gain. The 
argument is made that the best strategy is not to attempt to avoid 
inevitable expected surprises but to become a system that thrives 
amongst varying degrees of risk and uncertainty.
Recent work ( Waugh and Sali, 2023 ) explicitly placed 
resilience and allostasis into an active inference framework. 
Linking resilience with emotional intelligence, they argue active 
inference selects for the maintenance of well-being. Defining 
resilience as a pre-determined ability that can be learned across 
life, a hierarchical tradeoff between belief development and 
updating is proposed such that a positive sense of well-being is at 
the top level of beliefs. Model stability is argued to reduce 
variational free energy as an explanation for why resilience 
persists through both minor and major prediction errors, with an 
exception being made for consistent minor errors.
5 The enactive niche
The construct of niche has been applied to active inference in 
several contexts ( Bruineberg et al., 2018 ; Constant et al., 2022 ; 
Miller et al., 2022 ; Sladky et al., 2023 ; Tschantz et al., 2020 ). The 
cognitive niche was defined as a co-constructed ‘common ground’ 
that optimizes belief updating, also referred to as extended active 
inference ( Constant et  al., 2022 ). This formulation of niche 
captures the essence of our concept of enactive niche in intent, 
but we see an enactive niche as the sum total of all the sensory 
inputs, including interoception, against which the success of 
policy selection is evaluated. Policy selection within the enactive 
niche is based on posterior beliefs about the most plausible policy 
to pursue under the prior belief that will minimize EFE. Both 
prior and posterior beliefs include all unaware and aware 
mechanisms capable of reducing EFE within the given enactive 
niche. Within this enactive niche, we highlight the inseparability 
of our environment, our exchange with the environment, our 
allostatic systems, and our capacity for active inference. We stress 
the enactive role of situational awareness in the niche, impacting 
its own updating, as described in the cognitive niche, but also 
impacting policy selection.
We emphasize three elements of active inference in the setting of 
an enactive niche. First, (situational) awareness is both cause and 
consequence of predictive processing, thus framing thoughts as 
constructed by—and capable of influencing—predictions. This is 
essential in phenotypic plasticity as seen among individuals who 
accommodate a shift in the enactive niche by changing awareness. 
This is consistent with the emphasis on flexibility mindset in resilience 
(Bonanno et al., 2024 ). This increase in accommodation stands in 
contrast to the reactivity seen when a phenotype is ill-suited for the 
dynamics of their niche.
To put it vernacularly, our awareness can change our niche, and 
our niche changes our awareness; thoughts matter in the enactive 
niche. We do not find this to be a trivial issue in our formulation of 
resilience. Awareness, built on our uncertainty about future policy 
selections, is the inferential selection of policies that improve our 
ability to select future policies that minimize EFE. The niche also 
supports the development of meta-beliefs allowing for planning, both 
forward and backward, as inference, i.e., deep temporal models and 
cognitive flexibility, to reduce EFE.
The second element we emphasize is the role of awareness in 
interacting with the enactive niche. It is our awareness that allows 
for the possibility of reducing expected uncertainty across the 
entire niche. Engagement with the enactive niche using deep 
temporal models allows for proactive engagement with the entire 
niche. Social allostasis ( Saxbe et al., 2020 ) suggests mechanisms 
for the bi-directional effects that relationships have on the 
individual. Because one expects to engage with multiple social 
groups and individuals in one’s daily social interactions and roles, 
one’s holistic social niche can be  argued to be  comprised of 
multiple partially overlapping niches. Enactive predictions may 
be  systematically more or less accurate in these different 
exchanges; for example, interaction with family leading to 
predictions that result in complete allostatic accommodation 
than interaction in the workplace. Through aware beliefs such as 
compassion and gratitude, group homeostasis increases, thus 
decreasing the need for individual allostatic responses and 
promoting recovery when individual allostatic responses 
do occur.
This same level of engagement happens with the physical 
environment as the sensory information provided by the 
environment is processed for consistency with beliefs about the 
environment. History provides numerous models of how the 
environment exists in individual enactive niches, from the 
symbiotic niches of hunter-gathers to the domineering niche of 
industrialism to the digital niche of technology. Environments 
alter the entire niche including individual awareness. The clear 
increase in allostatic disorders that have occurred since 
industrialism speaks to a negative effect of aspects of this 
environmental change on allostatic predictions.
The final element we see as foundational to the enactive niche 
is the ability to construct an awareness that allows individuals to 
resist stress, i.e., to accommodate the chaos of new and/or 
changing enactive niches. Self-organizing agents are defined by 
their ability to develop, to some extent, enactive niches that defy 
entropic dissipation and dispersion. Humans have a unique ability 
to expand their individual and collective enactive niches into 
entropic environments. From an enactive niche perspective, this 
requires awareness and policy selection to act in coordination to 
switch between openness to chaos, i.e., being pro-entropic,  
intentionally embracing and enacting change in the niche, to a 
closed system when the individual resists further perturbations. 
This process of moving from open to closed systems, to greater or 
lesser degrees, underlies decision-making.
Enactive allostasis requires adapting to one’s niche. To be clear 
one’s enactive niche is dynamic, requiring constant updating of all 
model and policy distributions (see Figure  1 for a high-level 
overview of active inference within an enactive niche). Niches 
differ in the allostatic demands placed upon an individual, such 
that individuals may present themselves as resilient within certain 
social and physical environments but not others. Meanwhile, 
individuals vary in their ability to shape the dynamics of their 
niche in accordance with allostatic demands. However, these two 
factors highlight the variation in ways to achieve adaptation. 
Accounting for these two factors—the allostatic demands of the 
niche and the capability of the individual to shape their 
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 10 frontiersin.org
niche—the resilience phenotypes schematically presented in 
Figure 2  represent different strategies an individual may employ 
to successfully adapt within their niche.
These proposed phenotypes were presaged by the work of 
Bonanno (2004) and Bonanno et al. (2024) as outcome trajectories 
following exposure to potentially traumatic events. We find support 
FIGURE 1
Self-organizing agent within an enactive niche. This conceptualizes the brain, operating as a self-organizing agent, within an entropic environment. In 
the process of self-organization, the agent interacts with the environment, with the potential of shaping the environment, as the environment 
simultaneously shapes the agent’s behavioral interactions. This forms an enactive niche. Specific elements include: Generative Model(s) are 
probabilistic models of the cause-effect structure of the environment. They generate predictions of incoming sensory inputs using relevant prior 
models engendered by genetic, epigenetic, development, and previous experiences. These Bayesian priors are adjusted by active inference to reduce 
(precision-weighted) prediction error, or surprise. These models generate predictions in all sensed modalities (i.e., exteroceptive and interoceptive) and, 
in deep or hierarchical predictions of predictions of precision (c.f., metacognition and attention, respectively) necessary for awareness. Prediction Error 
is the difference between predicted and sensory inputs and is synonymous with surprise. Mathematically, free energy is a computable upper bound on 
surprise. Precision scores the reliability, confidence or efficacy afforded predictions and prediction errors. Higher sensory precision, as indicated by 
darker lines, results in predictions with less tolerance for sensory error, leading to greater belief updating in the face of precise sensory information. 
Bayesian Model (a.k.a., belief) Updating uses precision weighted prediction errors to revise or update prior Bayesian beliefs into posterior beliefs (i.e., 
after seeing sensory input). Perceptual Inference provides the “best explanation” for the causes of sensory input by which predictions of sensory input 
enable prediction errors to update prior beliefs. Perception is part of active inference and includes exteroception, interoception, and proprioception. 
Active Inference selects policies to change the enactive niche to better align with predictions. As indicated by the lower arrow, active inference can 
also act upon awareness, effectively linking the environment and awareness. This results in an enactive niche linking the agent with all environmental 
and social elements with which the agent interacts. Active inference allows for the niche to shape the agent and the agent to shape the niche.
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 11 frontiersin.org
in these trajectories for our central understanding of resilience as an 
allostatic phenotype that emerges within one’s current enactive niche. 
Approaching these differences from a free energy/enactive niche 
perspective allows for a formal theory of neural dynamics across 
spatiotemporal scales (Badcock et al., 2019).
Within this framework, we present descriptions of four proposed 
resilience phenotypes employing differential strategies using varying 
degrees of awareness and active inference, for variably active niche 
construction. More active construction relates to more successful 
accommodation of (variable) allostatic demand within the niche.
6 Resilience phenotypes
In our descriptions of each phenotype, we  provide a brief 
operational definition, outline enactive strategies and awareness 
profiles and map them onto existing clinical categorizations. Table 1 
provides an overview of this information, including preliminary 
clinical guidelines for phenotype identification and interventions. 
Figure  3 provides a visual representation of the continuum of 
phenotypes from fragile through to durable, resilient, and 
pro-entropic. Our goal is to provide a framework for the further 
study of enactive allostasis, including resilience, and resistance to 
stressful events, with emphasis on the role awareness may play 
in allostasis.
6.1 Fragile phenotype
The fragile phenotype stems from genetic predispositions, 
developmental/epigenetic disruptions or overwhelming trauma, alone 
or in combination and presents as susceptible to psychological and 
physiological dysregulation. The commonality across these diverse 
etiologies and symptom clusters is ineffective allostatic predictions. 
Over time—and without change to the enactive niche—phenotypic 
canalization, or the opposite of phenotypic plasticity ( Belsky and 
Pluess, 2013 ; Carhart-Harris et  al., 2023 ), becomes increasingly 
entrenched, dominating the person’s cognitive, emotional, and 
behavioral experiences ( Deane et  al., 2024) and making allostatic 
predictions more difficult. Rigid and recurrent patterns persist despite 
allostatic errors that indicate a need for adaptation and change (Lewis 
and Todd, 2007). This suggests what has been termed “motivated 
inattention” or “avoidant mental action” (Deane et al., 2024) where 
reduced interoceptive awareness. i.e., lessened emotional recognition 
likely stemming from canalization, is a central mechanism underlying 
the fragile phenotype.
Many of the errors the fragile phenotype displays involve sensory 
processing disruptions, notably sensitivity to external and/or internal, 
i.e., interoceptive, sensory inputs, with frequent allostatic responses. 
Within a predictive framework, sensory precision and processing 
differences and stress reactivity impact awareness. With sensory 
disruptions the effect on awareness is to limit the ability of the person 
to use active inference to update their predictive models or enactive 
niche. The association of sensory reactivity and obsessive compulsive 
disorder (Ben-Sasson and Podoly, 2017), along with anxiety (Podoly 
and Ben-Sasson, 2020 ) supports the suggestion that sensory 
disruptions of the fragile phenotype may result in niche limitation.
Sensory differences, often overlooked in clinical research, are 
related to several mental health conditions ( Harrison et al., 2019). 
Within a predictive processing framework, individual differences in 
sensory processing modulate attention given to sensory inputs (i.e., 
sensory sensitivity) and, crucially, the ability to ignore certain — 
usually self-generated — sensations (i.e., sensory attenuation). 
Regarding sensory awareness, assigning high precision to prior beliefs 
reduces the impact of incoming sensory prediction error signals, and 
vice versa (Clark et al., 2018).
The fragile phenotype may over-attend to specific external stimuli, 
thus updating beliefs with limited consideration of prior beliefs 
(Lawson et al., 2014). Failure to integrate sensory modalities is evident. 
Sensory over-reactivity has been associated with OCD and may reflect 
FIGURE 2
Schematic phenotypic enactive strategies. These schematics depict 
the relationship between the agent, as represented by the orb, and 
their enactive niche reflected by the grid. Three aspects of the grid 
are relevant: (1) the size: reflecting the range of physical and social 
diversity within the agent’s niche, (2) the shade: indicating the 
characteristic prediction error within the niche, lighter less error, and 
(3) the depth of the orb within the grid indicating the degree to 
which the agent has enactively shaped the niche. Fragile exists within 
a small niche with a limited range of accurate predictions. It exerts 
minimal influence on its enactive niche, rather exists as a slave to its 
senses. Durable has a well-defined niche within which it makes 
accurate predictions. Within this narrow niche it can shape the 
environment, provided the niche forwards minimal surprise. Resilient 
exists within a broad, diverse niche with a wide range of accurate 
predictions and an ability to accommodate surprise. It shapes its 
niche to better support its predictive allostasis. Pro-entropic has the 
characteristics of the Resilient with the addition of proactive enactive 
awareness; allowing context-sensitive and adaptive predictions even 
in novel niches, as suggested by the superimposition of the orb.
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 12 frontiersin.org
a high degree of uncertainty stemming from the persistently low 
precision of sensory predictions, with the obsessive need for order 
being a policy preference to mitigate sensory over reactivity (Poletti 
et al., 2023).
Like sensory awareness, interoceptive awareness may 
be altered, with a focus on a limited number of systems. This focus 
may at times play a role in the development of advanced specific 
interoceptive systems, e.g., high interoception is associated with an 
TABLE 1 Summary of resilience phenotypes.
Fragile Durable Resilient Pro-Entropic 
Resilient (PE)
Overview Highly sensitized and reactive. Exists well in stable niche, but 
vulnerable when perturbed.
Adeptly accommodates stress. Pro-actively adapts to and 
shapes their niche to avoid 
stress.
Enactive strategy Highly sensitized and often 
reactive and affronted by their 
environment. The focus on 
sensory inputs precludes the 
development of a positive 
epistemic memory.
They seek a predictable 
environment, and are surprised 
when it, or they, changes.
They are aware of and can 
modulate their stress response. 
They may be surprised when 
deeper models (sense of self, 
affiliative models) are violated.
Highly aware, they are attuned 
to sensory inputs and also have 
strong meta-awareness, 
allowing them to develop deep 
temporal models that avoid 
surprise in most cases. When 
surprised, they are aware of 
their ability to actively engage 
with their environment.
Allostatic profile Constant surprise accumulates 
into allostatic (over)load, 
reflected in increased incidence 
of mental health diagnoses.
Allostatic load accumulates 
under surprise, reflected in 
increased reports of subjective 
stress.
Allostatic recovery; balanced 
counter-regulatory physiological 
reactions to challenge.
Allostatic growth; individual 
shows allostatic recovery 
following exposure to 
increased stressors and develop 
a risk tolerant system.
Flexibility Low flexibility; presents as 
challenge: cognitive inflexibility 
engenders surprise; affective 
inflexibility reduces ability to 
regulate stress response; 
behavioral flexibility results in 
maladaptive policy selection.
Low flexibility, but little is 
needed within a narrow, stable 
niche.
With affective flexibility, can 
regulate and reappraise 
emotions.
Some behavioral flexibility, 
borne of lower cognitive 
flexibility than the PE 
phenotype. For example, 
cognitive inflexibility may bias 
them to sub-optimal risk 
aversion.
Affective, cognitive, and 
behavioral flexibility, mediated 
by awareness and ability to 
switch between exploiting 
known solutions and exploring 
new ones as expected are 
beliefs violated.
Epistemic experience Related to accumulated enactive 
surprise, they have a negative, 
unstable sense of self, poor 
affiliative processing, and tend to 
experience negative emotions 
and motivations.
One’s sense of self is primarily 
positive, but under-developed, 
especially a robust positive and 
flexible mindset and a flexible, 
supportive affiliative network.
Surprise is experienced, but 
surmounted, strengthening 
confidence in one’s own abilities 
(positive mindset) and/or 
recognition of stable sources of 
affiliative support (e.g., social 
connections, spirituality).
Borne of successful enactive 
adaptation, surprise is low and 
a stable, positive sense of self 
develops, which can engage in 
positive psychological 
constructs and affiliative 
behaviors allows for success 
during risk.
Clinical Guideline (combine 
self-report, behavioral 
observation, and available 
physiological measures)
Evaluate for heightened sensory 
sensitivity, sensory processing 
dysfunction, frequent allostatic 
reactivity, and limited cognitive/
affective flexibility during stress
Evaluate for high vulnerability 
outside of routine settings, 
rigid beliefs tailored to specific 
niche, lack of interoceptive 
awareness.
Evaluate for effective allostatic 
recovery, interoceptive/
emotional awareness, with 
adequate cognitive flexibility 
and positive sense of self.
Evaluate for high awareness 
across sensory, interoceptive 
and meta levels, allostatic 
growth post-stress, and the use 
of inferential planning to 
facilitate proactive shaping
Interventions Secure attachments. 
Pathological-specific treatment. 
Havening technique, Eye 
movement desensitization and 
reprocessing (EMDR), Safe and 
sound protocol
Mindfulness meditation, CBT 
with exposure to challenge 
rigid beliefs, Social skills 
training, Physical exercise in 
varied environments
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy 
with goal setting, Gratitude and 
compassion training, scenario-
based planning exercises to 
develop deep temporal models 
and cognitive flexibility
Advanced mindfulness and 
self-compassion, Group-based 
problem solving, Episodic 
forward thinking.
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 13 frontiersin.org
ability to detect others’ emotion ( Dobrushina et al., 2020 ), and also 
with higher empathy ( Fukushima et  al., 2011 ). Impaired 
interoceptive ability has been reported in depression ( Eggart et al., 
2019) and autism ( DuBois et al., 2016 ), while hyper-interoceptive 
sensitivity has been reported in anxiety ( Domschke et al., 2010 ). 
Decreased interoceptive ability is related to elevated alexithymia 
(Brewer et al., 2016 ), which is associated with a range of disorders 
(Kojima, 2012 ).
The fragile phenotype demonstrates repeated allostatic 
responses, which promote even more frequent responses of 
longer duration and greater intensity ( McEwen, 1998 ). Repeated 
exposure to rapid and strong allostatic responses without the 
foreseeable opportunity of recovery may result in allostatic 
overload ( Fava et al., 2019 ). These conditions are colloquially 
referred to as burnout or exhaustion. This process of allostatic 
overload can be further understood as the top-down collapse of 
the “highest goals” ( Goekoop and de Kleijn, 2021 ) similar to what 
is seen in hierarchical Bayesian control networks. As in 
sophisticated inference discussed above ( Friston et al., 2021 ), 
organisms optimize to reduce the dimensions needed to most 
parsimoniously represent the niche. These higher level models 
interact with those lower on the hierarchy to use planning as 
inference to reach solutions and control behavior with a minimal 
amount of information, a formalization of Occam’s razor ( Maisto 
et al., 2015 ). This hierarchical structure allows for the anticipation 
of more complex inter- and extra-personal events into deeper 
realms of the future using predictive modeling ( Goekoop and de 
Kleijn, 2021 ). When an organism is confronted with conditions 
that interfere with the anticipated state, a useful definition of 
stress ( Peters et  al., 2017 ), prediction errors accumulate 
throughout the hierarchy, leading to the collapse of the highest 
level models, or allostatic overload. This top-down failure 
degrades integrative function at lower levels, consistent with the 
sensory and emotional focus of those suffering from states of 
overload such as burnout.
Exposure to severe and/or chronic allostatic activation during 
critical developmental periods has the potential to alter allostatic 
predictions across the lifespan ( Wilkinson and Goodyer, 2011 ). 
Developmental exposure to trauma increases allostatic reactivity and 
sensitivity across the lifespan, increasing risk for not only stress-
related disorders such as PTSD, but also for the entire spectrum of 
disorders of allostatic systems, e.g., metabolic, cardiovascular, immune 
(Danese and McEwen, 2012; Finlay et al., 2022).
Awareness in the fragile phenotype is aligned closely with sensory 
inputs. An inability to integrate sensory information is associated with 
AL (Azizi et al., 2024) and conforms with this phenotype. This has 
been alluded to as being “a slave to one’s senses” (Lawson et al., 2014; 
Peters et  al., 2017; Quattrocki and Friston, 2014 ). With increased 
uncertainty, allostatic predictions are more closely linked to immediate 
neuromodulation of sensory inputs ( Arnaldo et  al., 2022). Given 
sensory over-reactivity, and focal interoceptive awareness, beliefs 
emphasize prediction of limited aspects of the environment. This 
circumscribes the ability to incorporate new experiences into beliefs. 
Beliefs in general are not updated quickly or with accuracy or 
precision. The inferential development of higher levels of awareness 
such as flexibility, theory of mind, and gratitude is inconsistent. 
Associated clinical characterizations include autism spectrum, OCD, 
affective conditions, Cluster B personalities, a history of ACES, 
and PTSD.
While this phenotype may be  explained as allostatic over-
reactivity stemming from childhood trauma and stress, it can also 
emerge from highly protected early environments. Notably, this 
phenotype can be  expressed among individuals who were not 
previously fragile through a combination of prior experiences and 
current stressors developing an overly sensitive biological system, as 
can be the case in allostatic (over) load (Pfaltz and Schnyder, 2023).
When considered from the perspective of enactive allostasis, all 
aspects of the niche can be  contributors to plasticity and to 
canalization. While we have focused on the maladaptive predictions 
characteristic of the fragile phenotype, it is important to consider 
interventions using this model. Specific interventions have been 
developed for a variety of conditions we understand to be part of 
this phenotype.
Havening, a technique using touch to develop adaptive processing 
of distressing thoughts and memories ( Sumich et  al., 2022 ), can 
be seen as using sensory inputs (soothing touch) to minimize sensory 
prediction errors to alter maladaptive prediction errors stemming 
from trauma and stress. Eye movement desensitization and 
reprocessing (EMDR) therapy assists patients through bilateral 
stimulation (Hase, 2021), usually guided eye movements, to reprocess 
traumatic memories by arguably reducing the prediction error 
associated with the trauma. The Safe and Sound Protocol, based on 
FIGURE 3
Continuum of resilience phenotypes. The four resilience phenotypes exist along a continuum—from fragile to durable to resilient to pro-entropic—and 
are characterized along key dimensions highlighted here and detailed in Table 1.
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 14 frontiersin.org
Polyvagal Theory ( Porges, 2022 ), employs music tuned to the 
frequency of human speech to reduce auditory sensitivity and improve 
speech processing and social awareness in autism spectrum disorder 
(Kawai et al., 2023). The success of these and other sensory-based 
therapeutic approaches in improving adaptive functioning by focusing 
on sensory predictions which in turn enhance predictions across the 
enactive niche—support the existence of the fragile phenotype and the 
potential value of our model in identifying and developing 
interventions to enhance phenotypic plasticity.
6.2 Durable phenotype
This phenotype is reflective of a degree of canalization, but as 
opposed to the fragile phenotype, canalization is not necessarily 
associated with poor allostatic predictions. Carhart-Harris et  al. 
(2023) has suggested four issues be  addressed to understand the 
adaptivity of canalization: (1) the nature of the canalized phenotype; 
(2) the extent of canalization; (3) the initial context when the process 
of canalization began; and (4) any changes in context. We propose that 
the durable phenotype shows a high degree of canalization that can 
be adaptive under certain circumstances; for example, when a person 
lives within the strictures of a supportive religious community. The 
durable phenotype is most concordant with an organism preferring 
exploitation from genetic, epigenetic, and developmental sources; its 
nature in effect. The extent of canalization depends on the fit between 
the phenotypic nature of the organism and on the extent of boundary 
limitations of the niche. In an initial context—where the niche is well-
suited to the nature of the organism—canalization develops efficiently 
for the specific niche. In this scenario, hierarchical higher order 
models are consistent across levels allowing for precise predictions 
and planning as inference within the niche. There is little need for 
accommodation within such a predictable niche thus canalization 
is efficient.
The durable phenotype often builds effective predictive allostatic 
response systems by living in defined cognitive and environmental 
niches (Constant et al., 2018, 2022). Within a predictable environment, 
durable persons experience little uncertainty and manage minimal 
surprise well. Active inference selects epistemic awareness to function 
within the social/environmental niche of the organism, which 
comports with the development of “echo-chambers” (Albarracin et al., 
2022) or limited enactive niches. If the fragile type were to be described 
as a slave to one’s senses, the durable type could be considered slave to 
one’s rigid or narrow enactive niche. Epistemic awareness inferentially 
selects for the sense of self that reduces surprise within the enactive 
system. Growing up in Malibu versus rural Oklahoma has marked 
effects on the sense of self for the durable; “I’m a surfer, ” “I’m 
a cowboy. ”
The defined range of sensory inputs allows for the development of 
precise beliefs with high certainty, making it likely durable individuals 
will be  unaware of the limited range within which the beliefs are 
accurate. This emphasis on precision, or bad bootstrapping (Miller 
et  al., 2022 ), can result in predictive allostatic errors related to 
inflexibility as well as a tendency to develop fixed future positions. 
Provided that the environment is stable and basic biological and social 
needs are status quo, there is limited interoceptive awareness. This is 
a central feature of this phenotype. However, with a change to the 
niche, or what Carhart-Harris et al. (2023) call context, predictions 
made from canalization are rendered ineffective and allostatic errors 
made. This is analogous to the collapse of higher order models that 
result in the disintegration of lower order models moving the 
individual towards a more fragile phenotype.
In the durable phenotype, meta-beliefs, or beliefs about beliefs—
for example estimates of the precision of prior beliefs—are updated 
for the niche within which the durable lives. Given the limited 
cognitive niche of the durable phenotype, awareness is not determined 
so much by sensory over-reactivity but by the demands of the niche. 
To maintain homeostasis, beliefs may conform with cultural systems 
that differ greatly from other niches, or from society in general, yet are 
functional for the individual’s allostatic system on a short-term basis. 
Without exposure to a wide range of enactive models, the ability to 
develop flexible epistemic awareness is hindered.
Even within one’s durable enactive niche, inflexibility can result in 
unexpected surprise and allostatic errors that accumulate over time, 
presenting as AL ( Peters et  al., 2017 ). We  call attention to two 
conditions where the durable phenotype can be expected to be prone 
to ineffective allostatic predictions. If a person has genetic/epigenetic/
developmental policy preferences (biases) that differ from their niche, 
uncertainty becomes likely and with time AL is accelerated. For 
example, if someone with a preference for exploration exists within a 
niche optimized for exploitation, their predictions will lack precision, 
making allostatic reactions more likely. Second, in the face of surprise, 
the repertoire of beliefs, meta-beliefs, and policies available to regain 
homeostasis is limited. If high levels of precision and certainty were 
developed within an enactive niche that becomes unviable or if the 
individual is seriously threatened in any way, allostatic overload is 
possible. Long-term, and possibly delayed, effects of allostatic overload 
are also possible, consistent with the delayed trajectory ( Bonanno 
et al., 2011; Galatzer-Levy et al., 2018).
It is also possible that an individual developed beliefs within their 
enactive niche that allow for resilient responses after a large surprise 
or allostatic overload. The physical, cultural, and social context of the 
niche are of notable importance. Given the probabilistic nature of 
awareness under active inference, a narrow niche does equate with 
canalization. When a narrow niche underlies a degree of canalization 
that dominates individual awareness and constantly clashes with new 
situations and evidence, as well as wider societal norms and values, 
adversity is likely to increase fragility. Nevertheless, we do empirically 
observe incredible outcomes in individuals who have also faced 
incredible adversity—a phenomenon that has been known to make 
even the most die-hard empiricists feel some degree of awe at the 
human spirit—demonstrating the meta-awareness needed to explore 
new hypotheses and update models can emerge from very limited, 
even dysfunctional, niches.
Cognitive flexibility helps in the application of prior models to 
new niches, explaining how the durable phenotype may move to 
successfully occupy a broader niche and/or actively shape the niche to 
fit their demands following a large surprise. This process could 
describe what is termed post-traumatic growth (Henson et al., 2021) 
and includes the development of a stronger sense of self, better social 
relationships, and a more grounded sense of purpose and meaning. 
Again, we see parallels to resilience trajectories here, specifically to 
that of recovery. Further we see the bi-directional nature of enactive 
niches, even when there are relatively constrained external resources, 
allowing for the possibility of positive phenotypic plasticity (see 
Figure 4 for vignettes of positive and negative phenotypic plasticity).
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 15 frontiersin.org
Again, we  see therapeutic interventions being developed that 
support plasticity, in this instance for the durable phenotype. 
Specifically, those targeting interoception such as mindfulness 
meditation and the awareness and manipulation of breathing (Weng 
et al., 2021) have shown promise. Much as interoceptive sensations, 
e.g., increases in heart rate and respiration alter predictions toward 
emotional states such as fear and anxiety to reduce interoceptive 
prediction error, within enactive allostasis, awareness allows for 
immediate regulation of respiration, which alters interoceptive 
predictions away from fear. We  see interoceptive awareness as a 
prerequisite for phenotypic plasticity in the durable phenotype.
6.3 Resilient phenotype
The resilient phenotype functions as durable within a broader 
enactive niche. With cognitive flexibility, allostatic systems consistently 
return to baseline after activation. The “elasticity” of this successful 
allostatic accommodation allows the enactive allostatic system to 
recover following exposure to a stressor; the regulatory and cognitive 
flexibility of the resilient phenotype can “bounce back” from stressors 
in the traditional sense. We also agree that the affiliation system is 
essential in the resilient phenotype (Darling Rasmussen et al., 2019; 
Feldman, 2020).
The defining feature of the resilient phenotype—from an 
enactive perspective—is the influence of interoceptive inference 
and a level of meta-awareness allowing for effective allostatic 
predictions outside of a predictable enactive niche. Unlike the 
durable phenotype, the resilient phenotype is consistently 
interoceptively aware, and generally emotionally regulated, 
enabling effective enactive allostasis. This interoceptive awareness 
allows for the development of temporal models needed to recover 
from stress in most situations.
Over time, successful allostatic accommodation engenders a 
positive sense of self. More specifically, there are cognitive processes 
that are consistent features of human enactive allostatic systems that 
return to baseline after challenge (Constant et al., 2022; Miller et al., 
2022). A positive sense of self provides a consistent weighting for 
posterior beliefs and policy selection. The ability to think temporally 
allows the brain to simulate the outcomes of a variety of predictions 
prior to policy selection. Simulations are made with the current matrix 
of priors, allowing for adjustments based on the certainty of simulated 
outcomes, prior to an active inference.
Cognitive states change enactive allostasis. Cognitive appraisal 
of events can redefine them from a threat to a challenge, a 
redefinition that shifts the allostatic response from one with 
unknown accommodation to one of clear accommodation ( Bobba-
Alves et al., 2022 ). There is also evidence that states of awareness 
such as meditation, mindfulness, and awe have associations with 
allostasis ( Klimes-Dougan et al., 2020 ). Physiological fitness and 
fit with the social/environmental niche are also foundational in 
this phenotype.
FIGURE 4
Vignettes of phenotypic plasticity. Highlighting the plasticity of the resilience phenotypes, we provide examples of two individuals’ current phenotypic 
presentation (“anchor”) and factors that can induce their movement along the resilience continuum. In these transitions, we emphasize the impact of 
different types of awareness on allostatic responses to changes in the enactive niche. (a) Mary presents as the resilient phenotype. (b) George serves as 
a durable example.
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 16 frontiersin.org
The elevated importance of awareness in this phenotype also 
highlights the role it can play in precluding resilience. Epistemic 
memories throughout hierarchical inferential processes do not occur 
to optimize resilience, or well-being as argued by Waugh and Sali 
(2023); they occur to minimize uncertainty and surprise. Rather than 
resilience being an ability or even a process, we see it as identifiable 
enactive allostatic predictions characterized by sensory and 
interoceptive awareness, cognitive flexibility and meta beliefs capable 
of accommodating allostatic surprise.
This enactive profile includes optimization of many aspects of the 
counteractive systems activated by allostasis. Without the benefit of 
empirical studies using measures that capture the dynamics of the 
enactive niche, current interventions developed to enhance resilience 
largely consider resilience traits and factors as outcome measure. 
Accepting these measurement limitations, a meta-analysis of training 
interventions including cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) 
techniques, e.g., emotion regulation, goal setting, and mindfulness 
practices, e.g., cognitive flexibility, self-compassion, gratitude, found 
a moderate benefit over control (Joyce et al., 2018). The inclusion of 
metrics indicative of reactivity and accommodation—e.g., heart rate, 
heart rate variability, respiration, available on biometric devices—will 
expand understanding of the enactive niche and are a logical next step 
in resilience training.
The resilient phenotype has some ability to alter or migrate niches 
when the demands of the niche become unsupportive of their 
allostatic systems. If a resilient person finds their niche collapsing or 
shifting in ways that cause chronic stress, e.g., a workplace becomes 
toxic, niche change becomes an important component of 
this phenotype.
6.4 The pro-entropic (PE) phenotype
The pro-entropic phenotype emerges from the core principle that 
the brain reduces surprise through generative cycles of action and 
perception (Badcock et al., 2019; Friston et al., 2010). This has been 
rephrased by Badcock et al. (2019), (ibid) as, “every organism seeks to 
maximize sensory evidence for its own existence, ” also termed self-
evidencing ( Hohwy, 2016 ). Implicit in this is a drive for self-
actualization which in its complete expression defines the pro-entropic 
phenotype. When awareness and action act in harmony to not only 
accommodate surprise but also change some element of the niche to 
preclude future surprise, the pro-entropic phenotype emerges.
The PE phenotype assumes the enactive properties of the resilient 
phenotype with the addition that the allostatic system not only returns 
to baseline after activation but shows improved allostatic predictions 
after allostatic responses. At the other end of the spectrum from the 
fragile phenotype, we propose that sensory awareness is also high in 
the PE phenotype, but responsivity is appropriate, similar to the 
adaptive high-sensitivity profiles described for individuals raised in 
supportive environments (Nave et al., 2022).
Within enactive allostasis, much as certain predictive errors lead 
to allostatic load, aware engagement with enactive allostasis allows for 
proactive selection of interoceptive and exteroceptive sensory inputs. 
This can be  thought of as aware enactive niche construction and 
enables not just allostatic recovery, as seen in the resilient phenotype, 
but allostatic growth, i.e., accommodation of increasing levels of stress 
exposure (both frequency and magnitude), both by more adept 
recovery, as well as heightened thresholds required to elicit an 
allostatic response. Heightened awareness as well as pro-active 
enactive shaping of one’s niche work together to increase one’s 
allostatic response threshold, including in novel social and 
physical environments.
We see PE as the Bayes optimal selection of meta-beliefs (and the 
resulting belief states). These belief states are selected in a recursive 
manner; this allows for the optimal selection of actions across any 
finite temporal horizon. Sophisticated inference allows for the 
identification of the end goal state and then through the use of 
backward planning through time, similar to game theory’s “backward 
induction, ” to determine the course of actions that will optimally reach 
the goal (Da Costa et al., 2023).
Perhaps the defining feature of the PE is the ability to use 
sophisticated inference to proactively shape the external aspects 
of the enactive niche to fit with the regulatory needs of the 
person. Where the resilient phenotype that can adapt and 
“bounce back, ” the pro-entropic phenotype proactively uses 
prediction to enact changes in their niche that minimize surprise. 
In this regard, much of human advancement can be seen as PE: 
we learned to control fire to survive in more fertile environments; 
much as we now develop business relationships that may be of 
future value. In addition to proactively shaping one’s enactive 
niche, the cognitive flexibility and temporal planning that are 
part of PE allow for the development of meta-models that can 
probabilistically infer the demands of new enactive niches. This 
allows for consideration of novel niches and more effective niche 
change when needed and/or beneficial.
PE also relies on the integrity of the underlying neurophysiological 
systems, sense of self, and temporal thinking. PE extends the role for 
awareness to include an understanding of the probabilistic nature of 
human life within the environment. Within this context, the PE 
phenotype proactively uses awareness to optimize active inferences that 
lead to preferred, unsurprising outcomes. Similar predictive processing 
models that describe directed awareness within a niche include, “when 
individual agents restructure their worlds so as to minimize internal 
processing costs and/or increase reliability, ” (Constant et al., 2022) and 
as a “sense of our own poise over an action space” (Nave et al., 2022). It 
is this constructed enactive niche that affords PE and allostatic growth. 
Clinically we see this mapping onto active engagement with novelty, 
challenge, and creativity, while nourishing one’s niche and regulating 
well across new niches.
Interventions to enhance phenotypic plasticity may be  as 
much informed by our history as by our present. When Aristotle 
argued that pain and adversity was needed for the drive for 
eudemonia, or self-awareness, personal growth, and ultimately 
contentment, he presaged much of the PE phenotype, as have 
generations of Buddhists and Hindus seeking enlightenment and 
dharma. However, we find in the model of enactive allostasis the 
potential for individualized strategies to facilitate the 
biopsychosocial operationalization of this wisdom of the ages.
A more pragmatic intervention with clear implications for PE 
has been receiving wider attention. Episodic future thinking 
(EFT) is the projection of the self into the future as a means of 
“pre-experiencing” an event ( Atance and O’Neill, 2001 ; Schacter 
et al., 2017 ). This has been most widely studied in the context of 
delay-discounting, or the tendency to overvalue more immediate 
rewards. EFT has been repeatedly shown to be associated with a 
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 17 frontiersin.org
tendency to place higher value on delayed rewards with a 
concomitant improvement in decision-making ( Rösch et  al., 
2022). This intervention has also been shown to be effective in 
treating disorders that relate to impulsivity, e.g., alcohol abuse 
(Myslowski et al., 2024 ). There are also suggestions that EFT may 
be an effective intervention to enhance resilient plasticity. Using 
both pilot work and literature review, Kent et al. (2015)  conclude 
that making and manipulating internal models frees behavior 
from the present and allows it to become future-oriented. 
Episodic future thinking has also been associated with 
performance enhancement in such diverse dimensions as 
decision-making, emotion regulation, prospective memory and 
spatial navigation ( Schacter et al., 2017 ). All these findings are 
consistent with active inference in general and the notion that 
interventions based on this theoretical model can enhance 
phenotypic plasticity toward PE. That cognitive rehearsal of 
future events increases the value placed on the future suggests 
that the higher order models that allow for inferential planning 
are strengthened by repetition. Any consistent method of 
strengthening higher order models is not only likely to improve 
the functioning of models lower in the hierarchy, such as the 
behavioral effects noted above, but also seem likely to allow for 
the higher order models to improve their robustness across novel 
situations, both of which we find characteristic of PE.
7 Discussion
Within the theoretical framework of enactive allostasis, 
we propose four resilience phenotypes: fragile, durable, resilient, and 
pro-entropic resilient. Within this model, individual differences in 
adaption to one’s environment can be predicted at various levels of 
inquiry; from genetics and epigenetics to counter regulatory 
physiological systems, to epistemic awareness and concomitant 
affective, cognitive, and behavioral flexibility.
In this enactive allostasis framework, the environment or enactive 
niche is inseparable from the individual, as is highlighted by the 
distinction between the fragile and PE phenotypes. Both are sensitive 
to the sensory inputs provided by their environment and body. These 
inputs are the central focus of the enactive niche within which the 
fragile exists, often leading to overly precise predictions without a 
clear reduction in uncertainty due to constrained sampling of sensory 
inputs. Consistent with an account of active versus passive coping best 
mitigating against physiological “wear and tear” experienced with 
stress and aging (Hawkley et al., 2005), with the PE sensory inputs are 
predicted within a broader enactive niche, allowing for a wider 
sampling strategy and utility of epistemic memory and deeper 
temporal models.
These cross-level characterizations speak to efforts to develop 
individualized or precision psychiatry (Friston, 2017). We propose that 
individuals with managed stress-related psychiatric diagnoses can 
express a durable resilience phenotype, which can switch back to fragile, 
depending on the success of their current niche adaptation. For example, 
while traditional resilience research examined binary risk versus 
protective factors for the development of PTSD (Y ehuda, 2004), in our 
phenotypic niche adaptation framework, the same individual in one 
environment may be fragile and susceptible to intrusive thoughts, an 
exaggerated startle response, and maladaptive avoidant behavior. 
Conversely, in a more stable, predictable environment, they may not 
exhibit PTSD symptomatology and may adapt to thrive and express as 
resilient or PE phenotypes. It would be relevant if recent multi-domain 
hybrid analytics (categorize, cluster, classify) used to identify subtypes of 
PTSD following acute trauma exposure (Ben-Zion et al., 2020) support 
such phenotypic plasticity over time. In addition to adapting to the 
environment, management may require active updating of beliefs, for 
example that which is assisted by cognitive behavioral therapy or 
psychoanalytic insights. This is not to say that the fragile phenotype 
cannot engage in chaotic environments. Rather there is plasticity 
between the phenotypes; considering a constellation of measures across 
several levels of analysis allows one to make a probabilistic inference 
about one’s current phenotypic expression and whether an individual is 
likely to accommodate and recover from exposure to some degree of 
encountered challenge.
This is not to minimize the effect of the default state of the brain 
when making generative predictions. The degree to which genetic, 
epigenetic, developmental and previous experiential models influence 
predictions when the brain functions from its default, i.e., bias, state 
is foundational in understanding phenotypes and plasticity.
Extending the argument that resilience can be bolstered in 
individuals with strong bias states acquired from experiential 
sources, e.g., trauma, stress-related conditions such as PTSD, 
anxiety and depression, our enactive framework can also 
theoretically be  applied to bolster resilience in 
neurodevelopmental conditions like autism and 
ADHD. Supported by early theoretical work ( Sinha et al., 2014 ) 
and research on resilience in adults with autism ( Ghanouni and 
Quirke, 2023 ), assisting such individuals develop strategies to 
shape and adapt to their environment over time offers a tractable 
perspective for fostering adaptability. In this framework, our 
resilience phenotypes, and others that might be described in the 
future, can move the field of resilience research away from 
investigating protective and risk factors for mental health 
diagnoses that reflect a crystalized view of resilience. Rather, one 
can be diagnosed with a psychiatric condition or developmental 
disorder at some point in one’s life and still exhibit an adaptable 
phenotype. Building on the sensory processing and interoceptive 
enhancement techniques mentioned above, the range of adaptive 
allostatic predictions can be systemically expanded.
In the enactive niche there are environments and states of 
awareness that improve allostatic predictions across all 
phenotypes. The value of exercise, positive relationships, time in 
nature, of living in tune with the basic circadian rhythms of life, 
are enactive choices that with repetition become engrained in our 
enactive niche. This strengthens homeostatic mechanisms and 
allows the individual to engage with stressful environments with 
less allostatic reactivity and raises the possibility of acting upon 
environments to reduce expected surprise. We view this level of 
enactive niche, with temporal models that reduce future 
uncertainty through proactive shaping of the environment, as 
most likely with a level of awareness constructed through prior 
positive social and environmental niches.
Mechanistically compatible with an enactive allostatic framework, 
this holistic approach is apt to foster generalizable adaptable resilience, 
so that the body’s stress response system can be co-opted to promote 
peak performance and well-being, shifting resilience research from 
avoiding “vulnerability” to mental health diagnoses, to increasing and 
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 18 frontiersin.org
growing an individual’s adaptability, shifting from solely pursuing 
precision psychiatry to a science of precision mental wellbeing.
This framework also holds implications for exceptional 
performance and the popular concept of growth mindset. From an 
enactive perspective, growth and exceptionality are accommodated by 
the niche, not the individual. While we  have stressed the role of 
awareness in PE, this level of awareness, i.e., deep temporal modeling 
and flexibility, develops in the context of its niche. In considering 
individual resilience, the entirety of all biological, social and 
environmental systems that underwrite awareness create the enactive 
niche. Within this niche it is the inferential selection of adaptive 
policies that allows for the participation of the individual in 
phenotypic plasticity, in effect allowing for the construction of a 
resilient allostatic person with a niche of their own design.
We offer these phenotypes primarily as a point for further discussion, 
recognizing the complexity of the systems involved in discussing 
resilience from a model of an enactive niche. Numerous relevant points 
have been largely overlooked in this paper so as not to stray from its 
focus on predictive allostasis and the phenotypic framework. The impact 
of socio-environmental factors on allostasis is well-established and needs 
to be discussed in phenotype development. The full gamut of issues that 
influence phenotypic expression also warrants exploration, cultural 
issues foremost among this list. Methodological concerns also remain to 
be explored; factors influencing phenotypic stability versus plasticity over 
time and consideration of the clinical and analytic criteria to be used in 
defining boundaries between phenotypes.
Given the large amount of phenotypic variability and plasticity 
inherent in this model, advanced quantitative analytic techniques are 
needed to confirm the model. Such a measurement schema has been 
advanced as a principled Bayesian model of emotional valence (Hesp 
et al., 2021). Relying on the assumption that feeling good or bad, i.e., 
emotional valence, is critical to survival and is largely predictable using 
deep active inference to estimate overall model fitness. Understood at 
psychological, neuronal, behavioral and computational levels, second-
order beliefs (beliefs about beliefs) track affective change. The concept of 
criticality, defined as the dynamic of persistent attractors between a stable 
and an unstable phase, has been suggested to be  informative in 
understanding differences between such states as allostatic load and 
allostatic repair, i.e., resilience (Bettinger and Friston, 2023), and will 
be  important as efforts to model resilient phenotypes and their 
plasticity proceed.
A few additional points we  hope to further explore include the 
formalization of possible clinical guidelines and interventions to promote 
plasticity toward the PE phenotype. Possibility that both aware and 
unaware aspects of the phenotype may change across context. Given that 
phenotypic expression is evinced in an enactive niche, changing 
environments, either social or physical, may change the mechanisms 
underwriting awareness. For example, a person may be highly resilient 
and flexible in a fast-paced work environment yet express as fragile and 
inflexible when in the context of personal relationships. Such contextual 
phenotypes may suggest individual development in overlapping but 
distinct enactive niches. Extending this concept, social roles may evince 
different resilient phenotypic expressions and offer a target for 
future work.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are included in 
the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed 
to the corresponding author.
Author contributions
LH: Conceptualization, Project administration, Supervision, 
Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. 
AG: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review 
& editing. KF: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, 
Conceptualization. JB: Conceptualization, Project administration, 
Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
Funding
The author(s) declare that no financial support was received for 
the research and/or publication of this article.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Aaron Schulman, Matthew Baker, Brett 
Kirby and the Theoretical Neurobiology Group for helpful discussions 
as well as Kai Mildenberger for assistance in creating Figures 1, 2.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
The author(s) declared that they were an editorial board member 
of Frontiers, at the time of submission. This had no impact on the peer 
review process and the final decision.
Generative AI statement
The authors declare that no Gen AI was used in the creation of 
this manuscript.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated 
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the 
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or 
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or 
endorsed by the publisher.
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 19 frontiersin.org
References
Agaibi, C. E., and Wilson, J. P . (2005). Trauma, PTSD, and resilience: A review of 
the literature. Trauma Violence Abuse  6, 195–216. doi: 10.1177/1524838005277438
Agorastos, A., and Chrousos, G. P . (2022). The neuroendocrinology of stress: the 
stress-related continuum of chronic disease development. Mol. Psychiatry 27, 502–513. 
doi: 10.1038/s41380-021-01224-9
Albarracin, M., Demekas, D., Ramstead, M. J. D., and Heins, C. (2022). Epistemic 
communities under active inference. Entropy 24:Article 4. doi: 10.3390/e24040476
Alexander, J. K., Hillier, A., Smith, R. M., Tivarus, M. E., and Beversdorf, D. Q. (2007). 
Beta-adrenergic modulation of cognitive flexibility during stress. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 19, 
468–478. doi: 10.1162/jocn.2007.19.3.468
Armbruster, D., Mueller, A., Strobel, A., Lesch, K.-P ., Brocke, B., and Kirschbaum, C. 
(2012). Children under stress – COMT genotype and stressful life events predict cortisol 
increase in an acute social stress paradigm. Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. 15, 1229–1239. 
doi: 10.1017/S1461145711001763
Arnaldo, I., Corcoran, A. W ., Friston, K. J., and Ramstead, M. J. D. (2022). Stress and 
its sequelae: an active inference account of the etiological pathway from allostatic 
overload to depression. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 135:104590. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev. 
2022.104590
Atance, C. M., and O’Neill, D. K. (2001). Episodic future thinking. Trends Cogn. Sci. 
5, 533–539. doi: 10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01804-0
Azizi, Z., Hirst, R. J., O’ dowd, A., McCrory, C., Kenny, R. A., Newell, F . N., et al. (2024). 
Evidence for an association between allostatic load and multisensory integration in middle-
aged and older adults. Arch. Gerontol. Geriatr. 116:105155. doi: 10.1016/j.archger.2023.105155
Badcock, P . B., Friston, K. J., and Ramstead, M. J. D. (2019). The hierarchically 
mechanistic mind: A free-energy formulation of the human psyche. Phys Life Rev 31, 
104–121. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2018.10.002
Barrett, L. F ., Quigley, K. S., and Hamilton, P . (2016). An active inference theory of 
allostasis and interoception in depression. Philo. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 371:20160011. 
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0011
Beauchaine, T. P . (2009). The role of biomarkers and Endophenotypes in prevention and 
treatment of psychopathological disorders. Biomark. Med 3, 1–3. doi: 10.2217/17520363.3.1.1
Belsky, J., and Pluess, M. (2013). Beyond risk, resilience, and dysregulation: phenotypic 
plasticity and human development. Dev. Psychopathol.  25, 1243–1261. doi: 
10.1017/S095457941300059X
Benjet, C., Bromet, E., Karam, E. G., Kessler, R. C., McLaughlin, K. A., Ruscio, A. M., et al. 
(2016). The epidemiology of traumatic event exposure worldwide: results from the world 
mental health survey consortium. Psychol. Med. 46, 327–343. doi: 10.1017/S0033291715001981
Ben-Sasson, A., and Podoly, T. Y . (2017). Sensory over responsivity and obsessive 
compulsive symptoms: A cluster analysis. Compr. Psychiatry  73, 151–159. doi: 
10.1016/j.comppsych.2016.10.013
Ben-Zion, Z., Zeevi, Y ., Keynan, N. J., Admon, R., Kozlovski, T., Sharon, H., et al. 
(2020). Multi-domain potential biomarkers for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 
severity in recent trauma survivors. Translational Psychiatry 10, 208.
Bernstein, E. E., and McNally, R. J. (2018). Exercise as a buffer against difficulties with 
emotion regulation: A pathway to emotional wellbeing. Behav. Res. Ther. 109, 29–36. doi: 
10.1016/j.brat.2018.07.010
Bettinger, J. S., and Friston, K. J. (2023). Conceptual foundations of physiological 
regulation incorporating the free energy principle and self-organized criticality. 
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 155:105459. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105459
Bobba-Alves, N., Juster, R.-P ., and Picard, M. (2022). The energetic cost of allostasis and 
allostatic load. Psychoneuroendocrinology 146:105951. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2022.105951
Boden, J. M., Fergusson, D. M., and Horwood, L. J. (2014). Associations between 
exposure to stressful life events and alcohol use disorder in a longitudinal birth cohort 
studied to age 30. Drug and alcohol dependence, 142, 154–160.
Bonanno, G. A. (2004). Loss, trauma, and human resilience: have we underestimated 
the human capacity to thrive after extremely aversive events? Am. Psychol. 59, 20–28. 
doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.59.1.20
Bonanno, G. A. (2021). The resilience paradox. Eur. J. Psychotraumatol. 12:1942642. 
doi: 10.1080/20008198.2021.1942642
Bonanno, G. A., Chen, S., Bagrodia, R., and Galatzer-Levy, I. R. (2024). Resilience and 
disaster: flexible adaptation in the face of uncertain threat. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 75, 
573–599. doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych-011123-024224
Bonanno, G. A., Chen, S., and Galatzer-Levy, I. R. (2023). Resilience to potential 
trauma and adversity through regulatory flexibility. Nat. Rev. Psychol. 2, 663–675. doi: 
10.1038/s44159-023-00233-5
Bonanno, G. A., and Mancini, A. D. (2012). Beyond resilience and PTSD: mapping 
the heterogeneity of responses to potential trauma. Psychol. Trauma Theory Res. Pract. 
Policy 4, 74–83. doi: 10.1037/a0017829
Bonanno, G. A., Westphal, M., and Mancini, A. D. (2011). Resilience to loss and 
potential trauma. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol.  7, 511–535. doi: 10.1146/annurev- 
clinpsy-032210-104526
Borodovitsyna, O., Flamini, M. D., and Chandler, D. J. (2018). Acute stress persistently 
alters locus Coeruleus function and anxiety-like behavior in adolescent rats. 
Neuroscience 373, 7–19. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2018.01.020
Brewer, R., Cook, R., and Bird, G. (2016). Alexithymia: A general deficit of 
interoception. R. Soc. Open Sci. 3:150664. doi: 10.1098/rsos.150664
Bricknell, M. C., Williamson, V ., and Wessely, S. (2020). Understanding military 
combat mental health. Occup. Med. 70, 216–218. doi: 10.1093/occmed/kqaa037
Brindle, R. C., Pearson, A., and Ginty, A. T. (2022). Adverse childhood experiences 
(ACEs) relate to blunted cardiovascular and cortisol reactivity to acute laboratory stress: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 134:104530. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104530
Brown, L., Cohen, B., Costello, R., Brazhnik, O., and Galis, Z. (2023). Conceptualizing 
a resilience research framework at the National Institutes of Health. Stress. Health 39, 
4–9. doi: 10.1002/smi.3260
Bruineberg, J., Rietveld, E., Parr, T., van Maanen, L., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Free-
energy minimization in joint agent-environment systems: A niche construction 
perspective. J. Theor. Biol. 455, 161–178. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2018.07.002
Bui, T., Zackula, R., Dugan, K., and Ablah, E. (2021). Workplace stress and 
productivity: A cross-sectional study. Kansas J. Med.  14, 42–45. doi: 
10.17161/kjm.vol1413424
Bunea, I. M., Szentágotai-Tătar, A., and Miu, A. C. (2017). Early-life adversity and 
cortisol response to social stress: a meta-analysis. Transl. Psychiatry  7:12. doi: 
10.1038/s41398-017-0032-3
Caddick, Z. A., and Rottman, B. M. (2021). Motivated reasoning in an explore-exploit 
task. Cogn. Sci. 45:e13018. doi: 10.1111/cogs.13018
Cannon, W . (1929). Organization for physiological homeostasis. Physiol. Rev. 9, 
399–431. doi: 10.1152/physrev.1929.9.3.399
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Chandaria, S., Erritzoe, D. E., Gazzaley, A., Girn, M., Kettner, H., 
et al. (2023). Canalization and plasticity in psychopathology. Neuropharmacology 
226:109398. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2022.109398
Chajut, E., and Algom, D. (2003). Selective attention improves under stress: 
implications for theories of social cognition. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol.  85, 231–248. doi: 
10.1037/0022-3514.85.2.231
Chrousos, G. P . (2009). Stress and disorders of the stress system. Nature reviews 
endocrinology, 5, 374–381.
Clark, J. E., Watson, S., and Friston, K. J. (2018). What is mood? A computational 
perspective. Psychol. Med. 48, 2277–2284. doi: 10.1017/S0033291718000430
Constant, A., Clark, A., Kirchhoff, M., and Friston, K. J. (2022). Extended active 
inference: constructing predictive cognition beyond skulls. Mind Lang. 37, 373–394. doi: 
10.1111/mila.12330
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P . L., Campbell, J. O., and Friston, K. J. 
(2018). A variational approach to niche construction. J. R. Soc. Interface 15:20170685. 
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0685
Corcoran, A. W ., and Hohwy, J. (2018). Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy 
principle: Feeling our way forward. in Manos Tsakiris, and Helena De Preester (eds), 
The Interoceptive Mind: From Homeostasis to Awareness.
Craig, A. (2003). Interoception: the sense of the physiological condition of the body. 
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 13, 500–505. doi: 10.1016/S0959-4388(03)00090-4
Critchley, H. D., and Harrison, N. A. (2013). Visceral influences on brain and 
behavior. Neuron 77, 624–638. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.02.008
Curtin, S. C., Tejada-Vera, B., and Bastian, B. A. (2024a). Deaths: leading causes for 
2020. Natl. Vital Stat. Rep. 72:13.
Curtin, S. C., Tejada-Vera, B., and Bastian, B. A. (2024b). Deaths: leading causes for 
2021. Natl. Vital Stat. Rep. 73:4.
Da Costa, L., Parr, T., Sajid, N., Veselic, S., Neacsu, V ., and Friston, K. (2020). Active 
inference on discrete state-spaces: A synthesis. J. Math. Psychol.  99:102447. doi: 
10.1016/j.jmp.2020.102447
Da Costa, L., Sajid, N., Parr, T., Friston, K., and Smith, R. (2023). Reward maximization 
through discrete active inference. Neural Comput. 35, 807–852. doi: 10.1162/neco_a_01574
Damasio, A. (2011). Neural basis of emotions. Scholarpedia 6:1804. doi: 
10.4249/scholarpedia.1804
Danese, A., and McEwen, B. S. (2012). Adverse childhood experiences, allostasis, 
allostatic load, and age-related disease. Physiol. Behav.  106, 29–39. doi: 
10.1016/j.physbeh.2011.08.019
Darling Rasmussen, P ., Storebø, O. J., Løkkeholt, T., Voss, L. G., Shmueli-Goetz, Y ., 
Bojesen, A. B., et al. (2019). Attachment as a Core feature of resilience: A systematic 
review and Meta-analysis. Psychol. Rep.  122, 1259–1296. doi: 10.1177/ 
0033294118785577
de Kloet, E. R., and Joëls, M. (2023). The cortisol switch between vulnerability and 
resilience. Mol. Psychiatry 29, 20–34. doi: 10.1038/s41380-022-01934-8
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 20 frontiersin.org
Deane, G., Mago, J., Fotopoulou, A., Sacchet, M., Carhart-Harris, R., and 
Sandved-Smith, L. (2024). The computational unconscious: Adaptive narrative control, 
psychopathology, and subjective well-being: OSF .
Dobrushina, O. R., Dobrynina, L. A., Arina, G. A., Kremneva, E. I., Suslina, A. D., 
Gubanova, M. V ., et al. (2020). Interaction of interoceptive perception and emotional 
intelligence: A functional neuroimaging study. Neurosci. Behav. Physiol. 50, 1043–1050. 
doi: 10.1007/s11055-020-01003-z
Domschke, K., Stevens, S., Pfleiderer, B., and Gerlach, A. L. (2010). Interoceptive 
sensitivity in anxiety and anxiety disorders: an overview and integration of 
neurobiological findings. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 30, 1–11. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2009.08.008
DuBois, D., Ameis, S. H., Lai, M.-C., Casanova, M. F ., and Desarkar, P . (2016). 
Interoception in autism Spectrum disorder: a review. Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 52, 104–111. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2016.05.001
Duquette, P . (2017). Increasing our insular world view: Interoception and 
psychopathology for psychotherapists. Front. Neurosci.  11:135. doi: 
10.3389/fnins.2017.00135
Dworkin, E. R. (2020). Risk for mental disorders associated with sexual assault: a 
meta-analysis. Trauma Violence Abuse 21, 1011–1028. doi: 10.1177/1524838018813198
Eggart, M., Lange, A., Binser, M. J., Queri, S., and Müller-Oerlinghausen, B. (2019). 
Major depressive disorder is associated with impaired interoceptive accuracy: A 
systematic review. Brain Sci. 9. doi: 10.3390/brainsci9060131
Fava, G. A., McEwen, B. S., Guidi, J., Gostoli, S., Offidani, E., and Sonino, N. (2019). 
Clinical characterization of allostatic overload. Psychoneuroendocrinology 108, 94–101. 
doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2019.05.028
Feder, A., Nestler, E. J., and Charney, D. S. (2009). Psychobiology and molecular 
genetics of resilience. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 446–457. doi: 10.1038/nrn2649
Feldman, R. (2012). Oxytocin and social affiliation in humans. Horm. Behav. 61, 
380–391. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.01.008
Feldman, R. (2020). What is resilience: an affiliative neuroscience approach. World 
Psychiatry 19, 132–150. doi: 10.1002/wps.20729
FitzGerald, T. H., Dolan, R. J., and Friston, K. (2015). Dopamine, reward learning, and 
active inference. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 9, 166836. doi: 10.3389/
fncom.2015.00136
Finlay, S., Roth, C., Zimsen, T., Bridson, T. L., Sarnyai, Z., and McDermott, B. (2022). 
Adverse childhood experiences and allostatic load: A systematic review. Neurosci. 
Biobehav. Rev. 136:104605. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104605
Fleming, S. M., and Dolan, R. J. (2012). The neural basis of metacognitive ability. Philo. 
Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 367, 1338–1349. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2011.0417
Fletcher, D., and Sarkar, M. (2013). Psychological resilience. Eur. Psychol. 18, 12–23. 
doi: 10.1027/1016-9040/a000124
Fotopoulou, A., and Tsakiris, M. (2017). Mentalizing homeostasis: the social origins 
of interoceptive inference. Neuropsychoanalysis 19, 3–28. doi: 
10.1080/15294145.2017.1294031
Friedline, T., Chen, Z., and Morrow, S. (2021). Families’ financial stress & well-being: 
the importance of the economy and economic environments. J. Fam. Econ. Iss.  42, 
34–51. doi: 10.1007/s10834-020-09694-9
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the brain? Trends Cogn. 
Sci. 13, 293–301. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 11, 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy 14, 
2100–2121. doi: 10.3390/e14112100
Friston, K. J. (2017). Precision psychiatry. Biol. Psychiatry  2, 640–643. doi: 
10.1016/j.bpsc.2017.08.007
Friston, K. (2018). Am I  self-conscious? (or does self-organization entail self-
consciousness?). Front. Psychol. 9:579. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00579
Friston, K. J. (2018). Active inference and cognitive consistency. Psychol. Inq. 29, 
67–73. doi: 10.1080/1047840X.2018.1480693
Friston, K., Da Costa, L., Hafner, D., Hesp, C., and Parr, T. (2021). Sophisticated 
inference. Neural Comput. 33, 713–763. doi: 10.1162/neco_a_01351
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., Kilner, J., and Kiebel, S. J. (2010). Action and behavior: A free-
energy formulation. Biol. Cybern. 102, 227–260. doi: 10.1007/s00422-010-0364-z
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F ., Schwartenbeck, P ., Doherty, J., and Pezzulo, G. 
(2016). Active inference and learning. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.  68, 862–879. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.06.022
Friston, K., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle for the brain. J. 
Physiol. 100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001
Friston, K. J., Lin, M., Frith, C. D., Pezzulo, G., Hobson, J. A., and Ondobaka, S. (2017). 
Active inference, curiosity and insight. Neural Comput.  29, 2633–2683. doi: 
10.1162/neco_a_00999
Friston, K., Rigoli, F ., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., and Pezzulo, G. (2015). 
Active inference and epistemic value. Cogn. Neurosci.  6, 187–214. doi: 
10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053
Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P ., Fitzgerald, T., Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T., and 
Dolan, R. (2013). The anatomy of choice: active inference and agency. Front. Hum. 
Neurosci. 7:598. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00598
Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P ., FitzGerald, T., Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T., and 
Dolan, R. J. (2014). The anatomy of choice: dopamine and decision-making. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 369, 20130481.
Fukushima, H., Terasawa, Y ., and Umeda, S. (2011). Association between interoception 
and empathy: evidence from heartbeat-evoked brain potential. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 79, 
259–265. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2010.10.015
Galatzer-Levy, I. R., Huang, S. H., and Bonanno, G. A. (2018). Trajectories of resilience 
and dysfunction following potential trauma: A review and statistical evaluation. Clin. 
Psychol. Rev. 63, 41–55. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2018.05.008
Ghanouni, P ., and Quirke, S. (2023). Resilience and coping strategies in adults with 
autism spectrum disorder. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 53, 456–467.
Goekoop, R., and de Kleijn, R. (2021). How higher goals are constructed and collapse 
under stress: A hierarchical Bayesian control systems perspective. Neurosci. Biobehav. 
Rev. 123, 257–285. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.12.021
Goldfarb, E. V ., Froböse, M. I., Cools, R., and Phelps, E. A. (2017). Stress and cognitive 
flexibility: cortisol increases are associated with enhanced updating but impaired 
switching. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 29, 14–24. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01029
Gradus, J. L. (2017). Prevalence and prognosis of stress disorders: A review of the 
epidemiologic literature. Clin. Epidemiol. 9, 251–260. doi: 10.2147/CLEP .S106250
Haase, L., Stewart, J. L., Y oussef, B., May, A. C., Isakovic, S., Simmons, A. N., et al. 
(2016). When the brain does not adequately feel the body: links between low resilience 
and interoception. Biol. Psychol. 113, 37–45. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2015.11.004
Hakulinen, C., Elovainio, M., Pulkki-Råback, L., Virtanen, M., Kivimäki, M., and 
Jokela, M. (2015). Personality and depressive symptoms: individual-participant Meta-
analysis of 10 cohort studies. Depress. Anxiety 32, 461–470. doi: 10.1002/da.22376
Harrison, L. A., Kats, A., Williams, M. E., and Aziz-Zadeh, L. (2019). The importance 
of sensory processing in mental health: A proposed addition to the research domain 
criteria (RDoC) and suggestions for RDoC 2.0. Front. Psychol.  10:103. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00103
Hase, M. (2021). The structure of EMDR therapy: A guide for the therapist. Front. 
Psychol. 12:660753. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.660753
Hawkley, L. C., Berntson, G. G., Engeland, C. G., Marucha, P . T., Masi, C. M., and 
Cacioppo, J. T. (2005). Stress, aging, and resilience: can accrued Wear and tear be slowed? 
Can. Psychol. 46, 115–125. doi: 10.1037/h0087015
Henson, C., Truchot, D., and Canevello, A. (2021). What promotes post traumatic 
growth? A systematic review. Eur. J. Trauma Dissoc.  5:100195. doi: 
10.1016/j.ejtd.2020.100195
Heron, M. (2021). Deaths: leading causes for 2019. Natl. Vital Stat. Rep. 70, 1–114
Hesp, C., Smith, R., Parr, T., Allen, M., Friston, K. J., and Ramstead, M. J. D. (2021). 
Deeply felt affect: the emergence of valence in deep active inference. Neural Comput. 33, 
398–446. doi: 10.1162/neco_a_01341
Hobföll, S. (1989). Conservation of resources: A new attempt at conceptualizing stress. 
Am. Psychol. 44, 513–524. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.44.3.513
Hobföll, S. (2001). The influence of culture, community, and the nested self in the 
stress process: Advancing conservation of resources theory. Appl. Psychol. 50, 337–370. 
doi: 10.1111/1464-0597.00062
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 50, 259–285. doi: 10.1111/nous.12062
Hulle, V ., Carol, A., Esbensen, K., and Goldsmith, H. H. (2019). Co-occurrence of 
sensory over-responsivity with obsessive-compulsive symptoms in childhood and early 
adolescence. J. Dev. Behav. Pediatr. 40, 377–382. doi: 10.1097/DBP .0000000000000671
Hunter, R. G., Gray, J. D., and McEwen, B. S. (2018). The neuroscience of resilience. J. 
Soc. Soc. Work Res. 9, 305–339. doi: 10.1086/697956
Iacoviello, B. M., and Charney, D. S. (2020). “Chapter 2—cognitive and behavioral 
components of resilience to stress” in Stress Resilience. ed. A. Chen (London: Academic 
Press), 23–31.
Johnson, S. F ., and Boals, A. (2015). Refining our ability to measure posttraumatic 
growth. Psychol. Trauma Theory Res. Pract. Policy  7, 422–429. doi: 
10.1037/tra0000013
Joyce, S., Shand, F ., Tighe, J., Laurent, S. J., Bryant, R. A., and Harvey, S. B. (2018). Road to 
resilience: A systematic review and meta-analysis of resilience training programmes and 
interventions. BMJ Open 8:e017858. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017858
Kalisch, R., Köber, G., Binder, H., Ahrens, K. F ., Basten, U., Chmitorz, A., et al. (2021). 
The frequent stressor and mental health monitoring-paradigm: A proposal for the 
operationalization and measurement of resilience and the identification of resilience 
processes in longitudinal observational studies. Front. Psychol.  12:710493. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2021.710493
Kalisch, R., Müller, M. B., and Tüscher, O. (2015). A conceptual framework for the 
neurobiological study of resilience. Behav. Brain Sci. 38:e92. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X1400082X
Kalisch, R., Russo, S. J., and Müller, M. B. (2024). Neurobiology and systems biology 
of stress resilience. Physiol. Rev. 104, 1205–1263. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00042.2023
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 21 frontiersin.org
Kamarck, T. W ., Annunziato, B., and Amateau, L. M. (1995). Affiliation moderates the 
effects of social threat on stress-related cardiovascular responses: boundary conditions 
for a laboratory model of social support. Psychosom. Med.  57, 183–194. doi: 
10.1097/00006842-199503000-00011
Kamin, H. S., and Kertes, D. A. (2017). Cortisol and DHEA in development and 
psychopathology. Horm. Behav. 89, 69–85. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2016.11.018
Kawai, H., Kishimoto, M., Okahisa, Y ., Sakamoto, S., Terada, S., and Takaki, M. (2023). 
Initial outcomes of the safe and sound protocol on patients with adult autism Spectrum 
disorder: exploratory pilot study. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health  20:862. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph20064862
Keller, A., Litzelman, K., Wisk, L. E., Maddox, T., Cheng, E. R., Creswell, P . D., et al. 
(2012). Does the perception that stress affects health matter? The association with health 
and mortality. Health Psychol. 31, 677–684. doi: 10.1037/a0026743
Kent, M., Rivers, C. T., and Wrenn, G. (2015). Goal-directed resilience in training 
(GRIT): A biopsychosocial model of self-regulation, executive functions, and personal 
growth (Eudaimonia) in evocative contexts of PTSD, obesity, and chronic pain. Behav. 
Sci. 5, 264–304. doi: 10.3390/bs5020264
Keya, T. A., Leela, A., Habib, N., Rashid, M., and Bakthavatchalam, P . (2023). Mental 
health disorders due to disaster exposure: A systematic review and Meta-analysis. Cureus 
15:e37031. doi: 10.7759/cureus.37031
Kirschbaum, C., Klauer, T., Filipp, S.-H., and Hellhammer, D. H. (1995). Sex-specific 
effects of social support on cortisol and subjective responses to acute psychological 
stress. Psychosom. Med. 57, 23–31. doi: 10.1097/00006842-199501000-00004
Klimes-Dougan, B., Chong, L. S., Samikoglu, A., Thai, M., Amatya, P ., Cullen, K. R., 
et al. (2020). Transcendental meditation and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis 
functioning: A pilot, randomized controlled trial with young adults. Stress 23, 105–115. 
doi: 10.1080/10253890.2019.1656714
Knauft, K., Waldron, A., Mathur, M., and Kalia, V . (2021). Perceived chronic stress 
influences the effect of acute stress on cognitive flexibility. Sci. Rep. 11:23629. doi: 
10.1038/s41598-021-03101-5
Kobasa, S. C. (1979). Stressful life events, personality, and health: an inquiry into 
hardiness. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 37, 1–11. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.37.1.1
Kobasa, S. C., and Puccetti, M. C. (1983). Personality and social resources in stress 
resistance. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 45, 839–850. doi: 10.1037//0022-3514.45.4.839
Kojima, M. (2012). Alexithymia as a prognostic risk factor for health problems: A brief 
review of epidemiological studies. Biopsychosoc. Med. 6:21. doi: 10.1186/1751-0759-6-21
Korte, S. M., Koolhaas, J. M., Wingfield, J. C., and McEwen, B. S. (2005). The 
Darwinian concept of stress: benefits of allostasis and costs of allostatic load and the 
trade-offs in health and disease. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.  29, 3–38. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2004.08.009
Krystal, J. H., and Neumeister, A. (2009). Noradrenergic and serotonergic mechanisms 
in the neurobiology of posttraumatic stress disorder and resilience. Brain Res. 1293, 
13–23. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.03.044
Lawson, R. P ., Rees, G., and Friston, K. J. (2014). An aberrant precision account of 
autism. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8:302. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00302
Lazarus, R. S., and Eriksen, C. W . (1952). Effects of failure stress upon skilled 
performance. J. Exp. Psychol. 43, 100–105. doi: 10.1037/h0056614
LeBouef, T., Y aker, Z., and Whited, L. (2023). Physiology, autonomic nervous system. 
Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing.
Lewis, M. D., and Todd, R. M. (2007). The self-regulating brain: cortical-subcortical 
feedback and the development of intelligent action. Cogn. Dev.  22, 406–430. doi: 
10.1016/j.cogdev.2007.08.004
Lin, N., Ensel, W . M., Simeone, R. S., and Kuo, W . (1979). Social support, stressful life 
events, and illness: A model and an empirical test. J. Health Soc. Behav. 20, 108–119. doi: 
10.2307/2136433
Madole, J. W ., and Harden, K. P . (2023). Building causal knowledge in behavior 
genetics. Behav. Brain Sci. 46:e182. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X22000681
Maggio, M., De Vita, F ., Fisichella, A., Colizzi, E., Provenzano, S., Lauretani, F ., et al. 
(2015). DHEA and cognitive function in the elderly. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 145, 
281–292. doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2014.03.014
Magruder, K. M., Kassam-Adams, N., Thoresen, S., and Olff, M. (2016). Prevention 
and public health approaches to trauma and traumatic stress: A rationale and a call to 
action. Eur. J. Psychotraumatol. 7:29715. doi: 10.3402/ejpt.v7.29715
Maisto, D., Donnarumma, F ., and Pezzulo, G. (2015). Divide et impera: Subgoaling 
reduces the complexity of probabilistic inference and problem solving. J. R. Soc. Interface 
12:20141335. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.1335
Mancini, A. D. (2019). When acute adversity improves psychological health: a social–
contextual framework. Psychol. Rev. 126, 486–505. doi: 10.1037/rev0000144
Marasini, G., Caleffi, F ., Machado, L. M., and Pereira, B. M. (2022). Psychological 
consequences of motor vehicle accidents: A systematic review. Transport. Res. F: Traffic 
Psychol. Behav. 89, 249–264. doi: 10.1016/j.trf.2022.06.017
Masten, A. S. (2001). Ordinary magic. Resilience processes in development. Am. 
Psychol. 56, 227–238. doi: 10.1037//0003-066x.56.3.227
Masten, A. S., Lucke, C. M., Nelson, K. M., and Stallworthy, I. C. (2021). Resilience in 
development and psychopathology: multisystem perspectives. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 
17, 521–549. doi: 10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-081219-120307
Maul, S., Giegling, I., Fabbri, C., Corponi, F ., Serretti, A., and Rujescu, D. (2020). 
Genetics of resilience: implications from genome-wide association studies and 
candidate genes of the stress response system in posttraumatic stress disorder and 
depression. Am. J. Med. Genet. B Neuropsychiatr. Genet.  183, 77–94. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.32763
Mazza, A., Ciorli, T., Mirlisenna, I., D’Onofrio, I., Mantellino, S., Zaccaria, M., et al. 
(2023). Pain perception and physiological responses are modulated by active support 
from a romantic partner. Psychophysiology 60:e14299. doi: 10.1111/psyp.14299
McCall, C., and Singer, T. (2012). The animal and human neuroendocrinology of 
social cognition, motivation and behavior. Nat. Neurosci.  15, 681–688. doi: 
10.1038/nn.3084
McEwen, B. S. (1998). Stress, adaptation, and disease: Allostasis and allostatic load. 
Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 840, 33–44. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1998.tb09546.x
Menezes, C. B., and Bizarro, L. (2015). Effects of focused meditation on difficulties in 
emotion regulation and trait anxiety. Psychol. Neurosci. 8, 350–365. doi: 10.1037/pne0000015
Miller, M., Albarracin, M., Pitliya, R. J., Kiefer, A., Mago, J., Gorman, C., et al. (2022). 
Resilience and active inference. Front. Psychol.  13:1059117. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1059117
Morris, L. S., McCall, J. G., Charney, D. S., and Murrough, J. W . (2020). The role of the 
locus coeruleus in the generation of pathological anxiety. Brain Neurosci. Adv.  
4:2398212820930321. doi: 10.1177/2398212820930321
Murren, C. J., Auld, J. R., Callahan, H., Ghalambor, C. K., Handelsman, C. A., 
Heskel, M. A., et al. (2015). Constraints on the evolution of phenotypic plasticity: limits 
and costs of phenotype and plasticity. Heredity 115, 293–301. doi: 10.1038/hdy.2015.8
Myslowski, J., McClure, S. M., Lisinski, J., Tomlinson, D. C., Kablinger, A. S., 
MacKillop, J., et al. (2024). Connectivity changes following episodic future thinking in 
alcohol use disorder. Brain Connect. 14, 550–559. doi: 10.1089/brain.2024.0025
Naragon-Gainey, K., McMahon, T. P ., and Chacko, T. P . (2017). The structure of 
common emotion regulation strategies: A meta-analytic examination. Psychol. Bull. 143, 
384–427. doi: 10.1037/bul0000093
Nave, K., Deane, G., Miller, M., and Clark, A. (2022). Expecting some action: 
predictive processing and the construction of conscious experience. Rev. Philos. Psychol. 
13, 1019–1037. doi: 10.1007/s13164-022-00644-y
Neal, J., Song, I., Katz, B., and Lee, T.-H. (2023). Association of Intrinsic Functional 
Connectivity between the locus Coeruleus and salience network with attentional ability. 
J. Cogn. Neurosci. 35, 1557–1569. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_02036
Niitsu, K., Rice, M. J., Houfek, J. F ., Stoltenberg, S. F ., Kupzyk, K. A., and Barron, C. R. 
(2019). A systematic review of genetic influence on psychological resilience. Biol. Res. 
Nurs. 21, 61–71. doi: 10.1177/1099800418800396
Offidani, E., and Ruini, C. (2012). Psychobiological correlates of allostatic overload 
in a healthy population. Brain Behav. Immun.  26, 284–291. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbi.2011.09.009
Ondobaka, S., Kilner, J., and Friston, K. (2017). The role of interoceptive inference in 
theory of mind. Brain Cogn. 112, 64–68. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2015.08.002
Osório, C., Probert, T., Jones, E., Y oung, A. H., and Robbins, I. (2017). Adapting to 
stress: understanding the neurobiology of resilience. Behav. Med. 43, 307–322. doi: 
10.1080/08964289.2016.1170661
Parr, T., Corcoran, A. W ., Friston, K. J., and Hohwy, J. (2019). Perceptual awareness 
and active inference. Neurosci. Conscious. 2019:niz012. doi: 10.1093/nc/niz012
Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2018). The anatomy of inference: generative models and 
brain structure. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 12:90. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2018.00090
Paulus, M. P ., Feinstein, J. S., and Khalsa, S. S. (2019). An active inference approach to 
interoceptive psychopathology. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol.  15, 97–122. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-050718-095617
Peters, A., McEwen, B. S., and Friston, K. (2017). Uncertainty and stress: why it causes 
diseases and how it is mastered by the brain. Prog. Neurobiol. 156, 164–188. doi: 
10.1016/j.pneurobio.2017.05.004
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F ., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Hierarchical active inference: A 
theory of motivated control. Trends Cogn. Sci.  22, 294–306. doi: 
10.1016/j.tics.2018.01.009
Pfaltz, M. C., and Schnyder, U. (2023). Allostatic load and allostatic overload: 
preventive and clinical implications. Psychother. Psychosom.  92, 279–282. doi: 
10.1159/000534340
Podoly, T. Y ., and Ben-Sasson, A. (2020). Sensory habituation as a shared mechanism 
for sensory over-responsivity and obsessive–compulsive symptoms. Front. Integr. 
Neurosci. 14:17. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2020.00017
Poletti, M., Gebhardt, E., Pelizza, L., Preti, A., and Raballo, A. (2023). 
Neurodevelopmental antecedents and sensory phenomena in obsessive compulsive 
disorder: A systematic review supporting a phenomenological-developmental model. 
Psychopathology 56, 295–305. doi: 10.1159/000526708
Harrison et al. 10.3389/fnbeh.2025.1524722
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 22 frontiersin.org
Porges, S. W . (2022). Polyvagal theory: A science of safety. Front. Integr. Neurosci. 
16:871227. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2022.871227
Quadt, L., Critchley, H., and Nagai, Y . (2022). Cognition, emotion, and the central 
autonomic network. Auton. Neurosci. 238:102948. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2022.102948
Quattrocki, E., and Friston, K. (2014). Autism, oxytocin and interoception. 
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 47, 410–430.
Quigley, K. S., Kanoski, S., Grill, W . M., Barrett, L. F ., and Tsakiris, M. (2021). 
Functions of Interoception: from energy regulation to experience of the self. Trends 
Neurosci. 44, 29–38. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2020.09.008
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P . B., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering Schrödinger’s 
question: A free-energy formulation. Phys Life Rev  24, 1–16. doi: 
10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Ramstead, M. J. D., Hesp, C., Tschantz, A., Smith, R., Constant, A., and Friston, K. 
(2021). Neural and phenotypic representation under the free-energy principle. Neurosci. 
Biobehav. Rev. 120, 109–122. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.11.024
Ramstead, M. J., Kirchhoff, M. D., and Friston, K. J. (2020). A tale of two densities: 
active inference is enactive inference. Adapt. Behav.  28, 225–239. doi: 
10.1177/1059712319862774
Richter-Levin, G., and Sandi, C. (2021). Title: “labels matter: is it stress or is it 
trauma?” . Transl. Psychiatry 11, 385–389. doi: 10.1038/s41398-021-01514-4
Rösch, S. A., Stramaccia, D. F ., and Benoit, R. G. (2022). Promoting farsighted 
decisions via episodic future thinking: a meta-analysis. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen.  151, 
1606–1635. doi: 10.1037/xge0001148
Rudland, J. R., Golding, C., and Wilkinson, T. J. (2020). The stress paradox: how stress 
can be good for learning. Med. Educ. 54, 40–45. doi: 10.1111/medu.13830
Russo, S. J., Murrough, J. W ., Han, M., Charney, D. S., and Nestler, E. J. (2012). 
Neurobiology of resilience. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 1475–1484. doi: 10.1038/nn.3234
Safron, A., and Sheikhbahaee, Z. (2023). Towards understanding persons and their 
personalities with cybernetic big 5 theory and the free energy principle and active 
inference (FEP-AI) framework: OSF .
Sales, A. C., Friston, K. J., Jones, M. W ., Pickering, A. E., and Moran, R. J. (2019). Locus 
Coeruleus tracking of prediction errors optimises cognitive flexibility: an active 
inference model. PLoS Comput. Biol. 15:e1006267. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006267
Saxbe, D. E., Beckes, L., Stoycos, S. A., and Coan, J. A. (2020). Social Allostasis and 
social allostatic load: A new model for research in social dynamics, stress, and health. 
Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 15, 469–482. doi: 10.1177/1745691619876528
Schacter, D. L., Benoit, R. G., and Szpunar, K. K. (2017). Episodic future thinking: 
mechanisms and functions. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci.  17, 41–50. doi: 
10.1016/j.cobeha.2017.06.002
Schiele, M. A., and Domschke, K. (2018). Epigenetics at the crossroads between genes, 
environment and resilience in anxiety disorders. Genes Brain Behav. 17:e12423. doi: 
10.1111/gbb.12423
Schulkin, J., and Sterling, P . (2019). Allostasis: A brain-centered, predictive mode of 
physiological regulation. Trends Neurosci. 42, 740–752. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2019.07.010
Schulz, A., and Vögele, C. (2015). Interoception and stress. Front. Psychol. 6:993. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00993
Schwabe, L., Höffken, O., Tegenthoff, M., and Wolf, O. T. (2013). Stress-induced 
enhancement of response inhibition depends on mineralocorticoid receptor activation. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 38, 2319–2326. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.05.001
Seehagen, S., Schneider, S., Rudolph, J., Ernst, S., and Zmyj, N. (2015). Stress impairs 
cognitive flexibility in infants. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.  112, 12882–12886. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1508345112
Seeman, T. E., Singer, B. H., Rowe, J. W ., Horwitz, R. I., and McEwen, B. S. (1997). Price of 
adaptation—allostatic load and its health consequences. MacArthur studies of successful 
aging. Arch. Intern. Med. 157, 2259–2268. doi: 10.1001/archinte.1997.00440400111013
Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends 
Cogn. Sci. 17, 565–573. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.007
Seth, A. K., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the emotional 
brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 371:20160007. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0007
Sheffler, J. L., Stanley, I., and Sachs-Ericsson, N. (2020). “Chapter 4—ACEs and mental 
health outcomes” in Adverse childhood experiences. eds. G. J. G. Asmundson and T. O. 
Afifi (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Academic Press), 47–69.
Shields, G. S., Trainor, B. C., Lam, J. C. W ., and Y onelinas, A. P . (2016). Acute stress 
impairs cognitive flexibility in men, not women. Stress 19, 542–546. doi: 
10.1080/10253890.2016.1192603
Sinha, P ., Kjelgaard, M. M., Gandhi, T. K., Tsourides, K., Cardinaux, A. L., Pantazis, D., 
et al. (2014). Autism as a disorder of prediction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111, 15220–15225. 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1416797111
Sladky, R., Kargl, D., Haubensak, W ., and Lamm, C. (2023). An active inference perspective 
for the amygdala complex. Trends Cogn. Sci. 28, 223–236. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2023.11.004
Smeeth, D., Beck, S., Karam, E. G., and Pluess, M. (2021). The role of epigenetics in 
psychological resilience. Lancet Psychiatry 8, 620–629. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30515-0
Southwick, S. M., Bremner, J. D., Rasmusson, A., Morgan, C. A., Arnsten, A., and 
Charney, D. S. (1999). Role of norepinephrine in the pathophysiology and treatment of 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol. Psychiatry  46, 1192–1204. doi: 
10.1016/S0006-3223(99)00219-X
Sripada, R. K., Marx, C. E., King, A. P ., Rajaram, N., Garfinkel, S. N., Abelson, J. L., et al. 
(2013). DHEA enhances emotion regulation Neurocircuits and modulates memory for 
emotional stimuli. Neuropsychopharmacology 38, 1798–1807. doi: 10.1038/npp.2013.79
Steptoe, A., Hackett, R. A., Lazzarino, A. I., Bostock, S., La Marca, R., Carvalho, L. A., 
et al. (2014). Disruption of multisystem responses to stress in type 2 diabetes: 
investigating the dynamics of allostatic load. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111, 15693–15698. 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1410401111
Sterling, P . (2004). Principles of Allostasis: Optimal design. In J. Schulkin (Ed.), 
Allostasis, homeostasis, and the costs of physiological adaptation, Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Pres. 17–63.
Sterling, P . (2012). Allostasis: A model of predictive regulation. Physiol. Behav. 106, 
5–15. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2011.06.004
Sterling, P ., and Eyer, J. (1988). “ Allostasis: A new paradigm to explain arousal 
pathology” in Handbook of life stress, cognition and health. eds. S. Fisher and J. Reason 
(Hoboken, New Jersey, U.S: John Wiley & Sons), 629–649.
Sumich, A., Heym, N., Sarkar, M., Burgess, T., French, J., Hatch, L., et al. (2022). The power 
of touch: the effects of havening touch on subjective distress, mood, brain function, and 
psychological health. Psychol. Neurosci. 15, 332–346. doi: 10.1037/pne0000288
Schwartenbeck, P ., FitzGerald, T. H., Mathys, C., Dolan, R., and Friston, K. (2015). 
The dopaminergic midbrain encodes the expected certainty about desired outcomes. 
Cerebral cortex, 25, 3434–3445.
Tabibnia, G. (2020). An affective neuroscience model of boosting resilience in adults. 
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 115, 321–350. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.05.005
Tschantz, A., Barca, L., Maisto, D., Buckley, C. L., Seth, A. K., and Pezzulo, G. 
(2022). Simulating homeostatic, allostatic and goal-directed forms of interoceptive 
control using active inference. Biol. Psychol.  169:108266. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsycho.2022.108266
Tschantz, A., Seth, A. K., and Buckley, C. L. (2020). Learning action-oriented models 
through active inference. PLoS Comput. Biol.  16:e1007805. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007805
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and 
biases. Science 185, 1124–1131. doi: 10.1126/science.185.4157.1124
Ueltzhöffer, K., Da Costa, L., and Friston, K. J. (2021). Variational free energy, 
individual fitness, and population dynamics under acute stress: comment on dynamic 
and thermodynamic models of adaptation. Phys Life Rev, 37, 111–115. doi: 
10.1016/j.plrev.2021.04.005
Ungar, M., and Theron, L. (2020). Resilience and mental health: how multisystemic 
processes contribute to positive outcomes. Lancet Psychiatry  7, 441–448. doi: 
10.1016/S2215-0366(19)30434-1
Uusberg, A., Taxer, J. L., Yih, J., Uusberg, H., and Gross, J. J. (2019). Reappraising 
Reappraisal. Emot. Rev. 11, 267–282. doi: 10.1177/1754073919862617
Vilas, M. G., Auksztulewicz, R., and Melloni, L. (2022). Active inference as a 
computational framework for consciousness. Rev. Philos. Psychol. 13, 859–878. doi: 
10.1007/s13164-021-00579-w
Waugh, C. E., and Sali, A. W . (2023). Resilience as the ability to maintain well-being: an 
allostatic active inference model. J. Intelligence 11 Article 8. doi: 10.3390/jintelligence11080158
Weng, H. Y ., Feldman, J., Leggio, L., Napadow, V ., Park, J., and Price, C. (2021). 
Interventions and manipulations of Interoception. Trends Neurosci. 44, 52–62. doi: 
10.1016/j.tins.2020.09.010
Werner, E. E. (1999). “High-risk children in Y oung adulthood: A longitudinal study 
from birth to 32 years” in Risks and problem behaviors in adolescence. Eds. R. M. Lerner 
and C. M. Ohannissian. (Milton Park, England: Routledge).
Wilkinson, P . O., and Goodyer, I. M. (2011). Childhood adversity and allostatic 
overload of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis: A vulnerability model for 
depressive disorders. Dev. Psychopathol. 23, 1017–1037. doi: 10.1017/S0954579411000472
Windle, G. (2011). What is resilience? A review and concept analysis. Rev. Clin. 
Gerontol. 21, 152–169. doi: 10.1017/S0959259810000420
Wise, R. A. (2004). Dopamine, learning and motivation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5:6. doi: 
10.1038/nrn1406
Wittchen, H. U., Jacobi, F ., Rehm, J., Gustavsson, A., Svensson, M., Jönsson, B., et al. 
(2011). The size and burden of mental disorders and other disorders of the brain in 
Europe 2010. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol.  21, 655–679. doi: 
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2011.07.018
Y ates, S. W . (2020). Physician stress and burnout. Am. J. Med. 133, 160–164. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjmed.2019.08.034
Y ehuda, R. (2004). Risk and resilience in posttraumatic stress disorder. J. Clin. 
Psychiatry 65, 29–36
Yu, R. (2016). Stress potentiates decision biases: A stress induced deliberation-to-
intuition (SIDI) model. Neurobiol. Stress 3, 83–95. doi: 10.1016/j.ynstr.2015.12.006
Zannas, A. S., and West, A. E. (2014). Epigenetics and the regulation of stress vulnerability 
and resilience. Neuroscience 264, 157–170. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.12.003
Zautra, A. J. (2013). “Resilience is social, after all” in The resilience handbook. Eds. M. 
Kent, M. C. Davis, J. W . Reich. (New Y ork, NY: Routledge).