Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119:8
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00422-025-01006-4
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Counteracting uncertainty: exploring the impact of anxiety
on updating predictions about environmental states
David Harris 1 · Tom Arthur 1 · Mark Wilson 1 · B e nL eG a l l a i s1 · Thomas Parsons 1 · Ally Dill 1 · Sam Vine 1
Received: 28 June 2024 / Accepted: 28 January 2025 / Published online: 20 February 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
Anxious emotional states disrupt decision-making and control of dexterous motor actions. Computational work has shown
that anxiety-induced uncertainty alters the rate at which we learn about the environment, but the subsequent impact on the
predictive beliefs that drive action control remains to be understood. In the present work we tested whether anxiety alters
predictive (oculo)motor control mechanisms. Thirty participants completed an experimental task that consisted of manual
interception of a projectile performed in virtual reality. Participants were subjected to conditions designed to induce states
of high or low anxiety using performance incentives and social-evaluative pressure. We measured subsequent effects on
physiological arousal, self-reported state anxiety, and eye movements. Under high pressure conditions we observed visual
sampling of the task environment characterised by higher variability and entropy of position prior to release of the projectile,
consistent with an active attempt to reduce uncertainty. Computational modelling of predictive beliefs, using gaze data as
inputs to a partially observable Markov decision process model, indicated that trial-to-trial updating of predictive beliefs
was reduced during anxiety, suggesting that updates to priors were constrained. Additionally, state anxiety was related to
a less deterministic mapping of beliefs to actions. These results support the idea that organisms may attempt to counter
anxiety-related uncertainty by moving towards more familiar and certain sensorimotor patterns.
Keywords Gaze · Stress · Eye tracking · Bayesian · Predictive Processing
1 Introduction
Both dextrous motor actions and control of our visual system
are thought to depend on predictions about future states of the
world and our own body (Wolpert and Flanagan 2001; Shad-
mehr et al. 2010; Adams et al. 2013). Skilled movement also
depends on the ability to ﬂexibly adapt and update those pre-
dictions according to new contexts or new sensory evidence.
As anxious emotional states can bias the way in which we
make and update predictions (Cornwell et al. 2017;H e i ne ta l .
2021; Hein and Herrojo Ruiz 2022), they can disrupt motor
actions with potentially damaging consequences (Harris et al.
2023b). It is well known that during highly pressurised situ-
ations, such as a job interview or the ﬁnal of a sporting event,
Communicated by Benjamin Lindner.
B David Harris
D.J.Harris@exeter.ac.uk
1 School of Public Health and Sport Sciences, Medical School,
University of Exeter, St Luke’s Campus, Exeter EX1 2LU,
UK
people can experience drastic breakdowns in task perfor-
mance (Beilock and Carr 2001; Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans
2012; Payne et al. 2018). In the present work we sought to
understand the impact of anxiety on predictive (oculo)motor
control mechanisms. We ﬁrst outline theoretical approaches
that have described anxiety in terms of uncertainty or entropy
and how sensorimotor control might reﬂect an active attempt
to resolve that uncertainty.
Anxiety is a negative emotional response to a perceived
threat (Eysenck 2013; Grupe and Nitschke 2013). It is often
characterised along cognitive (worry) and somatic (physi-
ological arousal) dimensions. Anxiety can lead to distinct
difﬁculties learning about the world and making decisions
(Bishop 2007; Carleton 2016), and can particularly disrupt
the ability to adapt to changing task conditions, especially
in individuals with an intolerance of uncertainty (Browning
et al. 2015; Huang et al. 2017;H e i ne ta l .2021). One potential
explanation for these effects is that anxiety may alter the way
in which we make predictions about the world around us. For
instance, several theoretical accounts have characterised anx-
iety as closely related to situational estimates of uncertainty
123
8 Page 2 of 16 Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8
and a (perceived) inability to reliably predict the absence of
threats (Grupe and Nitschke 2013;d eB e r k e re ta l . 2016;
Cornwell et al. 2017; Seriès 2019;L a w s o ne ta l . 2021). For
instance, Hirsh et al.’s. ( 2012) Entropy Model of Uncertainty
(EMU) describes uncontrollable or unpredictable situations
as creating an aversive high-entropy state, in which an organ-
ism experiences a reduced ability to predict successive states
(e.g., sensory outcomes) based on the current state. Accord-
ing to the EMU, organisms ﬁnd such uncertainty aversive
and experience it subjectively as anxiety. Research in this
vein therefore conceptualises anxiety as an epistemic emo-
tion, that is arising from our engagement with knowledge,
learning, or the need to reduce uncertainty (Miceli and Castel-
franchi 2005).
The EMU characterisation of anxiety aligns closely with
other dynamical systems approaches like the Free Energy
Principle (FEP) and Active Inference , which similarly con-
ceptualise the goal of a cognitive-behavioural system as the
minimization of internal entropy (or ‘free energy’) and an
increase in prediction success (Friston 2009; Friston et al.
2010;C l a r k2013). From this perspective, to cope with insta-
bility (e.g., during anxiety) organisms should seek to return to
familiar low-entropy states. Under the FEP (Friston 2010),
this tendency to return to low entropy states is, by deﬁni-
tion, true of a self-organising system as they must resist
dissipative forces (i.e., states of high entropy) to maintain
their own integrity and existence. One way to achieve this
goal in the face of anxiety-induced uncertainty, is to adopt
behaviours like withdrawal or avoidance to evade the aversive
stimulus. Alternatively, the organism may seek out new per-
ceptual information that will disambiguate any uncertainty
(e.g., looking under the bed to check for monsters). These
uncertainty-reducing behaviours can sometimes be detrimen-
tal, such as when a sportsperson’s movements become rigid
and constrained (Harris et al. 2023b), but they may also be
beneﬁcial, enabling faster belief updating (e.g., Behrens et al.
2007)), or neutral, as in cases of task-irrelevant uncertainty
reduction (e.g., Miceli and Castelfranchi 2005).
It has previously been suggested that an adaptive response
in times of uncertainty is to modify the rate with which you
update your beliefs about the world; learning faster allows
one’s model of the world to better reﬂect the current ‘reality’
of an environment (Behrens et al. 2007). Neurocomputa-
tional work has illustrated that this is indeed the case for
perceptual learning (Lawson et al. 2021) where learning rates
(i.e., the speed at which we revise prior expectations) appear
to be increased by noradrenergic up-regulation of predic-
tion error signal strength. What remains to be determined, is
whether anxiety-related uncertainty similarly induces faster
updating of predictive aspects of sensori motor control,
1 or
if these might instead be impaired. While quickly revising
predictions may be beneﬁcial in some instances (e.g., when
conditions are changing or inherently unstable), a constantly
high learning rate would generally disrupt the formation of
appropriate action beliefs or models (i.e., by limiting a per-
son’s ability to disregard atypical or uncharacteristic task
outcomes). As a result, participants may display highly vari-
able and reﬂexive sensorimotor responses, which correspond
less accurately with the surrounding performance context.
Moreover, it has previously been reported that participants
will constrain movement degrees of freedom when placed in
more unpredictable task environments as an active attempt to
reduce uncertainty (O’Sullivan et al. 2009; Arthur and Har-
ris 2021). These ﬁndings align with theoretical models of
impedance control in the motor system where co-activation
of antagonistic muscle pairs is a natural response to unpre-
dictable perturbations (Mitrovic et al. 2010). There is initial
evidence that updating of predictions that guide sensori-
motor control may indeed be slowed. Using a combination
of EEG and computational modelling, Sporn et al. ( 2020)
demonstrated that rates of motor learning were reduced under
anxiety, and that anxious states impaired reward process-
ing and the updating of predictions about rewards associated
with motor sequences. Similarly, Ellmers et al. ( 2024) found
that participants’ approach velocity in the moving escala-
tor paradigm (Reynolds and Bronstein 2003) was updated
more slowly under state anxiety. In essence, constraining
updates to sensorimotor predictions could help the organ-
ism stay in familiar states when uncertainty is already high.
Consequently, there may be important differences in how
perceived uncertainty inﬂuences prediction updating in overt
motor and oculomotor actions compared to simpler (percep-
tual) associative learning tasks.
1.1 The present study
Previous studies have shown that visual attention can be
disrupted during anxious states, leading to subsequent break-
downs in task performance (Wilson et al. 2009; Laretzaki
et al. 2011; Allsop and Gray 2014). An open question is
what effect anxious states have speciﬁcally on the predic-
tive mechanisms that underpin gaze control (Friston et al.
2012; Henderson 2017). This was the focus of the present
study, in which participants performed an interceptive task
in a virtual reality environment (see Fig. 1) while we manip-
ulated performance incentives to induce situational pressure
(as in Wood and Wilson 2010; Allsop and Gray 2014). Our
1 Here we refer to aspects of movement that are driven by expectations,
like anticipatory saccades that jump ahead of a moving target or look-
ing towards the most likely ball release location, rather than predictive
mechanisms like efference copy.
123
Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8 Page 3 of 16 8
Fig. 1 Virtual reality task environment for the high (left) and low (right)
pressure conditions. Note: The ball was projected from one of the two
locations on the front wall. The ball passed the player without bouncing
and they were instructed to intercept it with the racquet (videos of hit
and miss trials of the task are available online: https://osf.io/2amdv/).
The score counter was displayed right at the top of the participant’s
ﬁeld of view and increased with every successful interception during
the high pressure condition. In the low pressure condition (right) the
score was not counted, and the red ‘recording’ text was replaced with
‘not recording’
focus was therefore on performance anxiety as an epistemic
emotion (Miceli and Castelfranchi 2005), arising from uncer-
tainty about the ability to execute the task and the associated
monetary and social evaluative consequences. We measured
subsequent effects of performance pressure on physiologi-
cal arousal, self-reported state anxiety, and eye movements.
To examine changes to predictive beliefs underpinning gaze
control, we adopted computational modelling approaches
that are increasingly being employed in psychiatry and clini-
cal neuropsychology (Henco et al. 2020; Smith et al. 2020a;
Parr et al. 2021) as a method for estimating how expectations
change over time.
Our hypotheses were based on EMU and FEP characteri-
sations of anxiety as a state of entropy which organisms will
seek to resolve (Hirsh et al. 2012; McGovern et al. 2022).
Our primary hypothesis was that updates to predictive eye
movements (relating to the upcoming release location of a
projectile) over trials would be impaired during state anxi-
ety, as previous ﬁndings have indicated that participants may
constrain both their movements and their rate of prediction
updating under uncertainty (Sporn et al. 2020; Arthur and
Harris 2021). We also examined some secondary eye move-
ment metrics (before and after the release of the projectile)
to understand how anxiety inﬂuenced oculomotor control.
If participants are indeed uncertain about their ability to
predict future states during anxiety, we would also expect
impaired anticipatory tracking of predictable moving targets
during the interceptive task. Given the importance of prior
expectations in interceptive motor tasks (e.g., see Diaz et al.
2013), such uncertainty would likely be reﬂected in more
variable, stimulus-driven (as opposed to prediction-driven)
scan patterns under anxiety. We therefore hypothesised that
high pressure conditions would also lead to greater variance
and higher entropy of eye movements prior to the release of
the interception target.
2 Methods
2.1 Design
We used a repeated measures design in which all participants
took part in both high and low pressure conditions, the order
of which was counterbalanced across participants.
2.2 Transparency and openness
We report sample size determination, data exclusions, and
all manipulations in the study. All data and analysis code are
available at: https://osf.io/2amdv/. The hypotheses were not
preregistered. Data were analysed using RStudio v1.4.1106
(R Core Team 2017).
123
8 Page 4 of 16 Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8
2.3 Participants
Thirty participants (12 female; M age /equal120.8 years; SD age /equal1
1.2; range /equal118–23 years) took part in the study. Participants
were recruited from the undergraduate student population
at the host University. Eye tracking data was lost for one
participant in one condition due to a recording error. In a
previous study, we observed effects in the range of R
2 /equal1
0.03-0.06 for changes in predictive gaze position in this task
(Harris et al. 2023a). Power curves using the simr package
for R (Green and MacLeod 2016) showed that for linear
mixed effects models (with participant as a random factor),
36 trials for 30 participants was sufﬁcient to detect effects
at the lower end of this range with more than 85% power
(see power curves in the supplementary ﬁles: https://osf.io/
2amdv/). Written informed consent from all participants was
obtained in accordance with British Psychological Society
guidelines, and the study received approval from the Depart-
mental Ethics Committee (University of Exeter, UK; REF:
520,338). The study methods closely adhered to the approved
procedures and the Declaration of Helsinki. Data collection
was completed between December 2022 and May 2023.
2.4 Task and materials
The experimental task consisted of manual interception of a
projectile performed in virtual reality (VR). The task was
a simpliﬁed racquetball game in which participants were
instructed to intercept a ball projected from one of two pos-
sible locations at the front of the court using a virtual racquet
operated by a tracked hand controller. Participants were given
no prior cues as to which of the two locations the ball would
appear from on each trial, but there was an auditory tone
signalling the start of each trial. Overall, there was a 50/50
split of left and right sided trials which were presented to the
participants in one of four pseudo-randomised orders (coun-
terbalanced across participants). However, the trial orders
were designed to be volatile, with periods where the pro-
jection location was clearly biased to one side or the other
to induce probabilistic learning. Illustrations of these orders
are available in the online supplementary ﬁles ( https://osf.io/
pwmhy). Participants were given no information about the
statistical structure of the task or the optimal strategy, so that
any emerging eye movement patterns reﬂected a spontaneous
response to the task structure. Balls were 5.7 cm in diameter
and resembled the visual appearance of a real-world tennis
ball. These balls remained visible from the moment of their
release, through to the end of each trial, meaning that partic-
ipants could observe the true projected location regardless of
whether they intercepted or missed the target stimulus. The
visible racquet in VR was 0.6 × 0.3 × 0.01 m, although its
physical thickness was exaggerated by 20 cm to facilitate the
detection of ball-to-racquet collisions.
The virtual environment, which had the visual appear-
ance of an indoor racquetball court, was developed using the
gaming engine Unity (v2019.3.1f; Unity Technologies, San
Francisco, CA) (see Fig. 1). The same task has been used to
study predictive eye movements in previous papers (Harris
et al. 2022, 2023a). The task was displayed using an HTC
Vive head-mounted display (HTC Inc., Taoyuan City, Tai-
wan). The HTC-Vive is a high-precision, consumer-grade
VR system which has proven valid for small-area movement
research tasks (ﬁeld of view: 110°, accuracy: 1.5 cm, jitter:
0.5 mm, latency: 22 ms; (Niehorster et al. 2017; Schuetz
and Fiehler 2022). Two ‘lighthouse’ base stations projecting
infra-red light act as a reference point to record movements of
the headset and hand controller at 90 Hz. The headset features
inbuilt eye-tracking, which uses binocular dark pupil track-
ing to monitor gaze at 120 Hz (spatial accuracy: 0.5–1.1°;
latency: 10 ms, headset display resolution: 1440 × 1600 pix-
els per eye). Gaze was calibrated over ﬁve virtual locations
prior to each condition, and upon any obvious displacement
of the headset during trials.
3 Measures
3.1 Anxiety
State anxiety. State anxiety (S-ANX) during each experimen-
tal condition was assessed using The Anxiety Thermometer
(Houtman and Bakker 1989), which requires participants to
report their anxiety at the current moment on a simple scale
ranging from 0–10 (0 /equal1not at all anxious; 10 /equal1extremely
anxious). This is a time-efﬁcient measurement tool that has
been used in related studies that presented low- and high-
threat conditions (Wood and Wilson 2010).
Heart rate. Heart rate was used to index sympathetic ner-
vous system activation changes related to anxious states.
Participants wore a Polar H10 Heart Rate Sensor (Polar
Electro Oy, Kempele, Finland) around the chest, with data
recorded via a Polar 2 Heart Rate Monitor Transmitter Watch
(Polar Electro Oy, Kempele, Finland). The Polar H10 has a
100 Hz sample rate and values were recorded from the watch
at 1 min intervals and averaged across each block of trials.
Reported values were baselined to participants’ resting HR,
which was taken over a 2 min period while they were seated.
3.2 Eye tracking
Gaze-in-world coordinates (i.e., the intersection point of
the gaze vector with the task environment) were recorded
from the VR eye tracking system and then denoised with a
three frame moving median ﬁlter and a second-order 15 Hz
lowpass Butterworth ﬁlter (Fooken and Spering 2020). We
subsequently calculated the following metrics.
123
Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8 Page 5 of 16 8
3.2.1 Predictive eye movements
The primary variable of interest, was the predictive eye
movement that took place immediately before ball release.
Predictive gaze location , was deﬁned as the horizontal (x-
coordinate) gaze position (i.e., gaze vector intersection point
with the world) at the termination of the auditory tones, aver-
aged over a 50 ms window. Following Harris et al. ( 2023a)
this was taken as the most critical moment for anticipating
the projection location and therefore the critical eye move-
ment feature that would reveal participants’ prediction about
the upcoming trial. The predictive gaze location variable was
then used as an input to model the updating of sensorimotor
predictions over trials (described in the Active Inference Mod-
elling section below). Our previous work using this task has
shown that participants either make an overt prediction with
their eyes (directing gaze to one of the two projection loca-
tions) or make no prediction and ‘hedge their bets’ by looking
directly between the two locations (Arthur et al. 2024). The
fact that participants do not have to look at either location
means that trials in which they choose to direct gaze towards
one of the two locations is a strong indication of their expec-
tation about the most likely upcoming release location. We
therefore treated predictive gaze location as a discrete vari-
able (left/right/centre); the central half of the space between
the two locations (10.9° of visual angle) was treated as non-
predictive and those outside as left or right predictions (as
in Arthur et al. 2024). This approach allowed us to adopt
the widely used discrete state space approach to modelling
active inference (Smith et al. 2020b, a) to infer the underlying
belief (most likely location) from the eye position (anticipat-
ing left/right/neither).
3.2.2 Pre-release variability and complexity
To address our secondary hypotheses, we examined patterns
of eye movement shifts prior to release relating to (i) variabil-
ity of position and (ii) complexity (entropy) of the signal (see
example plots in Fig. 2). V ariability of eye position has been
used in previous studies (e.g., in driving tasks; Wilson et al.
2008) to indicate anxiety-induced disruptions to gaze. Gaze
variability was deﬁned as the 2-dimensional standard devia-
tion of the gaze intersection position for the period from the
trial start until the ball release cue. Here, we were interested
in the eye movements that occurred just before the ball was
projected from one of the two wall locations, as they would
indicate participant’s state predictions (e.g., about where the
ball would emerge from) and expected uncertainty (i.e., relat-
ing to the environment and its ‘hidden’ task probabilities).
Gaze entropy was calculated to index signal complexity, for
which we adopted a sample entropy measure calculated from
the natural logarithm of the conditional probability that a
series similar for n points remains similar at the next point
(see (Richman and Moorman 2000). Entropy was calculated
separately for horizontal and vertical planes. Entropy can
be used to index the level of randomness or complexity in
biological time series data, including eye tracking, and has
previously been used to detect changes in visual scanning
during anxious states (Allsop and Gray 2014; Vine et al.
2015). Sample entropy is generally robust to variations in
sample size so recording durations do not need to be exactly
matched. Higher entropy values (in bits) would suggest a
more complex signal, indicative of more random and reﬂex-
ive (i.e., less predictable) movements over time.
3.2.3 In-ﬂight tracking (pursuit gain)
For high speed targets (such as the ball in this task) close
tracking of the target’s in-ﬂight trajectory may only be
achieved through anticipation of its future location (Fooken
et al. 2021). Here, anticipatory head and eye movements can
facilitate continuous smooth pursuit dynamics, while pre-
venting a person’s point of gaze from signiﬁcantly ‘lagging
behind’ the target. To index whether eye position was keeping
up with the target in this way, we calculated a measure of pur-
suit gain . Following Palidis et al. ( 2017), this was computed
as the saccade-free eye velocity divided by target velocity
(i.e., values of 1 indicate that the eye perfectly kept pace
with the ball). To do this, periods during which a saccade
were made (identiﬁed as portions of data where gaze accel-
eration exceeded ﬁve times its median absolute acceleration;
Mann et al. 2019; Arthur et al. 2021) were ﬁrstly removed
from the data. Following Fooken and Spering ( 2019
), gain
values were then calculated for the closed-loop portion of
tracking (i.e., based on observed motion feedback; (Palidis
et al. 2017) which was deﬁned as 140 ms after ball release.
3.2.4 Active inference modelling
To probe the mechanisms behind the trial-to-trial updating
of predictions we ﬁt a computational model to the predictive
gaze location variable. The purpose of this model was to use
the observed behaviour (eye position) to infer an unobserved
variable (belief about the next release location). We there-
fore chose a gaze variable (position before release) that had
a clear mapping to a task-relevant belief (release location)
(as in Harris et al. 2023a). A Bayesian generative model of
perception derived from the Markov decision process (MDP)
formulation of active inference (Da Costa et al. 2020)w a s
chosen to align with the theoretical approach of the paper.
This approach has previously been used to model individual
characteristics of active inference in clinical states of depres-
sion and anxiety (Smith et al. 2020b, a; Taylor et al. 2023).
It has also been used for predictive eye movements in a task
similar to the one reported here (Arthur and Harris 2021).
123
8 Page 6 of 16 Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8
Fig. 2 Pre-release gaze position from a high entropy (left) and low
entropy (right) trial for participant 1. Note: The top ﬁgures show time
series plots of the x and y coordinates of gaze position prior to ball
release for two selected trials. Panel A (left) illustrates a high entropy
trial where gaze switched quickly between the two locations and the
participant searched the task space more randomly. Panel B (right) illus-
trates a low entropy trial where eye position was more stable and there
were fewer changes of location. The lower plots show the corresponding
gaze traces and entropy values
Active inference provides a principled way of modelling
behaviour as the minimisation of free energy, combin-
ing Bayesian inference and information-theoretic principles.
However, it is worth highlighting that it is not the only compu-
tational framework leveraging entropy-based measures. For
instance, reinforcement learning has been adapted to recast
reward maximisation as control as inference (CAI), lever-
aging variational inference to model how an agent infers
optimal action trajectories (Tschantz et al. 2020; Millidge
et al. 2020). These approaches have many similarities to
active inference but differ in the understanding of ‘reward’;
active inference approaches incorporate ‘rewards’ into the
generative model as prior preferences and seek to minimise
their divergence from expected observations, instead of opti-
mising a value function over external rewards. Here, we
focus on active inference due to its unique ability to model
anxiety-related processes as arising from the interplay of
uncertainty reduction and epistemic value (e.g., balancing
exploration and exploitation), making it particularly well-
suited for examining performance anxiety.
Such computational modelling of behavioural data allows
us to estimate the processes that generated that data and there-
fore move towards a better understanding of underpinning
mechanisms. This modelling approach requires specifying
a generative structure for the inference process of interest
(see Fig. 3), inputting observed values for known param-
eters, and optimising other, unobserved, model parameters
to best explain the data. In the current case, the predic-
tive eye movements that participants made (left/right/centre),
and their subsequent observations (left or right outcome) are
known. Given these known values, a gradient descent optimi-
sation routine can be used to estimate participants’ ongoing
beliefs about the most likely release location, the best courses
of action available to them, and the rate at which these beliefs
were updated over time.
In the model (see Fig. 3) beliefs about states of the
world (s) are estimated over timepoints within at r i a l( τ)
123
Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8 Page 7 of 16 8
Fig. 3 Directed acyclic graph illustrating the generative structure for the
partially observable Markov decision process model. Notes: The model
outlines inferences about projection locations based on active inference
behaviours (eye position). Following the notation of Smith et al. ( 2021),
circular nodes correspond to state, observation, and action policy vari-
ables, with arrows indicating dependencies between variables. Squares
indicates factors mediating conditional relationships and take the form
of matrices in the model. Observation and state subscripts correspond to
time points in a trial ( τ). When τ > 1, the B matrix from τ − 1 acts as an
empirical prior, playing the same role as the D vector at τ /equal11. Action
policy selection ( π) depends on the expected free energy associated
with each policy (G), which in turn depends on prior preferences for
outcomes (C), as well as expected precision of action policies (E). Poli-
cies expected to i) minimize uncertainty over states and ii) maximize
the probability of preferred observations will have the highest proba-
bility of being selected. Sigma ( σ) in the update equations (bottom left)
refers to a SoftMax function (normalized exponential). More extensive
descriptions of the model parameters in the table are provided in the
supplementary ﬁles: https://osf.io/2amdv/
and across trials ( t). The schematic in Fig. 3 represents a
single trial, in which prior expectations about the release
locations(p(S
1); D) are encoded as a categorical distribu-
tion over possible states of the world (i.e., release location).
Transitions between states ( p(sτ+1|s τ,π); B) are updated
over trials based on the likelihood matrix (( p(oτ |sτ )); A),
which maps the probability of hidden states given observed
instances. The partially-observable MDP model takes a set
of initial parameters speciﬁed by the experimenter – e.g.,
prior expectations about release location (see online supple-
mentary ﬁles for starting priors: https://osf.io/2amdv/) – then
iteratively updates beliefs (according to Bayes rule) follow-
ing the known actions and outcomes.
Each trial was modelled as consisting of three timesteps:
τ /equal11 was the start state before any observations had been
made; τ /equal12 was the cue timepoint when participants hear the
onset cue and where the eye position is taken to be a predic-
tion about release location; and τ /equal13 is the ball appearance
timestep when participants observe which release location
was correct. Models did not extend past the observation of the
ball appearance (i.e., into the swing of the racquet) because
task related uncertainty effectively ended with the ball obser-
vation. At τ /equal13, the participant observed the true release
location and inferred whether the true state was left or right.
That is, they inferred a posterior distribution over P(s
τ /equal13)
that assigned a probability to the left versus right state, based
on a Bayesian integration of prior beliefs about transitioning
to the respective states P(s
τ /equal12|sτ /equal11) and P(oτ |sτ ) (i.e., the
likelihood mapping). The inferred posterior formed the prior
for the next trial. Bayesian belief updating in the model was
based on the following equations for the timepoints ( τ /equal11
and τ /equal12–3, respectively):
sτ/equal11 /equal1σ
( 1
2 (ln D +l n B · sτ+1)+l n A · oτ
)
123
8 Page 8 of 16 Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8
sτ/equal12−3 /equal1σ(ln Bsτ−1 +l n A · oτ )
Here, σ indicates a SoftMax function which converts the
belief to a proper probability distribution and ln refers to
the natural logarithm. Posteriors over states were estimated
using an optimization routine (gradient descent) that min-
imises free energy in the model. Additional technical details
are described in Fig. 3. By ﬁtting the generative model to
real participant data, we were able to identify a set of param-
eters that enabled model predictions to best match observed
behaviour (i.e., maximising p(participant behavior |model)).
For further details on the mathematical formalism of these
models, see Friston et al. ( 2017), Smith et al. ( 2020a), or an
introductory review by Smith and colleagues (Smith et al.
2022).
After identifying the model structure, we compared dif-
ferent combinations of free parameters to determine the
best approach for ﬁtting to participant data. We examined
ﬁve possible free parameters and compared model ﬁts with
different combinations of these values. Full details of the
competing models and the comparisons are available in the
supplementary ﬁles ( https://osf.io/2amdv/ – supplementary
5). Successive models were compared using a Bayesian
random effects model (spm_BMS.m function: Statistical
Parametric Mapping 12 toolbox; Wellcome Trust Centre for
Neuroimaging, London, UK, http://www.ﬁl.ion.ucl.ac.uk/),
which assesses the variational free energy of each model
ﬁt and returns the relative probabilities (e.g., [0.9, 0.1]) of
the better ﬁt (the protected exceedance probability; Rigoux
et al. 2014). The winning model had three free parameters:
η (learning rate), α (action precision), and loss aversion.
The parameter η describes the magnitude of belief updat-
ing at each timestep of the model and therefore indicates
how fast prior expectations (e.g., about likely ball location)
are being adjusted in response to sensory observations (e.g.,
about the ball’s actual observed location). It is worth noting
that, in this context, learning rate does not refer to improv-
ing at the experimental task; indeed, a high learning rate
could be detrimental to task performance as it equates to
disregarding potentially valuable prior observations (e.g.,
beliefs which have been formed through previous sensori-
motor experiences and longer-term exposure to interception
cue-outcome contingencies). Action precision refers to the
mapping between beliefs and actions, it encodes the degree
to which action choices are deterministic or random. Loss
aversion describes the strength of the prior preference against
observing a particular outcome.
Next we ﬁt the models to observed data and extracted
participant-wise estimated parameters for learning rate,
action precision, and loss aversion. Average action probabil-
ities (i.e., the probability of a participant’s actions under the
model) were 73% suggesting high explanatory power of the
model. Next, we checked parameter recoverability and inde-
pendence (https://osf.io/2amdv/ – supplementary 4). Finally,
the estimated model parameters were subject to between-
condition comparisons (see Results).
3.3 Procedure
Participants attended the lab for a single visit lasting ~ 60 min.
They ﬁrst completed an informed consent form and were ﬁt-
ted with the heart rate chest strap. While they were seated,
their baseline heart rate was recorded over a period of 2 min.
All participants then watched a short video explaining the
broad aims of the study and what would be required during
the experiment, to standardise the instructions. Next, par-
ticipants were ﬁtted with the VR headset and performed a
familiarisation block of the interception task, consisting of
four trials (two left and two right-sided trials). They then
completed the high and low threat conditions in their pre-
assigned (counterbalanced) order. Before each condition,
participants watched a pre-recorded video (available from:
https://osf.io/2amdv/) which explained the task to them. They
then completed the S-ANX measure (anxiety thermometer)
immediately after the video and before the interception task,
capturing their anxiety about the upcoming event. The in-
built eye trackers were calibrated at the start of the ﬁrst block
and on any obvious displacement of the headset. Participants
then completed 36 interception trials in each of the high and
low threat conditions. On each trial, participants began in the
centre of the court, just behind the ‘short line’. The appear-
ance of each ball was cued by three auditory tones which
were followed by a variable onset delay. Based on previous
pilot testing, the onset delay was randomly selected from a
uniform distribution over a 0–5 s window. This variable onset
window was required to create sufﬁcient levels of challenge
and uncertainty in the task. Participants then had to intercept
the oncoming ball by reaching their racquet out to the left or
right. When participants successfully intercepted the ball it
‘popped’, and a rewarding ‘ding’ sound was played, along-
side a haptic vibration from the handheld controller. If the
ball was missed, a ‘buzz’ sound was played.
3.4 Anxiety induction
The anxiety induction consisted of a threat manipulation sim-
ilar to that used in previous studies (Wood and Wilson 2010;
Allsop and Gray 2014). This was based on the provision of
evaluative and ego-threatening instructions, monetary incen-
tives, and immediate consequences for performance failure.
Two pre-recorded videos presented by the head of depart-
ment were used to deliver these instructions to give them
added legitimacy. During the low-threat block of trials, par-
ticipants were advised that their score was not important and
that they should just do their best. On the game screen, the
123
Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8 Page 9 of 16 8
score was replaced with ‘N/A ’, and the text ‘not recording’
was shown in the bottom left (see Fig. 1). By contrast, in the
high-threat block of trials, participants were told that they if
they performed well enough they would receive a monetary
prize, whereas if they scored in the bottom three, they would
be consented into a follow-up study which examines people
who choke under pressure. They were also told that at the
end of testing a league table of participants’ scores would
be made public to all those who participated. On their head-
set display, their score was displayed in front of them along
with a sign saying ‘Recording’, to reinforce these elements
of evaluative pressure.
3.5 Data analysis
Processing of the raw eye movement data was performed in
MA TLAB 2022b (Mathworks, US) using bespoke analysis
scripts which are available from the Open Science Frame-
work project page ( https://osf.io/2amdv/). Computational
modelling was also performed using MA TLAB, using scripts
adapted from the Statistical Parametric Mapping 12 toolbox.
Statistical analysis was performed in RStudio v1.4.1106 (R
Core Team 2017). A series of linear mixed effects models
(LMMs; ﬁtted using restricted maximum likelihood in the
lme4 package (Bates et al. 2014)) were used to examine the
hypotheses. Model ﬁt checks were performed using the ‘per-
formance’ package (Lüdecke et al. 2021). For each model we
report R
2conditional (overall) and R 2marginal (all ﬁxed effects)
effect sizes, as well as standardised beta effect sizes for each
independent variable. Interpretations follow Acock’s ( 2014)
rule of thumb for std. beta values that < 0.2 is weak, 0.2–0.5
is moderate, and > 0.5 is strong.
4 Results
4.1 Manipulation checks
First we examined whether the pressure manipulation suc-
cessfully increased state anxiety. A linear mixed model on
S-ANX, with participant as a random effect [R
2conditional /equal1
0.42; R2marginal /equal10.14] indicated that the effect of Condition
[High] was statistically signiﬁcant and large in magnitude [ β
/equal11.50, 95%CI [0.69, 2.31], p < 0.001; std. beta /equal10.73]
indicating increased self-reported anxiety during the high
pressure condition (see Fig. 4 top). The linear mixed model
for HR [conditional R 2 /equal10.88; marginal R2 /equal10.09] similarly
indicated a statistically signiﬁcant increase in the high pres-
sure condition [ β /equal110.06, 95%CI [6.99, 13.12], p < 0.001;
std. beta /equal10.60] (see Fig. 4 bottom). Additionally, a further
model indicated that there was a strong and statistically sig-
niﬁcant relationship between HR and S-ANX. The model,
with participant as random effect, accounted for the majority
High Low
0
2
4
6
8Value
Anxiety thermometer
p<.001
High Low
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Beats per minute
Heart rate
p<.001
Differenceff
-5
0
5
10Value
Anxiety thermometer
 change
Differenceff
-10
0
10
20
30
Beats per minute
Heart rate change
Fig. 4 Anxiety and heart rate comparisons between low and high pres-
sure conditions. Note: Plots show mean and overlaid data points for
the condition comparison (left) and the associated between-condition
difference (right; high minus low). Heart rate plots show HR (averaged
across each condition) relative to baseline resting value
of variance in S-ANX [R 2conditional /equal10.76], of which a large
amount was attributed to HR [R 2marginal /equal10.22]. This indi-
cated that changes in HR were strongly related to anxiety [ β
/equal10.06, 95% CI [0.05, 0.06], p < 0.001; std. beta /equal10.62],
albeit with some remaining variance in S-ANX not explained
by HR.
4.2 Eye movement variables
4.2.1 Predictive eye movements
Before examining the model-derived variables, we ﬁrst
checked that there was no general difference in predictive
gaze behaviours between high and low pressure conditions.
We did not anticipate changes in these variables; however, we
assessed them to determine whether any changes in model
variables were simply a result of broad changes in the ability
to make anticipatory eye movements. A linear mixed model
on predictive gaze position (i.e., raw horizontal position)
indicated that the effect of Condition [High] was statistically
123
8 Page 10 of 16 Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8
non-signiﬁcant [ β /equal11.79e-03, 95% CI [-0.05, 0.05], p /equal1
0.94; std. beta /equal13.02e-03, R 2conditional /equal10.14, R 2marginal <
0.01]. Similarly, a logistic model indicated that there was no
change in the accuracy of pre-onset gaze predictions between
conditions [ β /equal1-0.04, 95% CI [-0.21, 0.13], p /equal10.68; std.
beta /equal1-0.04, R 2conditional < 0.01], i.e., participants did not
attend to the correct side more/less frequently. We further
examined whether there was any difference in variance of
predictive gaze location, by computing the standard devia-
tion in predictive gaze position for each participant. A linear
model indicated that there was no effect of condition on the
standard deviation of predictive gaze position [ β /equal1-0.02,
95% CI [-0.07, 0.03], p /equal10.51; std. beta /equal1-0.08, R
2conditional
/equal10.83, R 2marginal < 0.01]. These results indicate that there
was no systematic difference in predictive gaze position,
variance of that position, or the correctness of that position
between high and low pressure conditions.
4.2.2 Active inference model variables
Next, we examined whether there were differences in active
inference during anxiety, based on the model-estimated
parameters. A linear mixed effects model indicated that there
was no statistically signiﬁcant effect of pressure condition
on α (action precision) [ β /equal10.97, 95% CI [-0.23, 2.17], p /equal1
0.11; std. beta /equal10.33, R
2conditional /equal10.40, R2marginal /equal10.03],
showing no change in the randomness of action selection.
Similarly, there was no effect of condition on the loss aver-
sion parameter [ β /equal1-0.21, 95% CI [-0.85, 0.42], p /equal10.51;
std. beta /equal1-0.08, R 2conditional /equal10.80, R 2marginal /equal10.002].
We did, however, observe a signiﬁcant reduction in learning
rate ( η) in the high pressure condition [ β /equal1-0.09, 95% CI
[-0.16, -0.02], p /equal10.009; std. beta /equal1-0.62, R 2conditional /equal1
0.26, R2marginal /equal10.10], with a large effect indicating slower
updating of gaze predictions under state anxiety.
We also examined whether there were relationships
between the model-derived parameters and self-reported
or physiological measures of anxiety. For change in self-
reported anxiety (i.e., high pressure minus low pressure), the
correlation with learning rate was weak and non-signiﬁcant
[r /equal1-0.24, p /equal10.21]. There were, however, signiﬁcant rela-
tionships with α [r /equal1-0.44, p /equal10.02] and loss aversion [ r /equal1
-0.51, p /equal10.005] indicating that greater increases in felt anx-
iety were associated with more random and less deterministic
action choices, as well as a reduced aversion for unpreferred
outcomes. There were no correlations between change in HR
and α [r /equal1-0.12, p /equal10.54], η [r /equal10.04, p /equal10.85], or loss
aversion [r /equal1-0.11, p /equal10.57].
4.2.3 Pursuit gain
To examine whether pressure condition also affected in-ﬂight
tracking, we ran a linear mixed model on log-transformed
High Low
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0Gain [a.u.]
Pursuit gain
p<.001
Differenceff
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Gain [a.u.]
Pursuit gain 
change
Fig. 5 Comparison of pursuit gain between low and high pressure
conditions. Note: Plots show mean and overlaid data points for the
condition comparison (left) and the associated between-condition dif-
ference (right; high minus low)
pursuit gain values. The model (with participant as random
effect) had a conditional R 2 of 0.40 and marginal R 2 of 0.01.
The effect of Condition [High] was statistically signiﬁcant
but small [ β /equal10.33, 95% CI [0.21, 0.45], p < 0.001; std. beta
/equal10.10] indicating higher gain values (closer to 1) under high
pressure conditions (see Fig. 5 – top].
4.2.4 SD of pre-release position
To examine whether pressure condition affected gaze sam-
pling prior to ball release, we ran a linear mixed model on
the two dimensional standard deviation of eye position for
the period preceding the auditory cue. The model (with par-
ticipant as random effect) had a conditional R
2 of 0.41 and
marginal R 2 of 0.01. The effect of Condition [High] was
statistically signiﬁcant but relatively small [ β /equal10.04, 95%
CI [0.02, 0.05], p < 0.001; std. beta /equal10.15] indicating an
increase in the variance of eye position before ball release
under high pressure (Fig. 6).
4.2.5 Entropy
Finally, we tested whether the complexity of pre-release sam-
pling was different between conditions. A linear mixed model
on sample entropy of eye position indicated a small but sta-
tistically signiﬁcant difference between the low and high
pressure conditions for both the horizontal [ β /equal10.01, 95%
CI [3.38e-03, 0.01], p /equal10.002; std. beta /equal10.12] and vertical
[β /equal10.01, 95% CI [3.38e-03, 0.01], p /equal10.036; std. beta /equal1
0.09] planes. This indicates a higher degree of randomness or
complexity in eye movements in the high pressure condition.
123
Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8 Page 11 of 16 8
High Low
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0 [a.u.]
Learning rate
p=.009
05
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
 S-ANX
r = -.24
p = .21
High Low
0
5
10
15
20 [a.u.]
Action precision
p=.12
05
-6
-3
0
3
6
 S-ANX
r = -.44
p = .017
High Low
0
2
4
6
8
10[a.u.]
Loss aversion
p=.51
05
-4
-2
0
2
4
 S-ANX
Loss Aversion
r = -.51
p = .0047
Condition comparisons
Relationships with S-A X
Relationships with HR
01 0 2 0
-4
-2
0
2
4
HR
Loss Aversion
r = -.11
p = .57
01 0 2 0
-6
-3
0
3
6
HR
r = -.12
p = .54
01 0 2 0
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
HR
r = .04
p = .85
Fig. 6 Active inference model comparisons between low and high pressure conditions and relationships with state anxiety. Note: Scatterplots show
Pearson’sr values and (uncorrected) p-values
5 Discussion
In the present work, we examined how eye movements, and
their underpinning predictive mechanisms (e.g., uncertainty-
related learning and belief updating) were affected by tempo-
rary states of performance anxiety. Based on EMU and FEP
accounts of anxiety (Hirsh et al. 2012; McGovern et al. 2022),
we hypothesised that performance pressure would increase
entropy internal to the agent and reduce participants’ ability
to predict future states (impaired ball tracking), which they
would seek to resolve by: i) constraining updates to predic-
tive eye movements; and ii) more reﬂexive sampling of the
task environment. Our hypotheses about resolving internal
entropy through reduced learning rates and increased visual
sampling were supported by the data. However, we found no
123
8 Page 12 of 16 Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8
disruption to in-ﬂight tracking during the high-pressure con-
dition. Overall, these ﬁndings, based on advanced modelling
techniques, support the theoretical position that updating of
prior beliefs may be impaired during instances of perfor-
mance anxiety.
Firstly, the manipulation checks indicated that we success-
fully increased participants’ state anxiety, as shown by clear
increases in S-ANX and HR in the high (compared to the low)
pressure conditions. Our primary hypothesis was that updat-
ing of predictive eye movements (i.e., not actual pre-release
position but trial-to-trial changes) would be impaired under
state anxiety. Model-based estimates of trial-to-trial updat-
ing indeed indicated a lower learning rate in the high pressure
(anxiety) condition. This ﬁnding accords with previous work
reporting disrupted reward processing and updating of motor
predictions under anxiety (Sporn et al. 2020). Adding to
this picture, Lang et al. ( 2015) found more rigid, repetitive,
and redundant hand movement patterns during state anxiety,
which they characterised as an attempt to return to familiar
low-entropy states. Taken together, these results suggest a
growing picture that people attempt to counter uncertainty
(either in the form of internal entropy or shifting environ-
mental probabilities) by moving towards more familiar and
certain sensorimotor patterns.
The slowed updating of sensorimotor predictions
observed here contrasts with the relationship between anxi-
ety and increased rates of learning (belief updating) reported
by Lawson et al. ( 2021). However, this apparent discrepancy
is easily resolved by appealing to active inference models
of perception and action (Friston et al. 2009, 2010). Within
active inference theory, a distinction is made between min-
imising two types of ‘prediction error’ known as variational
free energy (VFE) and expected free energy (EFE). VFE is
effectively momentary prediction error arising from infer-
ences about the likely causes of sensations (e.g., during
simple perceptual or associative learning tasks). By con-
trast, EFE refers to minimisation of future prediction errors
through action. The ability to infer future states (of the body
or world) with conﬁdence is critical in computing EFE, as
action policies are most likely to be selected when they (i)
minimize uncertainty over states and (ii) maximize the prob-
ability of preferred observations. Uncertainty about future
states (i.e., expected precision) is explicitly represented by
the E term in our active inference model in Fig. 3. Conse-
quently, if an organism is generally less conﬁdent predicting
its own future states, it is unlikely to switch to new actions
where the outcomes may be more uncertain. In this way,
perceptual beliefs about the world (e.g., during associative
learning tasks; Lawson et al. 2021) may be updated more
quickly during states of uncertainty (Behrens et al. 2007),
while beliefs driving actions (e.g., predictive eye movements
in our task) may not. A question for future work is, therefore,
whether learning rates for beliefs about environmental states
can diverge from those relating to sensorimotor predictions
during the same task.
There are additional variables to consider that may
inﬂuence this relationship between uncertainty and belief
updating. For instance, ‘degrees of uncertainty’ are hard
to compare between studies/tasks, therefore results from
associative learning and motor learning studies may not be
directly comparable. Prediction updating is also dependent
on higher-level beliefs about uncertainty (Mathys et al. 2014;
Heilbron and Meyniel 2019). Indeed, probabilistic relation-
ships in the world can themselves be more or less changeable
(Bland and Schaefer 2012), and this additional ‘volatility’
can, itself, have varying levels of stability. When uncertainty
is short-lived, faster prediction updating will be adaptive,
but if it is persistent, updating your predictions is ineffec-
tive and wasteful. The source of uncertainty is, therefore,
also relevant. For instance, if uncertainty is purely a func-
tion of probabilistic relationships in the environment and the
outcome of one’s actions can be estimated with certainty, pre-
dictive movements should be adapted more quickly. If, on the
other hand, the organism has high internal entropy (e.g., anxi-
ety) and cannot predict their own future states with assurance,
prediction updating may be slower. Given the widespread
impact that these variables can have on performance and
learning, future investigations may wish to explore the (inter-
) relationships between uncertainty, volatility, and anxiety
beliefs during naturalistic sensorimotor tasks.
We also observed relationships between S-ANX and both
loss aversion and action precision parameters from the active
inference model. There was a weak non-signiﬁcant rela-
tionship, in the expected direction, for learning rate. As
the analyses of loss aversion and action precision were
exploratory, they should, however, be interpreted with more
caution. The relationship between S-ANX and reduced action
precision (i.e., less deterministic mapping from beliefs to
choices) makes intuitive sense and aligns with the theoreti-
cal models we have discussed above. Indeed, states of high
entropy can mean that an organism is less able to predict
its current or future states with conﬁdence, so there may
be an increase in the apparent randomness of their sen-
sorimotor actions (Friston
2010; Hirsh et al. 2012). More
broadly, anxiety is characterised by heightened uncertainty
and a tendency to prioritise safety or avoidance behaviours
over precise, goal-directed actions. Reduced action precision
can, therefore, be interpreted as a diminished conﬁdence in
selecting speciﬁc actions, potentially reﬂecting the individ-
ual’s increased sensitivity to uncertainty or fear of negative
outcomes. This ﬁnding is relevant to real-world decision-
making during high-anxiety states, where individuals might
exhibit hesitation, reliance on habitual actions, or less opti-
mal choices in uncertain environments (Browning et al. 2015;
Huang et al. 2017;H e i ne ta l . 2021). The observed relation-
ship between increasing S-ANX and reduced loss aversion,
123
Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8 Page 13 of 16 8
however, seems in the opposite direction to what we would
generally expect for anxious emotional states. Generally,
research has suggested a positive association between these
constructs, particularly in perceptual decision-making tasks
(Hartley and Phelps 2012). Sporn et al. ( 2020)h a v ep r e v i -
ously reported that anxiety disrupts reward processing in a
motor learning task, so this unexpected result could be related
to a reduced ability to predict the rewards associated their
own actions (eye movements).
Turning to our secondary hypotheses, we found that in-
ﬂight gaze tracking was not disrupted under performance
anxiety. In fact, participants in the high-pressure condition
actually had higher pursuit-gain values, indicating that they
were following the path of the ball more closely and contin-
uously than in the low-pressure conditions. This effect was
unexpected but might be an artefact of an increased moti-
vation to succeed in the high pressure conditions, given the
performance incentives. Our hypotheses related to increased
sampling of the environment prior to release were, however,
supported. We observed small but statistically signiﬁcant
increases in both the variability and the complexity of gaze
position before target release. These ﬁndings align with
previous studies that have reported similar anxiety-induced
disruptions to gaze control (Janelle 2002; Wilson et al. 2009;
Allsop and Gray 2014; Vine et al. 2015). Many of these stud-
ies have proposed attentional mechanisms (Payne et al. 2018)
– such as an altered balance between top-down and bottom-
up systems (Corbetta and Shulman 2002) – as responsible
for these effects. We have instead suggested that they could
be conceptualised as an active attempt to reduce uncertainty
in the environment through increased sampling of visual
information (e.g., as in Arthur et al. 2020). While atten-
tional mechanisms could equally explain the changes to gaze
variability and entropy, the alterations to learning rate that
we observed are more consistent with an entropy reduction
explanation. Additionally, the observed increase in pursuit
gain during the high pressure condition is inconsistent with
an attentional explanation but could be interpreted as an addi-
tional attempt at uncertainty reduction through closer ball
tracking.
The present work has both theoretical and practical impli-
cations. Our results contribute to an improved theoretical
understanding of the interactions between motor and affec-
tive states, illustrating that the feedforward and predictive
mechanisms which are fundamental to sensorimotor con-
trol may be impaired during high performance pressure (or
high anxiety) conditions. Our ﬁndings align with EMU and
FEP accounts of anxiety (Hirsh et al. 2012; McGovern et al.
2022). The results might also have implications for our under-
standing of motor skill breakdowns under pressure, such as
during sports. While previous explanations have focused on
attentional explanations (Payne et al. 2018), our ﬁndings sug-
gest that anxiety might disrupt predictive mechanisms, which
could theoretically contribute to episodes of ‘choking’ (see
Harris et al. 2023b for a review). Finally, our results have
implications for designing motor skill training programmes.
It has previously been suggested that training in the presence
of anxiety may ‘inoculate’ sports performers to the subse-
quent effects of performance pressure (Low et al. 2021).
Our results, however, suggest that the presence of anxiety
during training could alter the learning of critical predictive
sensorimotor control mechanisms. As such, it is crucial to
understand these effects more deeply in order to determine
the likely value of such ‘stress inoculation training’.
5.1 Limitations
A limitation of the current work is that we most probably
did not achieve genuinely high states of anxiety, such as
would occur during public speaking, job interviews, or high-
pressure sporting events. Scores on the anxiety thermometer
unmistakably increased in the high pressure condition (with
a large effect size) yet were still in the mid-to-low range of
the self-report scale. For instance, no participants reported
scores of eight or nine out of ten. Hence, the conditions in
the experiment cannot be said to replicate some of these real-
world experiences of anxiety. We did, however, observe large
increases in HR suggesting a notable activation of the sym-
pathetic nervous system. A related challenge is discerning
whether the observed effects were driven by changes in cog-
nitive anxiety or simple increases in arousal. The correlations
between changes in S-ANX and HR and the model-derived
variables indicated that relationships were much stronger
for S-ANX than HR, suggesting that psychological anxi-
ety, rather than just physiological arousal, was responsible.
Future studies, however, should examine this issue further
using self-report measures that distinguish between cogni-
tive and somatic elements of anxiety (e.g., see Thomas et al.
2002).
The focus of the present work was on the mechanistic
questions around updating of priors and subtle changes in
eye movements. We cannot, currently, draw any conclusions
about whether the observed changes will relate to overall
changes in task performance. Indeed, changes in gross out-
comes are likely to be subtle and challenging to detect. The
only way to assess performance in this task was whether
participants successfully intercepted the ball or not, whereas
previous studies of anxiety typically measure outcomes like
accuracy or performance variability. So future work could
use a task that allowed these more sensitive changes in task
execution to be studied and related to changes in model
parameters.
In future work, it would be valuable to directly com-
pare active inference to alternative reinforcement learning
approaches, such as those adopting control as inference (CAI;
Tschantz et al. 2020; Millidge et al. 2020)). While both
123
8 Page 14 of 16 Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8
frameworks share foundational principles, their treatment of
‘reward’ and decision-making diverges, with CAI optimiz-
ing external reward functions and active inference embedding
preferences within the generative model (Friston et al. 2009).
A comparative analysis would help delineate their respec-
tive strengths in capturing exploratory versus goal-directed
behaviours, further reﬁning their application to domains like
performance anxiety and adaptive decision-making.
6 Conclusion
They key ﬁnding from this work was that high pressure
conditions can disrupt the updating of beliefs that underpin
predictive sensorimotor control. In addition, we found perfor-
mance anxiety to be related to a less deterministic mapping
of beliefs to actions. These ﬁndings have relevance for a bet-
ter understanding of how ﬁnely tuned motor skills can break
down in the presence of heightened emotional states, as well
as providing an empirical test of theories like the EMU and
free energy principle (Hirsh et al. 2012; McGovern et al.
2022). By conceptualising anxiety as a state of uncertainty,
and anxious behaviours as uncertainty reduction attempts, it
will be possible to situate our understanding within a wider
computational framework (Hirsh et al. 2012; Cornwell et al.
2017; McGovern et al. 2022) and potentially explain wide-
ranging anxiety-related behaviours. This may contribute to
the growing appreciation of uncertainty computations in both
diagnosis (Carleton et al. 2012) and treatment (Boswell et al.
2013) of clinical anxiety, as well as situation-speciﬁc patterns
of sensory processing and/or motor performance.
Authors’ contributions DH: Data curation; Formal Analysis; Visual-
ization; Writing – original draft. BLG: Data collection; Data curation;
Conceptualization; Writing – review and editing. AD: Data collection;
Data curation; Conceptualization; Writing – review and editing. TP:
Data collection; Data curation; Conceptualization; Writing – review and
editing. MW: Conceptualization; Supervision; Writing – review and
editing. TA: Conceptualization; Methodology; Data curation; Formal
Analysis; Writing – original draft. SV: Conceptualization; Supervision;
Writing – review and editing.
Funding This work was supported by a Leverhulme Early Career Fel-
lowship awarded to DH.
Data Availability All relevant data and code is available online from:
https://osf.io/2amdv/
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation,
distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you
give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, pro-
vide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Acock AC (2014) A Gentle Introduction to Stata, 4th edn. Stata Press,
Texas
Adams RA, Shipp S, Friston KJ (2013) Predictions not com-
mands: active inference in the motor system. Brain Struct Funct
218:611–643. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-012-0475-5
Allsop J, Gray R (2014) Flying under pressure: Effects of anxiety on
attention and gaze behavior in aviation. J Appl Res Mem Cogn
3:63–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jarmac.2014.04.010
Arthur T, Harris D, Buckingham G et al (2021) An examination of active
inference in autistic adults using immersive virtual reality. Sci Rep
11:20377. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-99864-y
Arthur T, Harris DJ (2021) Predictive eye movements are adjusted in
a Bayes-optimal fashion in response to unexpectedly changing
environmental probabilities. Cortex 145:212–225. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cortex.2021.09.017
Arthur T, Vine S, Brosnan M, Buckingham G (2020) Predictive senso-
rimotor control in autism. Brain 143:3151–3163. https://doi.org/
10.1093/brain/awaa243
Arthur T, Vine S, Wilson M, Harris D (2024) The role of prediction and
visual tracking strategies during manual interception: an explo-
ration of individual differences. J Vis 24:4. https://doi.org/10.1167/
jov.24.6.4
Bates D, Mächler M, Bolker B, Walker S (2014) Fitting linear mixed-
effects models using lme4. ArXiv14065823 Stat
Behrens TEJ, Woolrich MW, Walton ME, Rushworth MFS (2007)
Learning the value of information in an uncertain world. Nat Neu-
rosci 10:1214–1221. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1954
Beilock SL, Carr TH (2001) On the fragility of skilled perfor-
mance: what governs choking under pressure. J Exp Psychol Gen
130:701725
Bishop SJ (2007) Neurocognitive mechanisms of anxiety: an integrative
account. Trends Cogn Sci 11:307–316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tics.2007.05.008
Bland AR, Schaefer A (2012) Different varieties of uncertainty in
human decision-making. Front Neurosci 6:52. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fnins.2012.00085
Boswell JF, Thompson-Hollands J, Farchione TJ, Barlow DH (2013)
Intolerance of uncertainty: a common factor in the treatment of
emotional disorders. J Clin Psychol 69:630–645. https://doi.org/
10.1002/jclp.21965
Browning M, Behrens TE, Jocham G et al (2015) Anxious individuals
have difﬁculty learning the causal statistics of aversive environ-
ments. Nat Neurosci 18:590–596. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3961
Carleton RN (2016) Into the unknown: a review and synthesis of
contemporary models involving uncertainty. J Anxiety Disord
39:30–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2016.02.007
Carleton RN, Mulvogue MK, Thibodeau MA et al (2012) Increasingly
certain about uncertainty: Intolerance of uncertainty across anxiety
and depression. J Anxiety Disord 26:468–479. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.janxdis.2012.01.011
Clark A (2013) Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and
the future of cognitive science. Behav Brain Sci 36:181–204.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X12000477
Corbetta M, Shulman GL (2002) Control of goal-directed and stimulus-
driven attention in the brain. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:201–215
123
Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8 Page 15 of 16 8
Cornwell BR, Garrido MI, Overstreet C et al (2017) The unpredictive
brain under threat: a neurocomputational account of anxious hyper-
vigilance. Biol Psychiatry 82:447–454. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biopsych.2017.06.031
Da Costa L, Parr T, Sajid N, et al (2020) Active inference on discrete
state-spaces: a synthesis. ArXiv200107203 Q-Bio
de Berker AO, Rutledge RB, Mathys C et al (2016) Computations of
uncertainty mediate acute stress responses in humans. Nat Com-
mun 7:10996. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10996
Diaz G, Cooper J, Hayhoe M (2013) Memory and prediction in natural
gaze control. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 368:20130064. https://
doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0064
Ellmers TJ, Durkin M, Sriranganathan K et al (2024) The inﬂuence of
postural threat-induced anxiety on locomotor learning and updat-
ing. J Neurophysiol 131:562–575. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00
364.2023
Eysenck MW (2013) Anxiety: the cognitive perspective. Psychology
Press
Fooken J, Kreyenmeier P , Spering M (2021) The role of eye movements
in manual interception: a mini-review. Vision Res 183:81–90.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visres.2021.02.007
Fooken J, Spering M (2020) Eye movements as a readout of sensori-
motor decision processes. J Neurophysiol 123:1439–1447. https://
doi.org/10.1152/jn.00622.2019
Fooken J, Spering M (2019) Decoding go/no-go decisions from eye
movements. J vis 19:5–5. https://doi.org/10.1167/19.2.5
Friston K (2009) The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain?
Trends Cogn Sci 13:293–301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2009.
04.005
Friston K (2010) The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nat
Rev Neurosci 11:127–138. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787
Friston K, Adams R, Perrinet L, Breakspear M (2012) Perceptions as
hypotheses: saccades as experiments. Front Psychol 3:63. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00151
Friston KJ, Daunizeau J, Kiebel SJ (2009) Reinforcement learning or
active inference? PLoS ONE 4:e6421. https://doi.org/10.1371/jo
urnal.pone.0006421
Friston KJ, Daunizeau J, Kilner J, Kiebel SJ (2010) Action and behavior:
a free-energy formulation. Biol Cybern 102:227–260. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00422-010-0364-z
Friston KJ, Parr T, de Vries B (2017) The graphical brain: Belief prop-
agation and active inference. Netw Neurosci 1:381–414. https://
doi.org/10.1162/NETN_a_00018
Green P , MacLeod CJ (2016) SIMR: an R package for power analysis
of generalized linear mixed models by simulation. Methods Ecol
Evol 7:493–498. https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.12504
Grupe DW, Nitschke JB (2013) Uncertainty and anticipation in anxiety:
an integrated neurobiological and psychological perspective. Nat
Rev Neurosci 14:488–501. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3524
Harris D, Vine S, Wilson M, Arthur T (2023) The relationship between
environmental statistics and predictive gaze behaviour during a
manual interception task: eye movements as active inference.
Comput Brain Behav 5:1–17. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42113-023-
00190-5
Harris DJ, Vine SJ, Wilson MR, Arthur T (2022) The design and
development of a virtual environment to measure eye movement
indicators of prediction: Report on pilot testing
Harris DJ, Wilkinson S, Ellmers TJ (2023b) From fear of falling to chok-
ing under pressure: a predictive processing perspective of disrupted
motor control under anxiety. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 148:105115.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105115
Hartley CA, Phelps EA (2012) Anxiety and decision-making. Biol
Psychiatry 72:113–118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.
12.027
Heilbron M, Meyniel F (2019) Conﬁdence resets reveal hierarchical
adaptive learning in humans. PLOS Comput Biol 15:e1006972.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006972
Hein TP , de Fockert J, Ruiz MH (2021) State anxiety biases estimates
of uncertainty and impairs reward learning in volatile environ-
ments. Neuroimage 224:117424. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroi
mage.2020.117424
Hein TP , Herrojo Ruiz M (2022) State anxiety alters the neural
oscillatory correlates of predictions and prediction errors during
reward-based learning. Neuroimage 249:118895. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.118895
Henco L, Diaconescu AO, Lahnakoski JM et al (2020) Aberrant com-
putational mechanisms of social learning and decision-making in
schizophrenia and borderline personality disorder. PLOS Comput
Biol 16:e1008162. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008162
Henderson JM (2017) Gaze control as prediction. Trends Cogn Sci
21:15–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.11.003
Hirsh JB, Mar RA, Peterson JB (2012) Psychological entropy: a frame-
work for understanding uncertainty-related anxiety. Psychol Rev
119:304–320. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026767
Houtman ILD, Bakker FC (1989) The anxiety thermometer: a validation
study. J Pers Assess 53:575–582. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327
752jpa5303_14
Huang H, Thompson W, Paulus MP (2017) Computational dysfunctions
in anxiety: failure to differentiate signal from noise. Biol Psychi-
atry 82:440–446. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2017.07.007
Janelle CM (2002) Anxiety, arousal and visual attention: a mechanis-
tic account of performance variability. J Sports Sci 20:237–251.
https://doi.org/10.1080/026404102317284790
Lang M, Krátký J, Shaver JH et al (2015) Effects of anxiety on spon-
taneous ritualized behavior. Curr Biol 25:1892–1897. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.05.049
Laretzaki G, Plainis S, Vrettos I et al (2011) Threat and trait anxiety
affect stability of gaze ﬁxation. Biol Psychol 86:330–336. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2011.01.005
Lawson RP , Bisby J, Nord CL et al (2021) The computational, phar-
macological, and physiological determinants of sensory learning
under uncertainty. Curr Biol 31:163-172.e4. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cub.2020.10.043
Low WR, Sandercock GRH, Freeman P et al (2021) Pressure training
for performance domains: a meta-analysis. Sport Exerc Perform
Psychol 10:149–163. https://doi.org/10.1037/spy0000202
Lüdecke D, Ben-Shachar M, Patil I et al (2021) Performance: an R pack-
age for assessment, comparison and testing of statistical models.
J Open Source Softw 6:3139
Mann DL, Nakamoto H, Logt N et al (2019) Predictive eye movements
when hitting a bouncing ball. J vis 19:28–28. https://doi.org/10.
1167/19.14.28
Mathys CD, Lomakina EI, Daunizeau J et al (2014) Uncertainty in per-
ception and the Hierarchical Gaussian Filter. Front Hum Neurosci
5:96
McGovern HT, De Foe A, Biddell H et al (2022) Learned uncertainty:
the free energy principle in anxiety. Front Psychol 13:415
Miceli M, Castelfranchi C (2005) Anxiety as an “epistemic” emotion:
an uncertainty theory of anxiety. Anxiety Stress Coping. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10615800500209324
Millidge B, Tschantz A, Seth AK, Buckley CL (2020) On the relation-
ship between active inference and control as inference
Mitrovic D, Klanke S, Osu R et al (2010) A computational model of limb
impedance control based on principles of internal model uncer-
tainty. PLoS ONE 5:e13601. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0013601
Niehorster DC, Li L, Lappe M (2017) The accuracy and precision of
position and orientation tracking in the HTC vive virtual real-
ity system for scientiﬁc research. Percept 8:2041669517708205.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2041669517708205
123
8 Page 16 of 16 Biological Cybernetics (2025) 119 :8
Nieuwenhuys A, Oudejans RRD (2012) Anxiety and perceptual-motor
performance: toward an integrated model of concepts, mecha-
nisms, and processes. Psychol Res 76:747–759. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00426-011-0384-x
O’Sullivan I, Burdet E, Diedrichsen J (2009) Dissociating variability
and effort as determinants of coordination. PLOS Comput Biol
5:e1000345. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000345
Palidis DJ, Wyder-Hodge PA, Fooken J, Spering M (2017) Distinct eye
movement patterns enhance dynamic visual acuity. PLoS ONE
12:e0172061. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0172061
Parr T, Limanowski J, Rawji V , Friston K (2021) The computational neu-
rology of movement under active inference. Brain 144:1799–1818.
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awab085
Payne KL, Wilson MR, Vine SJ (2018) A systematic review of the
anxiety-attention relationship in far-aiming skills. Int Rev Sport
Exerc Psychol 6:1–31. https://doi.org/10.1080/1750984X.2018.14
99796
R Core Team (2017) R: A language and environment for statistical
computing.
Reynolds RF, Bronstein AM (2003) The broken escalator phenomenon.
Exp Brain Res 151:301–308. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-003-
1444-2
Richman JS, Moorman JR (2000) Physiological time-series analysis
using approximate entropy and sample entropy. Am J Physiol-
Heart Circ Physiol 278:H2039–H2049. https://doi.org/10.1152/aj
pheart.2000.278.6.H2039
Rigoux L, Stephan KE, Friston KJ, Daunizeau J (2014) Bayesian model
selection for group studies—Revisited. Neuroimage 84:971–985.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.08.065
Schuetz I, Fiehler K (2022) Eye tracking in virtual reality: Vive pro eye
spatial accuracy, precision, and calibration reliability. J Eye Mov
Res 15:52
Seriès P (2019) Post-traumatic stress disorder as a disorder of prediction.
Nat Neurosci 22:334–336. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-019-03
45-z
Shadmehr R, Smith MA, Krakauer JW (2010) Error correction, sensory
prediction, and adaptation in motor control. Annu Rev Neu-
rosci 33:89–108. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-060909-
153135
Smith R, Friston K, Whyte C (2021) A step-by-step tutorial on active
inference and its application to empirical data
Smith R, Friston KJ, Whyte CJ (2022) A step-by-step tutorial on active
inference and its application to empirical data. J Math Psychol
107:102632. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2021.102632
Smith R, Kuplicki R, Feinstein J et al (2020a) A Bayesian computational
model reveals a failure to adapt interoceptive precision estimates
across depression, anxiety, eating, and substance use disorders.
PLOS Comput Biol 16:e1008484. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pcbi.1008484
Smith R, Schwartenbeck P , Stewart JL et al (2020b) Imprecise
action selection in substance use disorder: evidence for active
learning impairments when solving the explore-exploit dilemma.
Drug Alcohol Depend 215:108208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drug
alcdep.2020.108208
Sporn S, Hein T, Herrojo Ruiz M (2020) Alterations in the amplitude
and burst rate of beta oscillations impair reward-dependent motor
learning in anxiety. eLife 9:e50654. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.
50654
Taylor S, Lavalley CA, Hakimi N, et al (2023) Active learning impair-
ments in substance use disorders when resolving the explore-
exploit dilemma: A replication and extension of previous com-
putational modeling results. 2023.04.03.23288037
Thomas O, Hanton S, Jones G (2002) An alternative approach to short-
form self-report assessment of competitive anxiety: a research
note. Int J Sport Psychol 33:325–336
Tschantz A, Millidge B, Seth AK, Buckley CL (2020) Reinforcement
Learning through Active Inference
Vine SJ, Uiga L, Lavric A et al (2015) Individual reactions to stress
predict performance during a critical aviation incident. Anxi-
ety Stress Coping 28:467–477. https://doi.org/10.1080/10615806.
2014.986722
Wilson M, Chattington M, Marple-Horvat DE (2008) Eye movements
drive steering: reduced eye movement distribution impairs steering
and driving performance. J Mot Behav 40:190–202. https://doi.
org/10.3200/JMBR.40.3.190-202
Wilson MR, Vine SJ, Wood G (2009) The inﬂuence of anxiety on visual
attentional control in basketball free throw shooting. J Sport Exerc
Psychol 31:152–168. https://doi.org/10.1123/jsep.31.2.152
Wolpert DM, Flanagan JR (2001) Motor prediction. Curr Biol
18:R729–R732. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0960-9822(01)00432-8
Wood G, Wilson MR (2010) A moving goalkeeper distracts penalty
takers and impairs shooting accuracy. J Sports Sci 28:937–946.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02640414.2010.495995
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
123