Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 865203
CONCEPTUAL ANALYSIS
published: 31 May 2022
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.865203
Edited by: 
Gerit Pfuhl,  
UiT The Arctic University of Norway, 
Norway
Reviewed by: 
Robert Biegler,  
Norwegian University of Science and 
Technology, Norway
Vincenzo Romei,  
University of Bologna, Italy
*Correspondence: 
Achim Peters  
achim.peters@uni-luebeck.de
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to  
Cognitive Science,  
a section of the journal  
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 29 January 2022
Accepted: 04 April 2022
Published: 31 May 2022
Citation:
Hartwig M, Bhat A and 
Peters A (2022) How Stress Can 
Change Our Deepest Preferences: 
Stress Habituation Explained Using 
the Free Energy Principle.
Front. Psychol. 13:865203.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.865203
How Stress Can Change Our 
Deepest Preferences: Stress 
Habituation Explained Using the Free 
Energy Principle
Mattis Hartwig 1,2, Anjali Bhat 3 and Achim Peters 4*
1 German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Lübeck, Germany, 2 singularIT GmbH, Leipzig, Germany, 
3 Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 4 Medical Clinic 1, Center 
of Brain, Behavior and Metabolism, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany
People who habituate to stress show a repetition-induced response attenuation—
neuroendocrine, cardiovascular, neuroenergetic, and emotional—when exposed to a 
threatening environment. But the exact dynamics underlying stress habituation remain 
obscure. The free energy principle offers a unifying account of self-organising systems 
such as the human brain. In this paper, we elaborate on how stress habituation can 
be explained and modelled using the free energy principle. We introduce habituation priors 
that encode the agent’s tendency for stress habituation and incorporate them in the 
agent’s decision-making process. Using differently shaped goal priors—that encode the 
agent’s goal preferences—we illustrate, in two examples, the optimising (and thus 
habituating) behaviour of agents. We show that habituation minimises free energy by 
reducing the precision (inverse variance) of goal preferences. Reducing the precision of 
goal priors means that the agent accepts adverse (previously unconscionable) states 
(e.g., lower social status and poverty). Acceptance or tolerance of adverse outcomes 
may explain why habituation causes people to exhibit an attenuation of the stress response. 
Given that stress habituation occurs in brain regions where goal priors are encoded, i.e., 
in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and that these priors are encoded as sufficient 
statistics of probability distributions, our approach seems plausible from an anatomical-
functional and neuro-statistical point of view. The ensuing formal and generalisable 
account—based on the free energy principle—further motivate our novel treatment of 
stress habituation. Our analysis suggests that stress habituation has far-reaching 
consequences, protecting against the harmful effects of toxic stress, but on the other 
hand making the acceptability of precarious living conditions and the development of the 
obese type 2 diabetes mellitus phenotype more likely.
Keywords: stress, stress habituation, free energy, goal prioritisation, decision-making
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 865203
Hartwig et al. Stress Habituation and Free Energy
INTRODUCTION
Stress habituation occurs in about two-thirds of people when 
they are repeatedly exposed to the same aversive stimulus 
(homotypic stressor; Kirschbaum et  al., 1995 ). We  define 
habituators as individuals exhibiting a high tendency for 
repetition-induced response attenuation (neuroendocrine, 
cardiovascular, neuroenergetic, and emotional), when repeatedly 
exposed to the same aversive stimulus (homotypic stressor). 
Non-habituators have a high tendency not to show such a 
response attenuation.
In a given study population, repetition of the Trier Social 
Stress Test (TSST) leads to an attenuation of heart rate and 
cortisol responses ( Kothgassner et  al., 2021). However, a closer 
look shows that only a proportion of the participants habituate. 
In their classic experiment on stress habituation—which was 
extremely laborious and thus somewhat unique with five TSSTs 
on consecutive days— Kirschbaum et  al. (1995)  observed that 
habituated participants responded to the first TSST with a 
steep rise in cortisol but showed virtually no increase in cortisol 
on the second to fifth repetitions. In contrast, participants 
who did not habituate showed no attenuation of the cortisol 
response despite multiple exposures. Those who habituated 
considered themselves more attractive than those who did not 
habituate, had higher self-esteem and were less likely to 
be depressed (Kirschbaum et al., 1995). Of note, stress habituation, 
which elicits discrete results, i.e., all-or-nothing responses, differs 
in this respect from response habituation, in which the decrease 
is usually a decreasing exponential function of the number of 
stimulus presentations (e.g., withdrawal reflex, postrotatory 
nystagmus, and galvanic skin response), but both forms of 
habituation also share commonalities ( Thompson and Spencer, 
1966; Grissom and Bhatnagar, 2009 ).
In general, any self-organising system that exhibits sentient 
behaviour can be  seen as an agent. Since stress habituation 
requires a fully evolved stress system, i.e., sympathetic nervous 
system (SNS) and hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, 
we  focus here on stress habituation in mammals. To illustrate 
our proposed mathematical principles underlying stress 
habituation, we use examples that relate to human agents (work 
stimulus and social acceptance). This paper explores the question 
of whether habituation to stress can be  explained from 
first principles.
The free energy principle has become a unifying framework 
for many types of processes that occur in the human brain 
and, more generally, living organisms ( Friston, 2010 ). This 
theoretical framework is grounded in the so-called Bayesian 
Brain concept and introduced as an account of sentient behaviour, 
namely, perceptual and active inference ( Friston et  al., 2006 ). 
It has been applied to complex areas such as decision-making, 
exploration or social cooperation ( Schwartenbeck et  al., 2013 ; 
Hartwig and Peters, 2021 ). Recent research has also focused 
on using the free energy principle to better understand conditions 
such as hallucinations and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD; 
Corlett et  al., 2019 ; Linson et  al., 2020 ). In the free energy 
formulation, the agent has goal priors that encode the preferred 
states the agent believes they should occupy; i.e., part of its 
model of the lived world includes (sub-personal) beliefs about 
the characteristic states or outcomes they should experience 
(Friston et  al., 2013 ). Peters et  al. (2017)  have argued that in 
a threatening situation, free energy remains high if the agent 
fails to find a policy that leads to its goal states: if the expected 
free energy is irreducibly high, this results in a stress response, 
which in turn allows the agent to leverage the (recognised) 
state of arousal to resolve the challenges ahead. If a best policy 
can be  found with the help of additional sensory information 
and enhanced information processing—enabled by stress 
arousal—and the uncertainty about the policy choice can thus 
be  resolved, the agent experiences ‘good stress’ , a sense of 
mastery and high self-esteem (Kirschbaum et al., 1995; Pruessner 
et al., 1999 , 2005). If no solution can be found in this situation, 
toxic stress or stress habituation can occur. While toxic stress 
results in intermittent or permanent hyperactivity of SNS and 
HPA-axis, stress habituation leads to attenuated stress responses.
Since the free energy principle explains a range of phenomena 
in neuroscience, we  ask here whether it can also explain the 
process of stress habituation. For PTSD, a connection to the 
free energy principle and to the shape of goal priors has already 
been formulated but without describing the process of change 
(Linson et  al., 2020 ). Based on the free energy principle, both 
PTSD and stress habituation can be  viewed as processes that 
change the shape of goal preferences but with changes occurring 
in the opposite direction: in PTSD, the precision of the goal-
preference probability distribution is increased, in stress 
habituation, it is decreased.
This paper is structured as follows: First, we  introduce 
decision-making under the free energy principle in general 
(Section “Free Energy Principle and Decision-Making”). 
Afterwards, we  define stress, discuss stress habituation and 
show how stress can be  caused in an agent under the free 
energy principle in Section “Stress and Stress Habituation. ” In 
Section “Introducing a Habituation Prior Into the Model, ” 
we introduce a general model that allows for stress habituation 
through changes in goal priors and give two examples in 
Section “Stress Habituation in the Context of Work Stimulus 
Preferences and Social Acceptance.: In Section “Consequences 
of stress habituation, ” we  discuss the pathophysiological 
implications. We conclude in Section “Conclusion and Outlook” 
with an outlook for further research.
FREE ENERGY PRINCIPLE AND 
DECISION-MAKING
The free energy principle is a formalisation and extension of 
the influential observation that living organisms are, by definition, 
self-organising systems ( Schrödinger, 1956 ): they maintain a 
homeostatic balance by returning consistently to a limited set 
of states. When they cease to self-organise, they die. 
Mathematically, it emerges that all self-organising systems (look 
as if they) are driven to minimise a quantity called free energy  
(Friston et al., 2006 ). This mathematical consequence identifies 
(variational) free-energy minimisation as the fundamental 
imperative of all self-organising systems, from the simplest 
Hartwig et al. Stress Habituation and Free Energy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 865203
(e.g., a thermostat or a virus) to the most complex (e.g., a 
human or even civilisations of humans)—this is the free 
energy principle.
Active inference is a process theory that applies this principle 
to sentient behaviour, specifying that homeostasis can 
be maintained either by changing in response to the environment 
(adaptation) or—crucially—by changing the environment (action/
agency). In both cases, the imperative is a convergence between 
the environment and the agent’s generative model of that 
environment (Friston et al., 2010; Parr and Friston, 2018, 2019). 
An agent’s generative model is a probabilistic account of the 
causes of incoming sensory data (e.g., a flashing light or a 
noxious smell). For more sophisticated systems, this model 
also represents sequences of actions through time (or policies), 
from which the agent must select in order to minimise expected 
free energy. Policy selection, according to the process theory 
of active inference, is what underwrites decision-making and, 
indeed, all agentic behaviour. For context, active inference 
originated in the realm of human neuroscience, so the 
terminology and mathematics used here derive from Bayesian 
statistics, following from the Bayesian brain hypothesis ( Rao 
and Ballard, 1999 ; Knill and Pouget, 2004 ).
The agent is therefore said to hold (sub-personal and Bayesian) 
beliefs about the hidden states of its environment that maximise 
the model evidence or minimises surprisal, also often referred 
to as surprise ( Friston et  al., 2006 ). We  follow Buckley et  al. 
(2017) in the use of surprisal to ‘avoid confusion with the common 
sense meaning of surprise’ . Under the free energy principle, free 
energy is an upper bound on surprisal. In this paper, we  denote 
the hidden states of the environment with s and the agent’s 
observations as o. The agent has an approximate representation 
of the states in the world denoted as q(s), which approximates 
the real posterior distribution over the hidden states given the 
observation p(s|o). The agent has the opportunity to influence 
its own perception (or ‘actively sample’ sensory information; Parr 
and Friston, 2018 ) by varying control states (e.g., a variable to 
control its head movement). Modulation of control variables 
yields observable actions in the real world (e.g., the head is 
actually turning). The choice of future control variables—policy 
selection—is encoded in the policy π. We  assume that the agent 
has a limited number of discrete choices for its policy selection. 
In each time step, the policy is selected that has the lowest 
expected free energy. Policy selection and thus decision-making 
can be  modelled as minimisation of expected free energy. 
Technically, the expected free energy is the free energy of observable 
outcomes and beliefs about states of the world, expected under 
the outcomes predicted given a course of action or policy. The 
free energy itself can be expressed as a combination of complexity 
and accuracy:
 
Fc omplexitya ccuracy
KLDq sp s
s
qs os
=-
=- å[( )( )( )log()|| |] ||pp
The complexity term represents the divergence between 
the prior and posterior beliefs. The greater this divergence, 
the more extreme the belief update the agent will have to 
make to account for the new information. In other words, 
a model with greater complexity is generally in danger of 
overfitting, with a higher probability of the agent having to 
significantly change its beliefs to explain new observations 
(i.e., lower predictive power). The ordering in the Kullback–
Leibler-divergence (KLD) follows the definitions of the free 
energy principle. The accuracy is just the expected log 
likelihood of observed outcomes, given beliefs about their 
causes (e.g., the amplitude of residual or prediction errors 
in a statistical model). When complexity and accuracy are 
evaluated in the future, they become ‘risk’ and ‘ambiguity’ . 
Risk is now the divergence of anticipated states of affairs 
given a particular policy from the prior preferences or goal 
prior p(s), which models the agent’s beliefs about its 
characteristic or preferred states. Similarly, the expected 
inaccuracy becomes ambiguity; namely, the degree to which 
a particular state of affairs generates ambiguous outcomes. 
In short, agents are compelled to choose policies that minimise 
the risk of diverging from goals, while avoiding 
ambiguous situations.
Friston (2010)  frames goals as ‘prior expectations that an 
action is obliged to fulfil’ . The most primitive goal priors, it 
could be said, are specified by natural selection ( Friston, 2010). 
The classic example is a fish that likes (its goal prior is) to 
be  in the water, as this is the environment its physiology (fins 
and gills) is adapted for. The fish existentially prefers survival 
to death, so these physiological constraints limit the actions 
of the fish to those that keep it within a range of states it 
can survive in. If the fish could plan, then it would choose 
those policies that avoid leaving water. When the goal prior 
cannot be fulfilled, the risk (expected complexity) term increases, 
resulting in the agent expecting a higher free energy. The fish 
who finds itself out of water would indeed experience a high 
free energy. For humans, we  can think of these primitive goal 
priors as analogous to the lowest rung of pyramid of needs 
of Maslow (1943) . In sense of Maslow (1943) , humans also 
have higher rung goal priors, such as social acceptance and 
self-actualisation.
The ‘states that agents believe they should occupy’ are thought 
to be  represented in regions like the ventromedial prefrontal 
cortex (vmPFC) and the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC; Bechara 
et  al., 2000 ; Gottfried et  al., 2003 ; O’Doherty et  al., 2003 ; 
Roesch and Olson, 2004 ; Barron et  al., 2015 ). These regions 
occupy a deep or high hierarchical position in the Bayesian 
brain. They play a key role in defining the expected value 
(i.e., expected free energy) of future outcomes. These goal or 
prior preferences provide a point of reference for goal-directed 
behaviour. Behavioural experiments provided evidence that 
beliefs about goal states are encoded in the vmPFC as sufficient 
statistics (mean and variance) of internal probability distributions 
over the states of the world ( Lebreton et al., 2015). Interestingly, 
then, each goal prior is accompanied by a second-order valuation 
(a confidence estimate), which is also evinced in vmPFC activity 
(Lebreton et  al., 2015 ).
A very special belief about goal states is whether one wants 
to hold on to the other goal priors (social recognition, pecuniary 
Hartwig et al. Stress Habituation and Free Energy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 865203
goals, housing situation, etc.) under all circumstances or whether 
one is prepared to give them up, at least in part. In this 
paper, we propose that stress habituation is based on a broadening 
(i.e., decrease in precision) of goal preferences, so that states 
that previously appeared unacceptable henceforth become more 
acceptable. In other words, stress habituation ‘relaxes’ the degree 
of commitment to prior preferences. We will refer furthermore 
to anatomical and functional data that show the representation 
of goal states and the process of stress habituation are co-localised. 
The next section concerns the consequences of high free energy 
and how we  respond to it.
STRESS AND STRESS HABITUATION
Stress
Stress, as redefined by Peters et  al. (2017) , is grounded in the 
concept of uncertainty. Accordingly, people ask themselves, on 
certain occasions, the following question: ‘What policy should 
I  select to safeguard my future physical, mental and social 
wellbeing?’ Whoever is uncertain in their answer experiences 
‘angst’ , and who on top of that only has high-risk policies 
available, experiences ‘stress’ . In the context of stress, uncertainty 
means that no matter what policy the agent chooses, they are 
uncertain about what will happen sooner or later, i.e., they 
expect, on average, greater surprises. In technical terms: all 
plausible policies have high expected free energy; i.e., all policies 
entail a high degree of ‘risk’ . Heuristically, expected free energy 
is the expected surprise associated with a policy; either in 
terms of uncertainty about states of affairs (i.e., ambiguity) or 
the kind of surprise that accompanies the violation of preferred 
outcomes or goals (i.e., risk). Under this formulation, physical, 
mental, and social well-being are exactly what should be encoded 
in the agent’s goal priors. Simply said, a high expected free 
energy, for all policy options, characterises a situation where 
no policy can realise goal states, thus engendering angst, and 
ultimately, stress ( Peters et  al., 2017 ).
There is evidence that some of our model parameters are 
represented in mammalian brains. The anterior cingulate cortex 
(ACC) is involved in assessing policy risks ( Paulus et al., 2002 ; 
Feinstein et  al., 2006 ; Behrens et  al., 2007 ; Sarinopoulos et  al., 
2010; Karlsson et  al., 2012 ; Liljeholm et  al., 2013 ). Thus, the 
ACC is in a position to detect a high expected free energy. 
When all policies have a high expected free energy, the precision 
of beliefs about policies is necessarily low. This means that 
the question ‘What should I  do?’ cannot be  answered 
unequivocally. Thus, if the expected free energy is high for 
all policy options, we suppose that the ACC neurons disinhibit 
a stress response. The rationale behind this is that the ACC 
sends strong and functionally relevant projections to the amygdala 
(Jhang et  al., 2018 ), the hierarchical neuroendocrine stress 
response involves activation of the amygdala, hypothalamic 
nuclei, sympathetic nervous system, hypothalamic–pituitary–
adrenal axis, and feedback of glucocorticoids to all levels ( Peters 
et al., 2007; Weidenfeld and Ovadia, 2017). The agent’s experience 
during stress arousal includes symptoms such as increased 
vigilance, tension, trembling, sweating, palpitations, inner unrest, 
physical discomfort, anxiety, and sadness ( Peters et  al., 2013 ). 
At the neurobiological-neuro-statistical level, the stress response 
involves the activation of an uncertainty resolution programme, 
with the goal of minimising free energy in the future. To 
achieve this, the uncertainty resolution programme revises the 
precision afforded various (Bayesian) beliefs, 1 with the objective 
of restoring the precision of beliefs about policies. The uncertainty 
resolution programme has the potential to find out that a 
policy in the agent’s repertoire is promising after all or to 
creatively search for a new policy that eventually appears 
promising. If the programme is successful, the most plausible 
policy can be  selected which, in the sense of active inference, 
is most likely to minimise free energy.
For completeness, it should be  noted that the precision of 
beliefs about policies can also be  low if every option has a 
low expected free energy, i.e., is relatively risk-free. This is 
the case, for example, in daily life when an agent is faced 
with a very large choice, often referred to as choice overload. 
Here, too, the decision of what to choose is difficult. In such 
an ambiguous situation, the agent feels unsure about policy 
selection and experiences angst and discomfort. The resolution 
of this discomfort—say by the appearance of a conditioned 
stimulus—appears to be  accompanied by phasic dopaminergic 
discharges ( Schultz, 2007 ; Fiorillo et  al., 2008 ; Schultz et  al., 
2008; Friston et  al., 2014 , 2017; Schwartenbeck et  al., 2015 ). 
As long as the risk is low, however, this situation is existentially 
harmless, and the agent anticipates that their preferences can 
be fulfilled irrespective of the particular policy they commit too.
Examples of stressful situations can be  manifold, and each 
person has their own stress biography. The classic choice in 
stressful situations is the fight-or-flight decision. Stress also 
arises, for example, in a ‘stay-or-go’ conflict at work, where 
the person is threatened by either persistent bullying or 
unemployment. Both options, stay or go, result in major 
violations of goal expectations and are associated with a high 
risk or expected complexity.
From a neurobiological and neuroenergetic perspective, the 
stress response comprises three sub-responses, as shown in 
our earlier integrating work ( Peters et  al., 2017 ): first, a 
hypervigilant arousal state that allows for higher rate of 
information processing (bits/second; Berridge and Waterhouse, 
2003; Aston-Jones and Cohen, 2005; Harris et al., 2012), second, 
activation of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS), which 
supplies the brain with additional energy from the body (glucose, 
ketones, and lactate), to meet the brain’s higher energy needs 
due to increased information processing (joules/bit; Madsen 
et  al., 1995 ; Hitze et  al., 2010 ) and third, the release of 
glucocorticoids that control what is and what is not learned 
from the stressful experience for making better predictions in 
the future ( Pavlides et al., 1995 ; Maggio and Segal, 2007 , 2009). 
1 For example, by considering new policies—or nuancing the balance between 
prior beliefs and sensory evidence, through changing their relative precision. 
Physiologically, this corresponds to a neuromodulatory change in the excitability 
of gain of neuronal message passing. In turn, this is manifest as a change in 
synaptic rate constants, i.e., rates of evidence accumulation associative plasticity. 
Psychologically, this is generally thought of in terms of selective attention and 
sensory attenuation and concomitant experience-dependent plasticity.
Hartwig et al. Stress Habituation and Free Energy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 865203
All three of these responses reflect an increase in the precision 
or rate constants of neuronal message passing in cortical 
hierarchies, manifest in terms of the rate of evidence accumulation, 
the accompanying metabolic cost and learning rates. However, 
these stress-related increases come with side effects.
Prolonged glucocorticoid secretion can have adverse effects 
on brain and body ( McEwen, 1998 ). In fact, toxic stress has 
been confirmed to cause myocardial infarction ( Orth-Gomér 
et  al., 2009 ; Gulliksson et  al., 2011 ) and increase the risk of 
depression, memory loss and type 2 diabetes mellitus (Heraclides 
et  al., 2009 ). As already mentioned, in the best-case scenario, 
an agent can use the stress arousal state to find an alternative 
solution to the problem by entertaining new policies, e.g., by 
withdrawing from the confrontation or creatively engaging a 
novel policy. But in the worst-case scenario, if no clear option 
can be found, there are two further possibilities. One possibility 
is that the agent remains in a state of toxic stress, in which 
glucocorticoid levels are constantly or intermittently elevated, 
ultimately leading to detrimental effects on physical and mental 
well-being (McEwen, 2012). Another option is stress habituation, 
in which the glucocorticoid response is reduced for certain 
homotypic stressors, but the ability to provide a hormonal 
response for other different stressors (heterotypic stressors) is 
preserved ( Hill et  al., 2010b ).
Stress Habituation
Anatomical localisation associated morphological changes and 
endocannabinoid signalling of stress habituation have been 
intensively studied in rodent experiments. Stress habituation 
is controlled by brain regions such as the medial prefrontal 
cortex (mPFC) permitting or disrupting HPA-axis activity 
(Weinberg et  al., 2010 ). Habituation to stress is accompanied 
by structural changes in the mPFC. For example, repeated 
brief restraint, a treatment that generally induces habituation, 
results in retraction of the basal dendrites of the mPFC ( Brown 
et  al., 2005 ). Prolonged restraint stress leads to dendritic 
retraction and loss of spines in the mPFC ( Cook and Wellman, 
2004; Radley et  al., 2006 , 2008), and chronic immobilisation 
increases branching of GABAergic interneurons in the PFC 
(Gilabert-Juan et  al., 2013 ).
Endocannabinoids (eCBs) account for both the ability of 
glucocorticoid signalling in the mPFC to terminate stress-
induced-HPA-axis response and to establish stress habituation. 
Termination of stress-induced-HPA-axis response involves 
mobilisation of eCBs in the mPFC ( Hill et  al., 2011b ). After 
resolution of stress, the cannabinoid-1-receptor (CB1R) pathway 
contributes to the return of serum glucocorticoid levels to 
normal. CB1Rs are present on GABAergic terminals and inhibit 
GABA release at synapses with principal neurons within layer 
V of the prelimbic region of the mPFC. Glucocorticoids suppress 
GABA release in the mPFC via an endocannabinoid mechanism 
(Hill et  al., 2011b ).
Habituation to stress also involves endocannabinoid 
signalling ( Hill et  al., 2010a ). The endocannabinoids act in 
a bisynaptic process ( Hill et  al., 2011b ) that is referred to 
as ‘depolarisation-induced suppression of inhibition’ (DSI; 
Pitler and Alger, 1992 ). As Peters and McEwen (2015)  have 
proposed, this DSI process acts as a switch, with the ON 
position enabling habituation and the OFF position not. Three 
neurons are involved in this bisynaptic process: a presynaptic 
mPFC principal neuron, its postsynaptic glutamatergic 
counterpart and a GABAergic interneuron whose terminals 
contact the former presynaptic principal neuron. A homotypic 
stressor stimulates a principal mPFC neuron to release 
glutamate, which activates the postsynaptic neuron and, if 
the stimulus is strong enough, prompts the postsynaptic neuron 
to retrograde release large amounts of endocannabinoids. The 
eCBs, in turn, inhibit the GABAergic interneuron, which 
inhibits the presynaptic principal neuron. Thus, eCBs exert 
a reinforcing, i.e., disinhibitory, effect on the presynaptic 
principal neuron. In this way, only strong stimuli can turn 
the DSI switch into the ON position.
During severe stress, elevated glucocorticoid concentrations 
enhance endocannabinoid production in the postsynaptic 
neuron. Tagged by putting the DSI switch in the ON position, 
the presynaptic principal mPFC neurons are prone to undergo 
plastic changes at their GABAergic synapse through the 
induction of inhibitory long-term depression (I-LTD; Hill 
et  al., 2011b ). After habituation, especially by the I-LTD, the 
DSI switch would remain in the ON position, so that this 
mPFC neuronal ensemble enters a new state fixed by synaptic 
plasticity. Under this model, habituation is induced only when 
two factors are present simultaneously: the homotypic stressor 
must represent a strong stimulus and the glucocorticoid 
response must be  strong. Therefore, habituation to stress 
manifests itself as a specific form of synaptic and morphological 
plasticity, in the induction of which not only glucocorticoids 
but also endocannabinoids play a key role ( Patel and Hillard, 
2008; Hill et  al., 2010a ).
To distinguish individuals who tend to habituate from those 
who do not, the mechanical elements involved in the DSI 
switch are promising candidates. Among them are the 
glucocorticoid receptors ( Malcher-Lopes et al., 2008 ; McKlveen 
et  al., 2013 ), the cannabinoid receptors ( Fride et  al., 2005 ; 
Hill et  al., 2011a ) and the endocannabinoid degrading enzyme 
fatty acid amide hydrolase ( Hill et  al., 2013 ). Different 
characteristics in these candidates are likely to contribute whether 
an individual is a habituator or a non-habituator. Interestingly, 
polymorphisms in the glucocorticoid and endocannabinoid 
receptor gene and in the fatty acid amide hydrolase gene have 
been found associated with several differences in body shape 
(van Rossum and Lamberts, 2004 ; Benzinou et  al., 2008 ; Frost 
et al., 2010 ; Harismendy et al., 2010 ). The relationship between 
habituation and body shape will be discussed in more detail below.
How do the conventional and our novel view of stress 
habituation explain the anatomical and functional data just cited? 
According to the conventional view, the plasticity acquired 
through inhibitory long-term depression can lead to information 
about the homotypic stressor not being transmitted to the 
amygdala, so that a stress response does not occur. Our novel 
view of stress habituation is informed by experimental results 
showing that where the goal states are encoded, namely, in the 
vmPFC and OFC ( Bechara et  al., 2000 ; Gottfried et  al., 2003 ; 
O’Doherty et  al., 2003 ; Roesch and Olson, 2004 ; Barron et  al., 
Hartwig et al. Stress Habituation and Free Energy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 865203
2015), the process of stress habituation is also localised; to 
be  more precise, stress habituation is located in a subdomain 
of the vmPFC, that is, in the mPFC ( Weinberg et  al., 2010 ). 
Therefore, we  introduce here the concept that in the mPFC, 
first, the inhibitory long-term depression induced by habituation 
flattens (i.e. reduces the precision of) probability distributions 
that encode goal priors and, second, that in the ACC this leads 
to a new risk assessment of the agent’s available policies. If 
decreasing the precision of goal preferences reduces the risk of 
all available policies, there will be no—or only a small—amygdala 
activation and thus an eliminated or attenuated stress response. 
Our view is further supported by experimental evidence showing 
that habituation to repetitive stimuli, as seen in the well-established 
mismatch negativity paradigm, rests upon hierarchical predictive 
coding ( Wacongne et  al., 2012 ; Ramaswami, 2014).
Stress Habituation and the Problem With 
Fixed Goal Priors
When we  connect the decision-making under the free energy 
principle with the phenomenon of stress habituation, we  need 
a way to differentiate between non-habituators and habituators. 
In the stressful situation, there is no policy π for which the 
predictive posterior q(s|π) is close to the goal prior p(s). In the 
described scenarios, the policies and the corresponding posterior 
distributions do not change. In the stay-or-go conflict, both 
habituators and non-habituators have the same policy choices 
and possibly the same preferences (showing the same initial 
stress response), but they react differently when being exposed 
again. If the posterior is not changed, another option is to 
change the goal prior. Here, we  assume that the goal priors 
are encoded by synaptic connection strengths in specific (e.g., 
medial prefrontal cortex) canonical microcircuits, such that, in 
extreme stress situations, a physiological process may modify 
goal priors. This Bayesian belief updating of priors is an emergent 
property of free energy minimisation and reflects the hierarchical 
generative models used for belief updating, where priors become 
empirical or learnable priors ( Sajid et  al., 2021 ).
In the next section, we  look into how to setup a decision-
making model including the option for habituation. Peters et al. 
(2017) have previously suggested that habituation might 
be  connected to an influence on the goal prior as a last resort 
in stressful episodes. As described above, the goal prior has a 
direct connection to the preferred states of the agent. Therefore, 
changing the goal prior comes at a significant cost of compromising 
preferred states. To prevent the agent from making these sacrifices 
carelessly, some kind of internal barrier or threshold needs to 
be  present, which allows habituation only as a last resort. Next, 
we  will focus on how habituation might be  mathematically 
implemented into decision-making using the free energy principle.
INTRODUCING A HABITUATION PRIOR 
INTO THE MODEL
Given the classical experimental findings on stress habituation 
mentioned above ( Kirschbaum et  al., 1995 ), we  model stress 
habituation as a discrete process in which the agent either 
habituates or not. The differences between habituators and 
non-habituators are encoded within the agents. Some (but not 
necessarily all) characteristics of the goal prior are affected by 
stress habituation. The stress habituation is a result of optimising 
free energy.
We represent the habituation in a habituation variable h. 
If h = 1, the agent habituates; if h = 0, the agent does not 
habituate. In order to encode different tendencies for agents 
to habituate we  introduce a habituation prior p(h). It is 
ph h() ==1   and ph h() .== -01   We  call h  the habituation 
tendency. A zero tendency h  stands for an agent that cannot 
habituate no matter the stress level it is experiencing. A higher 
tendency makes habituation more likely, as we  will see in later 
simulations. We  use the new habituation prior to extend the 
existing goal prior distribution with ps ps hp h() () () .= |  The 
conditional distribution p(s|h = 0) is encoding the agent’s initial 
goal prior, whereas the ps h()| =1  is encoding the agent’s goal 
prior after habituation. To explain the transition (and the 
difference) between the two distributions, we  introduce a 
parameter qh that has a statistical influence on prior distribution. 
In general, qh can be  any of the sufficient statistics for the 
distribution but one example that we  will use later is the 
variance of the distribution. The parameter qh can be  changed 
only if the agent habituates. Analogue to the approximate 
posterior distribution that depends on the policy choice q s|p() , 
we also need a posterior q(h) that reflects if the agents habituate 
or does not habituate. Introducing these distributions and 
variables in the risk term of the expected free energy  
results in:
 Risk KLDq sh qh ps hp hh= éë ùû(, )( )( )()|| ||p q
Expected free energy minimisation is now a minimisation 
over three parameters: the habituation h, the habituation statistics 
qh, and the policy π. When stress is induced because the goal 
prior cannot be  attained by any policy at hand, the risk terms 
are high. Any reduction of expected free energy needs to 
minimise risk with the constraint that qh can only be  affected 
during habituation ( h = 1). Note that the habituation state h 
is generic for all policies. This means that optimising the 
habituation state necessarily integrates expectations under all 
policies entertained by the agent.
In general, there will be  always a trade-off for the agent 
to make. By habituation, the free energy is increased because 
the posterior q(h = 1) = 1 is significantly different from the 
habituation prior ph h() ==1   as long as h  is relatively small, 
which we  assume here because habituation should only 
be  available as a last resort for the agent and not as a daily 
preference changing scheme. We refer to this as the habituation 
costs in the figures later on. On the other hand, habituation 
has also a decreasing effect on expected free energy because 
the difference between the goal prior and the posterior of the 
policy selection is reduced. The stronger the agent is—in its 
beliefs about the goal states—the higher is the pressure for 
habituation when no policy fulfils the goals. The smaller the 
Hartwig et al. Stress Habituation and Free Energy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 865203
habituation tendency, the higher is the pressure (in the opposite 
direction) for non-habituation. Being able to minimise risk 
(or the discrepancy between goal states and control states)—i.e., 
being able to influence one’s environment—is known as KL 
`optimality’ . In previous active inference literature, the beliefs 
about ‘KL optimality’ are associated with a sense of agency 
(Friston et  al., 2013 ). The agent’s prior experiences inform 
beliefs about how strongly their own actions correspond with 
observable effects: if there is a low correspondence (I act 
repeatedly but nothing comes of it), the agent’s confidence 
(precision) in their beliefs about being KL optimal reduces—in 
other words, they lose their sense of being an agent. It may 
be, therefore, that agents who have low confidence in their 
agency are more likely to change their goal prior—i.e., this 
may influence the habituation prior.
Outer factors (like the environment), the policies and 
internal factors (like the goal prior and the habituation prior) 
affect the habituation process. In the same scenario, where 
agents have the same policy options, one agent might habituate 
while another agent with a different habituation prior might 
not. As noted above, we assume that the effect of habituation 
on the goal prior is an effect on its precision rather than 
changing the overall structure. This interpretation is in line 
with other work on the goal prior, e.g., the initial hypothesis 
of Peters et  al. (2017)  on stress habituation and goal priors 
and the work by Linson et  al. (2020)  who use very specific 
goal priors to explain the results in behaviour of PTSD 
patients. Our general structure would also allow qh to be any 
other statistics of the distribution. In the next section, we will 
illustrate the habituation process when qh is connected to 
precision. Later, we  discuss the physiological arguments 
for this.
STRESS HABITUATION IN THE 
CONTEXT OF WORK STIMULUS 
PREFERENCES AND SOCIAL 
ACCEPTANCE
Above, we  have already given some examples of high-level 
goal priors being involved in causing stress. In this section, 
we  introduce the preference for work stimulus and the need 
for social acceptance as further examples that can result in 
stress. The phenomenon when work becomes too much or 
too complex and the agent cannot find a way out of the 
situation is discussed extensively in the media and in research 
as burnout ( Maslach and Leiter, 2006 ; Bang and Reio, 2017 ). 
Burnout is often connected with overwhelming demands that 
cannot be  fulfilled ( Maslach et  al., 2001 ; Fralick and Flegel, 
2014). Another source of stress can also be  the situation when 
work is boring and is discussed under the term bore-out 
(Schaufeli and Salanova, 2014 ; Stock, 2015 ).
Here, we  consider a scenario where the agent has to decide 
either to take a job that is very demanding and exceeds one’s 
skills and work stimulus, or to keep the current job, which 
is very repetitive and boring. In our scenario, no other job 
offer is currently available, and in both situations, there is 
some deviation from the agent’s preference for work stimulus.
We model the scenario as a discrete setup and use states 
from −15 to 15 to denote the work stimulus (we use it just 
as an ordinary scale where 0 is in the middle). Figure  1  
contains the probability distributions used in the modelling 
of the scenario. We  set the most preferred work stimulus as 
the value 0. To model the initial goal prior (blue), we  use a 
discrete variant of the Gaussian distribution, that is rescaled 
to a sum of 1 to be a valid probability distribution. The variance 
of the prior is relatively low resulting in a steep peak at S = 0. 
We  use the variance of the distribution as the habituation 
parameter qh. The agent has two policies to choose from. 
With the demanding job (orange), a higher work stimulus of 
2 or 3 is attainable, while with the current repetitive job (green), 
only stimulus values between −10 and −3 can be  attained. 
Both policies result in high levels of expected free energy due 
to the large risk term. Before any habituation, taking the 
demanding job offer is the free energy optimal choice. When 
the agent becomes habituated, the goal prior would be changed 
to the flat distribution (red) via increasing the variance qh. 
After habituation, flattening of the goal prior results in a shift  
of the best policy to choose, which is then keeping the repetitive 
job. As mentioned above, habituation also comes at a cost 
that is depending on the agent’s habituation tendency h .  Only 
when the benefits of changing the goal prior outweigh the 
costs of habituation does the agent actually become habituated 
and change their policy decision.
Figure  2A shows the risk term (excluding the habituation 
costs) as a function of the goal prior variance. It can be  seen 
FIGURE 1 |  Work stimulus scenario—flattening of probability distributions 
over goal states underlying stress habituation. The bars show the different 
probability distributions used in the example of work stimulus preference. The 
blue distribution is the prior distribution that is encoding the agent’s 
preferences before habituation. The orange and green distributions visualise 
the states that can be attained with the two strategies at hand. The orange 
policy is connected to a scenario of an overwhelming work stimulus, while the 
green distribution is connected to a scenario of staying in a repetitive and 
boring job. The red distribution shows the optimal prior distribution the agent 
would choose if he could optimise its own prior. In our scenario, the red 
distribution can only be installed as a new prior by habituation.
Hartwig et al. Stress Habituation and Free Energy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 865203
that there is a local minimum at a variance of about 7, where 
the agent still prefers the policy of accepting the challenging 
job offer. At a variance of about 15, there is a tipping point. 
After that, it is more attractive to keep the repetitive job than 
to aim for the demanding job and risk too high a work 
stimulus. The global minimum is somewhere around 60. A 
higher than 60 variance increases the risk term, but only 
very slightly.
Knowing that some agents habituate to stress and others 
do not, we  examine different values for habituation tendency. 
Figure 2B contains the calculation of the full risk term (including 
the habituation costs) depended on the habituation tendency. 
When the habituation tendency is less than ~0.04, the risk 
term for habituation is higher than for non-habituation because 
the costs of habituation outweigh its benefits; in this case, 
non-habituation would be the better choice. When the habituation 
tendency is higher than ~0.04, the benefits of habituation 
outweigh its costs, making habituation the better choice. Using 
the free energy principle, a difference in a high-level prior 
characterising habituation tendency could explain why some 
people benefit from habituation and others do not.
The example shows that the discrete effect of habituation 
and non-habituation can be explained by the greater propensity 
of habituators to change goal priors and the lesser propensity 
of non-habituators to do so. The tendency to habituate is 
modelled as a binary prior distribution that is specific to context 
and to the agent ( Kirschbaum et  al., 1995 ). In the two-policy 
job choice scenario, the habituator chooses to stay in the 
repetitive-unfulfilling situation, while the non-habituator 
maintains his steep goal and takes the demanding, high-pressure 
job despite the stress it entails. For the non-habituator, the 
stress of being underchallenged is more pronounced (higher 
free energy) than that of accepting the challenging work. Due 
to the low habituation tendency, the non-habituator is only 
in rare cases able to broaden their goal preferences and thus 
to get used to difficult life situations.
The work stimulus example is one where the agent has its 
maximum preference somewhere within the state spectrum, 
e.g., in the middle. Of course, other goal priors are also 
conceivable. There are a number of situations in which the 
principle of ‘the more the better’ applies to preferences, with 
the optimal preference at one end of the state spectrum. 
Examples could be  wealth or social acceptance. We  use the 
left part of a discrete bell curve that we  normalised to sum-up 
to one to illustrate the preference for social acceptance. Similar 
to the previous example, Figure  3 contains the probability 
distributions. In this example, the agent has a clear preference 
(blue) to arrive on the right end of the state spectrum, i.e., 
at level 20. The agent’s first policy (orange) allows them to 
achieve a level of social acceptance of 15 or 16, while the 
second policy (green) has a broader spectrum of states, ranging 
from 8 to 14. Both policies are afflicted with a high degree 
of stress due to their high-risk terms.
Figure 4  shows the habituation analyses from Figure 2  for 
the social acceptance scenario. The second example shows that 
different forms of habituation priors are possible. There has 
been some literature on Gaussian shaped priors ( Friston, 2009), 
but in general, our model is agnostic to the prior’s form as 
long as we  have sufficient statistics that can be  influenced by 
the stress habituation. In both examples, the habituating agent 
AB
FIGURE 2 |  Work stimulus scenario—effect of goal prior variance and habituation tendency on risk. (A) The blue line shows the risk term (excluding the habituation 
costs) dependent on the variance of the goal prior. We exclude the cost of habituation to show the influence of the goal prior shape on the policy choice. It can 
be seen, that risk is reduced if the goal prior is progressively flatter, because of the high mismatch between goal prior and attainable states in the policies. There is a 
tipping point where the policy choice for the agent changes. (B) The lines show the complete risk values (including the habituation costs) in case of habituation (blue) 
and in case of no habituation (orange) dependent on the habituation tendency. It is clear that risk for habituation gets smaller when the habituation tendency gets 
higher because the penalty for habituation is reduced. The orange line remains relatively constant which is intuitive because in case of no habituation the goal prior is 
not affected, and the penalty is not reduced. However, there is a slight increase in risk. This is due to our assumption that the agent strictly infers to not habituate. 
Before the inference, the agent had a (very) small preference for habituation which can be interpreted as a small value for keeping the option open. In the posterior 
q(h) though, the option is gone [in case of no habituation, it is q(h) = 0]. A higher habituation tendency h  means a higher value for the option to habituate thus 
resulting in an increase of the orange line, where this option is gone.
Hartwig et al. Stress Habituation and Free Energy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 865203
changes their best policy. This is chosen by design to show 
how habituation can change behaviour, but it does not have 
to be  the case in all scenarios. Stress habituation can also 
occur if the policy choice stays the same; then, it is just a 
vehicle for the agent to reduce their stress level. From the 
outer perspective, no change in behaviour can be  seen, but 
the agent no longer shows stress arousals in the context to 
the homotypic stressor.
Comparing the overall stress of habituated and non-habituated 
individuals, habituated agents display much less free energy, 
i.e., they suffer from less stress than non-habituated individuals 
(see Figure 2A). While agents who habituated are characterised 
by the elimination of stress arousals on certain homotypic 
stressors, agents who did not habituate show continuous or 
intermittent stress arousals, even at night when they become 
insomniac. As a buffer mechanism, habituation can lead to 
‘tolerable stress’ (Peters et al., 2017 ). In fact, these people show 
only low cortisol responses and intermediate levels of self-
esteem and locus of control ( Kirschbaum et al., 1995 ; Pruessner 
et al., 1999, 2005). When buffer mechanisms such as habituation 
fail and individuals remain trapped in their aversive environment, 
‘toxic stress’ can result; the stress responses of these individuals 
are maximal, while their self-esteem and sense of control are 
minimal (Kirschbaum et al., 1995 ; Pruessner et al., 1999 , 2005). 
Thus, habituation is a means of escaping the harmful effects 
of toxic stress. But the price of habituation is that the habituated 
person has to give up their deepest preferences.
CONSEQUENCES OF STRESS 
HABITUATION
Habituation can affect both the internal body states of the 
agent and the external states that the agent occupies. The 
internal body states include the energy states of both brain 
and body. As we  have shown so far, habituation minimises 
the complexity term in the free energy formulation but 
interestingly also minimises the cerebral metabolic cost. For 
the complexity, costs of variational free energy are related to 
the brain’s metabolic costs (i.e., the thermodynamic free energy) 
in the sense that they have the same minimum ( Sengupta 
et al., 2013 ). Thus, statistically and metabolically efficient brains 
penalise high complexity and associated commodities like energy. 
With respect to habituation, this means that reducing the 
precision of goal priors may reduce not only complexity costs 
but also cerebral metabolic costs.
These theoretical considerations on the close relationship 
between variational and thermodynamic free energy made in 
previous work ( Sengupta et  al., 2013 ; Kiefer, 2020; Parr et  al., 
2020) are consistent with the experimental evidence from stress 
research. Experimentally induced stress arousals (i.e., states 
FIGURE 3 |  Social acceptance scenario—flattening of probability 
distributions over goal states underlying stress habituation. The bars show the 
different probability distributions used in the example of social acceptance 
analogously to the example of work stimulus. Here, the most preferred 
situation is to have as much social acceptance as possible.
AB
FIGURE 4 |  Social acceptance scenario-effect of goal prior variance and habituation tendency on risk. The plotted lines work analogously to the lines in Figure 2 in 
the example of work stimulus. (A) The blue line shows again the influence of the prior shape. The tipping point for choosing another policy has slightly different 
shape but results in the same conclusion as in Figure 2 that a habituating agent will change its policy choice. (B) The liens are anologue to Figure 2B. Here, a 
habituation tendency above roughly 0.03 results in stress habituation of the agent.
Hartwig et al. Stress Habituation and Free Energy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 865203
with high variational free energy) have been shown to be highly 
energetically costly; even mild mental laboratory stressor results 
in a 12% increase in global cerebral metabolic rate of glucose 
(Madsen et  al., 1995 ). Occasional arousal states are part of 
every vibrant and good life. People with toxic stress show 
recurrent or persistent arousal states during the day and insomnia 
at night, which increases the average brain’s energy need. 
Compared to people who live a vibrant and good life, people 
who have habituated to stress hardly show any arousals, so 
their average brain energy need is lower.
The subaverage cerebral energy demand and need after 
habituation may have a major impact on peripheral energy 
metabolism. To illustrate this, we  take a look at the brain’s 
energy logistics. As we  have shown in three recent systematic 
reviews, the brain can be  viewed as the end consumer of an 
energetic supply chain ( Figure  5; Sprengell et  al., 2021a ,b,c). 
The cerebral supply chain is a mathematical representation of 
the Selfish Brain theory. The Selfish Brain theory describes 
the mammalian brain’s ability to regulate energy metabolism 
in such a way that it covers its own high need with priority 
(Peters et al., 2004 ). The brain behaves ‘selfishly’ in this respect. 
The key feature of the Selfish Brain theory is the postulate of 
brain-pull mechanisms by which the brain procures itself with 
‘energy on demand’ (Peters and Langemann, 2009). Rival theories 
are the gluco-lipostatic theory and its modern variants denying 
the existence of brain-pull mechanisms ( Kennedy, 1953; Mayer, 
1953; Chaput and Tremblay, 2009 ; Schwartz et  al., 2017 ). In 
the three systematic reviews mentioned above, the competing 
theories were put to the test. The Selfish Brain theory was 
able to predict all the data sets studied (i.e., on caloric restriction, 
cerebral artery occlusion, and type 1 diabetes mellitus), whereas 
all predictions of the gluco-lipostatic theory and its modern 
variants failed (Sprengell et al., 2021a ,b,c). Based on the current 
evidence, we  can therefore rely on the cerebral supply chain 
model for our further considerations of stress habituation.
According to the general laws of supply chains, goods build 
up when the end user needs and demands less ( Slack et  al., 
2004). If customers do not buy, the shelves stay full. This is 
exactly what can be  expected when the brain consumes less 
energy after stress habituation, namely, that energy builds up 
in the body, leading to weight gain. The opposite occurs with 
toxic stress, when the brain consumes more energy and the 
body stores are emptied, resulting in weight loss. Because in 
toxic stress, peripheral glucose storage is inhibited, glucose can 
accumulate in the blood, so that the lean type 2 diabetes 
phenotype develops. However, when after stress habituation the 
brain consumes less energy, the energy accumulates in the adipose 
tissue (in the form of triglycerides) and in the blood (in the 
form of glucose), resulting in the obese type 2 diabetes phenotype 
(Peters and McEwen, 2015 ). In short, when the brain, as the 
end consumer, needs less energy after stress habituation, energy 
builds up in the cerebral supply chain—leading to obesity.
At first glance, one might expect that behavioural changes 
under toxic stress and after habituation would also contribute 
to changes in body shape. Under toxic stress, social withdrawal 
may occur due to depression, and after habituation, submissive, 
withdrawn, and undynamic behaviour may develop, so in both 
cases, decreased physical activity can be  expected to cause 
weight gain. But this is unlikely to be  the case, as toxic stress 
is more related to weight loss and habituation to weight gain 
(Epel et  al., 2000 ; Peters and McEwen, 2015 ), making such 
behavioural factors on body shape appear less contributing.
The external states that the agent occupies may also change 
through the habituation process. Looking at a population of 
people who have habituated to homotypic stressors (compared 
to non-habituated people), these people are more likely to 
occupy adverse (previously unaccepted) states (e.g., lower social 
status and poverty). This phenomenon is due to the preferences 
that have been established after habituation, which are less 
precise and thus make adverse states seem more acceptable. 
Thus, people who have habituated are unlikely to continue 
searching for promising ways out.
Interestingly, one could infer from our theoretical considerations 
that stress habituation is a risk factor on the one hand for the 
development of obesity and on the other hand for the tolerance/
acceptance of low socio-economic status. Such relationships could 
explain, at least to some extent, why many people of low socio-
economic status are obese ( Mohammed et  al., 2019 ). Further 
FIGURE 5 |  The cerebral supply chain. Energy is transferred from the environment through the body to the brain, the end consumer of the supply chain. When the 
brain needs energy, the brain-pull demands it from the body. When the body needs energy, the body-pull demands it from the environment.
Hartwig et al. Stress Habituation and Free Energy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 865203
evidence comes from the MTO project, a large social intervention 
study in which women in the intervention arm were able to 
move from a poverty area to a better vicinity. Compared to 
the control group, the women who were given the opportunity 
to move felt less uncertain and had a lower prevalence of severe 
obesity and type 2 diabetes after 15 years ( Ludwig et  al., 2011 , 
2012). These findings are consistent with the notion that alleviating 
stress through social interventions reduces the prevalence of 
obesity, a notion strongly supported by findings from animal 
experiments which demonstrated that stress causes obesity 
(Kaufman et  al., 2007 ; Jahng et  al., 2012 ). It is tempting to 
speculate that in the MTO project, less stress among the women 
who moved led to fewer stress habituations and thus to a lower 
prevalence of obesity.
Given the presence of heterotypic stressors in a complex 
environment, a person who has habituated to one stressor 
(e.g., at work) may not habituate to another (e.g., at home). 
Thus, complex interactions between the individual and their 
environment determine the extent to which internal and external 
consequences of habituation manifest themselves.
In summary, stress habituation based on less precise goal 
preferences, on the one hand, makes stress more tolerable (by 
reducing variational free energy to some extent) and protects 
against the deleterious effects of toxic stress, but, on the other 
hand, makes the occupation of precarious living conditions 
and the development of the obese type 2 diabetes mellitus 
phenotype more likely.
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
Three arguments support the notion that our approach captures 
the nature of stress habituation well:
 1. The free energy optimising perspective is a very general 
perspective that has been used to explain various behaviours. 
Stress habituation can easily be  integrated into the free 
energy principle, which makes our approach plausible because 
of the mathematical unification.
 2. Stress habituation has been found to occur in brain areas 
where goal priors are encoded (vmPFC). In addition, it 
could be  shown that in the vmPFC, the goal preferences 
are coded as the mean and variance of the internal probability 
distributions. Given this evidence, we  propose that stress 
habituation decreases the precision (inverse variance) of goal 
preferences. The vmPFC in turn controls stress responses 
(amygdalae), which makes our approach plausible from an 
anatomical-functional point of view.
 3. The mathematics behind the optimisation are well defined 
and can lead to easy-to-understand examples, as shown in 
Section “Stress Habituation in the Context of Work Stimulus 
Preferences and Social Acceptance” .
In summary, given the currently available theoretical and 
experimental background, our novel approach (compared to 
the conventional one) provides the best explanation. Future 
human studies combining repeated TSSTs with dynamic causal 
models could provide further insights into the mechanisms of 
stress habituation.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
AP developed the conceptual idea. MH created the examples. 
All authors contributed to the article and approved the 
submitted version.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors specially thank Karl Friston, University College 
London, for intensively accompanying our project, paying 
attention to formal and coherent terminology, contributing new 
interesting aspects, and providing constructive criticism.
 
REFERENCES
Aston-Jones, G., and Cohen, J. D. (2005). An integrative theory of 
locus coeruleus-norepinephrine function: adaptive gain and optimal 
performance. Annu. Rev. Neurosci.  28, 403–450. doi: 10.1146/annurev.
neuro.28.061604.135709
Bang, H., and Reio, T. G. (2017). Examining the role of cynicism in the 
relationships between burnout and employee behavior. Rev. Psicol. Trab. 
Organ. 33, 217–228. doi: 10.1016/J.RPTO.2017.07.002
Barron, H. C., Garvert, M. M., and Behrens, T. E. J. (2015). Reassessing VMPFC: 
full of confidence? Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1064–1066. doi: 10.1038/nn.4076
Bechara, A., Tranel, D., and Damasio, H. (2000). Characterization of the 
decision-making deficit of patients with ventromedial prefrontal cortex lesions. 
Brain 123, 2189–2202. doi: 10.1093/brain/123.11.2189
Behrens, T. E. J., Woolrich, M. W ., Walton, M. E., and Rushworth, M. F . S. 
(2007). Learning the value of information in an uncertain world. Nat. 
Neurosci. 10, 1214–1221. doi: 10.1038/nn1954
Benzinou, M., Chèvre, J. C., Ward, K. J., Lecoeur, C., Dina, C., Lobbens, S., 
et al. (2008). Endocannabinoid receptor 1 gene variations increase risk for 
obesity and modulate body mass index in European populations. Hum. 
Mol. Genet.  17, 1916–1921. doi: 10.1093/HMG/DDN089
Berridge, C. W ., and Waterhouse, B. D. (2003). The locus coeruleus-noradrenergic 
system: modulation of behavioral state and state-dependent cognitive 
processes. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev.  42, 33–84. doi: 10.1016/
S0165-0173(03)00143-7
Brown, S. M., Henning, S., and Wellman, C. L. (2005). Mild, short-term stress 
alters dendritic morphology in rat medial prefrontal cortex. Cereb. Cortex  
15, 1714–1722. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhi048
Buckley, C. L., Kim, C. S., McGregor, S., and Seth, A. K. (2017). The free 
energy principle for action and perception: a mathematical review. J. Math. 
Psychol. 81, 55–79. doi: 10.1016/j.jmp.2017.09.004
Chaput, J. P ., and Tremblay, A. (2009). The glucostatic theory of appetite control 
and the risk of obesity and diabetes. Int. J. Obes.  33, 46–53. doi: 10.1038/
ijo.2008.221
Cook, S. C., and Wellman, C. L. (2004). Chronic stress alters dendritic morphology 
in rat medial prefrontal cortex. J. Neurobiol.  60, 236–248. doi: 10.1002/
neu.20025
Corlett, P . R., Horga, G., Fletcher, P . C., Alderson-Day, B., Schmack, K., and 
Powers, A. R. (2019). Hallucinations and strong priors. Trends Cogn. Sci.  
23, 114–127. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2018.12.001
Epel, E. S., McEwen, B., Seeman, T., Matthews, K., Castellazzo, G., Brownell, K. D., 
et al. (2000). Stress and body shape: stress-induced cortisol secretion is 
Hartwig et al. Stress Habituation and Free Energy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 865203
consistently greater among women with central fat. Psychosom. Med.  62, 
623–632. doi: 10.1097/00006842-200009000-00005
Feinstein, J. S., Stein, M. B., and Paulus, M. P . (2006). Anterior insula reactivity 
during certain decisions is associated with neuroticism. Soc. Cogn. Affect. 
Neurosci. 1, 136–142. doi: 10.1093/SCAN/NSL016
Fiorillo, C. D., Newsome, W . T., and Schultz, W . (2008). The temporal precision 
of reward prediction in dopamine neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 966–973. doi: 
10.1038/nn.2159
Fralick, M., and Flegel, K. (2014). Physician burnout: who will protect us from 
ourselves? CMAJ 186:731. doi: 10.1503/CMAJ.140588
Fride, E., Suris, R., Weidenfeld, J., and Mechoulam, R. (2005). Differential 
response to acute and repeated stress in cannabinoid CB1 receptor knockout 
newborn and adult mice. Behav. Pharmacol.  16, 431–440. doi: 
10.1097/00008877-200509000-00016
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain? 
Trends Cogn. Sci.  13, 293–301. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., Kilner, J., Kiebel, S. J., Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., 
et al. (2010). Action and behavior: a free-energy formulation. Biol. Cybern. 
102, 227–260. doi: 10.1007/S00422-010-0364-Z
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F ., Schwartenbeck, P ., and Pezzulo, G. (2017). 
Active inference: a process theory. Neural Comput. 29, 1–49. doi: 10.1162/
NECO_A_00912
Friston, K., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle for 
the brain. J. Physiol. Paris  100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/J.
JPHYSPARIS.2006.10.001
Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P ., FitzGerald, T., Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T., and 
Dolan, R. J. (2013). The anatomy of choice: active inference and agency. 
Front. Hum. Neurosci.  7:598. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00598
Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P ., FitzGerald, T., Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T., and 
Dolan, R. J. (2014). The anatomy of choice: dopamine and decision-making. 
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.  369:20130481. doi: 10.1098/RSTB.2013.0481
Frost, M., Nielsen, T. L., Wraae, K., Hagen, C., Piters, E., Beckers, S., et al. 
(2010). Polymorphisms in the endocannabinoid receptor 1  in relation to 
fat mass distribution. Eur. J. Endocrinol. 163, 407–412. doi: 10.1530/EJE-10-0192
Gilabert-Juan, J., Castillo-Gomez, E., Guirado, R., Moltó, M. D., and Nacher, J. 
(2013). Chronic stress alters inhibitory networks in the medial prefrontal 
cortex of adult mice. Brain Struct. Funct.  218, 1591–1605. doi: 10.1007/
s00429-012-0479-1
Gottfried, J. A., O’Doherty, J., and Dolan, R. J. (2003). Encoding predictive 
reward value in human amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex. Science 301, 
1104–1107. doi: 10.1126/science.1087919
Grissom, N., and Bhatnagar, S. (2009). Habituation to repeated stress: get used 
to it. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem.  92, 215–224. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2008.07.001
Gulliksson, M., Burell, G., Vessby, B., Lundin, L., Toss, H., and Svärdsudd, K. 
(2011). Randomized controlled trial of cognitive behavioral therapy vs 
standard treatment to prevent recurrent cardiovascular events in patients 
with coronary heart disease: secondary prevention in Uppsala primary health 
care project (SUPRIM). Arch. Intern. Med.  171, 134–140. doi: 10.1001/
ARCHINTERNMED.2010.510
Harismendy, O., Bansal, V ., Bhatia, G., Nakano, M., Scott, M., Wang, X., et al. 
(2010). Population sequencing of two endocannabinoid metabolic genes 
identifies rare and common regulatory variants associated with extreme 
obesity and metabolite level. Genome Biol.  11:R118. doi: 10.1186/
GB-2010-11-11-R118
Harris, J. J., Jolivet, R., and Attwell, D. (2012). Synaptic energy use and supply. 
Neuron 75, 762–777. doi: 10.1016/J.NEURON.2012.08.019
Hartwig, M., and Peters, A. (2021). Cooperation and social rules emerging 
from the principle of surprise minimization. Front. Psychol. 11:606174. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2020.606174
Heraclides, A., Chandola, T., Witte, D. R., and Brunner, E. J. (2009). Psychosocial 
stress at work doubles the risk of type 2 diabetes in middle-aged women: 
evidence from the Whitehall II study. Diabetes Care  32, 2230–2235. doi: 
10.2337/DC09-0132
Hill, M. N., Hillard, C. J., and McEwen, B. S. (2011a). Alterations in corticolimbic 
dendritic morphology and emotional behavior in cannabinoid CB1 receptor–
deficient mice parallel the effects of chronic stress. Cereb. Cortex 21, 2056–2064. 
doi: 10.1093/CERCOR/BHQ280
Hill, M. N., Karatsoreos, I. N., Hillard, C. J., and McEwen, B. S. (2010a). 
Rapid elevations in limbic endocannabinoid content by glucocorticoid 
hormones in  vivo. Psychoneuroendocrinology 35, 1333–1338. doi: 10.1016/j.
psyneuen.2010.03.005
Hill, M. N., Kumar, S. A., Filipski, S. B., Iverson, M., Stuhr, K. L., Keith, J. M., 
et al. (2013). Disruption of fatty acid amide hydrolase activity prevents the 
effects of chronic stress on anxiety and amygdalar microstructure. Mol. 
Psychiatry 18, 1125–1135. doi: 10.1038/MP .2012.90
Hill, M. N., McLaughlin, R. J., Bingham, B., Shrestha, L., Lee, T. T. Y ., Gray, J. M., 
et al. (2010b). Endogenous cannabinoid signaling is essential for stress 
adaptation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.  107, 9406–9411. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.0914661107
Hill, M. N., McLaughlin, R. J., Pan, B., Fitzgerald, M. L., Roberts, C. J., Lee, T. T. 
Y ., et al. (2011b). Recruitment of prefrontal cortical endocannabinoid signaling 
by glucocorticoids contributes to termination of the stress response. J. 
Neurosci. 31, 10506–10515. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0496-11.2011
Hitze, B., Hubold, C., van Dyken, R., Schlichting, K., Lehnert, H., Entringer, S., 
et al. (2010). How the selfish brain organizes its supply and demand. Front. 
Neuroenerg. 2:7. doi: 10.3389/FNENE.2010.00007
Jahng, J. W ., Y oo, S. B., Ryu, V ., and Lee, J. H. (2012). Hyperphagia and 
depression-like behavior by adolescence social isolation in female rats. Int. 
J. Dev. Neurosci.  30, 47–53. doi: 10.1016/J.IJDEVNEU.2011.10.001
Jhang, J., Lee, H., Kang, M. S., Lee, H. S., Park, H., and Han, J. H. (2018). 
Anterior cingulate cortex and its input to the basolateral amygdala control 
innate fear response. Nat. Commun. 9, 1–16. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-05090-y
Karlsson, M. P ., Tervo, D. G. R., and Karpova, A. Y . (2012). Network resets 
in medial prefrontal cortex mark the onset of behavioral uncertainty. Science 
338, 135–139. doi: 10.1126/SCIENCE.1226518
Kaufman, D., Banerji, M. A., Shorman, I., Smith, E. L. P ., Coplan, J. D., 
Rosenblum, L. A., et al. (2007). Early-life stress and the development of 
obesity and insulin resistance in juvenile bonnet macaques. Diabetes 56, 
1382–1386. doi: 10.2337/DB06-1409
Kennedy, G. C. (1953). The role of depot fat in the hypothalamic control of 
food intake in the rat. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.  140, 578–596. doi: 
10.1098/rspb.1953.0009
Kiefer, A. B. (2020). Psychophysical identity and free energy. J. R. Soc. Interface  
17:20200370. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2020.0370
Kirschbaum, C., Prussner, J. C., Stone, A. A., Federenko, I., Gaab, J., Lintz, D., 
et al. (1995). Persistent high cortisol responses to repeated psychological 
stress in a subpopulation of healthy men. Psychosom. Med.  57, 468–474. 
doi: 10.1097/00006842-199509000-00009
Knill, D. C., and Pouget, A. (2004). The Bayesian brain: the role of uncertainty 
in neural coding and computation. Trends Neurosci.  27, 712–719. doi: 
10.1016/j.tins.2004.10.007
Kothgassner, O. D., Goreis, A., Glenk, L. M., Kafka, J. X., Pfeffer, B., Beutl, L., 
et al. (2021). Habituation of salivary cortisol and cardiovascular reactivity 
to a repeated real-life and virtual reality trier social stress test. Physiol. 
Behav. 242:113618. doi: 10.1016/J.PHYSBEH.2021.113618
Lebreton, M., Abitbol, R., Daunizeau, J., and Pessiglione, M. (2015). Automatic 
integration of confidence in the brain valuation signal. Nat. Neurosci.  18, 
1159–1167. doi: 10.1038/nn.4064
Liljeholm, M., Wang, S., Zhang, J., and O’Doherty, J. P . (2013). Neural correlates 
of the divergence of instrumental probability distributions. J. Neurosci.  33, 
12519–12527. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1353-13.2013
Linson, A., Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2020). Active inference, stressors, and 
psychological trauma: a neuroethological model of (mal)adaptive explore-
exploit dynamics in ecological context. Behav. Brain Res.  380:112421. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbr.2019.112421
Ludwig, J., Duncan, G. J., Gennetian, L. A., Katz, L. F ., Kessler, R. C., Kling, J. R., 
et al. (2012). Neighborhood effects on the long-term well-being of low-
income adults. Science 337, 1505–1510. doi: 10.1126/SCIENCE.1224648
Ludwig, J., Sanbonmatsu, L., Gennetian, L., Adam, E., Duncan, G. J., Katz, L. F ., 
et al. (2011). Neighborhoods, obesity, and diabetes—a randomized social 
experiment. N. Engl. J. Med.  365, 1509–1519. doi: 10.1056/NEJMSA1103216/
SUPPL_FILE/NEJMSA1103216_DISCLOSURES.PDF
Madsen, P . L., Hasselbalch, S. G., Hagemann, L. P ., Olsen, K. S., Bülow, J., 
Holm, S., et al. (1995). Persistent resetting of the cerebral oxygen/glucose 
uptake ratio by brain activation: evidence obtained with the Kety-Schmidt 
technique. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 15, 485–491. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.1995.60
Hartwig et al. Stress Habituation and Free Energy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 865203
Maggio, N., and Segal, M. (2007). Striking variations in corticosteroid modulation 
of long-term potentiation along the septotemporal axis of the hippocampus. 
J. Neurosci.  27, 5757–5765. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0155-07.2007
Maggio, N., and Segal, M. (2009). Differential modulation of long-term depression 
by acute stress in the rat dorsal and ventral hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 29, 
8633–8638. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1901-09.2009
Malcher-Lopes, R., Franco, A., and Tasker, J. G. (2008). Glucocorticoids shift  
arachidonic acid metabolism toward endocannabinoid synthesis: a non-
genomic anti-inflammatory switch. Eur. J. Pharmacol.  583, 322–339. doi: 
10.1016/J.EJPHAR.2007.12.033
Maslach, C., and Leiter, M. P . (2006). “Burnout, ” in Stress and Quality of Working 
Life: Current Perspectives in Occupational Health. Vol. 37. eds. A. M. Rossi, P . L. 
Perrewé and S. L. Sauter (Information Age Publishing), 42–49.
Maslach, C., Schaufeli, W . B., and Leiter, M. P . (2001). Job burnout. Annu. 
Rev. Psychol. 52, 397–422. doi: 10.1146/annurev.psych.52.1.397
Maslow, A. H. (1943). A theory of human motivation. Psychol. Rev. 50, 370–396. 
doi: 10.1037/h0054346
Mayer, J. (1953). Glucostatic mechanism of regulation of food intake. N. Engl. 
J. Med.  249, 13–16. doi: 10.1056/nejm195307022490104
McEwen, B. S. (1998). Protective and damaging effects of stress mediators. N. 
Engl. J. Med.  338, 171–179. doi: 10.1056/nejm199801153380307
McEwen, B. S. (2012). Brain on stress: how the social environment gets under 
the skin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.  109, 17180–17185. doi: 10.1073/
PNAS.1121254109
McKlveen, J. M., Myers, B., Flak, J. N., Bundzikova, J., Solomon, M. B., 
Seroogy, K. B., et al. (2013). Role of prefrontal cortex glucocorticoid receptors 
in stress and emotion. Biol. Psychiatry  74, 672–679. doi: 10.1016/J.
BIOPSYCH.2013.03.024
Mohammed, S. H., Habtewold, T. D., Birhanu, M. M., Sissay, T. A., Tegegne, B. S., 
Abuzerr, S., et al. (2019). Neighbourhood socioeconomic status and overweight/
obesity: a systematic review and meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. 
BMJ Open  9:e028238. doi: 10.1136/BMJOPEN-2018-028238
O’Doherty, J., Critchley, H., Deichmann, R., and Dolan, R. J. (2003). Dissociating 
valence of outcome from behavioral control in human orbital and ventral 
prefrontal cortices. J. Neurosci.  23, 7931–7939. doi: 10.1523/
jneurosci.23-21-07931.2003
Orth-Gomér, K., Schneiderman, N., Wang, H. X., Walldin, C., Blom, M., and 
Jernberg, T. (2009). Stress reduction prolongs life in women with coronary 
disease: the Stockholm women’s intervention trial for coronary heart disease 
(SWITCHD). Circ. Cardiovasc. Qual. Outcomes  2, 25–32. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCOUTCOMES.108.812859
Parr, T., Da Costa, L., and Friston, K. (2020). Markov blankets, information 
geometry and stochastic thermodynamics. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 378: 20190159. 
doi:10.1098/RSTA.2019.0159
Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2018). The anatomy of inference: generative models 
and brain structure. Front. Comput. Neurosci.  12:90. doi: 10.3389/
fncom.2018.00090
Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2019). Generalised free energy and active inference. 
Biol. Cybern.  113, 495–513. doi: 10.1007/s00422-019-00805-w
Patel, S., and Hillard, C. J. (2008). Adaptations in endocannabinoid signaling in 
response to repeated homotypic stress: a novel mechanism for stress habituation. 
Eur. J. Neurosci. 27, 2821–2829. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06266.x
Paulus, M. P ., Hozack, N., Frank, L., and Brown, G. G. (2002). Error rate and 
outcome predictability affect neural activation in prefrontal cortex and anterior 
cingulate during decision-making. NeuroImage 15, 836–846. doi: 10.1006/
NIMG.2001.1031
Pavlides, C., Kimura, A., Magarinos, A. M., and Mcewen, B. S. (1995). Hippocampal 
homosynaptic long-term depression/depotentiation induced by adrenal steroids. 
Neuroscience 68, 379–385. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(95)94332-S
Peters, A., Conrad, M., Hubold, C., Schweiger, U., Fischer, B., and Fehm, H. L. 
(2007). The principle of homeostasis in the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal 
system: new insight from positive feedback. Am. J. Phys. Regul. Integr. Comp. 
Phys. 293, R83–R98. doi: 10.1152/AJPREGU.00907.2006
Peters, A., Kuber, B., Hubold, C., and Langemann, D. (2013). The corpulent 
phenotype—how the brain maximizes survival in stressful environments. 
Front. Neurosci. 7:47. doi: 10.3389/FNINS.2013.00047
Peters, A., and Langemann, D. (2009). Build-ups in the supply chain of the 
brain: on the neuroenergetic cause of obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Front. Neuroenerg. 1:2. doi: 10.3389/NEURO.14.002.2009
Peters, A., and McEwen, B. S. (2015). Stress habituation, body shape and 
cardiovascular mortality. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 56, 139–150. doi: 10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2015.07.001
Peters, A., McEwen, B. S., and Friston, K. (2017). Uncertainty and stress: why 
it causes diseases and how it is mastered by the brain. Prog. Neurobiol.  
156, 164–188. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2017.05.004
Peters, A., Schweiger, U., Pellerin, L., Hubold, C., Oltmanns, K. M., Conrad, M., 
et al. (2004). The selfish brain: competition for energy resources. Neurosci. 
Biobehav. Rev. 28, 143–180. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2004.03.002
Pitler, T. A., and Alger, B. E. (1992). Postsynaptic spike firing reduces synaptic 
GABA(A) responses in hippocampal pyramidal cells. J. Neurosci. 12, 4122–4132. 
doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.12-10-04122.1992
Pruessner, J. C., Baldwin, M. W ., Dedovic, K., Renwick, R., Mahani, N. K., 
Lord, C., et al. (2005). Self-esteem, locus of control, hippocampal volume, 
and cortisol regulation in young and old adulthood. NeuroImage 28, 815–826. 
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.06.014
Pruessner, J. C., Hellhammer, D. H., and Kirschbaum, C. (1999). Low self-
esteem, induced failure and the adrenocortical stress response. Personal. 
Individ. Differ. 27, 477–489. doi: 10.1016/S0191-8869(98)00256-6
Radley, J. J., Rocher, A. B., Miller, M., Janssen, W . G. M., Liston, C., Hof, P . R., 
et al. (2006). Repeated stress induces dendritic spine loss in the rat medial 
prefrontal cortex. Cereb. Cortex  16, 313–320. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhi104
Radley, J. J., Rocher, A. B., Rodriguez, A., Ehlenberger, D. B., Dammann, M., 
Mcewen, B. S., et al. (2008). Repeated stress alters dendritic spine morphology 
in the rat medial prefrontal cortex. J. Comp. Neurol.  507, 1141–1150. doi: 
10.1002/cne.21588
Ramaswami, M. (2014). Network plasticity in adaptive filtering and behavioral 
habituation. Neuron 82, 1216–1229. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.04.035
Rao, R. P . N., and Ballard, D. H. (1999). Predictive coding in the visual cortex: 
a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nat. 
Neurosci. 2, 79–87. doi: 10.1038/4580
Roesch, M. R., and Olson, C. R. (2004). Neuronal activity related to reward 
value and motivation in primate frontal cortex. Science 304, 307–310. doi: 
10.1126/science.1093223
Sajid, N., Tigas, P ., Zakharov, A., Fountas, Z., and Friston, K. (2021). Exploration 
and Preference Satisfaction Trade-Off in Reward-Free Learning. Available 
at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.04316v2 (Accessed January 29, 2022).
Sarinopoulos, I., Grupe, D. W ., Mackiewicz, K. L., Herrington, J. D., Lor, M., 
Steege, E. E., et al. (2010). Uncertainty during anticipation modulates neural 
responses to aversion in human insula and amygdala. Cereb. Cortex  20, 
929–940. doi: 10.1093/CERCOR/BHP155
Schaufeli, W . B., and Salanova, M. (2014). “Burnout, boredom and engagement 
in the workplace, ” in An Introduction to Contemporary Work Psychology  
eds. M. C. W . Peeters, J. d. Jonge and T. W . Taris (Wiley Blackwell), 293–318.
Schrödinger, E. (1956). What Is Life? and Other Scientific Essays. Available 
at: https://philpapers.org/rec/SCHWIL-6 (Accessed December 23, 2021).
Schultz, W . (2007). Multiple dopamine functions at different time courses. Annu. 
Rev. Neurosci. 30, 259–288. doi: 10.1146/ANNUREV .NEURO.28.061604.135722
Schultz, W ., Preuschoff, K., Camerer, C., Hsu, M., Fiorillo, C. D., Tobler, P . N., 
et al. (2008). Explicit neural signals reflecting reward uncertainty. Philos. 
Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.  363, 3801–3811. doi: 10.1098/RSTB.2008.0152
Schwartenbeck, P ., FitzGerald, T., Dolan, R. J., and Friston, K. (2013). Exploration, 
novelty, surprise, and free energy minimization. Front. Psychol. 4:710. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00710
Schwartenbeck, P ., FitzGerald, T. H. B., Mathys, C., Dolan, R., and Friston, K. 
(2015). The dopaminergic midbrain encodes the expected certainty about 
desired outcomes. Cereb. Cortex  25, 3434–3445. doi: 10.1093/CERCOR/
BHU159
Schwartz, M. W ., Seeley, R. J., Zeltser, L. M., Drewnowski, A., Ravussin, E., 
Redman, L. M., et al. (2017). Obesity pathogenesis: an endocrine society 
scientific statement. Endocr. Rev. 38, 267–296. doi: 10.1210/ER.2017-00111
Sengupta, B., Stemmler, M. B., and Friston, K. J. (2013). Information and 
efficiency in the nervous system—a synthesis. PLoS Comput. Biol. 9:e1003157. 
doi: 10.1371/JOURNAL.PCBI.1003157
Slack, N., Chambers, S., and Johnston, R. (2004). Operations Management . 
4th Edn . Harlow: FT Prentice Hall.
Sprengell, M., Kubera, B., and Peters, A. (2021a). Brain mass (energy) resistant 
to hyperglycaemic oversupply: a systematic review. Front. Neurosci. 15:740502. 
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.740502
Hartwig et al. Stress Habituation and Free Energy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 865203
Sprengell, M., Kubera, B., and Peters, A. (2021b). Brain more resistant to 
energy restriction than body: a systematic review. Front. Neurosci. 15:639617. 
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.639617
Sprengell, M., Kubera, B., and Peters, A. (2021c). Proximal disruption of brain 
energy supply raises systemic blood glucose: a systematic review. Front. 
Neurosci. 15:685031. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.685031
Stock, R. M. (2015). Is boreout a threat to frontline employees’ 
innovative work behavior? J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 32, 574–592. doi: 10.1111/
jpim.12239
Thompson, R. F ., and Spencer, W . A. (1966). Habituation: a model phenomenon 
for the study of neuronal substrates of behavior. Psychol. Rev.  73, 16–43. 
doi: 10.1037/h0022681
van Rossum, E. F . C., and Lamberts, S. W . J. (2004). Polymorphisms in the 
glucocorticoid receptor gene and their associations with metabolic parameters 
and body composition. Recent Prog. Horm. Res.  59, 333–357. doi: 10.1210/
RP .59.1.333
Wacongne, C., Changeux, J.-P ., and Dehaene, S. (2012). A neuronal model of 
predictive coding accounting for the mismatch negativity. J. Neurosci.  32, 
3665–3678. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5003-11.2012
Weidenfeld, J., and Ovadia, H. (2017). “The role of the amygdala in regulating 
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, ” in The Amygdala—Where Emotions 
Shape Perception, Learning and Memories . ed. B. Ferry (IntechOpen).
Weinberg, M. S., Johnson, D. C., Bhatt, A. P ., and Spencer, R. L. (2010). 
Medial prefrontal cortex activity can disrupt the expression of stress response 
habituation. Neuroscience 168, 744–756. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.04.006
Conflict of Interest:  MH is employed by singularIT GmbH.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence 
of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, 
or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may 
be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is 
not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Hartwig, Bhat and Peters. This is an open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY) . The use, 
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original 
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication 
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, 
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.