fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 1
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 11 April 2022
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.842488
Edited by:
Patrice Duquette,
Private Practice, Birmingham, MI,
United States
Reviewed by:
Vivien Ainley,
University of London, United Kingdom
Patrick Connolly,
Hong Kong Shue Yan University,
Hong Kong SAR, China
*Correspondence:
Gernot Hauke
g.hauke@era-europa.com
Christina Lohr
c.lohr@era-europa.com
† These authors have contributed
equally to this work
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Health Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 23 December 2021
Accepted: 02 March 2022
Published: 11 April 2022
Citation:
Hauke G and Lohr C (2022)
Piloting the Update: The Use of
Therapeutic Relationship for Change –
A Free Energy Account.
Front. Psychol. 13:842488.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.842488
Piloting the Update: The Use of
Therapeutic Relationship for
Change – A Free Energy Account
Gernot Hauke*† and Christina Lohr*†
Embodiment Resources Academy (ERA) Europa, Munich, Germany
We apply the Free Energy Principle (FEP) to cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). FEP
describes the basic functioning of the brain as a predictive organ and states that any
self-organizing system that is in equilibrium with its environment must minimize its free
energy. Based on an internal model of the world and the self, predictions—so-called
priors—are created, which are matched with the information input. The sum of prediction
errors corresponds to the Free Energy, which must be minimized. Internal models can
be identiﬁed with the cognitive-affective schemas of the individual that has become
dysfunctional in patients. The role of CBT in this picture is to help the patient update
her/his priors. They have evolved in learning history and no longer provide adaptive
predictions. We discuss the process of updating in terms of the exploration-exploitation
dilemma. This consists of the extent to which one relies on what one already has,
i.e., whether one continues to maintain and “exploit” one’s previous priors (“better safe
than sorry”) or whether one does explore new data that lead to an update of priors.
Questioning previous priors triggers stress, which is associated with increases in Free
Energy in short term. The role of therapeutic relationship is to buffer this increase in Free
Energy, thereby increasing the level of perceived safety. The therapeutic relationship is
represented in a dual model of affective alliance and goal attainment alliance and is
aligned with FEP . Both forms of alliance support exploration and updating of priors. All
aspects are illustrated with the help of a clinical case example.
Keywords: free energy, active inference, exploration-exploitation-dilemma, therapeutic relationship, cognitive
behavioral therapy, safety regulation, emotional survival, embodied cognition
THE CONCEPT OF FREE ENERGY
The concept of free energy (FEP) is being used in the context of neuroscience as well as biology,
where it has been promoted for its broad applicability and even proposed as a fundamental principle
for understanding intelligent behavior and brain function (Friston, 2010). Meanwhile, this principle
has also made its way into psychotherapeutic thinking. There are considerable psychoanalytic
resonances (Hopkins, 2016; Connolly, 2018; Holmes and Nolte, 2019; Holmes, 2020; Solms, 2021).
Smith et al. (2021b) have introduced a computational model of cognitive-behavioral approaches
using this principle. For more integrative therapeutic approaches, the concept of free energy has
been suggested as a guiding principle for strategic modiﬁcation of priors (Krupnik, 2019). Overall,
interesting ideas are developing under this umbrella, which could provide a common theoretical
framework for a wide variety of psychotherapeutic streams (Chekroud, 2015; Duquette, 2017;
Papalini et al., 2020; Krupnik, 2021).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488
fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 2
Hauke and Lohr Therapeutic Relationship and the Free Energy Account
Free energy provides a single uniﬁed mathematical
concept. In all applications, it is concerned with minimizing
free energy as a fundamental process of self-organizing
systems. Particularly in the face of permanent changes in
the environment, this process serves to maintain its sensory
states within existing physiological limits. These abstract
connections are now to be made plausible with regard to
psychotherapeutic questions.
In the course of childhood and depending on experiences
of satisfaction or frustration of central needs such as security,
belonging, autonomy, self-worth, etc., the brain develops an
internal model of the self and the world (Beck et al., 1979; Young
et al., 2003; Sulz, 2006). This model contains expectations—they
are referred to here as priors—that are so good that the person
can survive with them. Development and learning usually lead
to a continuous update of these priors. The goal of this process
is to continually improve accuracy of the internal model so that
the most adaptive behavior possible can be realized even in
uncertain situations.
Internal models can never fully prepare for all the
uncertainties that might happen. The expectations they
generate cannot always represent what then actually happens,
so that a greater or less degree of uncertainty must always
be expected. This makes discrepancies between what actually
happens and what is predicted possible. Such discrepancies are
called prediction errors (PEs), and the free energy is essentially
the sum of these prediction errors. The free energy principle
calls for minimizing such prediction errors and thus minimizing
uncertainty. Too much uncertainty, however, contradicts the
natural goal of the system to move toward a stable state.
Experiences with higher amounts of stress are in many cases
necessary to initiate learning processes. Beyond mere tolerance,
an additional goal for clients is to learn that they can function
even when experiencing stress.
Moreover the intensity of stress must be oriented to the limits
of the client—it is unfavorable if he drops out or dissociates.
Besides the client’s limitations, duration of such an experience is
also a critical parameter. Critically therapy may proceed gradually
by working through a hierarchy of situations that are increasingly
more urge provoking, to overcome urges and other negative
mood states (Craske et al., 2014).
Too much free energy or uncertainty becomes a problem in
the long run (Peters et al., 2017). Beyond a certain limit, the
physical ability to survive is endangered.
How can free energy or PEs be minimized? Agents can
minimize free energy using two strategies. Together, they
constitute active inference:
• Update: Agents change their priors, or expectations, to
match incoming sensory information. In this way, priors
are revised through experience, resulting in more reality-
adapted priors.
• Acting: The second strategy is to perform an action to
control the sensory input so that the incoming data ﬁt the
existing priors best and minimizes PEs (i.e., no updating).
In this respect, diﬀerent exploratory behaviors may be
involved.
Active Inference describes perception as a computational
compromise between what priors lead us to expect and what
we actually experience. That is, perception is shaped by both
the internal model and the sensory impressions. This can be
described as a form of “controlled hallucination”. What is crucial
now is the “mixing ratio” of these two components that ﬁnally
leads to a perception. If the person is ﬁrmly convinced that his
or her inner model of a particular situation is correct, that is,
that it accurately represents reality, then it has a great inﬂuence
on the perceptual outcome. In this case, the priors are assigned
a strong weight (high precision). At the same time, if low
precision is assigned to the current sensory impressions, they
have little chance to make a meaningful contribution. In this case,
perception is more or less completely under the inﬂuence of the
internal model; context plays only a minor role.
Whether prediction error leads to an update of priors depends
on their relative strength or precision. For example, if someone
has repeatedly experienced massive fear toward authority ﬁgures,
the corresponding prior is “strong.” It dominates experience
so much that current information, such as open and friendly
behavior of a new boss, hardly matters. This is sometimes referred
to as hyper-precise priors, that disregard evidence and alternative
explanations that the world is a safe and predictable place
(Paulus et al., 2019).
When a patient comes to therapy with his or her problems,
his or her internal model has become dysfunctional. It does not
respond ﬂexibly enough to changes in the external world, which
has been linked to various mental illnesses (Paulus et al., 2019).
When patients repeatedly fail to match what they expect with
what is currently happening, a persistent discrepancy, or PEs,
occurs when they observe outcomes. They are unable to perform
an appropriate weighting of prior expectations and sensory cues.
A functional internal model relies on PEs to adjust priors and
then appropriate actions. However, in the case of a dysfunctional
model, the PEs remain. However, in the case of a dysfunctional
model, the PEs remain. Here, this update does not easily succeed,
and free energy remains permanently elevated.
ESSENTIAL TASK OF THERAPEUTIC
RELATIONSHIP: PROVIDE NEW
EXPERIENCE AND SUPPORT THE
UPDATE OF DYSFUNCTIONAL PRIORS
From the point of view of FEP , how should psychotherapeutic
relationship be conﬁgured so that the client can leave the zone of
problematic behavior associated with painful experiences, stress
and additional burdensome symptoms? Learning processes must
be initiated that allow a healthier adaptation to the environment.
Therefore, therapeutic interaction must support the development
and exploration of alternative behaviors. In the context of CBT,
experimental learning by success is an essential part of many
interventions. It is about gaining new insights, reﬂecting on them
and trying them out further, and thereby arriving at a more
coherent picture of oneself and the world. At the beginning
of therapy, patients are confronted with a lot of uncertainty:
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488
fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 3
Hauke and Lohr Therapeutic Relationship and the Free Energy Account
“Will I get worse with therapy than before?, ” “Can the therapist
understand me and how will he react if I fail?, ” “Do I have to turn
my whole life upside down?, ” “How am I going to manage with
my job and family?” This experience should be contained and
limited in therapeutic relationship. Our client is faced with the
decision to what extent he will use the actions and resources he
is familiar with for satisfaction of his most urgent needs, which
at least guarantees him a minimal degree of security in short
term, or whether in the longer term he will have to explore new
behavioral paths in order to improve his situation permanently.
To get an update of priors, experiments must be designed
that realize an appropriate balance between exploring new
possibilities and exploiting old certainties. This type of decision-
making situation is called an exploration-exploitation dilemma
(Wilson et al., 2014). We choose this dilemma here because
it links active inference with learning processes in the FEP
context. We argue here that the essential task of the therapeutic
relationship is to manage the exploration-exploitation-dilemma
in such a way that the amount of stress will be limited and so
learning processes can happen.
COMMON MANAGEMENT OF
EXPLORATION-EXPLOITATION-
DILEMMA
The exploration-exploitation dilemma has been addressed in
economics, behavioral ecology, and computational neuroscience,
where it has a longer tradition. In psychiatry, this approach has
only recently emerged (Addicott et al., 2017). How does FEP
address this issue?
Consider a person in a particular situation. How will he act?
Active inference uses an internal model to develop predicted
futures and calculate their free energy. It then selects a sequence
of actions (or policy) that will minimize the expected free
energy (EFE) (Da Costa et al., 2020). Since we are considering
consequences in the future here, we also refer to this as “expected
free energy.” If there is no doubt about the expected states, then
this reduces to matching the prior preferences with the expected
target states. If these target states correspond to rewarding states,
then minimizing free energy maximizes expected reward, just as
in reinforcement learning.
FACING UNCERTAINTY: GATHERING
INFORMATION THAT IS LACKING
LOWERS FREE ENERGY
In fact, in many situations, the relations are not so clear a priori,
but ambiguous. In this case, with active inference, the person
additionally selects actions that minimize the ambiguity that is
present. This results in the fact that he has to collect information.
This is done through exploration. At the behavioral level,
exploration denotes, for example, search, variation, risk taking,
experimentation, play, ﬂexibility, discovery, and innovation.
Exploitation takes advantage of all the behaviors that one already
knows, feels safe and familiar with, and that provide a proven
path to expected reinforcements.
Thus, in uncertain situations, reward-maximizing (or
exploitative) behavior is supplemented by novelty-seeking
(or exploratory) behavior. This brings us back to the classic
exploration-exploitation dilemma. Active inference also solves
this decision dilemma by minimizing free energy (Friston et al.,
2015). Mathematically, the expected free energy is minimized
by combining exploration and exploitation to yield the largest
possible amount. Active inference, after all, aims to maximize
the evidence for a given internal model and calls for a tradeoﬀ
between exploitation and exploration that ﬁts (Kaplan and
Friston, 2018). What is clear is that there can be no general or
even ﬁxed balance between the two strategies. The two strategies
are not independent of each other but are in tension with each
other. Those who rely too heavily on exploitative strategies have
strong habits, they don’t update their priors. Thus, the person
fails to learn more appropriate behavioral strategies that will help
him or her cope better with changes in the environment. The
other extreme is equally ineﬃcient. The person who engages in
excessive exploration makes too little use of past experiences as a
basis for later decisions. To be adaptive, however, the agent must
continually assess whether to use more or less of one strategy
or the other at any given time, depending on the situation
(Bruineberg and Rietveld, 2014; Kiverstein et al., 2019a).
In general, uncertain situations are thought to trigger the need
for exploration, with the goal of reducing existing uncertainty and
promoting rapid learning (Berger-Tal et al., 2014). This ﬁnding is
likely true in many cases and especially in healthy populations.
In fact, however, mental illness appears to be associated with
impaired or ineﬃcient exploration behavior (Addicott et al.,
2017; Cathomas et al., 2021; Smith et al., 2021a) and several
disorders have now been described as involving priors held
with excessive precision, including depression and mood (Seth
and Friston, 2016; Badcock et al., 2017; Clark et al., 2018),
schizophrenia and delusion (Tschacher et al., 2017) and aspects
of obsessive compulsive disorder (Kiverstein et al., 2019b).
This is exactly what most clients show at the beginning of
therapy. In problematic situations, they usually avoid focused
exploration, which put them more in touch with their fears.
So, therapy will increase FE in the short term. Either they
are stuck, clinging to the previous repertoire and avoiding
the slightest risks in trying out possible alternatives. Or they
lapse into a kind of unsystematic exploration, getting bogged
down in this respect and creating too much input and risk.
Likewise, dysfunctional oscillation back and forth between these
extremes is possible.
A rather vivid illustration of this dilemma for therapeutic
purposes emerges when explore and exploit decisions are placed
on a continuous scale (Mehlhorn et al., 2015; Addicott et al.,
2017). According to this view, decisions can vary along a
continuum between overly exploitation and overly exploration.
We saw earlier that the most beneﬁcial behaviors occur around a
point of equilibrium between the two. These aspects can be found
again in Figure 1.
Both “extremes” are problematic in the long run (cf.Figure 1):
Obviously, the client remains trapped in a less stable equilibrium
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488
fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 4
Hauke and Lohr Therapeutic Relationship and the Free Energy Account
FIGURE 1 |The therapeutic course as an idealized exploration-exploitation-dilemma (red). Goal-directed therapeutic interaction starts at pole (1): Overly
exploitation/non-adaptive behavioral outcome: At the beginning of therapy, the client is stuck and repeatedly maintains his dysfunctional pattern; free energy is very
high. (2) Elaborating/validating the current model, work with emotions, starting guided reality checks in a safe environment, deﬁne experiments. More clarity, ﬁrst
success experiences, less free energy. (3) Balance/more adaptive behavioral outcome: both sufﬁcient safety and sufﬁcient experimentation, ratio may vary, directed
exploration, thorough self-directed reality checks. Lowest possible value of free energy (4) Is there evidence that too much exploration, aimless experimenting leads
to avoidance of key issues? Problems in therapeutic relationship? Increasing free energy. (5) Overly exploration/non-adaptive behavioral outcome: many new
behavioral projects are started but not ﬁnished, impulsivity, too much new information, inefﬁcient use of behavioral experiments, no robust learning experience and
change, risk of falling back into the grip of the dysfunctional internal model. Free energy is very high again.
if he only engages in exploitation to the exclusion of exploration.
He applies his dysfunctional internal model again and again, but
learns nothing really new. On the other hand, limiting himself
to exploratory strategies may yield too many new undeveloped
ideas and too few viable concepts and competencies. He gets
bogged down and the results are less certain, so that uncertainty,
frustration, and helplessness may again increase.
The therapeutic interaction is thus confronted with the task
of determining, always while respecting the client’s limits, an
appropriate mix between the two strategies. This balancing act
keeps the occurring stress in the change process within limits and
minimizes surprise and thus free energy (Figure 1).
DEVELOPING THERAPEUTICAL
RELATIONSHIP FOR UPDATING PRIOS
Traditionally, three characteristics of a functional therapeutic
relationship have been addressed (Bordin, 1979; Horvath and
Greenberg, 1989; Horvath, 2018): (1) development of an aﬀective
bond between client and therapist, (2) agreement on the tasks
of therapy, and (3) agreement on the goals of therapy. This
alliance describes the extent to which the client and therapist
are jointly engaged in goal-directed work (Bordin, 1979). These
characteristics are summarized in Schulte and Eifert’s (2002) dual
working model of the therapeutic relationship. We choose this
form of description because it is a good way to incorporate the
FEP perspective.
The dual model describes two sides of therapeutic interaction,
which can hardly be separated from each other and can often be
realized simultaneously (Lundh, 2017).
• Aﬀective alliance: This particular form of interaction must
be designed in such a way that the client’s willingness to
open up, actively cooperate, try out new behaviors, etc.
increases. This establishes an important basis for further
change processes in therapy.
• Goal-achievement alliance: This side of therapeutic
interaction includes indication and use of speciﬁc
therapeutic intervention methods for behavior
modiﬁcation as well as joint planning, implementation and
evaluation of experiments.
Both aspects of the therapeutic relationship are guided by
relationship rules on the one hand and method rules on the other
(Table 1):
In order to described balancing act in the exploration-
exploitation dilemma to be successfully accomplished, the client’s
internal model of self and world must be worked out at the
beginning of therapy. This is the starting point for the ﬁrst steps
toward lowering free energy. A concomitant increase in perceived
safety is an essential prerequisite for setting a learning process
in motion. In the case described, we encounter a client who is
in a state of “over-exploitation” at the beginning of therapy (see
Figure 1).
Case: The 28-year-old client, Julia, comes to therapy with
depressive symptoms that she has experienced since her teenage
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488
fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 5
Hauke and Lohr Therapeutic Relationship and the Free Energy Account
TABLE 1 |Examples of relationship rules and method rules.
Rules for affective alliance Rules for goal achievement alliance
Active listening Conducting self-directed experiments and
expositions
Empathically validating conversation Tolerating a certain level of arousal and
tension
Complementary relationship building Being aware for bodily signals
years. Julia has been dating Ben for 2 years, and they plan to
move in together. Julia works as a dental assistant in a large
practice. She is the oldest of four sisters and was used to helping her
parents, who are self-employed with a bakery and take care of her
younger sisters. She also helps every Saturday with the bookkeeping
and orders for the bakery. The parents’ marriage was and still is
characterized by quarrels, which scared Julia a lot as a child. Father
and mother had little time for the children and demanded, as they
did of themselves, daily smooth functioning and a willingness to
work hard. “That’s the only way to make it in life, ” Julia’s father
always said. Julia therefore received a lot of appreciation when she
decided a few years ago to study part time beside her job. Since then,
she spends every free minute studying. Her relationship with Ben,
who prefers to enjoy his hobbies and meet friends in his free time,
has deteriorated signiﬁcantly. He has given up asking her to come
along. Julia often feels misunderstood by Ben and withdraws from
him more and more.
The Trigger for Her Current Crisis : Two months ago, Julia’s
mother suﬀered a severe slipped disk and since then can no longer
stand behind the counter as much. Julia now works not only on
Saturdays in the oﬃce but also early in the morning for 3 h at the
counter of the bakery before she goes to her own work. She sleeps
very little and therefore can hardly concentrate on studying in the
evenings. She ﬂuﬀed two exams and failed. Since then, Julia has had
the feeling of losing the ground under her feet. She feels more and
more overwhelmed. Physically, she now suﬀers from severe back
pain every day. In the evening, she lies awake ruminating for a
long-time despite of being very tired.
STUCK IN OVEREXPLOITATION:
“BETTER SAFE THAN SORRY”
Exploration means choosing an option which has less
information, and outcome is associated with a certain risk.
Exploitation means staying with an option that one knows
well and is believed to produce expected results. Ultimately, it
is learning history that determines what choices are made in
these situations. At the beginning of therapy, the client relies
on what she knows. Following the internal model, we term it as
a survival strategy (Sulz, 1994; Hauke, 2018a), refers to the old
priors and the attempt to ﬁt incoming data. Her self-regulation
is controlled by a survival strategy which, for the purpose of
satisfying needs, prescribes relatively narrow behavioral paths by
means of its commands and prohibitions. The more stressful the
personal developmental conditions were experienced, the smaller
the behavioral repertoire. Accordingly, behavioral tendencies
used for psycho-emotional “survival” are rigidly maintained
to prevent occurrence of the feared. At best, more eﬀort is
invested to fulﬁll speciﬁcations of the survival strategy even more
precisely. It is like squeezing a lemon that contains no more
juice: Quite a bit of eﬀort still yields a few drops. Indeed, it is
now well established that both acute and chronic stress leads to
the over-selection of exploitative strategies, even though little is
accomplished (Lenow et al., 2017). Under the inﬂuence of this
kind of stress experience, situation at hand is more likely to be
appraised as threatening, which furthermore makes selection of
exploratory strategies unlikely (Harms, 2017). The maladaptive
impact of stress is now what makes stress response no longer
context speciﬁc.
Case (Continuation): In our case Julia behaves the way she
learned it in the strict environment of her childhood. She works
harder and does no questioning. Thus, even in current situations,
their speciﬁcity and diﬀerences are not suﬃciently addressed.
Instead of situation-speciﬁc, schematic action is taken. Julia reacts
as she has learned in her family. She tries in vain to satisfy her need
for appreciation with the same attempts at low-maintenance and
performance-oriented behavior. Without need fulﬁllment, there is
a sharp drop in security. The exploration of alternative possibilities
of the real adult world is thus omitted, instead the contact to the
body is lost more and more: She feels her exhaustion only when she
gets a lot of pain.
This “clinging” to the previous schema is considered by
Van den Bergh et al. (2020) in the context of a predictive
processing mechanism. The authors develop a perspective
according to which many aﬀective and cognitive features
(e.g., worry, rumination, impaired anxiety learning, reduced
speciﬁcity of autobiographical memory, somatic symptoms) of
a wide variety of diagnoses can be traced back to a common
underlying processing strategy. This they refer to as the “better-
safe-than-sorry strategy.” The associated style of information
processing is essentially top-down oriented with a tendency
toward low sensory-perceptual detail. Here rumination can
be seen as a process of maintaining the old dysfunctional
priors and policies. Clients also no longer rely on their body
signals, for example (Smith et al., 2021c). As a result, bodily
signals are suppressed and cannot update the priors by “active
inference.” This happens in favor of rapid categorization of
threat-related stimuli, but at expense of an update of threat-
related priors (Van den Bergh et al., 2020). These priors
are held with high precision and as such represent learned
critical safety-related aspects. In our speciﬁc case, they are
all those features that are addressed in the four lines of the
survival strategy.
Case (Continuation): The survival strategy is elaborated on the
basis of a concrete problem situation (Hauke, 2018a; Hauke and
Lohr, 2020), so that it is not only cognitively understandable but
also emotionally tangible for the client.
Julia’s Survival Strategy:
−Only if I alwaysperform, function smoothly, and act dutifully
−and if I neverenter into conﬂicts and separate myself from
others
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488
fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 6
Hauke and Lohr Therapeutic Relationship and the Free Energy Account
−then I maintainsecurity through appreciation and aﬃliation,
−and preventlosing control and failing.
Since these precise threat-related expectations dominate
processing, noticeable deviations are very often ignored in
the current situation. This mode of operation is thus not
very context-speciﬁc, so that eﬀective error minimization and
thus a clear update of priors is omitted. At the same time,
active inference generates perceptions and actions that are
consistent with prior expectations but do not necessarily
match the current situation. Here, this update does not easily
succeed, the PEs remain and free energy remains permanently
increased. In the longer term, this gradually leads to more
and more free energy, i.e., PEs, and ultimately to chronic
uncertainty or chronic stress ( Figure 1 , left). In this respect,
a more adaptive internal model can hardly be developed
(Van den Bergh et al., 2020).
However, if there are changes in the environment, i.e., if
a new context arises, the previously very successful strategies
may fail.
Case (Continuation): The context changed dramatically for
Julia, when her mother falls ill and she starts working signiﬁcantly
more than usual in the bakery. Due to this overload, Julia
experiences a failure of previously successful strategies. This
produces massive stress and thus leads to an increase in “free
energy”: selected actions no longer produce rewarding energy boost
by satisfying the client’s central needs. On the contrary, all threads
slip away from her and she is confronted with loss of control and
failure—her central fear from line 4.
This context leads to stronger prioritization of safety, so that a
higher-level control is controlled by this prior. It is now provided
with stronger precision.
How should client Julia deal with this situation?
AFFECTIVE ALLIANCE: THE
THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP
PROVIDES A SAFETY BUFFER
The client’s internal model is summarized in her survival
strategy. It is worked out right at the beginning of therapy
and provides a precise “blueprint” for an initial shaping of
aﬀective alliance. This is intended to replenish safety reservoir,
since the “better-safe-than-sorry strategy” generates stress and
thus increasing insecurity and hopelessness due to stagnating
error reduction process. To understand these relationships more
precisely, let us take a closer look at safety regulation. In
respect, it will become clear how satisfaction of various needs
is related to the extent of perceived safety. The dynamics of
safety regulation are explored in more detail in the Zurich
Model of Social Motivation (Bischof, 2008). In Figure 2 , the
safety reservoir is ideally always well-ﬁlled. Its target level is
subjective and varies according to personality. If the level is
far below the target value, then the person feels too little
security and experiences anxiety. Conversely, too much security
leads to boredom.
A favorable safety level can be established by means of various
sources (Bischof, 2008):
From the Outside
Protection and security by close, familiar people, such as
partners, dear relatives, friends, appreciative colleagues, etc.
From the Inside
(1) By internalized good experiences of attachment. Because
of positive early childhood experiences, “ basic trust” is
formed. This corresponds to an internal working model of
secure attachment.
(2) Security based on self-conﬁdence, which in turn is
associated with high autonomy needs.
We are dealing here with two major sets of needs (Epstein,
1994; Mikulincer and Shaver, 2004; Grawe, 2007):
• Needs related to attachment and social relationships, e.g.,
security, belonging, caring, harmony, feeling valued and
welcome, etc., as well as
• Needs related to the self, e.g., self-worth, self-actualization,
expansion of the self through the exercise of power, through
new experiences, knowledge, achievement.
Looking at the client’s survival strategy, we can see in the third
line, strong attachment-related needs. Her willingness to perform
should make her attractive as an attachment partner, i.e., she ﬁlls
her security reservoir primarily by satisfying needs that can be
thematically assigned to the attachment motivation.
Based on our client’s needs proﬁle and Figure 2 , it
is clear that an increase in the level of felt safety is
achieved by the therapist satisfying the speciﬁc attachment-
oriented needs for being seen and belonging in the
therapeutic relationship.
Case (Continuation): Julia’s therapist gives her a warm
welcome from the beginning and asks her what she needs
to feel comfortable in therapy. She expresses appreciation for
her willingness to take on responsibility, shows empathy for
her exhaustion and tireless dedication to the family business.
In addition, the therapist acknowledges Julia’s commitment to
therapy. For here, Julia’s dutiful nature is also very helpful, as she
also practices therapy-promoting behavior regularly and therefore
achieves success quickly, e.g., improvement of her sleep quality.
This puts the client in a realm of experience—a kind of
ecological niche—in which her internal model receives sensory
input that it in turn predicts as probable. This leads to a lowering
of uncertainty or free energy.
The successful shaping of aﬀective alliance depends both
on accuracy with which the therapist grasps her client’s need
structure and, on her caution, and ﬂexibility in acting on it in
a need-satisfying way with her behavior. Here, the application
of relationship rules is particularly important ( Table 1 ). By
designing the relationship complementary to her needs, the
therapist provides experience that correspond to the expectation
or priors of the client. In this respect, the therapist tries to
actively establish and reinforce goals and experiences that are
outlined in the survival strategy. Conditions and experiences that
the client perceives as bad or avoids are not activated for the
moment, if possible.
Case (Continuation): In the ﬁrst phase of therapy, Julia’s
therapist therefore avoids questioning her client or criticizing her
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488
fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 7
Hauke and Lohr Therapeutic Relationship and the Free Energy Account
FIGURE 2 |Model of safety regulation modiﬁed according to Bischof (2008). The dashed line indicates the optimal level. Here, the person experiences no stress and
is in emotional equilibrium.
approach. This was a fear that Julia had also expressed at the very
beginning of therapy. She said at the time, “I’m afraid that you (the
therapist) will just say that I shouldn’t help my parents anymore
and ﬁnish my studies. But it’s not all that simple for me.” Julia
experienced it as very beneﬁcial to be understood and seen with
her needs in this way. This allows her to open up more and express
the full extent of her stresses.
In principle, complementary relationship design shows
empirically high eﬀectiveness in terms of therapy outcome
(Caspar et al., 2005). With this form of relationship design, the
therapist creates space for processes of active inference according
to client’s previous familiar pattern. This enables him or her to
adopt a PE-minimizing and thus self-informing policy. In other
words, this strategy for minimizing free energy looks like this: The
therapist engages with the client in a dance in which the client
leads and the therapist responds in ways that the client expects.
ESTABLISHING THE GOAL
ACHIEVEMENT ALLIANCE: LEAVING
THE “PROBLEM ZONE” WITH DIRECTED
EXPLORATION
The goal-achievement alliance serves to reduce the problem
behavior itself by means of eﬀective methods as well as to
promote goal behavior (Schulte and Eifert, 2002). In our chosen
perspective, this means establishing and supporting directed
exploration. The goal achievement alliance can be labeled in
therapy as a kind of expedition, in the course of which diﬃcult
situations have to be mastered but also important discoveries can
be made. This requires a shared map, good preparation, and a
coordinated approach.
Typically, people use a mix of undirected and goal-directed
exploration (Wilson et al., 2014; Schwartenbeck et al., 2019).
Goal-directed, information-seeking exploration is guided and
motivated by uncertainty in the agent’s world model. This
means that agents typically selectively choose options that are
informative, i.e., those associated with greatest uncertainty.
Undirected exploration is deﬁned as a deviation from current
most valuable strategy by unplanned selecting a diﬀerent
option. What does this mean for therapy? Clients are unlikely
to spontaneously choose the option associated with most
uncertainty. Nevertheless, targeted experiences must be provided
to selectively help erase uncertainty in this respect. To address
client’s fear/uncertainty, experiments are constructed along a
diﬃculty hierarchy. The client is encouraged to “question
reality” and is supported in trusting his or her own experience.
Undirected exploration—understood as a client’s unplanned and
impulsive actions—should be limited at the outset so that what
has been achieved is not risked carelessly. Once a certain level
of safety has been reached, then undirected exploration can later
lead to a pleasurable journey of discovery.
DIRECTED EXPLORATION AIMS AT THE
EXPLORATION OF THE SELF AND THE
BEHAVIORAL NICHE
The previous outline of directed exploration will now be made
more concrete. Directed exploration means searching for and
reﬂecting on speciﬁc information. This information concerns
both client’s view of himself and his view of the world: Who
am I and how do I react in a certain situation, what are
my emotions and impulses for action? On the other hand,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488
fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 8
Hauke and Lohr Therapeutic Relationship and the Free Energy Account
clients need information about the eﬃcacy of their actions,
possible reactions of their environment, and an assessment of
how they are likely to cope with consequences of their actions.
Typically, the internal model includes beliefs about future states
and policies, with the most likely policies leading to preferred
outcomes. In this sense, behavior is also understood here as
fulﬁllment of optimistic predictions (Friston et al., 2016). Clients
who are asked to test new situations do not necessarily share
this optimism, as they lack adaptive priors about future states,
eﬀective policies, and clarity about preferred outcomes. Here,
importance of therapeutic interaction in establishing optimism
and hope becomes clear. The updating process should be handled
in a manner which is free of judgment and within the context
of a benevolent error culture that promotes learning. In the
service of an acceptable level of certainty and controllability, the
goal-achievement alliance provides the following methodological
rules: (1) selection of an appropriate small-step approach,
(2) joint determination of the level of stress to be tolerated,
and (3) development of plans and strategies to prepare for
emerging uncertainties. The precise content of these aspects is
again guided by the model of safety regulation speciﬁc to the
client (Figure 2).
In order to keep the free energy during exploration
reasonably limited from the very start, goal-achievement alliance
additionally provides for a limited selection of future-related
priors. These are obtained based on a variety of tasks, joint
observations, and hypotheses. To this end, we thematize two foci
of work for the goal attainment alliance: (1) emotional work and
(2) behavioral experiments.
EXPLORING EMOTIONAL EVENTS:
EMOTIONAL WORK REFINES THE
INTERNAL MODEL
Emotional experience can be understood as a somatic
change that occurs in response to stimuli that aﬀect our
physical or mental well-being (Pollatos and Ferentzi, 2018).
More current theories of emotion focus primarily on the
perception and recognition of various bodily changes, although
traditional basic assumptions such as “appraisal” may also
be included as important components of emotion. Within
their integrative model, Smith et al. (2018) describe three
processes:
(1) Current situations, thoughts, and memories elicit changes
in the brain and body (e.g., changes in attention, changes
in heart rate, etc.).
(2) Physical changes are registered and classiﬁed in terms of
causation (e.g., I feel shaky because I drank too much coﬀee
or because I am scared).
(3) Finally, it is decided to what extent attention is paid
to such feelings.
Appropriate evaluations are based on learning experiences.
Even if bodily feelings are present, they may remain implicit
because, for example, it was “forbidden” in the learning
history to feel and express feelings of being overwhelmed.
The model highlights the importance of interoceptive processes
for emotional experience. Namely, interoception describes the
perception and representation of internal body signals (e.g.,
heartbeat, breathing activity, feelings of satiety). It contributes to
body awareness, deﬁned as attentional focus on and awareness
of internal body sensations, and is critically involved in the
regulation of emotions (Pollatos and Herbert, 2018).
How is this conceptualized within the framework of FEP?
In order to represent emotional events, the internal model
includes interoceptive priors in addition to exteroceptive priors.
They result from previous experiences of similar situations.
They form the basis not only of predictions about upcoming
interoceptive and exteroceptive signals but also about the most
appropriate action to deal with the upcoming sensory ﬂow. All
of this is processed in a single inference process (Seth, 2013). In
this respect, these predictions are compared with sensory input
from body and context. Minimizing the prediction errors results
in the perception of body sensations and action impulses. The
meaning emerges by mapping the response patterns to learned
emotion concepts (“this feels like anger”). However, minimizing
PEs or free energy in this respect may encounter problems
(Smith et al., 2020):
(a) Emotion concepts are too diﬀuse and provide inaccurate
predictions regarding body feelings, context, and action,
(b) There are hyper-precise priors that dominate interoceptive
and/or exteroceptive perception,
(c) Learning history has caused selective attentional biases that
now ignore bodily or contextual cues.
All these questions are addressed by our work in the so-called
“Emotional Field” (Hauke and Dall’Occhio, 2013; Hauke, 2018b).
In this respect, two important methodological rules of the goal
achievement alliance are applied. They refer to the practice of
focusing attention on the body and maintaining an agreed-upon
level of negative aﬀect. We repeatedly encounter clients who
have diﬃculty naming emotional categories. This is facilitated
if attention is ﬁrst selectively drawn to body signals when an
emotional episode occurs. Subsequently, this can be reﬂected
upon and usually emotion concepts can be named and reﬂected
upon (see Duquette and Ainley, 2019). Our working format is
essentially bottom-up and provides for a clear separation between
experiencing speciﬁc bodily sensations and talking about them.
Holmes and Nolte (2019) arguably refer to the same thing when
they speak methodologically of “decoupling.”
Case (Continuation): In the Emotional Field Julia works
with her therapist on a problematic situation with her father.
The argument arose when Julia wanted to explain to him
that she cannot help out in the bakery on Saturdays as well
because she needs time to study. The father, however, had shown
no understanding at all and insisted that he needed her for
bookkeeping on Saturdays as well. In order to ensure an intensive
emotional activation of Julia, she is ﬁrst asked to portray her
father as vividly as possible. For this, Julia, guided by her therapist,
chooses a typical body posture, a frequently heard phrase and the
corresponding facial expressions. So, Julia’s father becomes tangible
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488
fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 9
Hauke and Lohr Therapeutic Relationship and the Free Energy Account
as the central reference person in the room. Julia then positions
herself in front of the wall that shows her “visualized” father.
Julia chooses a middle distance and a smaller position, because
she has always felt inferior to her dominant father, although he
is physically much smaller than she is. Supported by the therapist,
Julia now begins to describe how she feels in her body. Julia reports
a heaviness in her chest that makes her breathing shallow. In
addition, she feels an impulse to make herself even smaller. Julia
should now give in to this impulse. She crouches down very tightly
and can hardly breathe. Julia should now wait for the next body
impulse and give in to it. After a short time, she reports a heat rising
in her head and a tension in her arms. Julia feels the urgent desire to
get up. When Julia stands in front of her father again, however, heat
and tension immediately disappear. Julia wants to make herself
small again. At this point, the therapist asks Julia to move to the
so-called expert position (Hauke, 2018b; Hauke and Lohr, 2020), a
reﬂection point in the room located away from the experience space
in front of the wall. Here Julia and her therapist try to give a name
to the diﬀerent emotional states just experienced. The ﬁrst emotion
that emerges is very familiar to Julia. It is fear, which takes away her
breath and helps her to hide. Julia is familiar with this strange heat,
but she cannot think of a more concrete name for it. The therapist
writes down the two terms fear and heat on one note each. Julia
places both pieces of paper accordingly in front of her visualized
father. After this short conversation, the therapist asks Julia if she
feels ready to go into the experience again and ﬁnd out more about
this heat. Julia agrees. Both start again with the confrontation of
Julia in front of the wall with her father. As in the ﬁrst run, Julia’s
fear shows up ﬁrst, which—if intensiﬁed—again creates erection
impulse, heat in the head and tension in the arms. The therapist
asks Julia to reinforce these body signals as well. Julia now also feels
a strong desire to move closer to her father and reports an impulse
to yell at him. She yells, “You bully make us all sick!” Now Julia
feels signiﬁcantly taller. To reinforce this feeling, her therapist gives
her a wooden stool to stand on. From here she can now look down
on her father, but at that moment all courage leaves Julia and she
immediately wants to make herself small again and back away. The
therapist lets Julia follow her body impulses and then discusses this
with her again on the expert position. In this way, Julia experiences
her survival strategy ﬁrst hand. The body impulses take up a lot
of space and make it easier for Julia to understand what happens
to her in conﬂicts. The so-called reaction chain (Hauke, 2018b)
becomes apparent (Table 2).
Again, and again, Julia goes back to her experience, and thus
shame and guilt gradually become apparent as further emotions
associated with this situation. By working in the Emotional Field,
Julia understands better why it is so diﬃcult for her to stand up for
her needs in everyday life. Because not only her fear but also shame
and guilt slow her down in anger. She has a strong trio of stopper
feelings (secondary emotions), which ensure that she behaves in
accordance with her survival strategy.
In the ﬁrst contact with her anger Julia was not even able to
recognize or name it. She also felt the power that was connected
with the anger and this awaked her interest. The special thing
about this kind of guided confrontation is that Julia is ﬁrst enabled
to learn about the emotional basis for her new behaviors and
this bottom-up. So, she learns not only from her mind that it
TABLE 2 |Julia’s reaction chain.
Reaction chain Julia’s reaction
Triggering situation Father has no understanding and
demands her work performance
Primary emotion Anger
Primary impulse To attack—to yell at the other
person
Anticipation of negative consequences losing control, losing the other
person’s favor
Secondary emotions fear
Secondary impulse Julia wants to make herself small
Visible behavior Julia gives in and does the work
anyway
Symptoms and problematic consequences Feelings of inferiority and
exhaustion
TABLE 3 |Method rules for working in bottom-up and top-down settings
(Hauke and Lohr, 2019).
Bottom-up oriented work.
- Focuses on sensory perceptions, body sensations and impulses, movements
of the whole body and parts of the body in space,
- Observes to access roots of emotional experience, automatic impulses and
pre-linguistic processes,
- Induces sensorimotor input, e.g., by touching, handling, tensing, moving,
conscious breathing, etc., to make automatic responding conscious.
- Time perspective: focuses on moments of the here and now, creating
opportunities to sense impulsive behavioral responses as they occur, to resist
automatisms, and to try out alternatives.
Top-down oriented work.
- Seeks linguistic expression for an experience, provides interpretation and
often alternative interpretations of experiences,
- Records and veriﬁes beliefs, compares, relativizes and communicates the
experience.
- Devises solutions to problems, goals, as well as plans and intermediate steps,
their timing, etc., formulates a clear intention.
- Time perspective: covers time span past to future. Placing experiences in life
history, determining their signiﬁcance for present and future, identity formation.
would be important to assert herself, but she feels her anger and
so the associated power enables her to assert herself. It is her
primary emotion that becomes palpable to her as a new sensory
input from the combination of her needs and conditions prevailing
in environment—namely, her unyielding father. Experiencing the
secondary emotion of fear makes it clear to her how strongly her
existing internal model has a grip on her. Consistently directing
attention to bodily sensations is the key here, as it spatially
separating reﬂection from experience during therapeutic work.
Julia understands and feels how her survival strategy prevents
problem solving in present. She can experience at the same
time that everything she needs emotionally for a solution is
already present within her. The central experience is the tipping
into each other of primary and secondary emotions. These are
the best prerequisites for successfully mastering later behavioral
experiments. Julia will not only be able to rationally comprehend
them as an external suggestion of an expert, but also experience
them as an authentic impulse from herself. And this despite the
fact that it is diametrically opposed to her existing model of
survival strategy.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488
fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 10
Hauke and Lohr Therapeutic Relationship and the Free Energy Account
The method rules listed in Table 3 help to adapt therapeutic
behavior to the two diﬀerent settings, in particular to strengthen
the relationship and trust in body sensations as early warning
signals (Pollatos and Herbert, 2018; Weineck, 2018).
DIRECTED EXPLORATION BY
BEHAVIORAL EXPERIMENTS
The FEP perspective refers to testing new situations
as “active learning, ” where uncertainties in the internal
model are reduced by observations and true attributions
(Schwartenbeck et al., 2019).
This is done using directed exploration guided by the contents
of the survival strategy. This selection of targets restricts the client
to behaviorally relevant trajectories, reducing for the moment the
variety of data a model must consider. Using FEP , it can be shown
that eﬃcient action-oriented models can be learned by now
combining goal-oriented and exploratory (information-seeking)
behavior (Tschantz et al., 2020).
Concrete action is designed to provide corrective experiences.
“Providing corrective emotional experiences” is considered
one of the recognized common factors of psychotherapy
(Tschacher et al., 2015).
The focus in this respect is on developing and testing
behavioral alternatives that may be more adaptive in terms of
need satisfaction. In this respect, regarding the balance aspect
in Figure 1 , the following applies: preserve the good and dare
the new. Exploitation and exploration are thus placed in a
dialectical relationship to each other. This dialectical attitude
is also found in modern CBT, where it is referred to as the
acceptance principle (Fruzzetti and Fruzzetti, 2008). As described
above, the minimization of free energy depends on the ability to
control directed exploration and exploitation in such a way that
the perceived stress can still be well tolerated. In constructing
and executing alternative approaches, the client can take familiar
and proven elements of her previous exploitative strategies and
combine them with the novelty of her directed exploration.
The mutually determined mixture ratio is oriented to the fact
that the client can still well bear the possibly occurring fear.
Thus, the goal-achievement alliance conveys an essential moment
of control. Directed exploration contains, depending on the
intention, a certain degree of uncertainty that cannot be avoided.
Experimentation can involve more or less risky events that create
a massive prediction error and thus a lot of free energy. The
goal attainment alliance can provide a key skill here, which we
will refer to in this context as “competence in dealing with
uncertainty.” This requires that failures be realistically calculated
in. This is not looking through rose-colored glasses, because here
the expectation of success is contrasted with possible problems in
achieving the goal. That such a view—one could call it functional
optimism—is more conducive to goal realization has been
empirically proven by Oettingen (1996). According to this, the
frequently praised positive thinking is not very promising. It only
contributes eﬃciently to goal realization if it is simultaneously
compared with a possible negative reality. This more problem-
oriented view has an attention-diverting eﬀect and, in contrast
to blue-eyed positive views, provides clues as to what needs
to be paid closer attention to and what may also need to be
avoided; the feasible is separated from the unfeasible (Oettingen
and Gollwitzer, 2010). In a further step, therefore, the behavior
plan is still examined for possible failures using a strategy of
mental contrasting and then supplemented. The practice of such
competencies leads to more and more priors about appropriate
policies, so that the client will minimize the free energy in the
future by an appropriate policy selection process.
The client may drop out of the goal-achievement alliance,
become involved only in a very non-committal way, and instead
of directed exploration, just experiment aimlessly ( Figure 1, 4).
She may have reached a point where she is confronted with a
diﬃcult issue that she wants to avoid and distracts herself with
activism, but also wants to please the therapist somehow. Stress
and free energy rise again, and she may ﬁnd herself trapped in
old patterns again (Figure 1, 5).
Case (Continuation): Directed exploration in practice means
that client and therapist work together on a goal and the plan to
achieve it. This involves a successful mixture of old and successful
safety regulation from the known traces of the survival strategy
as well as a targeted testing of new behaviors. After working
on survival strategy and reaction chain, Julia knew her own old
patterns very well. As she worked on her anger and the strength
that came with it, Julia learned more about the motor for her
new behaviors. One evening, Julia left the therapy session full of
energy and drive after a successful anger confrontation. She had
apparently ignored the therapist’s recommendation to think more
carefully in the coming week about how she could use this anger to
help solve her issues without giving up everything that is important
to her. The therapist’s goal was to keep the client on the path of
directed exploration so that she could concretely choose the goal
with her in the upcoming session and plan a suitable strategy for
achieving it. However, following her anger impulse, Julia drove
to the bakery on the same evening, where her father was busy
preparing for the next day. With this impulsive action, she left the
path of directed exploration ( Figure 1, 3) and landed at the point
of undirected exploration (Figure 1, 5). Without thinking about the
consequences, Julia unloaded all her anger and yelled at her father.
She accused him of wrecking her with his bossy manner. But her
father did not put up with Julia’s behavior. He also yelled at her
and accused her of being ungrateful. It was only because of his hard
work that she could study at all and have the life she was currently
leading. As usual, he appealed to her guilty conscience. It worked
well again. Julia could not counter her father’s accusations and was
suddenly struck by feelings of fear, guilt and shame. She fell right
back into the other extreme of overly exploitation (Figure 1, 1). She
apologized and backed down.
In the next therapy session, she reported the incident to her
therapist, who reminded her again of her recommendation at the
end of the last session. This time, Julia acquiesced and set her goal:
She would like to help out at the bakery only 2 × a week instead of
5× in order to have more time for her studies and her relationship.
The therapist also worked out a conversation guide with Julia on
how she could talk to her father in peace and also prepared her
for possible diﬃculties in the conversation with role-playing. She
wanted to talk to him after lunch on Sunday and planned 30 min
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488
fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 11
Hauke and Lohr Therapeutic Relationship and the Free Energy Account
for it. In this way, a good mixture between well-tried paths and new
behaviors emerged, which enables Julia to achieve her goals without
generating too much free energy and thus stress.
FRUSTRATING DUET: WORKING
DIRECTLY WITH THE THERAPEUTIC
RELATIONSHIP
In social situations, successful communication depends on people
aligning their mental states with those of their interaction
partners. We speak of cooperative communication when the
participants succeed in aligning their mental states about events
in their shared environment. This concept of alignment is found
in developmental psychology and behavioral biology (Tomasello,
2008). The therapeutic relationship is just that: developing and
establishing a cooperative relationship through aﬀective and
goal attainment alliance. Active Inference assumes that a person
uses a predictive model of what they would expect from a
social interaction in terms of emotional content, what alternative
emotional content would predict in the auditory or visual
domain, and what a change in those expectations would do
(Demekas et al., 2020). This is echoed by Vasil et al. (2020)
and presented in the Free Energy framework. According to this,
humans are endowed with an adaptive prior that controls this
alignment. Accordingly, the selection of action strategies depends
on providing sensory evidence that one’s mental states match
or are at least similar to those of the interaction partner. This
adaptive prior guides actions and inferences. Speciﬁcally, the
directing of attention occurs in such a way as to gather evidence
for this mental match. Cooperative communication in this
respect emerges in a process of convergence to shared internal
models (Friston and Frith, 2015). This ideal typical progression of
the process of agreement occurs in healthy interaction partners in
the best-case scenario and may not be fully realized in the client-
therapist relationship until the end of psychotherapy. Clients
who enter the psychotherapeutic relationship with a better-safe-
than-sorry strategy are certainly concerned with alignment. They
strive to produce sensory evidence that conforms to their model,
priors, the imperatives and prohibitions of their survival strategy,
respectively. That is, their interactive world isa priori conﬁned to
a limited sensory ﬁeld. However, this usually has little to do with
the real person of the therapist and is, after all, primarily oriented
to the prior for safety. If the therapist develops empathy for the
cognitive-aﬀective state of this safety-oriented strategy, she is able
to provide signals that ﬁt into this narrow sensory ﬁeld. This has
the eﬀect of minimizing the amount of PE and lowering the free
energy. This is consistent with the complementary relationship
design discussed earlier. As therapy progresses, however, the goal
is to expand this sensory ﬁeld with the help of new experiences
and the development of alternative priors. A particularly eﬃcient
way is represented by the work with the therapeutic relationship.
However, since this touches the previous “secure basis” of the
relationship formation, this developmental step is only indicated
in the last third of the therapy. The previous secure basis was
created by the therapist largely serving the client’s priors. Here
an emancipation of the client can be achieved by making the real
therapeutic relationship visible and exploring it together. This
begins with a frustration.
Case (Continuation): In the last part of therapy, it is often
useful to include the therapeutic relationship in the learning
process. The goal is to achieve a transfer of what has been learned
so far to this particular relationship as well. Julia was making
good progress in therapy and so it seemed appropriate to also
explore the current state of the therapeutic relationship together.
So far, Julia was used to her therapist appreciating her dutiful
nature, encouraging her, and meeting her needs for appreciation
and attachment. From now on, the therapist took back more and
more her complementary relationship design, in which she took
the lead in this “duet.” She presented herself in the next therapy
session as a factual rather questioning counterpart and reacted
less understandingly than usual. The client had just told that she
had helped her sister move. Julia was visibly irritated and seemed
unsettled by the therapist’s questions, whether it was really okay
for Julia to let her sister help her move while she was still suﬀering
from back pain and had been helping out so much at the bakery.
Julia didn’t quite know what hit her. She felt an unusual lack
of understanding in her relationship and that caused stress. She
didn’t know how to deal with it, seemed irritated and kept silent.
The therapist suggested to use this as an opportunity to take a
closer look at the therapeutic relationship and to present it with
Julia in the room.
SEEING IS BELIEVING: EMBODIMENT
OF THE RELATIONSHIP
For this purpose, the therapeutic alliance is represented in
space. By positioning the bodies in relation to each other, the
diﬀerent aspects of the relationship become visible and can
be felt very quickly. Using a technique that utilizes insights
into the embodiment of power and psychological closeness
(Schubert et al., 2009; Davis et al., 2011), the client is encouraged
to represent the therapeutic relationship in space. Such a
representation quickly gets to the heart of the quality of
the relationship while not being too confrontational (Hauke
et al., 2016). Abstract concepts of power and psychological
closeness/distance are made visible in space with the help of
horizontal and vertical distances. The corresponding sensory
input is of high precision and may be in competition with
the priors of the internal model. In this respect, the previous
dysfunctional interaction style, which is also evident outside
of therapy, usually becomes very apparent. At this point, the
relational work can leave behind the exploitative style and
become somewhat more exploratory. Exploration is supported
here by the therapist resisting the implicit invitation that arises
from the patient’s habitual priors. The resulting interaction with
the therapist is therefore contrary to the client’s expectations and
creates uncertainty. Uncertainty increases because the therapist
has consciously created—at ﬁrst gradually—a situation that
resists the previous dysfunctional mechanisms of alignment.
Case (Continuation): Julia began, guided by the therapist, to
present the relationship from her point of view. Julia feels inferior to
her therapist—she therefore makes herself much smaller and squats
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488
fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 12
Hauke and Lohr Therapeutic Relationship and the Free Energy Account
down while asking the therapist to stand on the stool. She also feels
dependent on her goodwill and is very afraid of doing something
that could endanger it. She therefore kneels directly in front of
her and looks at her from below, so that she is able to follow her
reactions in gestures and facial expressions. Asked about how she
feels, Julia says, that her position on her knees feels uncomfortable
but also familar.
The therapist asks Julia to try something new out. Julia agrees.
The therapist gets oﬀ the stool and increases the distance between
Julia and her. She takes a rope which she had deposited within
reach and oﬀers Julia to grab the other end. Julia grabs it. The
therapist shortens the rope so that Julia has to stand up to stay in
contact with the therapist. Both are now standing in front of each
other with a distance of about 1.5 m. This was how the therapist
experienced the ﬁrst half of their therapy together. Her primary goal
was to strengthen Julia and, in the meantime, she sees her at eye
level with all her new abilities. But then the following happened:
The therapist reaches into the neighboring bookshelf and hands the
client one book after another. The client stumbles while trying to
keep ﬁve books in under her arm. The therapist asks Julia how
she feels: Julia states that it felt unusual but good for her to get
on eye level with the therapist with the help of the rope. But now
she feels overwhelmed and frustrated. The books are hard to hold,
she says, and her shoulders are already aching. She has known
this feeling for so long. All the burdens and obligations are just
too heavy, she says. The therapist explains to Julia that this is
exactly what she wanted to achieve with her critical questioning,
namely that Julia directs her attention to the burden of her duties—
here represented by the burden of too many books. Julia begins to
understand how important critical inquiries are for her. Since she
falls into old patterns again. Julia and her therapist start talking
about what alternative actions she could try out right now. Julia
puts down the rope to be able to carry more books. But without
the connection, she feels uncomfortable and the load is still too
heavy for her. The therapist asks Julia what else she could do to
lighten her load without taking oﬀ the rope. Julia hesitantly begins
to understand: There are just too many heavy books. Julia feels a
distinct increase in tension at the thought of putting down books she
has accepted. The therapist encourages her to try it out. One book
after the other moves to the ﬂoor. A ﬁrst positive experience for Julia
in breaking her survival strategy in the therapeutic relationship.
She successfully shed burden when pointed out without having to
give up connection to a signiﬁcant other. On the contrary, Julia’s
therapist gives her a lot of credit for choosing to put down the book
load. Julia feels a deﬁnite relief, and the pain in her shoulders slowly
disappears. The foundation for the next level in therapeutic work is
prepared, in which Julia learns to deal with frustrations within the
therapeutic relationship as well.
THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP IN
SUPERVISION
During therapy, the client’s survival strategy starts interacting
with the therapist’s one. This can unintentionally lead to a
permanently frustrating duet. Therefore, regular supervision is
an important factor for high quality in therapy. Using the already
familiar case example, we would like to brieﬂy outline this point
and also embed it in the concept of free energy.
Security in therapeutic relationship is of utmost importance
in order to update the client’s priors, reduce her uncertainty
(Figure 1, 1 and 5) and to help her more and more to achieve
a balance ( Figure 1 , 3). However, this is only possible if the
therapist is also able to her own priors during the therapy that she
FIGURE 3 |Interacting survival strategies between Julia and her therapist.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488
fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 13
Hauke and Lohr Therapeutic Relationship and the Free Energy Account
can be like a rock for the client. Usually it depends on the survival
strategy of the therapist in which way this can become a challenge
at diﬀerent points of the therapeutic process. This challenge arose
for the Julia’s therapist toward the end of therapy:
Case (Continuation): Julia’s therapist herself comes from a
family with self-employed parents. Her father works as a country
doctor and her mother supports him as a physician’s assistant.
The family climate was also characterized by a lot of pressure to
perform and hardship. The father hoped that her twin brother
would 1 day take over the practice and always demanded top
grades from him in school. Her brother, on the other hand, was
very musical and preferred to become a pianist. This led to strong
conﬂicts in the family, in which she often took on the role of a
mediator and tried to appease her father.
Survival Strategy of Julia’s Therapist:
−Only if I alwaysdo my best, anticipate the needs of others, and
act diplomatically
−and if I nevermake mistakes or show weakness
−then I maintainsecurity by being seen and appreciation,
−and avoidbeing rejected.
The therapist therefore found it very easy to meet Julia’s needs
in terms of complementary relationship building and thus quickly
establish a safe climate that reduced “free energy.” However, it
became much more diﬃcult in the last third of treatment, in which
it was a matter of pointing out Julia’s maladaptive relationship
management a bit more clearly.
Here the therapist sensed a real inner blockade to frustrate Julia
in her needs. Because of her own life story, she could empathize all
too well with Julia’s stress and suﬀering. So, she went to supervision
with the following question: How do I manage to get into a good
directed exploration with my client despite my own patterns?
In supervision, the ﬁrst step is to visualize the interaction of
the two survival strategies. The emerging mutual expectations and
fears, could be represented as follows:
In this (Figure 3) it becomes visible at a glance at which point
it becomes diﬃcult for Julia’s therapist to keep her own free energy
low: Namely, when she realizes that the therapeutic process now
expects her to actively frustrate her client. Her own survival strategy
immediately anticipates the occurrence of the central anxiety. She
fears Julia might drop out of therapy or not open up to her anymore.
If the therapist remains faithful to her survival strategy due to
her own high stress ( Figure 1, 1), she would simply continue to
meet the client’s needs in a kind of anticipatory obedience. This is
exactly where supervision intervenes, because this approach would
prevent the client’s developmental process in the sense of directed
exploration and jeopardize therapeutic progress. Through the
trusting relationship with the supervisor, the therapist can update
her priors and work with her not to avoid the client’s frustration but
to actively enter into the clariﬁcation of the therapeutic relationship
and thus begin the directed exploration. To do this, the therapist
risks confronting her own anxiety and learns to endure it in favor of
her therapeutic role. In this way, the circle of successful therapeutic
work is closed by supervision, which also enables the therapist to
repeatedly establish a balance between exploration and exploitation
with his or her own patterns in daily work.
CONCLUSION
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that the CBT
process piloted by therapists has been seen through the
lens of the free energy principle (FEP) and vice versa. In
particular, viewing the therapeutic process in the format of
the exploration-exploitation dilemma oﬀers in this respect both
novel and important perspectives with regard to the successful
management of this process.
Patients’ problems can be seen as priors that do not update
and which keep supressing the PEs that are produced by new
incoming data. In view of FEP , CBT can be seen as a method
that supports an update of the internal model by revising the
priors, thereby minimizing free energy. From this perspective,
CBT interventions that promote this will be helpful. We have
shown that in this respect, the promotion of agency in particular,
as well as the design of opportunities for extended sensory and
interoceptive sampling in the context of directed exploration, are
of central importance.
The quality of directed exploration and the updating of
priors depend critically on the developmental space opened by
the therapeutic relationship, conceptualized here as an aﬀective
and goal-achievement alliance. FEP provides clear measures for
assessing these alliances and their eﬀectiveness.
Crucially, in this respect, therapists must also keep an eye on
their own stress in this dyad, e.g., in the context of supervision.
Otherwise, interaction problems may occur.
The more free energy there is, the greater the uncertainty
experienced, which simultaneously results in an increase
in metabolic energy costs for the brain (Peters et al.,
2017). Here, it could be useful to adapt energy-demanding
therapeutic interventions more precisely to the patient’s current
life situation and thus orchestrate the course of therapy
more successfully.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author/s.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Both authors listed have made a substantial, direct, and
intellectual contribution to the work, and approved it
for publication.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the two reviewers for an inspiring discussion and
valuable suggestions.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488
fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 14
Hauke and Lohr Therapeutic Relationship and the Free Energy Account
REFERENCES
Addicott, M. A., Pearson, J. M., Sweitzer, M. M., Barack, D. L., and Platt, M. L.
(2017). A primer on foraging and the explore/exploit trade-oﬀ for psychiatry
research. Neuropsychopharmacology 42, 1931–1939. doi: 10.1038/npp.
2017.108
Badcock, P. B., Davey, C. G., Whittle, S., Allen, N. B., and Friston, K. J. (2017). The
depressed brain: an evolutionary systems theory.Trends Cogn. Sci. 21, 182–194.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2017.01.005
Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., and Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive Therapy of
Depression. New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
Berger-Tal, O., Nathan, J., Meron, E., and Saltz, D. (2014). The exploration-
exploitation dilemma: a multidisciplinary framework. PLoS One 9:e95693. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0095693
Bischof, N. (2008). Psychologie. Ein Grundkurs für Anspruchsvolle . Stuttgart:
Kohlhammer.
Bordin, E. S. (1979). The generalizability of the psychoanalytic concept of the
working alliance. Psychotherapy 16, 252–260. doi: 10.1037/h0085885
Bruineberg, J., and Rietveld, E. (2014). Self-organization, free energy minimization,
and optimal grip on a ﬁeld of aﬀordances. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8:599. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2014.00599
Caspar, F., Grossmann, C., Unmüssig, C., and Schramm, E. (2005).
Complementary therapeutic relationship: therapist behavior, interpersonal
patterns, and therapeutic eﬀects. Psychother. Res. 15, 91–102. doi:
10.1080/10503300512331327074
Cathomas, F., Klaus, F., and Guetter, K. (2021). Increased random exploration
in schizophrenia is associated with inﬂammation. NPJ Schizophr. 7:2021. doi:
10.1038/s41537-020-00133-0
Chekroud, A. M. (2015). Unifying treatments for depression: an application of the
free energy principle. Front. Psychol. 6:153. doi: 10.3389/Fpsyg.2015.00153
Clark, J. E., Watson, S., and Friston, K. J. (2018). What is mood? A computational
perspective. Psychol. Med. 48, 2277–2284. doi: 10.1017/S0033291718000430
Connolly, P. (2018). Expected free energy formalizes conﬂict underlying defense in
freudian psychoanalysis. Front. Psychol. 9:1264. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01264
Craske, G. C., Treanor, M., Conway, C., Zbozinek, T., and Vervliet, B. (2014).
Maximizing exposure therapy: an inhibitory learning approach. Behav. Res.
Ther. 58, 10–23. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2014.04.006
Da Costa, L., Sajid, N., Parr, T., Friston, K. J., and Smith, R. (2020). The
relationship between dynamic programming and active inference: the discrete,
ﬁnite-horizon case. arXiv [Preprint] arXiv:2009.08111
Davis, J. I., Gross, J. J., and Ochsner, K. N. (2011). Psychological distance and
emotional experience: what you see is what you get. Emotion 11, 438–444.
doi: 10.1037/a0021783
Demekas, D., Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2020). An investigation of the free energy
principle for emotion recognition.Front. Comput. Neurosci.14:30. doi: 10.3389/
fncom.2020.00030
Duquette, P. (2017). Increasing our insular world view: interoception and
psychopathology for psychotherapists. Front. Neurosci. 11:135. doi: 10.3389/
fnins.2017.00135
Duquette, P., and Ainley, V. (2019). Working with predictable life of clients:
the importance of “mentalizing interoception” to meaningful change in
psychotherapy. Front. Psychol 10:2173. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02173
Epstein, S. (1994). Integration of the cognitive and the psychodynamic
unconscious. Am. Psychol. 49, 709–724. doi: 10.1037//0003-066x.49.8.709
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K., and Frith, C. (2015). A Duet for one. Conscious. Cogn. 36, 390–405.
doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2014.12.003
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., O’Doherty, J., and Pezzulo,
G. (2016). Active inference and learning. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 68, 862–879.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.06.022
Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., and Pezzulo, G.
(2015). Active inference and epistemic value. Cogn. Neurosci. 6, 187–214. doi:
10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053
Fruzzetti, A. R., and Fruzzetti, A. E. (2008). “Dialectics in cognitive and behavior
therapy, ” in Cognitive Behavior Therapy: Applying Empirically Supported
Techniques In Your Practice, eds W. T. O’Donohue and J. E. Fisher (New York,
NY: Wiley), 132–141.
Grawe, K. (2007). Neuropsychotherapy: How The Neurosciences Inform Eﬀective
Psychotherapy. New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Harms, M. B. (2017). Stress and exploitative decision-making. J. Neurosci. 37,
10035–10037. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2169-17.2017
Hauke, G. (2018a). “Getting the embodied emotional survival strategy, ” in
Embodiment in Psychotherapy – A Practitioner’S Guide , eds G. Hauke and
A. Kritikos (New York, NY: Springer), 143–162. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-92
889-0_11
Hauke, G., and Dall’Occhio, M. (2013). Emotional activation therapy (EAT):
intense work with diﬀerent emotions in a cognitive behavioral setting. Eur.
Psychother. 11, 5–29.
Hauke, G., and Lohr, C. (2019). “Embodiment in drei Akten – Geschmeidig und
kraftvoll Handeln, ” inPsychologie der Selbststeuerung , eds S. Rietmann and P.
Deing (Berlin: Springer Verlag), 211–242.
Hauke, G., and Lohr, C. (2020). Emotionale Aktivierungstherapie (EAT)
Embodiment in Aktion. Stuttgart: Klett Cotta Verlag.
Hauke, G., Lohr, C., and Pietrzak, T. (2016). Moving the mind: embodied cognition
in cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). Eur. Psychother. 13, 154–178.
Hauke, G. (2018b). “Mapping the embodied emotional mind: the emotionale ﬁeld, ”
in Embodiment in Psychotherapy – A Practitioner’S Guide , eds G. Hauke and
A. Kritikos (New York, NY: Springer), 163–187. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-92
889-0_12
Holmes, J. (2020). The Brain has a Mind of its Own: Attachment, Neurobiology, and
the New Science of Psychotherapy. London: Confer Books.
Holmes, J., and Nolte, T. (2019). “Surprise” and the bayesian brain: implications for
psychotherapy theory and practice. Front. Psychol. 10:592. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2019.00592
Hopkins, J. (2016). Free energy and virtual reality in neuroscience and
psychoanalysis: a complexity theory of dreaming and mental disturbance.Front.
Psychol. 7:922. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00922
Horvath, A. O. (2018). “The psychotherapy relationship: Where does the alliance
ﬁt?, ” in Developing The Therapeutic Relationship: Integrating Case Studies,
Research, And Practice , eds O. Tishby and H. Wiseman (Washington, D.C:
American Psychological Association), 15–28. doi: 10.1037/0000093-002
Horvath, A. O., and Greenberg, L. S. (1989). Development and validation of the
working alliance inventory. J. Couns. Psychol. 36, 223–233. doi: 10.1037/0022-
0167.36.2.223
Kaplan, R., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Planning and navigation as active inference.
Biol. Cybernet. 112, 323–343. doi: 10.1007/s00422-018-0753-2
Kiverstein, J., Miller, M., and Rietveld, E. (2019a). The feeling of grip: novelty,
error dynamics, and the predictive brain. Synthese 196, 2847–2869. 017-1583-9
doi: 10.1007/s11229-
Kiverstein, J., Rietvel, E., Slagter, H. A., and Denys, D. (2019b). Obsessive
compulsive disorder: a pathology of self-conﬁdence? Trends Cogn. Sci. 23,
369–372. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2019.02.005
Krupnik, V. (2019). Bayesian approach to psychotherapy integration: strategic
modiﬁcation of priors [perspective]. Front. Psychol. 10:356. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2019.00356
Krupnik, V. (2021). Depression as a failed anxiety: the continuum of precision-
weighting dysregulation in aﬀective disorders. Front. Psychol. 12:657738. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2021.657738
Lenow, J. K., Constantino, S. M., Daw, N. D., and Phelps, E. A. (2017). Chronic and
acute stress promote overexploitation in serial decision-making.J. Neurosci. 37,
5681–5689. doi: 10.1523/Jneurosci.3618-16.2017
Lundh, L. G. (2017). Relation and technique in psychotherapy: two partly
overlapping categories. J. Psychother. Integr. 27:5978. doi: 10.1037/int0000068
Mehlhorn, K., Newell, B. R., Todd, P. M., Lee, M. D., Morgan, K., Braithwaite, V. A.,
et al. (2015). Unpacking the exploration–exploitation tradeoﬀ: a synthesis of
human and animal literatures. Decision 2:33.doi: 10.1037/dec0000033
Mikulincer, M., and Shaver, P. R. (2004). “Security-based self-representations in
adulthood: Contents and processes, ” in Adult Attachment: Theory, Research,
And Clinical Implications, eds W. S. Rholes and J. A. Simpson (New York, NY:
Guilford Press), 159–195.
Oettingen, G. (1996). “Positive fantasy and motivation, ” in The Psychology Of
Action: Linking Cognition And Motivation To Behavior , eds P. M. Gollwitzer
and J. A. Bargh (New York, NY: The Guilford Press.), 236–259.
Oettingen, G., and Gollwitzer, P. M. (2010). “Strategies of setting and
implementing goals: Mental contrasting and implementation intentions, ” in
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488
fpsyg-13-842488 April 7, 2022 Time: 13:32 # 15
Hauke and Lohr Therapeutic Relationship and the Free Energy Account
Social Psychological Foundations Of Clinical Psychology , eds J. E. Maddux and
J. P. Tangney (New York, NY: The Guilford Press), 114–135.
Papalini, S., Beckers, T., and Vervliet, B. (2020). Dopamine: from prediction error
to psychotherapy. Transl. Psychiatry 1, 1–13. doi: 10.1038/s41398-020-0814-x
Paulus, M. P., Feinstein, J. S., and Khalsa, S. S. (2019). An active inference approach
to interoceptive psychopathology. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 7, 97–122. doi:
10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-050718-095617
Peters, A., McEwen, B. S., and Friston, K. (2017). Uncertainty and stress: why
it causes diseases and how it is mastered by the brain. Prog. Neurobiol. 156,
164–188. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2017.05.004
Pollatos, O., and Ferentzi, E. (2018). “Embodiment of emotion regulation, ” in
Embodiment In Psychotherapy – A Practitioner’S Guide , eds G. Hauke and A.
Kritikos (New York, NY: Springer), 43–56. doi: 10.1093/scan/nss089
Pollatos, O., and Herbert, B. M. (2018). “Interoception: deﬁnition, dimensions,
neural subtrates, ” inEmbodiment In Psychotherapy – A Practitioner’S Guide, eds
G. Hauke and A. Kritikos (New York, NY: Springer), 129–142.
Schubert, T. W., Waldzus, S., and Giessner, S. R. (2009). Control over the
association of power and size.Soc. Cogn. 27, 1–19. doi: 10.1521/soco.2009.27.1.1
Schulte, D., and Eifert, G. H. (2002). What to do when manuals fail? The
dual model of psychotherapy. Clin. Psychol. 9, 312–328. doi: 10.1093/clipsy.9.
3.312
Schwartenbeck, P., Passecker, J., Hauser, T. U., FitzGerald, T. H., Kronbichler,
M., and Friston, K. J. (2019). Computational mechanisms of curiosity and
goal-directed exploration. Elife 8:e41703. doi: 10.7554/eLife.41703
Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self.Trends
Cogn. Sci. 17, 565–573. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.007
Seth, A. K., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the
emotional brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 371:20160007. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.
0007
Smith, R., Badcock, P., and Friston, K. J. (2020). Recent advances in
the application of predictive coding and active inference models within
clinical neuroscience. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 75:1. doi: 10.1111/pcn.1
3138
Smith, R., Killgore, W. D. S., and Lane, R. D. (2018). The structure of emotional
experience and its relation to trait emotional awareness: a theoretical view.
Emotion 18:670. doi: 10.1037/emo0000376
Smith, R., Taylor, S., Wilson, R. C., Chuning, A. E., Persich, M., Wang, S.,
et al. (2021a). Lower levels of directed exploration and reﬂective thinking are
associated with greater anxiety and depression. PsyArXiv [Preprint]. doi: 10.
31234/osf.io/3w4je
Smith, R., Feinstein, J. S., and Kuplicki, R. (2021c). Perceptual insensitivity to the
modulation of interoceptive signals in depression, anxiety, and substance use
disorders. Sci. Rep. 11:2108. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-81307-3
Smith, R., Moutoussis, M., and Bilek, E. (2021b). Simulating the computational
mechanisms of cognitive and behavioral psychotherapeutic interventions:
insights from active inference. Sci. Rep. 11:10128. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-
89047-0
Solms, M. (2021). The Hidden Spring: A Journey To The Source Of Consciousness .
London: Proﬁle Books.
Sulz, S. (1994). Strategische Kurzzeittherapie: Eﬃziente Wege zur Wirksamen
Psychotherapie. München: CIP-Medien.
Sulz, S. (2006). From the symptom as strategy to strategic brief therapy: self-
regulation ans self-organization as fundamental therapeutic principles. Eur.
Psychother. 6, 55–94.
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins Of Human Communication . Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Tschacher, W., Giersch, A., and Friston, K. J. (2017). Embodiment and
schizophrenia: a review of implications and applications. Schizophr. Bull. 43,
745–753. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbw220
Tschacher, W., Haken, H., and Kyselo, M. (2015). Alliance: a common factor of
psychotherapy modeled by structural theory.Front. Psychol.6:421. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2015.00421
Tschantz, A., Seth, A. K., and Buckley, C. L. (2020). Learning action-oriented
models through active inference.PLoS Comput. Biol.16:e1007805. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pcbi.1007805
Van den Bergh, O., Brosschot, J., Critchley, H., Thayer, J. F., and Ottaviani, C.
(2020). Better safe than sorry: a common signature of general vulnerability
for psychopathology. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 16, 225–246. doi: 10.1177/
1745691620950690
Vasil, J., Badcock, P. B., Constant, A., Friston, K., and Ramstead, M. J. D. (2020).
A world unto itself: human communication as active inference. Front. Psychol.
11:417. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00417
Weineck, F. (2018). “Generating body focus: a stepping stone to emotional
awareness, ” inEmbodiment In Psychotherapy – A Practitioner’S Guide , eds G.
Hauke and A. Kritikos (New York, NY: Springer), 129–142. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-319-92889-0_10
Wilson, R. C., Geana, A., White, J. M., Ludvig, E. A., and Cohen, J. D. (2014).
Humans use directed and random exploration to solve the explore-exploit
dilemma. J. Exp. Psychol. General 143, 2074–2081. doi: 10.1037/a0038199
Young, J. E., Klosko, J., and Weishaar, M. E. (2003). Schema Therapy: A
Practitioner’s Guide. New York, NY: Guilford.
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note:All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Hauke and Lohr. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 842488