LETTER Communicated by Ian Robertson
Deeply Felt Affect: The Emergence of Valence
in Deep Active Inference
Casper Hesp*
c.hesp@uva.nl
DepartmentofPsychologyandAmsterdamBrainandCognitionCentre,University
ofAmsterdam,1098XHAmsterdam,Netherlands;InstituteforAdvancedStudy,
UniversityofAmsterdam,1012GCAmsterdam,Netherlands;andWellcomeCentre
forHumanNeuroimaging,UniversityCollegeLondon,LondonWC1N3BG,U.K.
Ryan Smith*
RSmith@laureateinstitute.org
LaureateInstituteforBrainResearch,Tulsa,OK74136,U.S.A.
Thomas Parr
thomas.parr.12@ucl.ac.uk
WellcomeCentreforHumanNeuroimaging,UniversityCollegeLondon,
LondonWC1N3BG,U.K.
Micah Allen
micah.allen@medschl.cam.ac.uk
AarhusInstituteofAdvancedStudies,AarhusUniversity,Aarhus8000,Denmark;
CentreofFunctionallyIntegrativeNeuroscience,AarhusUniversityHospital,
Aarhus8200,Denmark;andCambridgePsychiatry,CambridgeUniversity,
CambridgeCB28AH.U.K.
Karl J. Friston
k.friston@ucl.ac.uk
WellcomeCentreforHumanNeuroimaging,UniversityCollegeLondon,
LondonWC1N3BG,U.K.
Maxwell J. D. Ramstead
maxwell.d.ramstead@gmail.com
WellcomeCentreforHumanNeuroimaging,UniversityCollegeLondon,London
WC1N3BG,U.K.;DivisionofSocialandTransculturalPsychiatry,Department
ofPsychiatryandCulture,Mind,andBrainProgram,McGillUniversity,
MontrealH3A0G4,QC,Canada
*C.H. and R.S. made equal contributions and are designated co–first authors.
NeuralComputation 33, 398–446(2021) © 2020 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Published under a Creative Commons
Attribution4.0International(CCBY4.0)license.
https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_01341
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 399
Thepositive-negativeaxisofemotionalvalencehaslongbeenrecognized
asfundamentaltoadaptivebehavior,butitsoriginandunderlyingfunc-
tionhavelargelyeludedformaltheorizingandcomputationalmodeling.
Using deep active inference, a hierarchical inference scheme that rests
on inverting a model of how sensory data are generated, we develop a
principled Bayesian model of emotional valence. This formulation as-
sertsthatagentsinfertheirvalencestatebasedontheexpectedprecision
oftheiractionmodel—aninternalestimateofoverallmodelfitness(“sub-
jective fitness”). This index of subjective fitness can be estimated within
anyenvironmentandexploitsthedomaingeneralityofsecond-orderbe-
liefs (beliefs about beliefs). We show how maintaining internal valence
representationsallowstheensuingaffectiveagenttooptimizeconfidence
in action selection preemptively. Valence representations can in turn be
optimized by leveraging the (Bayes-optimal) updating term for subjec-
tive fitness, which we label affective charge (AC). AC tracks changes in
fitness estimates and lends a sign to otherwise unsigned divergences be-
tween predictions and outcomes. We simulate the resulting affective in-
ference by subjecting an in silico affective agent to a T-maze paradigm
requiring context learning, followed by context reversal. This formula-
tionofaffectiveinferenceoffersaprincipledaccountofthelinkbetween
affect,(mental)action,andimplicitmetacognition.Itcharacterizeshowa
deepbiologicalsystemcaninferitsaffectivestateandreduceuncertainty
aboutsuchinferencesthroughinternalaction(i.e.,top-downmodulation
ofpriorsthatunderwriteconfidence).Thus,wedemonstratethepotential
of active inference to provide a formal and computationally tractable ac-
countofaffect.Ourdemonstrationofthefacevalidityandpotentialutil-
ity of this formulation represents the first step within a larger research
program. Next, this model can be leveraged to test the hypothesized role
of valence by fitting the model to behavioral and neuronal responses.
1 Introduction
Wenaturallyaspiretoattainandmaintainaspectsofourlivesthatmakeus
feel “good.” On the flip side, we strive to avoid environmental exchanges
thatmakeusfeel“bad.”Feelinggoodorbad—emotionalvalence—isacru-
cialcomponentofaffectandplaysacriticalroleinthestruggleforexistence
inaworldthatisever-changingyetalsosubstantiallypredictable(Johnston,
2003).Acrossalldomainsofourlives,affectiveresponsesemergeincontext-
dependent yet systematic ways to ensure survival and procreation (i.e., to
maximize fitness).
In healthy individuals, positive affect tends to signal prospects of in-
creased fitness, such as the satisfaction and anticipatory excitement of
eating. In contrast, negative affect tends to signal prospects of decreased
fitness—suchasthepainandanticipatoryanxietyassociatedwithphysical
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

400 Hesp et al.
harm. Such valenced states can be induced by any sensory modality, and
evenbysimplyrememberingorimaginingscenariosunrelatedtoone’scur-
rent situation, allowing for adomain-general adaptive function. However,
that very same domain-generality has posed difficulties when attempting
to capture such good and bad feelings in formal or normative treatments.
This kind of formal treatment is necessary to render valence quantifiable,
via mathematical or numerical analysis (i.e., computational modeling). In
this letter, we propose a computational model of valence to help meet this
need.
In formulating our model, we build on both classic and contemporary
work on understanding emotional valence at psychological, neuronal, be-
havioral, and computational levels of description. At the psychological
level,aclassicperspectivehasbeenthatvalencerepresentsasingledimen-
sion (from negative to positive) within a two-dimensional space of “core
affect” (Russell, 1980; Barrett & Russell, 1999), with the other dimension
being physiological arousal (or subjective intensity); further dimensions
beyond these two have also been considered (e.g., control, predictability;
Fontaine, Scherer, Roesch, & Ellsworth, 2007). Alternatively, others have
suggested that valence is itself a two-dimensional construct (Cacioppo &
Berntson, 1994; Briesemeister, Kuchinke, & Jacobs, 2012), with the inten-
sity of negative and positive valence each represented by its own axis (i.e.,
wherehighnegativeandpositivevalencecancoexisttosomeextentduring
ambivalence).
At a neurobiological level, there have been partially corresponding re-
sults and proposals regarding the dimensionality of valence. Some brain
regions (e.g., ventromedial prefrontal (VMPFC) regions) show activation
patterns consistent with a one-dimensional view (reviewed in Lindquist,
Satpute, Wager, Weber, & Barrett, 2016). In contrast, single neurons have
been found that respond preferentially to positive or negative stimuli
(Paton, Belova, Morrison, & Salzman, 2006; Morrison & Salzman, 2009),
and separable brain systems for behavioral activation and inhibition (of-
ten linked to positive and negative valence, respectively) have been pro-
posed (Gray, 1994), based on work highlighting brain regions that show
stronger associations with reward and/or approach behavior (e.g., nu-
cleus accumbens, left frontal cortex, dopamine systems; Rutledge, Skan-
dali, Dayan, & Dolan, 2015) or punishment and/or avoidance behavior
(e.g.,amygdala,rightfrontalcortex;Davidson,2004).However,largemeta-
analyses(e.g.,Lindquistetal.,2016)havenotfoundstrongsupportforthese
views (with the exception of one-dimensional activation in VMPFC), in-
steadfindingthatthemajorityofbrainregionsareactivatedbyincreasesin
bothnegativeandpositivevalence,suggestingamoreintegrative,domain-
general use of valence information, which has been labeled an “affective
workspace”model(Lindquistetal.,2016).Notethattheassociateddomain-
general (“constructivist”) account of emotions (Barrett, 2017)—as opposed
to just valence—contrasts with older views suggesting domain-specific
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 401
subcortical neuronal circuits and associated “affect programs” for differ-
entemotioncategories(e.g.,distinctcircuitsforgeneratingthefeelingsand
visceral/behavioral expressions of anger, fear, or happiness; Ekman, 1992;
Panksepp,Lane,Solms,&Smith,2017).However,thisdebatebetweencon-
structivist and “basic emotions” views goes beyond the scope of our pro-
posal. Questions about the underlying basis of valence treated here are
muchnarrowerthan(andpartiallyorthogonalto)debatesaboutthenature
ofspecificemotions,whichfurtherencompassesappraisalprocesses,facial
expression patterns, visceral control, cognitive biases, and conceptualiza-
tionprocesses,amongothers(Smith&Lane,2015;Smith,Killgore,Alkozei,
& Lane, 2018; Smith, Killgore, & Lane, 2020).
At a computational level of description, prior work related to valence
has primarily arisen out of reinforcement learning (RL) models—with for-
mal models of links between reward/punishment (with close ties to pos-
itive/negative valence), learning, and action selection (Sutton & Barto,
2018).Morerecently,modelsofrelatedemotionalphenomena(mood)have
arisen as extensions of RL (Eldar, Rutledge, Dolan, & Niv, 2016; Eldar &
Niv,2015).Thesemodelsoperationalizemoodasreflectingarecenthistory
in unexpected rewards or punishments (positive or negative reward pre-
diction errors (RPEs)), where many recent better-than-expected outcomes
lead to positive mood and repeated worse-than-expected outcomes lead to
negative mood. The formal mood parameter in these models functions to
bias the perception of subsequent rewards and punishments with the sub-
jectiveperceptionofrewardsandpunishmentsbeingamplifiedbypositive
andnegativemood,respectively.Interestingly,intheextreme,thiscanlead
toinstabilities(reminiscentofbipolarorcyclothymicdynamics)inthecon-
text of stable reward values. However, these modeling efforts have had a
somewhat targeted scope and have not aimed to account for the broader
domain-general role of valence associated with findings supporting the af-
fective workspace view mentioned above.
In this letter, we demonstrate that hierarchical (i.e., deep) Bayesian net-
works, solved using active inference (Friston, Parr, & de Vries, 2018), af-
ford a principled formulation of emotional valence—building on both the
work mentioned above as well as prior work on other emotional phenom-
ena within the active inference framework (Smith, Parr, & Friston, 2019;
Smith, Lane, Parr, & Friston, 2019); Smith, Lane, Nadel, L., & Moutoussis,
2020;Joffily&Coricelli,2013;Clark,Watson,&Friston,2016;Seth&Friston,
2016).Ourhypothesisisthatemotionalvalencecanbeformalizedasastate
ofselfthatisinferredonthebasisoffluctuationsintheestimatedconfidence
(or precision) an agent has in her generative model of the world that in-
forms her decisions. This is implemented as a hierarchically superordinate
state representation that takes the aforementioned confidence estimates at
the lower level as data for further self-related inference. After motivating
our approach on theoretical and observational grounds, we demonstrate
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

402 Hesp et al.
affective inference by simulating a synthetic animal that “feels” its way
forward during successive explorations of a T-maze. We use unexpected
context changes to elicit affective responses, motivated in part by the fact
that affective disorders are associated with deficiencies in performing this
kind of task (Adlerman et al., 2011; Dickstein et al., 2010).
2 ABayesian View on Life: Survival of the Fittest Model
Every living thing from bachelors to bacteria seeks glucose proactively—
and does so long before internal stocks run out. As adaptive creatures, we
seekoutcomesthattendtopromoteourlong-termfunctionalandstructural
integrity (i.e., the well-bounded set of states that characterize our pheno-
types). That adaptive and anticipatory nature of biological life is the focus
of the formal Bayesian framework calledactive inference. This framework
revolves around the notion that all living systems embody statistical mod-
els of their worlds (Friston, 2010; Gallagher & Allen, 2018). In this way,
beliefs about the consequences of different possible actions can be evalu-
atedagainstpreferred(typicallyphenotype-congruent)consequencestoin-
formactionselection.Inactiveinference,everyorganismenactsanimplicit
phenotype-congruent model of its embodied existence (Ramstead, Kirch-
hoff, Constant, & Friston, 2019; Hesp et al., 2019), which has been referred
to as self-evidencing (Hohwy, 2016). Active inference has been used to de-
velopneuralprocesstheoriesandexplaintheacquisitionofepistemichabits
(Friston, FitzGerald et al. 2016; Friston, FitzGerald, Rigoli, Schwartenbeck,
&Pezzulo,2017).Thisframeworkprovidesaformalaccountofthebalance
between seeking informative outcomes (that optimize future expectations)
versuspreferredoutcomes(basedoncurrentexpectations;Schwartenbeck,
FitzGerald, Mathys, Dolan, & Friston, 2015).
Active inference formalizes our survival and procreation in terms of a
singleimperative:tominimizethedivergencebetweenobservedoutcomes
andphenotypicallyexpected(i.e.,preferred)outcomesundera(generative)
modelthatisfine-tunedoverphylogenyandontogeny(Badcock,2012;Bad-
cock,Davey,Whittle,Allen,&Friston,2017;Badcock,Friston,&Ramstead,
2019). This discrepancy can be quantified using an information-theoretic
quantitycalledvariationalfreeenergy(denoted F;seeappendixA1;Friston,
2010).Tominimizefreeenergyismathematicallyequivalenttomaximizing
(a lower bound on) Bayesian model evidence, which quantifies model fit
or subjective fitness; this contrasts with biological fitness, which is defined
as actual reproductive success (Constant, Ramstead, Veissière, Campbell,
& Friston, 2018). Subjective fitness more specifically pertains to the per-
ceived (i.e., internally estimated) efficacy of an organism’s action model
in realizing phenotype-congruent (i.e., preferred) outcomes. Through nat-
ural selection, organisms that can realize phenotype-congruent outcomes
moreefficientlythantheirconspecificswill(onaverage)tendtoexperience
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 403
a fitness benefit. This type of natural (model) selection will favor a strong
correspondence between subjective fitness and biological fitness by select-
ingforphenotype-congruentpreferencesandthemeansofachievingthem.
This Bayesian perspective casts groups of organisms and entire species
as families of viable models that vary in their fit to a particular niche.
On this higher level of description, evolution can be cast as a process of
Bayesianmodelselection(Campbell,2016;Constantetal.,2018;Hespetal.,
2019), in which biological fitness now becomes the evidence (also known
as marginal likelihood) that drives model (i.e., natural) selection across
generations. In the balance of this letter, we exploit the correspondence be-
tween subjective fitness and model evidence to characterize affective va-
lence. Section 3 begins by reviewing the formalism that underlies active
inference. In brief, active inference offers a generic approach to planning
as inference (Attias, 2003; Botvinick & Toussaint, 2012; Kaplan & Friston,
2018)underthefreeenergyprinciple(Friston,2010).Itprovidesanaccount
of belief updating and behavior as the inversion of a generative model. In
this section we emphasize the hierarchical and nested nature of generative
models and describe the successive steps of increasing model complexity
that enable an agent to navigate increasingly complicated environments.
Of the lowest complexity is a simple, single-time-point model of percep-
tion. Somewhat more complex perceptual models can include anticipation
offutureobservations.Complexityincreaseswhenamodelincorporatesac-
tion selection and must therefore anticipate the observed consequences of
different possible plans or policies. As we explain, one key aspect of adap-
tive planning is the need to afford the right level of precision or confidence
in one’s own action model. This constitutes an even higher level of model
complexity,whichcanberegardedasanimplicit(i.e.,subpersonal)formof
metacognition—a(typically)unconsciousprocessestimatingthereliability
ofone’sownmodel.Thissectionconcludesbydescribingthesetupweuse
to illustrate affective inference and the key role of an update term within
our model that we refer to as “affective charge.”
Insection3,wealsointroducethehighestlevelofmodelcomplexitywe
consider,whichaffordsamodeltheabilitytoperformaffectiveinference.In
brief, we add a representation of confidence, in terms of “good” and “bad”
(i.e., valenced) states that endow our affective agent with explicit (i.e., po-
tentially self-reportable) beliefs about valence and enable her to optimize
her confidence in expected (epistemic and pragmatic) consequences.
Having defined a deep generative model (with two hierarchical levels
of state representation) that is apt for representing and leveraging valence
representations,section4usesnumericalanalyses(i.e.,simulations)toillus-
trate the associated belief updating and behavior. We conclude in section
5 with a discussion of the implications of this work, such as the relation-
ship between implicit metacognition and affect, connections to reinforce-
ment learning, and future empirical directions.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

404 Hesp et al.
Figure 1: The first (M1, top panel) and second steps (M2,b o t t o mp a n e l )o fa
generative model of increasing complexity. M1: A minimal generative model
of perception can infer hidden statess from an observationo, based on prior
beliefs(D)andalikelihoodmapping( A).M2:Agenerativemodelofanticipation
extends perception (as in M1) forward into the future (and backward into the
past) using a transition matrix (Bτ ) for hidden states.
3 Methods
3.1 An Incremental Primer on Active Inference.At the core of active
inference lie generative models that operate with—and only with—local
information (i.e., without external supervision, which maintains biologi-
cal plausibility). We focus on partially observable Markov decision pro-
cesses (MDPs), a common generative model for Bayesian inference over
discretizedstates,wherebeliefstaketheformofcategoricalprobabilitydis-
tributions. MDPs can be used to update beliefs about hidden states of the
world “out there” (denoteds), based on sensory inputs (referred to as out-
comes or observations, denotedo). Given the importance of the temporally
deep and hierarchical structure afforded by MDPs in our formulation, we
introduce several steps of increasing model complexity on which our for-
mulation will build, following the sequence in Figure 1.
3.1.1 Step 1: Perception.At the lowest complexity, we consider a gen-
erative model of perception (see Table 1) at a single point in time: M1 in
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 405
Table 1: AGenerative Model of Perception.
Prior Beliefs (Generative Model) (P) Approximate Posterior Beliefs (Q)
P(s) = Cat(D)  
state prior
Q(s) = Cat(¯s)  
state posterior
P(o|s) = Cat(A)  
likelihood
¯s = σ(ln D
prior
beliefs
+ lnA· o  
sensory
evidence
)
s
state
expectations
= D
o
outcome
expectations
= As
Notes:Thegenerativemodelisdefinedintermsofpriorbeliefsabouthid-
denstates P(s) = Cat(D)(wher eDisavectorencodingthepriorprobabil-
ity of each state) and a likelihood mappingP(o|s) = Cat(A)( w h e r eA is a
matrixencoding theprobabilityofeach outcomegiven aparticularstate).
Cat(X) denotes a categorical probability distribution (see also the supple-
mentaryinformationA3).Throughvariationalinference,thebeliefsabout
hiddenstates sareupdatedgivenanobservedsensoryoutcome o,thusar-
riving at an approximate posteriorQ(s) = Cat(¯s) (see also supplementary
information in appendix A1), where¯s = σ(lnD+ lnA· o). Here, the dot
notationindicatesbackwardmatrixmultiplication(inthecaseofanormal-
ized set of probabilities and a likelihood mapping): for a given outcome,
A· oreturns the (renormalized) probability or likelihood of each hidden
state s (see also the supplementary information in appendix A2).
Figure 1 (top panel). It entails prior beliefs about hidden states (prior ex-
pectation D), as well as beliefs about how hidden states generate sensory
outcomes(viaa likelihoodmapping A).Perceptionherecorrespondstoapro-
cess of inferring which hidden states (posterior expectations¯s)p r o v i d et h e
best explanation for observed outcomes (see also appendix A2). However,
this model of perception is too simple for modeling most agents, because
it fails to account for the transitions between hidden states over time that
lend the world—and subsequent inference—dynamics or narratives. This
takes us to the next level of model complexity.
3.1.2 Step2:Anticipation. Thenextincreaseincomplexityinvolvesagen-
erative model that specifies how hidden states evolve from one point in
timetothenext(accordingtostatetransitionprobabilities Bτ ).Asshownin
Table 2 (M2 inFigure1,toppanel),updatingposteriorbeliefsabouthidden
states (¯sτ ) now involves the integration of beliefs about past states (¯sτ−1),
sensory evidence (oτ ), and beliefs about future states (¯sτ+1). From here, the
naturalthirdstepistoconsiderhowdynamicsdependonthechoicesofthe
creature in question.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

406 Hesp et al.
Table 2: AGenerative Model of Anticipation (M2 in Figure 1, Bottom Panel).
Generative Model (P) Approximate Posterior Beliefs (Q)
P(s1) = Cat(D)  
initial state prior
Q(sτ ) = Cat(¯sτ )  
state posterior
P(sτ |sτ+1) = Cat(Bτ )  
state transitions
¯s1 = σ(1/2 lnD + lnA· o1 + 1/2 lnB1 · ¯s2)
¯s2 = σ(1/2 lnB1¯s1 + lnA· o2 + 1/2 lnB2 · ¯s3)
s1 = D
sτ+1
state expectations
= Bτ sτ
¯s3 = σ(lnB2¯s2  
forward
messages
+lnA· o3  
sensory
evidence
)   
backward
messages
oτ
outcome expectations
= Asτ
Notes: The generative model is defined in terms of prior beliefs about initial
hidden statesP(s1) = Cat(D), hidden state transitionsP(sτ+1|sτ ) = Cat(Bτ ),
and a likelihood mappingP(o|s) = Cat(A). Note the factor of1/2 in posterior
statebeliefs ¯sτ resultsfromthemarginalmessage-passingapproximationin-
troduced by Parr et al. (2019).
3.1.3 Step3:Action. The temporally extended generative model already
discussed can be extended to model planning (M3 in Figure 2; see Table 3)
byconditioningtransitionprobabilities( Bτ )onaction.Policyselection(i.e.,
planning) can now be cast as a form of Bayesian model selection, in which
each policy (a sequence ofBπτ -matrices, subscripted byπ for policy) rep-
resents a possible version of the future. A priori, the agent’s beliefs about
policies (π) depend on a baseline prior expectation about the most likely
policies (which can often be thought of as habits, denotedEπ ) and an esti-
mate of the negative log evidence it expects to obtain for each policy—the
expected free energy (denotedGπ ). The latter is biased toward phenotype-
congruence in the sense that any given behavioral phenotype is associated
with a range of species—typical (i.e., preferred) sensory outcomes. For ex-
ample, within their respective ecological niches, different creatures will be
more or less likely to sense different temperatures through their thermore-
ceptors (i.e., those consistent with their survival). These phenotypic priors
(“priorpreferences”)arecastintermsofaprobabilityoverobservedfuture
outcomes.Together,thebaselineandactionmodelpriors( Eπ + Gπ )aresup-
plementedbytheevidencethateachnewobservationprovidesforapartic-
ular policy—leading to a posterior distribution over policies with the form
−ln ¯π = Eπ + Gπ + Fπ , which is equivalent to ¯π = σ(−Eπ − Gπ − Fπ ).
Expected free energy can be decomposed into two terms, referred to
as the risk and ambiguity for each policy. The risk of a policy is the ex-
pected divergence between anticipated and preferred outcomes (denoted
by C), where the latter is a prior that encodes phenotype-congruent out-
comes (e.g., reward or reinforcement in behavioral paradigms). Risk can
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 407
Figure2: Thethirdstep(M 3)ofanincrementalsummaryofactiveinference.Ina
generativemodelofaction,statetransitionsareconditionedonpolicies π.Prior
policy beliefsπ are informed by the baseline prior over policies (“model free,”
denoted Eπ ) and the expected free energy (Gπ ), which evaluates each policy-
specificperceptionmodel(asinM 2)intermsoftheexpectedriskandambiguity.
Riskbiasestheactionmodeltowardphenotype-congruentpreferences( C).Pos-
teriorpolicybeliefsareinformedbythefitbetweenanticipated(policy-specific)
and preferred outcomes, while at the same time minimizing their ambiguity.
therefore be thought of as similar to a reward probability estimate for each
policy. The ambiguity of a policy corresponds to the perceptual uncer-
tainty associated with different states (e.g., searching under a streetlight
versus searching in the dark). Policies with lower ambiguity (i.e., those ex-
pected to provide the most informative observations) will have a higher
probability, providing the agent with an information-seeking drive. The
resulting generative model provides a principled account of the subjec-
tiverelevanceofbehavioralpoliciesandtheirexpectedoutcomes,inwhich
an agent trades off between seeking reward and seeking new information
(Friston, FitzGerald,Rigoli, Schwartenbeck,& Pezzulo,2017.Furthermore,
it generalizes many established formulations of optimal behavior (Itti &
Baldi, 2009; Schmidhuber, 2010; Mirza, Adams, Mathys, & Friston, 2016;
Veale, Hafed, & Yoshida, 2017) and provides a formal description of the
motivated and self-preserving behavior of living systems (Friston, Levin,
Sengupta, & Pezzulo, 2015).
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

408 Hesp et al.
Table 3: AGenerative Model of Action (M3 in Figure 2).
Prior Beliefs (Generative Model) (P) Posterior Beliefs (Q) and Expectations
P(π) = Cat(π)  
policy prior
Q(π) = Cat(¯π)  
policy posterior
π
policy
expectations
= σ( −Eπ
baseline prior
− Gπ
action model
)¯ π = σ(lnEπ − Gπ − Fπ
perceptual evidence
)
Gπ
expected
free energy
= ∑
τ oπτ · (lnoπτ − C)  
expected phenotypic risk
Fπ = ∑
τ ¯sπτ · (ln¯sπτ − lnA· oτ
−1/2 lnBπτ −1¯sπτ −1 − 1/2 lnBπτ · ¯sπτ +1  
policy-specific prediction error
)
− diag(A· lnA)· sπτ
  
expected perceptual ambiguity
C
phenotypic
preferences
= lnP(oτ )
P(sτ+1|sτ ,π ) = Cat(Bπτ )  
policy-specific
state transitions
Q(sτ |π) = Cat(¯sπτ )  
policy-specific
state posterior
s1 = D ¯sπτ = σ(1/2 lnBπτ −1¯sπτ −1 + lnA· oτ
+ 1/2 lnBπτ · ¯sπτ +1)sπτ +1 = Bπτ sπτ
oπτ
policy-specific
expectations
= Asπτ
Note: Posterior policies ¯π inferred from (policy-specific) posterior beliefs about hidden
states sπτ , based on (policy-specific) state transitionsBπτ , the baseline policy priorEπ ,
the expected free energyGπ (action model), and prior preferences over outcomesC.
3.1.4 Step 4: Implicit Metacognition.The three steps of increasing com-
plexity are jointly sufficient for the vast majority of (current) active infer-
ence applications. However, a fourth level is required to enable an agent
to estimate its own success, which could be thought of as a minimal form
of (implicit, non-reportable) metacognition (M4 in Figure 3; see Table 4).
Estimation of an agent’s own success specifically depends on an expected
precisionterm(denoted γ)thatreflectspriorconfidenceintheexpectedfree
energyoverpolicies( Gπ ).Thisexpectedprecisiontermmodulatestheinflu-
ence of expected free energy on policy selection, relative to the fixed-form
policy prior (Eπ ): higherγ values afford a greater influence of the expected
free energies of each policy entailed by one’s current action model. Formu-
lated in this way, we can think ofγ as an internal estimate of model fitness
(subjective fitness), because it represents an estimate of confidence (M4)i n
aphenotype-congruentmodelofactions(M 3),giveninferredhiddenstates
of the environment (M2).
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 409
Figure 3: The fourth step (M4) of our incremental description of active infer-
ence in terms of the nested processes of perception (M1−2 in Figure 1), action
(M3 in Figure 2), and implicit metacognition (M4 in this figure), emphasizing
the inherently hierarchical, recurrent nature of these generative models. This
generative model infers confidence in its own action model in terms of the ex-
pected precision (γ), which modulates reliance onGπ for policy selection (as in
M3), based on perceptual inferences (as in M2). Expected precision (γ) changes
when inferred policies differ from expected policies. This term increases when
posterior (policy-averaged) expected free energy is lower than when averaged
underthepolicyprior ( AC= (π − ¯π)· Gπ < 0),anddecreaseswhenitishigher
AC> 0).
In turn, estimates for this precision term (γ) are informed by a (gamma)
priorthatisusuallyparameterizedbyarateparameter β,withwhichithas
an inverse relation. When expectedmodelevidence is greaterunderposte-
rior beliefs compared to prior beliefs (i.e., when (π − ¯π)· Gπ > 0),γ values
increase.Thatis,confidenceinthesuccessofone’smodelrises.Intheoppo-
site case (when (π − ¯π)· Gπ < 0), γ values decrease. That is, confidence in
thesuccessofone’smodelfalls.Notethatwhilerelated, γ valuesarenotre-
dundantwiththeprecisionofthedistributionoverpolicies( π).Highvalues
of the latter (which correspond to high confidence in the best policy or ac-
tion)neednotalwayscorrespondtohighconfidenceinthesuccessofone’s
model(high γ).Toemphasizeitsrelationtovalenceinourformulation,go-
ing forward we refer toγ updates using the termaffectivecharge (AC):
AC=− /Delta1¯β = (π − ¯π)· Gπ . (3.1)
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

410 Hesp et al.
Table 4: AGenerativeModel ofMinimal(Implicit)Metacognition—(M 4 inFig-
ure 3): Inferring Expected Precisionγ from Posterior Policiesπ,B a s e do na
Gamma Distribution with Temperatureβ.
Prior Beliefs (Generative Model) (P) Posterior Beliefs (Q) and Expectations
P(γ ) = /Gamma1(1, β
temperature
parameter
) Q(γ ) = /Gamma1(1, ¯β)
¯γ
posterior
precision
≡ EQ(γ )[γ] = 1/¯β
γ
expected
precision
≡ EP(γ )[γ] = 1/β
¯β = β − AC
AC
affective
charge
= (π − ¯π)· Gπ  
phenotypic progress
π = σ(−Eπ − γGπ
precision-weighted
action model
)¯ π = σ(−Eπ − γGπ − Fπ )
Note: Bayes-optimal updates ofβ differ only in sign from the term we label
affective charge (AC=− /Delta1¯β;s e ea l s oM4 in Figure 3).
Thisshowsthatthetimescaleoverwhichbeliefsaboutpoliciesareupdated
sets of the relevant timescale forAC, such that valence is linked inextrica-
bly to action.AC can only be nonzero when inferred policies differ from
expected policies π ̸= ¯π. It is positive when perceptual evidence favors
an agent’s action model and negative otherwise. In other words, positive
and negative AC corresponds, respectively, to increased and decreased
confidence in one’s action model. Accordingly, becauseGπ is a function of
achieving preferred outcomes,ACcan be construed as a reward prediction
error,whererewardisinverselyproportionalto Gπ (Fristonetal.,2014).For
example, a predator may be confidently pleased with itself after spotting a
prey(positive AC)andfrustratedwhenitescapes(negative AC).However,
having precise beliefs about policies should not be confused with having
confidence in one’s action model. For instance, consider prey animals that
are nibbling happily on food and suddenly find themselves being pursued
by a voracious predator. While fleeing was initially an unlikely policy, this
dramatically changes upon encountering the predator. Now these animals
haveaveryprecisebeliefthattheyshouldflee,butthisdramaticchangein
theirexpectedcourseofactionsuggeststhattheiractionmodelhasbecome
unreliable. Thus, while they have precise beliefs about action,AC would
be highly negative (i.e., a case of negative valence but confident action
selection).
ThiscompletesourformaldescriptionofactiveinferenceunderMarkov
decisionprocessmodels.Thisdescriptionemphasizestherecursiveandhi-
erarchicalcompositionofsuchmodelsthatequipasimplelikelihoodmap-
ping between unobservable (hidden) states and observable outcomes with
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 411
dynamics. These dynamics (i.e., state transitions) are then cast in terms of
policies,wherethepoliciesthemselveshavetobeinferred.Finally,theensu-
ingplanningasinferenceisaugmentedwithmetacognitivebeliefsinorder
tooptimizetherelianceonexpectedfreeenergy(i.e.,basedonone’scurrent
model) during policy selection. This model calls for Bayesian belief updat-
ing that can be framed in terms of affective charge (AC).
AC is formally related to reward prediction error within reinforcement
learning models (Friston et al., 2014; Schultz, Dayan, & Montague, 1997;
Stauffer, Lak, & Schultz, 2014). Accordingly, it may be reported or encoded
by neuromodulators like dopamine in the brain (Friston, Rigoli et al., 2015;
Schwartenbecketal.,2015),aviewthathasbeenempiricallysupportedus-
ing functional magnetic resonance imaging of decision making under un-
certainty (Schwartenbeck et al., 2015). The formal relationship betweenAC
(across each time step) and the neuronal dynamics that may optimize it
within each time step can be obtained (in the usual way) through a gradi-
ent descent on free energy (as derived in Friston, FitzGerald et al., 2017).
Through substitution ofAC, we find that posterior beliefs about expected
precision (¯γ = 1/¯β) satisfy the following equality:
˙¯β(t) = β − AC− ¯β(t), (3.2)
where t denotes the passage of time within a trial time step and thus sets
the timescale of convergence (here the bar notation indicates posterior be-
liefs; dot notation indicates rate of change). The corresponding analytical
solution shows that the magnitude of fluctuations in expected precision is
proportional toAC:
¯β(t) = β − AC(1− e−t)
˙¯β(t) =− ACe−t. (3.3)
We discuss the potential neural basis ofAC further below. In the next sec-
tion, we describe the simulation setup that we will use to quantitatively
illustrate the proposed role ofACin affective behavior.
3.1.5 TheT-MazeParadigm. Thegenerativemodelwehavedescribedhas
been formulated in a generic way (reflecting the domain-generality of our
formulation). The particular implementation of active (affective) inference
weuseinthisletterisbasedonaT-mazeparadigm(seeFigure4),forwhich
an active-inference MDPhas been validated previously (Pezzulo, Rigoli, &
Friston,2015).Herewedescribethisimplementationandsubsequentlyuse
it to show simulations demonstrating affective inference in a synthetic ani-
mal. Simulated behavior in this paradigm is consistent with that observed
in real rats within such contexts.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

412 Hesp et al.
Figure4: ThesetupoftheT-mazetask(toppanel)anditstypicalsolution(bot-
tom panel). The synthetic agent (here, a rat) starts in the middle of the T-maze.
Ifitmovesup,itwillencountertwoone-waydoors,leftandright,whichleadto
either a rewarding food source or a painful shock (high versus low pragmatic
value, respectively). If it moves downward, it will encounter an informative
cue (high epistemic value) that indicates whether the food is in the left or right
arm.
For the sake of simplicity, the agent is equipped with (previously gath-
ered) prior knowledge about the workings of the T-maze in her generative
model. Starting near the central intersection, the agent can either stay put
ormoveinthreedifferentdirections:left,right,ordownintheT-maze.She
knows that a tasty reward is located in either the left or right arm of the
T-maze, and a painful shock is in the opposite arm. She is also aware that
the left and right arms are one-way streets (i.e., absorbing states): once en-
tered, she must remain there until the end of the trial. She knows that an
informative cue at the downward location provides reliable contextual in-
formationaboutwhethertherewardislocatedintheleftorrightarminthe
currenttrial.Thekeyprobabilitydistributionsforthegenerativemodelare
provided in Figure 5.
Although this generative model is relatively simple, it has most of
the ingredients needed to illustrate fairly sophisticated behavior. Because
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 413
Figure 5: A generative model for the T-maze setup of Figure 4, with the pri-
ors (top-left panel) as in Figure 3, now specified as vectors or matrices. Here,
the probabilities reflect a set of simple assumptions embedded in the agent’s
generative model, each of which could itself be optimized by fitting to empiri-
cal data. Middle-left panel: Prior expectationsD for initial states are defined as
uniform,giventherathasbeentrainedinaseriesofrandomleftandrighttrials.
Middle panel: The vectorC encoding preferences is defined such that reward
outcomes are strongly preferred (green circles): odds e4:1 compared to “none”
outcomes labeled “none” (gray crosses), and punishments are extremely non-
preferred (red): odds e−6:1 compared to outcomes labeled “none.” Bottom-left
panel:Thematrix Aforthelikelihoodmappingreflectstwoassumptionsabout
theagent’sbeliefsgiveneachparticularcontext(whichcouldbetrainedthrough
prior trials). First, the location-reward mappings always have some minimal
amountofuncertainty(.02probability).Second,thecueisacompletelyreliable
context indicator. Top-right panel: The matrixBfor the state transitions reflects
the fact that changing location is either very easy (100% efficacious) or impos-
sible when stuck in one of the one-way arms. Bottom-right panel: The vectorV
forthepoliciesreflectspossiblecombinationsofactionsoverthetwotimesteps
andassociatedbaselineprioroverpolicies E,whichstartsataninitial,uniformly
distributed level of evidence for each policy, which can be seen as reflecting an
initialperiodoffreeexplorationofthemazestructure(herethevalueof2.3reg-
ulates the impact of subsequently observed policies, where the value for each
policy increments by 1 each time it is subsequently chosen).
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

414 Hesp et al.
Figure6: Simulatedresponsesover32trialswithfoodlocatedontheleftsideof
the T-maze. This figure reports the behavioral and (simulated) affective charge
responses during successive trials. The top panel shows, for each trial, the se-
lected policy (in image format) over the policies considered (arrows indicate
moving to each respective arm; circles indicate staying in, or returning to, the
center position). The policy selected in the first 12 trials corresponds to an ex-
ploratory policy, which involves examining the cue in the lower arm and then
going to the left or right arm to secure the reward (i.e., depending on the cue,
which here always indicates that reward is on the left). After the agent be-
comes sufficiently confident that the context does not change (after trial 12),
sheindulgesinpragmaticbehavior,movingimmediatelytotherewardwithout
checking the cue. The middle panel shows the associated fluctuations in affec-
tive charge. The bottom panel shows the accumulated posterior beliefs about
the initial state.
actions can lead to epistemic or informative outcomes, which change be-
liefs, it naturally accommodates situations or paradigms that involve both
exploration and exploitation under uncertainty. Our primary focus here is
on the expected precision term and its updates (i.e.,AC), that we have al-
ready described.
Figure 6 illustrates typical behavior under this particular generative
model. These results were modeled after Friston, FitzGerald et al. (2017)
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 415
and show a characteristic transition from exploratory behavior to exploita-
tivebehaviorastheratbecomesmoreconfidentaboutthecontextinwhich
she is operating—here, learning that the reward is always on the left. This
increaseinconfidenceismediatedbychangesinpriorbeliefsaboutthecon-
text state (the location of the reward) that are accumulated by repeated ex-
posure to the paradigm over 32 trials (this accumulation is here modeled
using a Dirichlet parameterization of posterior beliefs about initial states).
Thesechangesmeanthattheratbecomesincreasinglyconfidentaboutwhat
shewilldo,withconcomitantincreasesorupdatestotheexpectedprecision
term. These increases are reflected by fluctuations in affective charge (mid-
dle panel). We will use this kind of paradigm later to see what happens
when the reward contingencies reverse.
3.2 Affective Valence as an Estimate of Model Fitness in Deep Tem-
poralModels. Withinvariousmodelingparadigms,afewresearchershave
recognized and aimed to formalize the relation between subjective fitness
and valence. For example, Phaf and Rotteveel (2012) used a connection-
istapproachtoarguethatvalencecorrespondsbroadlytomatch-mismatch
processes in neural networks, thus monitoring the fit between a neural ar-
chitectureanditsinput.Asanotherexample,JoffilyandCoricelli(2013)pro-
posed an interpretation of emotional valence in terms of rates of change in
variationalfreeenergy.However,thisproposaldidnotincludeformalcon-
nection to action.
The notion of affective charge that we describe might be seen as build-
ing on such previous work by linking changes in free energy (and the cor-
responding match-mismatch between a model and sensory input) to an
explicit model of action selection. In this case, an agent can gauge sub-
jective fitness by evaluating its phenotype-congruent action model (Gπ )
against perceptual evidence deduced from actual outcomes (Fπ ). Such a
comparison, and a metric for its computation, is exactly what is provided
by affective charge, which specifies changes in the expected precision of
(i.e., confidence in) one’s action model (see M4 in Figure 3). Along these
lines, various researchers have developed conceptual models of valence
based on the expected precision of beliefs about behavior (Seth & Friston,
2016;Badcocket al., 2017;Clark et al.,2018). Crucially,negativelyvalenced
states lead to behavior suggesting a reduced reliance on prior expectations
(Bodenhausen, Sheppard, & Kramer, 1994; Gasper & Clore, 2002), while
positively valenced states appear to increase reliance on prior expectations
(Bodenhausen, Kramer, & Süsser, 1994; Park & Banaji, 2000)—both consis-
tentwiththeideathatvalencerelatestoconfidenceinone’sinternalmodel
of the world.
Onemightcorrespondinglyaskwhetheranagentshouldrelytoagreater
or lesser extent on the expected free energy of policies when deciding how
toact.Ineffect,thehighestlevelofthegenerativemodelshowninFigure3
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

416 Hesp et al.
(M4,alsooutlinedinTable4)providesanuninformativeprioroverexpected
precision that may or may not be apt in a given world. If the environment
is sufficiently predictable to support a highly reliable model of the world,
thenhighconfidenceshouldbeaffordedtoexpectedfreeenergyinforming
(posterior) plans. In economic terms, this would correspond to increasing
risk sensitivity, where risk-minimizing policies are selected. Conversely, in
an unpredictable environment, it may be impossible to predict risk, and
expected precision should, a priori, be attenuated, thereby paying more at-
tention to sensory evidence.
This suggests that in a capricious environment, behavior would benefit
from prior beliefs about expected precision that reflect the prevailing envi-
ronmental volatility—in other words, beliefs that reflect how well a model
of that environment can account for patterns in its own action-dependent
observations. In what follows, we equip the generative model with an ad-
ditional(hierarchicallyandtemporallydeeper)levelofstaterepresentation
thatallowsanagenttorepresentandaccumulateevidenceforsuchbeliefs,
and we show how this leads naturally to a computational account of va-
lence from first principles.
Deeptemporalmodels ofthiskind(withtwolevelsofstaterepresentation)
have been used in previous research on active inference (Friston, Rosch,
Parr, Price, & Bowman, 2017). In these models, posterior state representa-
tions at the lower level are treated as observations at the higher level. State
representations at the higher level in turn provide prior expectations over
subsequentstatesatthelowerlevel(seesection3.3).Thismeansthathigher-
level state representations evolve more slowly, as they must accumulate
evidence from sequences of state inferences at the lower level. Previous re-
searchhasshown,forexample,howthistypeofdeephierarchicalstructure
canallowanagenttoholdinformationinworkingmemory(Parr&Friston,
2017)andtoinferthemeaningofsentencesbasedonrecognizingasequence
of words (Friston, Rosch et al., 2017).
Hereweextendthispreviousworkbyallowinganagenttoinferhigher-
levelstatesnotjustfromlower-levelstates,butalsofromchangesinlower-
levelexpectedprecision( AC).Thisentailsanovelformofparametricdepth,
in which higher-level states are now informed by lower-level model pa-
rameter estimates. As we will show, this then allows for explicit higher-
level state representations of valence (i.e., more slowly evolving estimates
of model fitness), based on the integration of patterns in affective charge
overtime.Inanthropomorphicterms,theagentisnowequippedtoexplic-
itly represent whether her model is doing “good” or “bad” at a timescale
thatspansmanydecisionsandobservedoutcomes.Hence,somethingwith
similar properties as valence (i.e., with intrinsically good/bad qualities)
emergesnaturallyoutofadeeptemporalmodelthattracksitsownsuccess
toinformfutureaction.Notethat“good”and“bad”areinherentlydomain-
general here, and yet—as we will now show—they can provide empirical
priors on specific courses of action.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 417
3.3 Affective Inference. This letter characterizes the valence compo-
nentofaffectiveprocessingwithrespecttoinferenceaboutdomain-general
valence states—those inferred from patterns in expected precision updates
overtime.Inparticular,wefocusonhowvalenceemergesfromaninternal
monitoringofsubjectivefitnessbyanagent.Todoso,wespecifyhowaffec-
tive states participate in the generative model and what kind of outcomes
theygenerate.Sincedeepmodelsinvolvetheuseofempiricalpriors—from
higherlevelsofstaterepresentation—topredictrepresentationsatsubordi-
nate levels (Friston, Parr, & Zeidman 2018), we can apply such top-down
predictions to supply an empirical prior for expected precision (γ). For-
mally,weassociatealternativediscreteoutcomesfromahigher-levelmodel
with different values of the rate parameter (β) for the gamma prior on ex-
pected precision.
Note that we are not associating the affective charge term to emotional
valence directly. The affective charge term tracks fluctuations in subjective
fitness.Tomodelemotionalvalence,weintroduceanewlayerofstateinfer-
ence that takes fluctuations in the value ofγ (i.e., AC-driven updates) over
a slower timescale as evidence favoring one valence state versus another.
By implementing this hierarchical step in an MDP scheme, we effec-
tively formulate affective inference as a parametrically deep form of active
inference. Parametric depth means that higher-order affective processes
generatepriorsthatparameterizelower-order(context-specific)inferences,
which in turn provide evidence for those higher-order affective states.
3.3.1 SimulatingtheAffectiveUpsandDownsofaSyntheticRat. As a con-
crete example, we implement a minimal model of valence in which a syn-
thetic rat infers whether her own affective state is positive or negative
within the T-maze paradigm. Our hierarchical model of the T-maze task
comprises a lower-level MDP for context-specific active inference (M4 in
Figure3)andahigher-levelMDPforaffectiveinference(seeFigure7).Note,
however, that this is simply an example; the lowerlevel model in princi-
ple could generalize to any other type of task that is relevant to the agent
in question. The hidden states at the higher level provide empirical priors
overanyvariableatthelowerlevelthatdoesnotchangeoverthetimescale
associated with that level. These variables include the initial state, priors
over expected precision, fixed priors over policies, and so on (see the MDP
modeldescriptionsinsection3.1).Here,weconsiderhigher-levelpriorson
theinitialstateandtherateparameterofthepriorsoverexpectedprecision.
By construction, state transitions at the higher (affective) level are over tri-
als endowing the model with a deep temporal structure. This enables it to
keep track of slow changes over multiple trials, such as the location of the
reward.Inotherwords,beliefupdatingatthesecondlevelfromtrialtotrial
enablestheagenttoaccumulateevidenceandremembercontingenciesthat
are conserved over trials.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

418 Hesp et al.
Figure 7: A generative model for affective inference in terms of its key equa-
tions and probabilistic graphical model (top left panel) and the associated ma-
trices, again reflecting a number of relatively minimal assumptions about the
agent’sbeliefsconcerningtheexperimentalsetup—whereeachoftheseparam-
eters could itself be optimized by fitting to empirical data. Bottom left: Prior
expectations D(2) for initial states at the second level are distributed uniformly.
(Bottommiddle)Thelikelihoodmatrix A(A) reflectssomedegreeofuncertainty
in the affective predictions (.03), which, when multiplied byβ(+,−), sets the
lower-levelprioronexpectedprecision,allowingittovarybetween0.5and2.0.
Bottomright:Thematrix A(C) forthelikelihoodmappingfromcontextstatesto
the lower level reflects that the agent is always certain which context she ob-
served after each trial is over. Top right: The matrixB(2) for the state transitions
at the second level reflects two assumptions for cross-trial changes: (1) Both af-
fective and contextual states vary strongly but have some stability across trials
(.2–.3probabilityofchanging)and(2)theagenthasapositivitybiasinthesense
thatsheismorelikelytoswitchfromanegativetoapositivestatethanviceversa
(.3 versus .2 probability). The lower-level model is the same as in Figure 5.
In our example, we use two distinct sets of hidden states (i.e., hidden
state factors) at the second level, each with two states. The first state factor
corresponded to the location of the reward (food on the left or right, de-
noted Land R), and the second state factor corresponded to valence (posi-
tiveornegative,denoted + and−).Wewillrefertotheseas Contexts(sC)and
Affective states (sA), respectively—that is,s(2)
T = (s(C)
T ,s(A)
T ). This means the
rat could contextualize her behavior in terms of a prior over second-level
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 419
states (D(2)) and their state transitions from trial to trial (B(2)), in terms of
both where she believes the reward is most likely to be (Context) and how
confident she should be in her action model (Valence).
In short, our synthetic subject was armed with high-level beliefs about
contextandaffectivestatesthatfluctuateslowlyovertrials.Inwhatfollows,
weconsiderthebeliefupdatingintermsofmessagesthatdescendfromthe
affective level to the lower level and ascend from the lower level to the af-
fective level. Descending messages provide empirical priors that optimize
policy selection. This optimization can be regarded as a form of covert ac-
tionorattentionthatallowstheimpactofone’sgenerativemodelonaction
selection to vary in a state-dependent manner. Ascending messages can be
interpretedasmediatingbeliefupdatesaboutthecurrentcontextandaffec-
tive state: affective inference reflecting belief updates about model fitness.
3.3.2 Descending Messages: Contextual and Affective Priors.On each trial,
discrete prior beliefs about the reward being on the left (L,R)a r ee n c o d e d
in empirical priors or posterior beliefs at the second level, which inherit
from the previous posterior and enable belief updating from trial to trial.
Similarly, beliefs over discrete valence beliefs (+,−) are equipped with an
initial prior at the affective level and are updated from trial to trial based
onasecond-levelprobabilitytransitionmatrix.Fromtheperspectiveofthe
generativemodel,theinitialcontextstatesatthelowerlevelareconditioned
on the context states at the higher level, while the rate parameterβ, (which
constitutes prior beliefs about expected precision) is conditioned on affec-
tive states.
Because affective states are discrete and the rate parameter is continu-
ous, message passing between these random variables calls for the mixed
or hybrid scheme (described in Friston, Parr, & de Vries, 2018). In these
simulations, the affective states (i.e., valence) were associated with two
values of the rate parameterβ(+,−) = (0.5,2.0), where the corresponding
precisions provide evidence for positive valence (γ+ = 2.0) and negative
valence (γ− = 0.5). Effectively,γ+ and γ− are upper and lower bounds on
the expected precision under the two levels of the affective state. The de-
scending messages correspond to Bayesian model averages, a mixture of
the priors under each level of the context and affective states:
P
(
s(1)
1
⏐⏐s(C)
T
)
= Cat
(
A(C))
P(γ ) = EQ(s(2)
T )
[
P
(
γ
⏐⏐s(A)
T
)]
= /Gamma1(1,β)
β = β(+,−) · A(A)s(A)
T .
In short, the empirical priors over the initial state at the lower level (and
expected precision) now depend on hidden (valence) states at the second
level.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

420 Hesp et al.
3.3.3 AscendingMessages:ContextualandAffectiveEvidence. During each
trial, exogenous (reward location) and endogenous (affective charge) sig-
nalsinducebeliefupdatingatthesecondlevelofhiddenstates.Theydoso
insuchawaythatfluctuationsincontextandaffectivebeliefs(acrosstrials)
are slower than fluctuations in lower-level beliefs concerning states, poli-
cies, and expected precision. These belief updates following each trial are
mediated by ascending messages that are gathered from posterior beliefs
about the initial food location at the end of each trial (¯s(1)
1 ), which serves as
Bayesian model evidence for the appropriate context state:
¯s(C)
T = σ
(
lnB(C)¯s(C)
T−1 + lnA(C) · ¯s(1)
1
)
(contextevidence).
As with inference at the first level, this second-level expectation comprises
empiricalpriorsfromtheprevioustrialandevidencebasedontheposterior
expectation of the initial (context) state at the lower level.
For the ascending messages from the (continuous) expected precision
to the (discrete) affective states, we use Bayesian model reduction (for the
derivation, see Friston, Parr, and Zeidman, 2018) to evaluate the marginal
likelihood under the priors associated with each affective state:
¯s(A)
T = σ
(
lnB(A)¯s(A)
T−1 − ln β(+,−) − AC
β(+,−)
β
β − AC
)
(affectiveevidence).
Again, this contains empirical priors based on previous affective expec-
tationsandevidenceforchangesinaffectivestatebasedonaffectivecharge,
AC= (¯π − π)· Gπ , evaluated at the end of each trial time step. Notice that
when the affective charge is zero, the affective expectations on the current
trialaredeterminedcompletelybytheexpectationsattheprevioustrial(as
thelogarithmofoneiszero).SeeFigure7foragraphicaldescriptionofthis
deep generative model.
We used this generative model to simulate affective inference of a syn-
thetic rat that experiences 64 T-maze trials, in which the food location
switches after 32 trials from the left arm to the right arm. When our syn-
theticsubjectbecomesmoreconfidentthatheractionswillrealizepreferred
outcomes(C),increased(subpersonal)confidenceinheractionmodel( Gπ )
shouldprovideevidenceforapositivelyvalencedstate(through AC).Con-
versely, when she is less confident about whether her actions will realize
preferred outcomes, there will be evidence for a negatively valenced state.
In that case, our affective agent will fall back on her baseline prior over
policies(Eπ ),aquickanddirtyheuristicthattendstobeusefulinsituations
that require urgent action to survive (i.e., in the absence of opportunity to
resolve uncertainty via epistemic foraging).
Inthissetting,oursyntheticsubjectcanreceiveeitheratastyrewardora
painfulshock,basedonwhethershechoosesleftorright.Ofcourse,shehas
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 421
ahighdegreeofcontrolovertheoutcome,providedsheforagesforcontext
information and then chooses left or right, accordingly. However, her gen-
erativemodelincludesasmallamountofuncertaintyaboutthesedivergent
outcomes, which corresponds to a negatively valenced (anxious) affective
stateattheinitialtimepoint.Startingfromthatnegativestate,weexpected
thatoursyntheticratwouldbecomemoreconfidentovertime,asshegrew
to rely increasingly on her context beliefs about the reward location. We
hoped to show that at some point, our rat would infer a state of positive
valence and be sufficiently confident to take her reward directly. Skipping
theinformation-foragingstepwouldallowhertoenjoymoreofthereward
before the end of each trial (comprising two moves). The second set of 32
trials involved a somewhat cruel twist (introduced by Friston, FitzGerald
et al., 2016): we reversed the context by placing the reward on the opposite
(right) arm. This type of context reversal betrays our agent’s newly found
confidence that T-mazes contain their prize on the left. Given enough tri-
alswithaconsistentrewardlocation,oursyntheticratshouldultimatelybe
able to regain her confidence.
4 Results
Figure 8 shows the simulation outcomes for the setup we have described.
Thedynamicsofthissimulationcanberoughlydividedintofourquarters:
twoperiodswithineachofthe32trialsbeforeandafterthecontextreversal.
These periods show an initial phase of negative valence (quarters 1 and 3),
followed by a phase of purposeful confidence (positive valence; quarters
2 and 4). As stipulated in terms of priors, our subject started in a negative
anxious state. Because it takes time to accumulate evidence, her affective
beliefslaggedsomewhatbehindtheaffectiveevidenceathand(patternsin
affectivecharge).Asourratkeptfindingfoodontheleft,herexpectedpre-
cision increased until she entered a robustly positive state around trial 12.
Later, around trial 16, she became sufficiently confident to take the short-
cut to the food—without checking the informative cue. After we reversed
thecontextattrial33,ourratrealizedthatherapproachhadceasedtobear
fruit. Unsure of what to do, she lapsed into an affective state of negative
valence—and returned to her information-foraging strategy. More slowly
thanbefore(about15trialsafterthecontextreversal,asopposedto12trials
after the first trial), our subject returned to her positive feeling state as she
figured out the new contingency: food is now always on the right. It took
herabout22trialsfollowingcontextreversaltogatherenoughcourage(i.e.,
confidence)totaketheshortcuttothefoodsourceontheright.Thefactthat
ittookmoretrials(22insteadof16)beforetakingtheshortcutsuggeststhat
she had become more skeptical about consistent contingencies in her envi-
ronment (and rightly so).
Roughlyspeaking,ouragentexperienced(i.e.,inferred)anegativelyva-
lenced state during quarters 1 and 3 and a positively valenced state during
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

422 Hesp et al.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 423
quarters2and4ofthe64trials.Acloserlookatthesetemporaldynamicsre-
vealsadissociationbetweenpositivevalenceandconfidentriskybehaviors:
arobustpositivestate(Figure8d)precededtheagent’spragmaticchoiceof
taking the shortcut to the food (Figure 8b).
Toillustratetheimportanceofhigher-levelbeliefsinthiskindofsetting,
we repeated the simulations in the absence of higher-level contextual and
affectivestates.Afterremovingthehigherlevel,theresulting(lesssophisti-
cated)agent,whichcouldbethoughtofasanagentwitha“lesion”tohigher
levels of neural processing, updated expectations about food location by
simply accumulating evidence in terms of the number of times a particu-
lar outcome was encountered. Figure 9 provides a summary of differences
in belief updating and behavior between this simpler model and an affec-
tive inference model. In the top panel of Figure 9, we see that higher-level
context states can quickly adjust lower-level expectations based on recent
observations (recency effects), while the less sophisticated rat is unable to
forgetaboutpastobservations(afterobserving32timesleftandright,itsex-
pectedfoodlocationisagain50/50).Theeffectofremovingaffectivestates
is subtler. This effect becomes apparent when we inspect the difference
Figure8: Asummaryofbeliefupdatingandbehaviorofoursimulatedaffective
agentover64trials.Probabilisticbeliefsareplottedusingablue-yellowgradient
(correspondingwithhigh-lowcertainty).Asshowninthegraphicthatconnects
panels c and d, the dynamics of this simulation can be divided into four quar-
ters:twoperiodswithineachofthe32trialsbeforeandafterthecontextreversal,
eachcomprisinganinitialphaseofnegativevalence(anxiety;quarters1and3),
followed by a phase of positive valence (confidence; quarters 2 and 4). (a) The
context changed midway through the experiment (indicated in all panels with
a vertical green line): food was on the left for the first 32 trials (L) and on the
right for the subsequent 32 trials (R). (b, c) These density plots show the sub-
ject’s beliefs about the best course of action, both before (panel b) and after the
trial (panel c). Prior beliefs were based purely on baseline priorsand her action
model, which entailed high ambiguity (yellow) during quarters 1 and 3 of the
trial series (corresponding with cue-checking policies V8−9) and high certainty
(blue) during quarters 2 and 4 (corresponding to shortcut policies V5−6). After
perceptual evidence was accumulated (after the trial), posterior beliefs about
policiesalwaysconvergedtothebestpolicy,exceptinthefirsttrialaftercontext
reversal (trial 33, when the rat receives a highly unexpected shock), which ex-
plains her initial confusion. Whenever prior certainty about policies was high,
expectations agreed with posterior beliefs about policies (again, except for trial
33). (d) This density plot illustrates affective inference in terms of beliefs about
her valence state (confident positive or anxious negative statess(A)). Roughly
speaking,ourratexperiencedanegativelyvalencedstateduringquarters1and
3andapositivelyvalencedstateduringquarters2and4.(e)Weplotlower-level
expected precision (γ), overlaid on a density plot of valence beliefs (grayscale
version of panel d).
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

424 Hesp et al.
between the strongest prior beliefs about policies with and without affec-
tive states in play (second panel). As expected, we see that affective states
and associated fluctuations in expected precision (as in Figures 8d and 8e)
are associated with much larger variation in the strength of prior beliefs
aboutpoliciesatthestartofthetrial(whenourratisstillinthecentreofthe
maze). Furthermore, a comparison in terms of theACelicited within trials
(thirdversusfourthpanelofFigure9)demonstrateshowhigher-levelmod-
ulationofexpectedprecisiontendstoattenuatethegenerationof ACwithin
trials. Conversely, the simpler agent cannot habituate to its own successes
and failures: after every trial, expected precision is reset andACis elicited
again and again. Finally, the combined effects of lesioning the higher level
neatly explain the observed behavioral outcomes (bottom panel of Figure
9). Before context reversal, both agents end up selecting the same policies.
The absence of the higher-level affective state beliefs particularly disrupts
the capacity to deal with the change in context. First, she persisted in prag-
matic foraging for three trials despite receiving several painful shocks—as
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 425
opposed to the affective inference rat, which switched after a single unex-
pectedobservation.Second,theaffectiveinferenceratswitchedbacktoher
default strategy right away (checking the cue, then getting the food), but
thelesssophisticatedrat(witha“lesion”tothehigher-levelmodel)started
avoiding both left and right arms altogether. For eight consecutive trials,
she checked the informative cue but either stayed with the cue or returned
to the center. Only after she had gathered enough evidence about the re-
liability of the new food location did she dare to move to the right arm
(reminiscent of drift diffusion models of decision making). She kept using
that strategy until the end of the experiment, while our affective inference
ratmoveddirectlytotherightarmforthelastquarteroftheseriesoftrials.
Figure9: Acomparisonofbeliefupdating(fourtoprows)andbehavior(bottom
row) over 64 trials in our affective agent (plotted in orange) and an agent with-
out higher-level contextual and affective states (plotted in gray). Context was
changed midway through (vertical green line): food was on the left for the first
32trialsandontherightforthesubsequent32trials.(Firstpanel)Thetoppanel
shows differences in temporal dynamics of food location expectations. Thanks
to her higher-level context states (which decayed over time due to uncertainty
about cross-trial state transitions as defined in Figure 8), our affective agent
(orange) weighed recent evidence more heavily, allowing her to shift context
beliefs. In contrast, the agent without the higher affective level (gray) counted
events only over time. While her expectations developed similarly to the affec-
tiveagentforthefirst32trials,shewasmuchslowerinadjustingtothechange
in context (her beliefs return to 50/50 only after observing 32 trials for both left
and right). (Second panel) This panel displays the strongest prior belief about
policies foreach agent (pretrial),tracking the productof the expected precision
and the maximum of model evidence (negativeGπ ). The affective agent varied
(pretrial)herexpectedprecisiondynamicallywithcontextreliability.Thenonaf-
fective agent instead obtained (initial) certainty about the best course of action
much more slowly, only as a function of her action model (as initial expected
precisionwasconstant).(Thirdandfourthpanels)Acomparisonofwithin-trial
AC responses (fluctuations in expected precision) between the affective agent
(thirdpanel,orange)andthenonaffectiveagent(fourthpanel,gray).Ouraffec-
tive agent exhibited large fluctuations in expected precision within trials only
when she was switching between affective states: she attenuatedACresponses
byintegratingthemacross trials,adjustingexpectedprecisionpreemptively.In
contrast, the nonaffective agent exhibited large fluctuations throughout the se-
ries of trials, being surprised repeatedly because she was unable to integrate
affectivecharge.(Fifthpanel)Thebottompanelshowsthebehavioraloutcomes
forbothagents.Beforecontextreversal,theirbehaviorswereindistinguishable.
After context reversal, the nonaffective agent only foraged for information and
exhibitedavoidancebehaviors,eitherstayingdown(policy10)ormovingback
to the center (policy 7).
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

426 Hesp et al.
Clearly,onecanimaginemanyothervariantsofthegenerativemodelwe
used to illustrate affective inference; we will explore these in future work.
For example, it is not necessary to have separate contextual and affective
states on the higher level. One set of higher-level states could stand in for
both, providing empirical priors for beliefs about contingencies between
particular contexts and valence states. Nevertheless, our simulations pro-
vide a sufficient vehicle to discuss a number of key insights offered by af-
fective inference.
5 Discussion
In this letter, we have constructed and simulated a formal model of emo-
tional valence using deep active inference. We provided a computational
proof of principle of affective inference in which a synthetic rat was able to
infer not only the states of the world but also her own affective (valence)
states. Crucially, her generative model inferred valence based on patterns
in the expected precision of her phenotype-congruent action model. To be
clear, we do not equate this notion of expected precision (or confidence)
with valence directly; rather, we suggest thatAC signals (updates in ex-
pected precision) are an important source of evidence for valence states.
Aside fromAC, valence estimates could also be informed by other types of
evidence(e.g.,exteroceptiveaffectivecues).Ourformulationthusprovides
a way to characterize valenced signals across domains of experience. We
showed the face validity of this formulation of a simple form of affect, in
that sudden changes in environmental contingencies resulted in negative
valence and low confidence in one’s action model.
Extending nested active inference models of perception, action, and im-
plicit metacognition (M4; see Figure 3), our deep formulation of affective
inference can be seen as a logical next step. It required us to specify mu-
tual (i.e., top-down and bottom-up) constraints between higher-level con-
textualandaffectiveinferences(acrosscontexts)andlower-levelinferences
(withincontexts)aboutstates,policies,andexpectedprecision.InFigure10,
weemphasizetheinherenthierarchicalandnestedstructureofthecompu-
tational architecture of our affective agent. It evinces a metacognitive (i.e.,
implicitly self-reflective) capacity, where creatures hold alternative hy-
potheses about their own affective state, reflecting internal estimates of
model fitness. This affords a type of mental action (Limanowski & Fris-
ton, 2018; Metzinger, 2017) in the sense that the precision ascribed to low-
level policies is influenced by higher levels in the hierarchy. Concurrently,
at each level (top-down constrained), prior beliefs follow a gradient ascent
on an upper bound on model evidence, thus providing mutual constraints
between levels in forming posterior beliefs.
5.1 Implicit Metacognition and Affect: “I Think, Therefore I Feel.”
Our affective agent evinces a type of implicit metacognitive capacity that
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 427
Figure 10: A schematic breakdown of the nested processes of Bayesian in-
ference in terms of the affective agent presented in this letter. At each level,
top-downpriorbeliefschangealongagradientascentonbottom-upmodelev-
idence (negativeF), moving the entire hierarchy toward mutually constrained
posteriors.Perception(lightblue;M 2 inFigure1andTable2)providesevidence
for beliefs over policies (blue; M3 in Figure 2 and Table 3) and higher-levelcon-
textual states. Action outcomes inform subjective fitness estimates through af-
fective charge (brown; M4 in Figure 3 and Table 4), which provides evidence to
informvalencebeliefs(orange).Thesenestedprocessesofinferenceunfoldcon-
tinuously in each individual phenotype throughout development and learning
(e.g., neural Darwinism, natural selection; see Campbell, 2016; Constant et al.,
2018). In turn, the reproductive success of each phenotype provides model evi-
dence that shapes the evolution of a species.
is more sophisticated than that of the generative model presented in our
primer on active inference (M1−4 in Figures 1–3). Beliefs about her own af-
fective state are informed by signals conveying the phenotype congruence
of what she did or is going to do; put another way, they are informed by
the degree to which actions did, or are expected to, bring about preferred
outcomes. This echoes other work on Bayesian approaches to metacogni-
tion (Stephan et al., 2016). The emergence of this metacognitive capacity
rests on having a parametrically deep generative model, which can in-
corporate other types of signals from within and from without. Beyond
internal fluctuations in subjective fitness (AC, as in our formulation),
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

428 Hesp et al.
affective inference is also plausibly informed by exteroceptive cues as well
asinteroceptivesignals(e.g.,heartratevariability;Allen,Levy,Parr,&Fris-
ton, 2019; Smith, Thayer, Khalsa, & Lane, 2017). The link to exogenous sig-
nals or stimuli is crucial: equipped with affective inference, our affective
agent can associate affective states with particular contexts (throughD(2)
and B(2)). Such associations can be used to inform decisions on how to re-
spondinagivencontext(givenahigher-levelsetofpolicies π(2))orhowto
forageforinformationwithinagivenniche(via π(1)).Ifoursyntheticsubject
canforageefficientlyforaffectiveinformation,shewillbeabletomodulate
her confidence in a context-sensitive manner, as a form of mental action.
Furthermore, levels deeper in the cortical hierarchy (e.g., in prefrontal cor-
tex) might regulate such affective responses by inferring or enacting the
policiesthatwouldproduceobservationsleadingtopositive AC.Suchpro-
cessescouldcorrespondtoseveralwidelystudiedautomaticandvoluntary
emotion regulation mechanisms (Buhle et al., 2014; Phillips, Ladouceur, &
Drevets, 2008; Gyurak, Gross, & Etkin, 2011; Smith, Alkozei, Lane, & Kill-
gore, 2016; Smith, Alkozei, Bao, & Killgore, 2018), as well as capacities for
emotional awareness (Smith, Steklis, Steklis, Weihs, & Lane, 2020; Smith,
Bajaj et al., 2018; Smith, Weihs, Alkozei, Killgore, & Lane, 2019; Smith, Kill-
gore, & Lane, 2020), each of them central to current evidence-based psy-
chotherapies (Barlow, Allen, & Choate, 2016; Hayes, 2016).
5.2 ReinforcementLearningandtheBayesianBrain. Itisusefultocon-
trast the view of motivated behavior on offer here with existing normative
models of behavior and associated neural theories. In studies on reinforce-
ment learning (De Loof et al., 2018; Sutton & Barto, 2018), signed reward
prediction error (RPE) has been introduced as a measure of the difference
between expected and obtained reward, which is used to update beliefs
about the values of actions. Positive versus negative RPEs are often also
(atleastimplicitly)assumedtocorrespondtounexpectedpleasantandun-
pleasantexperiences,respectively.Note,however,thatreinforcementlearn-
ing can occur in the absence of changes in conscious affect, and pleasant or
unpleasantexperiencesneednotalwaysbesurprising(Smith&Lane,2016;
Smith, Kaszniak et al., 2019; Panksepp et al., 2017; Winkielman, Berridge,
&Wilbarger,2005;Pessiglioneetal.,2008;Lane,Weihs,Herring,Hishaw,&
Smith,2015;Lane,Solms,Weihs,Hishaw,&Smith,2020).Thetermwehave
labeled affective chargecan similarly attain both positive and negative val-
ues that are of affective significance. However, unlike reinforcement learn-
ing, our formulation focuses on positively and negatively valenced states
and the role ofAC in updating beliefs about these affective states (i.e., as
opposed to directly mediating reward learning). While similar in spirit to
RPE, the concept ofAChas a principled definition and a well-defined role
in terms of belief updating, and it is consistent with the neuronal process
theories that accompany active inference.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 429
Specifically, affective charge scores differences between expected and
obtained results as the agent strives to minimize risk and ambiguity (Gπ ;
see Table 3). In cases where expected ambiguity is negligible,ACbecomes
equivalent to RPE, as both score differences in utility between expected
and obtained outcomes (see Rao, 2010; Colombo, 2014; FitzGerald, Dolan,
& Friston, 2015). However, expected ambiguity becomes important when
one’sgenerativemodelentailsuncertainty(e.g.,drivingexploratorybehav-
iorssuchasthosetypicalofyoungchildren).Thiscomponentofaffectivein-
ferenceallowsustolinkvalencedstatestoambiguityreduction,whilealso
accounting for the delicate balance between exploitation and exploration.
In traditional RL models (as described by Sutton & Barton, 2018), the
primarycandidatesforvalenceappeartoberewardandpunishmentorap-
proachandavoidancetendencies.Incontrasttoourmodel,RLmodelstend
to be task specific and do not traditionally involve any internal representa-
tion of valence (e.g., reward is simply defined as an input signal that mod-
ifies the probability of future actions). More recent models have suggested
that mood reflects the recent history of reward prediction errors, which
serves the function of biasing perception of future reward (Eldar et al.,
2016; Eldar & Niv, 2015). This contrasts with our approach, which identi-
fies valence with a domain-general signal that emerges naturally within a
Bayesian model of decision making and can be used to inform represen-
tations of valence that track the success of one’s internal model and adap-
tivelymodifybehaviorinamannerthatcouldnotbeaccomplishedwithout
hierarchical depth. Presumably this type of explicit valence representation
is also a necessary condition for self-reportable experience of valence. The
adaptive benefits of this type of representation are illustrated in Figure 9.
Only with this higher-order valence representation was the agent able to
arbitratethebalancebetweenbehaviordrivenbyexpectedfreeenergy(i.e.,
explicitgoalsandbeliefs)andbehaviordrivenbyabaselineprioroverpoli-
cies (i.e., habits). More generally, the agent endowed with the capacity for
affective inference could more flexibly adapt to a changing situation than
anagentwithoutthecapacityforvalencerepresentation,sinceitwasableto
evaluate how well it was doing and modulate reliance on its action model
accordingly. Thus, unlike other modeling approaches, valence is here re-
latedto,butdistinctfrom,bothrewardandpunishmentandapproachand
avoidancebehavior(i.e.,consistentwithempiricallyobserveddissociations
betweenself-reportedvalenceandtheseotherconstructs;seeSmith&Lane,
2016;Pankseppetal.,2017;Winkielmanetal.,2005)andservesauniqueand
adaptive domain-general function.
Priorworkhassuggestedthatexpectedprecisionupdates(i.e., AC)may
be encoded by phasic dopamine responses (e.g., see Schwartenbeck, 2015).
If so, our model would suggest a link between dopamine and valence.
When considering this biological interpretation, however, it is important
to contrast and dissociateAC from a number of related constructs. This
includes the notion of RPEs discussed above, as well as that of salience,
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

430 Hesp et al.
wanting, pleasure, and motivation, each of which has been related to
dopamine in previous literature and appears distinct fromAC (Berridge
& Robinson, 2016). In reward learning tasks, phasic dopamine responses
have been linked to RPEs, which play a central role in learning within sev-
eralRLalgorithms(Sutton&Barto,2018);however,dopamineactivityalso
increases in response to salient events independent of reward (Berridge &
Robinson, 2016). Further, there are contexts in which dopamine appears
to motivate energetic approach behaviors aimed at “wanting” something,
which can be dissociated from the hedonic pleasure upon receiving it (e.g.,
amphetamineaddictsgainingnopleasurefromdrugusedespitecontinued
drivestouse;Berridge&Robinson,2016).Thus,if ACislinkedtovalence,it
isnotobviousapriorithatitstentativelinktodopamineisconsistentwith,
or can account for, these previous findings.
Whiletheseconsiderationsmaypointtotheneedforfutureextensionsof
our model, many can be partially addressed. First, there are alternative in-
terpretations of the role of dopamine proposed within the active inference
field (FitzGerald et al., 2015; Friston et al., 2014)—namely, that it encodes
expected precision as opposed to RPEs. Mathematically, it can be demon-
strated that changes in the expected precision term (gamma) will always
look like RPEs in the context of reward tasks (i.e., because reward cues up-
date beliefs about future action and relate closely to changes in expected
free energy). However, since salient (but nonrewarding) cues also carry
action-relevant information (i.e., they change confidence in policy selec-
tion), gamma also changes in response to salient events. Thus, this alterna-
tiveinterpretationcanactuallyaccountforbothsalienceandRPEaspectsof
dopaminergic responses. Furthermore, reward learning is not in fact com-
promisedbyattenuateddopamineresponsesandthereforedoesnotplaya
necessary role in this process (Fitzgerald et al., 2015). The active inference
interpretation can thus explain dissociations between learning and appar-
ent RPEs.
Arguably, the strongest and most important challenge for claiming a re-
lation of dopamine,AC, and valence arises from previous studies linking
dopamine more closely to “wanting” than pleasure (i.e., which is closely
related to positive valence; Berridge & Robinson, 2016). On the one hand,
some studies have linked dopamine to the magnitude of “liking” in re-
sponse to reward (Rutledge et al., 2015), and some effective antidepres-
sants are dopaminergic agonists (Pytka et al., 2016); thus, there is evidence
supporting an (at least indirect) link to pleasure. However, pleasure is also
associatedwithotherneuralsignals(e.g.,withintheopioidsystem).Alim-
itation of our model is that it does not currently have the resources to ac-
count for these other valence-related signals. It is also worth considering
that because only one study to date has directly tested and found support
foralinkbetween ACanddopamine(Schwartenbecketal.,2015),futurere-
searchwillbenecessarytoestablishwhether ACmightbettercorrespondto
othernondopaminergicsignals.Wepointout,however,thatourmodelonly
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 431
entailsthat ACprovidesonesourceofevidenceforhigher-levelvalencerep-
resentations and that pleasure is only one source of positive valence. Thus,
it does not rule out the additional influence of other signals on valence,
which would allow the possibility thatACcontributes to, but is also disso-
ciable from, hedonic pleasure (for additional considerations of functional
neuroanatomy in relation to affective inference, see appendix A4).
5.3 Affective Charge Lies in the Mind of the Beholder.Given that
our formulation of affective inference is decidedly action oriented, we owe
readers an explanation of how valence is elicited within aspects of our
mental lives that appear to be somewhat distant from action. For exam-
ple,wealltendtoexperiencearushofsatisfactionwhenwesolveapuzzle
or understand the punchline of a joke (an “aha!” moment). Our explana-
tion is straightforward: in active inference, biologically plausible forms of
cognition inevitably involve policy selection, whether internal (e.g., direct-
ing one’s attentionto affective stimuliandmanipulatingaffective informa-
tionwithinworkingmemory;Smith,Laneetal.,2017;Smith,Lane,Alkozei
et al.,2018; Smith,Lane,Sanova et al., 2018)or external(e.g.,saccadeselec-
tion to affective cues; Adolphs et al., 2005; Moriuchi, Klin, & Jones, 2017).
Therefore, AC is also elicited by mental action, typically in the form of
top-down modulation of (lower-level) priors. Across domains of experi-
ence,positiveversusnegativevalencehasbeenlinkedtocognitivematches
versus mismatches(e.g., Williams & Gordon, 2007), coherence versus inco-
herence(e.g.,Topolinski,Likowski,Weyers,&Strack,2009),resonancever-
susdissonance(e.g.,Sohal,Zhang,Yizhar,&Deisseroth,2009),andfluency
versus disfluency (e.g., Willems & Van der Linden, 2006). Affective infer-
ence can account for all of these different findings in terms of reductions of
ambiguity resulting from attentional policy selection. This provides a for-
malwaytorelatechangesinprocessingfluencyacrossdifferentdomainsto
particularaffectivestates,formalizingpreviousconceptualmodels(Phaf&
Rotteveel, 2012; Joffily & Coricelli, 2013; Van de Cruys, 2017).
Inthiscontext,weremindreadersthatexpectedprecision( γ)anditsdy-
namics(directedby AC)reflecttheagent’sconfidenceintheuseofexpected
free energy to inform action selection. Expected free energy can be inter-
pretedasanevaluationofhowwellone’smodelisdoingonthewhole(i.e.,
it scores departures from preferred outcomes), such that the expected pre-
cision (gamma) term represents confidence in the entirety of one’s action
model. This is distinct from confidence in any particular course of action
and thus distinguishesACfrom the related notions of agency and control.
While AC reflects an evaluation of how one’s generative model is doing
in general, notions of agency and control are somewhat narrower and, al-
though related toAC, they would in fact map to distinct model elements.
Specifically,theseconstructsarelikelybestcapturedinrelationtothepreci-
sionofexpectedtransitionsgiveneachallowablepolicy(i.e.,theprecisionof
thetransitionmatrices Binthemodel).Whenpolicy-dependenttransitions
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

432 Hesp et al.
have high precision, the agent will be confident in the outcomes of her
actions—andhenceherabilitytocontroltheenvironmentasdesired.How-
ever, this will not always co-vary withAC. Generally, highB precision is
necessary but not sufficient for positiveAC (e.g., one can have precise ex-
pectations about state transitions associated with nonpreferred outcomes).
In other contexts, it has been suggested that action model precision up-
dates (what we have labeledAC) could be used to inform selective atten-
tion (e.g., Clark et al., 2018; Palacios, Razi, Parr, Kirchhoff, & Friston, 2019).
When compared to a particular baseline of subjective fitness, any signifi-
cant departure, whether positive or negative, will tend to signify a fork in
the road: an opportunity or threat that requires (internal and external) ac-
tion. As one possible extension of our model, extreme values ofAC could
thereforebeusedtoinformarousalstates,accompaniedbyanaffect-driven
orienting process. In this scheme, the automatic (bottom-up) capture of at-
tentionbyaffectivestimulicanthenemergespontaneously,assuchstimuli
provide reliable information about the agent’s affective state. In turn, this
could be used to modelthe types of tunnel vision experiencesthat occurin
mammals when they are highly aroused.
We pursue this line of reasoning in a forthcoming sequel to this letter,
which builds naturally on prior work in active inference (Parr & Friston,
2017)showinghowthesalienceofastimuluscanbeformallyrelatedtothe
potentialreductionofuncertaintyaffordedbyselectingapolicypertaining
tothatstimulus(e.g.,avisualsaccade).Forexample,forouraffectiveagent,
the perceptual salience of a stimulus is proportional to her expectation
of reducing perceptual uncertainty (about lower-level perceptual states).
Affective salience could thus be framed similarly as an agent’s expecta-
tion of reducing affective ambiguity (about higher-level affective states).
Interestingly,theimpliedhierarchical(andtemporal)dissociationiscorrob-
orated by Niu, Todd, and Anderson (2012), who synthesize findings that
suggest a dissociation between perceptual salience and affective salience.
5.4 OntheDimensionalityofValence. Becausewehavepositedaclose
relationshipbetween ACandvalence,anumberofquestionsmayarise.For
example, in our model simulations,AC corresponds to a one-dimensional
signal, taking on either negative or positive values, that is used to up-
date higher-level valence representations. However, one might question
whethervalencehasthisunidimensionalstructure.Indeed,therearemany
competingperspectivesonthisissue(forareview,seeLindquistetal.,2016).
Some perspectives in emotion research and associated neuroscience re-
searchpositthatvalenceisunidimensional(Russell,1980;Barrett&Russell,
1999)andassume(forexample)thatasingleneuralsystemshouldincrease
(or decrease) in activity as valence changes along this dimension. Other
perspectives posit two dimensions (Fontaine et al., 2007), potentially cor-
responding to two independent neural systems activated by negative and
positivevalence,respectively.Finally,affectiveworkspaceviews(Lindquist
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 433
et al., 2016) posit that there are no distinct “valence systems” and that a
range of domain-general neural systems use, and are thus activated by, in-
formation regarding both negative and positive valence information in a
context-specific and flexible manner. In addition to the dimensionality of
valence in particular, a related question corresponds to whether our model
canaccountforgranular,multidimensionalaspectsofemotionalexperience
more broadly.
Whiletheseconsiderationscertainlyhighlighttheoversimplifiednature
of the formal simulations we have presented, they also point to a potential
strength of our formulation. Specifically, our formulation offers a few dif-
ferentconceptualresourcestobegintoaddresstheseissues.First,although
AC is a unidimensional signal, it is important to stress that the generation
ofthissignaldoesnotimplythatitisusedinthesamemannerbyalldown-
stream systems that receive it (i.e., it need not simply provide evidence for
asinglehigher-levelstateasinoursimulations).Indeed,somedownstream
systems could selectively use negative or positiveAC information (as in a
two-dimensional model), or multiple systems could use bivalent informa-
tionforadiversesetoffunctions(asinaffectiveworkspaceviews;Lindquist
et al., 2016). Second, each level in a hierarchical system could in principle
generate its ownAC signal and pass this signal forward, which opens up
the possibility that affective charge could be positive at one level (or in one
neuralsubsystem)andnegativeatanotherlevel(orinanothersubsystem),
potentially allowing for more nuanced mixtures of valenced experience.
Thatsaid,itisunclearhowaffectivechargecouldbeintegratedacrosslevels
or systems to inform experience. Furthermore, not all levels in a represen-
tational hierarchy plausibly contribute to conscious experience (Dehaene,
Charles,King,&Marti,2014;Whyte&Smith,inpress;Smith&Lane,2015),
anditisanopenquestionwhichlevelorsubsetoflevelsmaybeprivileged
with respect to its contribution to affective phenomenology). Finally, it is
important to stress that our claim is specific to valence and does not aim
to address more complex experiential components of emotion. There are
several further experiential aspects of emotion (e.g., interoceptive/somatic
sensations, approach/avoidance drives, changes in attention/vigilance)
that go beyond valence and would need to be incorporated into a future
model.
5.5 Addressing Potential Counterexamples: Negative Valence with
Confident Action. Here, we carefully consider potential counterexamples
andexplainhowthesedonotthreatenthefacevalidityofourformulation.
One class of potential counterexamples involves situations with seemingly
inevitable nonpreferred outcomes (i.e., in which there is little uncertainty
about future outcomes that will behighly unpleasant). Forexample,some-
one falling out of a plane without a parachute may feel very unpleasant
despite near certainty that he or she will hit the ground and die. Here, it
is important to emphasize that negativeAC is generated whenever there
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

434 Hesp et al.
is an increase in the divergence between preferred outcomes and the
outcomes expected under a policy that one could choose. Thus, under the
assumptionthatsmashingintothegroundisnotconsistentwithone’spref-
erences,falling froma planewithouta parachutewouldbeacasein which
allpoliciesavailabletoanindividualwouldbeexpectedtoleadtooutcomes
that diverge strongly from those preferences (e.g., no particular action will
preventcrashingintotheground).Assuch,theagentwillhavehighuncer-
taintyabouthowtoacttofulfillherpreferences(highexpectedfreeenergy),
despite accurately predicting the future outcomes themselves, and would
thus experience negative valence on our account.
Asecondclassofpotentialcounterexamplesinvolvescasesinwhichcon-
fidence in actions is seemingly high and yet valence is negative, most no-
tably in situations associated with fear and anger. In fear, one can feel very
confident one should be running away from a predator. In anger, one can
feel very confident in wanting to hurt someone. Ashort response that ap-
plies to most counterexamples of this kind is thatAC signals indicate rel-
ative changes in one’s current affective state; it serves a modulatory role
in such scenarios. While for simplicity we have included only binary cate-
goriesofnegativeandpositivevalenceinourformalmodel,itisimportant
to keep in mind that, experimentally, valence is measured on a continuous
scale„ from very negative to very positive. Thus, even in scenarios that are
categorically negative, the intensity of negative valence can vary in a way
that correlates negatively withAC. For example, while one would be ex-
pected to experience negative affect when running away from a predator,
thisfeelingwouldlikelybeevenmoreintenseifoneweretrappedandhad
no idea how to escape (this would involve more negativeACvalues). Fur-
thermore, the more confident one was that running away would succeed,
thebetteronewouldbeexpectedtofeel.Therefore,negative ACsignalswill
still be expected to track the intensity of negative affect in cases of fear.
Despiteinitialappearances,ourformulationofvalencecanalsoaccount
for the example of anger mentioned above, in which one yet remains very
confident in how to act (e.g., having a strong drive to hurt someone). First,
negativelyvalencedangerexperiencecanbeaccountedforbytheincreased
divergencefrompreferredoutcomesassociatedwithanger-inducingevents
(e.g., being unexpectedly insulted by a friend). Second, confidently acting
on anger can be associated with positive valence (e.g., punching someone
who insulted you can feel good), whereas conflicting drives during anger
areassociatedwithmorenegativevalence(e.g.,wantingtopunchsomeone
but also not wanting to compromise a valued relationship). Thus, each of
these aspects of anger remains consistent with our formulation, as the de-
greeofnegativeandpositivevalenceduringsuchepisodesofangerwould
still map ontoACvalues.
Next,therearesomeinterestingcaseswhereexpectedfreeenergywillin-
crease,despiteinductionofahighlypreciseposteriordistributionoverpoli-
cies.Thesecasesoccurwhenanagentishighlyconfidentinonepolicyand
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 435
then observes an outcome that unexpectedly leads to very high confidence
inadifferentpolicy,whichcanbeseenasevidencethatconfidenceinone’s
action model should decrease. This may actually be a common occurrence
withinthecasesjustmentioned—forexample,ifonestartedouthighlycon-
fidentinthe“calmlywalkaround inthewoods”policyand,uponseeinga
predator, unexpectedly became highly confident in the “run away” policy
orifonestartedouthighlyconfidentinthe“actfriendly”policyand,upon
being insulted by a friend, unexpectedly became highly confident in the
“respond sternly to my friend” policy. Thus, whileACoften covaries with
uncertaintyinactionselectionduetoitsrelationtopreferredoutcomesand
itsnonlinearrelationshipwithposteriorprecisionoverpolicies,theseother
types of cases can be accommodated naturally.
Finally,weshouldalsoconsidercaseswherepeoplereportahighlypos-
itive experience but their current fit to the environment is not good in any
measurable way. Such divergences between subjective fitness and external
measures of fitness (e.g., reproductive success) can naturally occur in af-
fective inference, highlighting an important strength of our formulation.
Becauseinternalestimatesoffitnesscanbeinaccurate,ourformulationpro-
vides resources for modeling maladaptive affective phenomena, such as
delusions of grandeur in mania (exaggerated subjective fitness) or learned
helplessness in depression (virtually zero subjective fitness). This notion
of Bayes-optimal inference within suboptimal models has been used to
study psychiatric disorders in computational psychiatry (Schwartenbeck
et al., 2015). Furthermore, due to the role of natural selection in sculpt-
ing prior preferences, one can also describe phenomena in our framework
that appear at odds with individual biological fitness (e.g., a bee sacrific-
ing itself for the hive). This thus makes contact with other evolved human
behaviors with affective components, such as altruistic and self-sacrificial
behaviors(e.g.,associatedwithkinselectionmechanismsandreciprocalal-
truism within evolutionary psychology; Buss, 2015).
5.6 Deep Feelings and Temporal Depth: Toward Emotive Artificial
Intelligence. It is an open question how deep a computational hierarchy
shouldbeinordertoaccountfortheexperienceofvalence.Whileourtwo-
level model seems to be complex, it is actually quite minimal in attempt-
ing to account for any type of subjective phenomenology. Although any
decision-making organism can be equipped with sensory and motor rep-
resentations in a one-level model and be equipped with tendencies to ap-
proach some situations and avoid others, we have shown that a higher
level is necessary to represent estimates about oneself. We assume, based
on what is known about conscious versus unconscious neural processes
(e.g., Dehaene et al., 2014; Whyte & Smith, in press), that explicit state rep-
resentationisanecessaryconditionforself-reportableexperience,andthus
that higher-level valence representation (as in our model) will be neces-
sary for conscious experience of valence. Under this plausible assumption,
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

436 Hesp et al.
while very simple organisms can exhibit approach and avoidance tenden-
cies,onlymorecomplexorganismsequippedwithhierarchicalmodelsthat
can integrate internal evidence for different internal states will be capable
of experiencing valence.
We deemedaffective inference(as opposed to merevalence inference)a n
appropriate label for our model because deep, active inference can be di-
rectly applied to model other affective state components (e.g., arousal) and
affect-related phenomena (e.g., affective salience). This is an important fu-
turedirectionforourframework.Enrichedaffectivestaterepresentationsof
this type (e.g., with high and low arousal states) can serve as higher-level
explanations for conditional dependencies between hyperparameters and
related effects on behavior. In future work, we will move beyondAC and
characterizetherichnessofcoreaffectivestatesinthe(hyper)parametersof
a generative model that applies to a wide range of lower-level generative
models (i.e., of many different shapes and settings). Another important di-
rection will be to connect our model to other active inference models used
to simulate approach/avoidance behavior and emotion-cognition (Linson,
Parr,&Friston,2020;Smith,Parr,&Friston,2019;Smith,Lane,Parr,&Fris-
ton, 2019; Smith, Kirlic et al., in press).
Alonger-termaimofextendingourmodelinthesedirectionsistobuild
towardageneralizableformofemotiveartificialintelligence.Anemotional
artificialagentofthiskindwouldbeabletoinferwhichgroupsofhyperpa-
rameters (e.g., characterizing “go” versus “no go” responses; fight, flight,
orfreeze;tendorbefriend)tendtoprovidethebestfitforparticularstimuli
and contexts. For example, by adding a term that parameterizes the pre-
cision of the baseline prior over policies (Eπ ), an affective agent can in-
crease and decrease her general tendency to rely on automatic responses
in a context-sensitive manner. The model of valence we have proposed,
and its natural extension to core affective states involving arousal, could
also be seamlessly integrated into active inference models of emotion con-
ceptlearningandemotionalawareness(Smith,Parr,&Friston,2019;Smith,
Lane, Parr et al., 2019). In these models, an agent can use combinations of
lower-level affective, interoceptive, exteroceptive, and cognitive represen-
tations (treated as observations) to infer and learn about emotion concepts
(e.g., sadness, anger) and to reflect on those emotional states in working
memory. Here, emotion concepts correspond to regularities in and across
those lower-level states. Because valence is treated as an observation in
these models, our formulation ofACwould provide an important compo-
nent that is currently missing in this previous work.
5.7 Future Empirical Directions.This letter has taken the first step in
a larger research program aimed at characterizing the neurocomputational
basis of emotion. We have demonstrated the face validity of the affective
dynamics emerging from an active inference model that incorporates ex-
plicit representations of valence. The next step will be to link our model
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 437
to specific neuroimaging or behavioral paradigms (or both) and compare
it with alternative modeling frameworks such as reinforcement learning.
In doing so, empirical data can be fit to these models, and Bayesian model
comparisoncanbeusedtoidentifythemodel(andmodelparameters)that
best accounts for neuronal and behavioral responses at both the individ-
ual and group level—an approach called computational phenotyping (as
in Schwartenbeck et al., 2015; Smith, Kirlic et al., in press); Smith, Kuplicki,
Feinsteinetal.,2020;Smith,Schwartenbeck,Stewartetal.,2020;Smith,Ku-
plicki,Teed,Upshaw,&Khalsa,2020).Ouraffectiveinferencemodelwould
besupportedifitbestaccountsforempiricaldatawhencomparedtoother
models. A further step will be to develop computational phenotypes that
bestexplaintypicalandatypicalsocioemotionalfunctioninginhumansand
how these can devolve into stable attractors that we associate with psychi-
atric conditions (see Hesp, Tschantz, Millidge, Ramstead, Friston, & Smith,
forthcoming). A final and more distant goal may be that by fitting affec-
tive model parameters to patients with symptoms of emotional disorders,
psychiatrists might eventually be able to derive additional diagnostic and
prognostic information about their patients that could inform treatment
selection, an approach called computational nosology (Friston, Redish, &
Gordon, 2017).
In terms of empirical predictions, our formulation of affective inference
suggests that in the majority of circumstances, standard measures of va-
lence (e.g., self-report scales of pleasant or unpleasant subjective experi-
ence,potentiatedstartleresponses;Watson,Clark,&Tellegen,1988;Bradley
& Lang, 1994; Bublatzky, Guerra, Pastor, Schupp, & Vila, 2013) should
be correlated with experimental inductions of uncertainty about the ac-
tions that will lead to preferred outcomes. Furthermore, when fitting an
affective-inference model to experimental data on an individual level dur-
ing and across a task, trial-by-trial changes inAC would be predicted to
correlate with those same valence measures (i.e., when also assessed on a
trial-by-trial basis). as well as with established neuroimaging correlates of
valence (Fouragnan, Retzler, & Philiastides, 2018; Lindquist et al., 2016).
Afuture research direction will be to test for patterns of human or non-
human animal behavior that can be better explained by our affective infer-
encemodelthanbyothermodels.Recentworkhasbeguntocompareactive
inference models with common reinforcement learning models, often sup-
porting the claim that active inference offers added explanatory power in
accounting for human behavior (Schwartenbeck et al., 2015). Comparisons
between reinforcement learning and active inference also tend to provide
evidencefortheclaimthatthelattertendstohavecomparableperformance
to, or can outperform, the latter, especially in environments with changing
contingenciesandsparserewards(Sajid,Ball,&Friston,2020).Similarcom-
parativeapproacheswillneedtobetakentodetermineempiricallywhether
affective inference can offer further explanatory resources. Qualitatively,
our model appears capable of accounting for previously observed effects
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

438 Hesp et al.
ofvalenceonbehavior(seeespeciallythecomparisontoanon-affectiveac-
tive inference agent in Figure 9), but future work will be necessary to test
its potentially unique explanatory power.
6C o n c l u s i o n
In this letter, we presented a Bayesian model of emotional valence, based
on deep active inference, that integrates previous theoretical and empirical
work. Accordingly, we provided a computational proof of principle of the
ensuing affective inference in a synthetic rat. Our deep formulation allows
for inference about one’s own valence state based on one’s confidence in
a phenotype-congruent action model (i.e., subjective fitness) and the corre-
spondingbelief-updatingtermthattracksitsprogressandregress:affective
charge(AC).Thedomaingeneralityofthisformulationunderwritesaview
of evolved life as exploiting the flexibility of second-order beliefs—those
about how to form beliefs. Our work provides a principled account of the
inextricable link between affect, implicit metacognition, and (mental) ac-
tion. The intriguing result is a view of deep biological systems that infer
theirownaffectivestate(usingevidencegatheredfromlower-levelposteri-
ors)andreducinguncertaintyaboutsuchinferencesthroughinternalaction
(through top-down modulation of lower-level priors). We look forward to
theoreticalextensionsandempiricalapplicationsofthisnovelformulation.
Acknowledgments
This research was undertaken thanks in part to funding from an NWO Re-
search Talent Grant of the Dutch government (C.H.; no. 406.18.535), the
Canada First Research Excellence Fund, awarded to McGill University for
the Healthy Brains for Healthy Lives initiative (M.R.), the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council of Canada (M.R.), and by a Wellcome
Trust Principal Research Fellowship (K.F.—088130/Z/09/Z). T.P. is sup-
portedbytheRosetreesTrust(award173346).R.S.isfundedbytheWilliam
K.WarrenFoundation.M.A.issupportedbyaLundbeckfondenFellowship
(R272-2017-4345), the AIAS-COFUND II fellowship program that is sup-
portedbytheMarieSkłodowska-CurieactionsundertheEuropeanUnion’s
Horizon 2020 (grant agreement 754513), and the Aarhus University Re-
search Foundation. We are grateful to Paul Badcock, Axel Constant, and
Samuel Veissière for helpful comments on earlier versions of this letter.
Author Contributions
C.H.implementedtheformalismofaffectiveinference,conductedthesim-
ulations, and made the figures. C.H. and M.R. wrote the first draft of
the manuscript. R.S. played a primary role in editing and extending the
manuscriptandlinkingitsconceptualinterpretationwithpriorworkinthe
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 439
affectivesciences.Allotherauthors alsoworkedonthemanuscript,thelit-
eraturereviewcomponents,andthetheoreticalbackground.C.H.,T.P.,K.F.,
andM.R.developedtheformalismforaffectiveinferenceandworkedonits
conceptual interpretation. M.A. also worked on the conceptual interpreta-
tion of affective inference.
Additional Information
There are four appendixes in the supplementary information. We have
uploaded the simulation code to a public folder on GitHub (see https://
github.com/CasperHesp/deeplyfeltaffect). These scripts were adapted
from the Matlab scripts for Markov decision processes in active inference
that are included in SPM12 (freely available here: https://www.fil.ion.ucl.
ac.uk/spm/software/download/), which also contains a few functions
called within our code. We declare no competing interests.
References
Adlerman, N. E., Kayser, R., Dickstein, D., Blair, R. J. R., Pine, D., & Leibenluft, E.
(2011). Neural correlates of reversal learning in severe mood dysregulation and
pediatric bipolar disorder.JournaloftheAmericanAcademyofChildandAdolescent
Psychiatry,50(11), 1173–1185, e1172. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2011.07.011
Adolphs, R., Gosselin, F., Buchanan, T. W., Tranel, D., Schyns, P., & Damasio, A. R.
(2005). Amechanism for impaired fear recognition after amygdala damage.Na-
ture, 433(7021), 68–72.
Allen,M.,Levy,A.,Parr,T.,&Friston,K.J.(2019). Inthebody’seye:Thecomputational
anatomyofinteroceptiveinference . bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/603928
Attias, H. (2003). Planning by probabilistic inference. InProceedings of the 9th Inter-
nationalWorkshoponArtificialIntelligenceandStatistics .https://doi.org/10.1.1.13.
9135
Badcock, P. B. (2012). Evolutionary systems theory: Aunifying meta-theory of psy-
chological science.Review of General Psychology, 16(1), 1023. https://doi.org/10.
1037/a0026381
Badcock, P. B., Davey, C. G., Whittle, S., Allen, N. B., & Friston, K. J. (2017). The de-
pressedbrain:Anevolutionarysystemstheory. TrendsinCognitiveSciences ,21(3),
182194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2017.01.005
Badcock,P.B.,Friston,K.J.,&Ramstead,M.J.D.(2019).Thehierarchicallymechanis-
tic mind: Afree-energy formulation of the human psyche.PhysicsofLifeReviews,
31, 104–121. https://doi.org/10.1016/J
Barlow, D. H., Allen, L. B., & Choate, M. L. (2016). Toward a unified treatment for
emotional disorders.BehaviorTherapy, 47(6), 838–853.
Barrett,L.F.(2017). Howemotionsaremade:Thesecretlifeofthebrain. Boston:Houghton
Mifflin.
Barrett, L. F., & Russell, J. A. (1999). The structure of current affect: Controver-
sies and emerging consensus.CurrentDirectionsinPsychologicalScience , 8(1), 10–
14.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

440 Hesp et al.
Berridge, K. C., & Robinson, T. E. (2016). Liking, wanting, and the incentive-
sensitization theory of addiction.AmericanPsychologist,71(8), 670.
Bodenhausen, G. V., Kramer, G. P., & Süsser, K. (1994). Happiness and stereotypic
thinkinginsocialjudgment. JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology ,66(4),621–
632. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.66.4.621
Bodenhausen, G. V., Sheppard, L. A., & Kramer, G. P. (1994). Negative affect and
social judgment: The differential impact of anger and sadness.European Journal
ofSocialPsychology , 24(1), 4562. https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.2420240104
Botvinick, M., & Toussaint, M. (2012). Planning as inference.Trends Cogn. Sci., 16,
485–488.
Bradley, M. M., & Lang, P. J. (1994). Measuring emotion: The self–assessment
manikinandthesemanticdifferential. JournalofBehaviorTherapyandExperimental
Psychiatry, 25(1), 49–59.
Briesemeister, B. B., Kuchinke, L., & Jacobs, A. M. (2012). Emotional valence:
A bipolar continuum or two independent dimensions? Sage Open, 1(4),
2158244012466558.
Bublatzky, F., Guerra, P. M., Pastor, M. C., Schupp, H. T., & Vila, J. (2013). Additive
effects of threat-of-shock and picture valence on startle reflex modulation.PLOS
One,8(1), e54003.
Buhle, J. T., Silvers, J. A., Wager, T. D., Lopez, R., Onyemekwu, C., Kober, H., &
Ochsner, K. N. (2014). Cognitive reappraisal of emotion: Ameta-analysis of hu-
man neuroimaging studies.CerebralCortex,24(11), 2981–2990.
Buss, D. (2015).Evolutionary psychology: The new science of the mind.Hove, UK: Psy-
chology Press.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Berntson, G. G. (1994). Relationship between attitudes and evalu-
ative space: Acritical review, with emphasis on the separability of positive and
negative substrates.PsychologicalBulletin,115, 401–423.
Campbell,J.O.(2016).UniversalDarwinismasaprocessofBayesianinference. Fron-
tiersinSystemsNeuroscience ,10, 49. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2016.00049
Clark, J. E., Watson, S., & Friston, K. J. (2018). What is mood? A computational
perspective. Psychological Medicine, 48(14), 22772284. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0033291718000430
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., Campbell, J. O., & Friston, K. J.
(2018). A variational approach to niche construction.Journal of the Royal Society
Interface,15, 2017.0685. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0685
Colombo, M. (2014). Deep and beautiful. The reward prediction error hypothesis
of dopamine. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C?, 45(1), 5767.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsc.2013.10.006
Davidson, R. J. (2004). What does the prefrontal cortex “do” in affect? Perspectives
on frontal EEG asymmetry research.BiologicalPsychology, 67(1–2), 219–234.
Dehaene, S., Charles, L., King, J. R., & Marti, S. (2014). Toward a computational the-
ory of conscious processing.CurrentOpinioninNeurobiology ,25, 76–84.
De Loof, E., Ergo, K., Naert, L., Janssens, C., Talsma, D., van Opstal, F., & Verguts,
T. (2018). Signed reward prediction errors drive declarative learning.PLOSOne,
13(1).
Dickstein, D. P., Finger, E. C., Brotman, M. A., Rich, B. A., Pine, D. S., Blair, J. R.,
& Leibenluft, E. (2010). Impaired probabilistic reversal learning in youths with
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 441
moodandanxietydisorders. PsychologicalMedicine,40 (7),1089–1100.https://doi.
org/10.1017/S0033291709991462
Ekman, P. (1992). Are there basic emotions?PsychologicalReview, 99(3), 550553.
Eldar, E., & Niv, Y. (2015). Interaction between emotional state and learning under-
lies mood instability.NatureCommunications,6(1), 1–10.
Eldar, E., Rutledge, R. B., Dolan, R. J., & Niv, Y. (2016). Mood as representation of
momentum. TrendsinCognitiveSciences ,20(1), 15–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tics.2015.07.010
FitzGerald, T. H., Dolan, R. J., & Friston, K. (2015). Dopamine, reward learning, and
active inference.Front.Comput.Neurosci. ,9, 136.
Fontaine, J. R., Scherer, K. R., Roesch, E. B., & Ellsworth, P. C. (2007). The world of
emotions is not two-dimensional.PsychologicalScience,18(12), 1050–1057.
Fouragnan, E., Retzler, C., & Philiastides, M. G. (2018). Separate neural represen-
tations of prediction error valence and surprize: Evidence from an fMRI meta-
analysis. HumanBrainMapping , 39(7), 2887–2906.
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: Aunified brain theory?NatureReviews
Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., O’Doherty, J., & Pezzulo, G.
(2016). Active inference and learning.Neurosci.Biobehav.Rev. , 68, 862–879.
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2017). Active
inference: Aprocess theory.NeuralComputation,29(1), 1–49.
Friston, K., Levin, M., Sengupta, B., & Pezzulo, G. (2015). Knowing one’s place: A
free–energy approach to pattern regulation.J.R.Soc.Interface , 12, 20141383.
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., & de Vries, B. (2018). The graphical brain: Belief propaga-
tion and active inference.NetworkNeuroscience,1(4), 381414. https://doi.org/10.
1162/NETN_a_00018
Friston,K.,Parr,T.,&Zeidman,P.(2018). Bayesianmodelreduction. arXiv:1805.07092.
Friston, K. J., Redish, A. D., & Gordon, J. A. (2017). Computational nosology and
precision psychiatry.ComputationalPsychiatry,1, 2–23. https://doi.org/10.1162/
CPSY_a_00001
Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., & Pezzulo, G. (2015).
Active inference and epistemic value.Cogn.Neurosci.,6(4), 187–214.
Friston, K. J., Rosch, R., Parr, T., Price, C., & Bowman, H. (2017). Deep temporal
models and active inference.Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 77, 388402.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEUBIOREV.2017.04.009
Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T., Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T., & Dolan,
R.J.(2014).Theanatomyofchoice:Dopamineanddecision–making. Philos.Trans.
R.Soc.Lond.B.Biol.Sci. , 369(1655).
Gallagher, S., & Allen, M. (2018). Active inference, enactivism and the hermeneu-
tics of social cognition. Synthese, 195(6), 26272648. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11229-016-1269-8
Gasper, K., & Clore, G. L. (2002). Attending to the big picture: Mood and global
versus local processing of visual information.Psychological Science, 13(1), 3440.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9280.00406
Gray, J. A. (1994). Three fundamental emotion systems. In P. Ekman & R. J. David-
son (Eds.), The nature of emotion(pp. 243–247). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

442 Hesp et al.
Gyurak, A., Gross, J. J., & Etkin, A. (2011). Explicit and implicit emotion regulation:
Adual-process framework.CognitionandEmotion ,25(3), 400–412.
Hayes, S. C. (2016). Acceptance and commitment therapy, relational frame theory,
andthethirdwaveofbehavioralandcognitivetherapies. BehaviorTherapy,47(6),
869–885.
Hesp, C., Tschantz, A., Millidge, B., Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., & Smith,
R. (Forthcoming). Sophisticated affective inference: Simulating anticipatory af-
fective dynamics of imagining future events. InProceedings of the First Interna-
tional Workshop on Active Inference—Communications in Computer and Information
Science.
Hesp,C.,Ramstead,M.,Constant,A.,Badcock,P.,Kirchhoff,M.,&Friston,K.(2019).
Amulti-scaleviewoftheemergentcomplexityof life:Afree-energyproposal. In
SpringerProceedingsinComplexity (pp. 195–227). Berlin: Springer.
Hohwy,J.(2016).Theself-evidencingbrain. Nous,50(2),259285.https://doi.org/10.
1111/nous.12062
Itti,L.,&Baldi,P.(2009).Bayesiansurpriseattractshumanattention. VisionResearch,
49(10), 12951306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visres.2008.09.007
Joffily, M., & Coricelli, G. (2013). Emotional valence and the free–energy principle.
PLOS Computational Biology, 9(6), e1003094. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pcbi.1003094
Johnston,V.S.(2003).Theoriginandfunctionofpleasure. CognitionandEmotion ,17,
167–179.
Kaplan, R., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Planning and navigation as active inference.Bio-
logicalCybernetics,112 , 323–343.
Lane, R., Solms, M., Weihs, K., Hishaw, A., & Smith, R. (2020). Affective agnosia:
A core affective processing deficit in the alexithymia spectrum.BioPsychoSocial
Medicine,14, 20. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13030-020-00184-w
Lane, R. D., Weihs, K. L., Herring, A., Hishaw, A., & Smith, R. (2015). Affective
agnosia: Expansion of the alexithymia construct and a new opportunity to in-
tegrate and extend Freud’s legacy.Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev., 55, 594–611. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.06.007
Limanowski, J., & Friston, K. (2018). “Seeing the dark”: Grounding phenomenal
transparency and opacity in precision estimation for active inference.Frontiers
inPsychology,9 , 643. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00643
Lindquist, K. A., Satpute, A. B., Wager, T. D., Weber, J., & Barrett, L. F. (2016). The
brain basis of positive and negative affect: Evidence from a meta-analysis of the
human neuroimaging literature.CerebralCortex, 26(5), 1910–1922.
Linson,A.,Parr,T.,&Friston,K.J.(2020).Activeinference,stressors,andpsychologi-
caltrauma:Aneuroethologicalmodelof(mal)adaptiveexplore–exploitdynamics
in ecological context.BehavioralBrainResearch ,380, 112421.
Metzinger,T.(2017).Theproblemofmentalaction.InT.Metzinger&W.Wiese(Eds.),
Philosophyandpredictiveprocessing . Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group.
Mirza,M.B.,Adams,R.A.,Mathys,C.D.,&Friston,K.J.(2016).Sceneconstruction,
visual foraging, and active inference.Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 10,
56. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2016.00056
Moriuchi, J. M., Klin, A., & Jones, W. (2017). Mechanisms of diminished attention to
eyes in autism.AmericanJournalofPsychiatry , 174(1), 26–35.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 443
Morrison, S. E., & Salzman, C. D. (2009). The convergence of information about re-
warding and aversive stimuli in single neurons.J.Neurosci., 29, 11471–11483.
Niu, Y., Todd, R. M., & Anderson, A. K. (2012). Affective salience can reverse the
effectsofstimulus-drivensalienceoneyemovementsincomplexscenes. Frontiers
inPsychology, 3, 336. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00336
Palacios, E. R., Razi, A., Parr, T., Kirchhoff, M., & Friston, K. (2019). On Markov
blankets and hierarchical self-organisation. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 486.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2019.110089
Panksepp, J., Lane, R. D., Solms, M., & Smith, R. (2017). Reconciling cognitive and
affective neuroscience perspectives on the brain basis of emotional experience.
NeuroscienceandBiobehavioralReviews , 76, 187–215.
Park, J., & Banaji, M. R. (2000). Mood and heuristics: The influence of happy and
sad states on sensitivity and bias in stereotyping.JournalofPersonalityandSocial
Psychology, 78(6), 10051023. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.78.6.1005
Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2017). Working memory, attention, and salience
in active inference. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 14678. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-017-15249-0
Parr,T.,Markovic,D.,Kiebel,S.J.,&Friston,K.J.(2019).Neuronalmessagepassing
usingmean-field,Bethe,andmarginalapproximations. ScientificReports,9,1889.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-38246-3
Paton,J.J.,Belova,M.A.,Morrison,S.E.,&Salzman,C.D.(2006).Theprimateamyg-
dalarepresentsthepositiveandnegativevalueofvisualstimuliduringlearning.
Nature, 439, 865870.
Pessiglione, M., Petrovic, P., Daunizeau, J., Palminteri, S., Dolan, R. J., & Frith, C. D.
(2008). Subliminal instrumental conditioning demonstrated in the human brain.
Neuron, 59(4), 561–567.
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. (2015). Active inference, homeostatic regulation
and adaptive behavioural control.Progress in Neurobiology, 134, 17–35. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2015.09.001
Phaf,R.H.,&Rotteveel,M.(2012).Affectivemonitoring:Agenericmechanismforaf-
fectelicitation. FrontiersinPsychology ,3,47.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.
00047
Phillips, M. L., Ladouceur, C. D., & Drevets, W. C. (2008). A neural model of vol-
untary and automatic emotion regulation: Implications for understanding the
pathophysiology and neurodevelopment of bipolar disorder.Molecular Psychi-
atry, 13(9), 833–857.
Pytka, K., Podkowa, K., Rapacz, A., Podkowa, A., Zmudzka, E., Olczyk, A., & Fil-
ipek, B. (2016). The role of serotonergic, adrenergic and dopaminergic receptors
in antidepressantlike effect.PharmacologicalReports, 68(2), 263–274.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Kirchhoff, M. D., Constant, A., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Multiscale
integration:Beyondinternalismandexternalism. Synthese,130.https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11229-019-02115-x
Rao, R. P. N. (2010). Decision making under uncertainty: A neural model based on
partially observable Markov decision processes.Frontiers in Computational Neu-
roscience,4, 146. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2010.00146
Russell, J. A. (1980). A circumplex model of affect.Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 39(6), 1161.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

444 Hesp et al.
Rutledge,R.B.,Skandali,N.,Dayan,P.,&Dolan,R.J.(2015).Dopaminergicmodula-
tionofdecisionmakingandsubjectivewell-being. JournalofNeuroscience ,35(27),
9811–9822.
Sajid, N., Ball, P. J., & Friston, K. J. (2020).Active inference: Demystified and compared.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.10863
Schmidhuber, J. (2010). Formal theory of creativity, fun, and intrinsic motivation
(1990–2010). IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, 2(3), 230247.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TAMD.2010.2056368
Schultz,W.,Dayan,P.,&Montague,P.R.(1997).Aneuralsubstrateofpredictionand
reward.Science, 275, 1593–1599.
Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T. H. B., Mathys, C., Dolan, R., & Friston, K.
(2015).Thedopaminergicmidbrainencodestheexpectedcertaintyaboutdesired
outcomes. Cerebral Cortex, 25(10), 3434–3445. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/
bhu159
Seth, A. K., & Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the emotional
brain.PhilosophicalTransactionsoftheRoyalSocietyB:BiologicalSciences ,371(1708),
20160007. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0007
Smith, R., Alkozei, A., Bao, J., & Killgore, W. D. S. (2018). Successful goal-directed
memory suppression is associated with increased inter-hemispheric coordina-
tionbetweenrightandleftfrontoparietalcontrolnetworks. PsychologicalReports,
121(1), 93111. https://doi.org/10.1177/0033294117723018
Smith,R.,Alkozei,A.,Lane,R.D.,&Killgore,W.D.S.(2016).Unwantedreminders:
The effects of emotional memory suppression on subsequent neuro-cognitive
processing. Consciousness and Cognition, 44, 103–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
concog.2016.07.008
S m i t h ,R . ,B a j a j ,S . ,D a i l e y ,N .S . ,A l k o z e i ,A . ,S m i t h ,C . ,S a n o v a ,A . ,...Killgore, W.
D. S. (2018). Greater cortical thickness within the limbic visceromotor network
predicts higher levels of trait emotional awareness.Consciousness and Cognition,
57, 5461. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2017.11.004
Smith,R.,Kaszniak, A.W., Katsanis, J., Lane,R.D., &Nielsen,L.(2019). Theimpor-
tance of identifying underlying process abnormalities in alexithymia: Implica-
tionsofthethree-processmodelandasinglecasestudyillustration. Consciousness
andCognition,68 , 33–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2018.12.004
Smith, R., Killgore, W. D. S., Alkozei, A., & Lane, R. D. (2018). A neuro-cognitive
processmodelofemotionalintelligence. Biol.Psychol.,139 ,131–151. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2018.10.012
Smith,R.,Killgore,W.D.,&Lane,R.D.(2020).Thestructureofemotionalexperience
anditsrelationtotraitemotionalawareness:Atheoreticalreview. Emotion,18(5),
670.
Smith, R., Kirlic, N., Stewart, J. L., Touthang, J., Kuplicki, R., Khalsa, S. S.,...A u p -
perle, R. (in press). Greater decision uncertainty characterizes a transdiagnostic
patient sample during approach-avoidance conflict: A computational modeling
approach.JournalofPsychiatryandNeuroscience .
Smith, R., Kuplicki, R., Feinstein, J., Forthman, K. L., Stewart, J. L., Paulus, M. P., . . .
Kalsa,S.S.(2020). ABayesiancomputationalmodelrevealsafailuretoadaptinterocep-
tive precision estimates across depression, anxiety, eating, and substance use disorders.
medRxiv:2020.06.03.20121343.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

Deeply Felt Affect 445
Smith, R., Kuplicki, R., Teed, A., Upshaw, V., & Khalsa, S. S. (2020).Confirmatoryevi-
dencethathealthyindividualscanadaptivelyadjustpriorexpectationsandinteroceptive
precision estimates.Paper presented at the First International Workshop on Ac-
tive Inference. https://www.biorxiv.org/content/biorxiv/early/2020/09/01/
2020.08.31.275594.full.pdf
Smith, R., & Lane, R. D. (2015). The neural basis of one’s own conscious and uncon-
scious emotional states.NeuroscienceandBiobehavioralReviews ,57, 1–29.
Smith, R., & Lane, R. D. (2016). Unconscious emotion: A cognitive neuroscientific
perspective. NeuroscienceandBiobehavioralReviews ,69, 216–238.
Smith, R., Lane, R. D., Alkozei, A., Bao, J., Smith, C., Sanova, A., . . . Killgore, W.
D. S. (2017). Maintaining the feelings of others in working memory is associated
withactivationoftheleftanteriorinsulaandleftfrontal–parietalcontrolnetwork.
SocialCognitiveandAffectiveNeuroscience ,12(5),848860.https://doi.org/10.1093/
scan/nsx011
Smith,R.,Lane,R.,Alkozei,A.,Bao,J.,Smith,C.,Sanova,A.,...Killgore,W.(2018).
Theroleofmedialprefrontalcortexintheworkingmemorymaintenanceofone’s
own emotional responses.ScientificReports,8 .
Smith, R., Lane, R., Nadel, L., & Moutoussis, M. (2020). A computational neuro-
science perspective on the change process in psychotherapy. In R. Lane & L.
Nadel (Eds.),Neuroscience of enduring change: Implications for psychotherapy.N e w
York: Oxford University press.
Smith, R., Lane, R. D., Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Neurocomputational mecha-
nisms underlying emotional awareness: Insights afforded by deep active infer-
enceandtheirpotentialclinicalrelevance. NeuroscienceandBiobehavioralReviews ,
107, 473–491.
Smith, R., Lane, R., Sanova, A., Alkozei, A., Smith, C., & Killgore, W. W. D. (2018).
Common and unique neural systems underlying the working memory main-
tenance of emotional vs. bodily reactions to affective stimuli: The moderat-
ing role of trait emotional awareness.Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 12, 370.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2018.00370
Smith, R., Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Simulating emotions: An active inference
modelofemotionalstateinferenceandemotionconceptlearning. Front.Psychol.,
10, 2844. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02844
Smith, R., Schwartenbeck, P., Stewart, J. L., Kuplicki, R., Ekhtiari, H., Paulus, M., &
Tulsa1000Investigators(2020).Impreciseactionselectioninsubstanceusedisor-
der: Evidence for active learning impairments when solving the explore–exploit
dilemma. DrugandAlcoholDependence , 2015, 108208.
Smith, R., Steklis, H. D., Steklis, N. G., Weihs, K. L., & Lane, R. D. (2020). The evolu-
tion and development of the uniquely human capacity for emotional awareness:
Asynthesisofcomparativeanatomical,cognitive,neurocomputational,andevo-
lutionary psychological perspectives.BiologicalPsychology, 154, 107925.
Smith, R., Thayer, J. F., Khalsa, S. S., & Lane, R. D. (2017). The hierarchical basis of
neurovisceral integration.NeuroscienceandBiobehavioralReviews , 75, 274–296.
Smith, R., Weihs, K. L., Alkozei, A., Killgore, W. D. S., & Lane, R. D. (2019). An
embodied neurocomputational framework for organically integrating biopsy-
chosocial processes: An application to the role of social support in health
and disease. Psychosomatic Medicine, 81, 125–145. https://doi.org/10.1097/
PSY.0000000000000661
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025

446 Hesp et al.
Sohal, V. S., Zhang, F., Yizhar, O., and Deisseroth, K. (2009). Parvalbumin neurons
andgammarhythmssynergisticallyenhancecorticalcircuitperformance. Nature,
459, 698702.
Stauffer, W. R., Lak, A., & Schultz, W. (2014). Dopamine reward prediction error re-
sponses reflect marginal utility.CurrentBiology,24, 2491–2500.
Stephan, K. E., Manjaly, Z. M., Mathys, C. D., Weber, L. A. E., Paliwal, S., Gard, T.,
. . . Petzschner, F. H. (2016). Allostatic self–efficacy: A metacognitive theory of
dyshomeostasis-inducedfatigueanddepression. FrontiersinHumanNeuroscience ,
10, 550. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00550
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (2018).Reinforcement learning: An introduction.C a m -
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Topolinski, S., Likowski, K. U., Weyers, P., & Strack, F. (2009). The face of fluency:
Semantic coherence automatically elicits a specific pattern of facial muscle reac-
tions.Cogn.Emot., 23, 260271.
Van de Cruys, S. (2017). Affective value in the predictive mind. Open Mind.
https://doi.org/10.15502/9783958573253
Veale, R., Hafed, Z. M., & Yoshida, M. (2017). How is visual salience computed
in the brain? Insights from behavior, neurobiology and modeling.Philosoph-
ical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 372(1714), 20160113.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0113
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief
measuresofpositiveandnegativeaffect:ThePANASscales. JournalofPersonality
andSocialPsychology , 54(6), 1063.
Whyte, C. J., & Smith, R. (in press). The predictive global neuronal workspace: A
formal active inference model of visual consciousness.ProgressinNeurobiology .
Willems,S.,&VanderLinden,M.(2006).Mereexposureeffect:Aconsequenceofdi-
rectandindirectfluency-preferencelinks. ConsciousnessandCognition ,15,323341.
Williams, L. M., & Gordon, E. (2007). Dynamic organization of the emotional brain:
Responsivity, stability, and instability.Neuroscientist,13, 349370
Winkielman,P.,Berridge,K.C.,&Wilbarger,J.L.(2005).Unconsciousaffectivereac-
tions to masked happy versus angry faces influence consumption behavior and
judgments of value.PersonalityandSocialPsychologyBulletin ,31(1), 121–135.
Received March 3, 2020; accepted August 17, 2020.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/33/2/398/1896849/neco_a_01341.pdf by guest on 13 December 2025
