3 
Free Energy Levels and 
Application to Muscle 
Contraction 
A supplementary topic in relation to free energy transduction 
(Chapter 1) and the diagrams we have been discussing (Chapter 2) 
is the assignment of relative free energy levels to the states of the 
diagram. For most kinetic systems, this is of conceptual value, 
primarily, except for a new expression for the rate of free energy 
dissipation (introduced in Sections 4 and 5). However, free energy 
levels are much more important in understanding muscle contrac­
tion and related systems (dynein, kinesin). 
We give a brief account in this chapter of free energy levels for 
ordinary ktnetic diagrams (Section 9) and their role in muscle con­
traction (Section 10). Many more details are available elsewhere.1 - 6 
9. Free Energy Levels in Kinetic Diagrams! 
The enzyme or protein complex of interest can exist in a finite 
number of discrete states, for example, in Fig. 1.2, E, E*, EM, etc. 
As usual, we use the index i for these states. The fraction of all 
complexes in state i in an ensemble of complexes is Pi; Pi may be a 
89 
T. L. Hill, Free Energy Transduction and Biochemical Cycle Kinetics
© Springer-Verlag New York, Inc. 1989
3. Free Energy Levels and Application to Muscle Contraction 
function of time before steady state is reached. The chemical poten­
tial of a complex in state i is written 
Jli = Gi + kT In Pi' (9.1) 
where Gi is a standard chemical potential with standard state Pi = 1 
(all complexes in state i). That is, Gi is the chemical potential (Gibbs 
free energy per complex) of complexes in state i when all complexes 
are in state i. 
Whereas Gi in Eq. (9.1) is an intrinsic property of state i alone, the 
chemical potential Jli is obviously a property of the whole ensemble 
of complexes since the population Pi at an arbitrary time t depends 
in general on all the rate constants of the diagram and on the initial 
state-at t = O-of the ensemble and on any restraints imposed in 
the time evolution of the ensemble. 
The standard free energies Gi of the states i of a single complex 
are fundamental in that they can be related to the first-order rate 
constants (of the diagram) which determine the kinetics of the en­
semble. To see this, we have to examine two cases. Consider first the 
inverse transitions between two states i and j such that no ligand is 
bound or released in the transitions [e.g., a conformational change 
E ~ E* or ES ~ EP in Fig. 1.4(b)]. That is, these are isomeric 
transitions. As usual, the first-order rate constants for i ~ j andj ~ i 
are designated rt.ij and rt.ji , respectively. A hypothetical equilibrium 
between the two states (with all other transitions in the diagram 
imagined blocked) can be used to establish the connection between 
the G's and rt.'s: 
rt.ijpf = rt.jiPj (detailed balance) (9.2) 
Jli = Gi + kT lnpf = Jlj = Gj + kT In pj (9.3) 
where Kij' defined here, is a dimensionless equilibrium constant. 
Although rt.ij/rt.ji = Pj/pf holds only at equilibrium, Eq. (9.4) is valid 
regardless of the state of the ensemble, that is, even after the imaginary 
90 