1 
Survey of the Elements of 
Free Energy Transduction 
The primary purpose of this book is to explain the basic principles 
of free energy transduction in biology in as simple a way as possible. 
A secondary purpose is to study biochemical kinetic diagrams and 
cycles. These topics are approached by a consideration ofhypotheti­
cal model systems, at steady state, that are no more complicated 
than necessary to bring out the essential points. Also, certain refine­
ments and special topics are intentionally omitted in order to keep 
the discussion at an elementary level. Thus the limited objective here 
is to provide the reader with an introductory foundation in these 
SUbjects. He or she will then be in a good position to study more 
sophisticated theory and applications to real systems, as summarized 
in the more advanced books of Hilll (1977), Caplan and Essig2 
(1983), and Westerhoff and van Dam 3 (1987). 
A related feature of the present book is that any combination of 
successive chapters, 1, 12, or 123, provides a coherent story. Chapter 
1 contains a survey that uses only very simple mathematics and then 
the two succeeding chapters add somewhat more detailed quantita-
1 
T. L. Hill, Free Energy Transduction and Biochemical Cycle Kinetics
© Springer-Verlag New York, Inc. 1989
1. Survey of the Elements of Free Energy Transduction 
tive aspects. In fact, Section 1 itself introduces many of the main 
ideas in a descriptive way. 
1. States, Diagrams, Cycles, and 
Free Energy Transduction 
We introduce general concepts here by means of an extended exam­
ple. Consider a cell that is surrounded by a membrane that separates 
the cell's interior (inside) from its environment (outside). Suppose 
that a small molecule M has a much larger concentration inside than 
outside, cM, » cMo • Another small molecule L has a somewhat larger 
concentration outside than inside, cLo > CLio The inequalities as used 
here mean, explicitly, CMjCM o > CL)C L,. These concentrations are 
maintained constant (i.e., independent of time). Given a mechanism 
or pathway across the membrane, M molecules would tend to move 
spontaneously from inside to outside whereas L molecules would 
tend to move in the opposite direction. Is it possible for the larger 
M concentration gradient to be utilized somehow to drive molecules 
of L from inside to outside against the smaller L concentration 
gradient? If this is accomplished, it is an example of "free energy 
transduction" (some of the free energy of M is used to increase the 
free energy of L, as explained in Section 2). 
Because ofthe nature of cell membranes, it is hard to imagine how 
M and L could perform this trick on their own, using a realistic 
mechanism. However, this type of activity is commonplace in cells 
through the mediation of a large protein molecule, or complex of 
protein molecules, that spans the membrane and interacts suitably 
with both M and L. Let us denote this large protein molecule or 
complex by E. The net process accomplished involves M and L only, 
but the process is made possible only through the intervention or 
participation of E: E plays the role of an "agent" or "broker" or 
"middleman." 
To illustrate, let us consider a hypothetical but possible model 
that will accomplish the job specified above. Suppose E exists in two 
different structures or "conformations," denoted E and E*, which 
are interconvertible. There is one binding site for L and one for M 
on both E and E*. However, these sites are accessible only to inside 
2 