Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 29 April 2022
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.855074
Edited by: 
Majid D. Beni,  
Middle East Technical University, 
Turkey
Reviewed by: 
Giovanni Rolla,  
Federal University of Bahia, Brazil
Eros Moreira De Carvalho,  
Federal University of Rio Grande do 
Sul, Brazil
*Correspondence: 
Inês Hipólito  
ines.hipolito@hu-berlin.de
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to  
Theoretical and Philosophical 
Psychology,  
a section of the journal  
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 14 January 2022
Accepted: 16 March 2022
Published: 29 April 2022
Citation:
Hipólito I and van Es T (2022) 
Enactive-Dynamic Social Cognition 
and Active Inference.
Front. Psychol. 13:855074.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.855074
Enactive-Dynamic Social Cognition 
and Active Inference
Inês Hipólito  1,2* and Thomas van Es  3
1 Berlin School of Mind and Brain, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2 Department of Psychology, Amsterdam 
Brain and Cognition, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3 Centre for Philosophical Psychology, Universiteit 
Antwerpen, Antwerp, Belgium
This aim of this paper is two-fold: it critically analyses and rejects accounts blending active 
inference as theory of mind and enactivism; and it advances an enactivist-dynamic 
understanding of social cognition that is compatible with active inference. While some 
social cognition theories seemingly take an enactive perspective on social cognition, they 
explain it as the attribution of mental states to other people, by assuming representational 
structures, in line with the classic Theory of Mind (ToM). Holding both enactivism and 
ToM, we argue, entails contradiction and confusion due to two ToM assumptions widely 
known to be  rejected by enactivism: that (1) social cognition reduces to mental 
representation and (2) social cognition is a hardwired contentful ‘toolkit’ or ‘starter pack’ 
that fuels the model-like theorising supposed in (1). The paper offers a positive alternative, 
one that avoids contradictions or confusion. After rejecting ToM-inspired theories of social 
cognition and clarifying the profile of social cognition under enactivism, that is without 
assumptions (1) and (2), the last section advances an enactivist-dynamic model of 
cognition as dynamic, real-time, fluid, contextual social action, where we use the formalisms 
of dynamical systems theory to explain the origins of socio-cognitive novelty in 
developmental change and active inference as a tool to demonstrate social understanding 
as generalised synchronisation.
Keywords: social cognition, niche construction, active inference, theory of mind, enactivism, dynamical systems 
theory
“In the beginning was the deed. ” – Goethe
INTRODUCTION
Because time is continuous and touch and bodily experience form the first interaction with 
the world, cognition must be  embodied. With bodily experience and action, infants first enact 
the world. They acquire simple motor skills such as walking, reaching, or kicking their legs. 
These tasks are learnt because infants have some motivation to reach a goal: getting across a 
room to grab a toy, for example. This motivation forces the exploration of the environment 
by both bodily experiencing it and learning of patterns: ‘infants come to acquire solutions 
through exploration: generating movements in various situations and feeling and seeing the 
consequences of those movements’ ( Thelen and Smith, 1996 , p.  325; see also Barsalou et  al., 
2007; Sheya and Smith, 2019 ). Although the challenge is new when faced with a new task, 
the cognitive process of moving and perceiving is continuous in time. Through everyday 
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
Hipólito and van Es  Social Cognition and Active Inference
embodied actions, such as poking, squinching, banging and 
so on, the child gathers understanding about their movements 
in the environment.
All of this, of course, occurs before language and continues 
to exist after language. With language and eventually mastering 
a reasoning toolkit, humans come to conceptually articulate 
their bodily experience, what they perceive and body action. 
More precisely, humans can and do use language to describe, 
think, or picture their bodily experience of the world; even 
if the phenomenon of linguistic articulation is non-propositional, 
as it is totally made of bodily experience ( Lakoff and Johnson, 
2008; Maturana and Varela, 2012 ; Varela et  al., 2016 ; Hutto 
and Myin, 2017 ; Gallagher, 2020 ).
From this follows that meaning is present even before 
language. An infant is forced to develop a body skill by first 
being motivated to reach a meaningful goal, such as reaching 
a toy or hugging mum and then bodily exploring and thereby 
experiencing the world. Meaning is here understood in terms 
of organism-environment attunement. That is to say, given the 
socio-material and historical organism that one is, the habits 
one has formed and so on, one develops certain sensitivities 
to the environment it is in. Meaning emerges through these 
sensitive interactions in the environment. In this sense, ‘meaning’ 
is not semantic but concerns a relation between organism and 
environment structured by the interactional history ( Varela 
et  al., 2016 ; Di Paolo et  al., 2022 ).
In the real world, of course, infants and individuals never 
explore the environment on their own. From as early as birth, 
learning and understanding the world is social. Family and 
peers are as much part of the world as the physical objects 
they interact with. Unlike physical objects, though, humans 
create an intricate, dynamic network situated and evolving in 
time. A fundamental aspect of this network is that it is partly 
held together by meanings. Relationships with family, school 
and other institutional communities, impart meanings in the 
same way meaning is made explicit by embodied action. 
Meaning, as the non-semantic natural attunements, is made 
explicit by the embodied actions of a specific community. The 
enculturation with meanings begins with the explorations of 
the world: as an agent explores, develops and eventually masters 
a social environment, they become enculturated, where meaning 
cannot be  disentangled from the actions that make meaning 
explicit. From this standpoint, the understanding of the world 
then is permeated by meanings, themselves permeating action, 
thought, imagination and language ( Dewey, 1916; Wittgenstein 
et  al., 1969 ; Hutto et  al., 2020 ).
In cognitive science, social cognition aims to explain how 
we  come to understand these meanings in others and the 
world. A traditional account is the computational theory of 
mind ( Fodor, 1983 ; see Sprevak and Colombo, 2018 ) on the 
foundations of cognitivism in cognitive science ( Haugeland, 
1978). Cognitivism is the position counteracting the behaviourist’s 
theoria non grata  of the mind as a black box, that cognitive 
life comes to the computation of mental representations 
(Pylyshyn, 1980 ; Dennett, 1982 ; Fodor, 1983 ; Sprevak and 
Colombo, 2018; Smortchkova et al., 2020). Explaining cognition 
is thereby explaining how information is received, organised, 
stored and retrieved. For cognitivists, while cognition is a 
process of developing mental representations about the state 
of the world, social cognition is a process of developing mental 
representations of another person’s mental state. The latter is 
known as mind reading approaches within Theory of Mind 
(ToM). Pushing against behaviourist and empiricist accounts 
of newborn’s mind as a ‘blank state’ , ToM suggests a hardwired 
social cognition module that from birth computes mental 
representations about other people’s beliefs, desires, intentions, 
emotions, etc. ( Scholl and Leslie, 1999 ; Gerrans, 2002 ; Stone 
and Gerrans, 2006 ; Wellman, 2018; Heyes et  al., 2020 ; Pesch 
et  al., 2020 ).
Embodied and enactive cognitive science rejects the cognitivist 
view that understanding others comes down to inferring and 
attributing mental states in a manner somewhat hardwired 
from birth. According to the enactivist view, even engagements 
with the world that involve representational structures, such 
as thinking, deliberating, or planning, cannot reduce to stored 
mental objects in the mind of a disembodied spectator. The 
aim of this paper is two-fold: to dissect new accounts that 
blend enactivism with inferential accounts and explain why 
doing so involves a contradiction. The second aim is to offer 
a reasonable way of linking enactivism and inferential accounts, 
specifically in the case of social cognition. While some social 
cognition theories seemingly take an enactive perspective on 
social cognition, they explain it as the attribution of mental 
states to other people via representational machinery in line 
with Theory of Mind (ToM). A recent account specifically 
making this link is Veissière et  al. ’s (2020) ‘Thinking through 
other minds’ (TTOM). Holding both enactivism and ToM 
entails, as we  shall see, contradiction and confusion. For ToM 
holds two assumptions that are widely known to be  rejected 
by enactivism: (1) that social cognition reduces to mental 
representation and (2) that, at birth, individuals are equipped 
with an inference toolkit or starter pack for fueling the model-
like theorising supposed in (1). The last section advances an 
enactivist-dynamic model of cognition as dynamic, real-time, 
fluid, contextual social action. We  use the formalisms of 
dynamical systems theory to explain the origins of socio-
cognitive novelty in developmental change and active inference 
to explain social understanding as generalised synchronisation.
THINKING THROUGH OTHER MINDS: 
‘ENACTIVE’ INFERENCE?
The explanation of neurocognitive processes and psychological 
experience underlying enculturation aspects of life is a live 
issue in cognitive science ( Colagè and d’Errico, 2020 ; Enfield 
and Levinson, 2020 ; Hutto et  al., 2020 ; Kirmayer et  al., 2020 ). 
The traditional philosophy of mind and cognitivism, reducing 
psychological experience to cognitive processes, comprehends 
cognition in general as a theoretical activity of applying or 
updating representations. More precisely, as an information-
based process that unfolds to the end of computing intelligible 
representations (Fodor, 1985; Millikan, 2017; Shea, 2018; Piccinini, 
2020; Smortchkova et  al., 2020 ; Rupert, 2021 ). If the mark of 
Hipólito and van Es Social Cognition and Active Inference
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
the cognitive is representational processes, then, under this 
account, enculturation is expected to involve representational 
properties. This reasoning is widely known as ‘Theory of Mind’ 
(ToM): the capacity to attribute mental states to other people 
in an accurate way ( Scholl and Leslie, 1999 ; Gerrans, 2002 ; 
Stone and Gerrans, 2006 ; Wellman, 2018 ; Heyes et  al., 2020 ; 
Pesch et  al., 2020 ).
Active inference is today a well-known theory of cognition 
that breaks up with the above computational orthodoxy (Baltieri 
and Buckley, 2018 ; Hipólito et  al., 2020 ; Parr et  al., 2020 ) and 
is increasingly brought to converge with enactivism insights 
(Constant et  al., 2018 ; Kirchhoff et  al., 2018 ; Korbak, 2021 ), 
although this compatibility has been questioned ( Di Paolo 
et al., 2022). Active inference has been employed as a framework 
for explaining social cognition and the processes of underwriting 
enculturation (Constant et al., 2018 ; Gallagher and Allen, 2018 ; 
Bolis and Schilbach, 2019 ; Vasil et  al., 2020 ; Veissière et  al., 
2020; Hesp et  al., 2021 ; Smith et  al., 2022 ).
Active inference is a modelling theory about how agents 
act in the environment to maximise their understanding and 
thereby maintain an appropriate state for their survival and 
experiential interests. An adaptive system’s action to maximise 
their adjustment to their local environment can be  translated 
into the constructs of minimisation of uncertainty, entropy, 
or surprisal. As a ‘first principles’ approach to understanding 
behaviour and the brain, it is framed in terms of a single 
imperative to minimise free energy given a generative model 
(Pezzulo et  al., 2022 ). The Free Energy Principle (FEP) states 
that natural systems remain in non-equilibrium steady states 
by restricting themselves to a limited number of states. The 
evolution of systems, that is how a system interacts with the 
environment, is explained in terms of a free energy gradient 
at the internal states of the system by variational Bayesian 
methods ( Da Costa et  al., 2021 ). Internal states correspond 
to an open system’s biomechanical dynamics: a living system 
(internal states), for example, is situated in an environment 
(external states).
The influences between internal and external states can 
be  highlighted using Markov blankets. A Markov blanket 
is a scale-free statistical tool that allows us to interpret a 
natural system’s behaviour as influences between a system 
and its environment. Because it is a statistical tool of dynamics 
and flows, it does not necessarily correspond to a physical 
boundary (e.g., external force in a moving pendulum), even 
if it sometimes does (e.g., cell exchanging energy in a tissue). 
A Markov blanket allows for interpreting the activity or 
behaviour of a system as influences between internal and 
external states, which indirectly influence one another via 
an additional set of states: active and sensory states . These 
states, also directly influencing one another, are called blanket 
states (see Figure  1 ).
How blanket influence occurs is explained by supposing 
that internal states of a system engage in an active inference 
activity: that of predicting the external state. This prediction 
is made by a generative model, that is a probabilistic model 
of how external states influence the Markov blanket implicit 
in internal states’ dynamics.
Here we  arrive at an interesting philosophical bifurcation 
that ties up with the well-known scientific realism debate in 
philosophy of science. It is possible to understand active inference 
in two ways: (1) a realist view that the properties of the model 
constructed by applying active inference tools should also 
be expected to exist as an ontological property in the phenomenon 
of scientific interest, for example the brain, cognitive, or cell 
activity and so on. The argument for realism can be  made, 
either by (i) conceiving models as accurate representations 
(Frege, 1948 ) or (ii) if they are conceived as abstractions, by 
their predictive power, if they successfully predict, then the 
properties of the model should be  (literally) present in the 
system being modelled ( Rescorla, 2019 ), or (iii) claims made 
about the system, by truth preservation, can also apply to the 
system, in which case a target system is held to the properties 
of the model ( Dengsø et  al., 2022 ; Kirchhoff et  al., 2022 ; 
Kiverstein and Kirchhoff, 2022 ). The second way of thinking 
of Markov blankets under the philosophical bifurcation is  
(2) a non-realist view  that takes the model as simply an 
instrumental tool that, once applied to some activity, allows 
the scientist to learn about and draw predictions about a system 
of scientific interest. However, the system under study does 
not need to have the properties of the model. Non-realism 
about Markov blankets can be  held in three ways: they are 
(i) meaning-less (semantic) tools, viz. they do not hold semantic 
value other than that constructed by using them to understand 
and/or predict behaviour. Following Bas van Fraassen and 
David Hilbert, scientific theories need not be  more than 
empirically adequate, thus the Markob blanket mathematics is 
arithmetic and algebraic qualifier-free identities, respectively; 
(ii) valuable fictions that allow abstracting certain features of 
a phenomenon ( Elgin 2017 ); (iii) the success of the use of 
the Markov blanket justifies the acceptance of the epistemic 
value of the model without necessarily making ontological 
claims. The success of our best scientific models, for example 
Markov blanket informed models, does not adequately justify 
the belief that everything in the model is (approximately) true. 
In more detail, following Copernicus (1854) , hypotheses ‘need 
not be  true nor even probable. And if any causes are devised 
by the imagination, as indeed very many are, they are not 
put forward to convince anyone that they are true, but merely 
to provide a reliable basis for computation’ . The hypotheses 
FIGURE 1  | A Markov blanket delineates the conditionally independent 
internal (μ) and external states (η) (the arrows represent conditional 
dependencies between random variables). Considering that there is no arrow 
between μ and η, these states are conditionally independent, being indirectly 
influenced by blanket states (b) comprising active (a) and sensory (s) states. 
Given its scale-free, this formalism can be applied to explain the influential 
flows and dynamics of any open system at any scale.
Hipólito and van Es Social Cognition and Active Inference
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
and assumptions encoded in a computational model are not 
intended to describe the way the object being modelled is 
actually structured, but simply served to represent the observed 
data in an economical fashion (see also, Austin, 1976 ; Barker 
and Goldstein, 1998 ; Borsboom, 2017 ). A Markov blanket, for 
example, informs about and represents the reciprocal dynamics 
between a system and its environment. Elsewhere we  have 
argued that only non-realism about computational models is 
compatible with enactivism ( van Es and Hipólito, 2020 ) and 
in this paper we  pursue an account of enactive-dynamic social 
cognition that is in line with (iii).
Veissière et  al. (2020)  aim to explain the processes 
underwriting culture acquisition via active inference. Taking 
a realist view on active inference, the authors claim that 
all aspects of social cognition come down to inference. 
Departing from an understanding of cognition as embodied 
and enactive, the authors argue that individuals learn 
sociocultural shared meanings, habits, norms and expectations 
by ‘TTOM’: ‘the process of inferring other agents’ expectations  
about the world and how to behave in social context’ by 
which ‘information from and about other people’s expectations 
constitutes the primary domain of statistical regularities that 
humans leverage to predict  and organize behaviour’ (p.  1, 
emphasis added). Veissière et  al. ’s (2020)  argument for 
understanding others and the world can be  formally put 
as follows:
P1: Social cognition is enactive and embodied.
P2: Enactive and embodied the social actor cannot 
directly grasp social cognition.
P3: Anything that cannot be  directly grasped must 
be inferred.
Conclusion: Enactive and embodied social cognition 
must be inferred.
For Veissière et al. (2020) , while (P1) cognition is embodied 
and enactive, because (P2) all aspects and scales of embodied 
and enactive social understanding are hidden, and (hidden 
assumption) there is information at all aspects and levels of 
social engagement, and (P3) what cannot be  directly grasped 
(i.e., requires mediation by a representation) must be  inferred, 
thus (conclusion) no doubt embodied and enactive social 
cognition must either be  or leverage inference.
By P2 and P3 TTOM joins the ToM orthodoxy: understanding 
the world and others comes down to the ability to infer and 
attribute mental states (e.g., beliefs, desires, intentions, 
imagination and emotions; Scholl and Leslie, 1999 ; Gerrans, 
2002; Stone and Gerrans, 2006 ; Wellman, 2018 ; Heyes et  al., 
2020; Pesch et  al., 2020 ):
In helping to solve the puzzle of the implicit acquisition 
of culture, our model provides an integrative view of 
what has variously been called mind reading, perspective 
taking, joint intentionality, folk psychology, mentalizing, 
or theory of mind (TOM) – in short, the human ability 
to ascribe mental states, intentions, and feelings to other 
human agents and to oneself (Veissière et al., 2020, p. 2, 
emphasis in the original, although we would highlight 
the last clause).
In Veissière et  al. ’s (2020) theoretical model, TTOM, while 
cognition is understood as embodied and enactive, the social 
understanding of others is leveraged in mind reading mechanisms 
under ToM as ‘the process of inferring other agents’ expectations 
about the world and how to behave in social context’ (p.  1). 
The next section critically assesses TTOM from an enactivist 
point of view.
SOMETHING’s GOTTA GIVE: REJECTING 
‘ENACTIVE’ INFERENCE THROUGH 
OTHER MINDS
Many well-known philosophical arguments have been raised 
in recent literature alone by the embodied and enactive 
cognitive science against the mind reading ToM ( Gallagher, 
2001, 2006; de Bruin et  al., 2011 ; Hutto et al., 2011 ; Slors, 
2012; Abramova and Slors, 2015 ; Fernández Castro and Heras-
Escribano 2020 ; Heersmink, 2020 ; Heras-Escribano, 2020 ; 
Hipólito et  al., 2020 ; Lindblom, 2020 ; see also Menary and 
Gillett, 2016 ).
A contradiction between enactivism and ToM is found 
between P1 and P2 of what we  laid out above as Veissière 
et  al. ’s (2020) formal argument: social cognition cannot both 
reduce to inference (P2) AND be  embodied/enacted (P1). The 
contradiction between P1 and P2 results from two hidden 
assumptions leveraging Veissière et  al. ’s (2020) argument: (1) 
that social cognition reduces to mental representation and (2) 
social cognition is hardwired with an inference toolkit or starter 
pack for fueling the model-like theorising supposed in (1), 
which this section critically analyses below. Veissière et  al. ’s 
(2020) argument, laid out now with its two hidden assumptions, 
is constructed as follows:
P1: Social cognition is enactive and embodied.
P2: Enactive and embodied social cognition cannot 
directly be grasped by the social actor.
P3: What cannot be directly grasped must be inferred.
Hidden assumption (1): social cognition reduces to 
information in explicit propositional form (mental 
representation and ascription).
Hidden assumption (2): social cognition is hardwired with 
the concepts and logical tools for inference.
Conclusion: Enactive and embodied social cognition 
must be inferred.
Hipólito and van Es Social Cognition and Active Inference
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
In what follows, we  analyse and clarify the contradiction 
between premises 1 and 2 by critically assessing, from an 
enactivist perspective, what problems underlie the two 
assumptions and why enactivists think they should be rejected. 
It is worth noting that while we critically assess Veissière et al. ’s 
(2020) TTOM formal argument, we  take it as a paradigmatic 
case of ToM. Because TTOM is in perfect alignment with 
ToM, whatever remarks we  make about TTOM will logically 
apply to ToM, viz. any representationalist account of social 
cognition, or any account of social cognition holding assumptions 
(1) and/or (2).
Assumption 1: Social Cognition Reduces 
to Mental Representation
Enactivism rejects the view that understanding others and the 
world reduces to mental representation or any form of model-
like theorising (Lakoff and Johnson, 2008; Maturana and Varela, 
2012; Hutto and Myin, 2013, 2017; Varela et al., 2016; Gallagher, 
2020). Because ToM-like theories, on the contrary, defend social 
cognition as always and everywhere an ascription of a mental 
and/or neural representation, we  find a contradiction between 
P1 and P2.
Across the board in embodied and enactive cognitive 
science, no one questions that fully enculturated agents engage 
in theorising activity with conceptual and reasoning skills. 
Humans can and do use propositional logic to describe, think, 
or picture their bodily experience of the world. They write 
poems essays, measure and map things, paint and draw how 
they see things from their embodied perspective and offer 
reasons to explain their actions. The bodily experience of 
the sociocultural setting is the stuff about which this theorising 
activity is about.
ToM-like theories suppose, however, that all there is to 
social cognition is the above form of implicit or explicit 
theorising. This is so much so that some of the most prominent 
architects of ToM explain infant development through the 
analogy between children and scientists: ‘the scientists as a 
child’ ( Gopnik, 1996 ; Bishop and Downes, 2002 ). Because the 
social world is hidden and mysterious from infancy, humans 
ought to go around developing and testing theories to attain 
the most plausible explanation of the social everyday world. 
Social interaction thus exposed delivers a profile of social actors 
by which they rejected agency: for, under mind reading 
perspectives, they are not active constructors of a social scene, 
but instead, on the outside spectators of someone else’s narrative, 
where much is unknown and thereby requires inferring and 
adjudicating reasoning via the employment of prefabricated 
models, representations or theories. We  reach a contradiction 
because enactivism widely rejects profiling social actors as 
passive inferring spectators.
In real-time social interaction, there is little to infer. Social 
interaction emerges from social actors co-constructing a social 
scene (the scene would not occur without them co-constructing 
it). Social interaction is replete with non-representational 
meanings that were there even before social actors were able 
to speak. An infant is forced to develop a body skill by first 
being motivated to reach a goal, such as a toy or hugging 
mum, as something meaningful to them. Meaning has its 
origins in action, and it is through real-time, fluid, dynamic, 
contextual action and activity that it is made explicit. From 
this follows that meanings are present before and regardless 
of language. It so happens that with mastering a language, 
humans get to symbolically articulate their bodily, social 
experiences. In other words, humans get to conceptually articulate 
experience, that is explain or give reasons for the 
non-representational stuff they bodily experience in a social 
scene. But embodied non-representational meanings are 
regardless of language.
If these embodied meanings are non-representational, 
what is their profile? They emerge as a co-construction in 
social action. That is to say, by embodied actions within 
a specifically enculturated community: for example, how 
people respond to specific events, how they proceed from 
one assumption or thought to another, how they organise 
word afterword, how sentences are said, what reasons they 
give in favour of an idea, what arguments they raise in 
what circumstances, what they find interesting and 
uninteresting and so on. Meanings are not made explicit 
by language, but that are grasped anyway. They emerge 
from our engaging in social practices and understanding 
others without the primacy of explicit theorising, wondering, 
or inferring. Ultimately, meanings are the links holding 
sociocultural shared beliefs and stories together: the 
non-representational aspects involved in social cognition 
rooted upon a combination of local stories embodied in 
the individual practices without them being 
explicitly discussed.
This is so much so that individuals sharing a sociocultural 
background can see links between the stories that 
non-enculturated individuals cannot. A cultural clash may result 
from the failure to see some culturally specific meanings by 
not having been enculturated in that way, launching them 
into a ‘spectator’ seat. What the spectator lacks are the 
enculturated non-explicit meanings. The spectator situation is 
evident, for example, in ‘second culture’ phenomena (e.g., 
visiting a new culture, newly ex-pats and refugees; Taguchi, 
2019; Ahmed, 2021 ). Before being specifically enculturated, 
they experience things from a spectator’s seat. This means 
that, while they can, in principle, understand the reasons for 
enculturated practices, the space of reasons does not immediately 
grant the space of enculturated action.
In this case, the spectator must resort to theoretical activity, 
that is inference to the best explanation, where this theoretical 
activity is fully permeated by the ways in which the spectator 
has been otherwise enculturated. Research shows that subjects 
in this transcultural situation suffer specific mental health issues 
(Bjertrup et  al., 2018 ; Iandolo and Silva, 2019 ). Potentially, 
this lack of meaningful understanding can be  partly overcome 
by community members explicitly offering reasons to the 
spectator, that is conceptually articulating an explanation of 
the enculturation meanings the spectator fails to understand 
(e.g., why someone acted the way they did). But all of this 
occurs within the space of reasons.
Hipólito and van Es Social Cognition and Active Inference
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
The spectator does not become a (social) actor, viz., does 
not leave the inference space until they slowly and gradually 
start enacting these practices themselves. Confronted with 
a novel sociocultural setting, there is still a form of 
co-construction, the social actor is there operating in the 
same space as the locally enculturated people do, and they 
still participate in some sense in the practices all the while 
they also infer what is going on. Notably, as agents become 
enculturated, inference is not necessarily gone, as 
co-construction is inherently negotiative , which can take 
inferential forms (even if it does not need to). It is in this 
form that co-constructing the sociocultural niche and forms 
of life that agents come to be  able to provide reasons for 
why some stories are played out as they are and explain 
whether they are consistent or conflicting with the enculturated 
practice. In this respect, Anscombe (2000)  remarks that 
individuals can justify an intention by providing reasons as 
to why something is done or something would be  the case, 
instead of evidence for why their action or practice is true. 
Truthiness refers exclusively to the inference space of a 
spectator’s logical reasoning and soundness adjudication, but 
not to practice. A practice can only be  consistent or 
inconsistent with a cultural picture, where the enactment 
of a practice reinforces or modifies culturally shared meanings. 
Notably, culture is enacted and permeates everything that 
we do, including more intellectual practices such as theorising 
scientific and philosophical models of the world or parts 
of it. If understanding others involves enculturated standpoints 
and practices, social cognition cannot reduce to 
representational structures with truth-value conditions. While 
representational structures may be  useful when non-explicit 
meanings fail, that is when someone’s action is ‘alien’ to 
us, meanings of the enculturated practice (the understandings 
that are not explicit by language) should take us a long 
way in our understandings and co-constructions of social 
scenes. As co-constructors of a social scene, social actors, 
from a specific enculturated standpoint, non-representational 
meanings are made explicit, that is, are embodied in everything 
we do. In doing so, niches are constructed as cultural niches, 
viz. language, rituals, beliefs, tools and so on.
While for ToM-like theories, social cognition comes down 
to discovering an objective hidden world by means of 
employing prefabricated, though ever-updating, neurocognitive 
models; for enactivists, there is no such thing as neurocognitive 
models: for understanding others takes place at the agent 
scale, partly allowed by the neural dynamics and processes, 
naturally. Understanding others is a matter of being skilled 
at shared non-explicit meanings and potentially some abductive 
and model-based reasoning, 1 all of which are context-specific, 
modifiable and dynamic: here lies an evident contradiction 
between P1 and P2. The primary issue enactivists take with 
1  Model-based reasoning is a theory that attempts to describe the psychological 
processes that are used when making a logical inference from a given set of 
premises This can include reason-giving or more sophisticated forms of logics 
aiming for the development and improvement of psychological models of the 
world (note that these are not cognitive predictive process models, but models 
that require aware thinking at the agent level).
ToM-like theories is that Tom will not be  able to take 
social actors out of the spectator’s seat. Enactivists do not 
think that the cultural world is mysterious, nor that culture 
is the acquisition  or transference  of mental objects. The 
cultural world is not hidden such that it requires understanding 
through intellectual achievement.
Meanings are out there, made explicit in the actions 
and permeating everything in between. Meanings cannot 
be  disentangled from the enculturated practices that give 
rise to them: for one cannot simply decide not to 
be  enculturated in a certain way. Even if one can question 
one’s enculturation structures, shared beliefs and practices, 
one will do so from our enculturated perspective. This 
does not mean that non-representational meanings of our 
experience are not real. They are real, not in the sense of 
objective reality (whatever this may mean), but they are 
real experiences standing next to atoms and tables. Indeed, 
someone interacts the way they do, given the very real, 
not hidden or mysterious, meanings explicit in the 
enculturated interaction. From this, culture is not simply 
the acquisition  and transferring  of objects. Culture emerges 
from communities acting their environments and thereby 
it is dynamically modifiable: a live museum preserving 
history but forever reinventing itself by means of member’s 
actions. This idea has been elaborated under the concept 
of intercorporeality  as ‘multimodal’ interaction in complex, 
material contexts of human life and action in the cultural 
world ( Meyer et  al., 2017 ).
While Veissière et  al. (2020)  could rejoin our criticism by 
opting for a two-level approach, according to which basic 
cognition is enactive and social cognition is inferential, this 
option would still not be  in line with embodied and enactive 
accounts of cognition. The reason is that social cognition does 
not consist of a separate subset of cognitive activities. In 
enactivism, the very idea of social cognition is that cognition 
as a whole is fundamentally social ( Di Paolo et  al., 2018 ). 
Basic cognition concerns, for example, basic sensorimotor 
activities, getting and eating food, perceiving and navigating 
the environment and so on, but these activities are inherently 
social: our environments are social, populated with others and 
co-constructively developed by others and ourselves. This means 
that even the simplest basic cognitive activity is inherently 
social. The activity always unfolds in relation to the activities 
(or lack thereof) of others. This means that adopting an 
inferential account for one type of cognitive activity and not 
for the other would miss the point by implying that basic 
and social cognition are two separate sets of activity in the 
first place.
Understanding and (enculturated) action without leaving 
the space of reasons will not take the social actor out of the 
spectator seat: for they will forever sit on the outside making 
inferences about things instead of acting or enacting. For 
enactivists, cognition is enacted and embodied, where social 
action need not but can involve some model-like theorising 
along with embodied graspings. This abductive reasoning and 
model-like theorising become more useful as a tool if one 
lacks the enculturation of a local community, though a space 
Hipólito and van Es Social Cognition and Active Inference
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
of reasons that does not grant on its own entry in the space 
of actions, which explains the specific mental health issues 
emerging in intracultural adjustments.
Assumption 2: Social Cognition Is 
Hardwired From Birth
Enactivism rejects the assumption that social cognition is 
hardwired from birth. Within ToM’s literature, there are two 
ways of understanding the hardwiring, both of them aligned 
with the Modularity of Mind, some go as far as to call it 
Theory of Mind Module (ToMM; Gerrans, 2002 ), that is a 
computational system that is automatically activated, given 
‘social cognition stimuli’ , in an encapsulated manner. The first 
way of understanding the hardwiring is to think that the 
social cognition-specific module is a fixed mechanism with 
universal, somewhat nativist properties a la  Fodor (1983) , 
‘doomed’ to work in a certain way given a certain stimulus, 
as Churchland (1996)  noted, that is a social cognition full 
toolkit. The second is a flexible mechanism that revises in 
the light of new evidence according to hardwired rules ( Scholl 
and Leslie, 1999 ; Wellman, 2017 ; Frith, 2019 ), that is a social 
cognition ‘starter pack’ .
Veissière et  al. (2020)  do not hold a nativist position. This 
is made evident given their main goal to determine ‘how 
culture is acquired’ . Siding with ToM, they must hold a 
developmental view of ToM, in which case two challenges are 
in order. The first is the circular reasoning  that comes from 
not spelling out how the starter pack is acquired (note that 
it is not possible to take a nativist move here). By starter 
pack, it is meant a flexible system whose models or representations 
are not universally constrained from birth but can update and 
upgrade given new evidence and according to hardwired rules, 
viz. Bayesian rules. It is in this sense that the rules are hardwired: 
they are contained in a generative model with social cognition-
specific conceptual machinery allowing for the theorising and 
adjudicating of mental states to others.
Without a nativist assumption, Veissière et  al. (2020)  (or 
any ToM-like theory) need to explain how the starter pack 
is such that at birth, newborns understand their mother’s 
face and gestures by means of inference. How can infants 
intend, move and understand the environment by means of 
inference without having yet been enculturated with (i.e., 
having developed) the conceptual machinery for model-based 
reasoning and adjudication? Without such explanation, their 
theory is circular:
Newborns acquire culture by inference.
AND
Inference is possible by virtue of being enculturated.
In this setting, the question of how humans become 
enculturated remains unanswered in the shadows of nativism. 
What needs to be  explained, without a nativist assumption, 
is the origins of novelty in developmental change. We  will 
answer this question in the next section.
As developing organisms perceive and act in daily life, there 
must be  continuity between these activities and changes over 
a long-time scale. No one denies the contribution of the nervous 
system, the hormonal system and the genes (and so on) to 
non-human animals and human practices and behaviour. But 
it would be  a serious mistake to limit the contributors to 
those inside the biological system and exclude contributors 
from outside the organism, such as everyday features of the 
physical and social environment. Turning things on their head, 
the question then is how behaviour arises from a multitude 
of underlying contributing elements. How do these pieces come 
together as a whole?
ToM-like theories take it that social cognition comes down 
to inference, where it is not spelt out how individuals come 
equipped with the tools for inference. This is a problem largely 
diagnosed by enactivists ( Gallagher, 2001, 2006; de Bruin et al., 
2011; Hutto et al., 2011 ; Slors, 2012 ; Abramova and Slors, 
2015; Fernández Castro and Heras-Escribano, 2020 ; Hipólito 
et  al., 2020 ; Lindblom, 2020 ). It is thereby with surprise that 
we see Veissière et al. ’s (2020) TTOM aligning with enactivism, 
as they say, ‘cognition as an embodied, enactive, affective process 
involving cultural affordances’ (p.  1, emphasis added).
In addition, it is also surprising to see Veissière et  al. ’s 
(2020) TTOM aligning with Dynamical Systems Theory (DST), 
a theory well-known for rejecting classic computationalism like 
mind reading theories. Veissière et  al. ’s (2020)  claim that 
their TTOM:
Seeks to resolve key debates in current cognitive science, 
such as… the more fundamental distinction between 
dynamical and representational accounts of enactivism” 
(p. 1, emphasis added).
But this cannot be  the case. DST categorically rejects the 
notion of representation or cognition as information processing 
(Favela, 2020 ). From the classics, we  have the insight: ‘rather 
than computation, cognitive processes may be dynamical systems; 
rather than computation, cognitive processes may be state-space 
evolution within these very different kinds of systems’ ( Van 
Gelder, 1995 , p.  346).
Seen under the concepts of emergence, non-linearity and 
change known to be  core to DST, social cognition cannot 
be  hardwired from birth, not in the form of representational 
content (nativist ToM), nor in the form of representational 
rules (developmental ToM). In DST terms, social cognition 
processes are not computational but a state-space evolution 
that is made explicit in the form of the niches constructed 
by non-human and human communities. From this follows 
that enculturation processes cannot be  conceived of as the 
acquisition and communication of static mental objects, but 
instead as an enactment of the dynamics of a temporally 
situated social scene. In fact, dynamic theories of social cognition 
clearly state that:
Our commitment to a biologically consistent theory 
means that we categorically reject machine analogies of 
cognition and development. The brain may well share 
Hipólito and van Es Social Cognition and Active Inference
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
certain operations with a digital computer, but it is 
different from a machine on the most fundamental 
thermodynamic level… a developmental theory must 
be  appropriate to the organism it serves; thus, we 
deliberately eschew the machine vocabulary of processing 
devices, programs, storage units, schemata, modules, or 
wiring diagrams. We substitute, instead, a vocabulary 
suited to fluid, organic systems, with certain 
thermodynamic properties” (Thelen and Smith, 1996 , 
p. Xix, emphasis added).
In conclusion, because enactivism categorically rejects any 
form of hardwired computations, it is in clear contradiction 
with ToM-like theories. Because DST categorically rejects the 
analogy between cognition and a computer and machinery 
vocabulary, ToM-like theories have nothing to offer DST. By 
the same token Veissière et al. ’s (2020) TTOM does not resolve 
any ‘key debates in current cognitive science, such as… the 
more fundamental distinction between dynamical and 
representational accounts of enactivism’ (p.  1). On the contrary, 
it brings unnecessary confusion holding upon contradiction.
In what follows, we present an enactivist-dynamic explanation 
of how we understand others and the world that, while consistent 
with the description above—of fluid, organic systems, with 
certain thermodynamic properties—answers questions about 
the origins of socio-cognitive novelty in developmental change.
INTO THE DYNAMICS OF SOCIAL 
UNDERSTANDING
In the previous section, we  have critically assessed the 
incompatibility between ToM-like theories and enactivism. In 
doing so we  rehearsed and laid out the main features of an 
enactivist social cognition profile. More precisely, 
we  characterised the activity of understanding others as an 
activity that is not reducible to mental representations nor 
hardwired from birth and rejected enculturation as a process 
of communicating or exchanging goods, viz. Mental 
representational objects. Enculturation instead can be  seen as 
niche construction: the process describing how some living 
beings, through their activities and choices, modify their own 
and each other’s niches. A niche refers to the specific natural 
selection and evolutionary pressures a living being is subject 
to in its local environment ( Odling-Smee et  al., 2003 ; Sterelny, 
2012; Laland et  al., 2016 ; Kusano and Kemmelmeier, 2021 ). 
Enactivist accounts bring forth a world in three conceptual 
levels: enaction, niche construction and social construction 
(Rolla and Figueiredo, 2021 ).
Dynamical Systems Theory (DST) we  shall argue in this 
section, is an approach that serves to learn about and generate 
predictive power about the socio-culturally situated practices 
of agents constructing their niches ( Hirsch, 2020 ; van den 
Bosch and van der Klauw, 2020 ). More precisely, we  shall 
explain, under DST, how humans come to develop conceptual 
toolkits. Importantly, because DST has at its core useful tools 
such as emergence, non-linearity and spontaneity (etc.) it allows 
us to move away from prefabricated models of ToM-like theories 
of social cognition. Despite recent hype, DST is not new. In 
fact, DST modelling technology, such as network analyses, 
agent-based modelling, dynamical causal modelling, or differential 
equations have facilitated some of cognitive science’s most 
significant early achievements ( Favela, 2020 ) to study diverse 
cognitive functions ( Holmes and Johnsrude, 2020 ; Barfuss, 
2021; Han and Amon, 2021; Tschacher, 2021) and neural activity 
in neuroimaging studies ( Friston et  al., 2019 ).
As a formalism, DST is useful to computationally learn 
about and understand cognitive behaviour for one major reason: 
it does not require a realist attitude about the (computational) 
models used to simulate a behaviour of scientific interest. That 
is, while DST offers mathematics as well as the computational 
and mathematical technology to simulate complex behaviour 
(such as agential practices and behaviour) that would otherwise 
not be  possible to study, it does so without supposing that 
the agents’ practices or behaviour ontologically entail, involve, 
or leverage the computational machinery used in the simulation 
model. This is precisely van Gelder’s insight in his seminal 
1995 paper, asking ‘what could cognition be if not computation?’ . 
For him, notably, cognitive processes and agential practices 
are not computational, but they are the situated observables 
whose underlying dynamics can be  modelled by the DST’s 
tools. Systems like neuroactivity and behavioural practices are 
complex system, which means that they are extremely hard 
to model, or are intractable ( Garey and Johnson, 1979 ; Rich 
et  al., 2021 ). Modelling the dynamics of the system involves 
too many variables and interrelations for it to be  tractable, in 
other terms, the system has large degrees of freedom, or it 
lives in high dimensions. How to model on our low dimension 
computer the high-dimension activity that is generated on a 
high level is a common problem posed to modelling. A textbook 
procedure is ‘dimensionality reduction’ , viz. approximation or 
optimisation procedure that involves representing in a low 
dimension, that is a model, some meaningful properties of 
the data collected from the activity of interest ( DeMers and 
Cottrell, 1993 ; Beyeler et  al., 2019 ; Tanisaro and Heidemann, 
2019). This procedure comes with a cost, a Laplace assumption: 
that local interacting parts generating behaviour do not interact 
in a non-linear manner. Although this is useful and insightful, 
it is simply an instrumental move. That is, a simplification of 
a complex system into a model that makes complexity tractable. 
One should therefore refrain from making ontological 
assumptions, licenced by realism, about the complex system 
based on the tractable model. Since the tractable model is an 
opportunity for learning about the complex behaviour, only 
epistemic claims are allowed. Let us take a closer look of this 
claim. To make it tractable, we  can represent a dynamical 
system by a static relationship as follows:
 yi fx i= ()  (1)
With y as a dependent variable and x as an independent 
variable, for any possible value of x1, a corresponding value 
will be  generated for the dependent variable y. In short, the 
Hipólito and van Es Social Cognition and Active Inference
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
equation describes a static system of a particular value of the 
variable as a function of the value of another variable or a 
set of such variables (we critically analyse this below). A static 
system or model, by definition, will generate predictions without 
any reference to recursiveness. Making ontological claims from 
a static model would mean to say that the physical system, 
just like the model, is static, linear and can be  understood as 
if it were isolated in time and space; and not accounting for 
its situated and embedded in a dynamical environment. Because 
we know that the model is reductive (dimensionality reduction) 
we  know we  can only make careful, circumscribed epistemic 
claims with it.
DST takes its instruments as epistemic instruments, not 
ontological predictors. Understanding cognitive behaviour, 
including its maturation and enculturation, through a model 
inherently means to simplify it. Y et this simplification must 
conserve the system’s characterising features, one of which is 
complexity. An organism situated in its environment is an 
ensemble of many closely interacting, interdependent 
components, whose activity is more than the sum of the parts 
of the components—known as non-linearity. Notably, although 
the situated organism is constantly changing, it maintains 
coherence over time, that is it is a complex system ( Phelan, 
2001; Ay et  al., 2012 ; De Domenico et  al., 2019 ). The way 
the system maintains coherence is explained by the Free Energy 
Principle ( Friston, 2013 , 2019; Hipólito, 2019 ). DST captures 
the system’s characterising feature: complexity. It departs from 
the observation that things change. Phrased more radically, it 
makes a key assumption ‘that there is only process’ ( Thelen 
and Smith, 1996 , p.  39). As defined by Weisstein (1999) : a 
dynamical model is ‘a means of describing how one state 
develops into another state over the course of time’ , which 
can be  expressed mathematically as:
 yf ytt+= ()1  (2)
expressing that the next state (at time t +  1) is a function, 
f, of the preceding state, at time t. In a slightly different notation:
 yf y/t = ()  (3)
stating that the change of a system, denoted by y, over 
some amount of time, denoted by t, is a function f of the 
state of y. The function f is the dynamical rules specifying 
some causal principle of change by which the current equation 
depicts recursive relationships (i.e., yt leads to yt  +  1 and 
accordingly, yt  +  1 generates yt  +  2 and so on).
Applying the DST model in (2) to enculturation aspects of 
cognition, for example, how a child comes to develop a conceptual 
kit (since this is not given from birth), that is a child’s growing 
conceptual toolkit, we  obtain the following. The equation 
describes the current state as a function of a preceding state 
in a recursive way. This means taking the result of step one 
in the process (conceptual toolkit today) as the starting value 
generating the next step (the conceptual toolkit tomorrow). f 
corresponds to the principle of change such that the learning 
of new concepts at time t depends on the concepts already 
known and the environment the child is situated at (e.g., the 
people with whom the child communicates at a time t; Van 
Geert, 2009 ; for recent dynamic approaches to education and 
learning see Kaplan and Garner, 2020 ; Koopmans, 2020). This 
recursiveness illustrates the enaction, that is the processes that 
happen ‘between one behavioural moment and the next’ (Varela, 
1992, p.  106; see also Di Paolo et  al., 2018 , 2022)—which is 
also characteristic of the dynamical systems approach. An 
individual’s conceptual toolkit is a niche construction process 
itself (introduced above): the language we speak, the conversation 
styles favoured in specific groups, the uses we  give to them, 
how we  use them to articulate our and others’ practices, all 
of this are niche construction practices. Acquiring the abilities 
to understand and respond to the links between spoken and 
written patterns, we  contribute to niche construction in real 
time. In languaging, we  participate in what constitutes a way 
of living as a human ( Wittgenstein et al., 1969 ; Hintikka, 1979; 
Moyal-Sharrock, 2021 ). After all, ‘we are linguistic/discursive 
beings and not merely animals with an evolved capacity for 
language’ (Rouse, 2015, p. 77). This can be frustratingly difficult 
in our language permeated environment, especially when we find 
ourselves learning a second language (second language 
acquisition, or SLA). On the matter, Soleimani (2013)  argues 
that the ‘Newtonian conceptualization of SLA research cannot 
be  comprehensive to deal with the complexities of language 
acquisition research’ and therefore applies a dynamical systems 
approach. Languaging is pervasive in that it remains connected 
to other forms of engagement with the environment: it involves 
complex non-representational perceptual and practical capacities. 
For these capacities are present from birth. Because linguistic 
exchanges are directed, responsive and accountable to our 
environmental circumstances, language and languaging are 
better understood as self-organising dynamical systems 
(Hohenberger, 2011; Di Paolo et  al., 2018 ). In line with this, 
Elman (1995)  explains language not as rule-governed, that is 
‘operations on symbols’ , but rather embedded in the dynamics 
of the system permitting movement from certain regions to 
others, that is navigating the situated environment where 
languaging happens (see also Patriarca et al., 2020). Importantly, 
on a DST account, not even languaging is understood in terms 
of mental representation.
Because languaging is always situated within a wider practical 
and perceptual context, linguistic capacities are open and 
incorporate other sensorimotor/cognitive capacities. In this 
regard, evidence from Nölle et  al. (2020)  confirms that ‘subtle 
environmental motivations drive the emergence of different 
communicative conventions in an otherwise identical task, 
suggesting that linguistic adaptations are highly sensitive to 
factors of the shared task environment’ . Moreover, the authors 
speculate that ‘local interactional level, through processes of 
cultural evolution, contribute to the systematic global variation 
observed among different languages’ (p. 1). Linguistic articulation, 
as an enculturated practice, thereby contributes to the material 
manipulations that further shape the niche we  find ourselves 
in, that is the self-producing process networks of the society, 
or the long history of niche constructive activities we  live in.
Hipólito and van Es Social Cognition and Active Inference
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
Dynamical models offer the opportunity to learn the dynamics 
of growing conceptual toolkits in languaging: how individuals 
come to explore and adapt, navigate and socially engage with 
their environments from one behavioural moment to the next. 
It does so without reducing this activity to computational 
neurocognitive processes. By applying dynamical models we learn 
that it is possible to describe the behaviour generated within 
the reciprocity between the environment and the organism, 
such that the specific way that an organism behaves does not 
exist without the specific way that the environment is and 
again vice versa.
From an instrumentalist perspective, DST is a useful tool 
because it seems to capture the right features of self-organising 
systems. By ‘right features’ , we  mean the features that require 
the least philosophical assumptions. Note that, because DST 
is apt to model self-organising systems, that is offer predictive 
power, it does not follow that these systems are complex, 
non-linear, dynamic, etc., in essence. If we  do come to ascribe 
those properties to these systems it must be  in virtue of other 
independent reasons, for example, empirical evidence, not 
because of DST as a tool for modelling.
ACTIVE INFERENCE IN AN 
ENACTIVE-DYNAMIC SETTING
To explain how we  understand others, it is necessary to 
highlight the changes involved in the unfolding enacted 
and dynamic activity or event in which people participate. 
Our enactive-dynamic account of cognition posits mental 
life as an emergence of activities in everyday social life. It 
provides the biological ground for a cultural and contextual 
account of how humans understand others and the world. 
Culture permeates everyday life, where the shared 
non-representational aspects of that culture permeate how 
we  understand others.
Active inference is  an insightful instrument to learn about 
and understand the dynamics underlying cultural co-construction, 
considering that it does not necessarily take agents as passive: 
agents together are the authors of the states of one another 
(Gallagher and Allen, 2018 ). Opposed to other process tools, 
such as prediction error minimisation or predictive processing, 
placing a boundary of cognition around the skull ( Hohwy, 
2013) or the skull and the body ( Clark, 2015); active inference 
relies on the Free Energy Principle stating that organisms are 
coupled with their local environment, viz. adjusted, attuned, 
or synchronised ( Friston, 2019 ; Hipólito, 2019 ). If agents are 
coupled with the environment as supposed by active inference, 
then there is not much in the environment that is hidden 
from its coupled agents. However, social interaction, under 
ToM-like theories, such as TTOM, takes the agent as ontologically 
fully hidden from their environment and social cognition to 
reduce thereby to inference; it takes the following 
acyclic description:
Inference of each other’s states → generative models → 
social action.
The description above means that, because the world and 
others are hidden, agents must infer another person’s and the 
world’s state by means of accurately applying a social cognition 
generative model. On close inspection, however, we  can note 
that the causality laid out above instead describes that of a 
scientific practice— viz. a scientist whose goal is to understand 
and predict social dynamics. More precisely, for example, to 
understand at what point in a conversation a person changes 
their mind about a certain belief, a modeller first must infer 
a hypothesis with folk psychology assumptions that will inform 
and thereby deliver a generative model of how the social scene 
is expected to unfold knowingly that not every aspect of the 
social scene can be modeled given it complexity. The likelihood 
of subject A changing their beliefs about x, given the interaction 
with subject B, in the model would be  represented as both 
agents sharing a generative model or general synchronisation 
of generative models ( Friston and Frith, 2015 ). But notably, 
the form of an investigative practice that a scientist engages 
with is different from that taken by social actors. Because 
scientists are not social actors, they lack the direct access that 
social actors otherwise have. This means that if scientists are 
to understand the dynamics of socialisation and enculturation, 
they must construct models. Characterising a social scene as 
analogous to scientific practice is thereby a mischaracterisation. 
A social scene itself unfolds dynamically as an interactive 
co-construction by its actors, as shown in Figure  2.
Understanding others and the social world involves the 
shared sociocultural meanings embedded in practices and some 
model-based reasoning enabled by the specific ways we  have 
been enculturated with. While understanding others and getting 
enculturated may sometimes require model-based reasoning, 
this does not suffice to claim social actors as spectators of 
their own doing i.e. that all they do is infer. After all they 
are active actors. They enact the world to adjust it to their 
existence. Missing this point is missing what active inference 
is about. Even when engaging in model-based reasoning, this 
activity is thoroughly permeated by and situated in sociocultural 
FIGURE 2  | This figure depicts a social interaction between two individuals. 
Both social actors 1 and 2 understand and contribute further to the 
construction of sociocultural shared meanings, that is habits and sensitivities 
to the environment structured by the history of embodied and enactive 
interactions. In the co-construction of the social scene, because they have 
been specifically enculturated they employ styles of model-based reasoning 
specific to the manner they have been enculturated with (e.g., language, 
social and normative expectations and rituals).
Hipólito and van Es Social Cognition and Active Inference
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
practices and non-representational meanings, for example 
manners of thinking, shared beliefs and rituals holding a culture.
We can now see how active inference can be  useful. Should 
the scientific question be  the finding out of the likelihoods 
of subject A changing his belief given the interaction with 
subject B, then an active inference model can be  applied, as 
shown in Figure  3.
Departing from the observation, supported by active inference, 
that agents are coupled with their local environment, it is 
possible to model social actors coupled in social interaction. 
The model must entail a critical assumption: that—for the 
purposes of the model—social actors are (internal) states 
engaging in belief update or engaging in active inference. The 
success of using the Markov blanket ( b) justifies the acceptance 
of its epistemic value. The epistemic use of the Markov blanket, 
allows us to learn about and make statements with predictive 
power about social dynamics if this is on track. But, notably, 
the profile of the social action does not need to entail ontological 
claims nor reducing the complexity of (social) phenomena to 
the mathematical reasoning that we  used to scaffold our 
understanding of it. From this, prediction or inference models 
are essential tools scientists construct to learn about, understand 
and predict the patterns in the dynamics of observed behaviour 
(see Table  1).
Avoiding ontological claims, we  can see that, while there 
is social understanding, social interaction is not caused by 
prediction. The observation of social understanding, from social 
actors co-constructing a social scene, motivates us to scientifically 
explain it using generative models or in terms of a general 
synchronisation of generative models  ( Friston and Frith, 2015 ). 
But this is not to say that social actors understand each other 
by simply inferring each other’s states and thereby synchronising 
models. Note that few would say that pendulums actively infer 
each other’s states, yet moving pendulums will synchronise 
their activity at some point ( Francke et  al., 2020). They behave 
as if they knew each other’s states. They do so, obviously, 
without following a generative model, viz. inferring each other’s 
states. The reason for this is that it is not prediction/inference 
that causes the behaviour of pendulums to synchronise. The 
synchronisation occurs as complex behaviour emerging from 
the interaction between relatively simple systems ( Rihani, 2002; 
Wolfram, 2018), known as stochastic resonance ( Gammaitoni 
et al., 1998; Lucarini, 2019). Other examples include synchronised 
neurons, individually interacting as if they knew their peer’s 
behaviour when they could not possibly ( Lewis et  al., 2004 ; 
Friston and Frith, 2015 ; Balconi et al., 2020 ; Protachevicz et al., 
2021). It is worth noting that, while pendulums do not predict 
each other’s states, they also do not know each other’s states. 
At this point, it is important to note a clear distinction between 
simpler systems like synchronising pendulums and neurons 
and more complex systems like interacting living beings. Although 
social interaction does not reduce prediction, agents know 
much of each other’s behaviour. Much of the meanings unfolding 
during the construction of the social interaction between 
enculturated beings is directly grasped in action (e.g., language, 
social and normative expectations and rituals; Gibson, 2002 ; 
Danón and Kalpokas, 2017 ; Gallagher, 2020 ).
Active inference is helpful to understand the natural world 
(Table 1) consisting of phenomena that we understand as complex 
systems: from synchronised neurons to synchronised social actors. 
As a corollary of the FEP , active inference provides the mathematical 
and conceptual tools that can be  applied to understand real-
world dynamical systems. It can be  used in two ways: (1) to 
build up scientific models of highly complex phenomena. As 
an information-theoretical function, Variational free energy can 
be  applied to solve for the optimisation of model evidence. 
This allows for model comparison analysis. Active inference can 
also be  applied to offer insights over (2) the behaviour of self-
organising systems. As seen in Figure  3, Markov blankets allow 
us to interpret the social interaction as the meaningful influences 
between social actors co-constructing the social environment. 
In a dynamical setting, they can highlight our patterns of 
synchronisation (e.g., pendulums or social understanding). In 
this respect, Friston et  al. (2021)  have advanced the formalisms 
that allow us to think of the coupling between internal and 
external states in terms of generalised synchrony of chaos on 
the interface between physical and life sciences.
None of the FEP/active inference techniques (1) or (2), 
however, demand a realist claim for its epistemic virtue. The 
FEP , as a principle, does not in itself prescribe that complex 
FIGURE 3  | This figure depicts the social action in Figure 2 under the active 
inference framework. The behaviour of social actor 2 is modelled as internal 
states coupled with social actor 1 as external states engaging in active 
inference. The understanding and construction of meanings and the 
engagement in model-based reasoning are depicted as the balanced 
influences between sensory and active states or blanket states (b). The 
converse is also possible: it is possible to invert the model such as that social 
actor 1 becomes internal states and social actor 2 becomes external states.
TABLE 1  | This table distinguishes between (A) phenomena observed in the 
natural world.
A. Natural world B. Scientific tools/constructs
Synchronised pendulums, neurons, 
agents
Collective intelligence (families, crowds, 
communities, swarms, flocks of birds)
Dynamical and complex systems 
theory
Active inference 
Free Energy Principle
In scientific practice, we our reasoning can be guided by principles such as the free 
energy principle, which inform our construction of models, for example, through the 
dynamic and complex systems theory, active inference, with the goal of learning more 
about and be able to predict (B) observed behaviour in the natural world.
Hipólito and van Es Social Cognition and Active Inference
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
systems’ behaviour uses, leverages, or are the models by which 
the behaviour is scientifically patterned and understood. Models 
and mathematics are our most prominent scaffolding tools 
to learn about and predict social behaviour and practices 
occurring within a complex system. But the system’s complexity 
shall not be  reduced to the behavioural part that we  were 
able to model. If any causal relations are to be  devised, they 
are not to convince anyone of their truthiness, i.e. to describe 
the way the object being modelled is, but merely to serve as 
the basis for computation, that is to represent the observed 
data in an economical fashion allowing for learning about 
the object.
CONCLUSION
This paper had a two-fold aim: to dissect new accounts 
that blend enactivism with inferential accounts and explain 
why doing so involves a contradiction. We  then offered the 
only reasonable link between enactivism and inferential 
accounts, that is one that does not include ToM-like 
assumptions, specifically in the case of social cognition. 
While some inference models of social cognition seemingly 
take an enactive perspective on social cognition, they explain 
it as the attribution of mental states to other people, via 
representational machinery, in line with Theory of Mind 
(ToM). We  have shown that holding both enactivism and 
ToM entails contradiction and confusion. This is evident 
when we  critically dissect the two hidden assumptions held 
by ToM-like theories such as TTOM, which are rejected 
by enactivism: (1) that social cognition reduces to mental 
representation and (2) that, at birth, individuals are equipped 
with an inference toolkit or starter pack for fueling the 
model-like theorising supposed in (1). In our critical 
assessment, we  rehearsed and laid out the main features of 
an enactivist social-cognitive profile: cognition is enacted 
and embodied, where social action can involve some model-
like theorising if and when embodied understanding is 
lacking. As co-constructors of a social scene, social actors, 
from a specific enculturated standpoint, non-representational 
meanings are made explicit in everything we  do. Enaction 
is the process that happens between one behavioural movement 
and the next. The formalisms of dynamical systems theory 
further explain the origins of socio-cognitive novelty in 
developmental change, and active inference is a suitable, 
complementary tool to demonstrate the social understanding 
as generalised synchronisation observed in natural and 
life sciences.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included 
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can 
be  directed to the corresponding author.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct, and intellectual 
contribution to the work and approved it for publication.
FUNDING
This study was supported by the German Research Foundation 
(DFG) and the Open Access Publication Fund of Humboldt-
Universität zu Berlin.
 
REFERENCES
Abramova, E., and Slors, M. (2015). Social cognition in simple action coordination: 
A case for direct perception. Conscious. Cogn.  36, 519–531. doi: 10.1016/j.
concog.2015.04.013
Ahmed, M. A. (2021). Cross-cultural adjustment and second language acquisition. 
Int. J. Lang. Lit. Stu.  3, 290–300. doi: 10.36892/ijlls.v3i2.646
Anscombe, G. E. M. (2000). Intention. United States: Harvard University Press.
Austin, W . H. (1976). “Instrumentalism in science, ” in The Relevance of 
Natural Science to Theology . ed. W . H. Austin (London: Palgrave Macmillan), 
13–30.
Ay, N., Der, R., and Prokopenko, M. (2012). Guided self-organization: perception–
action loops of embodied systems. Theory Biosci. 131, 125–127. doi: 10.1007/
s12064-011-0140-1
Balconi, M., Fronda, G., and Bartolo, A. (2020). Affective, social, and 
informative gestures reproduction in human interaction: hyperscanning 
and brain connectivity. J. Mot. Behav.  53, 296–315. doi: 10.1080/00222895.  
2020.1774490
Baltieri, M., and Buckley, C. L. (2018). The modularity of action and perception 
revisited using control theory and active inference. arXiv [Preprint].
Barfuss, W . (2021). Dynamical systems as a level of cognitive analysis of multi-
agent learning: Algorithmic foundations of temporal-difference learning 
dynamics. Neural. Comput. Appl. 34, 1–19. doi: 10.1007/s00521-021-06117-0
Barker, P ., and Goldstein, B. R. (1998). Realism and instrumentalism in sixteenth 
century astronomy: A reappraisal. Perspect. Sci.  6, 232–258.
Barsalou, L. W ., Breazeal, C., and Smith, L. B. (2007). Cognition as coordinated 
non-cognition. Cogn. Process.  8, 79–91. doi: 10.1007/s10339-007-0163-1
Beyeler, M., Rounds, E. L., Carlson, K. D., Dutt, N., and Krichmar, J. L. (2019). 
Neural correlates of sparse coding and dimensionality reduction. PLoS 
Comput. Biol. 15:e1006908. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006908
Bishop, M. A., and Downes, S. M. (2002). The theory theory thrice over: the 
child as scientist, Superscientist or social institution? Stu. History Philo. Sci.  
33, 117–132. doi: 10.1016/S0039-3681(01)00029-2
Bjertrup, P . J., Bouhenia, M., Mayaud, P ., Perrin, C., Farhat, J. B., and Blanchet, K. 
(2018). A life in waiting: Refugees’ mental health and narratives of social 
suffering after European Union border closures in march 2016. Soc. Sci. 
Med. 215, 53–60. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2018.08.040
Bolis, D., and Schilbach, L. (2019). ‘Through Others we  Become ourselves’: 
The Dialectics of Predictive Coding and Active Inference. Available at: https://
doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/6uwyn (Accessed October 6, 2019).
Borsboom, D. (2017). “Representation and Explanation in Psychometric Modeling. 
Philosophical Issues, ” in Psychiatry IV: Psychiatric Nosology ; April 6, 2017.
Bouizegarene, N., Ramstead, M., Constant, A., Friston, K., and Kirmayer, L. 
(2020). Narrative as Active Inference.
Churchland, P . M. (1996). The Engine of Reason, the Seat of the Soul: A 
Philosophical Journey into the Brain . United States: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2015). Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied 
Mind. United States: Oxford University Press.
Colagè, I., and d’Errico, F . (2020). Culture: The driving force of human cognition. 
Top. Cogn. Sci.  12, 654–672. doi: 10.1111/tops.12372
Hipólito and van Es Social Cognition and Active Inference
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J., Veissiere, S. P ., Campbell, J. O., and Friston, K. J. 
(2018). A variational approach to niche construction. J. R. Soc. Interface  
15:20170685. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0685
Copernicus, N. (1854). De revolutionibus orbium Coelestium: Libri VI. 
Norimbergae, I. Petreium, 1543 . Bruxelles: Culture et Civilisation.
Da Costa, L., Friston, K., Heins, C., and Pavliotis, G. A. (2021). Bayesian 
mechanics for stationary processes. Proc. Royal Soc. A  477:20210518. doi: 
10.1098/rspa.2021.0518
Danón, L., and Kalpokas, D. (2017). Perceiving mental states: co-presence and 
constitution. J. Philo. 18, 87–97. doi: 10.4013/fsu.2017.182.03
de Bruin, L., Strijbos, D., and Slors, M. (2011). Early social cognition: alternatives 
to implicit mindreading. Rev. Philos. Psychol.  2, 499–517. doi: 10.1007/
s13164-011-0072-1
De Domenico, M., Brockmann, D., Camargo, C. Q., Gershenson, C., Goldsmith, D., 
Jeschonnek, S., et al. (2019). Complexity explained.
DeMers, D., and Cottrell, G. (1993). Non-linear Dimensionality Reduction. 
NIPS 5, 580–587.
Dengsø, M., Robertson, I., and Constant, A. (2022). Markov Blankets and the 
Preformationist Assumption. United States: PhilSci Archive.
Dennett, D. C. (1982). “Styles of mental representation, ” in Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society; January 1, 1982.
Dewey, J. (1916). The pragmatism of Peirce. The Journal of Philosophy, Psychology 
and Scientific Methods  13, 709–715. doi: 10.2307/2012320
Di Paolo, E. A., Cuffari, E. C., and De Jaegher, H. (2018). Linguistic Bodies: 
The Continuity between Life and Language . United States: MIT Press.
Di Paolo, E., Thompson, E., and Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking 
path: Tensions between enaction and the free energy principle. PhiMiSci. 3. 
doi: 10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
Elgin, C. Z. (2017). True Enough . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Elman, J. L. (1995). “Language as a dynamical system, ” in Mind as motion: 
Explorations in the Dynamics of Cognition,  195–223.
Enfield, N. J., and Levinson, S. C. (2020). “Introduction: Human sociality as 
a new interdisciplinary field, ” in Roots of Human Sociality (London: Routledge), 
1–35.
Favela, L. H. (2020). Dynamical systems theory in cognitive science and 
neuroscience. Philos. Compass 15:e12695. doi: 10.1111/phc3.12695
Fernández Castro, V ., and Heras-Escribano, M. (2020). Social cognition: a 
normative approach. Acta. Anal.  35, 75–100. doi: 10.1007/s12136-019-  
00388-y
Fodor, J. A. (1983). The Modularity of Mind . United States: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. A. (1985). Fodor’s guide to mental representation: The intelligent 
auntie’s vade-mecum. Mind 94, 76–100. doi: 10.1093/mind/XCIV .373.76
Francke, M., Pogromsky, A., and Nijmeijer, H. (2020). Huygens’ 
clocks:‘sympathy’and resonance. Int. J. Control  93, 274–281. 
Frege, G. (1948). Sense and reference. Philos. Rev. 57, 209–230. doi: 10.2307/2181485
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we  know it. J. R. Soc. Interface  10:20130475. doi: 
10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K. (2019). A Free Energy Principle for a Particular Physics.
Friston, K., Conor, H., Kai, U., Lancelot, D. C., and Thomas, P . (2020). Stochastic 
chaos and markov blankets. Entropy  23:1220. doi: 10.3390/e23091220
Friston, K., and Frith, C. (2015). A duet for one. Conscious. Cogn. 36, 390–405. 
doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2014.12.003
Friston, K. J., Preller, K. H., Mathys, C., Cagnan, H., Heinzle, J., Razi, A., 
et al. (2019). Dynamic causal modelling revisited. NeuroImage 199, 730–744. 
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.02.045
Frith, C. (2019). “Theory of mind in schizophrenia, ” in The Neuropsychology 
of Schizophrenia. eds. P . Bloom and B. L. Finlay (United Kingdom: Psychology 
Press), 147–161.
Gallagher, S. (2001). The practice of mind. Theory, simulation or primary 
interaction? J. Conscious. Stud.  8, 83–108.
Gallagher, S. (2006). How the Body Shapes the Mind  Clarendon Press.
Gallagher, S. (2020). Action and Interaction . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallagher, S., and Allen, M. (2018). Active inference, enactivism and the 
hermeneutics of social cognition. Synthese 195, 2627–2648. doi: 10.1007/
s11229-016-1269-8
Gammaitoni, L., Hänggi, P ., Jung, P ., and Marchesoni, F . (1998). Stochastic 
resonance. Rev. Modern Phy.  70, 223–287. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.70.223
Garey, M. R., and Johnson, D. S. (1979). Computers and Intractability . Vol. 
174. San Francisco: Freeman.
Gerrans, P . (2002). The theory of mind module in evolutionary psychology. 
Biol. Philos.  17, 305–321. doi: 10.1023/A:1020183525825
Gibson, J. J. (2002). “ A theory of direct visual perception, ” in Vision and Mind: 
Selected Readings in the Philosophy of Perception. Vol. 25,  77–90.
Gopnik, A. (1996). The scientist as child. Philos. Sci.  63, 485–514. doi: 
10.1086/289970
Han, J., and Amon, M. J. (2021). “ A nonlinear dynamical systems approach 
to emotional attractor states during media viewing. ” in Proceedings of the 
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society . Vol. 43.
Harding, S. G. (Ed.) (2004). The Feminist Standpoint Theory Reader: Intellectual 
and Political Controversies . United States: Psychology Press.
Haugeland, J. (1978). The nature and plausibility of cognitivism. Behav. Brain 
Sci. 1, 215–226. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X00074148
Heersmink, R. (2020). Narrative niche construction: memory ecologies and 
distributed narrative identities. Biol. Philos.  35, 1–23. doi: 10.1007/
s10539-020-09770-2
Heras-Escribano, M. (2020). The evolutionary role of affordances: ecological 
psychology, niche construction, and natural selection. Biol. Philos. 35, 1–27. 
doi: 10.1007/s10539-020-09747-1
Hesp, C., Smith, R., Parr, T., Allen, M., Friston, K. J., and Ramstead, M. J. 
(2021). Deeply felt affect: The emergence of valence in deep active inference. 
Neural Comput. 33, 398–446. doi: 10.1162/neco_a_01341
Heyes, C., Bang, D., Shea, N., Frith, C. D., and Fleming, S. M. (2020). Knowing 
ourselves together: The cultural origins of metacognition. Trends Cogn. Sci.  
24, 349–362. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2020.02.007
Hintikka, J. (1979). “Language-games, ” in Game-Theoretical Semantics (Dordrecht: 
Springer), 1–26.
Hipólito, I. (2019). A simple theory of every ‘thing’ . Phys Life Rev  31, 79–85. 
doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2019.10.006
Hipólito, I., Hutto, D., and Chown, N. (2020). “Understanding autistic individuals: 
cognitive diversity not theoretical deficit, ” in Neurodiversity Studies: A New 
Critical Paradigm. eds. H. B. Rosqvist, N. Chown and A. Stenning (United 
States: Routledge).
Hirsch, M. W . (2020). The Chaos of Dynamical Systems . Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press, 189-196.
Hohenberger, A. (2011). Functional Categories in Language Acquisition: Self-
Organization of a Dynamical System Vol. 456 . Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Holmes, E., and Johnsrude, I. S. (2020). Speech spoken by familiar people is 
more resistant to interference by linguistically similar speech. J. Exp. Psychol.: 
Learn. Mem. Cogn.  46, 1465–1476. doi: 10.1037/xlm0000823
Hutto, D. D., Herschbach, M., and Southgate, V . (2011). Social cognition: 
mindreading and alternatives. Rev. Philos. Psychol.  2:375. doi: 10.1007/
s13164-011-0073-0
Hutto, D., Gallagher, S., Ilundain-Agurruza, J., and Hipólito, I. (2020). “Culture 
in mind  - An Enactivist account: not cognitive penetration But cultural 
permeation, ” in Culture, Mind, and Brain: Emerging Concepts, Models, 
Applications. eds. L. J. Kirmayer, S. Kitayama, C. M. Worthman, R. Lemelson 
and C. A. Cummings (New Y ork, NY: Cambridge University Press)
Hutto, D. D., and Myin, E. (2013). Radicalizing enactivism. Basic Minds 
without Content.
Hutto, D. D., and Myin, E. (2017). Evolving Enactivism: Basic Minds Meet 
Content. United States: MIT press.
Iandolo, D., and Silva, G. (2019). On research culture and mental health. Nat. 
Mater. 18:906. doi: 10.1038/s41563-019-0441-1
Kaplan, A., and Garner, J. K. (2020). Steps for applying the complex dynamical 
systems approach in educational research: A guide for the perplexed scholar. 
Int. J. Exp. Educ.  88, 486–502.
Kirchhoff, M., Kiverstein, J., and Robertson, I. (2022). The Literalist Fallacy 
and the Free Energy Principle: Model-Building, Scientific Realism and 
Instrumentalism. United Kingdom: PhilSci Archive.
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., and Kiverstein, J. (2018). The 
Markov blankets of life: autonomy, active inference and the free energy 
principle. J. R. Soc. Interface  15:20170792. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0792
Kirmayer, L. J., Worthman, C. M., Kitayama, S., Lemelson, R., and Cummings, C. A. 
(eds.). (2020). Culture, Mind, and Brain: Emerging Concepts, Models, and 
Applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kiverstein, J., and Kirchhoff, M. (2022). Scientific Realism about Friston Blankets 
without Literalism. United States: PhilSci Archive.
Hipólito and van Es Social Cognition and Active Inference
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
Koopmans, M. (2020). Education is a complex dynamical system: challenges 
for research. Int. J. Exp. Educ.  88, 358–374.
Korbak, T. (2021). Computational enactivism under the free energy principle. 
Synthese 198, 2743–2763. doi: 10.1007/s11229-019-02243-4
Kusano, K., and Kemmelmeier, M. (2021). Cultural change through niche 
construction: A multilevel approach to investigate the interplay between cultural 
change and infectious disease. Am. Psychol. 76, 962–982. doi: 10.1037/amp0000860
Lakoff, G., and Johnson, M. (2008). Metaphors we  Live by. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Laland, K., Matthews, B., and Feldman, M. W . (2016). An introduction to 
niche construction theory. Evol. Ecol.  30, 191–202. doi: 10.1007/s10682- 
016-9821-z
Lewis, P . A., Wing, A. M., Pope, P . A., Praamstra, P ., and Miall, R. C. (2004). 
Brain activity correlates differentially with increasing temporal complexity 
of rhythms during initialisation, synchronisation, and continuation phases 
of paced finger tapping. Neuropsychologia 42, 1301–1312. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuropsychologia.2004.03.001
Lindblom, J. (2020). A radical reassessment of the body in social cognition. 
Front. Psychol. 11:987. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00987
Lucarini, V . (2019). Stochastic resonance for nonequilibrium systems. Phys. 
Rev. E  100:062124. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.100.062124
Maturana, H. R., and Varela, F . J. (2012). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The 
Realization of the Living. Vol. 42. Germany: Springer Science and Business Media.
Menary, R., and Gillett, A. J. (2016). “Embodying culture: integrated cognitive 
systems and cultural evolution, ” in The Routledge Handbook of Philosophy 
of the Social Mind . ed. J. Kiverstein (United States: Routledge), 88–103.
Meyer, C., Streeck, J., and Jordan, J. S. (2017). Intercorporeality: Emerging 
Socialities in Interaction . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Millikan, R. G. (2017). Beyond Concepts: Unicepts, Language, and Natural 
Information. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Moyal-Sharrock, D. (2021). From deed to word: gapless and kink-free enactivism. 
Synthese 198, 405–425.
Nölle, J., Fusaroli, R., Mills, G. J., and Tylén, K. (2020). Language as shaped 
by the environment: linguistic construal in a collaborative spatial task. 
Palgrave Commun. 6, 1–10.
Odling-Smee, J., Laland, K. N., and Feldman, M. W . (2003). “Niche construction: 
The neglected process in evolution, ” in Monographs in Population Biology. 
Vol. 37. ed. M. Gilpin (United States: Princeton University Press)
Parr, T., Da Costa, L., and Friston, K. (2020). Markov blankets, information 
geometry and stochastic thermodynamics. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A 378:20190159.
Patriarca, M., Heinsalu, E., and Leonard, J. L. (2020). Languages in Space and 
Time: Models and Methods from Complex Systems Theory . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Pesch, A., Semenov, A. D., and Carlson, S. M. (2020). The path to fully 
representational theory of mind: conceptual, executive, and pragmatic 
challenges. Front. Psychol. 11:581117. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.581117
Pezzulo, G., Parr, T., and Friston, K. (2022). The evolution of brain architectures 
for predictive coding and active inference. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 377:20200531.
Piccinini, G. (2020). Neurocognitive Mechanisms: Explaining Biological Cognition. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Phelan, S. E. (2001). What is complexity science, really? Emerg.: Complex. 
Organ. 3, 120–136. doi: 10.1207/S15327000EM0301_08
Protachevicz, P . R., Hansen, M., Iarosz, K. C., Caldas, I. L., Batista, A. M., 
and Kurths, J. (2021). Emergence of neuronal synchronisation in coupled 
areas. Front. Comput. Neurosci.  15:663408. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2021.663408
Pylyshyn, Z. W . (1980). Computation and cognition: issues in the foundations of 
cognitive science. Behav. Brain Sci. 3, 111–132. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X00002053
Rescorla, M. (2019). A Realist Perspective on Bayesian Cognitive Science. In 
Inference and Consciousness  United States: Routledge.
Rich, P ., de Haan, R., Wareham, T., and van Rooij, I. (2021). “How hard is 
cognitive science?” in Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive 
Science Society . Vol. 43.
Rihani, S. (2002). Complex Systems Theory and Development Practice: Understanding 
Non-Linear Realities. United Kingdom: Zed Books.
Rolla, G., and Figueiredo, N. (2021). Bringing forth a world, literally. Phenomenol. 
Cogn. Sci.  3, 1–23. doi: 10.1007/s11097-021-09760-z
Rouse, J. (2015). Articulating the World. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Rupert, R. D. (2021). Representation in cognitive science: content without 
function. Stud. Hist. Philos. Sci.  [Epub ahead of print].
Scholl, B. J., and Leslie, A. M. (1999). Modularity, development and ‘theory 
of mind’ . Mind Lang.  14, 131–153. doi: 10.1111/1468-0017.00106
Shea, N. (2018). Representation in Cognitive Science . Oxford: Oxford University  
Press.
Sheya, A., and Smith, L. (2019). Development weaves brains, bodies and 
environments into cognition. Lang. Cognit. Neurosci.  34, 1266–1273. doi: 
10.1080/23273798.2018.1489065
Soleimani, H. (2013). A dynamical system approach to research in second 
language acquisition. Int. J. Engl. Lang. Teach.  5, 127–143.
Slors, M. (2012). The model-model of the theory-theory. Inquiry 55, 521–542. 
doi: 10.1080/0020174X.2012.716205
Smith, R., Ramstead, M. J., and Kiefer, A. (2022). Active inference models do 
not contradict folk psychology. Synthese 200:18. doi: 10.1007/s11229-022-03480-w
Smortchkova, J., Dołrega, K., and Schlicht, T. (2020). What Are Mental 
Representations? Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sprevak, M., and Colombo, M. (eds.) (2018). The Routledge Handbook of the 
Computational Mind. United States: Routledge.
Sterelny, K. (2012). The Evolved Apprentice: How Evolution Made Humans Unique. 
United States: A Bradford Book.
Stone, V . E., and Gerrans, P . (2006). What’s domain-specific about theory of 
mind? Soc. Neurosci.  1, 309–319. doi: 10.1080/17470910601029221
Taguchi, N. (ed.). (2019). The Routledge Handbook of Second Language Acquisition 
and Pragmatics . United States: Routledge.
Tanisaro, P ., and Heidemann, G. (2019). “Dimensionality reduction for visualization 
of time series and trajectories, ” in Scandinavian Conference on Image Analysis 
(Cham: Springer), 246–257.
Thelen, E., and Smith, L. B. (1996). A Dynamic Systems Approach to the 
Development of Cognition and Action . United States: MIT Press.
Tschacher, W . (2021). “Time and embodiment in the process of psychotherapy–A 
dynamical systems perspective, ” in Time and Body: Phenomenological and 
Psychopathological Approaches, 104–116.
van den Bosch, P . P ., and van der Klauw, A. C. (2020). Modeling, Identification 
and Simulation of Dynamical Systems . Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
van Es, T., and Hipólito, I. (2020). Free-Energy Principle, Computationalism 
and Realism: A Tragedy.
van Geert, P . (2009). “Nonlinear complex dynamical systems in developmental 
psychology, ” in Chaos and complexity in psychology: The theory of nonlinear 
dynamical systems. eds. S. J. Guastello, M. Koopmans and D. Pincus (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press), 242–281.
Van Gelder, T. (1995). What might cognition be, if not computation? J. Philos. 
92, 345–381. doi: 10.2307/2941061
Varela, F . J. (1992). “ Autopoiesis and a biology of intentionality. ” in Proceedings 
of the workshop Autopoiesis and Perception  (Dublin City University), 4–14.
Varela, F . J., Thompson, E., and Rosch, E. (2016). The Embodied Mind: Cognitive 
Science and Human Experience . United States: MIT Press.
Vasil, J., Badcock, P . B., Constant, A., Friston, K., and Ramstead, M. J. (2020). 
A world unto itself: human communication as active inference. Front. Psychol. 
11:417. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00417
Veissière, S. P ., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J., Friston, K. J., and Kirmayer, L. J. 
(2020). Thinking through other minds: A variational approach to cognition 
and culture. Behav. Brain Sci.  43:e90. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X19001213
Weisstein, E. W . (1999). Laplacian matrix. Available at: https://mathworld. 
wolfram.Com/
Wellman, H. M. (2017). The development of theory of mind: historical reflections. 
Child Dev. Perspect.  11, 207–214. doi: 10.1111/cdep.12236
Wellman, H. M. (2018). Theory of mind: The state of the art. Eur. J. Dev. 
Psychol. 15, 728–755. doi: 10.1080/17405629.2018.1435413
Wittgenstein, L., Anscombe, G. E. M., von Wright, G. H., Paul, D., and 
Anscombe, G. E. M. (1969). On Certainty. Vol. 174 . Oxford: Blackwell.
Wolfram, S. (2018). Complex Systems Theory 1 in Emerging Syntheses in Science . 
United States: CRC Press.
Conflict of Interest:  The authors declare that the research was conducted in 
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be  construed 
as a potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, 
or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may 
Hipólito and van Es Social Cognition and Active Inference
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 855074
be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is 
not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Hipólito and van Es. This is an open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY) . The 
use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the 
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original 
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. 
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with 
these terms.