fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 1
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 11 January 2021
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.603385
Edited by:
Myriam Mongrain,
York University, Canada
Reviewed by:
Gunes Sevinc,
Harvard Medical School,
United States
Paul Gilbert,
NHS England, United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
S. Shaun Ho
hosh@umich.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Theoretical and Philosophical
Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 06 September 2020
Accepted: 09 December 2020
Published: 11 January 2021
Citation:
Ho SS, Nakamura Y and Swain JE
(2021) Compassion As an Intervention
to Attune to Universal Suffering of Self
and Others in Conﬂicts:
A Translational Framework.
Front. Psychol. 11:603385.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.603385
Compassion As an Intervention to
Attune to Universal Suffering of Self
and Others in Conﬂicts:
A Translational Framework
S. Shaun Ho1*, Yoshio Nakamura2 and James E. Swain1
1 Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Health, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, United States,2 Department of
Anesthesiology, Division of Pain Medicine, Pain Research Center, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT,
United States
As interpersonal, racial, social, and international conﬂicts intensify in the world, it is
important to safeguard the mental health of individuals affected by them. According
to a Buddhist notion “if you want others to be happy, practice compassion; if you want
to be happy, practice compassion,” compassion practice is an intervention to cultivate
conﬂict-proof well-being. Here, compassion practice refers to a form of concentrated
meditation wherein a practitioner attunes to friend, enemy, and someone in between,
thinking, “I’m going to help them (equally).” The compassion meditation is based on
Buddhist philosophy that mental suffering is rooted in conceptual thoughts that give rise
to generic mental images of self and others and subsequent biases to preserve one’s
egoism, blocking the ultimate nature of mind. To contextualize compassion meditation
scientiﬁcally, we adopted a Bayesian active inference framework to incorporate
relevant Buddhist concepts, including mind (buddhi), compassion ( karuna), aggregates
(skandhas), suffering ( duhkha), reiﬁcation ( samaropa), conceptual thoughts ( vikalpa),
and superimposition (prapañca). In this framework, a person is considered a Bayesian
Engine that actively constructs phenomena based on the aggregates of forms,
sensations, discriminations, actions, and consciousness. When the person embodies
rigid beliefs about self and others’ identities (identity-grasping beliefs) and the resulting
ego-preserving bias, the person’s Bayesian Engine malfunctions, failing to use prediction
errors to update prior beliefs. To counter this problem, after recognizing the causes
of sufferings, a practitioner of the compassion meditation aims to attune to all others
equally, friends and enemies alike, suspend identity-based conceptual thoughts, and
eventually let go of any identity-grasping belief and ego-preserving bias that obscure
reality. We present a brain model for the Bayesian Engine of three components: (a)
Relation-Modeling, (b) Reality-Checking, and (c) Conﬂict-Alarming, which are subserved
by (a) the Default-Mode Network (DMN), (b) Frontoparietal Network (FPN) and Ventral
Attention Network (VAN), and (c) Salience Network (SN), respectively. Upon perceiving
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 2
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
conﬂicts, the strengthening or weakening of ego-preserving bias will critically depend
on whether the SN up-regulates the DMN or FPN/VAN, respectively. We propose that
compassion meditation can strengthen brain regions that are conducive for suspending
prior beliefs and enhancing the attunements to the counterparts in conﬂicts.
Keywords: meditation, neuroimaging, Bayesian, free energy principle, Buddhism, compassion (karuna), conﬂicts,
lojong
INTRODUCTION
Conﬂicts are inevitable in a society whose members have diverse
interests and ideologies. Unfortunately, political polarization
and inter-group animosity has increased in the United States
in the past decade (Pew Research Center, 2014). Even when
facing the pandemic of COVID-19, which is blind to one’s
viewpoint, the partisan gap has grown even wider on nearly
all important matters (Pew Research Center, 2020a,b). Due to
built-in self-organizing algorithms, social media users tend to
encounter messages that are similar to what they already liked
or viewed. Since the cognitive costs for attuning to counterparts
in conﬂicts are much higher than those for sticking to one’s
own ideas, the likelihood of attuning to people with diﬀerent
views is diminishing.
As social conﬂicts increase in frequency and intensity,
their adverse eﬀects on personal well-being also increase in
extent and severity. Conﬂict-related adversities in early life are
associated with poor health and reduced well-being. For example,
complete social isolations since birth caused great harms (Harlow
et al., 1965); adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) predicted
adulthood psychopathology (Anda et al., 2006), incoherent social
relationships (Tyrka et al., 2009), suicidality (Dube et al., 2001),
and other mortality risk factors (Felitti et al., 1998); poor
quality in social relationships have detrimental eﬀects on health
(Umberson and Montez, 2010) and positive association with
cellular aging (Uchino et al., 2012); an animal model suggested
that when conﬂicts resulted in social defeat, individuals are prone
for substance abuse and social emotional disorders (Hammels
et al., 2015). Across mental disorders that conﬂict-induced
adversities may aggravate, the failure of updating beliefs is very
common (Kube and Rozenkrantz, 2020). Thus, rigid beliefs may
be a manifestation or cause of post-conﬂict malfunctioning.
Notably, not all individuals subjected to defeats in social
conﬂicts are devastated. When people with childhood adversity
became adults, while about two-thirds of them suﬀered from
various symptoms of substance use, psychopathology, impaired
functioning in professional social realms, one-third of them
were resilient, doing even better than low-adversity controls by
showing more personal competence, determination, strong social
support from a domestic partner, and reliance on faith and prayer
(Werner, 1992). Likewise, many studies have documented that
spirituality and intimate social support played crucial roles in the
post-adversity bifurcation between resilient and worsened well-
being (Feiring et al., 1996; Leskela et al., 2002; Wilson et al., 2006;
Sippel and Marshall, 2011; Saraiya and Lopez-Castro, 2016; Lahav
et al., 2017). Mother–child attunement is considered a foundation
of resilience (Feldman, 2020).
We postulate that one of the key ingredients in the post-
conﬂict resilience aﬀorded by spirituality and positive social
relationship is attunement, which can be construed from two
perspectives: (1) In psychotherapy, attunement refers to a
kinesthetic and emotional sensing of others knowing (tuning-in)
their rhythm, aﬀect and experience. This is a two-part process of
communion of interpersonal contactóbeginning with empathy,
i.e., being sensitive to and identifying with the other person’s
sensations, needs or feelings, and then communication of that
sensitivity to the other person (Erskine, 1998). (2) In Buddhism,
as it will become clear below, attunement refers to both the
function of mind and meditative trainings of mind, as Arya
Shantideva said in A Guide to the Bodhisattva ’s Way of Life
(hereafter, GBWL):
“Thus, because he loves to pacify the pains of others, he whose mind
is attuned in this way, would enter even the deepest hell, just as a
wild goose plunges into a lotus pond.” (Shantideva, c. 700/1979)
An authentic instruction on this particular verse in GBWL
is that “if you keep on doing it, your mind will be trained in
that way. It will become part of your habit, your way of life.
You function that way; your mind is attuned. If you do so, it
will be like birds that are attracted to a beautiful lotus lake. No
matter how far they have to ﬂy, all the birds and animals will
try to come to the lotus lake . . . What does that mean? When
you can develop compassion, caring for people, they will be
with you. They will help you and protect you, because you serve
them.” (Gelek Rimpoche, 2008). Notably, these two perspectives
on attunement are highly coherent; after all, it is the mind that
makes the attunement in psychotherapy possible.
Would empathy and compassion help us deal with conﬂicts?
Induced perspective-taking can facilitate autonomic attunement
and reduced negative aﬀect after conﬂicts (Nelson et al., 2017). In
a systematic review on the roles of aﬀective empathy, personal
distress, and compassion in interpersonal and intergroup
conﬂicts, it was found that empathy, compassion, and training
thereof may facilitate the resolution of interpersonal and
intergroup conﬂicts and overcome otherwise limiting factors
such as intergroup empathy bias, identiﬁable victim eﬀect, and
reduced motivation for empathy toward out-group members
(Klimecki, 2019).
Can compassion be cultivated through non-religious training
to safeguard post-conﬂict well-being? As well-being can be
promoted by mental skills related to inner experiences, there
has been an emerging interest on cultivating compassion toward
self and others (Gilbert, 2019). For examples, studies of loving-
kindness meditation demonstrated that a brief practice was able
to increase feelings of social connectedness and aﬃliation toward
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 3
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
strangers (Hutcherson et al., 2008) and that repeated weekly
training sessions led to increase positive emotions, mindfulness,
feelings of purpose in life and social support as well as to decrease
illness symptoms (Fredrickson et al., 2008).
While a comprehensive review of compassion training is
beyond the scope of this paper, the literature suggested that
compassion-based interventions produced moderate eﬀect sizes
for reduced suﬀering and improved life satisfaction, suggesting
the potential beneﬁts of compassion-based interventions on a
range of outcomes related to well-being (Kirby, 2017; Kirby
et al., 2017). Future research is required to study the eﬀects of
Buddhism-derived compassion trainings on conﬂict resolution.
While perhaps nobody would dislike being a recipient of
attunement from others, i.e., being heard and understood,
attuning to others, especially to counterparts who stand in
conﬂicts with oneself, may be resisted or even dismissed under
some circumstances. Such resistance to attune to unfriendly
others may result from fears of being overwhelmed by others’
suﬀering, diversion of one’s own limited resources, being
exploited, losing the competition, or irrationality that may
compromise rule-of-law in society; see Mascaro and Gilbert
(2017) for a model of fears, blocks, and resistances of compassion.
All these fears point to an attack against one key ingredient of
empathy, i.e., identifying with others’ pains as if they are your own
(Bloom, 2017).
If attunement to others in suﬀering already has drawbacks,
why should anyone attune to counterparts who stand against
him or her? Buddhist philosophy provides an answer to this
provocative question: If one recognizes the ultimate nature of
mind, then one can see it is one’s own ego-preserving bias , not
the counterparts in conﬂicts, that blocks one’s equal attunement
to self and others and harms one’s own post-conﬂict well-being.
That is, any discontents against equal attunement to self and
others will cease to exist, if and only if one truly recognizes the
ultimate nature of mind.
Against this backdrop, we aim to introduce relevant Buddhist
concepts in the present work in order to identify an entry point
for attunement-oriented interventions to safeguard personal
well-being despite inevitable conﬂicts, although such personal
intervention is by no means a substitute for more socially active
processes such as better journalism, better accountability of
politicians, and better rule of law. We identiﬁed an entry point at
the point of bifurcation between two incompatible post-conﬂict
responses in an individual: (a) attuning to the counterparts’
perspectives and needs despite the conﬂicts and (b) blocking
the attunement to the counterparts due to the conﬂicts. We
hypothesize that:
Hypothesis 1: A form of bias, namely ego-preserving bias, can
prevent a person from attuning to those whose
perspectives conﬂict with his or her own.
Hypothesis 2: A form of compassion meditation designed to
cultivate equal attunement to universal suﬀering
of self and others can ultimately eliminate the
ego-preserving bias.
Given that people’s normal responses to conﬂicts are driven
by the brain that is of limited capacity and irrationalities, it has
been noted that “if we are to become more than just actors in
ancient archetypal dramas, it requires us to take responsibility
to understand our brains” (Gilbert, 2015, p. 265). We wish
to add that we also need to take responsibility to understand
the ultimate nature of mind. It is in this spirit that we put
together this multi-faceted paper with the following sections:
Section “Introduction, ” our post-conﬂict bifurcation hypotheses,
described above; Section “Parsing Our Hypotheses in Terms of
Buddhist Concepts, ” Buddhist notions of the ultimate nature of
mind and key processes through which ego-preserving bias can
entrap the mind in universal suﬀerings; Section “Compassion
Meditation and How It Maintains Attunement to Others, ”
Buddhist science and practice of compassion to elucidate the
ultimate nature of the mind and to remove ego-preserving
bias by attuning to friends, enemies, and strangers’ universal
suﬀering equally; Section “Incorporating Buddhist Concepts in a
Bayesian Active Inference Framework, ” how the Buddhist notions
of “person” can be understood in a Bayesian active inference
framework that has powerfully accounted for various forms of
complex adaptive systems in the literature; Section “A Brain
Model for the Social Cognition, Embodied Identity-Grasping
Beliefs, and Compassion Meditation Eﬀects, ” a putative brain
model of the bifurcation of post-conﬂict responses.
PARSING OUR HYPOTHESES IN TERMS
OF BUDDHIST CONCEPTS
Buddha Gotama gave his ﬁrst teaching on the foundation of
Buddhism, Four Noble Truths, namely, (1) Truth of Suﬀering,
(2) Truth of the Origin of Suﬀering, (3) Truth of Cessation
(of suﬀering), and (4) Truth of the Path (to cessation of
suﬀering), that can be recognized by those noble persons who
directly perceive ultimate reality (Tenzin Gyatso, 1997). We
consider that our ﬁrst hypothesis lies in the scope of the second
Noble Truths, and our second hypothesis in the scope of the
fourth Noble Truths.
To parse our hypotheses in terms of Buddhist concepts,
we introduce Buddhist concepts mainly according to three
authoritative texts, (1) the Science and Philosophy in the Indian
Buddhist Classics, Volume II: the Mind (hereafter, SPIBC-M)
(Tenzin Gyatso, 2020), (2) the Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism
(hereafter, PDB) (Buswell and Lopez, 2013), and (3) Arya
Shantideva’s GBWL (Shantideva, c. 700/1979). The transliteration
of Sanskrit and Tibetan is printed in all-upper-case and all-lower-
case-italic, respectively.
The backbone of our hypotheses is reﬂected in
the following verses from Arya Shantideva’s GBWL
(BODHISATTV ACHARYAV ATARA) (Shantideva, c. 700/1979):
Ch. 6, V.52
Since my mind is not physical, in no way can anyone destroy it.
But through its being greatly attached to my body, it is caused harm
by suﬀering.
Ch. 8, V.90
First of all, I should make an eﬀort to meditate upon the equality
between self and others: I should protect all beings as I do myself
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 4
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
because we are all equal in (wanting) pleasure and (not wanting)
pain.
Ch. 8, V.107
Thus, because he loves to pacify the pains of others, He whose
mind is attuned in this way, would enter even the deepest hell, just
as a wild goose plunges into a lotus pond.
Ch. 8, V.115
Through acquaintance has the thought of “I” arisen toward this
impersonal body; So, in a similar way, why should it not arise
toward other living beings?
The key concepts in the above verses that will be covered in
the following sections include:
(1) In ultimate truth, mind is not physical , and therefore it is
neither destroyable nor vulnerable for suﬀerings. We will
discuss this notion in Sections “The Nature of Mind and
The Ultimate Nature of All Phenomena.”
(2) Through certain acquaintance (and misattribution)
processes, mind can be attached to an otherwise
impersonal (selﬂess) collection of aggregates, giving
rise of a false identity of “I” that is bound to suﬀer. We will
discuss these processes in Sections “Buddhist Concepts of
Person and Its Impersonal Processes and How VIKALPA
and PRAPA—CA Prevent Attunements to Others.”
(3) Recognizing the faults of misattribution of “I, ” one who
aspires the ultimate excellence will attune the mind upon
the equal identiﬁcation with self and others and the nature
of mind to pacify distorted conceptions. We will discuss
these notions in Section “Compassion Meditation and How
It Maintains Attunement to Others.”
The Nature of Mind
We consider the concept of attunement as synonymous
with “awareness, ” the function of mind. The notion of
“attunement to a person” means awareness of a person’s
mental and sense awareness manifesting in the person’s ﬁve
aggregates (SKANDHAS), described later, which encompass
the person’s physical and social attributes, e.g., sex, age,
nationality, religion, social status, and non-physical attributes,
e.g., mental awareness and mental factors, e.g., feelings,
intentions, perspectives, memories etc.
The nature of mind is clear (as its ultimate nature) and aware
(as its function), as explained in SPIBC-M (Tenzin Gyatso, 2020):
“Generally, in the context of Buddhist texts, the terms cognition
[or comprehension or discernment] (Sanskrit: BUDDHI, Tibetan:
blo), consciousness (JNANA), and awareness (SAM. VITTI) are all
treated as coextensive or synonymous. The nature of cognition is
stated to be awareness, and the nature of consciousness is said
to be clear (or luminous) and aware. “Clear” here expresses the
essential nature of consciousness, and “aware” expresses its function.
“Clear” also indicates: (1) that consciousness is beyond the nature
of matter, which is characterized as tangible and obstructive, so it
is clear in nature; (2) that just as reﬂections appear in a mirror,
any internal or external object whatsoever — good or bad, pleasant
or unpleasant — can appear in consciousness, so consciousness is
luminous in that it illuminates objects; and (3) that the essential
nature of consciousness is not contaminated by the stains of mental
aﬄictions such as attachment, so its nature is clear or luminous”
(Tenzin Gyatso, 2020).
Buddhist teachers often likened the nature of the mind to a
clear lamp shade (Geshe Rabten, 1997; Gelek Rimpoche, 2005).
In this metaphor, a clear lamp shade is colorless (clear) and any
object that the mind perceives is like a light bulb in the clear
lamp shade, which can color the clear lamp shade with the color
of its light, e.g., the lamp shade’s color becomes red when a
light bulb sheds red light to the shade. However, just like the
light bulb can never stain the lamp shade, the object perceived
by the mind can never stain the mind. Thus, the mind (lamp
shade) returns to its colorless clarity as soon as the object (light
bulb) is turned oﬀ.
In Buddhism, there is a distinction between the ultimate
nature of mind (CITTA) and the mental factors (CAITTA). The
former is not causally related to any objects other than being
aware of them; the latter are causally deﬁned in terms of their
functional relationships with other factors, e.g., intention, feeling,
discrimination, thinking, etc. Although the ultimate nature of
mind is irreducible to physical forms, like a clear lamp shade
is irreducible to light bulbs, the mind can be entrapped in an
impersonal Bayesian active inference process and the brain, as
explained in Sections “Incorporating Buddhist Concepts in a
Bayesian Active Inference Framework” and “A Brain Model for
the Social Cognition, Embodied Identity-Grasping Beliefs, and
Compassion Meditation Eﬀects.”
The Ultimate Nature of All Phenomena
The third Noble Truth, the cessation of suﬀering, refers to the
realization of ultimate nature of all phenomena (Nagarjuna,
1995). The key to this realization is to understand the notion of
dependent origination (PRAT ¯ITYASAMUTP¯ADA), and thus it
has ontological, epistemological, and soteriological implications.
In Buddha Gotama’s earliest teaching, PRAT¯ITYASAMUTP¯ADA
was explained as “ from the arising of this, that arises; from the
cessation of this, that ceases, ”Later, Arya N ¯ag¯arjuna, the founder
of the MAHAYANA MADHYAMAKA school, expounded
this notion further that everything comes into existence in
dependence on something else, with such dependence including
(1) the dependence of an eﬀect upon its cause, (2) the
dependence of a whole upon its parts, and (3) the dependence
of an object on the consciousness that designates it. The
MADHYAMAKA school sees a necessary relation between
dependent origination and emptiness ( ´S ¯UNYAT¯A), arguing that
because everything is dependently arisen, everything is empty
of independence and intrinsic existence (SV ABH ¯AV A) (Buswell
and Lopez, 2013). When a person directly perceives the union of
dependent origination and emptiness, the person is considered
to become totally enlightened, as a buddha (Nagarjuna, 1995;
Tenzin Gyatso, 2009).
In sum, as far as the ultimate truth is concerned, the nature of
mind, which is clear and aware, and the nature of all phenomena,
which is dependent origination, are both empty of intrinsic
existence, i.e., the ultimate nature of what is observed is not
identical to what it appears in phenomena.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 5
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
Buddhist Concepts of Person and Its
Impersonal Processes
The concept of person, as in the “attunement to a person, ”
does not refer to an indivisible entity, but a collection of ﬁve
aggregates (SKANDHAS) functioning in an impersonal (selﬂess)
process of dependent origination, including: (1) materiality
or form (R ¯UPA), (2) sensations or feelings (VEDAN ¯A), (3)
perception or discrimination (SAM. J— ¯A), (4) conditioning factors
or volitional actions (SAM . SK ¯ARA), and (5) consciousness
(VIJ— ¯ANA). According to PDB, in this impersonal process of
perception-action cycle, consciousness (VIJ— ¯ANA) in one of
six modalities (visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, bodily, and
mental consciousness) occurs as the result of the interactions
between an internal sense base (INDRIYA) and an external
sense object ( ¯AYATANA) in each modality. When the internal
sense base, external sense object, and consciousness co-occur
in a contact (SPAR ´SA), it leads to the feeling (VEDAN ¯A) of
that contact as pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral. At that point,
however, this impersonal process can be intruded by a sense of
ego, which refers to the perspective of a conceited, self-aﬃrming
“I” when all sensory experiences are perceived in relation to “I”
itself. After the intrusion of ego, this process becomes egoistically
personal, whereby what one feels, one perceives (mediated by a
prior mental image) (SAM. J— ¯A); what one perceives, one thinks
about (VITARKA); and what one thinks about, one proliferatively
conceptualizes (PRAPA—CA), all infused with the sense of self.
As a result, the person lives in a bondage to SAM . S ¯ARA, when
everything that can be experienced in the past, present, and
future is bound together into a tangled network of concepts,
all tied to oneself and projected into the external world as
craving (TR. S. N. ¯A), conceit (M ¯ANA), and wrong views (DR. S. T. I)
(Buswell and Lopez, 2013).
The conceptual proliferation (PRAPA—CA), as described
above, refers to the tendency to superimpose the perspective of
ego throughout all of one’s sensory experience via the medium
of concept (Buswell and Lopez, 2013). PRAPA—CA develops
when the mind is already infused with conceptual thoughts
(VIKALPA) that can be proliferated. Conceptual thoughts
(VIKALPA) operate through the medium of generic images
(S ¯AM ¯ANYALAKS. AN. A), i.e., mental images or qualities that
are generic to a class of phenomena, as opposed to those
speciﬁc qualities that are unique to a given object. Closely
related to VIKALPA is a mental factor of thinking or applied
thought (VITARKA), which refers to a mental factor of an initial
engagement of or inquiry into an object that is not suﬃcient for
a full-blown VIKALPA (Tenzin Gyatso, 2020). Both conceptual
thoughts (VIKALPA) and conceptual constructions (KALPAN¯A)
are often contrasted against the direct perception (PRATYAKS. A),
especially yogic direct perception (YOGIPRATYAKS. A), in which
reality is perceived directly without the medium of mental images
(Buswell and Lopez, 2013).
How VIKALPA and PRAPAÑCA Prevent
Attunements to Others
It is important to note that mental awareness is one of six kinds
of consciousnesses, in addition to ﬁve sense consciousness, i.e.,
vision, audition, olfaction, gustation, and bodily senses, which are
aﬀorded by diﬀerent organs in the body (Tenzin Gyatso, 2020).
The percepts in sense consciousness are direct perceptions when
three factors, an object (say a cup), sense organ (eyes), and a top-
down model from a previous moment come in contact. As the
sixth kind of consciousness, mental awareness is pervading but
distinct from the sense consciousnesses, as mental awareness is
non-organic (not bound to an organ) and non-local (not bound
to any perceived object at a speciﬁc locus in time and space).
Nonetheless, mental awareness can be conceptual, mediated by
mental images, which can obscure direct perceptions. When a
person’s mental awareness becomes nothing but direct perception
of any phenomenon as it is, i.e., non-conceptual (unmediated by
mental images), the person is a buddha (Tenzin Gyatso, 2020).
As Dharmakirti said, the nature of the mind is luminous
clarity and the stains are adventitious (Tenzin Gyatso, 2020),
so attunement to one’s counterpart can occur despite conﬂicts,
because mental awareness is not bound to attributes that
one’s sense and conceptual consciousnesses have designate as
conﬂicts. That is, conceptual thoughts that obstruct direct
perceptions (attunement) of self and counterparts are only
adventitious “stains” to the mind. Since the primary causes of
mind-entrapping “stains, ” VIKALPA and PRAPA—CA, are not
inherently existing, they can be ultimately eradicated through
systematic methods.
To promote the awareness of VIKALPA and PRAPA—CA,
we hereby discuss how VIKALPA and PRAPA—CA are related
to our ﬁrst hypothesis. According to Arya Asanga, PRAPA—CA
is a process that can proliferate and embody eight types of
conceptual thoughts (VIKALPA) that are supported by three
levels of substances, i.e., vehicles of conceptual thoughts (Asanga,
2016). The eight types of VIKALPA are as follows.
Type 1. The conceptual thought that conceives of an
essential nature.
Type 2. The conceptual thought that conceives of a
distinguishing characteristic.
Type 3. The conceptual thought that grasps a collection (of
distinguishing characteristics) as a separate entity.
Type 4. The conceptual thought that conceives of an “I.”
Type 5. The conceptual thought that conceives of entities as
being “mine.”
Type 6. The conceptual thought that conceives of entities as
being agreeable.
Type 7. The conceptual thought that conceives of entities as
being disagreeable.
Type 8. The conceptual thought that conceives of entities
as being neither agreeable nor disagreeable, thus
leading to an attitude of indiﬀerence toward it.
VIKALPA are embodied in three levels of substances
(vehicles), which are developed in the order described below
(Asanga, 2016):
Level I: this level of substance provides a basis for the
ﬁrst three types of VIKALPA (Types 1–3). These
three types are beliefs that a property exists
deterministically in a speciﬁc form, identical to
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 6
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
its observed appearance, independent of speciﬁc
circumstances. This substance serves as the basis
of PRAPA—CA, a proliferating process that
superimpose ego onto an impersonal process,
through which the next levels of substances, and the
VIKALPA supported by them, develop.
Level II: this level of substance is the basis of the next two
types of VIKALPA (Types 4–5). The view of ego is
one that erringly grasps a self that is separate from
a collection of perishable events, i.e., the “I” who
aﬃrms itself to exist, which is the root of all ego-
centric views. The egoistic views feed an egoistic
conceitóa sense of entitlement to justify an event’s
value as “good” or “bad” according to one’s own
views, self-aﬃrmingly, e.g., “It’s good or bad (because
I think so).”
Level III: this level of substance is the basis of the last three
types of VIKALPA (Types 6–8)ówhich evaluate
entities as being agreeable, disagreeable, or neither
and give rise to craving, hatred, or ignorance
according to circumstances, respectively.
In the context of conﬂicts, we postulate that the eight types of
VIKALPA and the three levels of substances can account for the
identity-dependent social cognition, as follows:
The ﬁrst three types of VIKALPA (Types 1–3) point to
the fundamental reiﬁcation (SAM ¯AROPA), i.e., a mistaken
attribution to an object of a quality that the object does not in fact
possess (Buswell and Lopez, 2013). When dealing with complex
social interactions, the subtle VIKALPA compels a person to
think of characteristics that he or she believes to be identical
to another person’s “true nature, ” forming a mis-belief that the
true nature of a person is identical to certain attributes based on
generic images of a person , such as stereotypes of gender, race,
religion, nationality, etc.
The middle two types of VIKALPA (Types 4 and 5) point to
a further reduction of a person to divide up the world based
on available existing identities, i.e., the identity of the observing
subject “I” that is diﬀerent from the identities of the observed
objects, including other people. Based on the level of similarity
between the identities of self and others, other people whose
generic images are relatively similar to “I” are reduced to the
identity of “my people” (in-group), and those others whose
generic images are distinct from “I” are reduced to the identity
of “not my people” (out-group). These identities of “I” and “my
people” are over-reductions because nuanced information that is
not represented by generic images, such as feelings, thoughts, and
relationships, is disregarded erroneously in the construction of
the VIKALPA. We refer to these types of VIKALPA as identity-
grasping beliefs. As beliefs, these embodied identity-grasping
thoughts are always biased to serve the ego, self-righteously,
disregarding any counter evidence suggesting that this may be a
misbelief (wrong view).
The last three types of VIKALPA point to the generic images
of friends, enemies, and neutral persons who can serve as objects
that can invoke feelings of attraction, repulsion, and indiﬀerence,
and these feelings lead to thoughts and actions that behaviorally
condition a person in a network of concepts. These types of
VIKALPA are cognitive bases of ego-preserving bias. A person
with ego-preserving bias will strive to maintain his or her prior
beliefs related to self and others, denying or neglecting any data
that suggest nuanced information inconsistent with his or her
own identity-grasping beliefs.
Thus, as our ﬁrst hypothesis, we hypothesize that ego-
preserving bias can prevent a person from attuning to those
whose perspectives conﬂict with his or her own. If someone ﬁrmly
holds an identity-grasping belief, any conﬂicts between self and
others can be over-reduced to an inevitable battle between good
and evil categorically (however ﬁctitious that may be), and this
person will self-aﬃrm his or her own view and act to preserve his
or her own egocentric interest. In such ego-preserving bias, there
is no space or need to attune to the counterparts’ expectations and
interests or their ﬂeeting thoughts and feelings.
COMPASSION MEDITATION AND HOW IT
MAINTAINS ATTUNEMENT TO OTHERS
“If you want others to be happy, practice compassion; if you want to
be happy, practice compassion.” by Khunu Lama Tenzin Gyaltsen,
according to HHDL Tenzin Gyatso
In Buddhism, compassion (KARUNA), i.e., the wish that
others be free from suﬀering, and benevolence (MAITRI), i.e.,
the wish that others be happy, are like two sides of the same
coin (Buswell and Lopez, 2013). In this section, we will introduce
Buddhist compassion meditation and explain how it can subdue
ego-preserving bias, hence making it possible to attune to self and
others equally and make self and others happy (being well).
Three Types of Suffering to Be
Recognized in Compassion Meditation
As the wish for others to be free from suﬀering, the meaning
of compassion is incomplete in the absence of the recognition
of suﬀering. According to Buddhism (Tenzin Gyatso, 2020),
when a person’s mental awareness is obscured by conceptual
thoughts (VIKALPA), or conceptual construction (KALPAN ¯A),
life is nothing but SAM . S ¯ARAóa bondage to three types of
suﬀering (DUHKHAS), as follows (Buswell and Lopez, 2013):
(1) Misery caused by physical or mental suﬀering
(DUHKHADUHKATA).
(2) Misery caused by change (VIPARINAMADUHKHATA),
i.e., pleasant sensations may be a cause of suﬀering because
they do not persist and eventually turn into pain.
(3) Misery caused by conditioning
(SAMSKARADUHKHATA), i.e., sensations that are
neither painful nor pleasant may still be a cause of suﬀering
because they are impermanent and thus undependable;
because of past actions (KARMAN), suﬀering may always
occur unexpectedly in the next moment.
The three types of suﬀering can be named diﬀerently in social
domains (Buswell and Lopez, 2013):
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 7
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
(1) The misery caused by mental suﬀering can manifest as “the
suﬀering of being associated with persons and things one
dislikes, ” which involves VIKAPLA of thinking a generic
image of enemies.
(2) The misery caused by change can manifest as “the
suﬀering of being separated from persons and things one
likes, ” which involves VIKALPA of thinking a generic
image of friends.
(3) The misery of conditioning can be summarized as
“the suﬀering of not getting what one wants, ” which
involves the dissatisfaction despite the push-and-pull
between the VIKALPA of thinking enemies, friends, and
anyone in between.
We point to the following ingenious animal study as a model
to illustrate the three types of suﬀering. In this study, the rats were
implanted with electric stimulation in the lateral hypothalamus
and they were placed in a shuttle box, with a lever on either
end of the box. Pressing the lever in one end could turn on
electric stimulation and the lever in the other end could turn
it oﬀ. Electric stimulation of the lateral hypothalamus is known
to evoke appetite and other motivational behaviors. Surprisingly,
after the rats learned to press the levers to turn the stimulation
on or oﬀ, the rats ran between two ends constantly, alternating
between turning on the stimulation on one end and turning it oﬀ
on the other end (Mendelson and Freed, 1973). Thus, neither of
the presence (“on”) and absence (“oﬀ ”) of electric stimulation in
the lateral hypothalamus can fully satisfy the rats such that they
can stop running.
Using this animal study as a metaphor, a person entrapped in
VIKALPA and PRAPA—CA is like the rats in the study described
above. Say, evoking a mental image of “friend” or “enemy” is
like turning on the electric stimulation in the rats, and the
cessation of this mental image is like turning oﬀ the stimulation
in the rat. Whether turning on the stimulation is appetitive (like
thinking of a mental image of “friend”) or aversive (like thinking
of a mental image of enemy), the stimulation or cessation of
these mental images are miseries caused by suﬀering or miseries
caused by change (the ﬁrst two types of suﬀering); and the
conditioning that causes the alternation between turning on and
oﬀ a mental image is misery caused by conditioning actions (the
third type of suﬀering).
Buddhist Compassion Meditation - Lojong
Lojong (or blo sbyong ) is a speciﬁc compassion meditation to
train ( sbyong) a practitioner to comprehend ( blo) the ultimate
nature of mind and all phenomena. It emphasizes how to see
conﬂicts (and other circumstances that are ordinarily upsetting
or depressing) as reasons for happiness in the perspective of
dependent origination, e.g., thinking that diﬃculties faced in
day-to-day life are exhausting negative karmic results of one’s
own non-virtuous actions in the past; how to transform a self-
cherishing attitude into cherishing others, by contemplating the
illusory nature of the self, the faults in self-cherishing, and
the beneﬁts that ﬂow from cherishing others; the trainings
are based primarily on the techniques for equalizing the
attunement to self and others and exchange of self and other
by taking other’s suﬀering and giving them self ’s happiness
(Buswell and Lopez, 2013).
Notably, the exchange of self and other, known as give-and-
take ( tonglen, or gtong len ), depends on one’s ﬁrm re-appraisal
of how one relates to adversities that one experiences, that
is, from seeing adversities as unwanted trash to welcoming
them as treasury, as it exhausts negative consequences of past
non-virtuous deeds, and enhances one’s renunciation of such
non-virtues and compassion for others who shared the same
experiences, and aspiration for realizing the ultimate nature of
mind and all phenomena for the beneﬁts of all, as stated in GBWL
(Shantideva, c. 700/1979):
Ch. 6, V.21
Furthermore, suﬀering has good qualities: through being
disheartened with it (SAM . S ¯ARA is renounced), arrogance is
dispelled, compassion arises for those in cyclic existence, evil (non-
virtue) is shunned, and joy is found in virtue.
Since adversities can never obstruct the ultimate nature of
mind, this is why the transformation of adversities is always
possible if one realizes the ultimate nature of mind. On the basis
of such transformation, our second hypothesis points to the pith
of lojong meditation, the equal attunement to self and other’s
universal suﬀering, as stated in GBWL (Shantideva, c. 700/1979):
Ch. 8, V.90
First of all, I should make an eﬀort to meditate upon the equality
between self and others: I should protect all beings as I do myself
because we are all equal in (wanting) pleasure and (not wanting)
pain.
Ch. 8, V.91
Although there are many diﬀerent parts and aspects such as the
hands; As a body that is to be protected they are one. Likewise all
the diﬀerent sentient beings in their pleasure and their pain have a
wish to be happy that is the same as mine.
Ch. 8, V.92
The suﬀering that I experience does not cause any harm to
others. But that suﬀering (is mine) because of my conceiving of
(myself as) “I”; Thereby it becomes unbearable.
Ch. 8, V.93
Likewise the misery of others does not befall me. Nevertheless, by
conceiving of (others as) “I” their suﬀering becomes mine; Therefore
it too should be hard to bear.
Ch. 8, V.94
Hence I should dispel the misery of others because it is suﬀering,
just like my own, and I should beneﬁt others because they are
sentient beings, just like myself.
Ch.8, V.131
If I do not actually exchange my happiness for the suﬀerings of
others, I shall not attain the state of Buddhahood and even in cyclic
existence shall have no joy.
Prerequisites of Practicing Buddhist Compassion
Meditation
On the basis of ﬁrm renunciation of ego-preserving bias, a
lojong practitioner has to ﬁrst cultivate equality in three levels as
prerequisites (Gelek Rimpoche, 2007):
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 8
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
(1) The ﬁrst level is dwelling on the notion of wishing all beings
to be happy and free from suﬀering.
(2) The second level is the notion of developing equanimity to
friends and enemies within one’s self, i.e., inhibiting one’s
attraction to friends and repulsion from enemies.
(3) The third level is the notion of identifying with friends and
enemies equally as if their suﬀerings are one’s own.
Notably, only the third notion, that of identifying with friends
and enemies equally, is directly aiming to counter ego-preserving
bias. Due to the unwavering equality among self, friends, and foes,
this notion of equal identiﬁcation is therefore not the same as
bias-prone partial identiﬁcation, deemed as irrational side eﬀects
of empathy (Bloom, 2017), which only further corroborates the
necessity of renunciation of ego-preserving bias before practicing
lojong.
Main Practice of Buddhist Compassion Meditation
After the prerequisites, a lojong practitioner is ready to cultivate a
concentrated meditation on Awakening Mind (BODHICITTA),
i.e., the intention to reach the complete, perfect enlightenment, in
order to liberate all sentient beings in the universe from suﬀering.
This goal is informed by the recognition of the nature of universal
suﬀerings, as the targets to eliminate, and knowledge of the
nature of the mind, as the basis of eventual success. We hereby
introduce a technical feature of compassion meditation that is
directly relevant to our second hypothesis and explain how it may
counter PRAPA—CA and VIKALPA that cause ego-preserving
bias, as follows.
Je Tsongkhapa (1357–1419) taught that a compassion
meditation practitioner should focus on the friend, enemy, and
those in between, thinking, ‘I’m going to help them’ (Gelek
Rimpoche, 2014). Likewise, benevolence (or loving-kindness)
meditation is to focus on the friend, enemy, and those in between,
thinking, ‘I’m going to make them happy.’ Typically, in these
forms of meditations, the three types of people (friends, enemies,
and in-between) are visualized in front of the practitioner, and
then compassion or benevolence is generated and distributed
to them equally.
We postulate that the visualization of friends, enemies, and
anyone in between in one’s “meditation ﬁeld” invokes the mental
images of these people, which are preexisting VIKAPLAS in
one’s mind. By spatially arranging these three mental images in
the “meditation ﬁeld, ” with the images of friends and enemies
put on either side and the neutral persons’ image in the center,
the inclination to mentally run toward friend or away from
enemy is eﬀectively balanced out. By ceasing to have such
mental activities of push-and-pull in this visualization process,
the conditioning of emotional obsession toward friends, hatred
toward enemies, and indiﬀerence toward someone in between are
gradually weakened and extinguished. In this way, PRAPA—CA
is temporarily suspended and VIKALPA are weakened, from
the coarsest type (Types 6–8) to a subtler type of VIKALPA
(Types 4 and 5). Ultimately, PRAPA—CA and VIKALPA as well
as resulting identity-grasping belief and ego-preserving bias that
are supported by them, can cease to exist when compassion
meditation is practiced over time and skillfully mastered.
We hereby summarize a structure of the main practice of
compassion meditation below:
(1) Recognize that all people are entrapped in three types of
suﬀering, self and others alike.
(2) Invoke mental images of friends, enemies, and anyone in-
between, and arrange these images appropriately in the
ﬁeld of meditation.
(3) Identify with friends, enemies, and anyone in-
between equally, e.g., their suﬀering is my suﬀering,
no matter who they are.
(4) Think to help them by attuning to their three types of
suﬀering, noticing the resistance from one’s own identity-
grasping belief and ego-preserving bias, and let go of them.
(5) Concentrate on this state of mind and let go of conceptual
thoughts that emerge, focusing on the ultimate nature of
mind until the end of the meditation session.
Evidence of Buddhist Compassion
Practice Effects
The evidence of lojong practice’s eﬀectiveness is living in the
lives of the practitioners, as demonstrated by many anecdotes.
For example, according to a biography of Ribur Rinpoche, a
Tibetan monk who practiced and taught lojong, he did not lose
his compassion and attunement to those who relentlessly tortured
him, nor did he feel any psychological suﬀerings, during his
1959–1976 stint in a Chinese labor camp (Ribur Rinpoche, 1999).
While an experimental trial demonstrating torture-proof
eﬀects of compassion meditation is impossible for ethical reasons,
a hint of preliminary evidence of our conjecture has been
reported in a series of empirical studies testing the eﬀects
of a lojong-inspired compassion training, Cognitively-Based
Cognitive Training (CBCT
R⃝), which aims to cultivate equal
attunement to self and others, although the practice of self-other
exchange ( tonglen) was excluded in its curriculum and post-
conﬂict well-being was not measured as outcome variables in
these studies (Pace et al., 2009; Desbordes et al., 2012; Mascaro
et al., 2013; Lang et al., 2019; Ash et al., 2020).
INCORPORATING BUDDHIST
CONCEPTS IN A BAYESIAN ACTIVE
INFERENCE FRAMEWORK
Recent advances in theoretical neurobiology suggest that
Bayesian active inference is a universal principle in biological
evolution (Campbell, 2016), genotypic phylogeny (Price, 1970),
and phenotypic ontogeny (Friston, 2013). According to Free
Energy Principle (FEP) (Friston, 2013; Ramstead et al., 2017),
an organism is a self-organizing adaptive system, which develops
ergodic (self-repeating) models (1) by sensing the features that
the environments require the organism to predict and (2) by
acting on what the organism expects the environments to be. In
so doing, biological organisms capture free energy and thus defy
the second law of thermodynamics that requires everything to
naturally dissipate into a higher level of randomness. The FEP
framework is described in more details in Box 1.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 9
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
BOX 1 | Free energy principle in biological self-organizing systems.
By interacting with different entities in the environments, biological systems are self-organizing systems that defy the second law of thermodynamics, which requires
that everything naturally dissipates into a higher level of randomness. Thus, biological organisms are inter-dependently self-organizing systems. Karl Friston
described Free Energy Principle, as a heuristic model of Bayesian active inference system, capable of drawing random ﬂuctuation and outcomes bounded in a
sample space (Friston, 2013). An organism can have many layers of Bayesian Networks. In a Bayesian Network, the relations between nodes can be designated as
parent (cause), child (effect), or peer (interaction). If x causes y to change, then x is a parent of y, and y is a child of x; if x and y mutually depend on each other, then
x is a peer of y. A Markov Blanket of a node, x, refers to a set of variables including x’s parents,x’s children, andx’s children’s other parents. When all the knowledge
in x’s Markov Blanket is known, thenx is known.
Free Energy Principle can be heuristically described as follow. As depicted in Figure 1, there are four nodes in a basic Bayesian Network, namely Internal,
External, Sensory, and Active States. Internal State is a parent of Active State and a child of Sensory State; External State is a parent of Sensory State and a child of
Active State; In addition, Sensory State and Active State are peers, and they are the Markov Blanket of Internal and External States, which means Internal State does
not directly observe External State, but it can predict External State through the Markov Blanket. A biological organism is a Bayesian Engine using its Internal State,
Sensory State, and Active State to perform Bayesian active inferences of its External State.
(1) External States are the source of observable events that cause sensations
and depend on action;
(2) Internal State serves as working models that cause actions and depend on
sensations;
(3) Sensory State constitutes a probabilistic mapping from action to external
states; and
(4) Active State depends on sensations and working models.
The Bayesian Engine optimizes the inferences actively by updating the prior probability in Internal State to minimize (variational) free energy, the upper bound of
prediction error computed as the difference between sensation and actions.
Karl Friston’s Bayesian Network Model:
Free Energy Principle
Although an adaptive system must possess many layers of
Bayesian Networks, Friston described a heuristic model with
only four nodes, namely Active State (Node A), Sensory State
(Node S), Internal State (Node I), and External State (Node E)
(Friston, 2013). Every biological organism is a Bayesian Engine,
which consists of Nodes I, S, and A, to perform Bayesian active
inferences of Node E from the environments. The Bayesian
Engine optimizes the inferences actively by computing the
prediction error, i.e., the diﬀerence between Node S and Node
A, and then updating the prior probability in Node I to minimize
(variational) free energy, the upper bound of prediction error. See
Figure 1.
Thus, a person as a Bayesian Engine can initiate an Internal
State as a seed of prior knowledge (prior probabilities) about
its environments, and the seed can be transformed into mature
“working models” to predict the environments (External State)
by utilizing the engine’s sensory receptors (Sensory State) and
active eﬀectors (Active State). FEP points to the possibility
that the development of a working modelófrom an initial
“seed” of prior probability to its eventual maturityódepends on
ongoing optimization of Bayesian active inference, prompted by
prediction errors of prior models, but the “life span” of a working
model will depend on its capacity in capturing (variational) free
energy caused by prediction errors.
Comparison of Bayesian Network and
Five Aggregates
In comparison to Buddhist concepts, we postulate that the
impersonal Bayesian network may instantiate a network of ﬁve
aggregates (SKANDHAS). In Buddhist concepts, consciousness
(VIJ— ¯ANA) occurs by the conditioning of an internal sense base
(INDRIYA) and an external sense object ( ¯AYATANA). In the
FIGURE 1 | Bayesian active inference framework. Biological organisms are
Bayesian Engines, equipped with nodes of Sensory State and Active State
(Node S and A, solid round-corner rectangles) and of Internal State (Node I,
solid oval), to observe events from the node of External State (Node E, dashed
rectangle) in a sample space (bounded by the outer boundary). The causal
relations among these nodes follow Free-Energy Principle, described inBox 1.
Bayesian network, Node E is equivalent to the external sense
object ¯AYATANA, while Bayesian Engine (Nodes S, I, A) is
equivalent to the internal sense base INDRIYA. When the Node
E makes a contact (SPAR ´SA) with the Bayesian Engine, it leads
to the feeling (VEDAN ¯A), which is equivalent to Node S, of
that contact as pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral. Then, Node
S leads to Node I (SAM . J— ¯A) when prior models are used to
make predictions of the events; the predictions cause Node A
to act to interact with the events, so Node A is a conditioning
factor or volitional action (SAM . SK ¯ARA). All these nodes are
embodied and supported by materiality or form (R ¯UPA). In this
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 10
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
process, consciousness emerges when the top-down model (Node
I) interacts with the bottom-up data (encoded in Nodes S and A)
(He and Raichle, 2009; Bachmann and Hudetz, 2014).
Thus, it is relatively straightforward to create potential
mappings between Buddhist concepts and the Bayesian
framework. Because of this, we are encouraged to use the
Bayesian framework to explicate Buddhist concepts in the
process related to conﬂicts and compassion meditation.
Stress, Resilience, and Free Energy in
Bayesian Networks
Since free energy increases when prediction errors increase, and
prediction errors increase when one’s expected outcomes conﬂict
with others’ expected outcomes, conﬂicts tend to increase free
energy temporarily until the Bayesian Engine learns to reduce
prediction errors by addressing the conﬂicts. Accordingly, it has
been postulated that stress ensues when an organism’s existing
working models fail to minimize free energy under challenging
circumstances, i.e., uncertainty that threatens one’s prior models
(Peters et al., 2017). In other words, as a Bayesian Engine, an
individual’s eﬃcacy in re-capturing (and thus reducing) the free
energy induced by conﬂicts is directly related to the individual’s
stress resilience. The notion that the exposure and subsequent
reduction of conﬂict promote stress resilience is highly consistent
with the stress inoculation hypothesis, supporting that brief
intermittent stress exposure in early life can induce relatively
low stress reactivity to stressors in adulthood in humans and
non-human primates (Parker et al., 2006).
The Embodiment of Bayesian Engine
According to FEP , the development of an individual organism
(ontogeny) is a dynamic process of individual-environment
transactions that gradually embody the functional nodes of
the Bayesian Engine. The embodiment of Bayesian Engine is
probably corresponding to the notion of clinging to physical
existence depending on conceptual imputation, i.e., dependent
designation (PRAJ—APTI UP ¯AD ¯ANA). Once embodied, the
nodes serve as conditioned circumstances that interact with the
environments to register features of an incoming event (via
Nodes S and A), as a primary transaction, and then to infer
how the Bayesian Engine should relate to the event (via Node
I), as a secondary transaction. The embodiment of these nodes
makes these primary and secondary transactions automatic, such
that the agent subjectively experiences phenomena without any
eﬀorts. In other words, the agent automatically takes an observer
perspective when perceiving events that seem to occur separately
from one’s viewpoint, hence the split between the observer
and the observed (i.e., the emergence of the duality in the mind).
The embodiment of Bayesian Engine does not entitle any
intrinsic independent existence of an individual agent. When
multiple agents interact in a multi-agent system, each agent is
not only a subject of his or her own experience but also an
object for other agents. In other words, all phenomena that can
be observed must be originated from the interactions among
multiple Bayesian Engines. Because none of the nodes in any
Bayesian Engines can be a constant (i.e., non-variable), otherwise
it will be drop out of mathematical operations that give rise
to any phenomena, there cannot be any permanent observer
(self) or observed objects (others). Since all nodes are inter-
dependent in any Bayesian networks, there is no inherently
individual entity as a Bayesian Engine. For a discussion on
the limitation of Darwinian self-preservation interpretation in
prosocial behaviors, see Ludwig and Welch (2019). We postulate
that the self-preservation interpretation should be replaced by
the notion of attunement to the environments, including one’s
counterparts in conﬂicts.
VIKALPA Mediated the Reiﬁcation of Self
and Other’s Divided Identities
By the age of two a child normally develops object permanence,
i.e., a phenomenon wherein a child starts to seek an object
when it is not sighted surprisingly (Shaﬀer and Kipp, 2013).
The development of object permanence suggests the emergence
of mental image that mediates the child’s object seeking,
implicating an operation of conceptual thoughts (VIKALPA).
Because phenomena appear to the observer so automatically
and reliably, the observer may likely neglect the mental images
mediating the object permanence of self and others, such that
identities of self (the observer) and others (the observed) are
reiﬁed as truly existing, i.e., identity-grasping beliefs. In so doing,
the observer may over-reduce others (the observed) to mental
objects, neglecting that other people are also living Bayesian
Engines who can actually feel (equipped with Node S), do (Node
A), and think (Node I). See Figure 2.
We wish to underscore that identity-grasping beliefs are
not “innately” built-in features of any Bayesian Engines. As
demonstrated by the success of artiﬁcial intelligence programs,
these artiﬁcial Bayesian Engines are impersonal and free of any
identity-grasping, as they never refuse to update any prior models
(Silver et al., 2017a,b). Thus, it is clear that identity-grasping
beliefs are adventitious not only to the nature of mind, but also
to the operations of Bayesian Engines.
A BRAIN MODEL FOR THE SOCIAL
COGNITION, EMBODIED
IDENTITY-GRASPING BELIEFS, AND
COMPASSION MEDITATION EFFECTS
The human neuroimaging literature suggests that mental factors
(not the ultimate nature of mind per se ) can be related to
the brain from the perspective of neurophenomenology (Varela,
1996). Here we propose a putative brain model to contemplate
how ﬁve-aggregates-related Bayesian Engine is supported by the
brain, and how the brain responds to conﬂicts in a bifurcating
way, either disturbed by identity-grasping beliefs or not. We
postulate that lojong-like compassion meditations would shun
the inﬂuences of identity-grasping beliefs (hence ego-preserving
bias) in the brain. Notably, this postulation does not necessarily
support the notion that the brain is a physical cause of mind.
Rather, the putative brain model is like a model of two
modes of brain in response to conﬂicts. Using the clear lamp
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 11
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
FIGURE 2 | Bayesian Engine in a state that identity-grasping beliefs and ego-preserving bias obscure its sampling space. When identity-grasping beliefs and other
conceptual thoughts (VIKALPA) “hijack” a person P1’s Node I, these conceptual thoughts explain away prediction errors without attuning to another person P2. The
reactions to the events from Node E pre-occupy P1’s Nodes S, A, and I at the expense of actual attunement to P2’s Bayesian Engine, manifesting as an
ego-preserving bias. Outwardly, the identity-grasping beliefs in P1’s Node I drive P1’s Node A (escape, aggression, or acquisition) to avoid fear-provoking objects
and/or seek distracting or addictive objects with negative reinforcement; Inwardly, the sampling of the events is biased toward covert cues, e.g., trauma-related
ﬂashbacks, interoceptive triggers, and conceptual thoughts (VIKALPA) that cause fear, anger, or obsession in P1’s Node S to re-conﬁrm the conceptual thoughts
(VIKALPA) in P1’s Node I. In such an obscured state, P1 fails to infer and “see” the other person in the relationship, denoted by the dashed bracket in front of P2. The
obscuration of P1’s Bayesian Engine is denoted by the other person P2 who is excluded from P1’s sample space. Due to the conﬂicts that are not constructively
reduced by the obscured Bayesian Engine, excessive free energy ensues and results in chronic stress.
shade metaphor, the model of brain is not a model of clear
lamp shade (the nature of mind), but a model of two light
bulbs (two modes of mental factors), in which one light bulb
would color the mind with the ego-preserving bias and the
other would not.
A Brain Model in Bayesian Framework
The Bayesian active inference framework has been applied to
several domains, e.g., self-reference (Carhart-Harris and Friston,
2010), interoception (Barrett and Simmons, 2015), visuo-motor
mirror-neuron system (Kilner et al., 2007), and post-conﬂict well-
being (Connolly, 2018). We reported a meta-analysis to explain
a post-adversity bifurcation in the brain responses, highlighting
a brain network, namely the Aﬀect-Object Generating Network,
through which conceptual thoughts can be generated by
linking the representations of self (as a proximal object) and
others (as a distal object) to aﬀective potentials via thinking
processes propelled by a thought generator, depicted in Figure 3
(Ho and Nakamura, 2017).
We hereby propose a putative brain model of social cognition
in the Bayesian framework, as depicted in Figure 4. To simplify
the description, we will ﬁrst parse the brain-based Bayesian
Engine into three functional components, namely Relation-
Modeling, Reality-Checking, and Conﬂict-Alarming. As seen
below, these three functional components are large-scale brain
networks that support complex mental processes involved in
social cognition in general and cognitive processing of potential
conﬂicts in particular.
(1) Relation-Modeling refers to the development and selection
of Relational Models in the Bayesian Engine’s Node
I (Internal State). It is primarily subserved by the
hippocampus and the Default-Mode Network (DMN)
that consists of the precuneus, ventromedial prefrontal
cortex (vmPFC), orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), (anterior)
middle medial prefrontal cortex (mmPFC), dorsomedial
prefrontal cortex (dmPFC), perigenual ventral anterior
cingulate cortex (vACC), temporal poles, and parietal
lobes. We will discuss the functional signiﬁcance of these
regions in Section “Relation-Modeling: Generating Aﬀect-
Objects in Conceptual Thoughts (VIKALPA).”
(2) Reality-Checking refers to the detection and regulation of
data-driven, primary transactions in the Bayesian Engine.
It is primarily subserved by the following frontoparietal
areas: (a) the Mirror-Neuron System that automatically
detects the intention of others’ actions in premotor and
parietal areas (Iacoboni et al., 2005), and this Mirror-
Neuron System overlaps with the DMN in the parietal lobe;
(b) the Ventral Attention Network (V AN) that monitors
features of episodic events (reality monitoring), prediction
errors, and response conﬂicts; (c) the Frontoparietal
Network (FPN) that performs higher order cognitive
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 12
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
FIGURE 3 | Affect-object generative inference and regulation (AGIR) model, adapted from Ho and Nakamura (2017). There are two systems in the model. In the ﬁrst
system, an affect-object inference generation system encompasses four components: a thought generator in precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), an affect
potential storage in subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (sgACC) for negative affect and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) for positive affect, a proximal object
sketchpad in middle medial prefrontal cortex (mmPFC), and a distal object sketchpad in dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC). When “vehicles” of conceptual
thoughts are running in this system, thoughts of affect-objects can be represented as mental objects (e.g., self = proximal objects charged with affective potentials;
other = distal objects charged with affective potentials). In the second system, a cognitive control system encompasses a component of reality/conﬂict monitoring in
anterior dorsal middle cingulate cortex (adMCC)/dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and other cortical components not depicted in the ﬁgure. The main function
of reality/conﬂict monitoring is to pause an ongoing affect-object generating thought and observe all modalities of information involved in a potential conﬂict, allowing
an unrealistic expectation generated in the ﬁrst system to be paused and updated. In terms of cortical networks that are self-organized in intrinsic resting-state
functional connectivity in Yeo et al. (2011), the ﬁrst system primarily involves Default Mode Network (yellow) and Cortical Limbic Network (cyan), and the second
system primarily involves Ventral Attention Network (red) and Frontal-Parietal Network (violet). The colors of the components’ text boxes are reversed between the
two systems, indicating an anti-correlative relationship between them. The demarcation of the brain areas is approximate.
control including working memory that maintains or
updates the contents as mental objects (Cohen et al.,
1997), and FPN is involved in releasing a set of rules or
thoughts according feedback (Buchsbaum et al., 2005) and
in spatial frame processing to represent objects according
to ego-centric or allocentric (other-centered) references
in space. This FPN overlaps with the DMN in the
hippocampus, parahippocampal cortex, and retrosplenial
cortex (Ekstrom et al., 2014). We will discuss some key
functions of this component in more details in Section
“Reality-Checking: The Gateway to Attuning to Self and
Others.”
(3) Conﬂict-Alarming refers to the intense responses when
an individual perceives threats to his or her prior model,
as a special case of severe prediction error signals in the
Bayesian Engine. The Conﬂict-Alarming component is
primarily subserved by the Salience Network (SN), which
includes dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), posterior
ventral middle cingulate cortex (pvMCC), bilateral anterior
insula/orbital frontal insula, subcortical regions such
as periaqueductal gray (PAG), hypothalamus, thalamus,
midbrain, striatum (including caudate), and extended
amygdala (Seeley et al., 2007). While SN and V AN overlap
in several cortical areas, as they are both involved in
the processing of prediction error signals, the substrate
of Conﬂict-Alarming component refers to the part of
SN that is preferentially activated in pain, i.e., intense
emotional responses related to belief-violating or survival-
threatening prediction errors (Lieberman and Eisenberger,
2015). According to the public online database providing
automatic term-based meta-analysis of neuroimaging
studies (Y arkoni et al., 2011), brain regions that are
preferentially associated with the term “pain” include
the SN mentioned above, and additionally some regions
overlapping with the anterior midline regions in DMN
(mmPFC, vmPFC, and vACC) and the lateral regions of
FPN/V AN (right prefrontal and bilateral parietal lobes).
The SN network largely overlaps with the parental brain
(Ho et al., 2014; Swain and Ho, 2017) and the SN
(amygdala and frontoinsular) responses to infant cry was
associated with mother–child intersubjectivity in free play
(Hipwell et al., 2015) pointing to the roles of parenting
in the development of compassion (Swain et al., 2013).
We will discuss some key functions of this component in
more details in Section “Conﬂict-Alarming: The Salience
Network at the Pivotal Point.”
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 13
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
FIGURE 4 | Bayesian Engines in a state of attuning to others, such that all agents (e.g., P1 and P2) in the system are present in the sampling space of their Bayesian
Engines. Here, we focus on P1’s Bayesian Engine as an example, even though P2’s Bayesian Engine is also present in the same sampling space (denoted by the
inclusion of P2 in P1’s sample space). The Bayesian Engine consists of three functional components, namely Relation-Modeling, Reality-Checking, and
Conﬂict-Alarming. Relation-Modeling is a component, consisting of Node I, wherein conceptual thoughts involving self and others are generated in the Affect-Object
Generating Network (part of Default-Mode Network, DMN) in a relational frame generated by hippocampus and parahippocampal cortex. Reality-Checking is a
component, consisting of Nodes S and A, subserved by multiple brain networks for data detection, reality monitoring, and attention regulation, including the
Mirror-Neuron System, Ventral Attention Network, and Frontoparietal Network. Conﬂict-Alarming is a component that can be triggered by excessive free-energy due
to conﬂicts that violate one’s rigid beliefs, so conﬂicts can activate the brain regions in the Salience Network, including periaqueductal grey (PAG), amygdala, caudate
nucleus, posterior ventral middle cingulate cortex (pvMCC), and anterior insula. We postulate that when a conﬂict between P1 and P2 occurs, P1’s Conﬂict-Alarming
is triggered, then P1’s subsequent course of actions can bifurcate, pivotally depending on how P1’s Salience Network regulates other brain networks underlying
Relation-Modeling and Reality-Checking, denoted by the up/down arrows near the ﬂame: Post-conﬂict resilience will ensue if the activations of Salience Network
consistently down-regulate pre-existing Relation-Modeling and up-regulate Reality-Checking, such that P1 can attune to P2 adaptively, which will ultimately reduce
conﬂicts in the long run; conversely, identity-grasping beliefs and ego-preserving bias will be exacerbated if the activations of Salience Network consistently
up-regulate pre-existing Relation-Modeling and down-regulate Reality-Checking, which will generate even more conﬂicts in the long run.
In what follows, we provide more detailed functional
characterizations of the three components in the Bayesian Engine
in the context of conceptual thoughts (VIKALPA), attunement,
and post-conﬂict bifurcation.
Relation-Modeling: Generating Affect-Objects in
Conceptual Thoughts (VIKALPA)
Some evidence for the designation of these regions’ functions
is described below. The functional distinction of the aﬀective
potential, proximal object sketchpad, and distal object sketchpad
is highly consistent with a body of literature showing how the
respective brain regions (the vmPFC, mmPFC, and dmPFC)
are functionally connected to other brain regions distinctively
(Li et al., 2014). The relative distinction between the proximal
and distal object sketchpads is that the former can represent
one’s self and the latter can represent remote objects (animate
or inanimate) during mentalization in the mmPFC and dmPFC,
respectively. A meta-analysis suggested that self- and other-
oriented mentalizations are mapped onto the medial prefrontal
cortex with a spatial gradient in the direction from the
mmPFC (self-oriented) to the dmPFC (other-oriented) (Denny
et al., 2012). When individuals had more gripping experiences
during the retrieval of negative autobiographical memories, the
mmPFC activation was increased accordingly (Kross et al., 2009).
Anatomically, as compared to the dmPFC, the mmPFC (also
known as BA10p) is more intimately connected to interoception-
processing areas such as the insular, vACC, vmPFC, and OFC
(Petrides and Pandya, 2007). The distinction is further supported
by a study using machine learning algorithm in neuroimaging to
validate their roles across diﬀerent tasks (Skerry and Saxe, 2014),
which documented that both mmPFC and dmPFC can represent
cross-modal, abstract values, rather than stimulus-driven values
(consistent with the notion that both mmPFC and dmPFC are
“sketchpads” that can represent abstract information) and the
mmPFC, not dmPFC, can also represent subjectively experienced
values (consistent with the distinction of proximal versus
distal representation between the two regions); furthermore, the
vmPFC can represent subjectively experienced values, rather than
abstract values (consistent with its role as aﬀective potential).
In addition to the medial prefrontal cortex, the
precuneus/PCC is considered to play a role in thought
generation, suggested by the converging evidence that
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 14
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
the precuneus/PCC region is associated with the terms
of “thinking” or “thoughts” (Ho and Nakamura, 2017).
Indeed, in a neurofeedback study based on the activity level
of precuneus/PCC, this region became more active when
the participants exerted more eﬀorts in thinking while they
performed a self-regulation task and conversely, the region
became rested when they achieved a state of mental quiescence
(Garrison et al., 2013).
Thus, the Relation-Modeling component is supported by
the combination of the Aﬀect-Object Thought Generationó
subserved by the amygdala, precuneus, vACC, vmPFC, OFC,
mmPFC, and dmPFCóand the Relational Framingósubserved
by the hippocampus, parahippocampal cortex, retrosplenial
cortex, and parietal lobe. The relation frames provide a temporal-
spatial context in which an individual is virtually situated in,
and in this context the precuneus/PCC can produce temporal
aﬀect-objects by generating thoughts that “aﬀectively color” the
representations of self or other in the sketchpads of proximal
object (mmPFC) or distal objects (dmPFC), respectively, by
channeling the aﬀective potentials (mediated in the amygdala,
vACC, OFC, and vmPFC) to these sketchpads, leading to the
formation of aﬀect-objects. Under the inﬂuences of identity-
grasping beliefs, the conceptual thoughts (VIKALPA) regarding
the identities of self and others can inﬂuence the precuneus/PCC
that may serve as the generator of thought (VITARKA).
Reality-Checking: The Gateway to Attuning to Self
and Others
The Reality-Checking component should involve the V AN and
FPN: the former can monitor background information and
inhibit ongoing responses when surprises (prediction errors)
happen, and the latter can make information explicitly available
in one’s awareness. For examples, FPN forms a coherent coupling
with another network containing the information (Cole et al.,
2013). When individuals become subjectively aware of their
spontaneous thoughts generated in Aﬀect-Object Generating
Network, they will have co-activation of FPN and DMN (Fox
et al., 2015); likewise, the FPN’s connectivity with DMN was
strengthened when the participants retrieved autobiographical
episodic memories from the past or imagining a future
scene (both tasks activating the DMN), but not when they
were performing visual-spatial tasks unrelated to the DMN
(Schacter et al., 2012).
Here, we focus on the adMCC, as it plays an integral role in
functions related to both V AN and FPN, e.g., conﬂict monitoring,
working memory, and inhibition (de la Vega et al., 2016). The
adMCC region has been speciﬁcally identiﬁed as a region in
which the gray matter structural property is directly associated
with reality monitoring performance in a memory task, which
required monitoring memory retrieval and inhibiting distractors
(Buda et al., 2011). The individual diﬀerences in the morphology
of adMCC are related to the capacity for the regulation of negative
emotions (Shackman et al., 2011).
Notably, the roles of the reality-monitoring adMCC in
FPN/V AN and the distal object dmPFC in DMN are dissociable
in social cognition. In an empirical study (Sommer et al., 2007),
the dmPFC in DMN was more activated when individuals
predicted what others might do on the basis of a belief that was
identical with the self ’s perspective (undiﬀerentiated belief), as
compared to what they might do on the basis of a diﬀerentiated
(individuated) belief, when the other’s perspective would be
opposite to the self ’s; conversely, the regions in FPN/V AN,
including the dACC/adMCC, right prefrontal cortex, right
temporal parietal junction, and right dorsal precuneus were more
activated in diﬀerentiated belief than in undiﬀerentiated belief
conditions. This study provides supportive evidence that the
dmPFC represents another person’s attributes as a distal object
in an ego-centric frame (which is VIKALPA-dependent), while
the dACC/adMCC is needed when one represents others in an
allocentric frame with diﬀerentiated perspectives. Interestingly,
always seeing another person in an ego-centric frame is
considered a symptom of under-developed self with inadequate
understanding of others (Kohut, 1982; Summers, 2014). Thus, the
Reality-Checking component of the Bayesian Engine, mediated
by the FPN/V AN, can be considered a gateway to facilitate
engagement with others eﬀectively, as it enables the person to see
self and other’s subjectivity ﬂexibly.
Conﬂict-Alarming: The Salience Network at the
Pivotal Point
We postulate that excessive free energy should trigger the
SN underlying the Conﬂict-Alarming component, thus the SN
should play a pivotal role in regulating the dynamic coherence
between the DMN and FPN/V AN underlying Relation-Modeling
and Reality-Checking components, respectively.
In accordance with this notion, it has been found that the SN
can initiate the up- or down-regulation of DMN and FPN/V AN
(Goulden et al., 2014). In addition, the striatum, as part of
the Conﬂict-Alarming component, also plays a pivotal role
in regulating DMN and FPN. In a healthy state, violation of
expectations (a form of prediction error) can activate the caudate
(O’Doherty et al., 2004) and the caudate was associated with
urge-to-react (Jackson et al., 2011). The urge to smoke increased
response in the vACC and vmPFC along with increased craving
for nicotine in smokers (Wilson and Sayette, 2015). Patients with
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (who have excessive urge-like
thoughts or behaviors) showed excessive coupling between the
caudate and the vACC, vmPFC, and dmPFC (Harrison et al.,
2009). When facing a fear-evoking situation, a stronger coupling
between the caudate and vACC (part of DMN) resulted in a
greater urge to react with unnecessary but prepotent responses,
while a stronger coupling between the caudate and right
prefrontal cortex (part of FPN/V AN) resulted in the inhibition of
the urge to act out the unnecessary reactions (Gillan et al., 2015).
Thus, the caudate can up- or down-regulate FPN and DMN
motivationally. When healthy individuals were challenged by
acute stressors in the laboratory, their adaptive coping responses
increased when the SN increased its functional connectivity with
the FPN, but their negative aﬀects and ruminative thoughts
increased when the SN increased its functional connectivity with
the DMN (van Oort et al., 2017).
The SN may fail to down-regulate the DMN when one’s
mental states are associated with exacerbated ego-preserving
bias. For example, after trauma-related episodes were triggered,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 15
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
the functional connectivity among the amygdala (part of SN)
and vACC and vmPFC (part of DMN) was hyperactive in
patients with PTSD (Dunkley et al., 2014). The integrity of SN,
measured as the white matter tractography between the right
anterior insula and dACC, was associated with the capacity
for response inhibition, which was achieved by deactivating
DMN when receiving a signal to stop a response (Bonnelle
et al., 2012). Indeed, the dACC and anterior insula in the
SN are of great clinical signiﬁcance because structural and
functional deﬁcits of these regions are commonly identiﬁed in
multiple major psychiatric disorders including major depression,
anxiety, obsessive-compulsive (OCD), substance use, bipolar, and
schizophrenia disorders (Goodkind et al., 2015).
The Brain Model Underlying
Post-conﬂict Bifurcation
According to our model, prior models supported by conceptual
thoughts of self and others (VIKALPA) are subserved by DMN
in the Relational Modeling component. Reality is registered
and prediction errors are detected by FPN/V AN in the Reality-
Checking component. When interpersonal conﬂicts contradict
the prior model, SN in the Conﬂict-Alarming component is
triggered. This Bayesian model is consistent with a recent meta-
analysis on brain responses to viewing faces of same or diﬀerent
races (Bagnis et al., 2020). In this meta-analysis, own- and other-
race visual categorizations led to distinct activation patterns
in the brain: Categorization of own-race mainly activated
DMN and categorization of other-race mainly activated visuo-
attentive processing and amygdala (part of SN) (Bagnis et al.,
2020). We interpret these meta-analysis results as consistent
with our model, because the same-race stimuli are relatively
familiar and similar to the prior models stored in DMN, so
these stimuli can mainly activate DMN; and the other-race
stimuli are relatively unfamiliar and dissimilar to the prior
models, so they may carry more prediction errors (relative to
the same-race stimuli) to activate the SN and other reality-
checking regions.
We hereby describe how this brain model can explain the
post-conﬂict bifurcation between maintaining the attunement
and exacerbating ego-preserving bias. As described in the section
above, when excessive free energy resulting from conﬂicts
activates the Conﬂict-Alarming component, the underlying SN
plays a key role in the regulation of what behavior will
follow afterward. When the SN down-regulates the DMN and
up-regulates FPN/V AN, the person can inhibit the previous
Relational Models and potentially engage more productively
with the ongoing demands from the environments. When the
SN fails to down-regulate DMN, the Bayesian Engine would
not be able to use the excessive free energy to inhibit ongoing
prepotent Relational Models subserved by DMN, and then the
person is susceptible to urges to act out automatic habitual
behaviors that are entangled with prior models instantiated in the
Bayesian Engine. In other words, in the latter case, the individual
will exacerbate the ego-preserving bias, which manifests as the
inability to update one’s prior models or beliefs in the presence of
salient prediction errors during the conﬂicts with others.
The notion that SN’s post-conﬂict up-regulation of DMN
can indicate a potential exacerbation of ego-preserving bias
is consistent with a recent neuroimaging study on implicit
racial bias in samples of Black and White Americans (Wang
et al., 2019). As shown in this study, both Black and White
participants rated other people’s social encounters less favorably
when the social encounters were cross-race, involving one
Black and one White person, as compared to those same-
race encounters involving two persons of the same race; both
Black and White participants showed reduced reward activities,
indicating negative values as prediction errors in rewards, and
enhanced activities in the temporal-parietal junction in the DMN
when viewing the cross-race encounters as compared to same-
race ones (Wang et al., 2019).
In addition, the ego-preserving bias may be exacerbated
when certain overlapping regions between the Relation-
Modeling and Reality-Checking components are functionally
impaired. These regions include the parietal lobe, hippocampus
and adjacent hippocampal cortex, and retrosplenial cortex,
which are all closely related to spatial frame processing
and regulation. These overlapping regions are known to
mediate the regulation of egocentric-allocentric frames in a
mental space, which is key to interpersonal understanding
and resilience to adversity (Frith and de Vignemont, 2005;
Gilbertson et al., 2007; Langston and Wood, 2010; Ekstrom
et al., 2014). As evidenced in animal models (Hammels
et al., 2015), hippocampus and related regions are crucial
regions mediating the bifurcation of post-trauma stress
disorders and resilience. The hippocampus is crucial for
pattern diﬀerentiation and contextual frame completion. The
neurogenesis in hippocampus is crucial for the resilience in
chronic stress and mood regulation through enhancing cognitive
ﬂexibility (Anacker and Hen, 2017), and social experiences
can modulate the hippocampal neurogenesis (Dranovsky
et al., 2011). Conversely, the impairment of hippocampus will
compromise contextual frame processing, e.g., allocentric spatial
framing, (Langston and Wood, 2010). In human twin studies, the
weaker capacity of hippocampus-dependent allocentric framing
is a dispositional risk factor for developing posttraumatic stress
disorders (Gilbertson et al., 2007).
The Relations Between Compassion
Meditations and the Brain Model
Here we postulate some predictions of compassion meditation
eﬀects on the brain based on our Bayesian brain model,
discussed above. First, we predict that compassion should inhibit
conceptual thoughts (VIKALPA) that are generated in the
aﬀect-object generating network, which is largely overlapping
with DMN, as part of the Relation-Modeling component.
This is consistent with a neurofeedback study showing that
the more one can rest the precuneus/PCC, which may be
a generator of active conceptual thoughts in the DMN, the
calmer and peaceful the participants can be in the study
(Garrison et al., 2013).
Second, we predict that the compassion meditation can
enhance the attunement to others through enhancing the
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 16
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
reality monitoring capacity or volume in the adMCC (Buda
et al., 2011), as the volumes of adMCC are related to the
capacity for the regulation of negative emotions (Shackman
et al., 2011). This is consistent with the meta-analysis of
meditation, showing that the activity in the adMCC is
enhanced by both open monitoring meditation that improves
awareness of spontaneous mental phenomena and single-
pointed meditation that improves attentional focus and stability
(Fox et al., 2016).
Third, we predict that the compassion meditation can
enhance the capacity in the FPN/V AN as part of the
Reality-Checking component through enhancing the attunement
to others’ feelings. This is consistent with several studies
showing that long-term meditation practitioners have increased
cortical thickness in the frontal-insular cortices, and greater
responses in these regions when performing loving-kindness
meditation, as compared to meditation-naive controls (Engen
et al., 2018). Interestingly, enhancing the attunement to
others’ feelings may be diﬀerent from feeling painful when
observing other people in pain. In a neuroimaging study, the
long-term meditation practitioners, who practiced mindfulness
meditation just prior to observing others’ social pain, showed
reduced left anterior insula activation during the observation
of others’ pain, as compared to meditation-naive controls,
and the strength of the anterior insula activation following
the mindfulness meditation was negatively associated with
levels of trait compassion in these long-term meditation
practitioners (Laneri et al., 2017). While these results may
suggest that concentration meditation could reduce potential
vicarious distress due to the observation of others’ suﬀering,
an alternative explanation may be that the practitioners have
reduced their alarming signals, as the anterior insula is a key
region in the SN, as part of the Conﬂict-Alarming component,
because they have reduced ego-preserving bias when observing
others’ suﬀering.
Lastly, as described above, the hippocampus and adjacent
areas play a critical role in the bifurcation of post-trauma
mental disorders and resilience (Hammels et al., 2015),
possibly by promoting the neurogenesis in hippocampus that
can enhance cognitive ﬂexibility (Anacker and Hen, 2017).
Furthermore, a human twin study suggested that the weaker
capacity of hippocampus-dependent allocentric framing is a
dispositional risk factor for developing posttraumatic stress
disorders (Gilbertson et al., 2007). Thus, we predict that
compassion meditation should help promote the capacity in
the hippocampus and adjacent areas by its spatial arrangement
of the visualization of the mental images of friends, enemies,
and anyone in between. Speciﬁcally, we predict that compassion
meditation can promote neurogenesis in the hippocampus after
conﬂicts or other anxiety-provoking situations. This prediction
is consistent with a randomized controlled longitudinal study:
(1) after mindfulness meditation training, the volume increases
in the left subiculum (potentially due to neurogenesis in the
hippocampus) were associated with decreased coupling between
the left hippocampus and two clusters in lateral occipital
cortex, and (2) the larger decreases in the hippocampus-
occipital functional coupling were associated with the larger
decreases in anxiety levels after the meditation training
(Sevinc et al., 2020).
The Neuroscience of Compassion
Meditations
Neuroimaging research in the neural correlates of compassion
meditation is still in its infancy. While more studies are needed
to test our predictions described above, results from some
studies on neuroscience of compassion meditation or similar
training are described here. In a meta-analysis of functional
neuroimaging research in compassion based on 16 fMRI studies
reviewed, the shared brain regions that are consistently related to
compassion were identiﬁed, including the PAG, bilateral anterior
insula, and putamen, which are part of the SN, the dorsal
ACC/adMCC, which is part of the FPN/V AN, and the inferior
frontal gyrus and subgenual ACC, which are part of DMN. This
meta-analysis failed to identify regions purportedly common to
compassion such as the DLPFC, OFC, and amygdala, possibly
due to the inclusion of a small number of studies that used
loving-kindness meditation in their meta-analysis (Kim et al.,
2020).
Speciﬁcally, a 2-week compassion training (focusing on
benevolent wishes for family, friends and diﬃcult people)
was found to have increased altruistic behaviors, which were
associated with altered activation in the inferior parietal cortex
and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), and in DLPFC
connectivity with the nucleus accumbens (Weng et al., 2013). In
a randomized study investigating eﬀects of 2-week compassion
vs. reappraisal training (Weng et al., 2018), neural responses
were measured before and after training while participants
actively engaged in their assigned training in response to images
depicting human suﬀering or non-suﬀering; the study found that
increases in the amount of time looking at aversive images due
to compassion training were associated with decreases in the
amygdala responses. The authors of the study suggested that
compassion meditation can cultivate an enhanced motivation
to look at visual images depicting suﬀering while attenuating
amygdala responses to the aversiveness of stimuli. However, an
alternative interpretation may be that the compassion training
increased the synchrony between the negative valence of the
pictures and the valence-dependent responses in the amygdala, as
suggested by a recent study on compassion-promoting parenting
intervention eﬀects on amygdala (Ho et al., 2020).
As mentioned earlier, a lojong-inspired compassion training
showed beneﬁcial eﬀects on stress reactivity and the brain (Pace
et al., 2009; Desbordes et al., 2012; Mascaro et al., 2013; Lang
et al., 2019; Ash et al., 2020). In a longitudinal study (Singer and
Engert, 2019), distinct constructs of attention and interoception
(present-moment), socio-emotional processes (compassion and
loving-kindness), and meta-cognitive processes (perspective-
taking), were evaluated and found to be diﬀerentially
augmented in the 9-month training program; generally, the
results supported diﬀerential neural plasticity that promoted
diﬀerential training eﬀects on social cognition, altruism, and
hormonal response to psychosocial stress. Notably, we recently
reported how a compassion-promoting parenting intervention
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 16 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 17
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
in mothers promoted the attunement to their child through the
changes in the brain network in support of our predictions,
e.g., better maternal attunement to the child was associated
with decreased parenting stress and increases in attunement-
dependent responses in the amygdala and reality-checking
networks; the training also decreased dmPFC responses that may
mediate child-speciﬁc conceptual thoughts when the mothers
responded to the child; the decreases in functional connectivity
between PAG and dmPFC were associated with decreases in
parenting stress, suggesting that maternal stress was reduced
when relatively less defensive signals from PAG were channeled
to the mothers’ mental images of the child, which would have
“stained” the maternal perception of the child (Ho et al., 2020).
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we aimed to expand the science of compassion
in multiple aspects: (a) we expanded the scope of the science
of compassion by suggesting that the practice of compassion
is an intervention to recognize the ultimate nature of mind
and promote post-conﬂict well-being, over and beyond studies
of social emotions and prosocial motivations; (b) we expanded
the theoretical background of compassion science by importing
Buddhist concepts; (c) we expanded the translational framework
of compassion science by juxtaposing the concepts in Buddhism,
Bayesian active inference, and Neuroscience in a uniﬁed
framework. We hope that the present paper may serve as an
example of interdisciplinary contemplative science investigation
that can stimulate and facilitate cross-disciplinary integrations in
compassion research.
“Compassion is not religious business; it is human business; it is
not luxury; it is essential for our own peace and mental stability; it
is essential for human survival.” – HH the 14th Dalai Lama.
The turmoil of COVID-19 pandemic, United States
presidential election, and geopolitical struggles happening in
year 2020 may have marked a transformative opportunity for the
humanity to bifurcate into future actions. Will the humankind
traverse a right course of actions into the future? Our theoretical
work may support the notion that compassion is a necessity, not
a luxury, for the survival of the humanity, as quoted above. We
wish to present this work as a small steppingstone toward the
humanity’s evolution into a future where conﬂicts in all levels of
the society can be addressed with compassion and kindness by
as many people as possible, i.e., doing our best to recognize the
ultimate nature of mind and universal suﬀering caused by ego-
preserving bias and rather wishing to attune to all people equally,
friends and enemies alike.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions generated for this study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
SH is the principal developer of the theoretical framework and
hypotheses and writer of the manuscript. He created the ﬁgures in
the study. YN collaborated with SH in developing and reﬁning the
theoretical framework. He also co-wrote the manuscript. JS co-
wrote the manuscript and supported the research involved in the
manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and approved
the submitted version.
FUNDING
This work has been supported by the Research Foundation for
the State University of New York (SUNY) and the National
Institutes for Health (NIH): National Institute on Drug Abuse
(NIDA) R01 DA047336.
REFERENCES
Anacker, C., and Hen, R. (2017). Adult hippocampal neurogenesis and cognitive
ﬂexibility – linking memory and mood. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 335–346. doi:
10.1038/nrn.2017.45
Anda, R. F., Felitti, V. J., Bremner, J. D., Walker, J. D., Whitﬁeld, C., Perry, B. D.,
et al. (2006). The enduring eﬀects of abuse and related adverse experiences in
childhood. Eur. Arch. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 256, 174–186. doi: 10.1007/
s00406-005-0624-4
Asanga (2016). “The nature of reality, ” in The Bodhisattva Path to Unsurpassed
Enlightenment: A Complete Translation of the Bodhisattvabhumi, (Boston, MA:
Shambhala Publications), 63–103.
Ash, M. J., Walker, E. R., Diclemente, R. J., Florian, M. P., Palmer, P. K.,
Wehrmeyer, K., et al. (2020). Compassion meditation training for hospital
chaplain residents: a pilot study.J. Health Care Chaplain[Epub ahead of print],
Bachmann, T., and Hudetz, A. G. (2014). It is time to combine the two main
traditions in the research on the neural correlates of consciousness: C = L x
D. Front. Psychol. 5:940. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00940
Bagnis, A., Celeghin, A., Diano, M., Mendez, C. A., Spadaro, G., Mosso, C. O.,
et al. (2020). Functional neuroanatomy of racial categorization from visual
perception: a meta-analytic study. Neuroimage 217, 116939. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2020.116939
Barrett, L. F., and Simmons, W. K. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in the brain.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 16, 419–429. doi: 10.1038/nrn3950
Bloom, P. (2017). Empathy and its discontents. Trends Cogn. Sci. 21, 24–31. doi:
10.1016/j.tics.2016.11.004
Bonnelle, V., Ham, T. E., Leech, R., Kinnunen, K. M., Mehta, M. A., Greenwood,
R. J., et al. (2012). Salience network integrity predicts default mode network
function after traumatic brain injury. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 4690–
4695. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1113455109
Buchsbaum, B. R., Greer, S., Chang, W. L., and Berman, K. F. (2005). Meta-analysis
of neuroimaging studies of the Wisconsin card-sorting task and component
processes. Hum. Brain. Mapp. 25, 35–45. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20128
Buda, M., Fornito, A., Bergström, Z. M., and Simons, J. S. (2011). A speciﬁc brain
structural basis for individual diﬀerences in reality monitoring. J. Neurosci. 31,
14308–14313. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.3595-11.2011
Buswell, R. E., and Lopez, D. S. (2013). The Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism .
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Campbell, J. O. (2016). Universal darwinism as a process of Bayesian inference.
Front. Syst. Neurosci. 10:49. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2016.00049
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 17 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 18
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
Carhart-Harris, R. L., and Friston, K. J. (2010). The default-mode, ego-functions
and free-energy: a neurobiological account of Freudian ideas. Brain 133, 1265–
1283. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq010
Cohen, J. D., Perlstein, W. M., Braver, T. S., Nystrom, L. E., Noll, D. C., Jonides, J.,
et al. (1997). Temporal dynamics of brain activation during a working memory
task. Nature 386, 604–608. doi: 10.1038/386604a0
Cole, M. W., Reynolds, J. R., Power, J. D., Repovs, G., Anticevic, A., and Braver, T. S.
(2013). Multi-task connectivity reveals ﬂexible hubs for adaptive task control.
Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1348–1355. doi: 10.1038/nn.3470
Connolly, P. (2018). Expected free energy formalizes conﬂict underlying defense in
freudian psychoanalysis. Front. Psychol. 9:1264. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01264
de la Vega, A., Chang, L. J., Banich, M. T., Wager, T. D., and Y arkoni, T. (2016).
Large-scale meta-analysis of human medial frontal cortex reveals tripartite
functional organization. J. Neurosci. 36, 6553–6562. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.
4402-15.2016
Denny, B. T., Kober, H., Wager, T. D., and Ochsner, K. N. (2012). A meta-analysis
of functional neuroimaging studies of self- and other judgments reveals a spatial
gradient for mentalizing in medial prefrontal cortex. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 24,
1742–1752. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_00233
Desbordes, G., Negi, L. T., Pace, T. W., Wallace, B. A., Raison, C. L., and Schwartz,
E. L. (2012). Eﬀects of mindful-attention and compassion meditation training
on amygdala response to emotional stimuli in an ordinary, non-meditative
state. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 6:292. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00292
Dranovsky, A., Picchini, A. M., Moadel, T., Sisti, A. C., Y amada, A., Kimura, S., et al.
(2011). Experience dictates stem cell fate in the adult hippocampus. Neuron 70,
908–923. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.05.022
Dube, S. R., Anda, R. F., Felitti, V. J., Chapman, D. P., Williamson, D. F., and
Giles, W. H. (2001). Childhood abuse, household dysfunction, and the risk of
attempted suicide throughout the life span: ﬁndings from the adverse childhood
experiences study. JAMA 286, 3089–3096. doi: 10.1001/jama.286.24.3089
Dunkley, B. T., Doesburg, S. M., Sedge, P. A., Grodecki, R. J., Shek, P. N., Pang,
E. W., et al. (2014). Resting-state hippocampal connectivity correlates with
symptom severity in post-traumatic stress disorder. NeuroImage 5, 377–384.
doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2014.07.017
Ekstrom, A. D., Arnold, A. E. G. F., and Iaria, G. (2014). A critical review of
the allocentric spatial representation and its neural underpinnings: toward a
network-based perspective. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8:803. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.
2014.00803
Engen, H. G., Bernhardt, B. C., Skottnik, L., Ricard, M., and Singer, T. (2018).
Structural changes in socio-aﬀective networks: multi-modal MRI ﬁndings in
long-term meditation practitioners.Neuropsychologia 116, 26–33. doi: 10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2017.08.024
Erskine, R. G. (1998). Attunement and involvement: therapeutic responses to
relational needs. Int. J. Psychother. 3, 235–244.
Feiring, C., Taska, L., and Lewis, M. (1996). A process model for understanding
adaptation to sexual abuse: the role of shame in deﬁning stigmatization. Child
Abuse Neglect 20, 767–782. doi: 10.1016/0145-2134(96)00064-6
Feldman, R. (2020). What is resilience: an aﬃliative neuroscience approach. World
Psychiatry 19, 132–150. doi: 10.1002/wps.20729
Felitti, V. J., Anda, R. F., Nordenberg, D., Williamson, D. F., Spitz, A. M., Edwards,
V., et al. (1998). Relationship of childhood abuse and household dysfunction to
many of the leading causes of death in adults: the adverse childhood experiences
(ACE) study. Am. J. Prevent. Med. 14, 245–258. doi: 10.1016/s0749-3797(98)
00017-8
Fox, K. C., Dixon, M. L., Nijeboer, S., Girn, M., Floman, J. L., Lifshitz, M., et al.
(2016). Functional neuroanatomy of meditation: a review and meta-analysis
of 78 functional neuroimaging investigations. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 65,
208–228. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.03.021
Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., and Christoﬀ, K.
(2015). The wandering brain: meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies
of mind-wandering and related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage
111, 611–621. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.02.039
Fredrickson, B. L., Cohn, M. A., Coﬀey, K. A., Pek, J., and Finkel, S. M. (2008).
Open hearts build lives: positive emotions, induced through loving-kindness
meditation, build consequential personal resources. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 95,
1045–1062. doi: 10.1037/a0013262
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 10, 20130475.
Frith, U., and de Vignemont, F. (2005). Egocentrism, allocentrism, and Asperger
syndrome. Conscious. Cogn. 14, 719–738. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2005.04.006
Garrison, K. A., Santoyo, J. F., Davis, J. H., Thornhill, T. A. T., Kerr, C. E.,
and Brewer, J. A. (2013). Eﬀortless awareness: using real time neurofeedback
to investigate correlates of posterior cingulate cortex activity in meditators’
self-report. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7:440. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00440
Gelek Rimpoche (2005). SEM - The Nature of Mind. New York, NY: Jewel Heart.
Gelek Rimpoche (2007). Lojong Mind Training in Seven Points . New York, NY:
Jewel Heart.
Gelek Rimpoche (2008).Shantideva’s Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life: Chapter
8 Concentration. New York, NY: Jewel Heart Corp.
Gelek Rimpoche (2014). How the Mind Works. New York, NY: Jewel Heart Inc.
Geshe Rabten (1997). Treasury of Dharma. Le Mont-Pèlerin: Rabten.
Gilbert, P. (2015). “Negotiating in the world of mixed beliefs and value systems:
a compassion-focused model, ” in Handbook of International Negotiation:
Interpersonal, Intercultural, and Diplomatic Perspectives , ed. M. Galluccio
(Cham: Springer International Publishing), 261–277. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
10687-8_19
Gilbert, P. (2019). Explorations into the nature and function of compassion. Curr.
Opin. Psychol. 28, 108–114. doi: 10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.12.002
Gilbertson, M. W., Williston, S. K., Paulus, L. A., Lasko, N. B., Gurvits, T. V.,
Shenton, M. E., et al. (2007). Conﬁgural cue performance in identical twins
discordant for posttraumatic stress disorder: theoretical implications for the
role of hippocampal function. Biol. Psychiatry 62, 513–520. doi: 10.1016/j.
biopsych.2006.12.023
Gillan, C. M., Apergis-Schoute, A. M., Morein-Zamir, S., Urcelay, G. P., Sule, A.,
Fineberg, N. A., et al. (2015). Functional neuroimaging of avoidance habits in
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry 172, 284–293.
Goodkind, M., Eickhoﬀ, S. B., Oathes, D. J., Jiang, Y., Chang, A., Jones-Hagata,
L. B., et al. (2015). Identiﬁcation of a common neurobiological substrate for
mental illness. JAMA Psychiatry 72, 305–315. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.
2014.2206
Goulden, N., Khusnulina, A., Davis, N. J., Bracewell, R. M., Bokde, A. L., Mcnulty,
J. P., et al. (2014). The salience network is responsible for switching between
the default mode network and the central executive network: replication from
DCM. NeuroImage 99, 180–190. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.052
Hammels, C., Pishva, E., De Vry, J., Van Den Hove, D. L. A., Prickaerts, J., Van
Winkel, R., et al. (2015). Defeat stress in rodents: from behavior to molecules.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 59, 111–140. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.10.006
Harlow, H. F., Dodsworth, R. O., and Harlow, M. K. (1965). Total social isolation
in monkeys. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 54, 90–97. doi: 10.1073/pnas.54.1.90
Harrison, B. J., Soriano-Mas, C., Pujol, J., Ortiz, H., López-Solà, M., Hernández-
Ribas, R., et al. (2009). Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 66, 1189–1200. doi: 10.
1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.152
He, B. J., and Raichle, M. E. (2009). The fMRI signal, slow cortical potential and
consciousness. Trends Cogn. Sci. 13, 302–309. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.004
Hipwell, A. E., Guo, C., Phillips, M. L., Swain, J. E., and Moses-Kolko, E. L. (2015).
Right frontoinsular cortex and subcortical activity to infant cry is associated
with maternal mental state talk. J. Neurosci. 35, 12725–12732. doi: 10.1523/
jneurosci.1286-15.2015
Ho, S. S., Konrath, S., Brown, S. L., and Swain, J. E. (2014). Empathy and stress
related neural responses in maternal decision making. Front. Neurosci. 8:152.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00152
Ho, S. S., Muzik, M., Rosenblum, K. L., Morelen, D., Nakamura, Y., and Swain,
J. E. (2020). Potential neural mediators of mom power parenting intervention
eﬀects on maternal intersubjectivity and stress resilience. Front. Psychiatry doi:
10.3389/fpsyt.2020.568824 [Epub ahead of print],
Ho, S. S., and Nakamura, Y. (2017). Healing dysfunctional identity: bridging mind-
body intervention to brain systems.J. Behav. Brain Sci.7, 137–164. doi: 10.4236/
jbbs.2017.73013
Hutcherson, C. A., Seppala, E. M., and Gross, J. J. (2008). Loving-kindness
meditation increases social connectedness. Emotion 8, 720–724. doi: 10.1037/
a0013237
Iacoboni, M., Molnar-Szakacs, I., Gallese, V., Buccino, G., Mazziotta, J. C., and
Rizzolatti, G. (2005). Grasping the intentions of others with One’s own mirror
neuron system. PLoS Biol. 3:e79. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0030079
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 18 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 19
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
Jackson, S. R., Parkinson, A., Kim, S. Y., Schüermann, M., and Eickhoﬀ, S. B. (2011).
On the functional anatomy of the urge-for-action. Cogn. Neurosci. 2, 227–243.
doi: 10.1080/17588928.2011.604717
Kilner, J. M., Friston, K. J., and Frith, C. D. (2007). Predictive coding: an account
of the mirror neuron system. Cogn. Process. 8, 159–166. doi: 10.1007/s10339-
007-0170-2
Kim, J. J., Cunnington, R., and Kirby, J. N. (2020). The neurophysiological basis
of compassion: an fMRI meta-analysis of compassion and its related neural
processes. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 108, 112–123. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.
2019.10.023
Kirby, J. N. (2017). Compassion interventions: the programmes, the evidence,
and implications for research and practice. Psychol. Psychother. 90, 432–455.
doi: 10.1111/papt.12104
Kirby, J. N., Tellegen, C. L., and Steindl, S. R. (2017). A meta-analysis
of compassion-based interventions: current state of knowledge and future
directions. Behav. Ther. 48, 778–792. doi: 10.1016/j.beth.2017.06.003
Klimecki, O. (2019). The role of empathy and compassion in conﬂict resolution.
Emot. Rev. 11, 175407391983860.
Kohut, H. (1982). Introspection, empathy, and the semi-circle of mental-health.
Int. J. Psycho Anal. 63, 395–407.
Kross, E., Davidson, M., Weber, J., and Ochsner, K. (2009). Coping with
emotions past: the neural bases of regulating aﬀect associated with negative
autobiographical memories. Biol. Psychiatry 65, 361–366. doi: 10.1016/j.
biopsych.2008.10.019
Kube, T., and Rozenkrantz, L. (2020). When beliefs face reality: an integrative
review of belief updating in mental health and illness. Perspect. Psychol. Sci.
doi: 10.1177/1745691620931496 [Epub ahead of print],
Lahav, Y., Kanat-Maymon, Y., and Solomon, Z. (2017). Posttraumatic growth and
dyadic adjustment among war veterans and their wives. Front. Psychol. 8:1102.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01102
Laneri, D., Krach, S., Paulus, F. M., Kanske, P., Schuster, V., Sommer, J.,
et al. (2017). Mindfulness meditation regulates anterior insula activity during
empathy for social pain. Hum. Brain Mapp. 38, 4034–4046. doi: 10.1002/hbm.
23646
Lang, A. J., Malaktaris, A. L., Casmar, P., Baca, S. A., Golshan, S., Harrison,
T., et al. (2019). Compassion meditation for posttraumatic stress disorder in
veterans: a randomized proof of concept study. J. Trauma Stress 32, 299–309.
doi: 10.1002/jts.22397
Langston, R. F., and Wood, E. R. (2010). Associative recognition and the
hippocampus: Diﬀerential eﬀects of hippocampal lesions on object-place,
object-context and object-place-context memory. Hippocampus 20, 1139–1153.
doi: 10.1002/hipo.20714
Leskela, J., Dieperink, M., and Thuras, P. (2002). Shame and posttraumatic stress
disorder. J. Trauma. Stress 15, 223–226. doi: 10.1023/a:1015255311837
Li, W., Mai, X., and Liu, C. (2014). The default mode network and social
understanding of others: what do brain connectivity studies tell us.Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 8:74. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00074
Lieberman, M. D., and Eisenberger, N. I. (2015). The dorsal anterior cingulate
cortex is selective for pain: results from large-scale reverse inference.Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 112, 15250–15255. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1515083112
Ludwig, R. J., and Welch, M. G. (2019). Darwin’s other dilemmas and the
theoretical roots of emotional connection. Front. Psychol. 10:683. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2019.00683
Mascaro, J. S., and Gilbert, P. (2017). Compassion Fears, Blocks and Resistances: An
Evolutionary Investigation, 1 Edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mascaro, J. S., Rilling, J. K., Tenzin Negi, L., and Raison, C. L. (2013). Compassion
meditation enhances empathic accuracy and related neural activity. Soc. Cogn.
Aﬀect. Neurosci. 8, 48–55. doi: 10.1093/scan/nss095
Mendelson, J., and Freed, W. J. (1973). Do rats terminate hypothalamic stimulation
only in order to turn it on again? Behav. Biol. 8, 619–628. doi: 10.1016/s0091-
6773(73)80147-6
Nagarjuna (1995). The Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle Way : Nagarjuna’s
Mulamadhyamakakarika. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nelson, B. W., Laurent, S. M., Bernstein, R., and Laurent, H. K. (2017).
Perspective-taking inﬂuences autonomic attunement between partners during
discussion of conﬂict. J. Soc. Pers. Relat.34, 139–165. doi: 10.1177/02654075156
26595
O’Doherty, J., Dayan, P., Schultz, J., Deichmann, R., Friston, K., and Dolan,
R. J. (2004). Dissociable roles of ventral and dorsal striatum in instrumental
conditioning. Science 304, 452–454. doi: 10.1126/science.1094285
Pace, T. W., Negi, L. T., Adame, D. D., Cole, S. P., Sivilli, T. I., Brown, T. D., et al.
(2009). Eﬀect of compassion meditation on neuroendocrine, innate immune
and behavioral responses to psychosocial stress. Psychoneuroendocrinology 34,
87–98. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2008.08.011
Parker, K. J., Buckmaster, C. L., Sundlass, K., Schatzberg, A. F., and Lyons,
D. M. (2006). Maternal mediation, stress inoculation, and the development of
neuroendocrine stress resistance in primates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103,
3000–3005. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0506571103
Peters, A., Mcewen, B. S., and Friston, K. (2017). Uncertainty and stress: why
it causes diseases and how it is mastered by the brain. Prog. Neurobiol. 156,
164–188. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2017.05.004
Petrides, M., and Pandya, D. N. (2007). Eﬀerent association pathways from the
rostral prefrontal cortex in the macaque monkey. J. Neurosci. 27, 11573–11586.
doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.2419-07.2007
Pew Research Center (2014). Political Polarization in the American Public .
Available online at: https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2014/06/12/political-
polarization-in-the-american-public/ (accessed March 8, 2020).
Pew Research Center (2020a). As the U.S. Copes with Multiple Crises, Partisans
Disagree Sharply on Severity of Problems Facing the Nation. Available online at:
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/07/14/as-the-u-s-copes-with-
multiple-crises-partisans-disagree-sharply-on-severity-of-problems-facing-
the-nation/ (accessed March 8, 2020).
Pew Research Center (2020b). Republicans, Democrats Move Even Further Apart
in Coronavirus Concerns . Available online at: https://www.pewresearch.org/
politics/2020/06/25/republicans-democrats-move-even-further-apart-in-
coronavirus-concerns/ (accessed March 8, 2020).
Price, G. R. (1970). Selection and covariance. Nature 227, 520.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., and Friston, K. J. (2017). Answering
Schrödinger’s question: a free-energy formulation. Phys. Life Rev. 24, 1–16.
doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Ribur Rinpoche (1999).How to Generate Bodhicitta. Singapore: Amitabha Buddhist
Centre.
Saraiya, T., and Lopez-Castro, T. (2016). Ashamed and afraid: a scoping review of
the role of shame in post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). J. Clin. Med. 5, 94.
doi: 10.3390/jcm5110094
Schacter, D. L., Addis, D. R., Hassabis, D., Martin, V. C., Spreng, R. N., and Szpunar,
K. K. (2012). The future of memory: remembering, imagining, and the brain.
Neuron 76, 677–694. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.11.001
Seeley, W. W., Menon, V., Schatzberg, A. F., Keller, J., Glover, G. H., Kenna, H.,
et al. (2007). Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing
and executive control. J. Neurosci. 27, 2349–2356. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.5587-
06.2007
Sevinc, G., Greenberg, J., Hölzel, B. K., Gard, T., Calahan, T., Brunsch, V., et al.
(2020). Hippocampal circuits underlie improvements in self-reported anxiety
following mindfulness training. Brain Behav. 10, e01766.
Shackman, A. J., Salomons, T. V., Slagter, H. A., Fox, A. S., Winter, J. J., and
Davidson, R. J. (2011). The integration of negative aﬀect, pain and cognitive
control in the cingulate cortex. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12, 154–167. doi: 10.1038/
nrn2994
Shaﬀer, D. D. R., and Kipp, K. (2013). Developmental Psychology: Childhood &
Adolescence: Childhood and Adolescence . Boston, MA: Wadsworth Cengage
Learning.
Shantideva. (c. 700/1979). A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life. Dharamshala:
Library of Tibetan Works & Archives.
Silver, D., Hubert, T., Schrittwiesser, J., Antonoglou, I., Lai, M., Guez, A., et al.
(2017a). Mastering chess and shogi by self-play with a general reinforcement
learning algorithm. arXiv [Preprint] Available online at: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1712.01815 (accessed March 8, 2020).
Silver, D., Schrittwieser, J., Simonyan, K., Antonoglou, I., Huang, A., Guez, A., et al.
(2017b). Mastering the game of Go without human knowledge. Nature 550,
354–359. doi: 10.1038/nature24270
Singer, T., and Engert, V. (2019). It matters what you practice: diﬀerential training
eﬀects on subjective experience, behavior, brain and body in the ReSource
Project. Curr. Opin. Psychol. 28, 151–158. doi: 10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.12.005
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 19 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385
fpsyg-11-603385 December 28, 2020 Time: 17:19 # 20
Ho et al. Compassion as Intervention to Conﬂicts
Sippel, L. M., and Marshall, A. D. (2011). Posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms,
intimate partner violence perpetration, and the mediating role of shame
processing bias. J. Anxiety Disord. 25, 903–910. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2011.05.
002
Skerry, A. E., and Saxe, R. (2014). A common neural code for perceived and
inferred emotion. J. Neurosci. 34, 15997–16008. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.1676-
14.2014
Sommer, M., Döhnel, K., Sodian, B., Meinhardt, J., Thoermer, C., and Hajak, G.
(2007). Neural correlates of true and false belief reasoning. NeuroImage 35,
1378–1384. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.01.042
Summers, F. (2014). The bonds of empathy: beyond the selfobject concept. Int. J.
Psychoanal. Self Psychol. 9, 222–236. doi: 10.1080/15551024.2014.917464
Swain, J. E., and Ho, S. S. (2017). “Parental brain: the crucible of compassion, ”
in The Oxford Handbook of Compassion Science , eds E. M. Seppälä, E. Simon-
Thomas, S. L. Brown, M. C. Worline, C. D. Cameron, and J. R. Doty (Oxford:
Oxford University Press).
Swain, J. E., Konrath, S., Dayton, C. J., Finegood, E. D., and Ho, S. S. (2013). Toward
a neuroscience of interactive parent-infant dyad empathy. Behav. Brain Sci. 36,
438–439. doi: 10.1017/s0140525x12002063
Tenzin Gyatso, T. T. D. L. (1997).The Four Noble Truths: Fundamentals of Buddhist
Teachings. London: Thorsons.
Tenzin Gyatso, T. T. D. L. (2009). The Middle Way: Faith Grounded in Reason .
Boston, MA: Wisdom Publications.
Tenzin Gyatso, T. T. D. L. (2020). Science and Philosophy in the Indian Buddhist
Classics: The Mind. Boston, MA: Wisdom Publications.
Tyrka, A. R., Wyche, M. C., Kelly, M. M., Price, L. H., and Carpenter, L. L. (2009).
Childhood maltreatment and adult personality disorder symptoms: inﬂuence of
maltreatment type. Psychiatry Res. 165, 281–287. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2007.
10.017
Uchino, B. N., Cawthon, R. M., Smith, T. W., Light, K. C., Mckenzie, J., Carlisle,
M., et al. (2012). Social relationships and health: is feeling positive, negative, or
both (ambivalent) about your social ties related to telomeres? Health Psychol.
31, 789–796. doi: 10.1037/a0026836
Umberson, D., and Montez, J. K. (2010). Social relationships and health: a
ﬂashpoint for health policy. J. Health Soc. Behav. 51, S54–S66.
van Oort, J., Tendolkar, I., Hermans, E. J., Mulders, P. C., Beckmann, C. F., Schene,
A. H., et al. (2017). How the brain connects in response to acute stress: a
review at the human brain systems level. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 83, 281–297.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.10.015
Varela, F. (1996). Neurophenomenology: a methodological remedy for the hard
problem. J. Conscious. Stud. 3, 330–349.
Wang, Y., Schubert, T. W., and Quadﬂieg, S. (2019). Behavioral and neural
evidence for an evaluative bias against other people’s mundane interracial
encounters. Soc. Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 14, 1329–1339. doi: 10.1093/scan/
nsaa005
Weng, H. Y., Fox, A. S., Shackman, A. J., Stodola, D. E., Caldwell, J. Z. K., Olson,
M. C., et al. (2013). Compassion training alters altruism and neural responses
to suﬀering. Psychol. Sci. 24, 1171–1180. doi: 10.1177/0956797612469537
Weng, H. Y., Lapate, R. C., Stodola, D. E., Rogers, G. M., and Davidson, R. J.
(2018). Visual attention to suﬀering after compassion training is associated with
decreased amygdala responses. Front. Psychol. 9:771. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.
00771
Werner, E. E. (1992). The children of kauai – resiliency and recovery in adolescence
and adulthood. J. Adolesc. Health 13, 262–268. doi: 10.1016/1054-139x(92)
90157-7
Wilson, J. P., Droždek, B., and Turkovic, S. (2006). Posttraumatic shame and guilt.
Trauma Violence Abuse7, 122–141.
Wilson, S. J., and Sayette, M. A. (2015). Neuroimaging craving: urge intensity
matters. Addiction 110, 195–203. doi: 10.1111/add.12676
Y arkoni, T., Poldrack, R. A., Nichols, T. E., Van Essen, D. C., and Wager, T. D.
(2011). Large-scale automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging
data. Nat. Methods 8, 665–670. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.1635
Yeo, B. T., Krienen, F. M., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M. R., Lashkari, D., Hollinshead,
M., et al. (2011). The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by
intrinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. 106, 1125–1165. doi: 10.1152/
jn.00338.2011
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Ho, Nakamura and Swain. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with
these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 20 January 2021 | Volume 11 | Article 603385