Predictive processing as a systematic basis for
identifying the neural correlates of
consciousness
Jakob Hohwya(Jakob.Hohwy@monash.edu)
Anil Sethb (a.k.seth@sussex.ac.uk)
Abstract
The search for the neural correlates of consciousness is in need of a systematic, principled
foundation that can endow putative neural correlates with greater predictive and explanatory
value. Here, we propose the predictive processing framework for brain function as a promis-
ing candidate for providing this systematic foundation. The proposal is motivated by that
framework’s ability to address three general challenges to identifying the neural correlates
of consciousness, and to satisfy two constraints common to many theories of consciousness.
Implementing the search for neural correlates of consciousness through the lens of predictive
processing delivers strong potential for predictive and explanatory value through detailed,
systematic mappings between neural substrates and phenomenological structure. We con-
clude that the predictive processing framework, precisely because it at the outset is not itself a
theoryofconsciousness, hassignificantpotentialforadvancingtheneuroscienceofconsciousness.
Keywords
Active inference ∙ Consciousness ∙ Neural correlates ∙ Prediction error minimization
This article is part of a special issue on “The Neural Correlates of Consciousness”,
edited by Sascha Benjamin Fink.
1 Introduction
The search for theneural correlates of consciousness(NCCs) has now been under-
way for several decades (Crick & Koch,1990b). Several interesting and suggestive
aCognition & Philosophy Lab, Monash University
bSackler Center for Consciousness Science and School of Engineering and Informatics, University
of Sussex; Azrieli Program in Brain, Mind, and Consciousness Toronto
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 2
patterns of brain activity have been revealed but no unequivocal ‘correlate’ has
emerged. Alongside these developments, a plethora oftheories of consciousness
have been formulated. Many of these theories are conceptually intriguing, and
some have empirical evidence in their favour, but the field of consciousness sci-
ence is some distance from consensus on a theory of consciousness (for overviews,
seeBayneetal., 2009); thelackofconsensushassparkedfundingbodiestoencour-
age adversarial collaborations between proponents of different theories (Reardon,
2019). As with NCCs, this lack of consensus can be attributed partly to continuing
debateoverthesenseinwhichanadequatetheoryshould‘explain’‘consciousness’.
There is a further distinction between scientific and metaphysical theories of con-
sciousness; the former typically at least tacitly assumes materialism and aims at
explanation and mechanistic approaches to consciousness, whereas the latter is
concerned with the ultimate nature of consciousness rather than with specifics
about neuronal mechanisms.
Here, we propose that it will be fruitful for the field to capitalize on a general
account of brain function, which can serve as a systematic basis for identifying
NCCs, and which may as a consequence increase the predictive and explanatory
power of the science of consciousness. We suggest, in particular, that a predic-
tive processing (PP) approach brings many advantages to the scientific investiga-
tion of consciousness, primarily through encouraging and operationalizing closer
links between phenomenological properties of conscious experience and mecha-
nistic properties of underlying neural substrates. Perhaps counter-intuitively, we
suggest these advantages accrue in part because the PP approach is not, in itself, a
theory of consciousness.
2 The need for a systematic NCC
To identify the neural correlates of consciousness, it is commonly accepted that
one needs to find the minimally sufficient conditions for the occurrenceof a global
consciousstateorlevel(suchasbeingconsciousratherthanunconscious, orbeing
in the Minimally Conscious State rather than the awake state) or content (such as
consciously experiencing a face rather than a house). There exist a number of dif-
ferent methods and typical paradigms for revealing such correlates. For example,
binocular rivalry and masking paradigms have been extensively used in studies of
conscious content, while for the global conscious state the natural or artificial ma-
nipulations of (respectively) sleep and anaesthesia provide productive approaches.
These NCC methods are generally, at least implicitly, considered relatively the-
ory neutral – they are not immediately proprietary to any particular scientific the-
oryofconsciousness(andproponentsofmostmetaphysicaltheories,evendualists,
canagreethatthesemethodsimplementavalidscientificendeavorevenif,bytheir
lights, they cannot reveal the ultimate truth about consciousness). There is discus-
sion about whether states can be conscious even if not accessed and reportable,
and if that is the case, whether the neural correlates of such states can be identi-
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 3
fied by paradigms that require behavioural report (Block,1995). There has been
progress in extending NCC methods across conditions where introspective or be-
havioural report are not required and such ‘no report’ paradigms may begin to
address this discussion (Tsuchiya et al.,2015). While NCC methods may initially
appeartobetheory-neutral, differenttheoriesmaygravitatetowardscertaintypes
of paradigms and proposed neural correlates. For example, theories that deny the
possibility of unaccessed conscious experience will tend to gravitate to paradigms
that capitalise on reportability.
After paradigm-defining research in the early 1990s, the NCC methodology be-
came a focus of the science of consciousness (Metzinger,2000), and has received
several reviews and commentaries since, reporting on significant progress (Aru et
al., 2012; Fink,2016; Hohwy,2009; Klein & Barron,2020; Koch et al.,2016; Miller,
2007; Seth,2009; Tononi & Koch,2008). An influential early discussion was given
in Chalmers (Chalmers,2000), which pointed to a crucial and so far underappreci-
ated distinction betweenarbitrary and systematic NCCs.
An arbitrary NCC is revealed when some neural activity in some region of
the organism’s brain (as accessed with some neuroimaging or neurophysiological
method) reliably correlates with a given conscious state or content. Such a corre-
late is ‘arbitrary’ because mere activation on its own does not help us extrapolate,
predict, understand or explain much about the mechanisms underlying conscious-
ness. Thefactthatregion x ‘lightsup’whenconsciouslyratherthanunconsciously
perceiving Gabor patches does not, by virtue of this fact alone, allow us to predict
under what other stimulus conditionsx might also be activated, or which regions
might be activated for other types of stimuli. Nor does it throw much light on the
particular phenomenological properties that characterize such a conscious percep-
tion, nor what mechanisms underlie conscious perception generally. Even with
extensive brain mapping along these lines, the result would be an explanatorily
inert descriptive list of areas or patterns of activity. Arbitrary NCCs are not likely
to do much to let us understand the brain basis of consciousness, or to use such
an understanding to help with consciousness-related conditions, such as disorders
of consciousness (Fernández-Espejo & Owen,2013), split brains (De Haan et al.,
2020), or islands of consciousness (Bayne et al.,2020).
As a terminological note, we take ‘arbitrary’ in the sense that we would have
no inkling why the pattern of activity would be like this and not some other way,
given some particular phenomenology; such a fully arbitrary NCC is one extreme
kind of NCC. We recognize that talk of ‘arbitrary’ NCCs may not be entirely felic-
itous since the NCC in question may have a reliable correlation with phenomenal
states that is law-like and exceptionless – and in this sense be ‘non-arbitrary’. In
some respects, a better distinction could be between ‘non-explanatory’ and ‘ex-
planatory’ correlates, as in (Seth,2009). Note however that the arbitrariness we
(following Chalmers,2000) refer to is not in the correlation, reliable or not, with
phenomenal states, but rather in the question why it is this rather than another
correlated pattern of neural activity that is the focus of the NCC search. Being
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 4
‘systematic’ then means being systematically guided by theoretical considerations
of some sort.
Most actual instances of NCC research will not be fully arbitrary, as they natu-
rallyengagetosomedegreeinterpretationsofthepatternorlocationofactivation,
mainlyusingthatpatternorlocationtoinspireatheoreticalapproachtoconscious-
ness. Examples of such theory building can be found in the idea that frontopari-
etal activity is not arbitrary in the sense that it accounts for the global broadcast
and access that seems predictive and explanatory at least for access consciousness
(Mashour et al.,2020), or in the interpretation of the role of ‘posterior hubs’, asso-
ciated with integrated information theory approaches (Koch et al.,2016).
In light of such concerns, Chalmers notes that if we could “find a neural sys-
tem whose states do not just arbitrarily correlate with the phenomenal [contents
and] states in question, but which vary along a correspondingsystematic dimen-
sion, then the NCC in question will have much greater potential explanatory and
predictive power”. We agree with this reasoning and label this thesystematicity
requirement for the NCC. (Chalmers suggested as an example of systematicity cor-
relations of conscious content with ‘neural representational systems’ (Chalmers,
2000: 11); for critical discussion, see Noë & Thompson (2004) and responses; in
this paper, we will consider a more inclusive notion than just representational sys-
tems).
Tounpackthesystematicityrequirement,wemustfirstdeterminewithrespect
to what there should be greater explanatory and predictive power. The answer to
this question is that explanatory and predictive power should be with respect to
both brain activity and phenomenology. A systematic approach will be useful for
the NCC search only if its core elements can eventually be used to predict when
and how conscious phenomena arise, explain why conscious phenomena have the
structure and form they have, and potentially even control through interventions
how conscious experience unfolds.
We propose that such a systematic approach will best be developed by embed-
ding the proposed correlates of the studied conscious phenomena within a larger
understandingofbrainfunction,onewhichisnotitselfprimarilytiedtoconscious-
ness. This will help move beyond mere arbitrary correlates by ensuring that the
relevant brain activity can be identified and interpreted as more than just “the ac-
tivity, whatever it is, that correlates with this or that conscious phenomenon”. In
other words, it would enable us to look at the correlated brain activity and project
systematically from that activity to predict related phenomenological states, and
provide unifying explanations of their occurrence.
We can then say that, to discharge the systematicity requirement, a larger un-
derstanding,theoryor,asweshallphraseit,a framework foroverallbrainfunction
must be found for the NCC. This framework must perform the task of providing
explanatory and predictive power for certain patterns of brain activityand the
structure and form of their correlated phenomenology. Note, it is not necessary
for such a framework to itself propose an explanation of consciousness. In fact, it
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 5
mayservethesearchforasystematicNCCbetterifthislargerframeworkdoesnot
– at least not initially – contain a theory of consciousness. As we will discuss later,
partsoftheframeworkmayneverthelesscoalesceintoatheoryofconsciousnessif
it turns out to be successful in contributing to a systematic NCC. (We do not argue
that discharging the systematicity requirement necessarily requires a framework
that is not a theory of consciousness. For example, Integrated Information Theory
is a theory of consciousness that proposes systematic relationships between neu-
ral mechanisms and phenomenological properties (Tononi et al.,2016). Note that
IIT is not generally considered as part of the NCC programme.)
Naturally, it will be a tremendous challenge to fully cash out this notion of a
frameworkforoverallbrainfunctionwiththerequisiteexplanatoryandpredictive
power. We believe, as we shall discuss later, that there is cause for optimism. For
now, an analogymightbe useful, thatthesystematicity requirementisnotspecific
to consciousness science. If we are interested in physiological phenotypic traits
then a basic genetic theory of what governs changes to the DNA sequence will not
be useful on its own, even if that theory is in fact true. Rather, to gain explanatory
and predictive power with respect to phenotype we need to appeal to epigenetics.
Epigeneticsplacesgenesincontextandallowsustobuildupmechanisticaccounts
of how genes, cells, bodies, and environments interact over developmental trajec-
tories to explain phenotypic traits. Epigenetics is a theoretical approach in its own
right and there is considerable work to be done in correlating epigenetic processes
withphenomena like cancer. Similarly, for atheory of brain function, therewillbe
kinds of frameworks that are not optimal for generating explanatory and predic-
tivepowerforconsciousness, eveniftheymightadequatelydescribe(forexample)
neuronal and synaptic activities, while there will be frameworks at other levels of
description that will have the right kind of explanatory and predictive ‘grain’ for
consciousness.
Withthehelpofasuitableframeworkforbrainfunction,thefactthatconscious
perceptionofaGaborpatchcorrelateswithbrainactivity x wouldhavegreaterpo-
tential for predicting under what other conditionsx would or wouldn’t be present,
and under what conditions a similar conscious perception would or wouldn’t be
present. Critically, such a framework should be capable of providing an adequate
language in which to account for phenomenological properties of consciousness
(e.g., representational content, sensory presence, feature binding, spatiality or the
lack of spatiality, illusion formation, sense of agency etc.), which constitute the
explananda of any satisfactory theory of consciousness. That is, unpacking brain
activity x within the framework should cast light on phenomenology.
In this manner, it would be useful for the empirical search for NCCs to be
coupled to a framework, not for consciousness per se but rather a framework for
brain function, with the right internal structure and level of description to have
explanatory potential for phenomenology. Such an approach contrasts with the
NCC search as it has largely unfolded until now, which may be characterized as
identifying relatively arbitrary and piecemeal correlates.
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 6
3 Three challenges to the NCC search
Identifying the general framework for brain function for the systematic NCC will
be helped by considering three additional and extensively discussed challenges
associated with the NCC search.
3.1 The global states and local contents challenge
The first challenge has to do with the widely acknowledged distinction between
states and contents of consciousness (Laureys,2005; Rosenthal,1986). Most NCC
programs are devoted to content NCCs, and fewer (though increasingly more) to
finding the NCC of global states (sometimes called ‘levels’) of consciousness. The
challenge here is that a satisfying account of consciousness may require treating
statesandcontentstogether(Bayne, 2007;Hohwy, 2009). Thechallengecanbestbe
introduced with an example. Binocular rivalry is a classic NCC paradigm, where
different stimuli are shown continuously to each eye, and conscious perception
alternates between them. In a typical binocular rivalry NCC study, a participant
may be exposed to rivalry stimuli and fMRI data may be acquired, showing alter-
nating regions of activity associated with the alternating conscious percepts (as
in, e.g., the classic study by Tong et al.,1998). The problem, stressed early on by
Searle(2000),isthattheparticipantwasalreadyconsciouswhenputinthescanner
and so the brain activity cannot reveal why one percept is conscious rather than
not, but merely what brain activity is associated with selection of the content into
consciousness, in analready conscious creature.
More generally, the NCC search has largely sidestepped the issue of the rela-
tion between global states and contents (exceptions include Bachmann,2012; Aru
et al.,2019; Haun & Tononi,2019; Noreika et al.,2017). Much remains to be discov-
ered about interactions between global states and contents. For example, it may
be that insertion of some contents into some global states changes those states, or
that certain states may change the contents inserted into them (e.g., rivalry stim-
uli may be processed very differently in different global states of consciousness
such as delirium, psychedelic states, or absence seizures). Indeed, the psychedelic
state serves as a compelling example in which there seem to be changes in both
state/levelandcontent,which,further,seemtobedependentoneachother(Schart-
ner et al.,2017).
This challenge constrains the search for a systematic NCC in the following
way: the systematic dimension under which neural activity is described should
be able to have both global states and local content as factors. There should be
dimensions of overall functioning – a ‘whole of system’ approach – as well as of
individual conscious contents.
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 7
3.2 The screening off challenge: Brain structure and phe-
nomenology
The second challenge concerns how to ‘screen off’ less explanatory neural corre-
lates from the more explanatory correlates. Importantly, the degree to which a
candidate NCC is explanatory is not simply a matter of how tight or reliable its
correlation is with conscious states or contents. A number of researchers, begin-
ning with Miller (2007), have argued that even with very tight, reliable correlates
being identified, it may still be an open question which of these are the true con-
stituents or substrates of the conscious states or contents (with the underlying
assumption being that only the true constituents would facilitate predictive and
explanatory power). If there are three causally chained neural states NS1, NS2,
NS3 that tightly and reliably correlate with the conscious experience of seeing a
face, it may be that NS1 is a mere causal precursor, and NS3 a causal consequent
of the true (and presumably most explanatory) constituent NS2, even though the
empirical correlation between all three and the conscious experience is much the
same (Graaf et al.,2012; Miller,2015).
One response to the screening off challenge is to make use of techniques for
causal inference (Aru et al.,2012; Hohwy, 2009; Klein & Barron, 2020; Neisser,
2012; Pearl,2000; Woodward,2003). In particular, better methods for causalinter-
vention should be able to advance the issues. For example, TMS, tDCS, and espe-
cially optogenetics should allow fine-grained (‘surgical’) manipulation of distinct
elements of the causal neural chains of events underlying conscious states and
contents (see Marshel et al. (2019) for an impressive optogenetic study along these
lines). This holds most obviously for precursors, where interventions would lead
to effects on consciousness. It also holds for downstream consequences, where
interventions should fail to influence consciousness.
A second and perhaps more important response lies in examining whether po-
tential correlates (e.g., NS2) better account for the corresponding conscious con-
tent or state than precursors (NS1) or consequents (NS3). This requires the ability
todistinguishpotentialcorrelatesontheirexplanatorypotentialwith(phenomeno-
logical) explanatory targets. For example, NS2 and NS1 may correlate equally
tightly with a conscious experience of a horizontal Gabor patch, but NS1 corre-
lates better than NS2 with several orientations of the experienced patch. Here, it
isaquestionforphilosophyofsciencetoformulateasubstantialnotionof‘explana-
tory potential’; this may be, for example, in terms of homology, causal/functional
isomorphism, contrastive explanations, or mechanistic reduction (Bechtel,2007;
Craver,2007; Hohwy & Frith,2004; O’Brien & Opie,1999).
Meeting the screening off challenge would therefore be facilitated if brain ac-
tivity could be ‘carved at the joints’ in a way that both allowed meaningful and
efficient interventions and which mapped to an equivalent partitioning of the ex-
planatory targets, namely the phenomenological properties of experience. There
is a considerable and challenging task in revealing this ‘architecture’ of conscious
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 8
phenomenology, and it seems likely that approaches to screening off at the level
of brain activity will develop in tandem with understanding of the phenomeno-
logical explanatory targets. In particular, we may learn more about the building
blocks of the neural system and the varieties of phenomenology as we learn to
better intervene on both.
Astandardexampleservestoillustratethedifficultiesinherentincarvingbrain
activity at its joints such that it matches the structure of the phenomenological ex-
planatory targets. An early dynamical NCC approach proposed that conscious
contents depended on gamma-band synchrony among neural populations (Crick
& Koch,1990a, 1990b). This proposal gained conceptual plausibility through its as-
sociation with the classic ‘binding problem’ in neuroscience of how spatially seg-
regated processing of distinct object features become ‘bound’ together. Despite
some early empirical support it became rapidly clear that synchrony among neu-
ral populations does not always go along with conscious contents and/or binding
(for review and discussion, see Gold,1999; Engel & Singer,2001). To the contrary,
an excess of neuronal synchrony reliably leads to the global loss of consciousness,
as in absence epilepsy. In hindsight, the insufficiency of a simple association be-
tween neural synchrony and consciousness is hardly surprising. Allowing a more
global view of binding, conscious scenes are not well described as single unified
perceptual objects; rather, conscious experiences normally comprise of a multi-
modal range of contents each of which retain a distinctive identity while being
embedded within a single unified scene. This phenomenological observation may
then be a good guide for how to carve brain activity at the joints, where neuronal
synchrony may still play some role – though no longer as the NCC itself (Tononi
& Edelman,1998).
3.3 The action challenge
We turn next to a challenge which is more prescriptive, about where conscious-
ness science should go, than the previous challenges. Recent years have seen an
increased focus on the role ofaction (in a broad and inclusive sense) for the mind.
A number of broadly ‘enactive’ approaches have been suggested, which highlight
the important point that conscious perception is closely entwined with agency, in-
tention, movement and behaviour (contributions to this debate range very widely
from radical reconceptualizations of cognitive science, biological approaches to
active sensing, and computational approaches, see, e.g., Hurley,1998; Engel et al.,
2016; Hutto & Myin,2013; Krakauer et al.,2017; Noë,2004; Noë & O’Regan,2001;
Schroeder etal.,2010). Indeed, someofthe pressureto includeaction inconscious-
ness science comes from the predictive processing literature itself, insofar as this
literature rests on a notion of action (as we discuss later) and has already begun
to address consciousness (Parr et al.,2019), and so insisting on this challenge will
somewhat preemptively help secure a good position for this framework.
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 9
Our conscious experience is intimately coupled with our actions at both per-
sonal levels (for example, a voluntary decision to reach for a cup of tea) and sub-
personal levels (for example, as we actively sample the world in visual search, by
moving our eyes around a visual scene). Though we might readily imagine an ut-
terly actionless but conscious system, it seems misguided to suggest that action is
an optional extra for any actual system that is conscious. Notice, this is not just
the idea that consciousness isfor action, but rather that the conscious experience
has the structure and trajectory it has in part because we are active systems.
Presently, neuroscientific theories of consciousness and NCC research that fo-
cusonconsciousstatesandcontentspaylittleattentiontotheroleofactionincon-
sciousness. The natural exceptions are studies that explicitly focus on experiences
of intention, volition and agency, but these studies are rarely taken to motivate
general accounts of consciousness or brain function (see also Fleming et al. (2015)
for an intriguing link between action and metacognition). One possible reason for
general neglect of action is that action and consciousness seem to be dissociable,
at least on the face of it. For example, we can be conscious without overt action as
in dreaming, and we can act without consciousness, as in reflexes. Nevertheless, a
systematic dimension to brain function that includes action as an integrated part
would be desirable, allowing us to posit the necessity of action for consciousness.
Such proposals might include covert, mental actions (such as endogenous alloca-
tion of attention) as well as overt actions – and they might distinguish between
actions being constitutively necessary (i.e., necessary at any given time for con-
sciousness), compared to being merely diachronously necessary (i.e., necessary as
part of the history of the organism’s interaction with its environment).
Summarizing these three challenges for the systematic NCC search, we would
like to have a framework for interpreting brain activity that allows interactions
between global and local states of consciousness, enables intervention at ‘joints’
which make sense both in terms of brain activity and phenomenology, and which
allowsanintegratedroleforactioninconsciousness. Next, afterconsideringsome
theoreticallymotivatedconstraints, wewillproposethatthepredictiveprocessing
framework fits the bill.
4 Theories of consciousness
There are now many theories of consciousness vying for attention and empirical
evidence. Here is an incomplete list of some of the most discussed theories, with
some exemplifying references:
Global neuronal workspace theory(Baars, 1988; Mashour et al.,2020)
Integrated information theory(Tononi et al.,2016; Tononi & Edelman,
1998)
Recurrent processing theory(Lamme, 2020, 2010)
Higher order thought theories & Metacognitive theories(Brown et al.,
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 10
2019; Fleming, 2020; Lau, 2008; Lau & Rosenthal, 2011; Rosenthal,
1997)
Radical plasticity thesis(Cleeremans, 2011)
Virtual reality theories(Metzinger,2004; Revonsuo,2006)
Attention-based theories(Graziano & Webb,2015; Prinz,2012)
Heterophenomenology (Dennett, 1991)
Core consciousness theory(Damasio, 2000)
Orchestrated objective reduction(Hameroff & Penrose,2014)
Electromagnetic theory(McFadden, 2020, 2002)
Some of these labels and groupings ignore substantial differences. For example,
though versions of Higher-order thought theory are closely linked to Metacogni-
tive theories they differ significantly in how they cash out the higher-order ele-
ment; the two Attention-based theories differ, though both appeal to attention,
and similarly for the two Virtual reality theories. There are also now several the-
ories proposed which connect to the framework we shall consider below, namely
predictive processing; we discuss these theories below. Though there is some di-
versity in the explanatory targets and in metaphysical assumptions (for discussion
of this kind of diversity, see e.g., Seth,2021), there is general agreement that a the-
ory of consciousness should explain the underlying mechanism(s) for conscious
contents and/or global states of consciousness.
Regarding metaphysical assumptions, there is some debate about whether the-
ories of consciousness are or should be aimed at resolving the metaphysical mind-
body problem (the “hard problem”, see also alternate versions such as the knowl-
edge argument or the explanatory gap; Descartes,1641; Chalmers,1996; Jackson,
1982; Levine,1983). While some theories explicitly seek to solve the hard problem
(e.g., Integrated information theory, Orchestrated objective reduction, Electromag-
netic theory), others do not, or do so only implicitly or indirectly (e.g. recurrent
processing theory, global neuronal workspace theory). To solve the hard problem,
a theory must remove any open question about whether a system characterised in
terms of that theory is in fact conscious. This is a tall order. It seems to us the best
hope for making inroads on the metaphysical question is to take an indirect ap-
proach, and to extend this approach by searching forsystematic neural correlates
of consciousness (though weacknowledge of course that the hardproblemmay be
toometaphysicallyhardforanyscientificapproachtobesuccessful). Ononelevel,
this strategy will deliver greater predictive and explanatory power regarding fac-
tors that shape and modulate consciousness. Such advances will have important
practical consequences in (for example) neurology and psychiatry. Equally impor-
tant, a focus on systematic NCCs recognizes that ‘consciousness’ is not a singular
explanatory target. The multifaceted structure of conscious phenomenology in-
stead provides a repertoire of explanatory targets. Applying a general theory of
brain function alongside a refined repertoire of explanatory targets (as opposed
to implicitly assuming consciousness to be a singular phenomenon) should prove
powerfulincircumventingthehardproblemofwhyconsciousexperiencehappens
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 11
at all (Seth,2016). In other words, a sensible mapping – achieved by satisfying the
systematicity constraint – of brain states and phenomenology may make the hard
problem less pressing, or perhaps even dissolve it altogether.
Asmentioned,laterweexamineextensivelywhetherpredictiveprocessingcan
providethetheoreticalframeworkneededtodeliverasystematicNCC.Thisdiscus-
sion will raise the issue whether PP is itself a theory of consciousness (and really
belongs on the list above), or is on the way to becoming one. For now, we note
that there have been several recent proposals for how to connect PP to conscious-
ness. Our point here is that PP is not first and foremost a theory of consciousness
since, as a framework for brain function, it could exist perfectly well even in the
absence of any discussion of consciousness. This fact about it will, as we shall see,
encourage its consideration as the basis for a systematic NCC.
4.1 Common themes
In spite of the diversity of current theories of consciousness, the most prominent
have at least two elements in common. If these theories are at least roughly on the
right track, then it will be desirable if the underlying framework for a systematic
NCC, which we seek, can give rise to these common elements.
The first element isuncertainty reduction. Many theories associate conscious-
ness with a mechanism such that experiencing a certain content in a certain con-
sciousstateisrelatedtouncertaintyreduction,inaninformation-theoreticalsense.
For example, Global neuronal workspace theory operates with the idea of con-
tentsbeingignitedintoconsciousnesswhenanevidenceaccumulationthresholdis
reached(Dehaene, 2011);versionsofHigher-orderthoughttheoryoperatewithcri-
terion setting that optimizes a variable signal-to-noise ratio (Lau,2008), the same
holdsfortheRadicalplasticitythesis,andMetacognitivetheories; Integratedinfor-
mationtheoryformallydefinesconsciousstatesinpartintermsofthepossibilities
excluded by being in that state (Oizumi et al.,2014); Recurrent processing theory
considers whether the mechanisms for consciousness have to do with integrating
information and with learning, both of which are uncertainty reducing. The rea-
soning behind this insistence on uncertainty reduction often seems to be that a
conscious system has a tendency to settle in one unified and highly informative
representationalstate. Ofcourse, wearenothereplacingallthesediversetheories
onthesamefootingwithrespecttohowtheyconceivesuchuncertaintyreduction.
Different theories propose diverse and often incompatible mechanisms, operating
at quite different spatiotemporal and even conceptual scales (for discussion, see
Doerig et al.,2020; Graziano et al.,2020).
The second element that many theories of consciousness have in common
is top-down signalling. Many theories of consciousness agree that there is little
chance for consciousness to occur in a system that does not have top-down (‘back-
ward’or‘inside-out’)signallinginadditiontothebottom-up(‘forward’or‘outside-
in’) flow from the sensory cortices. For Integrated information theory, it turns out
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 12
that a system with only bottom-up connectivity has no φ (‘phi’, the quantitative
measure of consciousness on this theory; (Oizumi et al.,2014: 19); Recurrent pro-
cessing theory is based on the notion of backward, ‘recurrent’ processing; NCC
studiesinsupportofGlobalneuronalworkspacetheorysuggestthatconsciousness
is ‘ignited’ partly by recurrent connectivity; Higher-order thought and Metacog-
nitive theories all operate with an assumption that some higher-level process can
‘look down’ at lower-level states; and finally, it is hard to see how Virtual reality
theory would work without extensive top-down signalling in the construction of
the internal virtual reality model that can arise in the absence of bottom-up sig-
nals. We also note that studies of the global state of consciousness in anaesthesia
suggest that a global state of consciousness depends on top-down signalling in the
brain (Boly et al.,2011, 2012; Pal et al.,2020).
Therearesignificantdifferencesamongstthetheoriesconcerninghowthistop-
down signalling should work, neurophysiologically and computationally. Some
theories (e.g., Global neuronal workspace theory and versions of Higher-order
thought and Metacognitive theories place the source of top-down signals more
forward in the brain than others, such as Recurrent processing theory). In spite of
these differences, the agreement on the need for top-down signalling is striking,
and does seem to be supported by the available evidence.
Given that most theories of consciousness allocate key roles to uncertainty re-
duction and top-down signalling, and assuming these theories are at least roughly
on the right track, it would be desirable if the systematic framework for the NCC
was able to accommodate these two elements in a central but relatively theory
neutral role. As we shall see, this requirement also makes PP a good fit.
5 Core properties of PP
Predictiveprocessingisatheoreticalframeworkthatpositsthatthebrain’soverall
function is to minimize long-term average prediction error. According to PP, the
brain harbors a generative model of its internal, bodily environment as well as
its external, worldly environment and continually finesses this model through a
prediction/prediction error dynamic. The predictions are compared to the actual
input, andthebrain’sjobistokeeppredictionerrorwithinexpectedboundsinthe
long term (Friston,2010, 2005; Friston, Parr, et al.,2017). The underlying objective
forthisPPactivityisfortheorganismtoact(internallyandexternally)tomaintain
itself in its expected (homeostatic) states. As we shall acknowledge further in the
final section, the PP framework is by no means universally accepted and there is
substantial,interestingandchallengingdebateaboutit. Here,weseektoprimarily
develop its promising properties for the science of consciousness.
Predictive processing in the brain can occur in four basic ways, all analogous
to familiar descriptions of scientific inference (for comprehensive reviews, see e.g.,
Bogacz, 2017; Buckley et al.,2017; Hohwy, 2020a; Yon et al.,2019). The central
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 13
principle for the operation of these four processes is thaton average and over the
long run, (statistical) surpriseshould be minimized:
Perception. The model can be revised in the light of prediction error, which
will reduce the error over different timescales, at different levels of the model’s
hierarchy, and improve the model fit. On short timescales prediction errors are
minimized to find the optimal (or near-optimal) posterior (using approximations
to Bayesian inference). This is perceptual inference (Friston,2003). On longer
timescales the parameters of generative models can change, corresponding to per-
ceptual learning, which in turn finesses models to perform better in perceptual
inference. This is analogous to how a scientist might update their hypothesis in
the light of new data, hoping to eventually learn models that generate predictions
encountering only little prediction error.
Action. The model can be kept fixed and used to generate predictions even
though prediction error may transiently increase. Action, or selective sampling of
the sensory input, can then be used to minimize the prediction error. In particular,
proprioceptive predictions are delivered to the classic reflex arcs, which engage
the body plant until the expected sensory input is obtained. This is action, and is
analogous to how a scientist may retain a hypothesis and control the environment
for confounds until the expected evidence obtains (or, less optimistically, engages
in repeating slight variations of an experiment until the desired result arrives). Ac-
tion is then simply prediction error minimization with a different direction of fit
than perceptual inference. In the PP framework, this is active inference and in-
volves inference of policies for action, under expectations that precise (unambigu-
ous) policies best minimize future prediction error (Friston et al.,2013; Friston,
FitzGerald, Rigoli, Schwartenbeck, O’Doherty, et al.,2016). Conceiving of active
inference in this way allows for both instrumental actions (actions that directly
fulfil perceptual predictions) and exploratory, epistemic actions that improve the
capacity for future instrumental action (Tschantz, Seth, et al.,2020). Importantly,
actionscanalsobeinternaltotheorganism(‘intero-actions’), sothatinteroceptive
predictions enslave autonomic reflexes in order to maintain physiological home-
ostasis (Allen et al.,2019; Seth, 2013; Seth & Tsakiris,2018). Active inference is
indispensable to PP in any sufficiently rich understanding – a PP system without
action will not be like any biological creature, certainly not like any system with
a brain.
Attention. The dynamic exchange of predictions and prediction errors in PP
can be modulated according to the expected precision of prediction error, rela-
tive to the prediction, such that prediction error minimization occurs on the basis
of prediction error estimated to be trustworthy; this amounts to gain control (or
gating), and functionally maps on toattention (Feldman & Friston,2010; Hohwy,
2012). This is analogous to assessment of variance in statistical inference, and to
how a scientist over time will build up expectations about which types of measure-
mentswillbepreciseandwhichnot. Precisionoptimizationreferstoinferenceand
learning for precision expectations. Note that despite the common association of
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 14
attention with exteroceptive modalities, precision optimization is ubiquitous in
PP and applies (for example) equally to interoceptive inference (Petzschner et al.,
2019).
Recognition, understanding, exploration.The model can be simplified (cf. com-
plexity reduction) to enable prediction error minimization in the long run; this
correspondstoBayesianmodelselection, wherecomplexityispenalized. Itisanal-
ogous to how a scientist may prefer simpler models in the long run even though
a more complex model may better fit the current evidence. Functionally, this may
map on to aspects of recognition (rather than mere detection) of sensory causes
and their interactions, within an understanding of the causal structure of the en-
vironment, where different models of what may have caused sensory input are
weighed against each other. As mentioned above, in relation to epistemic action,
anemphasisonminimizingfuturepredictionerrorcanleadnaturallytonotionsof
exploration, where prediction error is occasionally allowed to increase in order to
enablenewcausalinformationtobediscovered, openingnewavenuesforefficient
future prediction error minimization (Friston, FitzGerald, Rigoli, Schwartenbeck,
O’Doherty, et al.,2016; Friston et al.,2015; Tschantz, Seth, et al.,2020).
Putting these elements together, we arrive at the powerful idea that the brain
embodies a model of its environment (including the organism itself), and exerts
control on this environment through statistical inference geared towards minimiz-
ing its own long-term prediction error. This ambitious framework has been the
focus of much work across neuroscience, cognitive science, biology and philos-
ophy (e.g., Metzinger & Wiese,2017; Hohwy,2020a; Mendonça et al.,2020). The
pointofminimizingpredictionerrorinthelongrunaverage, isthatthisallowsthe
organismtostaywithinitsexpectedstates–i.e., tostayalive. Thisgivesaperspec-
tive on the whole organism as primarily concerned with maintaining homeostasis
by repeatedly visiting (expected) states of its (internal and external) environment.
The overall prediction error minimization of the organism is therefore put into the
context of the specific environmental impact (on physiological homeostasis) the
organism is exposed to. This foundational biological perspective underwrites the
claim that the PP framework is not in itself a theory of consciousness.
AkeypointaboutPPisthatthemechanisticprocessofsensorypredictionerror
minimization will (given certain assumptions such as normally distributed data
and separable timescales) come to approximate Bayesian inference on the causes
of sensory signals. This provides another perspective on PP: as transforming a
typically intractable inference problem (exact Bayesian inference) into a tractable
optimization problem. This perspective in turn licenses the view that a system
that manages to minimize prediction error in the long run will tend to behave as
if it were a representational system. This follows because Bayesian inference is
representational, in the sense of resting on statistical models of the causes of data.
(AlreadythereisalinkheretoChalmers’exampleofasystematicNCC,mentioned
earlier, as being a neural representational system, though PP is much richer than
just this).
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 15
This perspective highlights that the PP framework can be cast at different lev-
els of abstraction which make different claims about the underlying mechanism.
On ‘strong’ interpretations, the brain isin factutilizing generative models and ap-
proximate Bayesian inference to accomplish prediction error minimization. On
‘weaker’ interpretations, brains (and other systems) can be described as if they are
utilizing such models and inferential processes, though the underlying physical-
causalmechanismmaybedifferent(cf.theWattgovernor; VanGelder, 1995). Here
lie interesting questions about the necessary and sufficient conditions required to
be vs. tohave a model, what this implies for PP, and for the application of PP as a
framework for expressing systematic NCCs (Baltieri et al.,2020; Kiefer,2017; Seth
& Tsakiris,2018; Van Es,2020).
Note that for organisms living in a dynamically changing world, Bayesian in-
ference will have to anticipate changes in the world that may threaten their prior
beliefs (especially those prior beliefs concerning homeostasis). That is, such sys-
tems cannot just accumulate evidence under the assumption that the causes they
are sampling from remain constant, they must takevolatility into account too (i.e.,
changesinstatisticaldistributionsovertime). ThisimpliesthatBayesianinference
should be hierarchical: an adequate prediction-error minimizing system should
find patterns in patterns and build corresponding expectations about expectations,
be able to regulate the rate with which it learns, and it should be prepared to re-
linquish parts of the model that it expects to become obsolete (Mathys et al.,2011,
2014). In addition, with an appeal to hierarchical inference there is an opportu-
nity to ameliorate the problem of understanding where priors come from: in a
hierarchical setting, posteriors at one level form (empirical) priors for the level
below. Notice that under PP, hierarchies should not be understood in overly ide-
alized terms of neatly stacked levels passing messages only to their nearest neigh-
bours. Cortical hierarchies, though mathematically describable, will recapitulate
the causal structure of the world it is modelling, with several leap-frogging mes-
sage pathways among more distant levels (Markov et al.,2013).
These core properties of the overall PP framework can be implemented mech-
anistically throughprocess theoriesfor particular kinds of systems, such as brains.
The best known process theory for perceptual inference is predictive coding, and
gradientdescentonvariationalfreeenergyforactiveinference(Friston, 2003; Fris-
ton, FitzGerald, Rigoli, Schwartenbeck, & Pezzulo,2016). Predictive coding is a
concrete ‘message passing’ scheme where neuronal representations in higher lev-
els of cortical hierarchies generate predictions of representations in lower levels.
The top-down predictions are compared with representations at the lower level to
form a prediction error (associated with the activity of superficial pyramidal cells).
This mismatch signal is passed back up the hierarchy, to update higher level repre-
sentations (associated with the activity of deep pyramidal cells). As a result of this
recursive exchange of signals, prediction errors are suppressed (‘explained away’)
at all hierarchical levels, to provide a hierarchical explanation for sensory inputs
at the very lowest (sensory) level. This message passing process encompasses a
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 16
limited number of signals, consistent with PP: top-down predictions and expected
precisions, endogenous precision modulation, and bottom-up precision-weighted
prediction error and precision prediction errors (canonical microcircuits for this
scheme have been proposed Bastos et al.,2012; see also Walsh et al.,2020; and
Friston, 2019b; see also Teufel & Fletcher,2020 for possible roles for “bottom-up”
signaling of predictions). Minimization of variational free energy for active infer-
ence is less widely known but is beginning to be extensively studied too (Friston,
FitzGerald, Rigoli, Schwartenbeck, & Pezzulo,2016; Parr& Friston,2018; Tschantz,
Millidge, et al.,2020; Tschantz, Seth, et al.,2020). Outstanding issues in this area of
research concern the underlying neuronal architecture of continuous vs. discrete
processing, the relative extent to which predictive coding or complexity reduc-
tion occurs at higher or deeper levels of the cortical hierarchy (Friston, Parr, et
al., 2017), how best to formalize notions of ‘expected free energy’ (Millidge et al.,
2020), and – more generally – its relation to machine learning approaches such as
reinforcement learning and ‘control as inference’ (Tschantz, Millidge, et al.,2020).
6 PP as a systematic NCC
Now we are in a position to propose PP as a promising candidate for satisfying
the systematicity requirement for the NCC. Recall that to meet this goal we need
a general framework for brain function with sufficient explanatory and predictive
power to account for the structure and form of its correlated phenomenological
distinctions. We further identified three challenges to the NCC search (global
vs. local, screening off, and action) as well as two common elements of theories
of consciousness (uncertainty reduction and top-down signal flow), which should
be used as selection criteria for this general framework. PP evidently fits this bill.
Here we show how this is the case assuming some ‘strong’ version of PP, that is,
the existence of some explicit message passing scheme similar to that described
for perceptual and active inference above. (This assumption is important because
it opens the possibility that ‘weaker’ versions of PP will work less well to establish
a systematic correlate for consciousness, in other words, PP will also be able to
describe systems that are not conscious).
PP holds promise for addressing the ‘Global states and local contents’ chal-
lenge. PP is an account of the global state of creatures that act to remain in their
expected states, and who in the course of this process install a probabilistic model
of their internal and external environment. This perspective allows that local in-
put, caused by the occurrence of particular environmental states, can be inserted
into this global state, potentially leading to interactions between the global pre-
diction error landscape and the local exposure to new causes. This perspective
then connects specific contents to the global regulation of homeostatic and allo-
static states (for discussion, see Stephan et al.,2016; Corcoran & Hohwy,2018).
This connection illustrates how the machinery of PP can be used to systematically
account for properties of consciousness, without being a theory of consciousness
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 17
itself. From this perspective, global states of consciousness like sleep and anesthe-
sia may involve disruption of the top-down or bottom-up signaling that is needed
to instantiate the process of prediction error minimization with respect to local
exposure to sensory causes; sleep and dreaming may relate to how expected re-
ductions in precision of sensory input lead to global reduced gain on prediction
error (Hobson & Friston,2012), and propofol-induced loss of consciousness seems
to relate to disruption of top-down signaling (Boly et al.,2012).
PPholdspromisealsoforthe‘Screeningoff: basicbrainstatesandphenomenol-
ogy’ challenge about how to ‘screen off’ less explanatory neural correlates from
the more explanatory correlates. To address this challenge, we highlighted the im-
portance of having ways of intervening on causal chains in neural systems that in
a reasonable sense ‘carve nature at the joints’, that is, are informed by a mecha-
nistic framework for brain function, and which are formulated at a level that can
capture phenomenological distinctions.
PP meets the first part of this challenge since it posits a mechanism of pre-
diction error minimization, replicated throughout levels of a cortical hierarchy.
In other words, manipulations and interventions that are aimed at screening off
for the purposes of the NCC, should be informed and interpreted by the process
theories animating PP (we recognise that there remain many open theoretical
and empirical questions about these process theories (Friston, FitzGerald, Rigoli,
Schwartenbeck, & Pezzulo,2016; Heeger,2017; Van der Helm,2016)). Consider, as
an example, an attempt to screen off upstream and downstream correlates for con-
sciousfaceperception. Inthisexample, itmakessensetoaskhowareasimplicated
in face perception, such as the fusiform face area (FFA) and the occipital face area
(OFA) stand to each other in terms of hierarchical inference and message passing
of predictions and prediction errors. It could be that even if activity in FFA is more
tightly coupled to face perception than activity in OFA, we cannot understand the
systematic contribution of FFA to conscious perception without appreciating the
role of prediction error signals arriving from another area (such as OFA). In other
words,itmaybethatPPcanmakecontributionstothesearchforsystematicNCCs
by guiding the balancing of functional segregation (localization) and functional
connectivity (integration) in formulating candidate NCCs. In a concrete instance
of this kind of approach, Weilnhammer and colleagues (Weilnhammer et al.,2020)
employed a predictive coding model of binocular rivalry to provide evidence that
prefrontal activity is not downstream to alternations in conscious perception.
PP then also offers a powerful approach to the phenomenological part of this
challenge, namely, to match neural substrates to the structure of conscious expe-
rience. Certain aspects of PP readily lend themselves to matching with informal
descriptions of perceptual phenomenology. For example, conscious experiences
typically contain many objects set in a contextualized scene. The hierarchical na-
ture of PP nicely accommodates this phenomenological observation, so that sen-
sory signals are ‘explained away’ by predictive models combining many degrees
of invariance. This admits predictions about sensory causes that have different
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 18
degrees of invariance with respect to exogenous environmental dynamics and
sensory changes resulting from actions. This is a useful property in light of the
range of invariances characterizing perceptual phenomenology (e.g., objects are
perceived invariantly as being a certain way while at the same time we experience
their changing position, lighting, and even presence to our sensory surfaces at all
during occlusion). PP also readily accounts for multisensory integration through
approximation to precision-weighted optimal Bayesian inference (Alais & Burr,
2004; Hohwy,2013: Ch. 5); it also speaks to unusual conscious experiences, for
example in delusions and hallucinations, which may reflect sensory signals being
inappropriately overwhelmed by perceptual priors (Corlett et al.,2019; Fletcher &
Frith, 2009; Powers et al.,2017).
Perhapsmostinterestingly,thelanguageofPPenablesnewquestions(orreani-
mates old, neglected questions) about conscious phenomenology. For example, ex-
tending early claims that peripheral vision is ‘somehow statistical’ (Lettvin,1976),
we could ask whether perceptual content in the visual periphery is constituted by
precision estimations, instead of merely being shaped by them. Or, starting from
empirical observations rather than phenomenology, we could ask how the concep-
tual tools of PP account for intriguing findings such as the inability to distinguish
between large variations in colour saturation for rapidly presented images (Cohen
& Rubenstein,2020). In other words, the language of PP enables new and produc-
tive mappings to be drawn between phenomenological descriptions and underly-
ing neurocognitive processes. If PP can facilitate informative mapping of struc-
tured phenomenology with neural substrates screened off in an informed manner,
then it can make significant headway on this challenge.
PP can also help address the ‘Action challenge’. This challenge asks for a flexi-
ble way to integrate action into an account of the structuring of conscious experi-
ence. PP does this first in a general way, by defining the organism in terms of how
it acts to maintain itself in its expected states. Within this general setting, PP can
account for the specific role of action in perception through the notion of active
inference where policies are inferred on the basis of the expected prediction error,
given the selected policy. Policies cover long-term goals such as going shopping,
or choosing an education (or maintaining homeostatic and interoceptive states in
the face of environmentally or internally caused fluctuations), and translate these
goals through shorter-term policies all the way down to control states that can be
executed by the agent’s body (such as limb or eye movement). The key move here
is to recognize that goals (in a reinforcement learning sense) can be expressed as
priorswithinPP,sothatanorganismwillcometoactinwaysthatfulfilits(biased)
expectationsaboutitsfuturecondition(Friston,FitzGerald,Rigoli,Schwartenbeck,
O’Doherty, et al.,2016; Tschantz, Millidge, et al.,2020).
The fact that both perception and action are inferential, albeit with different
directions of fit, places them on equal footing and ensures they can meaningfully
participate within the same, systematic NCC project. This can be exemplified in
a computational model that explains one of the basic paradigms in consciousness
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 19
science, binocular rivalry, in terms of active inference where selective sampling,
driven by beliefs about volatility, leads to perceptual alternations (Parr et al.,2019).
In addition, since, within PP, actions themselves emerge from fulfillment of (pro-
prioceptive) predictions, the PP framework provides a means of accounting for
the phenomenology of action – such as sense of agency; (Pacherie,2008) as well
as the influence of action on other conscious contents (such as the fidgeting we ex-
perience when bored or excited (Perrykkad & Hohwy,2020), or the role of action-
related predictions in the shaping of conscious access (Skora et al.,2020). PP is
therefore well placed to systematically integrate an action component into the
NCC, and thereby to afford an understanding of the key role for action in con-
sciousness, rather than conceiving action as an optional extra to consciousness.
In addition to the three challenges for a systematic NCC, we also identified
two constraints, extracted from theories of consciousness, concerning uncertainty
reduction and top-down signaling.
PPcaneasilyprovideasystematicframeworkfortheNCCthatidentifiesuncer-
taintyreductionasacoreelement. Thereasonissimple: predictionerrorminimiza-
tion, construed as (implicit) minimization of surprisal, is equivalent to uncertainty
reductionoverthelong-termaverage. Predictionerrorminimizationhappensover
multiple hierarchical, spatiotemporal scales, and through several interlinked pro-
cesses (perceptual and active inference, precision optimization, complexity reduc-
tion); this richness affords some capacity to capture the different styles of uncer-
tainty reduction that various theories of consciousness focus on. Thus PP seems
consistent with the following ideas: that (phenomenal) consciousness correlates
with recurrent processing within perceptual cortices (as opposed to requiring the
contribution of domain-general, higher-order, or ‘executive’ cortices) (cf. Recur-
rent processing theory); that (access) consciousness requires ignition into a more
anterior global workspace, perhaps once a prediction error minimization thresh-
old has been crossed (cf. Global neuronal workspace theory; this leaves an inter-
esting open question for PP as to what determines this threshold, with one option
being that it varies contextually with expected precision); that a conscious expe-
rience is the way it is, and not some other way, in part because of the repertoire
of excluded alternatives (cf. Integrated information theory; though much formal
work still needs to be done to ascertain in which ways uncertainty reduction in PP
andintegratedinformationtheorymayalign); orthatmetacognitiveassessmentof
first-order representations requires prefrontal areas (cf. Higher order thought and
Metacognitive theories). Note, we are not claiming that all these theories reduce
to PP. Instead, we argue that several of them are consistent with different aspects
of PP (at least in their theoretical motivation, if not in formal detail), and – further
– that PP’s tools may be useful in broadening the conceptual appeal and empirical
grip of some of these theories.
PP is also well placed to underpin the second constraint: top-down signalling.
This is because most prediction error minimization schemes, such as hierarchical
predictive coding, are cashed out in ways that emphasise top-down message pass-
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 20
ing. Itmaybethatinsome(e.g.,singlecelled)PPorganisms,thereisnostraightfor-
ward way to distinguish anything resembling top-down or bottom-up signalling.
Butitisreasonablyclearthatdirectionally-orientedmessagepassingdoesoccurin
primates and many other animals, and the prevalence of top-down or ‘inside out’
connections in the brain is indeed one of the main motivations for PP in the first
place (e.g., Friston,2003). While this basic functional architecture is undeniably
prominent, many open questions remain, the resolution of which likely deliver
a more complicated picture. For example, it may be that different message pass-
ing schemes are required for continuous and discrete processing (Friston, Parr, et
al., 2017), and there may be a role for ‘bottom-up predictions’ (Teufel & Fletcher,
2020), perhaps in relation to ‘amortized’ inference in machine learning. From the
perspective of developing a systematic NCC, these questions should be considered
in relation to their relevance for phenomenological properties of consciousness.
In short, we find that PP is an exceptionally promising candidate to satisfy
the systematicity requirement in the search for candidate NCCs. It is a general-
purpose mechanistic framework, which has plausible neurobiological underpin-
nings,andwhichiswellequippedtoaddresssignificantchallengesfacingtheNCC
project. Moreover, it is able to marry the NCC concept to key considerations in
some prominent theories of consciousness, and its constructs already show poten-
tial in accounting for fundamental aspects of conscious phenomenology. By inter-
pretingNCCfindingsintermsofsomethingthatisnotitself, inthefirstinstance, a
theory of consciousness, it therefore seems possible to increase the predictive and
explanatory value of the NCC.
Of course, something that has great predictive and explanatory power with re-
spectto x mayitselfbe,orbecome,atheoryof x. Andweviewitasindeedpossible
(even likely) that, in time, some aspects of PP will emerge as a theoretical expla-
nation of consciousness. Thus, PP could eventually supersede current theories of
consciousness. For this to happen, a core challenge will be to distinguish those
aspects of PP that apply particularly to conscious creatures, from those that don’t.
In its broadest and most general formulation, in terms of the free energy princi-
ple (Friston, 2019a), the theory applies to any system in a far-from-equilibrium
steady state, which almost certainly includes non-conscious creatures – indeed
it may apply literally to everything. The strategy should therefore be to learn
what is special about the way in which prediction error is minimized in creatures
that we are relatively sure are conscious, such as primates (probably all mammals),
and with this understanding to formulate a theory of at least some aspects of con-
sciousness in terms of PP (Wiese,2018, 2020). There are various possible avenues
here, but to give this prospect some substance, it may be that conscious selfhood
is grounded in control-oriented active inference of physiological homeostasis – a
“beast-machine” theory of consciousness (Seth,2021; Seth & Tsakiris,2018). We
return to this theme in the concluding remarks below.
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 21
7 Predictive and explanatory power of PP as a sys-
tematic basis for NCC
Implementation of PP to arrive at a systematic NCC can happen on several fronts,
with much relevant work already underway. We give a flavor of some of this work
below.
Atthetheoreticallevel,thereareemergingbasicformulationsofpredictivepro-
cessing (or active inference, or the free energy principle, or adjacent or kindred
formulations) directed at consciousness (or sentience, or self) (Carhart-Harris et
al., 2014; Chang et al.,2020; Clark,2019; Friston,2018; Friston, Wiese, et al.,2020;
Rudrauf et al.,2017; Williford et al.,2018), including the emergence of the problem
of consciousness itself (Clark et al.,2019), or how PP might supersede, dissolve, or
deflate the ‘hard problem’ of consciousness (Clark,2019; Seth,2016, 2021). There
has been a significant amount of research mapping a large set of properties of PP
to many different aspects of conscious phenomenology (Clark,2015; Hohwy,2013,
2020a; Seth,2019). Existing theories of consciousness are being interpreted in the
lightofPP,suchasHeterophenomenology(Dołęga&Dewhurst, 2020), Globalneu-
ronal workspace theory (Hohwy,2013; Whyte,2019; Whyte & Smith,2020), ver-
sions of Higher-order thought theory and Metacognitive theories (Hohwy,2015;
SandvedSmithetal., 2020),Attention-basedtheories(Marchi&Hohwy, 2020),and
Integrated information theory (for related discussion, see Kanai et al.,2019).
Moving closer to empirical implementation, PP is increasingly able to speak to
keyparadigmsinconsciousnessscience, suchasbinocularrivalry. Anearlycontri-
bution here proposed that if some representational content enters consciousness,
then this content is captured in the perceptual hypothesis that is best at minimiz-
ing prediction error; or, equivalently, for content to be conscious it must be rep-
resented by the posterior with the most evidence (highest probability) (Hohwy et
al., 2008). Note that this is only a starting point since it does not pretend to be a
sufficient condition for consciousness (and even with that caveat, there are some
additional questions about how active inference may contribute to this idea, as
the action challenge highlights; for example, desired or survival-relevant states
might influence the ‘winning’ posterior through increased prior precision (Seth
& Tsakiris,2018)). The idea that the best perceptual hypothesis determines con-
scious content has been pursued successfully with quantitative predictions and
neuroimagingmethods(Weilnhammeretal., 2017),pointingtoinvolvementofpre-
frontal cortex in the lead-up to perceptual transitions (Weilnhammer et al.,2020).
This position has since been re-visited in the computational model mentioned ear-
lier, which integrates active inference and thereby displays the potential for PP to
see conscious perception in its essential relation to action (Parr et al.,2019).
OneaspectofPPthatappliesacrossmanyempiricalcontextsistheassociation
oftop-downsignalingwithpredictions(orexpectations)thatenableandshapeper-
ceptual content. This sharply defined functional role contrasts with some other
perspectives, like Recurrent processing theory, in which the role of top-down sig-
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 22
naling is left comparatively unspecified. Following early demonstrations that the
integrity of top-down signaling within visual cortex was necessary for conscious
perception of motion (Pascual-Leone & Walsh,2001), there has been a productive
upsurge in studies of how expectations shape perception, much of which has been
directly inspired by versions of PP (Lange et al.,2018; Summerfield & Egner,2009).
Behavioural experiments have addressed the simple question of whether we (are
more likely to) consciously see what we expect to see, or what violates our expec-
tations. Pinto and colleagues found evidence using continuous flash suppression
that valid perceptual expectations accelerated conscious access (Pinto et al.,2015);
Melloni and colleagues used a perceptual hysteresis design to show that valid ex-
pectationsfacilitatedconsciousperceptionandalteredthelatencyofevent-related
potentials distinguishing seen from unseen stimuli (Melloni et al.,2011); this fo-
cus extends to action, where Yon and colleagues found that action sharpens the
sensory representations of expected outcomes (Yon et al.,2018), and where Suzuki
andcolleaguesfoundthatvalidsensorimotorpredictionsacceleratedbreakthrough
of virtual objects from continuous flash suppression (Suzuki et al.,2019; see also
Skora et al.,2020).
A growing number of studies using fMRI have provided evidence for how con-
textual expectations modulate activity in a content specific manner in early visual
areas even in the absence of sensory input to those areas, and have begun unravel-
ing how the interplay of predictions and prediction errors might take place across
distinct laminae of the cortex (Kok et al.,2019; Muckli et al.,2015). In one recent
study, expectations based on word context were found to both increase the per-
ceptual legibility of individual letters, and to sharpen their representations within
early visual cortex (Heilbron et al.,2020). Another study, using MEG, was able
to quantify the time course of the influence of probabilistic top-down priors in
perception (Aru et al.,2016; Dijkstra et al.,2020). A further study systematically
explored the dynamic interactions of predictions for conscious awareness (Meijs
et al., 2018). A number of studies have applied PP to the question of aberrant
conscious perception, for example, in schizophrenia (Cole et al.,2020; Stuke et al.,
2019) and autism (Lawson et al.,2017; Skewes et al.,2015).
An important question in consciousness science is the relation between con-
sciousness and attention. Theories of the Attention-based type suggest a tight
relation (Graziano et al.,2020; Prinz,2012), while some theoretical and empirical
considerations suggest that consciousness and (at least top-down) attention can
be dissociated (Koch & Tsuchiya,2007). PP seems able to provide a middle ground
allowing a tight connection between attention and consciousness together with el-
ements of dissociation, via the multifaceted involvement of precision optimisation
(Hohwy, 2012). As mentioned, PP sees attention as precision optimisation, which
isrequiredforanyperceptualandactiveinferenceinachangingworld. Thismeans
that any processing leading to any conscious perception must include attention, at
least in this PP-sense, to some degree.
Methodologically, PP has inspired studies of attention and expectation treated
as orthogonal factors. For example, one influential study used PP to derive hy-
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 23
potheses about interactions between attention and expectation, and explored how
these interactions would manifest for conscious perception at low visual process-
ingareasofthe brain(V1); (Koketal., 2012). Dual-task paradigmscan also beused
to dissociate the effects of expectation from those of attention (e.g., Sherman et al.,
2015, in a study connecting prior expectations to metacognition). Recent studies
usingfrequencytagginginEEGhavesoughttousePPtodisentanglethetop-down
and bottom-up pathways for expectation and attention (Gordon et al.,2019).
ThereisincreasingfocusonMetacognitiveapproachestoconsciousness. There
is a clear sense in which PP involves a certain kind of metacognition, namely in
terms of higher-level expected precisions. That is, the PP system is constantly
‘looking down’ at its own representations seeking to learn how their precisions
(and more generally their sufficient statistics) change over time. Many questions
are still open about how this general PP element can speak to the role of different
kinds of metacognition in consciousness (for deployment of active inference to
metacognition, see Sandved Smith et al.,2020). An outstanding challenge here
will be to formally integrate the framework of signal detection theory, in which
most theories of metacognition are articulated (e.g., Barrett et al.,2013) with PP
(see, e.g., FitzGerald et al.,2014; Fleming,2020).
Aswelookbrieflytomoresubtleaspectsofconsciousexperience,PPissurpris-
ingly resourceful. Conscious perception combines both invariant and variant ele-
ments, and is mostly accompanied by a sense of presence of the perceived objects
and properties; this may be accounted for by the way states of affairs are repre-
sented throughout the cortical hierarchy, which exhibits a gradient from variance
to invariance (Clark,2015; Felleman & Essen,1991; Hohwy,2013), which appears
tounderwriteperceptualstabilityinthevisualcortex(Podvalnyetal., 2017). Afur-
ther contributor to presence could be the ability, in some PP systems, for counter-
factualpredictionerrorminimization(Seth, 2014)allowingrepresentationalaccess
to occluded properties. Since PP applies equally to body-related perceptual infer-
ence (e.g., inference on the causes of proprioceptive and interoceptive signals), it
is able to address issues about bodily self-awareness (Allen et al.,2019; Seth,2013).
The role of action for self-representation is also being explored with PP; in partic-
ular, sensory attenuation (manifested, e.g., in our inability to tickle ourselves) in
action has received a new explanation in terms of precision optimization (Brown
et al.,2013; Van Doorn et al.,2015; Vasser et al.,2019).
This overall approach to self-related inference may be extended to models of
the philosophically recalcitrant topic of the self (Apps & Tsakiris,2014; Hohwy
& Michael,2017; Limanowski & Blankenburg,2013); two recent collections have
severalrelevantPPcontributionsonthistopic(Milliere&Metzinger, 2020;Tsakiris
& Preester,2018). Indeed, ambitious applications of PP have begun to account for
thesubjectiveexperiencesofembodiedselfhoodasarisingfromactiveinferenceof
interoceptivestates,wheresuchinferenceismotivatedbythecontrolorregulation
of the hidden causes of these states rather than by their accurate representation
(Seth,2015b,2015a; Wiese,2015). Theseideascallonearlycyberneticformulations
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 24
of predictive regulation of essential variables, like those of Ross Ashby (Ashby,
1954), which provide an alternative context for the free energy principle.
It is worth sounding a note of caution about interpreting evidence for (espe-
cially) altered experiences of embodiment in terms of Bayesian inference on body-
related sensory signals. For example, a recent study by Lush and colleagues has re-
vealed a link between subjective reports of illusory ownership in the well-known
‘rubber hand illusion’ (RHI) and hypnotic suggestion (Lush et al.,2020). In this
study, individual differences in the strength of the RHI correlated tightly with in-
dividual differences in hypnotic suggestibility (which the authors refer to as trait
‘phenomenological control’). This result raises the possibility that reported experi-
encesofembodimentoftheRHImaybedue,atleastinpart,toimplicitimaginative
suggestions arising from the experimental context, putting pressure on accounts
of the RHI that are based primarily on multisensory integration. However, the PP
view offers a potential solution to this confound too, by considering suggestion
effects as top-down expectations of a distinctive kind (see, for example, Martin &
Pacherie, 2019).
As a final example, the sense of the present as temporally extended may be
explained by PP-like internal simulation (Grush,2006); the sense of temporal flow
of conscious experience – how one moment passes seamlessly into the next even
whennothingmuchhappensintheenvironment–maybeexplainedbythedynam-
ics of hierarchical Bayes that encode expected change in the environment (Hohwy
et al.,2016; Sherman et al.,2020; Vogel et al.,2020, 2019); this process may in turn
relate to the alternation of percepts in binocular rivalry, as discussed above.
In summary, then, PP is already able to cash out significant predictive and ex-
planatory value for the study of consciousness. This supports the proposal that
PP is an excellent candidate for providing the foundational framework for a sys-
tematic NCC. It also encourages the prospect that, eventually, aspects of PP may
themselves coalesce into a theory of consciousness in its own right.
8 Challenges and concluding remarks
We have proposed that the science of consciousness can move toward a more ex-
planatory and predictive conception of the NCC by capitalising on the predictive
processing (PP) framework. PP holds unique promise for addressing challenges
that a successful NCC strategy must overcome, and for linking candidate NCCs
to key theoretical constraints shared among several prominent theories of con-
sciousness. We are not aware of any other theoretical framework with this kind
of potential for moving toward a systematic NCC.
Several areas of theoretical and empirical research are already demonstrating
the potential of PP as such a basis for a systematic, rather than arbitrary, NCC.
Full exploitation of this potential will be facilitated by focused efforts to draw on
the PP framework when formulating and testing for candidate NCCs. Altogether,
this approach will deliver significantly enhanced predictive and explanatory value
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 25
for the NCC program, as well as for the science of consciousness at large. In the
end, this approach may also change the extent to which the hard problem of con-
sciousness is still seen, by some, as a fundamental limit on a materialist science of
consciousness.
In this discussion we have focused on the promising explanatory and unifi-
catory aspects of PP. However, PP, although increasingly pervasive, is certainly
not universally accepted and there are conflicting findings and perspectives, driv-
ing ongoing debate (e.g., Alilović et al.,2019; Cao,2020; Li & Ma,2020; Litwin &
Miłkowski, 2020; Rahnev & Denison,2018). For example, one recurring challenge
to PP is that worry that an imperative to minimize sensory prediction errors will
lead to agents that do nothing at all – the so-called ‘dark room problem’ (Friston
et al.,2012; Sun & Firestone,2020a, 2020b). However, this challenge has already
been effectively addressed by extensions of PP that consider the minimization of
expected future prediction error, rather than just prediction error in the here and
now (Hohwy,2020b; Seth et al.,2020; Van de Cruys et al.,2020). Overall, PP as
a framework continues to evolve, with new formal and modelling approaches ap-
pearing at a steady pace, some of which are yet to find its way into the broader
debates about PP (Friston, Parr, et al.,2017; Friston, Da Costa, et al.,2020).
Thesenewapproacheswillplausiblyhelpgeneraterobustexperimentalresults,
and could also enable closer links between neural substrates and conscious phe-
nomenology. We believe the incorporation of active inference into consciousness
science will be one major step in this revision, and that an increased focus on inte-
roceptive inference will bring us closer to conscious phenomenology, especially in
relation to affect, emotion, and self (Seth,2021). Likewise, it will be important to
gain clarity on the distinction between continuous and discrete predictive process-
ing, both in order to reveal neural substrates and message passing and to begin
exploring the phenomenology of thinking and (propositional) reasoning.
A foundational challenge to PP is the question whether the brain is actually
engaged in approximate Bayesian inference, or whether this is just an attractive
framework within which to interpret behavior and brain dynamics. This relates
to the question whether organisms have explicit internal models, implementing
PP processes, or whether their body plant in a more abstract sense embodies an
implicit model. The answers to these questions will help determine how PP can
underwrite the search for NCCs, and in what sense it will be of explanatory and
predictive value to do so. These answers might also afford an opportunity to be-
gin addressing a related challenge, namely why and how PP should underpin con-
sciousness at all, if it is so general that it literally underpins every organism’s exis-
tence – including those that are not conscious (e.g., viruses)? A first approach to
this challenge would be to acknowledge that even if PP (in its free energy formula-
tion) is indeed of maximal scope, the process theories under PP apply to particular
kinds of systems and thereby allow for differences in the way PP is implemented.
Such differences could in principle speak to the distinction between conscious and
non-conscious creatures. In addition to the distinction between explicit and im-
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 26
plicit generative models, a further useful distinction could be between creatures
with and without a capacity for explicit counterfactual modelling of expected pre-
diction error, or with and without temporally deep generative models (Friston,
2017). Such differences may potentially also account for differences in global con-
scious states in conscious creatures – such as the difference between anaesthesia
and normal wakefulness in humans.
It remains to be seen if developments in these respects will help address im-
portant clinical and ethical issues for individuals and creatures at the edges of con-
sciousness, such as disorders of consciousness, infants, and non-verbal animals. It
also remains to be seen if the accumulation of these PP-driven advances in con-
sciousness science will eventually lead to meaningful inroads on the hard problem
of consciousness, or onto the meta-problem of why many people are convinced
that there is a hard problem of consciousness (Chalmers,2018). It is precisely be-
cause PP is not itself a theory of consciousness that it holds unique promise for
shedding new light on these perennially intractable issues.
Acknowledgments
AKS is grateful to the Dr. Mortimer and Theresa Sackler Foundation, which supports the
Sackler Centre for Consciousness, and to the CIFAR Program on Brain, Mind, and Con-
sciousness. JHandAKSaresupportedbytheAustralianResearchCouncilDiscoverygrant
DP160102770.
References
Alais, D., & Burr, D. (2004). The ventriloquist effect results from near-optimal bimodal integration.Current Biology, 14(3),
257–262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2004.01.029
Alilović, J., Timmermans, B., Reteig, L. C., van Gaal, S., & Slagter, H. A. (2019). No evidence that predictions and attention
modulate the first feedforward sweep of cortical information processing.Cerebral Cortex, 29(5), 2261–2278. https:
//doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhz038
Allen, M., Levy, A., Parr, T., &Friston, K. J.(2019). Inthebody’s eye: The computationalanatomyof interoceptiveinference.
bioRxiv, 603928.https://doi.org/10.1101/603928
Apps, M. A. J., & Tsakiris, M. (2014). The free-energy self: A predictive coding account of self-recognition.Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, 41, 85–97.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2013.01.029
Aru, J., Bachmann, T., Singer, W., & Melloni, L. (2012). Distilling the neural correlates of consciousness.Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(2), 737–746.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.12.003
Aru, J., Rutiku, R., Wibral, M., Singer, W., & Melloni, L. (2016). Early effects of previous experience on conscious perception.
Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2016(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niw004
Aru, J., Suzuki, M., Rutiku, R., Larkum, M. E., & Bachmann, T. (2019). Coupling the state and contents of consciousness.
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 13. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2019.00043
Ashby, W. R. (1954).Design for a brain. Wiley.
Baars, B. J. (1988).A cognitive theory of consciousness. Cambridge University Press.
Bachmann, T. (2012). How to begin to overcome the ambiguity present in differentiation between contents and levels of
consciousness? Frontiers in Psychology, 3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00082
Baltieri, M., Buckley, C. L., & Bruineberg, J. (2020). Predictions in the eye of the beholder: An active inference account of
Watt governors.Artificial Life Conference Proceedings, 32, 121–129.https://doi.org/10.1162/isal_a_00288
Barrett,A.B.,Dienes,Z.,&Seth,A.K.(2013). Measuresofmetacognitiononsignal-detectiontheoreticmodels. Psychological
Methods, 18(4), 535–552.https://doi.org/10.1037/a0033268
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 27
Bastos, A. M., Usrey, W. M., Adams, R. A., Mangun, G. R., Fries, P., & Friston, K. J. (2012). Canonical microcircuits for
predictive coding.Neuron, 76(4), 695–711.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.038
Bayne, T. (2007). Conscious states and conscious creatures: Explanation in the scientific study of consciousness.Philosoph-
ical Perspectives, 21(1), 1–22.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1520-8583.2007.00118.x
Bayne, T., Cleeremans, A., & Wilken, P. (Eds.). (2009).Oxford companion to consciousness. Oxford University Press.
Bayne, T., Seth, A. K., & Massimini, M. (2020). Are there islands of awareness?Trends in Neurosciences, 43(1), 6–16.https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2019.11.003
Bechtel, W. (2007).Mental mechanisms: Philosophical perspectives on cognitive neuroscience. Taylor & Francis.
Block, N. (1995). On a confusion about a function of consciousness.Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 18(2), 227–247. https:
//doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00038188
Bogacz, R. (2017). A tutorial on the free-energy framework for modelling perception and learning.Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 76, 198–211.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2015.11.003
Boly, M., Garrido, M. I., Gosseries, O., Bruno, M.-A., Boveroux, P., Schnakers, C., Massimini, M., Litvak, V., Laureys, S., &
Friston,K.J.(2011). Preservedfeedforwardbutimpairedtop-downprocessesinthevegetativestate. Science,332(6031),
858–862. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1202043
Boly, M., Moran, R., Murphy, M., Boveroux, P., Bruno, M.-A., Noirhomme, Q., Ledoux, D., Bonhomme, V., Brichant, J.-F.,
Tononi,G.,Laureys,S.,&Friston,K.J.(2012). ConnectivitychangesunderlyingspectralEEGchangesduringpropofol-
induced loss of consciousness.Journal of Neuroscience, 32(20), 7082–7090.https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3769-
11.2012
Brown, H., Adams, R. A., Parees, I., Edwards, M., & Friston, K. J. (2013). Active inference, sensory attenuation and illusions.
Cognitive Processing, 14(4), 411–427.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10339-013-0571-3
Brown, R., Lau, H., & LeDoux, J. E. (2019). Understanding the higher-order approach to consciousness.Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 23(9), 754–768.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.06.009
Buckley, C. L., Kim, C. S., McGregor, S., & Seth, A. K. (2017). The free energy principle for action and perception: A
mathematical review.Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 81, 55–79.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2017.09.004
Cao, R. (2020). New labels for old ideas: Predictive processing and the interpretation of neural signals.Review of Philosophy
and Psychology, 11(3), 517–546.https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164-020-00481-x
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Leech, R., Hellyer, P. J., Shanahan, M., Feilding, A., Tagliazucchi, E., Chialvo, D. R., & Nutt, D. (2014).
Theentropicbrain: Atheoryofconsciousstatesinformedbyneuroimagingresearchwithpsychedelicdrugs. Frontiers
in Human Neuroscience, 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00020
Chalmers, D. J. (2000). What is a neural correlate of consciousness? In T. Metzinger (Ed.),Neural correlates of consciousness
(pp. 17–39). MIT Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2018). The meta-problem of consciousness.Journal of Consciousness Studies, 25(9-10), 6–61.
Chalmers, D. J. (1996).The conscious mind: In search of a fundamental theory. Oxford University Press.
Chang, A. Y. C., Biehl, M., Yu, Y., & Kanai, R. (2020). Information closure theory of consciousness.Frontiers in Psychology,
11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01504
Clark, A. (2015).Surfing uncertainty: Prediction, action, and the embodied mind. Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2019). Consciousness as generative entanglement.Journal of Philosophy, 116(12), 645–662.https://doi.org/10.584
0/jphil20191161241
Clark, A., Friston, K. J., & Wilkinson, S. (2019). Bayesing qualia: Consciousness as inference, not raw datum.Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 26(9-10), 19–33.
Cleeremans, A. (2011). The radical plasticity thesis: How the brain learns to be conscious. Frontiers in Psychology, 2.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00086
Cohen, M. A., & Rubenstein, J. (2020). How much color do we see in the blink of an eye?Cognition, 200, 104268. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2020.104268
Cole, D. M., Diaconescu, A. O., Pfeiffer, U. J., Brodersen, K. H., Mathys, C. D., Julkowski, D., Ruhrmann, S., Schilbach, L.,
Tittgemeyer, M., Vogeley, K., & Stephan, K. E. (2020). Atypical processing of uncertainty in individuals at risk for
psychosis. NeuroImage: Clinical, 26, 102239.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2020.102239
Corcoran, A. W., & Hohwy, J. (2018). Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy principle: Feeling our way forward. In
M. Tsakiris & H. de Preester (Eds.),The interoceptive basis of the mind(pp. 272–292). Oxford University Press.
Corlett, P. R., Horga, G., Fletcher, P. C., Alderson-Day, B., Schmack, K., & Powers, A. R. (2019). Hallucinations and strong
priors. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 23(2), 114–127.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.12.001
Craver, C. F. (2007).Explaining the brain: Mechanisms and the mosaic unity of neuroscience. Oxford University Press.
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 28
Crick, F., & Koch, C. (1990a). Some reflections on visual awareness.Sympos Quant Biol, 953–962. https://doi.org/10.1101/
sqb.1990.055.01.089
Crick, F., & Koch, C. (1990b). Towards a neurobiological theory of consciousness.Seminars in the Neurosciences, 2, 263–275.
Damasio, A. (2000).The feeling of what happens: Body and emotion in the making of consciousness. Mariner Books.
De Haan, E. H. F., Corballis, P. M., Hillyard, S. A., Marzi, C. A., Seth, A., Lamme, V. A. F., Volz, L., Fabri, M., Schechter, E.,
Bayne, T., Corballis, M., & Pinto, Y. (2020). Split-brain: What we know now and why this is important for understand-
ing consciousness.Neuropsychology Review, 30(2), 224–233.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11065-020-09439-3
Dehaene, S. (2011). Conscious and nonconscious processes: Distinct forms of evidence accumulation?Biological Physics.
Progress in Mathematical Physics, 60. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-0346-0428-4_7
Dennett, D. C. (1991).Consciousness explained. Little, Brown & Company.
Descartes, R. (1641).Descartes: Meditations on first philosophy: With selections from the objections and replies(J. Cottingham,
Ed.). Cambridge University Press.
Dijkstra, N., Ambrogioni, L., Vidaurre, D., & Gerven, M. van. (2020). Neural dynamics of perceptual inference and its
reversal during imagery.eLife, 9, e53588.https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.53588
Doerig, A., Schurger, A., & Herzog, M. H. (2020). Hard criteria for empirical theories of consciousness.Cognitive Neuro-
science, 1–22.https://doi.org/10.1080/17588928.2020.1772214
Dołęga, K., & Dewhurst, J. E. (2020). Fame in the predictive brain: A deflationary approach to explaining consciousness in
the prediction error minimization framework.Synthese. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02548-9
Engel, A. K., Friston, K. J., & Kragic, D. (Eds.). (2016).The pragmatic turn: Toward action-oriented views in cognitive science.
The MIT Press.
Engel, A. K., & Singer, W. (2001). Temporal binding and the neural correlates of sensory awareness.Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 5(1), 16–25.https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01568-0
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy.Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 4. https:
//doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215
Felleman, D. J., & Essen, D. C. V. (1991). Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral cortex.Cereb Cortex,
1–47. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/1.1.1
Fernández-Espejo, D., & Owen, A. M. (2013). Detecting awareness after severe brain injury.Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
14(11), 801–809.https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3608
Fink, S. B. (2016). A deeper look at the “neural correlate of consciousness”.Frontiers in Psychology, 7. https://doi.org/10.338
9/fpsyg.2016.01044
FitzGerald, T. H. B., Schwartenbeck, P., Moutoussis, M., Dolan, R. J., & Friston, K. J. (2014). Active inference, evidence
accumulation, and the urn task.Neural Computation, 27(2), 306–328.https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00699
Fleming, S. M. (2020). Awareness as inference in a higher-order state space.Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020(1). https:
//doi.org/10.1093/nc/niz020
Fleming, S. M., Maniscalco, B., Ko, Y., Amendi, N., Ro, T., & Lau, H. (2015). Action-specific disruption of perceptual confi-
dence: Psychological Science. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797614557697
Fletcher, P. C., & Frith, C. D. (2009). Perceiving is believing: A Bayesian approach to explaining the positive symptoms of
schizophrenia. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10(1), 48–58.https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2536
Friston, K. J. (2017). The mathematics of mind-time.Aeon. https://aeon.co/essays/consciousness-is-not-a-thing-but-a-
process-of-inference
Friston, K. J. (2018). Am I self-conscious? (Or does self-organization entail self-consciousness?).Frontiers in Psychology, 9.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00579
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory?Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138.https:
//doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. J. (2005). A theory of cortical responses.Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
360(1456), 815–836.https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2005.1622
Friston, K. J. (2019a). A free energy principle for a particular physics.arXiv. https://doi.org/arXiv:%201906.10184
Friston, K. J. (2019b). Waves of prediction.PLOS Biology, 17(10), e3000426.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000426
Friston, K. J. (2003). Learning and inference in the brain.Neural Networks, 16(9), 1325–1352.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neun
et.2003.06.005
Friston, K. J., Da Costa, L., Hafner, D., Hesp, C., & Parr, T. (2020). Sophisticated inference.arXiv. https://doi.org/arXiv:
%202006.04120
Friston, K. J., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., O’Doherty, J., & Pezzulo, G. (2016). Active inference and learning.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 68, 862–879.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.06.022
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 29
Friston, K. J., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2016). Active inference: A process theory.Neural
Computation, 29(1), 1–49.https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00912
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., & Vries, B. de. (2017). The graphical brain: Belief propagation and active inference.Network Neuro-
science, 1(4), 381–414.https://doi.org/10.1162/NETN_a_00018
Friston, K. J., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., & Pezzulo, G. (2015). Active inference and epistemic value.
Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(4), 187–214.https://doi.org/10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053
Friston, K. J., Schwartenbeck, P., Fitzgerald, T., Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T., & Dolan, R. J. (2013). The anatomy of choice:
Active inference and agency.Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00598
Friston, K. J., Thornton, C., & Clark, A. (2012). Free-energy minimization and the dark-room problem.Frontiers in Psychol-
ogy, 3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00130
Friston, K. J., Wiese, W., & Hobson, J. A. (2020). Sentience and the origins of consciousness: From Cartesian duality to
Markovian monism.Entropy, 22(5), 516.https://doi.org/10.3390/e22050516
Gold, I. (1999). Does 40-Hz oscillation play a role in visual consciousness?Consciousness and Cognition, 8(2), 186–195.
https://doi.org/10.1006/ccog.1999.0399
Gordon, N., Tsuchiya, N., Koenig-Robert, R., & Hohwy, J. (2019). Expectation and attention increase the integration of
top-down and bottom-up signals in perception through different pathways.PLOS Biology, 17(4), e3000233. https:
//doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000233
Graaf, T. A. de, Hsieh, P.-J., & Sack, A. T. (2012). The “correlates” in neural correlates of consciousness.Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(1), 191–197.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.05.012
Graziano,M.S.A.,Guterstam,A.,Bio,B.J.,&Wilterson,A.I.(2020). Towardastandardmodelofconsciousness: Reconciling
the attention schema, global workspace, higher-order thought, and illusionist theories.Cognitive Neuropsychology,
37(3-4), 155–172.https://doi.org/10.1080/02643294.2019.1670630
Graziano, M. S. A., & Webb, T. W. (2015). The attention schema theory: A mechanistic account of subjective awareness.
Frontiers in Psychology, 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00500
Grush, R. (2006). How to, and how not to, bridge computational cognitive neuroscience and Husserlian phenomenology of
time consciousness.Synthese, 153(3), 417–450.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-006-9100-6
Hameroff,S., &Penrose,R.(2014). Consciousnessintheuniverse: Areviewofthe“OrchOR”theory. Physics of Life Reviews,
11(1), 39–78.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2013.08.002
Haun, A., & Tononi, G. (2019). Why does space feel the way it does? Towards a principled account of spatial experience.
Entropy, 21(12), 1160.https://doi.org/10.3390/e21121160
Heeger, D. J. (2017). Theory of cortical function.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(8), 1773–1782.https:
//doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1619788114
Heilbron,M.,Richter,D.,Ekman,M.,Hagoort,P.,&Lange,F.P.de. (2020). Wordcontextsenhancetheneuralrepresentation
of individual letters in early visual cortex.Nature Communications, 11(1), 321. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-
13996-4
Hobson, J. A., & Friston, K. J. (2012). Waking and dreaming consciousness: Neurobiological and functional considerations.
Progress in Neurobiology, 98(1), 82–98.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.05.003
Hohwy, J. (2012). Attention and conscious perception in the hypothesis testing brain.Frontiers in Psychology, 3. https:
//doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00096
Hohwy, J. (2013).The predictive mind. Oxford University Press.
Hohwy, J. (2015). Prediction error minimization, mental and developmental disorder, and statistical theories of conscious-
ness. In Disturbed consciousness: New essays on psychopathology and theories of consciousness(pp. 293–324). MIT
Press.
Hohwy, J. (2020a). New directions in predictive processing.Mind & Language, 35(2), 209–223.https://doi.org/10.1111/mila
.12281
Hohwy, J. (2020b). Self-supervision, normativity and the free energy principle.Synthese. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-
020-02622-2
Hohwy, J. (2009). The neural correlates of consciousness: New experimental approaches needed?Consciousness and Cogni-
tion, 18(2), 428–438.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2009.02.006
Hohwy, J., & Frith, C. (2004). Can neuroscience explain consciousness?Journal of Consciousness Studies, 11(7-8), 180–198.
Hohwy, J., & Michael, J. (2017). Why does any body have a self? In F. de Vignemont & A. J. T. Alsmith (Eds.),The body and
the self, revisited(pp. 363–391). MIT Press.
Hohwy, J., Paton, B., & Palmer, C. (2016). Distrusting the present.Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 15(3), 315–335.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-015-9439-6
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 30
Hohwy, J., Roepstorff, A., & Friston, K. J. (2008). Predictive coding explains binocular rivalry: An epistemological review.
Cognition, 108(3), 687–701.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2008.05.010
Hurley, S. L. (1998).Consciousness in action. Harvard University Press.
Hutto, D. D., & Myin, E. (2013).Radicalizing enactivism: Basic minds without content. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Jackson, F. (1982). Epiphenomenal qualia.The Philosophical Quarterly 32, 32(127), 127–136.https://doi.org/10.2307/2960077
Kanai, R., Chang, A., Yu, Y., Magrans de Abril, I., Biehl, M., & Guttenberg, N. (2019). Information generation as a functional
basis of consciousness.Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niz016
Kiefer, A. B. (2017). Literal perceptual inference. In T. K. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.),Philosophy and predictive processing.
MIND Group.
Klein, C., & Barron, A. B.(2020). Howexperimentalneuroscientistscan fixthe hardproblemof consciousness.Neuroscience
of Consciousness, 2020(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niaa009
Koch, C., Massimini, M., Boly, M., & Tononi, G. (2016). Neural correlates of consciousness: Progress and problems.Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 17(5), 307–321.https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2016.22
Koch, C., & Tsuchiya, N. (2007). Attention and consciousness: Two distinct brain processes.Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
11(1), 16–22.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.10.012
Kok, P.,Rahnev, D.,Jehee,J.F.M., Lau, H.C., &Lange,F.P.de. (2012). Attentionreversestheeffectofpredictioninsilencing
sensory signals.Cerebral Cortex, 22(9), 2197–2206.https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhr310
Kok, P., Rait, L. I., & Turk-Browne, N. B. (2019). Content-based dissociation of hippocampal involvement in prediction.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 32(3), 527–545.https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01509
Krakauer, J. W., Ghazanfar, A. A., Gomez-Marin, A., MacIver, M. A., & Poeppel, D. (2017). Neuroscience needs behavior:
Correcting a reductionist bias.Neuron, 93(3), 480–490.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2016.12.041
Lamme, V. A. F. (2020). Visual functions generating conscious seeing.Frontiers in Psychology, 11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fp
syg.2020.00083
Lamme, V. A. F. (2010). How neuroscience will change our view on consciousness.Cognitive Neuroscience, 1(3), 204–220.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17588921003731586
Lange, F. P. de, Heilbron, M., & Kok, P. (2018). How do expectations shape perception?Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 22(9),
764–779. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.06.002
Lau, H. C. (2008). A higher order Bayesian decision theory of consciousness.Elsevier, 168, 35–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0079-6123(07)68004-2
Lau, H., & Rosenthal, D. (2011). Empirical support for higher-order theories of conscious awareness.Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 15(8), 365–373.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.05.009
Laureys, S. (2005). The neural correlate of (un)awareness: Lessons from the vegetative state.Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
9(12), 556–559.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2005.10.010
Lawson, R. P., Mathys, C., & Rees, G. (2017). Adults with autism overestimate the volatility of the sensory environment.
Nature Neuroscience, 20(9), 1293–1299.https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4615
Lettvin, J. Y. (1976). On seeing sidelong.The Sciences, 16(4), 10–20.https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2326-1951.1976.tb01231.x
Levine, J. (1983). Materialism and qualia: The explanatory gap. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 64(4), 354–361. https:
//doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0114.1983.tb00207.x
Li, H.-H., & Ma, W. J. (2020). Confidence reports in decision-making with multiple alternatives violate the Bayesian confi-
dence hypothesis.Nature Communications, 11(1), 2004.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15581-6
Limanowski, J., & Blankenburg, F. (2013). Minimal self-models and the free energy principle.Frontiers in Human Neuro-
science, 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00547
Litwin, P., & Miłkowski, M. (2020). Unification by fiat: Arrested development of predictive processing.Cognitive Science,
44(7), e12867.https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12867
Lush, P., Botan, V., Scott, R. B., Seth, A. K., Ward, J., & Dienes, Z. (2020). Trait phenomenological control predicts experience
of mirror synaesthesia and the rubber hand illusion.Nature Communications, 11(1), 4853. https://doi.org/10.1038/s4
1467-020-18591-6
Marchi, F., & Hohwy, J. (2020). The intermediate scope of consciousness in the predictive mind.Erkenntnis. https://doi.or
g/10.1007/s10670-020-00222-7
Markov, N. T., Ercsey-Ravasz, M., Essen, D. C. V., Knoblauch, K., Toroczkai, Z., & Kennedy, H. (2013). Cortical high-density
counterstream architectures.Science, 342(6158). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1238406
Marshel, J. H., Kim, Y. S., Machado, T. A., Quirin, S., Benson, B., Kadmon, J., Raja, C., Chibukhchyan, A., Ramakrishnan,
C., Inoue, M., Shane, J. C., McKnight, D. J., Yoshizawa, S., Kato, H. E., Ganguli, S., & Deisseroth, K. (2019). Cortical
layer–specific critical dynamics triggering perception.Science, 365(6453). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaw5202
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 31
Martin,J.-R., &Pacherie,E.(2019). Alterationsofagencyinhypnosis: Anewpredictivecodingmodel. Psychological Review,
126(1), 133–152.https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000134
Mashour, G. A., Roelfsema, P., Changeux, J.-P., & Dehaene, S. (2020). Conscious processing and the global neuronal
workspace hypothesis.Neuron, 105(5), 776–798.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.01.026
Mathys, C., Daunizeau, J., Friston, K. J., & Stephan, K. E. (2011). A Bayesian foundation for individual learning under
uncertainty. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2011.00039
Mathys, C. D., Lomakina, E. I., Daunizeau, J., Iglesias, S., Brodersen, K. H., Friston, K. J., & Stephan, K. E. (2014). Uncertainty
in perception and the hierarchical Gaussian filter.Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.
2014.00825
McFadden, J. (2020). Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: The cemi field theory of consciousness.Neuroscience
of Consciousness, 2020(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niaa016
McFadden, J. (2002). The conscious electromagnetic information (Cemi) field theory: The hard problem made easy?Journal
of Consciousness Studies, 9(8), 45–60.
Meijs, E. L., Slagter, H. A., Lange, F. P. de, & Gaal, S. van. (2018). Dynamic interactions between top–down expectations and
conscious awareness.Journal of Neuroscience, 38(9), 2318–2327.https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1952-17.2017
Melloni, L., Schwiedrzik, C. M., Müller, N., Rodriguez, E., & Singer, W. (2011). Expectations change the signatures and
timing of electrophysiological correlates of perceptual awareness.Journal of Neuroscience, 31(4), 1386–1396. https:
//doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4570-10.2011
Mendonça, D., Curado, M., & Gouveia, S. (2020).The philosophy and science of predictive processing. Bloomsbury Publishing.
Metzinger, T. (2004).Being no one. MIT Press.
Metzinger, T. (Ed.). (2000).Neural correlates of consciousness: Empirical and conceptual questions. MIT Press.
Metzinger, T., & Wiese, W. (Eds.). (2017).Philosophy and predictive processing. MIND Group.https://predictive-mind.net/p
apers
Miller, S. M. (2015).The constitution of phenomenal consciousness. John Benjamins.
Miller, S. M. (2007). On the correlation/constitution distinction problem (and other hard problems) in the scientific study of
consciousness. Acta Neuropsychiatrica, 19(3), 159–176.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1601-5215.2007.00207.x
Millidge, B., Tschantz, A., & Buckley, C. L. (2020).Whence the expected free energy?https://doi.org/arXiv:2004.08128v3
Milliere, R., & Metzinger, T. (2020). Radical disruptions of self-consciousness:Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(I), 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.I.50
Muckli, L., De Martino, F., Vizioli, L., Petro, L. S., Smith, F. W., Ugurbil, K., Goebel, R., & Yacoub, E. (2015). Contextual
feedback to superficial layers of V1.Current Biology, 25(20), 2690–2695.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.08.057
Neisser, J. (2012). Neural correlates of consciousness reconsidered.Consciousness and Cognition, 21(2), 681–690. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2011.03.012
Noë, A. (2004).Action in perception. MIT Press.
Noë, A., & O’Regan, J. K. (2001). A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness.Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
24(5), 939–973.
Noë, A., & Thompson, E. (2004). Are there neural correlates of consciousness?Journal of Consciousness Studies, 11(1), 3–28.
Noreika, V., Canales-Johnson, A., Harrison, W. J., Johnson, A., Arnatkevičiūtė, A., Koh, J., Chennu, S., & Bekinschtein, T.
A. (2017). Wakefulness state modulates conscious access: Suppression of auditory detection in the transition to sleep.
bioRxiv, 155705.https://doi.org/10.1101/155705
O’Brien, G., &Opie, J.(1999). Aconnectionisttheoryofphenomenalexperience. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,22, 127–148.
Oizumi, M., Albantakis, L., & Tononi, G. (2014). From the phenomenology to the mechanisms of consciousness: Integrated
information theory 3.0.PLOS Computational Biology, 10(5), e1003588.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003588
Pacherie, E. (2008). The phenomenology of action: A conceptual framework.Cognition, 107(1), 179–217.https://doi.org/10
.1016/j.cognition.2007.09.003
Pal, D., Li, D., Dean, J.G., Brito, M.A., Liu, T., Fryzel, A.M., Hudetz, A.G., &Mashour, G.A.(2020). Levelofconsciousnessis
dissociablefromelectroencephalographicmeasuresofcorticalconnectivity,slowoscillations,andcomplexity. Journal
of Neuroscience, 40(3), 605–618.https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1910-19.2019
Parr, T., Corcoran, A. W., Friston, K. J., & Hohwy, J. (2019). Perceptual awareness and active inference.Neuroscience of
Consciousness, 2019(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niz012
Parr, T., &Friston, K.J.(2018). Theanatomyofinference: Generativemodelsandbrainstructure. Frontiers in Computational
Neuroscience, 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2018.00090
Pascual-Leone, A., & Walsh, V. (2001). Fast backprojections from the motion to the primary visual area necessary for visual
awareness. Science, 292(5516), 510–512.https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1057099
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 32
Pearl, J. (2000).Causality: Models, reasoning and inference. Cambridge University Press.
Perrykkad, K., & Hohwy, J. (2020). Fidgeting as self-evidencing: A predictive processing account of non-goal-directed
action. New Ideas in Psychology, 56, 100750.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.newideapsych.2019.100750
Petzschner, F. H., Weber, L. A., Wellstein, K. V., Paolini, G., Do, C. T., & Stephan, K. E. (2019). Focus of attention modulates
the heartbeat evoked potential.NeuroImage, 186, 595–606.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.11.037
Pinto, Y., Gaal, S. van, Lange, F. P. de, Lamme, V. A. F., & Seth, A. K. (2015). Expectations accelerate entry of visual stimuli
into awareness.Journal of Vision, 15(8), 13–13.https://doi.org/10.1167/15.8.13
Podvalny, E., Yeagle, E., Mégevand, P., Sarid, N., Harel, M., Chechik, G., Mehta, A. D., & Malach, R. (2017). Invariant
temporal dynamics underlie perceptual stability in human visual cortex.Current Biology, 27(2), 155–165. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.11.024
Powers, A. R., Mathys, C., & Corlett, P. R. (2017). Pavlovian conditioning–induced hallucinations result from overweighting
of perceptual priors.Science, 357(6351), 596–600.https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aan3458
Prinz, J. J. (2012).The conscious brain: How attention engenders experience. Oxford University Press.
Rahnev,D.,&Denison,R.N.(2018). Behaviorissensiblebutnotgloballyoptimal: Seekingcommongroundintheoptimality
debate. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 41. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X18002121
Reardon, S. (2019). “Outlandish” competition seeks the brain’s source of consciousness.Science. https://www.sciencemag
.org/news/2019/10/outlandish-competition-seeks-brain-s-source-consciousness
Revonsuo, A. (2006).Inner presence: Consciousness as a biological phenomenon. MIT Press.
Rosenthal, D. M. (1986). Two concepts of consciousness.Philosophical Studies, 49(3), 329–359.
Rosenthal, D. M. (1997). A theory of consciousness. In N. Block, O. J. Flanagan, & G. Guzeldere (Eds.),The nature of
consciousness (pp. 729–753). MIT Press.
Rudrauf, D., Bennequin, D., Granic, I., Landini, G., Friston, K. J., & Williford, K. (2017). A mathematical model of embodied
consciousness. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 428, 106–131.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2017.05.032
Sandved Smith, L., Hesp, C., Lutz, A., Mattout, J., Friston, K. J., & Ramstead, M. (2020). Towards a formal neurophenomenol-
ogy of metacognition: Modelling meta-awareness, mental action, and attentional control with deep active inference.
In PsyArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/5jh3c
Schartner,M.M.,Carhart-Harris,R.L.,Barrett,A.B.,Seth,A.K.,&Muthukumaraswamy,S.D.(2017). Increasedspontaneous
MEG signal diversity for psychoactive doses of ketamine, LSD and psilocybin.Scientific Reports, 7(1), 46421. https:
//doi.org/10.1038/srep46421
Schroeder, C. E., Wilson, D. A., Radman, T., Scharfman, H., & Lakatos, P. (2010). Dynamics of active sensing and perceptual
selection. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 20(2), 172–176.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2010.02.010
Searle, J. R. (2000). Consciousness.Annual Review of Neuroscience, 23(1), 557–578. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.
23.1.557
Seth, A.(2009). Explanatorycorrelatesofconsciousness: Theoreticalandcomputationalchallenges. Cognitive Computation,
1(1), 50–63.https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-009-9007-x
Seth, A. K. (2016). The real problem.Aeon. https://aeon.co/essays/the-hard-problem-of-consciousness-is-a-distraction-
from-the-real-one
Seth, A. K. (2021).Being you. Faber & Faber.
Seth, A. K. (2015a). Inference to the best prediction. In T. K. Metzinger & J. M. Windt (Eds.),Open mind. MIND Group.
Seth, A. K. (2015b). The cybernetic Bayesian brain: From interoceptive inference to sensorimotor contingencies. In T. K.
Metzinger & J. M. Windt (Eds.),Open mind. MIND Group.
Seth, A. K. (2014). A predictive processing theory of sensorimotor contingencies: Explaining the puzzle of perceptual
presence and its absence in synesthesia.Cognitive Neuroscience, 5(2), 97–118.https://doi.org/10.1080/17588928.2013.
877880
Seth, A. K. (2019). From unconscious inference to the beholder’s share: Predictive perception and human experience.
European Review, 27(3), 378–410.https://doi.org/10.1017/S1062798719000061
Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self.Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(11), 565–573.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.007
Seth, A. K., Millidge, B., Buckley, C. L., & Tschantz, A. (2020). Curious inferences: Reply to sun and firestone on the dark
room problem.Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 24(9), 681–683.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.05.011
Seth, A. K., & Tsakiris, M. (2018). Being a beast machine: The somatic basis of selfhood.Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 22(11),
969–981. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.08.008
Sherman, M. T., Fountas, Z., Seth, A. K., & Roseboom, W. (2020). Accumulation of salient perceptual events predicts sub-
jective time.bioRxiv, 2020.01.09.900423.https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.09.900423
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Predictive processing and the neural correlates of consciousness 33
Sherman, M. T., Seth, A. K., Barrett, A. B., & Kanai, R. (2015). Prior expectations facilitate metacognition for perceptual
decision. Consciousness and Cognition, 35, 53–65.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2015.04.015
Skewes, J. C., Jegindø, E.-M., & Gebauer, L. (2015). Perceptual inference and autistic traits.Autism, 19(11). https://doi.org/
10.1177/1362361313519872
Skora, L., Seth, A., & Scott, R. B. (2020). Sensorimotor predictions shape reported conscious visual experience in a breaking
continuous flash suppression task. InPsyArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/hwkdj
Stephan, K. E., Manjaly, Z. M., Mathys, C. D., Weber, L. A. E., Paliwal, S., Gard, T., Tittgemeyer, M., Fleming, S. M., Haker,
H., Seth, A. K., & Petzschner, F. H. (2016). Allostatic self-efficacy: A metacognitive theory of dyshomeostasis-induced
fatigue and depression.Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00550
Stuke, H., Weilnhammer, V. A., Sterzer, P., & Schmack, K. (2019). Delusion proneness is linked to a reduced usage of prior
beliefs in perceptual decisions.Schizophrenia Bulletin, 45(1), 80–86.https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbx189
Summerfield, C., & Egner, T. (2009). Expectation (and attention) in visual cognition.Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(9),
403–409. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2009.06.003
Sun, Z., & Firestone, C. (2020a). The dark room problem.Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 24(5), 346–348.https://doi.org/10.101
6/j.tics.2020.02.006
Sun,Z.,&Firestone,C.(2020b). Optimismandpessimisminthepredictivebrain. TrendsinCognitiveSciences ,24(9),683–685.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.06.001
Suzuki, K., Schwartzman, D. J., Augusto, R., & Seth, A. K. (2019). Sensorimotor contingency modulates breakthrough of
virtual 3D objects during a breaking continuous flash suppression paradigm.Cognition, 187, 95–107.https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cognition.2019.03.003
Teufel, C., & Fletcher, P. C. (2020). Forms of prediction in the nervous system.Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 21(4), 231–242.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-020-0275-5
Tong,F.,Nakayama,K.,Vaughan,J.T.,&Kanwisher,N.(1998). Binocularrivalryandvisualawarenessinhumanextrastriate
cortex. Neuron, 21(4), 753–759.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80592-9
Tononi, G., Boly, M., Massimini, M., & Koch, C. (2016). Integrated information theory: From consciousness to its physical
substrate. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 17(7), 450–461.https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2016.44
Tononi, G., & Edelman, G. M. (1998). Consciousness and complexity.Science, 282(5395), 1846–1851.https://doi.org/10.112
6/science.282.5395.1846
Tononi, G., & Koch, C. (2008). The neural correlates of consciousness.Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1124(1),
239–261. https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1440.004
Tsakiris, M., & Preester, H. D. (2018).The interoceptive mind: From homeostasis to awareness. Oxford University Press.
Tschantz, A., Millidge, B., Seth, A. K., & Buckley, C. L. (2020).Reinforcement learning through active inference. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2002.12636
Tschantz, A., Seth, A. K., & Buckley, C. L. (2020). Learning action-oriented models through active inference.PLOS Compu-
tational Biology, 16(4), e1007805.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007805
Tsuchiya, N., Wilke, M., Frässle, S., & Lamme, V. A. F. (2015). No-report paradigms: Extracting the true neural correlates of
consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(12), 757–770.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2015.10.002
Van de Cruys, S., Friston, K. J., & Clark, A. (2020). Controlled optimism: Reply to Sun and Firestone on the dark room
problem. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 24(9), 680–681.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.05.012
Van der Helm, P. A. (2016). Structural coding versus free-energy predictive coding.Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 23(3),
663–677. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-015-0938-9
VanDoorn,G.,Paton,B.,Howell,J.,&Hohwy,J.(2015). Attenuatedself-ticklesensationevenundertrajectoryperturbation.
Consciousness and Cognition, 36, 147–153.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2015.06.016
Van Es, T. (2020). Living models or life modelled? On the use of models in the free energy principle.Adaptive Behavior.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059712320918678
Van Gelder, T. (1995). What might cognition be, if not computation?The Journal of Philosophy, 92(7), 345–381. https:
//doi.org/10.2307/2941061
Vasser, M., Vuillaume, L., Cleeremans, A., & Aru, J. (2019). Waving goodbye to contrast: Self-generated hand movements
attenuate visual sensitivity.Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2019(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niy013
Vogel, D. H. V., Beeker, T., Haidl, T., Kupke, C., Heinze, M., & Vogeley, K. (2019). Disturbed time experience during and after
psychosis. Schizophrenia Research: Cognition, 17, 100136.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scog.2019.100136
Vogel, D. H. V., Falter-Wagner, C. M., Schoofs, T., Krämer, K., Kupke, C., & Vogeley, K. (2020). Flow and structure of time
experience – concept, empirical validation and implications for psychopathology.Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences, 19(2), 235–258.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-018-9573-z
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Jakob Hohwy and Anil Seth 34
Walsh,K.S.,McGovern,D.P.,Clark,A.,&O’Connell,R.G.(2020). Evaluatingtheneurophysiologicalevidenceforpredictive
processing as a model of perception.Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1464(1), 242–268.https://doi.org/10
.1111/nyas.14321
Weilnhammer, V., Fritsch, M., Chikermane, M., Eckert, A.-L., Kanthak, K., Stuke, H., Kaminski, J., & Sterzer, P. (2020).
Evidence for an active role of inferior frontal cortex in conscious experience.bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.0
5.28.114645
Weilnhammer, V., Stuke, H., Hesselmann, G., Sterzer, P., & Schmack, K. (2017). A predictive coding account of bistable
perception – a model-based fMRI study.PLOS Computational Biology, 13(5), e1005536.https://doi.org/10.1371/journa
l.pcbi.1005536
Whyte, C. J. (2019). Integrating the global neuronal workspace into the framework of predictive processing: Towards a
working hypothesis.Consciousness and Cognition, 73, 102763.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2019.102763
Whyte, C. J., & Smith, R. (2020). The predictive global neuronal workspace: A formal active inference model of visual
consciousness. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.11.944611
Wiese, W. (2018). Toward a mature science of consciousness.Frontiers in Psychology, 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018
.00693
Wiese, W. (2015). Perceptual presence in the Kuhnian-Popperian Bayesian brain. In T. K. Metzinger & J. M. Windt (Eds.),
Open mind. MIND Group.
Wiese, W. (2020). The science of consciousness does not need another theory, it needs a minimal unifying model.Neuro-
science of Consciousness, 2020(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niaa013
Williford, K., Bennequin, D., Friston, K. J., & Rudrauf, D. (2018). The projective consciousness model and phenomenal
selfhood. Frontiers in Psychology, 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02571
Woodward, J. (2003).Making things happen. Oxford University Press.
Yon, D., Gilbert, S. J., Lange, F. P. de, & Press, C. (2018). Action sharpens sensory representations of expected outcomes.
Nature Communications, 9(1), 4288.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-06752-7
Yon, D., Lange, F. P. de, & Press, C. (2019). The predictive brain as a stubborn scientist.Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 23(1),
6–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.10.003
Open Access
ThisarticleisdistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0Interna-
tional License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, as long as you give appropriate credit
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license,
and indicate if changes were made.
Hohwy, J., & Seth, A. (2020). Predictive processing as a systematic basis for identifying the neural
correlates of consciousness.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(II), 3.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.64
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369