About the authors
Charlene Sunkelis founder and chief executive oﬃcer (CEO) of the Global
Mental Health Peer Network, Roodepoort, South Africa.Claudia Sartoris dep-
uty CEO of the Global Mental Health Peer Network, Roodepoort, South Africa.
Funding
This research received no speciﬁc grant from any funding agency, commer-
cial or not-for-proﬁt sectors.
Declaration of interest
None.
References
1 World Health Organization.Advocacy for Mental Health (Mental Health
Policy and Service Guidance Package). WHO, 2003.
2 Weiten W, Hassim J. Psychology: Themes and Variations (2nd South
African edn): 487. Cengage Learning, 2016.
3 Leighton S, Dogra N. Deﬁning mental health and mental illness. In
Nursing in Child and Adolescent Mental Health (eds S Leighton,
N Doghra): 7–18. Open University Press, 2009.
4 Kishore J, Gupta A, Jiloha RC, Bantman P. Myths, beliefs and perceptions
about mental disorders and health-seeking behavior in Delhi, India.
Indian J Psychiatry2011; 53: 324–9.
5 World Health Organization, Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation. Social
Determinants of Mental Health. WHO, 2014.
6 Byrne L, Wykes T. A role for lived experience mental health leadership in
the age of Covid-19.J Ment Health2020; 29: 243–6.
7 Gillard S, Foster R, Gibson S, Goldsmith L, Marks J, White S. Describing a
principles-based approach to developing and evaluating peer worker
roles as peer support moves into mainstream mental health services.
Ment Health Soc Inclusion2017; 21: 133–43.
8 Hill C, Lyrstrup A, Kline K, Gebru NM, Birchler J, Palmer G, et al. Aspiring
to become a therapist: personal strengths and challenges, inﬂuences,
motivation, and expectations of future psychotherapists.Couns Psychol
Q 2013; 26: 267–93.
SPECIAL ARTICLE
Friston’s free energy principle: new life for
psychoanalysis?
Jeremy Holmes
BJPsych Bulletin (2022)46, 164–168, doi:10.1192/bjb.2021.6
Department of Psychology, University of
Exeter, UK
Correspondence to Jeremy Holmes
(j.a.holmes@btinternet.com)
First received 6 Sep 2020, final revision
30 Dec 2020, accepted 20 Jan 2021
© The Author(s), 2021. Published by
Cambridge University Press on behalf of
the Royal College of Psychiatrists. This is
an Open Access article, distributed
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution licence (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),
which permits unrestricted re-use,
distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.
Summary The free energy principle (FEP) is a new paradigm that has gain
widespread interest in the neuroscience community. Although its principal architect,
Karl Friston, is a psychiatrist, it has thus far had little impact within psychiatry.
This article introduces readers to the FEP, points out its consilience with Freud’s
neuroscientiﬁc ideas and with psychodynamic practice, and suggests ways in which
the FEP can help explain the mechanisms of action of the psychotherapies.
Keywords Free energy; Friston; psychoanalysis; Freud; neuroscience.
Today’s psychiatrists are pragmatists, on the look-out for
what ‘works’ and sceptical about the grand theories that
held sway in the previous century. But ideology cannot be
wholly avoided, nor theoretical controversy evaded. Current
psychiatry’s pantheon incudes evidence-based practice,
DSM diagnosis and neuroscience. The search for evidence
is theory driven. Diagnostic profusion raises questions
about the medicalisation of human suﬀering. Despite extraor-
dinary recent advances in neuroscience, their impact on
everyday psychiatric practice has been modest.
The purpose of this article is twofold:ﬁrst, to introduce
readers to an overarching model of brain function associated
164
SPECIAL ARTICLE
Holmes Friston’s free energy principle
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2021.6 Published online by Cambridge University Press
with the mathematical psychiatrist Karl Friston, the free
energy principle (FEP), which has been inﬂuential in neuro-
science generally, but thus far has caused relatively little stir
within psychiatry or clinical psychology. My hope is to
redress that. Second, I make the case that FEP can revitalise
the psychoanalytic psychotherapies, marginalised by the
inexorable rise of cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT) as
the dominant psychological therapy paradigm.
It should be noted that FEP is deliberately described by
Friston as a‘principle’, akin to the principles of natural selec-
tion or gravity. The evidence for its validity is circumstantial
rather than direct, and its detailed neuronal mechanisms and
clinical implications remain to be fully explored.
Friston’s forebears
Friston’s project builds on the work of a number of pioneer-
ing predecessors and their concepts. These include Erwin
Schrödinger, Heinrich Helmholtz, the Claudes – Claude
Bernard and Claude Shannon – and Thomas Bayes. We
live in an entropic universe. Broken cups don’t spontan-
eously reassemble. Coﬀee cools once poured. Stars burn
out. The exception is life itself. Quantum physicist
Schrödinger
1 coined the term‘negentropy’ to describe how
living matter, Canute-like for its lifetime, reverses this cos-
mic tide towards disorder and homogeneity.
The key to negentropy is homeostasis. As Bernard fam-
ously put it, the condition of a free life is the stability of the
interior milieu– whether one is a unicellular amoeba or, like
Schrödinger, a Nobel-prize winning primate. Homeostasis,
and the more general processes of allostasis,
2 resist the
forces of entropy, physiologically and behaviourally.
Inherent in homeostasis are boundaries: cell membranes,
the skin, the brain within its skull. Janus-like, homeostasis
faces outwards towards the environment and inwards
towards the milieu interieur. Temperature sensors in the
skin tell us it’s a hot day; the sympathetic nervous system
activates sweat glands, the brain tells us toﬂing oﬀ jumpers,
move into the shade, etc., all in the service of resisting being
entropically fried. Note that homeostats vary in‘precision’–
some are highly sensitive, whereas others tolerate a great
range of variation.
Friston had the insight and mathematical sophistication
to see that the negentropic homeostatic principle applies not
just to the organism as a whole but to the brain itself.
3,4 The
brain’s job is to counteract entropy and to maintain internal
stability on behalf of the organism whose processes and behav-
iour it controls and directs; this applies, reﬂexively, to itself.
The FEP goes back to the ideas of 19th-century poly-
math Hermann von Helmholtz, updated by artiﬁcial intelli-
gence (AI) neuroscientists Geo ﬀrey Hinton and Peter
Dayan.
5 Naively, we tend to think of vision as a camera-like
image passively projected onto the visual cortex, or the audi-
tory system as microphone-like, responding indiscriminat-
ingly to the prevailing phonic universe. In the Helmholtz
model thebrain makes its own world. Our sense organs, exter-
nal and internal, are constantly bombarded by a vast range of
stimuli from an ever-changing environment. To operate with
maximum eﬃciency, the brain selects out the‘meaning’of its
sensations, attending only to those that are relevant to its
‘aﬀordances’
6 – its speciﬁc ecological niche– and especially
to input that is anomalous or novel.
Working in the 1950s at the Bell telephone company
laboratory, Claude Shannon saw that this‘meaning’ could
be quantiﬁed – as ‘bits’ of information. Gregory Bateson,
anthropologist and family therapy guru, called these‘diﬀer-
ences that make a diﬀerence’. White noise is chaotic, entropic
and devoid of information. Language, whether spoken, sung
or gestured, is structured, ordered, negentropic. The measure
of informational energy is‘surprise’, i.e. how unexpected a
signal is. In the board game Scrabble, the letter‘x’ conveys
more information than ‘e’ because it is relatively unusual,
applying to a smaller range of words, and so in calculating
the score, is‘worth’ more. The brain’s aim is constantly to
reduce informational entropy and maximise meaning.
A crucial building block for the FEP is the concept of the
Bayesian brain. The Reverend Thomas Bayes, a late
18th-century clergyman and founder of probability theory,
grasped, Doris Day-like, that the future’s not ours to see.
Yet, to survive and adapt we need to know, moment to
moment, ‘what is going on’– in ourselves, in the interper-
sonal world and in the physical world. On the basis of
prior experience, the Bayesian brain
7 continuously estimates
the likelihood of future events. Probabilities are computed
by comparing current states of aﬀairs with past occurrences,
estimating the extent of correspondence between them,
factoring in the likelihood of errors in both memory and
perception, and ending with a portion that represents that
which cannot be predicted. This is‘prediction error’, which
must, in the service of negentropy, be minimised as far as
is possible – prediction error minimisation or PEM.
The brain,‘top-down’,u s e sB a y e s i a np r o b a b i l i t i e st oc l a r -
ify ‘bottom-up’input, extero- and interocaptive:
8 ‘My stomach
is complaining, but it’s not surprising– I overdid it on the
pudding, so it’s probably not cancer’; ‘I know that tune, I’ve
heard it so many times – yes of course, it’s the Beatles’
Yellow Submarine’; ‘Is that a stick or a snake? Come on, no
adders in city centres, probably safe to pick it up’.
Free energy
Now to the free energy principle itself.‘Energy’equates to infor-
mation, albeit physically embodied in patterns of neuronal
impulses, synaptic transmission (‘ﬁre together, wire together’9)
and the neurohormonal environment. Prior models of the
world, top-down, ‘bind’ incoming bottom-up information.
Energy unbound, or prediction error, reﬂects novelty in need
of binding– and so forestall the dangers of entropic chaos.
Circumstantial evidence for the FEP is the fact that
more neuronal ﬁbres reach the eye downwards from the
brain than travel upward towards the visual cortex.
Whenever possible, the brain‘tells’ the eye what it is likely
to be seeing. The FEP postulates a hierarchical series of
neuronal interactions, starting from the least to the most
complex, from the periphery to the central nervous system,
from speci ﬁcity to abstraction, most of which operate
below conscious awareness. At the level of the eye itself
the retinal receptors are activated:‘round, two dots and a
straight line between’. Top-down, even in a 1-month baby,
this will elicit an answering smile (‘face equals security’).
165
SPECIAL ARTICLE
Holmes Friston’s free energy principle
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2021.6 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Once language arrives, verbal concepts shape perceptions:
‘Oh of course, that’s a face’. At the highest level is mentalis-
ing – thinking about thinking:‘I wonder why bearded faces
always make me feel slightly unsettled? Perhaps it’s remin-
iscent of my scary grandfather’.
The FEP visualises a series of‘conversations’ in which
top-down ‘priors’‘bind’ bottom-up input into probabilistic-
ally recognisable meanings. Each level can be thought of as
a meaning–action boundary. Ascending the hierarchy, the
Bayesian process ensures that the most mathematically
probable pattern prevails across these statistical boundaries
or ‘Markov blankets’.
10 Prediction error is minimised by
‘binding’bottom-up energy (informational as well as physio-
logical) by top-down generative models based on pre-
existing patterns and concepts. Thus is order preserved,
entropy eschewed. We know what we like and, mostly, see
what we want and expect to see.
But there will always be a discrepancy between our pre-
existing models of the world and incoming sensations, an
excess of energy that cannot be bound and will have to be
passed onto the next level up of the hierarchy. Lockdown
excepted, we don’t live huddled in‘dark rooms’.
11 The envir-
onment is constantly inﬂux; we need to explore as much as
conserve – to ﬁnd new sources of food, suitable mates, inter-
est and excitement. Surprise, calibrated by the brain as the
discrepancy between expectation and incoming sensation,
is a proxy for free energy– and hence entropy. Surprise is
both vital to survival but also potentially entropic, disruptive
or even life-threatening. This represents the prediction error
aforementioned. The brain minimises such surprise/error by
whatever means possible.
At this point the role of aﬀect becomes important. Free
energy is aversive and can be thought of as representing
mental pain. Conversely,‘binding’ free energy is rewarding
and therefore motivating. The role of aﬀect, positive and
negative, is to drive the free energy minimising processes.
This is another‘AI’– active inference.
The idea of active inference captures a number of psycho-
logical processes central to psychological health. First, action
or agency. Given that incoming stimuli are inherently subject
to error and imprecision, the brain increases precision by
movement – approaching an ambiguous stimulus source,
turning the head to use foveal rather than peripheral vision,
switching lights on in order to see better, etc. Second, top-
down model revision. Now we know what that vague shape
really ‘is’– a cat, clothes strewn on theﬂoor, etc.:‘Let’sl i s t e n
more carefully. Oh, that’s not the Beatles at all, it’s the Beach
Boys’. Third, and vitally in the case of social species such as
our own, active inference is enhanced by recruiting help or
‘twogetherness’: ‘Did you hear something, or was I just
imagining it?’; ‘You know about’70s music – what was that
group’sn a m e ?’. Friston & Frith call this‘duets for one’ and
have worked out the mathematics of such collaborative
Markov blankets.
12 Fourth, if all else fails, by choosing or fash-
ioning environments that conform to the brain’s pre-existing
models of the word:‘Ic a n’t stand modern music. Let’sg o
over to Classic FM’. This last aspect is captured by the psycho-
analytic concept of ‘projective identiﬁcation’,i nw h i c hw e
shape our interpersonal world, often deleteriously, to conform
with expectations:‘You psychiatrists are all the same– never
there when I need you’.
Free energy and psychopathology
The FEP has clear implications for those who work in
mental ill health, and especially who favour psychological
methods of treatment. Consider depression, typically trig-
gered by loss, trauma or multiple setbacks. Adversity is
widespread – poverty, inequality, racism– but not all suc-
cumb. To understand resilience, we need an illness model
that encompasses not just events, but individuals’responses
to them. Attachment research shows that those who are
securely attached are able to repair the inevitable ruptures
to which all are prone, often through the typical sequence
of protest, rage, grief and mourning.
13 As children, securely
attached people have had caregivers they could depend on
to acknowledge their pain, tolerate protest and help them
to move on. Repeated episodes of everyday rupture–repair
cycles help build this resilience.
The free energy released by the rupture is bound by the
child’s knowledge that help is at hand and that their epistemi-
cally trusted caregiver will provide a generative model to
counteract the free energy associated with ruptures:‘Don’t
worry love, I’m just going to the loo, I’ll be back in a minute’.
In the‘still face’paradigm, parents are asked to freeze their
facial expression for 1 minute while talking or playing with
their child.
14 Securely attached children continue actively to
try to re-engage with their caregivers in the conﬁdent expect-
ation that they will be‘back soon’. For insecurely attached
children, by contrast, rather than rupture–repair, cycles of
rupture–despair or rupture–disappear are the norm. Their
caregivers have either themselves been overwhelmed by
their child ’s unhappiness and so despairingly abandon
attempts to alleviate it; or repress the impact of the child’s
mental pain and so‘disappear’ emotionally. Both leave the
child alone toﬁnd ways to bind the free energy the rupture
evokes. When their caregiver’s face freezes they look away,
become miserable and regressed, and often resort to self-
soothing rituals such as rocking or emotional dissociation.
Such insecurely attached children are primed in later
life for depression in response to loss or trauma or, in
extreme cases, to developing post-traumatic stress disorder.
The ingredients of free energy minimisation needed to
maintain psychological equilibrium are for them problem-
atic. Active inference is compromised. They tend to be pas-
sive rather than active. They stick with limited and simplistic
and inﬂexible ‘top-down’models such as‘It’s no use trying to
make things better, it never works’ or ‘Feelings are danger-
ous, best to keep them buried’. They ﬁnd it hard to trust
people and so can’t ‘borrow’ an intimate other’s brain with
which to process feelings and build up alternative ways of
viewing the world.
Psychotherapeutic implications
The most commonly used therapy for depression, CBT,
attempts to address these deﬁciencies. Therapists encourage
patients actively to test their negative‘hypotheses’ by look-
ing more closely at their experiences and by exploring alter-
native top-down models to account for them (‘Maybe my
boyfriend didn’t answer his phone because he’d run out of
battery, not because he doesn’t love me’). But CBT has its
166
SPECIAL ARTICLE
Holmes Friston’s free energy principle
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2021.6 Published online by Cambridge University Press
limitations. ‘Treatment-resistant depression’ is common.15
People with personality disorders do badly with standard
CBT, often refusing to engage or dropping out.16 The FEP
provides explanations for this. From an FEP perspective,
one way to minimise free energy is to gravitate towards or
engender environments that con ﬁrm one’s view of the
world, however negative. Depression relegates suﬀerers to
emotionally impoverished relationships, stereotyped and
simplistic top-down models, and thus becomes a self-
fulﬁlling hypothesis, resistant to psychotherapeutic inter-
ventions. In addition, these negative top-down priors are
‘inferentially inert’, i.e. inaccessible for modiﬁcation.
A degree of chaos/uncertainty/free energy needs to be
tolerated before new generative models can evolve.
Homeostatic imprecision needs to be tolerated for a while.
The holding and‘negative capability’ of the therapist’s ‘bor-
rowed brain’ paves the way for a more complex, nuanced
top-down reset. Given that people with personality disorders
notoriously ﬁnd it diﬃcult to trust others, the brevity and
defocus on the therapeutic relationship in standard CBT
limits the scope for such fundamental change.
Moving from depression to an FEP perspective on
trauma, the latter creates an overwhelming inﬂux of free
energy for which there are no available top-down models
with which to bind it. Thoughts of cruelty, neglect and
abuse remain in the realm of the unthinkable and are there-
fore ‘defended against ’ by repression or dissociation.
17
However, when jointly considered – under a shared
Markov blanket– these bottom-up unprocessed experiences
can be bound with the therapist ’s encouragement and
expertise into manageable narratives. However painful,
they become less overwhelming, a source of new ways of
thinking and psychic reorganisation. As the patient begins
to feel that the therapist is safe, reliable, compassionate
and empathic, so everyday ruptures– session-endings, holi-
day breaks and misunderstandings– are repeatedly repaired
via model revision (‘Maybe the weekend break does not inev-
itably mean I’m forgotten’), and the trust this engenders can
be generalised into the patient’s everyday life.
We can see here how contemporary psychoanalytic psy-
chotherapy and revitalised Freudian ideas resonate with the
FEP. Freud started oﬀ his working life as a neurologist. Like
Friston, he conceptualised the brain ’s aim as reducing
psychic energy, typically through action and‘word represen-
tations’– i.e. transmuting free energy into thinkable
thoughts. He saw unbound energy (which he later trans-
muted into‘libido’) as potentially disruptive and responsible
for the symptoms of psychological illness. Psychoanalysis
was designed ﬁrst to evoke and then to quieten this
trauma-related unbound energy. To achieve this, three key
psychoanalytic procedures are free association, dream ana-
lysis and analysis of transference.
The ‘virtual’ nature of the psychoanalytic relationship
brings both top-down and bottom-up components of the
FEP process into focus, enabling them to be mentalised rather
than enacted. Free association taps into the mind’s normally
unvoiced upward-welling stream of consciousness, counter-
acting the elusiveness of aﬀect seen in the rupture–despair/
disappear attachment pattern. This enables the range of
top-down responses to be enhanced and aversive free energy
minimised. At the top-down level, in a process comparable
to the immune system’s lexicon of antigen-activated anti-
bodies, dreaming is the means by which the mind generates
a repertoire of narratives with which to bind the free energy
which life’s vicissitudes engender. Transference analysis
turns the spotlight on the limited varieties of top-down narra-
tives that suﬀerers use in their dealings with intimate others
to minimise free energy. The enigmatic ambiguity of thera-
pists’ persona enables patients to experience, reconsider and
extend the top-down assumptions with which they approach
the world of intimate others.
Psychoanalysis has tended to self-isolation, sequestrated
from cross-fertilisation by other disciplines. The Friston–
Freud consilience opens up new possibilities. Psychoanalytic
and attachment-derived mentalisation-based therapy (MBT)
is now established as a highly eﬀective therapy for borderline
personality disorder, previously considered untreatable.
18
MBT leads to big reductions in medication use, suicide
attempts, hospital admission and unemployment among peo-
ple with borderline personality disorder, as compared with
treatment as usual.
MBT is both practically and conceptually consistent
with the FEM. It encourages patients (a) to identify the
bottom-up feelings that fuel their self-injurious actions, (b)
to pause and think of diﬀerent ways of handling these, i.e.
to tolerate a quantum of free energy with the help of the
therapists’‘borrowed brain’ and (c) through mutual menta-
lising (therapist and patient together forming a neurobio-
logical ‘bubble’) to generate more complex and adaptive
models of the self and signiﬁcant others. The result is man-
ageable surprise: confounding suﬀerers’ negative assump-
tions about the world, becoming less overwhelmed by
unbound aﬀect (fewer ‘melt-downs’) and facilitating greater
resilience.
Conclusions
If rehabilitation of the psychoanalytic method in the light of
the FEP comes as a pleasant surprise, this is consistent with
its principles. As in Mark Twain’s trope, rumours of psycho-
analysis’s death have been greatly exaggerated. In place of
despair or disappearance, the FEP suggests that repair is
possible. FEP-grounded psychoanalytic approaches such as
MBT are now known to help those with profound mental
distress. They also suggest a scientiﬁcally sound account of
the interpersonal and neuronal mechanisms by which psy-
chological change comes about.
About the author
Jeremy Holmesis a retired psychiatrist and psychoanalytic psychotherapist.
He is a Visiting Professor at Exeter University, UK, and author of many arti-
cles and books in theﬁeld of attachment theory and psychoanalysis, includ-
ing The Brain Has a Mind of Its Own: Attachment, Neurobiology, and the New
Science of Psychotherapy, in which the ideas of this article are explored in
greater detail.
Funding
This research received no speciﬁc grant from any funding agency, commer-
cial or not-for-proﬁt sectors.
167
SPECIAL ARTICLE
Holmes Friston’s free energy principle
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2021.6 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Declaration of interest
None.
References
1 Schrödinger E. What is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell .
Cambridge University Press, 1944.
2 Sterling P. Principles of allostasis. In Allostasis, Homeostasis, and the
Costs of Physiological Adaptation(ed J Schulkin). Cambridge University
Press, 2004.
3 Friston KJ. The free energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nat Rev
Neurosci 2010; 11: 127–38.
4 Friston KJ, Fortier M, Friedman DA. Of woodlice and men: a Bayesian
account of cognition, life and consciousness. An interview with Karl
Friston. ALIUS Bull 2018; 2:1 7–43.
5 Dayan P, Hinton G, Nesl R, Zemel R. The Helmholtz machine.Neural
Comput 1995; 7: 889–904.
6 Gibson J.The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Laurence Erlbaum,
1986.
7 Holmes J, Nolte T.“Surprise” and the Bayesian brain: implications for
psychotherapy theory and practice.Front Psychol 2019; 10: 592.
8 Holmes J.The Brain Has a Mind of Its Own: Attachment, Neurobiology and
the New Science of Psychotherapy. Confer Books, 2020.
9 Hebb D. The Organisation of Behaviour. John Wiley & Sons, 1949.
10 Kirchhoﬀ M, Parr T, Palacios E, Friston K, Kiverstein J. The Markov blan-
kets of life: autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle.JR
Soc Interface 2018; 15(138): 20170792.
11 Friston KJ, Thornton C, Clark A. Free energy minimisation and the dark-
room problem. Front Psychol 2012; 3: 130.
12 Friston K, Frith C. A duet for one.Conscious Cogn 2015; 36: 390–405.
13 Holmes J, Slade A.Attachment in Therapeutic Practice. Routledge, 2017.
14 Tronick E. The Neurobehavioural and Socio-Emotional Development of
Infants and Children. Norton, 2007.
15 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence.
Depression in Adults:
Recognition and Management (Clinical Guideline CG90). NICE, 2009.
16 Davidson KM. Cognitive Therapy for Personality Disorders: A Guide for
Clinicians (2nd edn). Routledge, 2008.
17 Connolly P. Expected free energy formalizes conﬂict underlying defense
in Freudian psychoanalysis.Front Psychol 2018; 9: 1264.
18 Bateman A, Fonagy P. A randomized controlled trial of a mentalization-
based intervention (MBT FACTS) for families of people with borderline
personality disorder. Person Disord: Theory Res Treat2019; 10:7 0–9.
PRAXIS
The Royal College of Psychiatrists’ Leadership and
Management Fellow Scheme
Alex Till,1 Deepa Bagepalli Krishnan,2 Russell Gibson,3 Michael Hobkirk,4 David Somerﬁeld,5
Helen Crimlisk6
BJPsych Bulletin (2022)46, 168–173, doi:10.1192/bjb.2021.31
1Health Education England (North
West), UK;2Health Education England
(East Midlands), UK;3Health Education
England (Peninsula), UK;4Sussex
Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, UK;
5Devon Partnership NHS Trust, UK;
6Sheﬃeld Health and Social Care NHS
Foundation Trust, UK
Correspondence to Dr Alex Till
(alextill54@gmail.com)
First received 14 Sep 2020, final revision
6 Mar 2021, accepted 13 Mar 2021
© The Author(s), 2021. Published by
Cambridge University Press on behalf of
the Royal College of Psychiatrists. This is
an Open Access article, distributed
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution licence (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),
which permits unrestricted re-use,
distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.
Summary The Royal College of Psychiatrists’ Leadership and Management Fellow
Scheme aims to develop and support a new cohort of leaders within psychiatry. This
article provides an introduction to the scheme, which is accessible to all higher
trainees with the support of their host organisation. We explore its development,
structure and how it is evolving to provide a strong platform for achieving the
College’s ambition to beneﬁt patient care by embedding a culture of medical
leadership within mental health services.
Keywords Education and training; leadership and management; leadership
development; psychiatric leadership.
168
PRAXIS
Till et alRCPsych Leadership and Management Fellow Scheme
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2021.6 Published online by Cambridge University Press