1Scientific  RepoRtS  |         (2019) 9:16870  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-53028-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports
free energy principle in Human 
postural control System: Skin 
Stretch feedback Reduces the 
entropy
pilwon Hur  1,2*, Yi-Tsen pan  1 & christian DeBuys1
Human upright standing involves an integration of multiple sensory inputs such as vision, vestibular 
and somatosensory systems. It has been known that sensory deficits worsen the standing balance. 
However, how the modulation of sensory information contributes to postural stabilization still remains 
an open question for researchers. the purpose of this work was to formulate the human standing 
postural control system in the framework of the free-energy principle, and to investigate the efficacy 
of the skin stretch feedback in enhancing the human standing balance. Previously, we have shown 
that sensory augmentation by skin stretch feedback at the fingertip could modulate the standing 
balance of the people with simulated sensory deficits. In this study, subjects underwent ten 30-second 
trials of quiet standing balance with and without skin stretch feedback. Visual and vestibular sensory 
deficits were simulated by having each subject close their eyes and tilt their head back. We found that 
sensory augmentation by velocity-based skin stretch feedback at the fingertip reduced the entropy 
of the standing postural sway of the people with simulated sensory deficits. This result aligns with 
the framework of the free energy principle which states that a self-organizing biological system at its 
equilibrium state tries to minimize its free energy either by updating the internal state or by correcting 
body movement with appropriate actions. The velocity-based skin stretch feedback at the fingertip 
may increase the signal-to-noise ratio of the sensory signals, which in turn enhances the accuracy of the 
internal states in the central nervous system. With more accurate internal states, the human postural 
control system can further adjust the standing posture to minimize the entropy, and thus the free 
energy.
Upright standing is one of the most important motor tasks that enable the use of the upper limbs and hands for 
tool use and dexterity. Even though this motor task seems trivial, it involves the complicated interplay between 
neurophysiology and biomechanics of sensory, neuromuscular, and neural processing subsystems
1–8. Specifically, 
upright standing involves the integration and transformation of various sensory inputs (e.g., vision, vestibular 
system, proprioception, touch) via a highly-coordinated central nervous system (CNS) into bodily information 
(e.g., position, velocity, and acceleration of body sway). Degradation in the sensory systems (e.g., vision
7,9 propri-
oception10–12, vestibular system8,13, touch3,14), muscular systems15,16 and nervous systems17,18 worsens balance of 
the upright standing.
One of the key elements for the successful balance rehabilitation is to quantitatively assess the balance. 
Traditionally, descriptive parameters have been used to characterize the postural sway of the standing balance19. 
Several mathematical models using statistical mechanics have also been introduced to capture the stochastic 
behaviors of the postural sway
20–22. However, these measures provide only the statistical description of the sys-
tem, but not the dynamics itself23. Instead, several researchers tried to model the sensorimotor system from the 
control-theoretic perspectives to understand the human motor control system. Wolpert et al.24 proposed that a 
sensorimotor system has an internal model such that the CNS internally simulates the dynamical behavior of the 
system for the purpose of planning, control and learning. They argued that the CNS internally integrates sensory 
signals such that predicted sensory errors temporally propagate in the framework of a Kalman filter. In addition, 
1Texas A&M University, Department of Mechanical Engineering, College Station, TX, 77843, USA. 2Texas A&M 
Engineering Experiment Station, Center for Remote Health Technologies and Systems, College Station, TX, 77843, 
USA. *email: pilwonhur@tamu.edu
open
2Scientific  RepoRtS  |         (2019) 9:16870  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-53028-1
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
motor learning was suggested to be the process of updating the prior knowledge of the system by evidences from 
the error feedback in the Bayesian-optimal framework25. However, even though the control-theoretic framework 
seems fascinating, it requires for the biological systems to have the complicated inverse model and the heavy 
computation, which are not likely to be realizable neurobiologically
26.
Recently, a unifying theory, called free-energy principle, was proposed to account for the action, perception 
and learning of sensorimotor systems27. The free-energy principle argues that a self-organizing biological system 
at its equilibrium point tries to minimize its free energy. In other words, a self-organizing biological system tries 
to resist a tendency toward disorder. According to the free-energy principle, a self-organizing biological system 
minimizes the free energy either by (i) updating the internal state (equivalently, internal model or prior
25) or (ii) 
correcting body movement with appropriate actions. Free energy principle does not require any complicated 
inverse models and is neurobiologically realizable
26. Therefore, the idea of the free-energy principle may also be 
applied to human postural control system to understand how the human CNS maintains the standing balance 
under external perturbations. In other words, this framework can be used to quantify the human postural control 
system
7,28. In the Method section and Appendix (see Supplementary Information), we will examine the use of the 
free-energy principle to derive metrics that quantify or assess the human standing balance.
Rehabilitation is a process of a motor adaptation in response to external changes or stimuli to restore the 
normative motor functions. These external changes or stimuli mostly result from errors or deviations from the 
reference (or desired) trajectories for the given tasks. However, how the motor adaptation takes place is still 
not well known and is one of the important research topics in human motor control and rehabilitation. One 
widely-accepted idea is that human sensorimotor systems utilize the error feedbacks for motor adaptation
29. 
Several studies have reported that amplifying the movement errors could enhance the rehabilitation outcomes, 
which is sometimes referred to as an error augmentation
13,30,31. Although rehabilitation may include internal 
sources of adaptation such as motor imagery, these are not the focus of this study.
Cutaneous feedback has been of a great interest as a way to sensory augmentation for the balance enhance-
ment13,32–34. Random vibrotactile feedback has been used to strengthen the weak signal, known as stochastic 
resonance, and thus improve the sensorimotor functions35–38. It was shown that the random vibrotactile signal at 
various body parts (e.g., foot sole, wrist) enhanced sensorimotor functions (e.g., light touch sensation, gait var-
iability, hand functions) in young adults, elderly adults, and stroke patients, suggesting the great potential of the 
random vibrotactile feedback for balance rehabilitation
35,36,38–40.
Similarly, Jeka et al .32 reported the effect of light touch in standing balance. They found that subjects who 
are lightly touching a fixed surface with their index fingertip (with the normal force less than 1N) exhibited the 
reduced postural sway in tandem Romberg posture. Clapp and Wing
33 also showed a reduction in postural sway 
in the sagittal plane when subjects were making a light contact with their fingertips on a fixed surface during 
normal bipedal stance. Pan et al.
13 showed that skin stretch and skin deformation at the fingertip could provide 
subjects with additional information to identify the direction of body sway and thus to modulate the postural 
sway. These suggest that additional cutaneous sensory inputs at the fingertip can provide a robust regulation of 
the postural sway. It has been shown, by partially blocking sensory afferents during human standing, that the 
enhanced balance due to light touch was not due to the mechanical support on the fingertip but due to the tactile 
feedback
41. Krishnamoorthy et al.34 observed that a light touch at the head or neck reduced the body sway even 
more effectively compared with a fingertip touch.
The objective of this study is twofold: (i) to formulate the human standing postural control system in the 
framework of the free-energy principle, and thus to introduce measures that quantify the human postural control 
system and (ii) to investigate the efficacy of the skin stretch feedback in enhancing the human standing balance. 
We hypothesized that skin stretch feedback would both reduce the entropy of the postural sway and improve bal-
ance with respect to other measures in accordance with the free energy principle. The formulation of the human 
postural control system in the framework of the free-energy principle is given in the Method section. We also 
provide a proof that the long-term average of the free energy can be approximated by an entropy of the postural 
sway in the Appendix (see Supplementary Information). In the Experiment section, the details of experimental 
protocol to test the efficacy of the skin stretch feedback are described. In the Result and Discussion sections, we 
show that the skin stretch feedback at the fingertip reduces Entropy of the postural sway.
Methods
In this section, we introduce the framework of free-energy principle and provide an algorithm to estimate the 
entropy of the human postural sway. To test the feasibility of the framework, we conduct an experiment of quiet 
standing with and without skin stretch feedback.
free energy principle. The free-energy principle states that a self-organizing biological system at its equi-
librium point tries to minimize its free energy 27. Similar to the idea of the conventional optimal control theory 
based on forward-inverse models24,42,43, free energy principle explains how a biological system makes movements, 
perceives the environments and infers the internal states. However, unlike the conventional optimal control the-
ory, free energy principle does not require the complicated inversion process of the forward models via heavy 
computation and optimization
26. That is, free energy principle uses a forward model only and does not need 
to solve the complicated Bellman equation from dynamic programming with cost functions. Instead, it uses 
prior beliefs about the given tasks learned via previous sensorimotor behaviors, which is generally considered 
to be Bayes-optimal
44,45. With these benefits, we frame the human postural control system with the free energy 
principle.
Surprise. In essence, free energy principle, or equivalently active inference, claims to minimize the prediction 
error of the forward model (i.e., generative model) via appropriate actions and perceptions 27. The prediction 
3Scientific  RepoRtS  |         (2019) 9:16870  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-53028-1
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
error is called self-information, or surprise. In other words, minimizing the surprise is equivalently maximizing 
the accuracy of prediction about the sensory states by the agent (i.e., biological systems). A careful mathematical 
formulation (see Supplementary Information) can prove that minimizing the free energy is implicitly equivalent 
to minimizing surprise. To minimize the free energy, the agent either i) makes a movement of the body to alter 
the sensory input or ii) updates the internal states of the brain to refine the approximation of the posterior beliefs 
(i.e., recognition model)
27. When this principle is applied to the human standing balance, CNS is understood to 
minimize the free energy either by correcting body posture or by updating the internal model of the postural con-
trol system (i.e., self-awareness of body movement). In other words, the human postural control system with the 
goal or intention of stable standing balance always tries to be confident about the the current state of its posture.
Entropy. The long-term average of surprise can be proven to be Entropy  (see Supplementary Information). 
Therefore, the free energy principle is called a minimum entropy principle, suggesting that CNS keeps the average 
surprise of the body posture sampled from a probability distribution or density to be low. A density with low 
entropy means that, on average, the body posture is relatively predictable23,27.
Then, what is the meaning of entropy minimization in the problem of the human postural control? Ones are 
easily tempted to consider that the postural control system is trying to prevent any postural sways. From the 
optimal control point of view, this may seem to be true since the usual cost functions include states (e.g., linear 
quadratic regulator). However, it is important to note that the equilibrium point during the quiet standing is not 
necessarily the same as standing still with no postural sway. In general, humans do not take the strategy of stand-
ing still since it requires excessive efforts
46. Instead, the human postural control system allows flexibility to some 
extent such that whenever the postural sway is within a certain range, little control efforts are made in correcting 
the posture
20.
In our previous study 23, we developed an algorithm to compute the entropy of human quiet standing and 
showed that people with better balance control have smaller entropy of postural sway distribution. Postural sway 
data captured by the center of pressure (COP) were used to extract the reduced order dynamics of the human pos-
tural control system in the framework of a Markov chain. The reduced order dynamics were expressed in the form 
of transition probability matrix that describes the movement of COP , and thus the evolution of COP distribution. 
With the careful development of the algorithm, the distribution is guaranteed to converge to be stationary. This 
framework, a free energy principle applied to human postural control system, is called Invariant Density Analysis 
(see Data analysis section). For the detailed development of the framework, please refer to Hur et al.
23. From the 
Invariant Density Analysis, it was found that people with degraded sensorimotor functions or under perturbations 
had significantly higher entropy compared with healthy people with no perturbations
16,23.
Skin stretch feedback.  Reduction of entropy. As mentioned in the Introduction, skin stretch feedback 
showed its potential for balance rehabilitation. Skin stretch is a simple mechanism for generating additional sen-
sory signals and can be made accessible in almost every situation via fixed structures or wearable robotic devices. 
Skin stretch feedback is a type of sensory augmentation that enables the error augmentation for motor learning. 
In terms of free energy principle, the additionally-sampled sensory data (i.e., skin stretch feedback) increase the 
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and thus the brain can generate motor commands more effectively by maximizing 
the model evidence. In other words, the increased prediction accuracy of the sensory states due to skin stretch 
feedback, and thus the increased SNR contributes to the optimal motor planning. The motor adjustment from 
the optimal motor planning further contributes to minimizing the prediction errors. These repeated processes 
eventually minimize the entropy of sensory state probability
27.
Skin stretch feedback device. Previously, we developed a wearable sensory augmentation system for standing bal-
ance rehabilitation using a skin stretch feedback device (Fig. 1)13. The device was inspired by the concept of a light 
touch as mentioned in the Introduction. By mimicking the shear force that subjects may experience at the finger-
tip during a light touch of fixed surface, the additional postural sway information was provided to the subjects’ 
fingertip in the form of the skin stretch feedback. This preliminary study
13 found that the sensory augmentation 
due to skin stretch feedback at the fingertip could enhance the standing balance, indicating the reinforcement of 
the accuracy of the sensory prediction.
The components of the system include (Fig. 1): a wearable skin stretch device (SSD), and a waist belt enclos-
ing an inertia measurement unit (IMU) (MPU-9150, InvenSense Inc., San Jose, CA), a motor driver (L298N, 
STMicroelectronics, Italy), and an embedded control unit (myRIO, National Instruments, Austin, TX). A wear-
able skin stretch device (Fig. 1a) is designed to be attached to the subject’s index finger. SSD roughly imposed 
about 20–30 g weight on the fingertip
13 and the coefficient of friction between the contactor and the fingertip was 
roughly 0.5 or less47. A DC motor (1524T009SR, Faulhaber, Germany) mounted inside the device’s housing was 
powered by an h-bridge type motor driver (Fig.  1c). As the subject sways, IMU detects the change of the body 
orientation and the motor rotates accordingly. Then, the contactor stretches the fingertip pad, which induces the 
skin stretch feedback. The housing of the device was made of ABS-type filament through a 3D printer (Replicator 
2X, Makerbot, Brooklyn, NY). Different sizes of housings and contactors were fabricated to cover various finger 
sizes of all subjects so that the contact at the fingertip was maintained with qualitatively small normal force.
Control strategy. Subjects wore the SSD at their index finger and the waist belt around their waist. The IMU was 
placed at the estimated center of mass (COM) location (Fig. 1b). Postural sway in anterior-posterior (AP) direc-
tion was registered by the IMU (e.g., pitch angle). The recorded sway angle was processed by myRIO in real-time. 
The contactor of SSD was controlled by proportional, integral and derivative (PID) terms of body pitch angle, θ
p. 
Specifically, body pitch angle was mapped to the angular velocity of the contactor, ωc, of SSD as follows:
4Scientific  RepoRtS  |         (2019) 9:16870  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-53028-1
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
∫ωθ θθ=+ +KK dt Kcp pi pd p
where Kp, Ki, and Kd are PID gains with units of s−1, s, and unitless, respectively. To find Kd, we tuned the parame-
ters during the pilot test to make sure the subjects do not feel any discomfort, but feel light touch at their fingertips. 
We let Kp = Ki = 0 since sway velocity information was found to be a more accurate form of information acquired 
by sensory systems when compared to its sway position and acceleration information for human standing bal-
ance5,48. Intuitively, this idea of D control is plausible since skin stretch feedback is based on the flow or slip at the 
contact surface. To avoid any potential discomfort at the fingertip, the maximum angular velocity of the contactor 
was limited to 25 rad/s.
Both direction and velocity information of postural sway can be provided and augmented by additional light 
touch of a stationary surface
48–51. Moreover, it was found that postural sway was highly consistent with the driving 
frequency of moving surface where subjects are touching. This emphasizes the important role of cutaneous feed-
back in modulating the control of upright posture
50,51. The maximum value of ωc was restricted to 25 rad/s for this 
purpose, which is about 4 Hz. In this way, when the subject stayed still regardless of the pitch angle (e.g., forward 
or backward), the contactor stopped, and no skin stretch was applied to the fingertip pad. This also removed the 
drift issues of the IMU data.
experiment. To test the idea of free energy principle and the efficacy of the skin stretch feedback in reducing 
the entropy of the standing balance, the following experiment was conducted.
Subjects. In Pan et al.13, the range of COP in AP direction with two factors (sensory augmentation and vision) 
had the Partial η2 = 0.1. We assumed a correlation of 0.5 between these two data; then we could get an effect size 
of 0.33. Then, at least 12 subjects were needed for each group for a significance level of 0.05 and a power of 0.95 
using G*Power52. To ensure significance, 15 subjects were recruited (three females and twelve males: mean age 
s.d.: 25.6 ± 3.33 years) for this experiment. The subjects have neither been neurologically impaired nor had bal-
ance issues before. They were informed of the experimental procedures except how the sensory feedback device 
operates. All subjects provided the informed consent before the experiment started. All experimental protocol 
and methods in this experiment were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations from 
the Declaration of Helsinki and were approved by the Texas A&M University Institutional Review Board.
Protocols. Subjects wore the SSD on their index finger and put on the waist belt around their waist. Their arms 
hung naturally by their sides. Ten trials of 30 second quiet standing on a forceplate (OR6, AMTI, Watertown, 
MA) with simulated sensory deficits and two sensory augmentation conditions were performed. Subjects were 
instructed to stand quietly. No other instructions were given to subjects about the behavior of the contactor. To 
simulate the sensory deficit condition, both visual and vestibular deficits were induced by asking subjects to close 
their eyes and tilt their head up at least 45 (Fig. 1b). Under such a head-extended condition, the vestibular organ 
moves and the utricle otoliths are put into irregular location, which perturbs the vestibular sensory system and 
therefore results in postural imbalance
53,54. Subjects put on an overhead safety harness for protection against 
unwanted and unexpected falls. Two sensory augmentation condition were included: (i) SSD is turned on (ON), 
Figure 1. Skin stretch feedback system and experiment setup. The system consists of a skin stretch device 
(SSD), a waist belt enclosing an inertia measurement unit (IMU), a motor driver, and an embedded control 
unit (myRIO). (a) SSD is designed to be attached to subject’s index finger. A DC motor is mounted inside the 
housing of SSD. A contactor rotates while the subject is swaying back and forth to provide additional cutaneous 
skin stretch feedback on one’s fingertip pad. (b) Subjects were asked to perform 30 seconds of quiet standing on 
a force plate with simulated sensory deficits (eyes closed and head tilted backward).
5Scientific  RepoRtS  |         (2019) 9:16870  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-53028-1
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
and (ii) SSD is turned off (OFF). The experiment comprised of practice and main sessions. Practice session aimed 
at familiarizing the subjects with the experiment setup. Subjects were asked to stand quietly with barefoot on a 
forceplate. There were three practice trials before the main session to make sure that subjects become familiar 
with the experiment. In the main session, subjects were instructed to perform the same quiet standing tasks as in 
the practice session under the 2 sensory augmentation conditions: (i) SSD OFF , (ii) SSD ON. Each condition was 
repeated 10 times to minimize random effects by taking the mean values of each metric. Note that the order of all 
20 trials was fully randomized, and subjects were not informed of the sensory augmentation condition. Break was 
provided upon request, and a two-minute rest was provided between every 5 trials to avoid muscle fatigue. The 
whole experiment lasted about 30 minutes. Note that in both sensory augmentation conditions, subject wore the 
SSD all times even when no skin stretch feedback was provided.
Data analysis. Based on the free energy principle, human postural control system tries to minimize the entropy 
of body posture sampled from a postural sway probability density. An algorithm, Invariant Density Analysis 
(IDA), to compute the probability density of body posture was developed by Hur et al.
23. In the following, a brief 
explanation of IDA is presented. IDA includes several measures including entropy to parameterize the invariant 
density. In addition to IDA, Stabilogram Diffusion Analysis (SDA) is computed to complement the explanation 
of the postural control.
Postural balance was quantified by measuring the COP displacement registered by a forceplate (OR6, AMTI, 
Watertown, MA, USA) and a data acquisition system (USB-6002, National Instruments, Austin, TX). COP from 
a forceplate and pitch angle from IMU were collected at a sampling rate of 1 kHz and 500 Hz, respectively. The 
data were processed offline using MATLAB (R2016a, MathWorks, Natick, MA). Postural sway measures were 
computed in anterior-posterior (AP), medio-lateral (ML), and radial (Rad) direction. Rad displacements are the 
Euclidean distance from the mean COP to each COP .
invariant density analysis. Previously, we23 introduced a reduced-order finite Markov chain model to ana-
lyze the stochastic structure of postural sway, which provides insight into the long-term system behavior. This 
model describes the states (zero-mean COP data) of the dynamical system and evolution of those states. It was 
found that the distribution of COP over the state space would eventually converge to a unique steady state distri-
bution π, known as invariant density. To acknowledge the details of subject-specific COP behaviors, five parame-
ters were introduced as follows. P
peak is the peak value of π. D̅ is the average location (state) of the COP , and the 
unit is mm. D95 is the largest state at which there is a 95% probability of containing the COP . It has the same unit 
as D̅. λ2 is the second largest eigenvalue of the transition matrix and describes the convergence rate of the system 
to its invariant long-term behavior. H is the entropy and is the measure of randomness. H is computed as 
H ii() log( )iI 2ππ=− ∑ ∈  where I is the set of all possible states.
In addition to the above five parameters, we computed a metric that may provide insight into the control 
mechanisms of the postural control system. The eigenvector corresponding to the second largest eigenvalue is 
of our interests
28. It was noted that investigation of the eigenvector corresponding to λ2 has the potential to pro-
vide a complete understanding of the embedded dynamics in the reduced order model28. For simplicity, we call 
the eigenvector corresponding to the second largest eigenvalue as the second eigenvector. Recently, the second 
eigenvector has been used to formulate an intuitive understanding of the dynamics for a finite state-space ergodic 
Markov chain by decomposing the state space into essential features
55–57. Specifically, Dellnitz55 reported that the 
state space could be subdivided into two subsets depending on the sign of the corresponding second eigenvector 
(i.e., positive vs. negative). Each subset shows different dynamic behavior. Using this idea, we investigated the zero 
crossing point of the second eigenvector, z
λ2.
Stabilogram diffusion analysis. Collins and DeLuca20 proposed a Stabilogram Diffusion Analysis (SDA) 
that could provide several physiologically-meaningful parameters from stabilogram from the viewpoint of statis-
tical mechanics. SDA computes how the COP diffuses over time at each arbitrary time. It was shown that the pos-
tural control system during quiet standing could be separated into two different control mechanisms: open-loop 
and closed-loop control. Figure 2 shows an example of a resultant planar stabilogram-diffusion plot. Short-term 
and long-term regions are dominated by the open-loop and closed-loop control strategies, respectively. This phe-
nomenon can be described by the following parameters.
Diffusion coefficients (D
s, Dl), which equal one-half of the slopes of the fitting line to both regions, represent 
the level of stochastic activities of the COP about the plane of support. For example, greater Ds, compared to Dl, 
reflects a more random behavior and less active control in the short-term interval. The next parameters are called 
the scaling exponents (H
s, Hl), which are the slopes of the log-log plots of the stabilogram, evaluate the persis-
tence/anti-persistence of the COP behavior. Scaling exponents suggested that COP tends to move away from the 
equilibrium during the short-term interval (H
s > 0.5, persistent) whereas COP tends to return to the equilibrium 
over long-term interval ( Hl < 0.5, antipersistent). The last two parameters are critical point coordinates ( Δtc, 
〈Δr2〉2) where 〈 ·〉 represents the mean value. A critical point is defined as the point where the slope changes 
considerably from one region to another, representing the critical time interval (Δ tc) and critical mean square 
displacements (〈Δr2〉c). The critical point is calculated by finding the first minimum of the second derivative of 
the linear stabilogram-diffusion plot.
Statistical analysis. Data from all trials were averaged for the two feedback conditions, SSD OFF and SSD ON. 
A two-tailed paired t-test was performed using SPSS statistical software package (v21, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL) to 
6Scientific  RepoRtS  |         (2019) 9:16870  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-53028-1
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
evaluate the effects of SSD on quiet standing balance analyzed using three different methods. The significance 
level was set to α = 0.05.
Results
Effect of the skin stretch feedback (SSD) on standing balance under the simulated sensory deficit condition is 
summarized in Fig. 3. Specifically, among IDA measures, P
peak,AP (t(14) = 2.12, d = 0.55, p = 0.05 where t, d, and p 
represent t statistic, Cohen’s d for effect size and p value) significantly increased, and HAP (t(14) = −2.11, d = 0.54, 
p = 0.05), HRad (t(14) = −2.34, d = 0.60, p = 0.04), and zλ2,AP (t(14) = −2.54, d = 0.66, p = 0.02) significantly 
decreased when SSD was provided. Even though no significant differences were found in the other IDA measures, 
D
95,Rad (t(14) = −1.94, d = 0.50, p = 0.07) and zλ2,Rad (t(14) = −1.99, d = 0.51, p = 0.07) tended to decrease when 
SSD was provided. Figure 4 shows the representative invariant density plots of SSD ON and OFF conditions, and 
their associated IDA parameters (e.g., Ppeak, ̅D, and D95). It is observed that when SSD was on, Ppeak,AP increased, 
whereas HAP, and HRad significantly decreased. Also, D95,AP tended to decrease when SSD was on. Figure 5 shows 
the representative plots of the second eigenvector of the transition matrix for both SSD ON and OFF conditions. 
It is observed that z
λ2,AP significantly reduced when SSD was on. Also, z λ2,Rad tended to reduce when SSD was 
provided.
IDA gives a comprehensive view on postural sway behavior and its long-term prediction. Figure 3 shows that 
D95,Rad tended to decrease (p  = 0.07) when SSD was provided, suggesting that radial COP stayed closer to the 
Figure 2. Linear and log-log stabilogram diffusion plots in the radial (Rad) direction. Short-term and long-
term regions fitted by straight black regression lines are dominated by the open-loop and closed-loop control 
strategies respectively. Stabilogram diffusion parameters (D
s, Dl, Hs, Hl) are determined by the slopes of lines 
fitted to short-term or long-term regions. A critical point is defined as the point where the slope changes 
considerably from one region to another.
Figure 3. IDA and SDA measures of postural sway in AP , ML and Rad directions. Value represents mean 
(standard deviation) with the condition of skin stretch feedback (SSD). Bold text denotes significant differences 
between SSD OFF and SSD ON) (p < 0.05). Underline denotes near significance or tendency (p < 0.10).
7Scientific  RepoRtS  |         (2019) 9:16870  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-53028-1
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
centroid. A lower entropy (HAP, p = 0.05; HRad, p = 0.04) with SSD ON implies a more deterministic system that 
one can more actively control the ankle and keeps their COP closer to a relative equilibrium position. It can be 
seen in the representative invariant density plot (Fig. 4) that Ppeak,AP is greater (p = 0.05) and the COP location is 
more concentrated with SSD ON, compared with SSD OFF . It indicated that COP traveled around the centroid in 
a more regular pattern and it has a higher probability to be found in particular states (i.e., more likely to be closer 
to the centroid)
23.
Figure 4. Representative IDA plots of both SSD ON (solid) and SSD OFF (dashed) conditions, and their 
associated IDA parameters. When additional skin stretch was applied on the subject (SSD ON), Ppeak increased, 
whereas D̅ and D95 decreased, indicating a higher probability that COP will be found closer to the equilibrium, 
and COP traveled within a smaller region near centroid.
Figure 5. Representative plots of the second eigenvector of the transition matrix for both SSD ON (solid) 
and SSD OFF (dashed) conditions. The first zero crossing point is denoted zλ2. When additional skin stretch 
was applied on the subject (SSD ON), zλ2 decreased. The scale of y-axis has no meaning, in contrast to the 
first eigenvector which is a probability measure. Instead, the sum of all components of the second eigenvector 
becomes zero.
Figure 6. Representative stabilogram-diffusion plots from a subject. It shows two SDA plots of both SDD ON 
and SDD OFF conditions. The slopes of lines fitted to both short-term region (Ds,AP) and long-term region 
(Dl,AP) are less steep while SSD was on. The critical point coordinates (Δtc,AP, 〈Δr2〉c,AP) are both smaller when 
SSD ON.
8Scientific  RepoRtS  |         (2019) 9:16870  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-53028-1
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
Among SDA measures (Fig. 3), both Ds,ML (t(14) = −2.42, d = 0.62, p = 0.03) and 〈Δr2〉c,Rad (t(14) = −2.39, 
d = 0.62, p = 0.03) significantly decreased by approximately 15%. 〈Δr2〉c,AP tended to reduce when SSD was pro-
vided (p = 0.08). No significant effects were observed for the other SDA parameters. Figure 6 illustrates the rep-
resentative stabilogram-diffusion plots from a subject for both SSD ON and OFF conditions. The critical point 
〈Δr2〉c decreased in AP direction with a tendency (t(14) = −1.90, d = 0.49, p = 0.08) and in Radial direction with 
significance (p = 0.03) when the skin stretch feedback was provided. Looking at the representative linear stabilo-
gram diffusion plot (Fig. 6), it can be inferred that skin stretch feedback reduced the rate of COP diffusion from 
the equilibrium point 20. This also provides insight into how the skin stretch feedback enhances the open-loop 
and closed-loop control mechanisms on postural stability and demonstrates a reduced random behavior of COP .
Discussion
In this paper, entropy and skin stretch feedback were examined based on the neuromechanical first principles 
and were considered for the design of the robotic balance rehabilitation system. The effectiveness of this system 
was examined in healthy young adults standing quietly with the perturbed sensory systems (i.e., removed vision 
and unreliable vestibular systems). IDA and SDA were performed to examine the efficacy of SSD during quiet 
standing in terms of stochastic processes.
The findings from IDA and SDA indicate that the postural sway significantly enhances when the additional 
sensory augmentation from skin stretch feedback is applied. The additional fingertip cutaneous sensation may 
have provided subjects with additional body sway information along the AP direction. Similar to the previous 
studies using the concept of light touch
32–34,41,49–51, the fingertip cutaneous sensation replicated the sensory cues 
obtained from the fixed surface by a rotational contactor. However, unlike the previous studies that required a 
reachable stable surface, our SSD can be easily worn and carried by people, suggesting that it is a highly portable 
balance rehabilitation system.
According to the free-energy principle, the human postural control system adjusts the body posture to mini-
mize the free energy of the system, or equivalently, to maximize the self-evidence based on the internal model
27. 
The skin stretch feedback is an additional and artificial afferent signal that is fused in the sensorimotor system. By 
nature, existing afferent signals (e.g., proprioception, vestibular sensation, vision, somatosensation) are noisy and 
have uncertainty. Therefore, similar to Kalman filter, when the skin stretch feedback is combined with the exist-
ing afferent signals, the quality of the state estimation for the sensorimotor integration (e.g., body sway position, 
velocity and acceleration) improves
46. Thus, the postural control system can easily increase the self-evidence of 
the system based on the internal model, which in turn, reduces the entropy.
The enhanced postural sway from IDA and SDA analyses due to the skin stretch feedback seems to be related 
to the strategy of the ankle stiffening. In other words, skin stretch feedback increased the ankle stiffness of the 
inverted pendulum model 7,58,59. This agrees with previous studies regarding the influences of secondary tasks 
(e.g., internal/external focus on touching60, articulation task61) on postural control and suggests that the adaptive 
mechanism ensures a more active (increased frequency of sway) and more robust (reduced sway) control strategy. 
The present study confirms the theoretical findings in
62 that if CNS receives sufficient body sway velocity infor-
mation, ankle muscle activation can be modulated in anticipation of the changes in the COM position and there-
fore stabilizes the body, which reinforces the idea of free energy principle for postural control. It is possible that 
subjects used hip and knee strategies to reduce the entropy. However, it was visually confirmed that all subjects 
did not use any excessive movement of hip or knee. Also, due to the nature of the unperturbed quiet standing, it 
is believed that subjects used ankle strategy.
In this study, body sway velocity information was used to synthesize the controller of the skin stretch device 
rather than body sway position information
13. In addition to position information, velocity information is essen-
tial in contributing to the regulation of posture balance 62. Pan et al.13 reported that position-based skin stretch 
feedback did not have consistent positive effects on postural sway in various sensory deficit conditions. In the 
current study, we found that velocity-based skin stretch feedback significantly reduced the entropy of the postural 
sway. This may suggest that subjects learn the mapping between skin stretch feedback and body sway movements 
more quickly and efficiently by the velocity-based coding scheme rather than the position-based coding scheme. 
Sketch et al.
63 found that a control scheme using velocity-based haptic feedback is more intuitive and effective 
compared with a control scheme using position-based haptic feedback. Bark et al.64 reported that subjects seem 
to have better ability in detecting changes in skin stretch stimuli than in the magnitude of the stimuli. This may 
support that subjects are more sensitive to body tilt rate instead of the absolute tilt angle. In sum, velocity-based 
skin stretch feedback may be more effective in minimizing the entropy of the postural sway. However, a further 
systematic investigation is required to confirm that this speculation.
z
λ2,AP significantly decreased (p = 0.02) when skin stretch feedback was provided. Similarly, zλ2,Rad tended to 
decrease (p = 0.07) when skin stretch feedback was provided. As suggested by55–57, zλ2 may represent the location 
in the state space where the dynamic behavior changes. Collins and De Luca 20 observed two distinct regions of 
behavior during quiet standing and postulated that there exist both open loop and closed loop control regimes 
during quiet standing. This may indicate that the set of state {x|x ≤ z
λ2} is the open loop control regime and the set 
of state {x|x > zλ2} is the closed loop control regime. Following the interpretation of the SDA, postural sway ran-
domly diffuses in the open loop region near the centroid. When the COP enters into the closed loop region (i.e., 
farther away from the centroid) due to external perturbations and the inherent instability of the upright standing, 
the postural control system actively adjusts the standing posture so that the postural sway enters back into the 
open loop region. Therefore, z
λ2 may suggest that the open loop region shrinks as the skin stretch feedback is 
provided. It is very inspiring to note ̅D < zλ2 < D95. This inequality also supports the idea that {x|x ≤ zλ2} is related 
to the open loop control regime and {x|x > zλ2} is related to the closed loop control regime. However, it is not still 
known that zλ2 is the unique point where the control scheme changes. In other words, it is not sure whether the 
9Scientific  RepoRtS  |         (2019) 9:16870  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-53028-1
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
transition happens at a single point or in an overlapping area between the two control regimes. Further 
simulation-based research needs to verify this.
Interestingly, Ds,ML significantly decreased when skin stretch feedback based on postural sway in AP direc-
tion was provided, suggesting that skin stretch feedback information in AP direction significantly enhanced the 
open-loop control of posture in the ML direction. Since the skin stretch feedback contains the information of only 
AP directional postural sway, the enhancement of D
s,ML may seem nonsensical. Several studies have reported that 
postural sway is more sensitive in ML direction16,65,66. However, increased sensitivity in ML direction is not suf-
ficient enough to explain this phenomenon. One possible explanation is that the skin stretch feedback may have 
worked as stochastic resonance. Stochastic resonance means that white noise signals can enhance the sensation 
of weak signals at some sensory receptors
67. For example, a subthreshold random vibration at the hand could 
enhance the touch sensation at the fingertip of the stroke survivors36. Similarly, a subthreshold random vibration 
at the hand could enhance the motor performance of both healthy people and stroke survivors37,38. Thus, if skin 
stretch feedback based on postural sway in the AP direction worked as a stochastic resonance in all directions, 
D
s,ML could enhance with the skin stretch feedback based on postural sway in AP direction. However, there should 
be one thing to be assumed for this to happen. Since skin stretch stimulus happens at the fingertip and other 
afferent signals are coming from different locations (e.g., ankle joint, foot, inner ear), the sensory fusion should 
happen at the supraspinal level. Luckily, Pan et al.
13 showed the possibility that skin stretch feedback for the stand-
ing balance is happening at the supraspinal level. However, further systematic studies are needed to investigate the 
effect of random skin stretch feedback at the fingertip on the entropy of the postural sway.
This paper is not without limitations. The limb dominance of each subject was not considered. It was assumed 
that desensitization would not occur if moderate breaks were given between trials
68, but this was not explicitly 
verified in this experiment. Adaptation to the device over the course of the trials was not examined. It is possible 
that the SSD may have not stimulated skin stretch only, but also have stimulated additional sensory modalities 
including vibration and pressure. It is important to note that these modalities are coupled: without pressure, 
there is no shear friction between the fingertip and SSD and thus no skin stretch. Also, shear friction can induce 
mechanical vibration due to elastic properties of fingertip. However, it is important to note that the skin stretch 
feedback due to shear friction at the fingertip may have provided the additional information of direction and 
speed of postural away even when there may have been small and/or consistent pressure and vibration.
conclusion
In this paper, we devised a way of quantifying the standing balance using a neuromechanical first principle of the 
sensorimotor system, called free-energy principle. Specifically, entropy was defined, and an algorithm for com-
puting entropy of the human postural control system was investigated. Skin stretch feedback was examined, and a 
robotic balance rehabilitation system was designed so that the entropy of the postural control system reduces with 
the sensory augmentation (i.e., skin stretch feedback) according to the free-energy principle. An experiment was 
conducted and found that the proposed skin stretch device could effectively reduce the entropy of the postural 
control system when the proposed skin stretch device was used. Thus, we implicitly showed the feasibility of the 
framework of free energy principle in the human postural control system.
Data availability
The datasets generated and analyzed during the current study are available from github repository. https://github.
com/pilwonhur/SensoryAugmentationVelocity/.
Received: 24 January 2019; Accepted: 24 October 2019;
Published: xx xx xxxx
References
 1. Kuo, A. & Felix, Z. Human standing posture: multi-joint movement strategies based on biomechanical constraints. Prog. Brain Res. 
97, 349–358 (1993).
 2. van der Kooij, H., Jacobs, R., Koopman, B. & Grootenboer, H. A multisensory integration model of human stance control. Biol 
Cybern 80, 299–308 (1999).
 3. Oie, K., Kiemel, T. & Jeka, J. Multisensory fusion: simultaneous re-weighting of vision and touch for the control of human posture. 
Cogn Brain Res 14, 164–176 (2002).
 4. Mergner, T., Maurer, C. & Peterka, R. A multisensory posture control model of human upright stance. Prog Brain Res 142, 189–201 
(2003).
 5. Jeka, J., Kiemel, T., Creath, R., Horak, F . & Peterka, R. Controlling human upright posture: Velocity information is more accurate 
than position or acceleration. J Neurophysiol 92, 2368–2379 (2004).
 6. Horak, F . Postural orientation and equilibrium: what do we need to know about neural control of balance to prevent falls? Age Ageing 
35(Suppl 2), ii7–ii11 (2006).
 7. Hur, P ., Duiser, B., Salapaka, S. & Hsiao-Wecksler, E. Measuring robustness of the postural control system to a mild impulsive 
perturbation. IEEE Transactions on Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 18, 461–467 (2010).
 8. Peterka, R. Sensorimotor integration in human postural control. J Neurophysiol 88, 1097–1118 (2002).
 9. Collins, J. & De Luca, C. The effects of visual input on open-loop and closed-loop postural control mechanisms. Exp Brain Res 103, 
151–163 (1995).
 10. Dietz, V . Proprioception and locomotor disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 781–871 (2002).
 11. Diracoglu, D., Aydin, R., Baskent, A. & Celik, A. Effects of kinesthesia and balance exercises in knee osteoarthritis. J Clin Rheumatol 
11, 303–310 (2005).
 12. Hur, P ., Rosengren, K., Horn, G., Smith, D. & Hsiao-Wecksler, E. Effect of protective clothing and fatigue on functional balance of 
firefighters. J Ergonomics S2:004 (2013).
 13. Pan, Y .-T., Y oon, H. & Hur, P . A portable sensory augmentation device for balance rehabilitation using fingertip skin stretch 
feedback. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 25, 31–39 (2017).
 14. Meyer, P ., Oddsson, L. & De Luca, C. The role of plantar cutaneous sensation in unperturbed stance. Exp brain Res 156, 505–512 
(2004).

10Scientific  RepoRtS  |         (2019) 9:16870  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-53028-1
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
 15. Granacher, U., Gollhofer, A., Hortobágyi, T., Kressig, R. & Muehlbauer, T. The importance of trunk muscle strength for balance, 
functional performance, and fall prevention in seniors: a systematic review. Sports Med 43, 627–641 (2013).
 16. Hur, P ., Park, K., Rosengren, K., Horn, G. & Hsiao-Wecksler, E. Effects of air bottle design on postural control of firefighters. Appl. 
Ergonomics 48, 49–55 (2015).
 17. Ebersbach, G., Edler, D., Kaufhold, O. & Wissel, J. Whole body vibration versus conventional physiotherapy to improve balance and 
gait in parkinson’s disease. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 89, 399–403 (2008).
 18. Chen, J., Lin, C., Wei, Y ., Hsiao, J. & Liang, C. Facilitation of motor and balance recovery by thermal intervention for the paretic 
lower limb of acute stroke: a single-blind randomized clinical trial. Clin Rehabil 25, 823–832 (2011).
 19. Prieto, T., Myklebust, J., Hoffmann, R., Lovett, E. & Myklebust, B. Measures of postural steadiness: Differences between healthy 
young and elderly adults. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 43, 956–966 (1996).
 20. Collins, J. & De Luca, C. Open-loop and closed-loop control of posture: a random-walk analysis of center-of-pressure trajectories. 
Exp Brain Res 95, 308–318 (1993).
 21. Frank, T., Daffertshofer, A. & Beek, P . Multivariate ornstein–uhlenbeck processes with mean-field dependent coefficients: 
Application to postural sway. Phys. Rev. E 63, 011905 (2000).
 22. Bosek, M., Grzegorzewski, B. & Kowalczyk, A. Two-dimensional langevin approach to the human stabilogram. Hum. Mov. Sci. 22, 
649–660 (2004).
 23. Hur, P ., Shorter, K., Mehta, P . & Hsiao-Wecksler, E. Invariant density analysis: Modeling and analysis of the postural control system 
using markov chains. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 59, 1094–1100 (2012).
 24. Wolpert, D., Ghahramani, Z. & MI, J. An internal model for sensorimotor integration. Sci. 269, 1880–1882 (1995).
 25. Kording, K. P . & Wolpert, D. M. Bayesian integration in sensorimotor learning. Nat. 427, 244–247 (2004).
 26. Friston, K. What is optimal about motor control? Neuron 72, 488–498 (2011).
 27. Friston, K. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat. Rev Neurosci. 11, 127–138 (2010).
 28. Hur, P . Quantification of the human postural control system to perturbations. Ph.D. thesis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
(2010).
 29. Kawato, M. Feedback-error-learning neural network for supervised learning. In Eckmiller, R. (ed.) Advanced neural computers , 
365–372, 1 edn (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1990).
 30. Y oon, H. U., Anil Kumar, N. & Hur, P . Synergistic effects on the elderly people’s motor control by wearable skin-stretch device 
combined with haptic joystick. Front. Neurorobotics 11, 31 (2017).
 31. Marchal-Crespo, L., Lopez-Oloriz, J., Jaeger, L. & Riener, R. Optimizing learning of a locomotor task: Amplifying errors as needed. 
In IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC) (2014).
 32. Jeka, J. & Lackner, J. Fingertip contact influences human postural control. Exp Brain Res 79, 495–502 (1994).
 33. Clapp, S. & Wing, A. Light touch contribution to balance in normal bipedal stance. Exp Brain Res 125, 521–524 (1999).
 34. Krishnamoorthy, V ., Slijper, H. & Latash, M. Effects of different types of light touch on postural sway. Exp Brain Res 147, 71–79 
(2002).
 35. Priplata, A., Niemi, J., Harry, J., Lipsitz, L. & Collins, J. Vibrating insoles and balance control in elderly people. Lancet 362, 1123–1124 
(2003).
 36. Enders, L., Hur, P ., Johnson, M. & Seo, N. Remote vibrotactile noise improves light touch sensation in stroke survivors’ fingertips via 
stochastic resonance. J Neuro Eng Rehabil 10, 105 (2013).
 37. Hur, P ., Wan, Y .-H. & Seo, N. Investigating the role of vibrotactile noise in early response to perturbation. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 
61, 1628–1633 (2014).
 38. Seo, N., Kosmopoulos, M., Enders, L. & Hur, P . Effect of remote sensory noise on hand function post stroke. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 
8, 934 (2014).
 39. Wells, C., Ward, L., Chua, R. & Inglis, J. Touch noise increases vibrotactile sensitivity in old and young. Psychol Sci  16, 313–320 
(2005).
 40. Collins, J., Thomas, T. & Grigg, P . Noise-mediated enhacements and decrements in human tactile sensation. Phys Rev E 56, 923–926 
(1997).
 41. Kouzaki, M. & Masani, K. Reduced postural sway during quiet standing by light touch is due to finger tactile feedback but not 
mechanical support. Exp brain Res 188, 153–158 (2008).
 42. Todorov, E. & Jordan, M. Optimal feedback control as a theory of motor coordination. Nat. Neurosci. 5, 1226–1235 (2002).
 43. Todorov, E. Optimality principles in sensorimotor control. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 907–915 (2004).
 44. Rao, R. & Ballard, D. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptivefield effects. 
Nat. Neurosci. 2, 79–87 (1999).
 45. Friston, K., Kilner, J. & Harrison, L. A free energy principle for the brain. J Physiol Paris 100, 70–87 (2006).
 46. Bottaro, A., Casadio, M., Morasso, P . G. & Sanguineti, V . Body sway during quiet standing: Is it the residual chattering of an 
intermittent stabilization process? Hum. Mov. Sci. 24, 588–615 (2005).
 47. Vilhena, L. & Ramalho, A. Friction behavior of human skin rubbing against different textured polymeric materials obtained by a 3d 
printing microfabrication technique. Tribology transactions 62, 249–261 (2019).
 48. Kiemel, T., Oie, K. & Jeka, J. Multisensory fusion and the stochastic structure of postural sway. Biol Cybern 87, 262–277 (2002).
 49. Dickstein, R., Peterka, R. & Horak, F . Effects of light fingertip touch on postural responses in subjects with diabetic neuropathy. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 74, 620–626 (2003).
 50. Jeka, J., Oie, K., Schoner, G., Dijkstra, T. & Henson, E. Position and velocity coupling of postural sway to somatosensory drive. J 
Neurophysiol 79, 1661–1674 (1998).
 51. Wing, A., Johannsen, L. & Endo, S. Light touch for balance: influence of a time-varying external driving signal. Philos Trans R Soc B 
Biol Sci 366, 3133–3141 (2011).
 52. Faul, F ., Erdfelder, E., Buchner, A. & Lang, A. Statistical power analyses using g *power 3.1: Tests for correlation and regression 
analyses. Behav Res Methods 41, 1149–1160 (2009).
 53. Brandt, T., Krafczyk, S. & Malsbenden, I. Postural imbalance with head extension: improvement by training as a model for ataxia 
therapy. Ann N Y Acad Sci 374, 636–649 (1981).
 54. Jackson, R. & Epstein, C. Effect of head extension on equilibrium in normal subjects. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 100, 63–67 (1991).
 55. Dellnitz, M. & Junge, O. Almost invariant sets in chua’s circuit. Int. J. Bifurc. Chaos 7, 2475–2486 (1997).
 56. Schutte, C., Fischer, A., Huisinga, W . & Deuflhard, P . A direct approach to conformational dynamics based on hybrid monte carlo. J. 
Comput. Phys. 151, 146–168 (1999).
 57. Mehta, P ., Dorobantu, M. & Banaszuk, A. Graph based multi-scale analysis of building system transport models. In American 
Control Conference (ACC), 1110–1115, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACC.2006.1656365 (2006).
 58. Winter, D., Patla, A., Prince, F ., Ishac, M. & Gielo-Perczak, K. Stiffness control of balance in quiet standing. J Neurophysiol  80, 
1211–1221 (1998).
 59. Carpenter, M., Frank, J., Silcher, C. & Peysar, G. The influence of postural threat on the control of upright stance. Exp Brain Res 138, 
210–218 (2001).
 60. McNevin, N. & Wulf, G. Attentional focus on supra-postural tasks affects postural control. Hum Mov Sci 21, 187–202 (2002).
 61. Dault, M., Y ardley, L. & Frank, J. Does articulation contribute to modifications of postural control during dual-task paradigms? Cogn 
Brain Res 16, 434–440 (2003).
11Scientific  RepoRtS  |         (2019) 9:16870  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-53028-1
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
 62. Masani, K., Popovic, M., Nakazawa, K., Kouzaki, M. & Nozaki, D. Importance of body sway velocity information in controlling ankle 
extensor activities during quiet stance. N Neurophysiol 90, 3774–3782 (2003).
 63. Sketch, S., Deo, D., Menon, J. & Okamura, A. Design and experimental evaluation of a skin-stretch haptic device for improved 
control of brain-computer interfaces. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 272–277 (2015).
 64. Bark, K., Wheeler, J., Shull, P ., Savall, J. & Cutkosky, M. Rotational skin stretch feedback: A wearable haptic display for motion. IEEE 
Trans Haptics 3, 166–176 (2010).
 65. Piirtola, M. & Era, P . Force platform measurements as predictors of falls among older people - a review. Gerontol. 52, 1–16 (2006).
 66. Stel, V ., Smit, J., Pluijm, S. & Lips, P . Balance and mobility performance as treatable risk factors for recurrent falling in older persons. 
Clin Epidemiol 56, 659–668 (2003).
 67. Wiesenfeld, K. & Moss, F . Stochastic resonance and the benefits of noise: From ice ages to crayfish and squids. Nat.  373, 33–36 
(1995).
 68. Bark, K., Wheeler, J., Premakumar, S. & Cutkosky, M. Comparison of skin stretch and vibrotactile stimulation for feedback of 
proprioceptive information. In Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environments and Teleoperator Systems, 71–78 (2008).
Acknowledgements
This study was partially supported by fundings from National Institute for Occupational and Environmental 
Health (NIOSH)/Center for Disease Control and Prevention Education and Research Center at the Southwest 
Center for Occupational and Environmental Health (SWCOEH) (Grant #5T42OH008421) and the National 
Science Foundation Engineering Research Center for Precise Advanced Technologies and Health Systems for 
Underserved Populations (PATHS-UP) (Award #1648451). The open access publishing fees for this article have 
been covered by the Texas A&M University Open Access to Knowledge Fund (OAKFund), supported by the 
University Libraries and the Office of the Vice President for Research.
Author contributions
P .H. conceived and set up the experiment, analyzed the results, and wrote the manuscript. Y .P . conducted the 
experiment, analyzed the results and helped P .H. write the manuscript. C.D. analyzed the results and helped P .H. 
write the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-53028-1.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to P .H.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2019