1
Rugged Free-Energy Landscapes – An
Introduction
Wolfhard Janke
Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik and Centre for Theoretical Sciences (NTZ),
Universit¨at Leipzig, Postfach 100 920, D-04009 Leipzig, Germany
wolfhard.janke@itp.uni-leipzig.de
Understanding the static and even more the dynamical behavior of complex
physical systems is one of the most challenging problems of current research in
physics, chemistry and biology. Paradigmatic examples of condensed matter
physics are spin glasses and structural glasses. More recently, in life sciences,
the rapid advances in computational biology have added the exploration of
the properties of biologically relevant macromolecules to this list. Here, the
most prominent example is protein folding, but also studies of protein ag-
gregation and adsorption to soft or hard interfaces are of great medical and
technological interest. While the physics concepts underlying the behavior of
spin and structural glasses are still quite close, the basic principles governing
the properties of biomolecules are in many respects quite diverse. Still, there
are certain joint features in all these systems which make a common treatment
quite promising for future scientiﬁc advances.
The lectures in this volume are mainly centered around computational
approaches. Due to the steadily increasing power of modern capability com-
puters combined with signiﬁcant algorithmic improvements over the past few
years, computational physics/chemistry/biology is by now the third column
of basic research tools in fundamental natural science besides the traditional
analytical theory and experiments. This is nicely illustrated by the “Landau
triangle” in Fig. 13.1 of Chap. 13.
Among the most prominent joint key features of the three ﬁelds considered
in this volume are rugged free-energy landscapes which generate metastability
and are often responsible for very slow dynamics. In computer simulation
studies, this is reﬂected by a slow time evolution of the systems which tend to
get trapped in one of these multiple minima. It is a great challenge to develop
new simulation algorithms that alleviate the resulting slowing down problem.
Usually a quite speciﬁc knowledge of t he considered system is necessary to
develop ideas for improvements. Once discovered, however, it is often possible
to transfer new methods also to the related ﬁelds. In the last couple of years,
precisely this mechanism has been at work concerning the rugged free-energy
W. Janke: Rugged Free-Energy Landscapes – An Introduction , Lect. Notes Phys. 736,1 – 7
(2008)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-540-74029-2
 1 c⃝ Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008
2W . J a n k e
landscape problem, where improvements have been discovered (and often also
rediscovered) in computational physics, computational chemistry and more
recently also computational biology.
To follow up these developments and take advantage of them, a fairly deep
understanding of at least the basic notions and elementary properties of the
speciﬁc systems is necessary. For exam ple, the concept of “overlap parame-
ters” is rooted in the replica theory of spin glasses, originally developed for
inﬁnite-range mean-ﬁeld models of the Sherrington–Kirkpatrick type. Later
the computational deﬁnition of “real replicas” and their “overlap parameters”
has been carried over to short-range spin glasses of the Edwards–Anderson
type. More recently, “overlap parameters” are considered in a by now quite
routine fashion also in protein-folding studies to measure the distance to some
given reference conformation.
Besides similarities and analogies there are, of course, also many features
that distinguish the three systems. For example, the overall shapes of the
free-energy landscape for t he protein-folding problem and for spin glasses
are quite diﬀerent, see Fig. 1.1. While for proteins a funnel-like landscape
with a minimum hosting the native conformation is expected, spin glasses ex-
hibit pronounced metastability. The main diﬀerence between glasses and spin
system state
rare−event states
free energy
–45
–50
–55
–60
–65
(1)
(3) (4)
(6)(7)
(11)
(9)
–70
–75 16 12 8 4 0
N
E
proteins spin glasses
Fig. 1.1. Typical shapes of rugged free-energy landscapes in the protein-folding
problem and for spin glasses. While the native protein conformation resides in the
minimum of a funnel-like landscape, for spin glasses many degenerate minima are
expected (the protein sketch is taken with permission from G. Srinivas, B. Bagchi:
J. Chem. Phys. 116, 8579 (2002))