Citation: Kent, L. Mental Gravity:
Depression as Spacetime Curvature
of the Self, Mind, and Brain. Entropy
2023, 25, 1275. https://doi.org/
10.3390/e25091275
Academic Editor: Arnaud Delorme
Received: 5 June 2023
Revised: 9 August 2023
Accepted: 18 August 2023
Published: 30 August 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
entropy
Review
Mental Gravity: Depression as Spacetime Curvature of the Self,
Mind, and Brain
Lachlan Kent
Mental Wellbeing Initiatives, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, Melbourne, VIC 3001, Australia;
lachlan.kent@rmit.edu.au
Abstract: The principle of mental gravity contends that the mind uses physical gravity as a mental
model or simulacrum to express the relation between the inner self and the outer world in terms
of “UP”-ness and “DOWN”-ness. The simulation of increased gravity characterises a continuum of
mental gravity which states includes depression as the paradigmatic example of being down, low,
heavy, and slow. The physics of gravity can also be used to model spacetime curvature in depression,
particularly gravitational time dilation as a property of MG analogous to subjective time dilation
(i.e., the slowing of temporal ﬂow in conscious experience). The principle has profound implications
for the Temporo-spatial Theory of Consciousness (TTC) with regard to temporo-spatial alignment that
establishes a “world-brain relation” that is centred on embodiment and the socialisation of conscious
states. The principle of mental gravity provides the TTC with a way to incorporate the structure of
the world into the structure of the brain, conscious experience, and thought. In concert with other
theories of cognitive and neurobiological spacetime, the TTC can also work towards the “common
currency” approach that also potentially connects the TTC to predictive processing frameworks such
as free energy, neuronal gauge theories, and active inference accounts of depression. It gives the
up/down dimension of space, as deﬁned by the gravitational ﬁeld, a unique status that is connected
to both our embodied interaction with the physical world, and also the inverse, reﬂective, emotional
but still embodied experience of ourselves.
Keywords: spacetime; self; depression; cognition; gravity; default mode network
1. Mental Gravity: Depression as Spacetime Curvature of the Conscious Self, Mind,
and Brain
The Temporo-spatial Theory of Consciousness (TTC) maintains that there is a corre-
spondence between the spatial and temporal organisation of the brain and the spatial and
temporal structure of experience [1]. The principle of mental gravity [2] maintains that a key
dimension of space also gives structure and meaning to the conscious experience, namely
the up/down dimension associated with the gravitational ﬁeld. This correspondence
between the two theories goes beyond the metaphorical notion of “CONSCIOUSNESS
IS UP , DEATH IS DOWN” [3]. This paper explores a deeper between the two theories in
terms of the structure of subjective experience (phenomenology), the structure of thought
(cognition), and the structure of the brain (neurobiology). This exploration is therefore
aligned with Northoff’s related ideas of: (1) the “common currency” of space and time
(i.e., spacetime, spatiotemporal, or temporospatial) across all levels of psychological expla-
nation (i.e., phenomenological, cognitive/behavioural, and neurobiological); and (2) the
“spatiotemporal psychopathology” of depression and other mental disorders, where the
disordered experience of space and time is associated with disordered spatial/temporal
binding and the integration of neural activity.
The speciﬁc idea to explore is the possibility that spatial dimensions and orientations
are not equivalent in experience and therefore, as adduced via the “common currency”
approach, neither should we expect them to be equivalent in other aspects of cognition or
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275. https://doi.org/10.3390/e25091275 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 2 of 21
even neurobiology. The proposition is that the vertical dimension has a special status owing
to its relation to physical gravity and that being “down” psychologically connotes meanings
speciﬁc to that status. The principle of mental gravity posits that psychological up-ness and
down-ness represent a primary, universal, and core dimension of consciousness that pro-
vides the TTC a more central role in the multidimensional characterisation of consciousness
in terms of local and global states, content-related and functional dimensions, and so on [4].
While the “levels” of consciousness may not be a useful conceptualisation, the idea of
“more” or “less” conscious states in a unidimensional or multidimensional space remains
a plausible way to categorise various disorders of consciousness in contrast to the “full”
consciousness of alert wakefulness [5]. Depression is put forward as a canonical experience
of psychological down-ness, which may also be considered a disorder of “diminished”
consciousness in a multidimensional framework [6].
The current paper argues that the distorted experiences of the self in time and space in
depression can be modelled via the TTC as a marker of disordered conscious experience.
The key focus will be the experience of subjective time dilation, which is the experience
of a reduced temporal ﬂow of consciousness [7,8], an experience that is highly prevalent
in those diagnosed with depression [9]. The principle of MG connects the experience of
subjective time dilation to the dilation of time in physics under conditions of gravity. The
core feature of the MG model is the distortion or curvature of subjective time and space,
which manifests in many ways in depression including at the neurobiological level in terms
of the spreading of neural activity through the brain’s spatiotemporal organisation [10].
The paper is structured as follows: (1) the principle of MG is summarised; (2) the
physics of gravitation are systematically related to the mental simulation of gravity-like
behaviours; (3) MG spacetime curvature is illustrated in depression; (4) a model for the
curvature of the brain’s spacetime is presented; (5) similarities between MG and the
predictive processing accounts of curvature are described; and (6) implications for the TTC
are summarised.
2. Overview of the Principle of Mental Gravity
Gravity is a fundamental law of nature in physics [11,12] but, beyond physics itself,
“gravity models” have been used in economics and other special sciences to describe
the movement of goods, services, people, or other economic or biological factors [13,14].
The current paper seeks to explore a gravity model for psychology and consciousness
science—to make an explicit connection between the mathematical models of physical
gravity and the internal gravity model of cognitive neuroscience [15–18].
Internal models are a neuroscientiﬁc explanation for how humans (and primates)
move in their environment according to, among other things, physical laws of motion [19].
This includes modelling gravity according to implicit (Newtonian) physics [20], a model
that can differentiate linear acceleration from the downward pull of gravity [21]. The aim of
this paper is to outline a principle of mental gravity (MG) that explores the relation between
the internal gravity model to broader aspects of cognition, consciousness, selfhood, and
psychopathology.
Before delving further, it is essential to clarify what the principle of MG unequivocally
does not entail. First and foremost, MG should not be misconstrued as a sociological
“law of attraction” that posits some spiritual or mental force binding individuals together.
Additionally, MG is distinct from the quantum gravity effects proposed in the theory of
Orchestrated Objective Reduction [22] involving microtubules. Furthermore, it does not
align with the religious concept of a “fallen” human nature in any moral or mythical sense.
Instead, the principle of MG solely establishes a connection between physical gravity and
fundamental mental phenomena associated with feelings of being down, low, heavy, and
slow, within the domains of affect, personality, and psychopathology. By clarifying these
distinctions, we ensure a precise understanding of the scope and focus of MG, rooted in
empirical observations and theoretical considerations of gravitational experiences and their
psychological implications.
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 3 of 21
The principle of MG applies to phenomena associated with being down, low, heavy,
and slow, particularly those evident in the experience of depression. These phenomena
can manifest as concrete, embodied, physiological experiences such as the (mis)perception
of increased bodily heaviness [ 23–25] or psychomotor retardation (i.e., slowed speech,
decreased movement, and impaired cognitive function) [ 26–28]. Or they can manifest
in very abstract, metaphorical representations of depression as a personal descent to a
low or “fallen” state of being, which includes feeling stuck or weighed down by guilt,
worthlessness, isolation, despair, and dislocation from the world [29,30].
2.1. Continuum of MG Experiences
Depression is not the only mental state associated with being down or low, but it is a
more global description of mood that subsumes other negative emotional or feeling states
like sadness [23], grief [31], boredom [32], frustration [33], and even nihilism [25]. Nor is
depression the only way that MG can manifest in an experience or behaviour. As explained
below, there exists a hypothetical continuum of MG states ranging from positive “up” and
“down” states like joy and calmness, respectively, to negative “up” and “down” states like
anxiety and depression, respectively. The principle of MG focuses on depression but does
not rule out a whole spectrum of gravity-like experiences depending on the precise context
and content of any given mental state. There are an indeterminate number of intermediate
states along this continuum, of course, in the same way that there are inﬁnite combinations
of vertical and horizontal movements or asymmetries within the gravitational ﬁeld [34].
The principle of MG reﬂects our experience of physical gravity in that it is not just about
vertical elevation (UP/DOWN) but also horizontal alignment (ALIGNED/UNALIGNED)
to the gravitational ﬁeld. The abstract physical concept of falling, for example, involves
a simple change in vertical position from high (UP) to low (DOWN). With respect to our
contextualised experience of falling as embodied objects, however, we tend to fall when
our centre-of-gravity is too high for the degree of non-alignment between our body’s axis
and the gravitational axis (i.e., when we are not perpendicular to the Earth). A fall also
usually involves a bodily change from a vertical to horizontal alignment, from standing
to some degree of lying down, in other words. The principle of MG therefore models
the full range of MG experiences by combining the feelings of both vertical elevation and
horizontal alignment.
2.2. Anxiety and Depression as Distortions of Lived Space and Time
Although much of this paper focuses on verticality, the inclusion of horizontal align-
ment means the principle of MG relates to the whole four-dimensional ﬁeld of lived space
and time. This is in keeping with the longstanding analyses of lived space and time in
mental disorders like depression and anxiety [35]. In the MG formulation, anxiety is an
elevated but unaligned state analogous to the fear experienced when one is at-risk of
falling, about to fall, or in the process of falling. Depression, on the other hand, is an
unelevated and unaligned state analogous to the pain or discomfort (including negative
self-worth or shame) experienced when one has fallen. There are many phenomenological
corollaries that accompany these falling versus fallen states, especially in depression which
is often described in experiential or metaphorical terms as “DEPRESSION IS WEIGHT”,
“DEPRESSION IS CAPTOR”, “DEPRESSION IS ENCLOSED SPACE”, “DEPRESSION IS
FORCE”, and “DEPRESSION IS DARKNESS” [36]. Being stuck or weighed down at some
lower depth by various feelings of guilt, worthlessness, and despair also comes with feelings
of isolation, detachment or dislocation from the world [ 30]. All of space is distorted, in
other words, not just the vertical dimension. This is because gravity also deﬁnes centrality
in addition to verticality. Not that being depressed is straightforwardly akin to being
self-centred, but there is a tendency to attend more to self-related information and less to
externally related events [37].
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 4 of 21
2.3. The Internal Gravity Model
The basis for the principle of MG is the observation that gravity structures how we
think about ourselves, others, and the world. Humans have very ﬁrm perceptual and motor
expectations about how objects will behave under the conditions of gravity, including
our own body as the primary object of our experience [ 17]. This internal gravity model
is mediated by the vestibular system, which integrates multimodal gravitational input
from vision, proprioception, and viscera [15,38]. In addition to being the “balance system”,
the vestibular system also mediates behavioural functions like posture, gait, and gaze, as
well as autonomic functions and higher-order cognitive processes like spatial navigation,
learning and memory, and behavioural control [18,39,40].
The internal gravity model’s strong expectations can alter behavioural strategies based
on the body’s alignment to the gravitational ﬁeld. Standing upright motivates novel,
exploratory behaviours over repetitive, exploitative behaviours [18]. We also have aesthetic
preferences for vertically aligned objects in art [41] and, more importantly for the present
analysis, the internal gravity model also affects the phenomenological experiences of the
self as anchored to the body [42], egocentrism [43], perceived body weight [44], and the
perception of time and space [45,46].
The internal gravity model models complex interactions between the body and the
external environment by integrating vestibular signals with other sensory inputs from
vision, proprioception, and viscera [ 15]. Multisensory integration is performed via the
insular cortex, with the posterior insular cortex operating when there is graviceptive
feedback from the vestibular system, and the anterior insular cortex operating when there
is no graviceptive feedback—in other words, the anterior insular cortex mediates imagined
or simulated graviception [ 16]. This distinction between posterior and anterior insula
activity when simulating or imagining the gravity’s effects is key to understanding how
physical gravity “becomes” mental—i.e., it is one of the neural correlates of MG.
2.4. Mental Gravity as Simulated Graviception
The anterior insular cortex mediates MG, not in response to physical cues from the
external environment, but from psychological cues derived from the internal milieu. Under
the conditions of imaginary or simulated gravity, the graviceptive system is freed from the
constraints of physical and physiological input and can instead respond to non-physical,
social, or emotional stimuli, including the self. The anterior insular cortex is a key salience
network hub associated with interoceptive subjective feelings [ 47], social emotions [48],
emotional awareness [49], and empathic pain perception [ 50]. As such, MG simulation
is used to communicate subjective feelings about a person or situation. In other words,
MG simulates the effects of physical gravity to communicate the internal, autonomic,
and interoceptive predictions or inferences regarding affective, allostatic, and emotional
states [51,52].
2.5. Universal Verticality Value
The MG simulation responds to social and emotional value. As with languages and
metaphors across different cultures [53–56], verticality deﬁnes a universal aspect of intrinsic
human value—hereafter called Universal Verticality Value (UVV). Adapting to gravity
has evolutionary survival value, where the tendency to fall and feel heavy is factored into
everything we do. Graviception (i.e., the perception of gravity) also structures key aspects
of language, thought, and action. Being “UP” denotes positive emotional valence across
cultures and contexts [53]. Some African languages use “UP” metaphors to communicate
joy, certainty, courage, or social value (i.e., pride), and “DOWN” metaphors for lower
social value (i.e., shame), calmness, or comfort [ 55,56]. The ﬁrst “orientational” English
metaphors proposed by Lakoff and Johnson [54] are “HAPPINESS IS UP , SAD IS DOWN”,
“CONSCIOUSNESS IS UP , UNCONSCIOUSNESS IS DOWN”, “HEALTHY AND LIFE
ARE UP , SICKNESS AND DEATH ARE DOWN”.
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 5 of 21
2.6. UVV and the Continuum of MG experiences
The continuum of MG experiences therefore reﬂects a higher or lower UVV which,
as stated above, is not just about being “UP” or “DOWN” in the gravitational ﬁeld. It
also depends on whether that “UP” or “DOWN” state is vertically aligned or unaligned.
Alignment to the gravitational ﬁeld indicates positive value [41] for MG because it denotes
stability and thus a higher UVV , regardless of whether the height is “UP” or “DOWN”. If
the position in the gravitational ﬁeld is “UP” and vertically aligned, then the experience
is positive (e.g., joy, excitement, and ecstasy). If the position in the gravitational ﬁeld is
“DOWN” and vertically aligned, then the experience is also positive (e.g., contentedness,
calmness, and relaxation). But if the position in the gravitational ﬁeld is “UP” and not
vertically aligned, then the experience is negative and akin to falling (e.g., fear, insecurity,
and panic). If the position in the gravitational ﬁeld is “DOWN” and also not vertically
aligned, then the experience is also negative and akin to having fallen (e.g., hopelessness,
dejection, and sadness). The difference between falling and having fallen is similar to the
distinct but related states of anxiety and depression, respectively, and so MG can model
anxiety and mood disorders in terms of a common explanatory mechanism. However,
depression is the iconic experience of MG because it is associated with being down, low,
heavy, and slow, meaning it is associated with “gravity-like” behaviours.
2.7. Feeling and Acting “As Though” Affected by Strong Gravity
Imagine gravity was much stronger. Imagine you felt heavier and moving was more
difﬁcult, even breathing or talking. Imagine standing was an enormous effort that left
you mentally or physically exhausted. In strong gravity, you would engage in fewer
novel behaviours to explore your environment. You would instead need to conserve
energy through slow, minimal, and deliberate movements; a downcast posture (lowered
head, eyes, and shoulders); a softer and deeper tone of voice; and other behaviours that
reﬂect a weighty environment. The principle of MG posits that these same “gravity-like”
behaviours manifest when people are depressed or, to a lesser extent, anxious. Symptoms
of anxiety and depression are both associated with less-directed exploratory behaviour,
where individuals are less motivated to seek further information and so exhibit maladaptive
avoidance behaviours [57]. A non-alignment to gravity (i.e., lying supine) is associated
with a tendency to exhibit more “exploit” and less “explore” behaviours [18]. This implies
that MG makes people act as thoughsomething is preventing them from exploring their
environment, namely physical gravity. This principle can explain basic observations such
as why depressed individuals tend to have a slumped posture [58], and anxious individuals
tend to have problems with balance [ 59]. It is as though they are experiencing stronger
physical gravity which, especially in the case of depression, leads to behaviours that are
stereotypically down, low, heavy, and slow. People such as astronauts in hypogravitational
or weightless conditions also move slowly, but this is due to motor control factors that
maintain smoothness and accuracy [60], and is therefore not a counterexample of the motor
slowing under the conditions of MG.
2.8. Summary of Mental Gravity
MG involves simulating stronger or misaligned physical gravity in order to commu-
nicate UVV in a meaningful, heuristic way through gravity-like behaviours. The intuitive
physics of gravity serves as a mental model or simulacrum for MG, such that individ-
uals communicate their emotional or dispositional response to the social or emotional
world by simulating the gravitational relationship between their body and the physical
world. The principle of MG draws a behavioural analogy between the physical and
social–emotional environments.
3. Neural Correlates of Mental Gravity
Via the anterior insular cortex, the salience network mediates the expression of MG
by virtue of other roles mediating interoceptive inference, emotional awareness, and the
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 6 of 21
simulation of the internal gravity model [16,48,61]. The salience network’s more general
function is to “gatekeep” the various aspects of executive control [ 62] by switching the
attentional resources between self-related information processing of the Default Mode
Network (DMN) and task-related information of the Central Executive Network [63]. The
DMN’s general role is to create the self’s internal narrative through episodic and autobi-
ographical memory, social cognition, language, and semantic memory [ 64]. Davey and
Harrison [65] also dubbed the DMN as the “brain’s centre of gravity” given its importance
for self-referential processing, which is similar to the philosophical ideas presented by
Dennett [66] of the self being the “centre of narrative gravity”. So, whereas the salience
network mediates the expression of MG, the DMN mediates the role of the self in forming
evaluations of UVV . The DMN creates the conditions for MG and the salience network
creates the mechanism of simulating and thus embodying the effects of physical gravity.
Mental “Mass”
Whereas physical gravity requires physical mass (e.g., the Earth), MG revolves around
the accumulated “mass” of personal experiences and autobiographical memory as repre-
sented by the DMN self-narrative [64]. The mental massof the DMN’s internal narrative
places the self at the phenomenological centre of simulated MG in the same way that
non-simulated graviception anchors the self to the body [42] to give an egocentric perspec-
tive [43] to perceive time and space [45,46]. The subjective experience of space and time are
therefore intimately connected to the DMN’s composition of mental mass, with more mass
being equivalent to stronger gravity that then translates into the mental states associated
with being down, low, heavy, and slow. In depression, self-related autobiographical mem-
ory tends to be non-speciﬁc [67,68], over-general [69,70], intrusive [71], and emotionally
negative [72–74]. This distortion of autobiographical memory and the narrative self is
the MG’s source of the disturbed experience of space and time that speaks directly to
the TTC [1].
4. Translating Basic Physics into a Psychological Gravity Model
Two physical theories are used to model or explain gravity (or more formally, “gravi-
tation”). Newtonian [12] gravity involves attractive forces between two masses and is used
to model our direct experience of the Earth’s gravity as well as astronomical phenomena
such as microgravity in space, planetary orbits, and so on. Einstein’s [75–77] general theory
of relativity is a more precise mathematical model of the curvature of spacetime, which can
also explain more exotic gravitational phenomena like black holes, time dilation, and the
bending of light. However, despite its precision and objective truth, general relativity is not
part of our intuitive physics of how biological objects move in the Earth’s relatively weak
gravitational ﬁeld. Relativistic effects are only evident in very strong gravitational ﬁelds, in
high-precision instruments, or at velocities near to the speed of light.
The principle of MG can also be formulated in two ways: (1) according to Newton’s [12]
theory to model the “intuitive physics” [78] of feeling mentally and physiologically “down”;
and (2) general relativity as an isomorphic process of mental phenomena that affects deeper,
more fundamental mental processes that are only evident in highly precise (i.e., clinical
research) contexts where MG is very strong or prolonged. The current exposition of MG
will therefore address both the Newtonian and Einsteinian formulations of gravity in turn,
with intuitive physics explaining more basic properties of being down, low, heavy, and
slow, and fundamental physics explaining the more implicit or extreme aspects of MG in
depression. Table 1 attributes the different types of MG experience to the different levels of
explanation. The postulate of the principle for intuitive physics is that the physical mass of
the body is perceived to increase in MG simulation due to the increased mental mass.
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 7 of 21
Table 1. Similarities between the aspects of physical gravity (left) and mental gravity in depres-
sion (right).
Physical Gravity Mental Gravity in Depression
Newtonian Gravity and Intuitive Physics Simulation of Intuitive Physics
Down or low:objects fall down towards the
centre of gravity but require energy to ascend
or escape gravity’s “pull”. Equivalent to height
variable (H) in potential energy and
power calculations.
Feeling “down” or “low”:the feeling of personal
descent and of being stuck in a low state of
being (i.e., effortless descent but
effortful ascent).
Heavy: the same physical mass weighs more in
a stronger gravitational ﬁeld. Equivalent to
mass variable (m) in gravity, energy, and
power calculations.
Feeling “heavy”:the feeling of increased
bodily weight.
Higher energy costs and restricted motion:due to
increased weight in stronger gravitational
ﬁelds, it either takes more energy to move or
else movement takes longer.
Feeling fatigued and “slow”:psychomotor
retardation as the result of increased mental
effort/energy required to move the body,
causing fatigue (or compensatory agitation)
and also a sense that movement is restricted.
General relativity Experience of non-intuitive physics
Spacetime curvature:acceleration in a
gravitational ﬁeld occurs when objects move
along straight paths through spacetime curved
by mass–energy causing gravitational time
dilation, length contraction, and curved
geodesics (trajectories).
Time dilation:passage of time in conscious
experience is slow and expanded (i.e., dilated).
Spatial contraction:the self and world are
experienced as ﬂat. Spacetime combined:
psychological temporal distance is altered,
cognitive spacetime is distorted, events are
disordered, and trajectories of neural
spatiotemporal dynamics are curved.
DMN activity occurs at the brain’s narrative centre of gravity. To translate this into
Newtonian physics, a gravitational ﬁeld is deﬁned via two properties: (1) how large the
interacting masses are; and (2) how close they are to one another. The strength of the
gravitational force between two masses is determined via Newton’s [12] inverse-square
law of gravity, as shown below:
F = G m1m2
r2 (1)
where the force of gravity (F) increases proportional to the mass (m1 and m2) and decreases
proportional to the distance (r) as a function of the gravitational constant (G). Distance, the
Earth’s gravity, and the gravitational constant are not relevant here because our intuitive
physics does not include the direct experience of changes in the Earth’s mass, signiﬁcant
distance from the Earth’s centre of gravity (unless one counts recent astronautical expe-
rience), or changes in fundamental physical constants. All we experience is a change in
physiological mass and so this can be the only intuitive basis for MG simulation that makes
depressed individuals feel heavy when they also feel down, low, and slow.
A heavier body requires extra effort (i.e., energy) to move the body a given distance
through the environment, or else it will take longer to move the heavier body with the
same amount of energy. These cognitive calculations can be modelled using simple physics.
The equation for overcoming gravitational force (Equation (1)) is:
E = mgH (2)
where potential energy ( E) is created when you raise a mass ( m) to a height ( H) in the
Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld (g), which is in turn calculated by:
g = G M
r2 (3)
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 8 of 21
where M equals the Earth’s mass in kilograms,r the Earth’s radius in metres, andG the
gravitational constant (i.e., the strength of the gravitational force acting on a body of a given
size and mass over a given amount of time, 6.67 × 10−11 m3 kg−1 s−2). If the increased
mental mass in depression increases the expected weight of the body’s physical mass,
then the effect on Equation (2) is that the same amount of energy (E) will raise the body
to a lower height ( H) or, equivalently, more energy will be required to raise the larger
mass to the same height. In effect, it is energetically more “costly” for someone to move
while depressed.
These equations show how depression can cause someone to feel heavy on account
of being down or low, but it does not show how they could also feel slow. The physics of
“power” (P) calculates the amount of energy exerted in a given amount of time (t):
P = E
t = mgH
t (4)
where the time taken to raise a mass (m) to a given height (H) depends on the amount of en-
ergy (E). If the mass of the body increases, then the same amount of energy will take longer
to counteract the force of gravity, making movement slower and/or moreeffortful—both
of which are symptoms of depression. Psychomotor retardation is a common symptom
of depression with severe impacts on daily functioning due to slowed speech, decreased
movement, and impaired cognitive function [27]. From feeling down and low due to the
increased mental mass, simple physics can also explain why depression makes people feel
heavy and move slowly.
5. The Einsteinian Mechanics of Non-Intuitive MG in Depression
However, this mechanical power calculation does not explain every aspect of “feeling
slow” in depression. In addition to moving slowly on account of the increased energy costs,
weight, or power calculations, depression also tends to lead to a more abstract feeling that
time itselfhas slowed down, which is an experience called “depressive time dilation” [79,80].
This equates to a reduction in subjective temporal ﬂow or the reduced rate of felt temporal
passage [8] which, in depression at least, is distinct from the estimations of duration like
those in the power calculation above. A meta-analysis of clinical patients in six separate
studies has conﬁrmed (Hedge’s g = 0.66, medium effect size) that severely depressed
individuals tend to experience subjective time as slow or dilated [9]. This is despite the fact
that, according to the same meta-analysis, no deﬁcits in interval timing were clearly evident
from the 16 separate studies of over 400 patients. “Slow” time does not equate to “more”
time, in other words. The story is more complicated because subjective time is a complex
scientiﬁc question. Even though the body moves more slowly, and conscious experience is
felt to unfold more slowly, clock time is mostly judged accurately while depressed, and so
the MG calculations above in relation to energy, weight, and power do not generalise to all
the aspects of temporal cognition. Psychomotor retardation in depression is not equivalent
to depressive time dilation, and so there must be a different explanatory model.
Phenomenological psychopathology asks more open, qualitative questions about
temporal experiences than the typical psychophysical time perception tasks like interval
estimation, production, reproduction, discrimination, and bisection, or temporal processing
tasks like temporal order, simultaneity, or gap detection [8]. Depressed individuals describe
their experience of time using phrases like “Time seemed an eternity”, “Time seems to
drag”, “Time is void”, “Time is stopped”, and “I lost ﬂow of time” [80]. This is in radical
contrast to states of mania, the opposing “up” state in bipolar disorder to depression’s
“down”, where people report a radically accelerated temporal experience [81].
Phenomenological studies also connect these changes in the rate of temporal ﬂow in
the present experience to changes in how depressed people relate to the past and future.
The guilt-ridden past exerts a dragging effect on an inexorable, unchangeable, and mean-
ingless present experience because the future is “blocked” by feelings of hopelessness [82].
However, these phenomenological distortions of slowing in the present (i.e., dilation),
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 9 of 21
cycling over the past (i.e., rumination), and blocking the future (i.e., hopelessness) do not
seem to affect “intersubjective” time perception abilities [9,82]. As with psychomotor retar-
dation, time dilation in depression is distinct from time perception as typically measured
in laboratory experiments [83]. Instead, it is more related to the phenomenology of the
narrative self over the extended time periods of the past, present, and future. In fact, time
perception and passage over time judgements are only aligned over extended durations as
shown in ecological experiments using experience sampling methods [84]. The relationship
between time perception and the passage of time in depression is itself temporal in nature,
specifying the long and slow nature of depressive time dilation.
To summarise, depressive time dilation is distinct from either psychomotor retardation
(physiological slowing), or a slowed internal clock used for judging the intervals of clock
time (cognitive slowing). The mechanistic explanation of slowing under MG provided
above in terms of power calculations in a physical gravitational ﬁeld therefore do not
apply. Consequently, the more-intuitive physics of Newtonian [ 12] gravity no longer
applies because the strength of the depressed MG ﬁeld requires a more clinically precise
explanation. The non-intuitive physics of Einsteinian gravity [76,77,85] is needed instead
because general relativity deals explicitly with the phenomenon of gravitational time dilation
(explained in detail below) that is absent from Newton’s formulation. Space and time are
two aspects of the same thing in general relativity (i.e., spacetime) and gravity is caused,
not by a force exerted between two masses as above, but rather by spacetime curvature.
The next sections will focus on MG in depression as an analogue of spacetime curvature,
both in the felt sense of distorted space and time, and also the curvature of underlying
spatiotemporal neural dynamics.
6. Mental Gravity in Depression as Spacetime Curvature
6.1. Spacetime Curvature in General Relativity
According to general relativity, mass and energy curve spacetime around them so
that the path of moving objects, including massless particles of light, bend in the presence
of a gravitational ﬁeld [ 86]. In our everyday experience, we observe this bending as an
acceleration towards the surface of the Earth. Newton [12] theorised that a gravitational
force was actively pulling objects down, but that is not the case according to the more precise
general relativity. Acceleration is just the result of objects falling in a straight line through
curved spacetime. According to Einstein [75], a gravitational ﬁeld is a ﬁeld of acceleration
equivalent to spacetime curvature. Just as the vestibular organs cannot distinguish between
gravity and linear acceleration, our everyday feeling of being “weighed down” on the
Earth’s surface is difﬁcult to separate from the feeling of being “accelerated up” away from
the surface (cf., the equivalence principle between inertial and gravitational mass) [75]. The
experiments of grip force in varying conditions during parabolic ﬂights show that people
can differentiate between acceleration and gravity [ 87,88], but this does not completely
discount the fact that gravity feels like an acceleration.
In addition to objects following accelerated but straight paths through curved space
(called geodesics), time also ﬂows at different rates depending on an object’s location within
a gravitational ﬁeld. From the point of view of an external observer, time always ﬂows more
slowly for objects (i.e., clocks) that are closer to a massive object compared to objects further
away. Time also ﬂows more slowly when the massive object is larger and the gravitational
ﬁeld is stronger. This phenomenon is called gravitational time dilation and it has been
experimentally proven that a clock in the near-Earth orbit ticks more quickly than a clock
on the surface of the Earth, a critical consideration when calibrating orbiting satellites
and planning astronautical missions [86]. Whereas Newton [12] proposed a “clockwork”
universe where all events unfold according to absolute time, Einstein [ 75] showed that
time and space are not absolute but relative to the local context of mass (and energy via the
mass–energy equivalence, E = mc2).
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 10 of 21
General relativity deﬁnes a gravitational ﬁeld according to the reciprocal relationship
between mass–energy and spacetime, expressed mathematically as:
gµν = Tµν (5)
Here, spacetime curvature is represented by the left-hand term, called the Einstein ten-
sor, and the matter–energy contents are represented by the right-hand term, called the stress–
energy–momentum tensor. This formula shows that both are mutually dependent—matter
and energy tells spacetime how to curve, and spacetime tells matter and energy how to
move [86]. In the MG theory of depression, the argument is that the high concentrations of
autobiographical information (mental mass) and self-related attention (mental energy) is
accompanied by distortions in the cognitive representation and subsequent experience of
the self in space and time. Part of the MG effect is explicable in terms of the gravity’s effects
on the body, as above, but the explanation also goes deeper to consider the underlying
general relativity notion of spacetime curvature.
6.2. Analogy between Mental and Physical Time Dilation
By extending the behavioural analogy between physical and social–emotional envi-
ronments in MG simulation, the common experience of time dilation in depression [9] is
proposed here as a mental analogue of gravitational time dilation in general relativity. A
visual depiction of the MG ﬁeld is needed to illustrate the mechanics of this explanatory
model. Figure 1 shows the self-axis extending from a central DMN point of narrative grav-
ity to the self-world boundary which is mediated by the extension of the salience network’s
present experience [65]. The side view compresses one of the three spatial dimensions to
depict the strength of the gravitational ﬁeld as a literal depression in the 2D fabric of space
(plus one dimension of time). The mass causes a gravitational gradient of descent towards
its centre, much like a massive ball will depress a 2D rubber sheet.
Entropy 2023, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 22 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic of MG field states in terms of the self -axis extending from DMN centre to sali-
ence network limit at the self -world boundary. The mass at the DMN centre determines degree of 
spacetime curvature and the tendency to draw salience network attentional resources inwards and 
down in anxiety and depression, i.e., the strength of the MG field. 
In this schematic, depressive time dilation occurs because the salience network is di-
recting attention “down” into the DMN’s strong MG field where the gravitational time 
dilation effects are sufficiently strong to be observable. Attending to self-related information 
causes a subjective slowing in the passage of time from the point of view of the salience 
network (i.e., the experiential self in the present moment), just as attending to a physical 
clock in a strong gravitational field will seem to tick more slowly than a clock in a weak 
gravitational field. The salience network mediates MG time dilation through arousal and 
attentional effects [90], and the DMN mediates the strength of the MG field by comprising 
the mental mass at the brain’s centre of narrative gravity. 
6.3. Spatial Distortions in Depression 
Depression is associated with distortions of space as well as time. Space is also dis-
torted in depression at a very basic perceptual level. Depth perception tends to be dimin-
ished in depression due to reduced stereopsis [91]. Depressed individuals tend to report 
a “flatter” perception of objects, themselves, and other people [92]. Beyond perception, 
depressed individuals also use spatial metaphors to characterise their experience as “EN-
CLOSED SPACE”, “BOUNDED SPACE”, or “DARK CONFINED SPACE” [36], which im-
ply a sense of spatial curvature as closedness or boundedness. Importantly, the DMN is 
implicated in spatial navigation as well as other functions associated with MG including 
autobiographical memory, prospection (future projection), and sel f-referential goal -di-
rected tasks [93,94].  
Phenomenological studies also suggest that depressed individuals tend to feel that 
external objects are out of reach, dull, or distant as though the self -world boundary has 
expanded [95]. Compared to anxiety, depression symptoms are associated with a reduced 
“anticipatory auditory looming bias”, meaning that depressed individuals tend to not per-
ceive objects approaching as quickly or as closely, which reflects both a physical and cog-
nitive disengagement from their surroundings in the physical and social space [96]. De-
pression distorts phenomenological space by creating a sense of separation, seclusion, and 
of being “locked in” from the external environment [97,98]. 
Figure 1. Schematic of MG ﬁeld states in terms of the self-axis extending from DMN centre to
salience network limit at the self-world boundary. The mass at the DMN centre determines degree of
spacetime curvature and the tendency to draw salience network attentional resources inwards and
down in anxiety and depression, i.e., the strength of the MG ﬁeld.
This heuristic depiction illustrates how the increased mass at the brain’s DMN centre
of narrative gravity causes greater spacetime curvature in the MG ﬁeld and increases the
tendency of the salience network’s attentional resources to be directed inwardly. Time
dilation is common in depression because the MG ﬁeld is the strongest. Grave situations
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 11 of 21
may also involve time slowing down, such as during traumatic accidents [89], but these
experiences of acute panic or anxiety are typically transient compared to depression, and
so the MG ﬁeld is not as strong.
According to Figure 1, the MG ﬁeld is so strong in depression and spacetime and so
curved that the self is all but attentionally secluded from the outside world. Spacetime
curvature may be temporarily strong in anxious states, but the self is still actively connected
to the world by virtue of theirs being a “grave” situation to respond to. The self may be
under threat during the “falling” MG state, but the depressed self is a threat to itself in the
self-reinforcing “fallen” state.
In this schematic, depressive time dilation occurs because the salience network is
directing attention “down” into the DMN’s strong MG ﬁeld where the gravitational time
dilation effects are sufﬁciently strong to be observable. Attending to self-related information
causes a subjective slowing in the passage of time from the point of view of the salience
network (i.e., the experiential self in the present moment), just as attending to a physical
clock in a strong gravitational ﬁeld will seem to tick more slowly than a clock in a weak
gravitational ﬁeld. The salience network mediates MG time dilation through arousal and
attentional effects [90], and the DMN mediates the strength of the MG ﬁeld by comprising
the mental mass at the brain’s centre of narrative gravity.
6.3. Spatial Distortions in Depression
Depression is associated with distortions of space as well as time. Space is also
distorted in depression at a very basic perceptual level. Depth perception tends to be
diminished in depression due to reduced stereopsis [91]. Depressed individuals tend to
report a “ﬂatter” perception of objects, themselves, and other people [92]. Beyond percep-
tion, depressed individuals also use spatial metaphors to characterise their experience as
“ENCLOSED SPACE”, “BOUNDED SPACE”, or “DARK CONFINED SPACE” [36], which
imply a sense of spatial curvature as closedness or boundedness. Importantly, the DMN is
implicated in spatial navigation as well as other functions associated with MG including
autobiographical memory, prospection (future projection), and self-referential goal-directed
tasks [93,94].
Phenomenological studies also suggest that depressed individuals tend to feel that
external objects are out of reach, dull, or distant as though the self-world boundary has
expanded [95]. Compared to anxiety, depression symptoms are associated with a reduced
“anticipatory auditory looming bias”, meaning that depressed individuals tend to not
perceive objects approaching as quickly or as closely, which reﬂects both a physical and
cognitive disengagement from their surroundings in the physical and social space [ 96].
Depression distorts phenomenological space by creating a sense of separation, seclusion,
and of being “locked in” from the external environment [97,98].
6.4. Combined Spacetime Distortions in Depression
A central feature of general relativity is the fact that space and time are combined
into one four-dimensional ﬁeld called spacetime which “curves” in the presence of mass
or energy. For the analogy between general relativity and MG in depression to be valid,
then it is not sufﬁcient to show that space and time are distorted independently, as per
the two preceding sections. Instead, one must show how subjective space and time are
merged mentally and thus affected simultaneously. The concept of psychological distance
merges mental space and time. Times, places, people, and counterfactual alternatives are
mentally construed to exist at different distances from an egocentric reference point of one’s
experience in the “here and now” [99]. Time, space, social distance, and hypotheticality
each represent different “dimensions” of psychological distance [100]. Temporal distance is
thus a form of a merged mental spacetime that construes the past, present, and future as
different points along the time dimension.
Temporal distance studies show that depression makes the past seem closer to, and
the future more distant from the present [101]. Depressed people therefore feel spatially
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 12 of 21
more distant from the external world [95] while also feeling that the future is more distant,
showing a strong convergence between space and time in terms of physical and psycholog-
ical distance. Spacetime curvature also manifests in non-linear memory recollections. A
qualitative interview study by Habermas et al. [102] found that the tendency to feel “stuck”
in the past in depression is accompanied by a tendency to order past autobiographical
events non-linearly, grouping events thematically instead of temporally. The mental time-
line of events in autobiographical episodic memory is not structured according to the linear
ordering of memory encoding in physical time, but rather by the order of events in terms
of psychological distance. From the egocentric point of view, objects that are thematically
related are represented as being psychologically closer, and so events are recalled according
to the subjective, psychological spacetime order instead of the intersubjective, physical
time order.
6.5. Curvature of Mental Spacetime
Cognitive models also merge time and space via common computational processes.
Van Wassenhove [103] proposed an amodal representational space common to the mag-
nitudes of space, time, and numerosity, which is supported by psychophysical studies
demonstrating the common processing of time, number, and length [104]. The principle of
MG posits that mental activity (e.g., computation, cognition, representation, or information
processing) occurs in a mental spacetime that curves in the presence of mental mass or
energy. Stocker [105] theorised about such a “cognitive spacetime” but thought the concept
of curvature was irrelevant. The principle of MG instead proposes that cognitive spacetime
is not a ﬂat, featureless, static background that serves the cognitive function of a “Cartesian
theatre” where events simply unfold in real time [106]. Instead, mental spacetime is an ac-
tive constituent of, and contributor to, cognitive and conscious activity precisely because it
is not a ﬁxed structure deﬁning absolute space and time. Like physical spacetime, cognitive
spacetime is governed by the principles of relativity, and so space and time are relative
to the mass–energy context and vice versa. This reciprocal co-dependence is expressed
mathematically in Equation (5) as the left spacetime term equal tothe right energy–mass
term. Cognitive spacetime therefore responds ﬂexibly to mental matter–energy while also
actively shapingthose mental contents. Importantly, the curvature of mental spacetime can
also be instantiated in the brain via the curvature of spatiotemporal neural dynamics.
7. Curvature in the Brain’s Spacetime
Whereas Newtonian mechanics was used above to model the intuitive physics of
MG simulation (i.e., feeling down, low, heavy, and slow), the more complex mathematics
of Einstein’s [95] general relativity can be used to model how non-intuitive gravity-like
experiences emerge in depression. Le Bihan [10] proposed a relativistic model of neural
activity which, like Einstein’s [95] theory of physical gravity, focuses on the central notion
of curvature of the brain’s “spacetime” or “spacetime connectome” [107]. The framework,
called relativistic pseudo-diffusion, proposes that the brain’s four-dimensional structure
(three space dimensions and one time) is prone to a “functional curvature generated by
brain activity, in a similar way gravitational masses give our 4-dimensional Universe
spacetime its curvature” (p. 1) [10].
Le Bihan’s [10] model depicts neural activity propagating through a brain network
in the same way that matter or energy propagates through physical spacetime. Neural
activity diffuses along trajectories called “brainlines”, which are shaped via the structure
and activity of the brain’s spacetime. Diffusion occurs at different rates depending upon
the amount of neural activity (i.e., energy) and grey-matter density (i.e., mass) at speciﬁc
network nodes, as well as the structure of white-matter interconnections (i.e., spacetime
ﬁeld). A greater density of nodes and higher node activity lowers the rate of diffusion
of neural activity in the same way that increased mass–energy dilates time according to
general relativity.
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 13 of 21
Of course, time and space are intrinsically linked in general relativity and so this dila-
tion of time is also a result of the spatial distribution of the spacetime connectome’s network
nodes and neural activity. In relativistic pseudo-diffusion, neural activity propagates out
from the source through a spatially distributed “map” of the network nodes, traversing
the topographical “peaks” and “valleys” of lower and higher density/activity, respectively.
As per the side view of Figure 1, the connectome’s valleys are areas of slower propagation
analogous to gravitational time dilation. Since gravity is a ﬁeld of acceleration according
to Einstein’s [75] general relativity, neural activity decelerates in the lower “valley” areas
of brain spacetime that have higher energy or density (mass). In some sense, the propa-
gation of neural activity gravitates towards depressions or valleys in the brain’s spacetime
ﬁeld. Le Bihan [ 10] uses Einstein’s ﬁeld equations to model this process mathematically, as
shown below:
Rµν − 1
2 Rg
µν
= −κTµν (6)
Similar to Equation (5), the left-hand terms represent spacetime curvature via the
Einstein tensor and the geometric curvature of spacetime ( Rµv denotes the Ricci tensor,
R the scalar curvature [0 in the absence of node activity in “ﬂat” Minkowski spacetime],
and gµv the brain spacetime Einstein metric tensor). The right-hand terms describe neural
activity and density in a region of spacetime responsible for the curvature ( κ a constant
and Tµv the stress–energy–momentum tensor [T00 represents local node activity and other
terms denote activity in the spacetime surrounding the nodes]). Solving this ﬁeld equation
entails ﬁnding a metric tensor gµv of the brain’s spacetime curvature corresponding to
the conﬁguration of neural activity/density as deﬁned by Tµv. Equation (6) can thus be
simpliﬁed to Equation (5), as shown below:
gµν = Tµν
which conveys the essential property of Einstein’s [ 75] theory of gravity—namely that
spacetime (gµv) tells matter and energy (Tµv) how to move, while matter and energy tells
spacetime how to curve [86]. Gravitational time dilation is time ﬂowing relatively slowly
within the brain’s lower spacetime “valleys” of higher node density and activity and
relatively quickly in the “higher peaks” of lower density and activity.
7.1. Time Dilation in Le Bihan’s Relativistic Pseudo-Diffusion Framework
Although not addressed by Le Bihan [10] speciﬁcally, time dilation in depression can be
explained according to the relativistic pseudo-diffusion framework very straightforwardly.
Consider that the DMN mediates self- or internally oriented attention while the central
executive network mediates externally oriented attention [108]. Neuroimaging studies of
depression suggest that, in the resting state, the DMN shows increased intrinsic activity and
functional connectivity, whereas the central executive network shows decreased activity
and connectivity [109]. According to Le Bihan’s [10] relativistic framework, neural activity
in depression will diffuse more slowly through the DMN than the central executive network,
meaning that internal or self-related attention and information will be ﬂowing relatively
slowly compared to external or world-related attention and information. This imbalance
is the primary cause of time dilation in depression which, according to the relativistic
pseudo-diffusion framework, is precisely analogous to gravitational time dilation.
Low central executive network activity and connectivity compared to the DMN can
distort space as well as time through relativistic pseudo-diffusion. The curvature of mental
spacetime can occur because the nodes of the central executive network mediate temporal,
spatial, and social dimensions of psychological distance [110]. Whereas medial prefrontal
nodes of the DMN mediate mind-wandering, the lateral prefrontal nodes of the central
executive network mediate cognitive control [ 111]. Reduced central executive network
connectivity or activity resulting in a loss of control constitutes the spatial separation,
seclusion, or sense of being “locked in” in depression [97,98]. This central executive network
is also highly integrated with the DMN and plausibly implicated in the breakdown of
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 14 of 21
executive control over self-related thoughts and actions in depression that manifests as
“sticky” autobiographical memory and prospection [112].
Importantly, the intuitive physics of falling MG is also consistent with a felt loss of
control [30] and suppressed central executive network activity of depression [ 113]. The
depressed individual feels less able to inﬂuence the world through planned, coordinated,
and controlled behaviour and so their global mood (i.e., long-term average of the local
emotional states) expresses this feeling using the template of falling that constitutes MG.
Other intuitive gravity-like behaviours follow from this core belief of depression as falling to
a descended state of being, giving the impression or feeling of being heavy, low, down, and
slow. At a deeper computational, phenomenological, and neurobiological level, however,
all of these surface-level impressions stem from an underlying problem with the way a
person experiences time and space, the past and the future, and themselves and the world.
The relativistic pseudo-diffusion framework offers a plausible neurobiological substrate
for MG processes and experiences couched in the mathematics of general relativity [10].
Understanding how the brain’s spacetime manifests in depression could facilitate the
earlier detection and perhaps prevention of depression, especially in high-risk groups such
as children exposed to adverse experiences or trauma. Risk factors, such as changes in
brain development, could show up as changes in the brain’s spacetime topography. These
changes could serve as an early biomarker of depression risks that is more speciﬁc and
sensitive than the current knowledge allows with respect to reduced cortical and subcortical
grey-matter volume [114–118] or structural connectomics [119].
7.2. The “Common Currency” of the Brain’s Spacetime
The relativistic pseudo-diffusion framework can be used to model more than just
depression. Le Bihan [10] uses it to model the temporal disordering of events in schizophre-
nia, resulting in confusions about internal versus external sources of information and
hallucinatory symptoms. Combined spatial and temporal distortion as the basis for mental
disorder mirrors Northoff’s [109] “spatiotemporal psychopathology” approach to depres-
sion. According to this model, depression arises because the DMN resting state activity and
global functional connectivity are both abnormally high and new information is integrated
more slowly:
In the healthy subject, both world- and self-related time usually correspond to a high
degree and thus synchronized. This though changes in MDD where self-related time
becomes slowed or decelerated compared and henceforth relative to world-related time [. . .]
Increased functional connectivity across the whole brain means that neural activity in specific
regions (as triggered by either internal or external stimuli) can no longer change as much
[. . .] The abnormal increase in temporal continuity of the brain’s overall resting state activity
is especially fostered via the infraslow frequency fluctuations showing increased functional
connectivity (as measured in fMRI) because their extremely long phase durations (up to
100s) contribute strongly to an abnormally high degree of temporal continuity. (pp. 7–8).
Northoff’s (2016) passage covers key elements of the MG theory of depression: (1) the
distorted sense of self as desynchronised from the world; (2) the slowing of self-related
time; (3) the altered network function and connectivity in the DMN; and (4) an enhanced
continuity or inertia due to a lower rate of change. According to Northoff [120], space and
time are the “common currency” of all neural, cognitive, and phenomenological manifesta-
tions of depression in terms of the curvature of underlying neural spatiotemporal dynamics
centred on the DMN, the central executive network, and the salience network [121–123].
Importantly, aberrant salience network–DMN/central executive network connectivity has
been linked to depression severity [124] and all three regions mediate risk and resilience
to the depressive disorder [ 125], meaning that Le Bihan’s [10] general relativity model
completes the “common currency” of spacetime across phenomenological, cognitive, and
neurobiological domains of psychological explanation. The phenomenal consciousness of
those diagnosed with depression is fundamentally altered with respect to the experience
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 15 of 21
of the self in space and time, meaning they also think differently about space and time in
ways that map onto the altered spatiotemporal organisation of their brain.
8. Spacetime Curvature in Predictive Processing
This MG principle is not alone in using curvature to model core aspects of mental
processing. The underlying spacetime curvature of MG simulation is also explicable in pre-
dictive processing terms. From the Bayesian perspective, Friston et al. [126] referred to the
“curvature of surprisal” and “surprisal gradients”. Recall that, throughout infancy and early
childhood, the vestibular system and other graviceptive centres of the brain functionally
integrate to distinguish the force of gravity from accelerations due to movement [15,127].
This internal gravity model contributes vital information to an intuitive physics of how
and why objects fall and feel heavy [ 78], and MG simulation simply decouples strong,
top–down expectations or gravity priors [17] from bottom–up sensory feedback [16].
If depression is both an increased spacetime curvature and an increased weighting of
top–down gravity priors, then the principle of MG can be translated into the language of
the “curvature of surprisal” used by Friston et al. [126]. They argue that self-information
creates negative curvature (i.e., a depression, downwards and inwards) in the information
geometry or state space that shapes the dynamics (i.e., trajectories) of perception and action.
These curved trajectories are analogous to the geodesics that matter and energy travel along
in a gravitational ﬁeld. The MG theory of depression also stipulates attention is directed
inwards and downwards (i.e., negative curvature) in depressed mental states with one
key distinction. Whereas transient emotional states refer to the precision of prior beliefs
about the consequences of perception and action, mood is the long-term average of the
emotional states, with depression representing suboptimal long-term ﬂuctuation [ 128].
Mood is therefore related to the so-called “hyperpriors” acting at a deeper-level of the
predictive hierarchy over longer timescales than emotion [129].
Curvature on account of mood is therefore not the same “curvature of surprisal”
that applies to a single trajectory of the present experiential self and the short-term emo-
tional states. The long-term curvature of mood-states from hyperpriors is more akin to
“hypercurvature” of all possibletrajectories, meaning the curvature of the general space-
time/gravitational ﬁeld as opposed to a single path through it. Another way to say this
is that the brain’s DMN centre of narrative gravity (the self) is not just one of the multi-
ple local minimain the curved manifold of the probability state space (time), but rather a
global minimum.
Sengupta et al. [130] expanded on the notion of curvature in probability state space to
argue that “attention is a force that manifests from the curvature of information geometry,
in exactly the same way that gravity is manifest when the space–time continuum is curved
by massive bodies” (p. 7). According to the principle of MG, attention is not the only
“force” that can create curvature. Mental mass also curves subjective spacetime in deeper,
more global levels of the predictive hierarchy over the longer-term averages of experience
and behaviour (e.g., long-term autobiographical memory, mood, cognitive development,
and the diachronic self).
Sengupta et al. [130] also connected the notion of spacetime curvature of information
geometry to the underlying neural dynamics via so-called “neuronal gauge theories”, which
link the activity of neural dynamics over a vast range of evolutionary, developmental, and
perceptual timescales. Gauge theories are physical theories that describe the interactions
between spacetime ﬁelds and matter or energy, deﬁning properties that are invariant
under the changing reference frames and under the conditions of curvature. Einstein’s [75]
general relativity is one example of a gauge theory in physics, and the vestibular system also
perceives gravity by transforming sensory information between body-centric and other non-
body-centric reference frames [40,127,131]. Given that the reference frame transformation
of spatiotemporal information is common to gauge theories, general relativity, and the
perception of gravity, there may be a straightforward way to apply the principle of MG as a
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 16 of 21
neuronal gauge theory in relation to the perception of gravity and various conscious states,
including mood as a prime example.
The principle of MG could serve as a neuronal gauge theory linking the moment-to-
moment experience of depression (and other manifestations of MG) to human lifespan
development and cultural or biological evolution [132,133]. The MG theory of depression
covers multiple timescales of gravity-like experiences from the development of “outside-in”
empirical priors to the long-term signs and symptoms of depression, listed in Table 1, that
manifest as a feeling of personal descent [36], perceived bodily heaviness [23], subjective
time dilation [ 9,80], an altered sense of self in relation to narrative gravity [ 37,65], and
distorted neural spatiotemporal dynamics [109,134,135]. More work is needed to translate
the principle into a more rigorous conceptual framework, such as Bayesian Mechanics [136],
via an implementation framework such as relativistic pseudo-diffusion which uses the
mathematics of general relativity to model the mental energy–matter contents and mental
spacetime [10].
9. Summary and Implications for the TTC
The MG principle contends that the mind uses physical gravity as a mental model,
isomorphism, or simulacrum to express the relation between the inner self and the outer
world in terms of “UP”-ness and “DOWN”-ness (i.e., UVV). The simulation of increased
gravity characterises a continuum of MG states which includes depression as the paradig-
matic example of being down, low, heavy, and slow. Simulated graviception is mediated
via the anterior insula cortex of the salience network but revolves around the centre of
MG identiﬁed with the DMN as the mental mass deﬁning the strength of MG for an in-
dividual, which is equivalent to DMN activity as the brain’s narrative centre-of-gravity.
The mechanics of MG in depression is modelled using the basic Newtonian physics of
gravitation to show how the perception and (hyper)embodiment and increased bodily mass
can cause other feelings associated with being down, low, heavy, and slow. The general
relativity physics of gravity can also be used to model spacetime curvature in depression,
particularly gravitational time dilation as a property of MG analogous to subjective time
dilation (i.e., the slowing of temporal ﬂow in conscious experience), but also the curvature
of the brain’s spacetime and cognitive spacetime.
The principle of MG has profound implications for the TTC. Northoff and Huang [1]
suggest that “temporo-spatial alignment is altered in psychiatric patients (e.g., schi- zophre-
nia, depression and bipolar disorder) corresponding to abnormal form of consciousness”
(p. 642). As opposed to the short-term alignment for speciﬁc local contents of consciousness,
the authors contend that a long-term temporo-spatial alignment establishes a “world-brain
relation” that is centred on embodiment and the socialisation of conscious states. This is
in accordance with Whiteley’s [6] view that a depressed mood is a distinct global state of
consciousness that involves an experiential “shift” to a world that is seemingly detached
from reality and other people.
Long-term temporo-spatial misalignment in depression is associated with the obser-
vation that DMN activity occurs over the longest timescale in the infraslow frequency
range [137]. Increased DMN activity or connectivity in depression serves as the TTC neural
correlate of mental mass and a neural mechanism for determining the strength of the MG
ﬁeld. The TTC can connect the idea of a narrative centre of gravity to the activity of DMN
and the cortical midline structures associated with long-term temporo-spatial alignment
and, thus, the notion of the curvature of spacetime in conscious experience. In concert with
other theories of cognitive [105] and neurobiological spacetime [10], the TTC can also work
towards the “common currency” approach to space and time that also potentially connects
the TTC to predictive processing frameworks such as free energy [138,139], neuronal gauge
theories [130], and active inference accounts of depression [140].
In sum, the principle of MG provides the TTC with a way to incorporate the structure
of the world into the structure of the brain, conscious experience, and thought. It gives the
up/down dimension of space, as deﬁned by the gravitational ﬁeld, a unique status that is
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 17 of 21
connected to both our embodied interaction with the physical world, and also the inverse,
reﬂective, emotional but still embodied experience of ourselves.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: Many thanks to Niccolo Negro, Georg Northoff, and Denis Le Bihan for their
thoughtful comments and feedback on the recent drafts. Thanks also to Liz Temple, Britt Klein,
George van Doorn, Terry Caelli, and Mark Bennett for their contributions to the previous versions of
the theory.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Northoff, G.; Huang, Z. How do the brain’s time and space mediate consciousness and its different dimensions? Temporo-spatial
theory of consciousness (TTC). Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.2017, 80, 630–645. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Kent, L. Mental Gravity: A novel theory of self, mind, and brain in depression. PsyArXiv, preprint. Available online: https:
//psyarxiv.com/76xmk/ (accessed on 11 August 2023).
3. Lakoff, G.; Johnson, M. Metaphors We Live By; University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.
4. Bayne, T.; Hohwy, J.; Owen, A.M. Are there levels of consciousness? Trends Cogn. Sci.2016, 20, 405–413. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Bayne, T.; Hohwy, J.; Owen, A.M. Reforming the taxonomy in disorders of consciousness. Ann. Neurol. 2017, 82, 866–872.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Whiteley, C.M.K. Depression as a Disorder of Consciousness. Br. J. Philos. Sci.2021, in press. [CrossRef]
7. Vogel, D.; Falter-Wagner, C.M.; Schoofs, T.; Krämer, K.; Kupke, C.; Vogeley, K. Flow and structure of time experience–concept,
empirical validation and implications for psychopathology. Phenom. Cogn. Sci.2018, 19, 235–258. [CrossRef]
8. Thönes, S.; Stocker, K. A standard conceptual framework for the study of subjective time. Conscious. Cogn. 2019, 71, 114–122.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Thönes, S.; Oberfeld, D. Time perception in depression: A meta-analysis.J. Affect. Disord.2015, 175, 359–372. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Le Bihan, D. On time and space in the brain: A relativistic pseudo-diffusion framework. Brain Multiphys. 2020, 1, 100016.
[CrossRef]
11. Einstein, A.; Fokker, A.D. Die nordströmsche gravitationstheorie vom standpunkt des absoluten differentialkalküls. Ann. Phys.
1914, 349, 321–328. [CrossRef]
12. Newton, I. Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica (“Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy”); Jussu Societatis Regiæ ac
Typis Josephi Streater: London, UK, 1687.
13. Anderson, J.E. The Gravity Model. Annu. Rev. Econ.2011, 3, 133–160. [CrossRef]
14. Lewer, J.J.; Van den Berg, H. A gravity model of immigration. Econ. Lett.2008, 99, 164–167. [CrossRef]
15. Gallagher, M.; Kearney, B.; Ferrè, E.R. Where is my hand in space? The internal model of gravity inﬂuences proprioception. Biol.
Lett. 2021, 17, 20210115. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Rousseau, C.; Barbiero, M.; Pozzo, T.; Papaxanthis, C.; White, O. Actual and Imagined Movements Reveal a Dual Role of the
Insular Cortex for Motor Control. Cereb. Cortex2020, 31, 2586–2594. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Jörges, B.; López-Moliner, J. Gravity as a Strong Prior: Implications for Perception and Action. Front. Hum. Neurosci.2017, 11, 203.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Gallagher, M.; Arshad, I.; Ferrè, E.R. Gravity modulates behaviour control strategy. Exp. Brain Res.2019, 237, 989–994. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
19. Angelaki, D.E.; Shaikh, A.G.; Green, A.M.; Dickman, J.D. Neurons compute internal models of the physical laws of motion.
Nature 2004, 430, 560–564. [CrossRef]
20. McIntyre, J.; Zago, M.; Berthoz, A.; Lacquaniti, F. Does the brain model Newton’s laws?Nat. Neurosci.2001, 4, 693–694. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
21. Merfeld, D.M.; Zupan, L.; Peterka, R.J. Humans use internal models to estimate gravity and linear acceleration. Nature 1999, 398,
615–618. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Hameroff, S.; Penrose, R. Consciousness in the universe: A review of the ‘Orch OR’ theory. Phys. Life Rev. 2014, 11, 39–78.
[CrossRef]
23. Hartmann, M.; Lenggenhager, B.; Stocker, K. Happiness feels light and sadness feels heavy: Introducing valence-related bodily
sensation maps of emotions. Psychol. Res.2022, 87, 59–83. [CrossRef]
24. Barkow, K.; Heun, R.; Bedirhan Üstün, T.; Berger, M.; Bermejo, I.; Gaebel, W.; Härter, M.; Schneider, F.; Stieglitz, R.-D.;Maier, W.
Identiﬁcation of somatic and anxiety symptoms which contribute to the detection of depression in primary health care. Eur.
Psychiatry 2004, 19, 250–257. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 18 of 21
25. Fuchs, T.; Schlimme, J.E. Embodiment and psychopathology: A phenomenological perspective. Curr. Opin. Psychiatr.2009, 22,
570–575. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Kroenke, K.; Spitzer, R.L.; Williams, J.B.W. The PHQ-9. J. Gen. Intern. Med.2001, 16, 606–613. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Buyukdura, J.S.; McClintock, S.M.; Croarkin, P .E. Psychomotor retardation in depression: Biological underpinnings, measurement,
and treatment. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry2011, 35, 395–409. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28. Bennabi, D.; Vandel, P .; Papaxanthis, C.; Pozzo, T.; Haffen, E. Psychomotor Retardation in Depression: A Systematic Review of
Diagnostic, Pathophysiologic, and Therapeutic Implications. BioMed Res. Int.2013, 2013, 158746. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. McMullen, L.M.; Conway, J.B.Conventional METAPHORS for Depression; Psychology Press: New York, NY, USA, 2002; pp. 167–181.
30. Ratcliffe, M. Experiences of Depression: A Study in Phenomenology; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2014.
31. Huang, F.-Y.; Hsu, A.-L.; Chao, Y.-P .; Shang, C.M.-H.; Tsai, J.-S.; Wu, C.W. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy on bereavement
grief: Alterations of resting-state network connectivity associate with changes of anxiety and mindfulness. Hum. Brain Mapp.
2021, 42, 510–520. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Farmer, R.; Sundberg, N.D. Boredom proneness—The development and correlates of a new scale. J. Pers. Assess.1986, 50, 4–17.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Tipples, J. Increased Frustration Predicts the Experience of Time Slowing-Down: Evidence from an Experience Sampling Study.
Timing Time Percept.2018, 6, 220. [CrossRef]
34. Gaveau, J.; Berret, B.; Angelaki, D.E.; Papaxanthis, C. Direction-dependent arm kinematics reveal optimal integration of gravity
cues. eLife 2016, 5, e16394. [CrossRef]
35. Moskalewicz, M.; Fuchs, T. Psychotic disorders of space and time—A contribution of Erwin W. Straus. Front. Psychiatry2023,
14, 1150005. [CrossRef]
36. Coll-Florit, M.; Climent, S.; Sanﬁlippo, M.; Hernández-Encuentra, E. Metaphors of Depression. Studying First Person Accounts of
Life with Depression Published in Blogs. Metaphor Symb.2021, 36, 1–19. [CrossRef]
37. Davey, C.G.; Harrison, B.J. The self on its axis: A framework for understanding depression. Transl. Psychiatry 2022, 12, 23.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. White, O.; Gaveau, J.; Bringoux, L.; Crevecoeur, F. The gravitational imprint on sensorimotor planning and control.J. Neurophysiol.
2020, 124, 4–19. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Frank, S.M.; Greenlee, M.W. The parieto-insular vestibular cortex in humans: More than a single area? J. Neurophysiol.2018, 120,
1438–1450. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40. Cullen, K.E. Vestibular processing during natural self-motion: Implications for perception and action. Nat. Rev. Neurosc.2019, 20,
346–363. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41. Gallagher, M.; Ferrè, E.R. The aesthetics of verticality: A gravitational contribution to aesthetic preference. Q. J. Exp. Psychol.2018,
71, 2655–2664. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Ferrè, E.R.; Lopez, C.; Haggard, P . Anchoring the Self to the Body: Vestibular Contribution to the Sense of Self.Psychol. Sci.2014,
25, 2106–2108. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Pavlidou, A.; Ferr è, E.R.; Lopez, C. Vestibular stimulation makes people more egocentric. Cortex 2018, 101, 302–305. [CrossRef]
44. Ferrè, E.R.; Frett, T.; Haggard, P .; Longo, M.R. A gravitational contribution to perceived body weight.Sci. Rep.2019, 9, 11448.
[CrossRef]
45. Clément, G. Perception of time in microgravity and hypergravity during parabolic ﬂight.Neuroreport 2018, 29, 247–251. [CrossRef]
46. Ferre, E.; Longo, M.; Fiori, F.; Haggard, P . Vestibular modulation of spatial perception. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2013, 7, 660.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Craig, A.D. How do you feel-now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nat. Rev. Neurosc.2009, 10, 59–70. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
48. Lamm, C.; Singer, T. The role of anterior insular cortex in social emotions. Brain Struct. Funct.2010, 214, 579–591. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
49. Gu, X.; Hof, P .R.; Friston, K.J.; Fan, J. Anterior insular cortex and emotional awareness.J. Comp. Neurol.2013, 521, 3371–3388.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Gu, X.; Gao, Z.; Wang, X.; Liu, X.; Knight, R.T.; Hof, P .R.; Fan, J. Anterior insular cortex is necessary for empathetic pain perception.
Brain 2012, 135, 2726–2735. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51. Barrett, L.F.; Simmons, W.K. Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosc.2015, 16, 419. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Seth, A.K.; Friston, K.J. Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain.Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.2016, 371, 20160007.
[CrossRef]
53. Hamdi, S. A Cognitive Study of Happiness Metaphors in English, Tunisian Arabic and Spanish. Arab World Engl. J.2016, 6,
132–143. [CrossRef]
54. Lakoff, G. Explaining Embodied Cognition Results. Top. Cogn. Sci.2012, 4, 773–785. [CrossRef]
55. Dzokoto, V .A.; Okazaki, S. Happiness in the Eye and the Heart: Somatic Referencing in West African Emotion Lexica.J. Black
Psychol. 2006, 32, 17–140. [CrossRef]
56. Dzokoto, V .; Senft, N.; Kpobi, L.; Washington-Nortey, P .-M. Their Hands Have Lost Their Bones: Exploring Cultural Scripts in
Two West African Affect Lexica.J. Psycholinguist. Res.2016, 45, 1473–1497. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 19 of 21
57. Smith, R.; Taylor, S.; Wilson, R.C.; Chuning, A.E.; Persich, M.R.; Wang, S.; Killgore, W.D.S. Lower Levels of Directed Exploration
and Reﬂective Thinking Are Associated With Greater Anxiety and Depression. Front. Psychiatry2022, 12, 782136. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
58. Dehcheshmeh, T.F.; Majelan, A.S.; Maleki, B. Correlation between depression and posture (A systematic review).Curr. Psychol.2023.
[CrossRef]
59. Feldman, R.; Schreiber, S.; Pick, C.; Been, E. Gait, balance and posture in major mental illnesses: Depression, anxiety and
schizophrenia. Austin Med. Sci.2020, 5, 1–6.
60. Mechtcheriakov, S.; Berger, M.; Molokanova, E.; Holzmueller, G.; Wirtenberger, W.; Lechner-Steinleitner, S.; De Col, C.;
Kozlovskaya, I.; Gerstenbrand, F. Slowing of human arm movements during weightlessness: The role of vision. Eur. J.
Appl. Physiol.2002, 87, 576–583. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61. Seth, A.K. Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends Cogn. Sci.2013, 17, 565–573. [CrossRef]
62. Molnar-Szakacs, I.; Uddin, L.Q. Anterior insula as a gatekeeper of executive control. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.2022, 139, 104736.
[CrossRef]
63. Goulden, N.; Khusnulina, A.; Davis, N.J.; Bracewell, R.M.; Bokde, A.L.; McNulty, J.P .; Mullins, P .G. The salience network
is responsible for switching between the default mode network and the central executive network: Replication from DCM.
Neuroimage 2014, 99, 180–190. [CrossRef]
64. Menon, V . 20 years of the default mode network: A review and synthesis. Neuron 2023, 111, 2469–2487. [CrossRef]
65. Davey, C.G.; Harrison, B.J. The brain’s center of gravity: How the default mode network helps us to understand the self.World
Psychiatry 2018, 17, 278–279. [CrossRef]
66. Dennett, D. The Self as a Center of Narrative Gravity. In Self and Consciousness: Multiple Perspectives; Kessel, F.S., Cole, P .M.,
Johnson, D.L., Eds.; Lawrence Erlbaum: Hillsdale, NJ, USA, 1992.
67. Williams, J.M.G.; Barnhofer, T.; Crane, C.; Herman, D.; Raes, F.; Watkins, E.; Dalgleish, T. Autobiographical memory speciﬁcity
and emotional disorder. Psychol. Bull.2007, 133, 122. [CrossRef]
68. Barry, T.J.; Chiu, C.P .; Raes, F.; Ricarte, J.; Lau, H. The neurobiology of reduced autobiographical memory speciﬁcity.Trends Cogn.
Sci. 2018, 22, 1038–1049. [CrossRef]
69. Gibbs, B.R.; Rude, S.S. Overgeneral autobiographical memory as depression vulnerability. Cognit. Ther. Res.2004, 28, 511–526.
[CrossRef]
70. Sumner, J.A.; Grifﬁth, J.W.; Mineka, S. Overgeneral autobiographical memory as a predictor of the course of depression: A
meta-analysis. Behav. Res. Ther.2010, 48, 614–625. [CrossRef]
71. Patel, T.; Brewin, C.R.; Wheatley, J.; Wells, A.; Fisher, P .; Myers, S. Intrusive images and memories in major depression.Behav. Res.
Ther. 2007, 45, 2573–2580. [CrossRef]
72. Joormann, J.; Gotlib, I.H. Updating the contents of working memory in depression: Interference from irrelevant negative material.
J. Abnorm. Psychol.2008, 117, 182–192. [CrossRef]
73. Bradley, B.; Mathews, A. Negative self-schemata in clinical depression. Br. J. Clin. Psychol.1983, 22, 173–181. [CrossRef]
74. Peckham, A.D.; McHugh, R.K.; Otto, M.W. A meta-analysis of the magnitude of biased attention in depression. Depress. Anxiety
2010, 27, 1135–1142. [CrossRef]
75. Einstein, A. Über die Spezielle und Allgemeine Relativitätstheorie; Henry Holt: New York, NY, USA, 1920.
76. Einstein, A. Zum Relativitäts-Problem. Scientia 1914, 8, 337.
77. Einstein, A. Sur le probl ème de la relativité. Scientia 1914, 8, 139–150.
78. Kubricht, J.R.; Holyoak, K.J.; Lu, H. Intuitive Physics: Current Research and Controversies. Trends Cogn. Sci.2017, 21, 749–759.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
79. Kent, L.; Van Doorn, G.; Klein, B. Time dilation and acceleration in depression. Acta Psychol. 2019, 194, 77–86. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
80. Stanghellini, G.; Ballerini, M.; Presenza, S.; Mancini, M.; Northoff, G.; Cutting, J. Abnormal time experiences in major depression:
An empirical qualitative study. Psychopathology 2017, 50, 125–140. [CrossRef]
81. Moskalewicz, M.; Schwartz, M.A. Temporal experience in mania. Phenomenol. Cogn. Sci.2018, 19, 291–304. [CrossRef]
82. Vogel, D.; Krämer, K.; Schoofs, T.; Kupke, C.; Vogeley, K. Disturbed Experience of Time in Depression—Evidence from Content
Analysis. Front. Hum. Neurosci.2018, 12, 66. [CrossRef]
83. Jording, M.; Vogel, D.H.V .; Viswanathan, S.; Vogeley, K. Dissociating passage and duration of time experiences through the
intensity of ongoing visual change. Sci. Rep.2022, 12, 8226. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84. Droit-Volet, S.; Trahanias, P .; Maniadakis, M. Passage of time judgments in everyday life are not related to duration judgments
except for long durations of several minutes. Acta Psychol.2017, 173, 116–121. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Einstein, A.; Grossmann, M. Kovarianzeigenschaften der Feldgleichungen der auf die verallgemeinerte Relativitätstheorie
gegründeten Gravitationstheorie. Z. Math. Phys.1914, 63, 215–225.
86. Misner, C.W.; Thorne, K.S.; Wheeler, J.A. Gravitation; W. H. Freeman & Company: San Francisco, CA, USA, 1973.
87. White, O.; McIntyre, J.; Augurelle, A.-S.; Thonnard, J.-L. Do novel gravitational environments alter the grip-force/load-force
coupling at the ﬁngertips? Exp. Brain Res.2005, 163, 324–334. [CrossRef]
88. White, O. The brain adjusts grip forces differently according to gravity and inertia: A parabolic ﬂight experiment. Front. Integr.
Neurosci. 2015, 9, 7. [CrossRef]
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 20 of 21
89. Arstila, V . Time Slows Down during Accidents. Front. Psychol.2012, 3, 196. [CrossRef]
90. Wearden, J. Passage of time judgements. Conscious. Cogn.2015, 38, 165–171. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91. Hou, W.-L.; Yin, X.-L.; Yin, X.-Y.; Guan, L.-Y.; Cao, J.-Q.; Tang, Z.; Jiang, C.-X.; Xu, D.-W.; Yu, X.; Wang, J.; et al. Association
between stereopsis deﬁcits and attention decline in patients with major depressive disorder. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol.
Psychiatry 2021, 110, 110267. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92. Kunzendorf, R.G.; Flynn, H.; Shedlack, J.; Georges, M.; Deno, S.; Rosa, N.; Burns, J. Depression, unlike Normal Sadness, is
Associated with a “Flatter” Self-Perception and a “Flatter” Phenomenal World.Imagin. Cogn. Pers.2011, 30, 447–461. [CrossRef]
93. Spreng, R.N.; Mar, R.A.; Kim, A.S. The common neural basis of autobiographical memory, prospection, navigation, theory of
mind, and the default mode: A quantitative meta-analysis. J. Cogn. Neurosci.2009, 21, 489–510. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94. Sheline, Y.I.; Barch, D.M.; Price, J.L.; Rundle, M.M.; Vaishnavi, S.N.; Snyder, A.Z.; Mintun, M.A.; Wang, S.; Coalson, R.S.;
Raichle, M.E. The default mode network and self-referential processes in depression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2009, 106,
1942–1947. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95. Sass, L.; Pienkos, E. Space, time, and atmosphere a comparative phenomenology of melancholia, mania, and schizophrenia,
Part II. J. Conscious. Stud.2013, 20, 131–152.
96. Riskind, J.H.; Kleiman, E.M.; Seifritz, E.; Neuhoff, J. Inﬂuence of anxiety, depression and looming cognitive style on auditory
looming perception. J. Anxiety Disord.2014, 28, 45–50. [CrossRef]
97. Barrett, L.F.; Quigley, K.S.; Hamilton, P . An active inference theory of allostasis and interoception in depression.Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. B Biol. Sci.2016, 371, 20160011. [CrossRef]
98. Hohwy, J. The Self-Evidencing Brain. Noûs 2016, 50, 259–285. [CrossRef]
99. Liberman, N.; Trope, Y.; Stephan, E. Psychological distance. InSocial Psychology: Handbook of Basic Principles, 2nd ed.; The Guilford
Press: New York, NY, USA, 2007; pp. 353–381.
100. Trope, Y.; Liberman, N. Construal-level theory of psychological distance. Psychol. Rev.2010, 117, 440. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Rinaldi, L.; Locati, F.; Parolin, L.; Girelli, L. Distancing the Present Self from the past and the Future: Psychological Distance in
Anxiety and Depression. Q. J. Exp. Psychol.2017, 70, 1106–1113. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Habermas, T.; Ott, L.-M.; Schubert, M.; Schneider, B.; Pate, A. Stuck in the past: Negative bias, explanatory style, temporal order,
and evaluative perspectives in life narratives of clinically depressed individuals. Depress. Anxiety2008, 25, E121–E132. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
103. van Wassenhove, V . Minding time in an amodal representational space.Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.2009, 364, 1815–1830.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Droit-Volet, S. Speeding up a master clock common to time, number and length? Behav. Process.2010, 85, 126–134. [CrossRef]
105. Stocker, K. The Theory of Cognitive Spacetime. Metaphor. Symb.2014, 29, 71–93. [CrossRef]
106. Dennett, D.C.; Kinsbourne, M. Time and the observer: The where and when of consciousness in the brain. Behav. Brain Sci.1992,
15, 183–201. [CrossRef]
107. Cabral, J.; Castaldo, F.; Vohryzek, J.; Litvak, V .; Bick, C.; Lambiotte, R.; Friston, K.; Kringelbach, M.L.; Deco, G. Metastable
oscillatory modes emerge from synchronization in the brain spacetime connectome. Commun. Phys.2022, 5, 184. [CrossRef]
108. Nelson, B.; Sass, L.A. Towards integrating phenomenology and neurocognition: Possible neurocognitive correlates of basic
self-disturbance in schizophrenia. Curr. Probl. Psychiatry2017, 18, 184. [CrossRef]
109. Northoff, G. Spatiotemporal psychopathology I: No rest for the brain’s resting state activity in depression? Spatiotemporal
psychopathology of depressive symptoms. J. Affect. Disord.2016, 190, 854–866. [CrossRef]
110. Parkinson, C.; Liu, S.; Wheatley, T. A Common Cortical Metric for Spatial, Temporal, and Social Distance.J. Neurosci.2014, 34,
1979–1987. [CrossRef]
111. Braver, T.S. The variable nature of cognitive control: A dual mechanisms framework. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2012, 16, 106–113.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. Andrews-Hanna, J.R.; Smallwood, J.; Spreng, R.N. The default network and self-generated thought: Component processes,
dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.2014, 1316, 29. [CrossRef]
113. Northoff, G. Spatiotemporal Psychopathology II: How does a psychopathology of the brain’s resting state look like? Spatiotempo-
ral approach and the history of psychopathology. J. Affect. Disord.2016, 190, 867–879. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Vythilingam, M.; Heim, C.; Newport, J.; Miller, A.H.; Anderson, E.; Bronen, R.; Brummer, M.; Staib, L.; Vermetten, E.; Charney,
D.S. Childhood trauma associated with smaller hippocampal volume in women with major depression. Am. J. Psychiatry2002,
159, 2072–2080. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Videbech, P .; Ravnkilde, B. Hippocampal volume and depression: A meta-analysis of MRI studies.Am. J. Psychiatry2004, 161,
1957–1966. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Morey, R.A.; Haswell, C.C.; Hooper, S.R.; De Bellis, M.D. Amygdala, Hippocampus, and Ventral Medial Prefrontal Cortex
Volumes Differ in Maltreated Youth with and without Chronic Posttraumatic Stress Disorder.Neuropsychopharmacology 2016, 41,
791–801. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. Frodl, T.; Schaub, A.; Banac, S.; Charypar, M.; Jäger, M.; Kümmler, P .; Bottlender, R.; Zetzsche, T.; Born, C.; Leinsinger, G.; et al.
Reduced hippocampal volume correlates with executive dysfunctioning in major depression. J. Psychiatry Neurosci.2006, 31,
316–323.
Entropy 2023, 25, 1275 21 of 21
118. Kempton, M.J.; Salvador, Z.; Munaf ò, M.R.; Geddes, J.R.; Simmons, A.; Frangou, S.; Williams, S.C. Structural neuroimaging
studies in major depressive disorder: Meta-analysis and comparison with bipolar disorder.Arch. Gen. Psychiatry2011, 68, 675–690.
[CrossRef]
119. Korgaonkar, M.S.; Fornito, A.; Williams, L.M.; Grieve, S.M. Abnormal structural networks characterize major depressive disorder:
A connectome analysis. Biol. Psychiatry2014, 76, 567–574. [CrossRef]
120. Northoff, G.; Wainio-Theberge, S.; Evers, K. Is temporo-spatial dynamics the “common currency” of brain and mind? In Quest of
“Spatiotemporal Neuroscience”. Phys. Life Rev.2019, 33, 34–54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121. Grimm, S.; Boesiger, P .; Beck, J.; Schuepbach, D.; Bermpohl, F.; Walter, M.; Ernst, J.; Hell, D.; Boeker, H.; Northoff, G. Altered
negative BOLD responses in the default-mode network during emotion processing in depressed subjects.Neuropsychopharmacology
2009, 34, 932. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Wiebking, C.; Bauer, A.; De Greck, M.; Duncan, N.W.; Tempelmann, C.; Northoff, G. Abnormal body perception and neural
activity in the insula in depression: An fMRI study of the depressed “material me”. World J. Biol. Psychiatry2010, 11, 538–549.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Wang, Y.; Hu, X.; Han, J.; Scalabrini, A.; Hu, Y.; Hu, Z.; Tan, Z.; Zhang, J.; Northoff, G. Time is of essence—Abnormal time
perspectives mediate the impact of childhood trauma on depression severity. J. Psychiatr. Res.2020, 137, 534–541. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
124. Manoliu, A.; Meng, C.; Brandl, F.; Doll, A.; Tahmasian, M.; Scherr, M.; Schwerthöffer, D.; Zimmer, C.; Förstl, H.; Bäuml, J. Insular
dysfunction within the salience network is associated with severity of symptoms and aberrant inter-network connectivity in
major depressive disorder. Front. Hum. Neurosci.2014, 7, 930. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
125. Trapp, N.T.; Bruss, J.E.; Manzel, K.; Grafman, J.; Tranel, D.; Boes, A.D. Large-scale lesion symptom mapping of depression
identiﬁes brain regions for risk and resilience. Brain 2022, 146, 1672–1685. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
126. Friston, K.J.; Wiese, W.; Hobson, J.A. Sentience and the Origins of Consciousness: From Cartesian Duality to Markovian Monism.
Entropy 2020, 22, 516. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
127. Day, B.L.; Fitzpatrick, R.C. The vestibular system. Curr. Biol.2005, 15, R583–R586. [CrossRef]
128. Clark, J.E.; Watson, S.; Friston, K.J. What is mood? A computational perspective. Psychol. Med.2018, 48, 2277–2284. [CrossRef]
129. Schiller, D.; Yu, A.N.C.; Alia-Klein, N.; Becker, S.; Cromwell, H.C.; Dolcos, F.; Eslinger, P .J.; Frewen, P .; Kemp, A.H.;
Pace-Schott, E.F.; et al.The Human Affectome. PsyArXiv , preprint. Available online: https://psyarxiv .com/9nu32/ (accessedon 11
August 2023).
130. Sengupta, B.; Tozzi, A.; Cooray, G.K.; Douglas, P .K.; Friston, K.J. Towards a Neuronal Gauge Theory.PLoS Biol.2016, 14, e1002400.
[CrossRef]
131. Angelaki, D.E.; Cullen, K.E. Vestibular System: The Many Facets of a Multimodal Sense. Annu. Rev. Neurosci.2008, 31, 125–150.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
132. Badcock, P .B.; Davey, C.G.; Whittle, S.; Allen, N.B.; Friston, K.J. The depressed brain: An evolutionary systems theory.Trends
Cogn. Sci.2017, 21, 182–194. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
133. Badcock, P .B.; Friston, K.J.; Ramstead, M.J.D. The hierarchically mechanistic mind: A free-energy formulation of the human
psyche. Phys. Life Rev.2019, 31, 104–121. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Scalabrini, A.; Vai, B.; Poletti, S.; Damiani, S.; Mucci, C.; Colombo, C.; Zanardi, R.; Benedetti, F.; Northoff, G. All roads lead to the
default-mode network—Global source of DMN abnormalities in major depressive disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology 2020, 45,
2058–2069. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
135. Northoff, G. Why Do We Need Psychopathology? From the Brain’s Resting State to “Spatiotemporal Psychopathology” of
Depression. In Understanding Depression: Volume 1. Biomedical and Neurobiological Background; Kim, Y.-K., Ed.; Springer: Singapore,
2018; pp. 145–152. [CrossRef]
136. Ramstead, M.J.D.; Sakthivadivel, D.A.R.; Heins, C.; Koudahl, M.; Millidge, B.; Da Costa, L.; Klein, B.; Friston, K.J. On Bayesian
Mechanics: A Physics of and by Beliefs. arXiv 2022, arXiv:2205.11543. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Hasson, U.; Yang, E.; Vallines, I.; Heeger, D.J.; Rubin, N. A Hierarchy of Temporal Receptive Windows in Human Cortex.
J. Neurosci.2008, 28, 2539. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
138. Northoff, G.; Klar, P .; Bein, M.; Safron, A. As without, so within: How the brain’s temporo-spatial alignment to the environment
shapes consciousness. Interface Focus2023, 13, 20220076. [CrossRef]
139. Friston, K. Dynamics versus dualism: Comment on “Is temporo-spatial dynamics the ‘common currency’ of brain and mind?” by
Georg Northoff et al. Phys. Life Rev.2020, 33, 70–72. [CrossRef]
140. Arnaldo, I.; Corcoran, A.W.; Friston, K.J.; Ramstead, M.J.D. Stress and its sequelae: An active inference account of the etiological
pathway from allostatic overload to depression. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.2022, 135, 104590. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.