fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 1
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 20 May 2022
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.828952
Edited by:
Stefano Triberti,
University of Milan, Italy
Reviewed by:
Julian Kiverstein,
Academic Medical Center,
Netherlands
Radhakrishnan Delhibabu,
VIT University, India
*Correspondence:
Joohan Kim
jkim@yonsei.ac.kr
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Health Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 04 December 2021
Accepted: 02 May 2022
Published: 20 May 2022
Citation:
Kim J, Esteves JE, Cerritelli F and
Friston K (2022) An Active Inference
Account of Touch and Verbal
Communication in Therapy.
Front. Psychol. 13:828952.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.828952
An Active Inference Account of
Touch and Verbal Communication in
Therapy
Joohan Kim1*, Jorge E. Esteves2,3,4, Francesco Cerritelli2 and Karl Friston5
1 Department of Communication, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea,2 Clinical-Based Human Research Department,
Foundation Center for Osteopathic Medicine Collaboration (COME) Collaboration, Pescara, Italy,3 Malta ICOM Educational
Ltd., St. Julian’s, Gzira, Malta,4 Research Department, University College of Osteopathy, London, United Kingdom,
5 Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom
This paper offers theoretical explanations for why “guided touch” or manual touch
with verbal communication can be an effective way of treating the body (e.g.,
chronic pain) and the mind (e.g., emotional disorders). The active inference theory
suggests that chronic pain and emotional disorders can be attributed to distorted
and exaggerated patterns of interoceptive and proprioceptive inference. We propose
that the nature of active inference is abductive. As such, to rectify aberrant active
inference processes, we should change the “Rule” of abduction, or the “prior beliefs”
entailed by a patient’s generative model. This means pre-existing generative models
should be replaced with new models. To facilitate such replacement—or updating—
the present treatment proposes that we should weaken prior beliefs, especially the
one at the top level of hierarchical generative models, thereby altering the sense of
agency, and redeploying attention. Then, a new prior belief can be installed through
inner communication along with manual touch. The present paper proposes several
hypotheses for possible experimental studies. If touch with verbal guidance is proven to
be effective, this would demonstrate the relevance of active inference and the implicit
prediction model at a behavioral level. Furthermore, it would open new possibilities
of employing inner communication interventions, including self-talk training, for a wide
range of psychological and physical therapies.
Keywords: active inference, abduction, guided touch, Markov blanket, communication, interoception, meditation
INTRODUCTION
One of the main arguments of the present paper is that the essence of therapy is an intervention
to alter patients’ habituated interpretation of their interoceptive signals, which may underwrite
chronic pain and emotional disorders. Manual touch can be a potent and eﬀective tool in
this process, because it can provide new interoceptive signals and promote a therapeutic
(re)interpretation (guidance) of interoceptive signals (touch).
The main purpose of this paper is to propose the following hypotheses: a new and therapeutic
framework of (re)interpretation can be instantiated eﬃciently through verbal communication. To
facilitate therapeutic (re)interpretation, we argue for methods that enable the redeployment of
attention, ﬂattening prior beliefs, thereby weakening pre-existing generative models, and installing
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 2
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
new generative models. It should be noted that the aims of this
paper are purely hypothetical: this paper is not a comprehensive
review of what is currently known about guided touch, rather, it
introduces some novel hypotheses, based on the active inference
framework. The ensuing hypothetical framework explains why
guided touch could undergird eﬀective therapy for the treatment
of chronic pain and emotional disorders.
The enactivistic perspective proposes that pain and emotion
can be attributed to active inference, or the top-down and
bottom-up communication processes among levels of neuronal
hierarchies. The human body generates enormous amounts of
interoceptive signals from myriads of organs including guts
and heart; most of the signals are ignored and processed at
unconscious levels, but some “unusual”óthat is, unpredicted or
unattenuatedósignals receive special attention, revising beliefs
at higher levels of processing that may include conscious
processing. The “unusual” signals drawing stronger attention are
often interpreted as bad feelings, negative emotions, or pain.
Tons of interoceptive sensory data are continuously arriving,
but most are eﬀectively ignored in the sense that they convey
no useful informationóor they are returned to the active states
immediately to engage various reﬂexes, without any further
(central) processing. One of the important tasks for the brain’s
active inference system is to ﬁlter out, attenuate and ignore the
uninformative sensations.
Enactivism suggests that the goal of manual therapy should
be about improving active inference through re-construction of
the sense and meaning making from sensations. On this view,
through touch, the manual therapist should equip the patient
with new ways of interpreting interoceptive and proprioceptive
stimuli. From this perspective, the present paper proposes, in
order to help patients with persistent physical symptoms or
emotional disorders, therapists should “install” new prior beliefs
for alternative ways of interpreting bodily sensations and new
ways of sense-making. The “installation” may take various forms,
from strong “implantation” to gentle “suggestions, ” all depending
on the context in which pain and emotion are experienced by
patients (Von Mohr and Fotopoulou, 2018).
Although the present paper is not strictly enactivist, the
proposed active inference framework is, in fact, aligned with the
enactivist approach to cognition (Parr et al., 2022). Moreover,
we also have proposed osteopathic care (a form of hands-on
care) as (En)Active inference (Esteves et al., 2022). In this vein,
the present paper proposes that touch therapy is a dynamic
interactive ritual that provides opportunities for reinterpreting
sensory signals, redeploying attention, and attenuating and
ignoring irrelevant or ego-dystonic sensory inputs.
The enactivistic and predictive model of active inference
maintains that emotion and pain are inferences or explanations
for “states of being” that are based on largely interoceptive
signals. Theories in social neuroscience suggest that interoceptive
sensations may arise from other people as well as from
the body (Cacioppo et al., 1992; Norman et al., 2014).
The somatovisceral aﬀerence model of emotion (SAME)
demonstrates that touch may produce “social interoception.”
The implication is that touchówith certain characteristics
carried by thin, unmyelinated ﬁbers called C-tactile aﬀerents
(CTs) to the posterior insulaósupplies interoceptive signals
that may have strong inﬂuences on emotional experience
(Burleson and Quigley, 2021).
Active inference explains sentient behavior in terms of
inference under a generative model that can generate the sensory
consequences of some hidden or latent states of being. Crucially,
the enactive aspect of active inference rests on closing the action
perception cycle by considering the role of action in generating
sensations. This action can be overtóe.g., moving muscles
or engaging autonomic reﬂexesóor covertóe.g., redirecting
attention so that messages from sensory organs are augmented
or attenuated. The implicit circular causality between the internal
states of the brain and the external states of the body (and
environment) is based on the notion of a Markov blanket.
Following Ramstead et al. (2019), we consider the human
body as a recursively nested collection of Markov blankets. Our
Markov blanket comprises sensory and active states (e.g., sensory
epithelia and the motor system, respectively). Its role is to mediate
exchange between internal states (e.g., neuronal activity) and
external states (e.g., physiology within the body and states of
aﬀairs within the world). Sensory states mediate the eﬀect of
external states on internal states (i.e., perception) while active
states mediate the eﬀect of internal states on external states (i.e.,
action). In dyadic (e.g., practitioner patient) interactions, the
sensory states of one Markov blanket become the active states of
the other and vice versa.
The ultimate goal of touch therapy in general is to help
patients develop new internal models for interpreting the
interoceptive signals (Von Mohr and Fotopoulou, 2018; Cerritelli
et al., 2020). Touch therapy is a process of establishing shared
narratives through “listening to body-talk and constructing body-
stories” (Gale, 2011). In this therapeutic process, the therapist
suggests new possibilitiesóor hypothesesóto explain patterns
of sensory input; in other words, encouraging the patient to
experience (i.e., explain) somatic sensations in a way that eludes
entrenched explanations, such as “I am suﬀering.”
Touch therapies, and for that matter any other types of
therapies as well, should help patients to establish a revised
version of their self model; that is, new prior beliefs, new
hypotheses, and new generative models. Persistent physical
syndromes such as chronic pain, and emotional disorders
(anxiety, depression, trauma stress, etc.) can be attributed to
aberrant active inference, in which certain hypotheses (e.g.,
“these visceral sensations are evidence that I suﬀer from chronic
pain”) become self maintaining. To revise their self-maintaining
hypotheses, patients need to discard old and erroneous habits
of bad interpretation (i.e., false inference) and establish new
and healthy ways of interpreting their interoceptive signals. In
this setting, manual therapies can be a very eﬀective treatment,
because touch can directly provide new sensory signals in a
context that calls for a novel (i.e., therapeutic) interpretation.
From the enactivistic perspective, the present treatment
attempts to answer the following questions: how can we
eﬀectively replace the old and disabling generative model of
a patient with a new and enabling model through touch
therapy? Why is guided touch (touch accompanied with verbal
communication) necessary? What types of guidance would
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 3
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
enhance the eﬀects of the manual therapy and strengthen
the therapeutic alliance? And why? To test the validity of
putative answers, we propose a set of hypotheses for possible
empirical studies.
The authors of the present paper envisage that the strategic
methods of manual touch with verbal guidance would beneﬁt
the providers of mental and physical health care services
through hands-on techniques, such as osteopaths (Bohlen
et al., 2021; Esteves et al., 2022; McParlin et al., 2022),
somatic psychotherapy (Guest and Parker, 2022), body-centered
psychotherapy, Hakomi Method, sensorimotor psychotherapy
(Fisher, 2019), rolﬁng (Micozzi, 2018), Functional Integration
in Feldenkrais Method (Bearman and Shafarman, 1999), hands-
on in Alexander techniques (Carneiro et al., 2020), and Somatic
Experiencing (SE) therapy (Payne et al., 2015).
ACTIVE INFERENCE AND MARKOV
BLANKETS
Considering the Body as a Markov
Blanket
Life is the continuous exchange of energy and material between
the inside and outside, without fully isolating the inside from
the outside (environment). Without boundaries, there is no
life. Indeed, one could argue without boundaries there would
be no-thing because everything would be the same thing.
The “boundary” itself has probabilistic, stochastic properties
that change with the progress of time (Friston, 2012). This
boundary can be described technically as a Markov blanket.
The very existence of a Markov blanket means that the internal
states eﬀectively minimize the free energy (i.e., implausibility
and dispersion) of their blanket states. In other words, active
and internal states will appear to maintain homeostasis and
autopoiesis through Bayesian reasoning (Friston, 2013).
Statistically speaking, the Markov blanket is about a network
of multiple states, inﬂuencing one another, statistically linked
together with Markov chains. In discussing graphical models
that depict probabilistic relationships between states and events
(nodes), Pearl (1988) deﬁnes a Markov blanket as follows: the
minimum set of nodes required to suﬃciently predict the state
of a speciﬁc node is the Markov blanket of that node. It looks like
a “blanket” as it surrounds and statistically insulates the node in
question. This statistical insulation means that all the information
necessary to predict the next state of the node is contained in its
blanket nodes or states.
In Figure 1 , “I7” is the speciﬁc (internal) node surrounded
by S4, S5, S6, S8, A9, and A10. If the information about the
boundary nodes is given, the state of I7 can be predicted
(Kirchhoﬀ et al., 2018). Any additional information about outside
the blanket, such as node X1 or X13, does not contribute to the
prediction of node I7.
Friston proposes that the Markov blanket construct entails
the four states of any particle or organism: namely, the internal,
external, sensory, and active states (Friston, 2010). It should be
noted that “external states” here do not refer to external objects
FIGURE 1 |A Markov blanket. A Markov blanket of a particular node
probabilistically deﬁnes the state of a particular node without being affected by
the state of any other nodes. The external states are outside the Markov
blanket (the nodes of X1, X2, X3, X11, X12, X13), which are the environment
or the world (and body) in which we live. The internal state, or I7, is what is
inside—the neuronal and possibly conscious self. The Markov blanket
consists of the gray circles surrounding the internal state I7. Among them, the
nodes A9 and A10 are active states inﬂuenced by the internal state and
inﬂuencing the environment, or the external states (X11, X12, and X13). The
rest are the sensory states, and there are two types: one that provides the
sensory data to the internal state (S4 and S5), such as sensory organs
producing perceptions; the other directly inﬂuences the active states without
going through the internal state (S6 and S8), such as automated
sensory-motor reﬂexes processing information at a sub-personal level,
unconsciously. The human body, comprising sensory states (S4, S5, S6, and
S7) and active states (A9 and A10), lies between the internal state (i.e.,
sentience) and the external states (i.e., environment). Note that the arrows in
this graphical model represent Markovian dependencies, referring to
probabilistic effects, rather than strictly deterministic inﬂuences.
or the environments per se. Rather, it means states that are hidden
from internal (neuronal) states by the blanket (sensory) states. In
the context of interoception, these external states correspond to
physiological and homeostatic states of the body. In other words,
the “external states” are bodily states that have to be inferred.
By selectively sampling salient information from the sensory
states, the internal state constructs and image of the outside world
through a free energy or prediction-error minimizing processes
(Friston, 2013). It is “active” inference because the sensory states
depend upon active states. In other words, the very action of the
active states (A9 and A10) on the external objects (say, X1, and
X2), strongly inﬂuences the internal state’s interpretation of the
sensory data (S4 and S5). The active state of the Markov blanket
can change the environment and reduce the free energy of the
Markov blanket itself by actively ensuring the sensory states are
consistent with the predictions aﬀorded by internal states. In
short, active states maintain the structural-functional integrity of
the Markov blanket. This can be read as an elemental form of
autopoiesis in the sense that we organize and create ourselves
(Varela et al., 2016).
When we make active inferences and minimize prediction
errors (i.e., free energy), we do not necessarily call on
conscious or declarative processes, e.g., “Oh, my prediction
was wrong, I will correct it.” Most of the prediction error
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 4
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
minimization processes are sub-personal, right down to the
level of motor and autonomic reﬂexes that control movement
and mediate physiological homeostasis, respectively. The sensory
system is generally considered to be at the lowest level of
a hierarchy of internal states that comprises several levels.
Internal states such as neuronal activity and synaptic eﬃcacy
are driven by bottom-up or ascending prediction errors.
These prediction errors can be read as free energy and are
computed by comparing representations at each hierarchical
level with top-down or descending predictions based on
representations at higher levels. In other words, the internal
states are hierarchically organized and inﬂuence each other
through a counter stream of ascending prediction errors
and descending predictions. The minimization of prediction
error is automatically made at all levels of processing. The
basic task of the brain is therefore to generate perceptual
hypotheses and narratives about the world by constantly
inferring the meaning of ambiguous and sparse sensory
data. Technically, this prediction error minimization (a.k.a.
predictive coding) is a particular instance of Bayesian belief
updating under a hierarchical generative model, where deep
hierarchical models entail deeply structured prior beliefs about
how sensations are generated. One might imagine that at
the deepest levels of hierarchical inference, hypotheses about
selfhood, intentions and narrativesóbased on perceptionsó
could underwrite conscious processing.
In guided touch, the sensational information conveyed by
touch would be mostly processed unconsciously at a sub-
personal level, while accompanying attribution of agency and
inferring the intentional or propositional stance of the therapistó
in conjunction with verbal communicationówould be the
remit of higher-level processing. For example, the touch itself
would work on S4 and S5, while the verbal guidance could
directly inﬂuence I7.
Scale Invariance and the Nested
Structure of Markov Blankets
Markov blankets exist not only at the brain level: for a cell
to survive as a living system, it needs a cell membrane as a
boundary that separates itself from the surrounding milieu. Each
cell is a Markov blanket. Each organ, such as the heart, stomach,
and kidneys, also has boundaries, which are Markov blankets.
For example, as an organ, the heart constantly exchanges
information with other parts of the body, including the brain,
while maintaining its own independent functions. The same
goes for other organs, such as the kidneys and stomach. Each
organ has a boundary that separates its internal states from its
external states.
The human body, which is a collection of various kinds of
organs, is also a Markov blanket. In addition, an organization
or society formed by a group of humans can also be said to
be a large Markov blanket. All countries maintain a boundary
that separates the inside from the outside. So, a nation is also
deﬁned by a Markov blanket. In this way, one Markov blanket
can act like a node in a larger Markov blanket, and at the same
time, it could have a network of smaller Markov blankets within
itself. This property is called the “nested structure” of the Markov
blanket (Kirchhoﬀ and Kiverstein, 2021), or “a multiscale nesting
of Markov blankets that integrates the smallest scale of the cell to
the largest scale of the embodied person” (Kiverstein et al., 2022).
Not only is the structure of the Markov blanket nested, but
the functional networks of active inference can be also nested. In
other words, the nested structure of the Markov blanket can be
found in functional networks as well as in structural connections.
As such, the arrows in the Markov blanket model represent
functional as well as structural connectivity. Park and Friston
(2013) have emphasized the similarity between hierarchical
topologies (based on structural and functional connectivity
among the brain regions) and the eﬀective connectivity that
would be required for hierarchical message passing (at the
neuronal level) required for active inference. The pursuing
hierarchical and the nested structures are illustrated in Figure 2.
Understanding Consciousness Through
the Markov Blanket
At the highest level of hierarchically organized internal states,
conscious processing may correspond to an image of the self
that integrates inferences about the world with its own action
(Friston et al., 2010). The information about action per se is
supplied by proprioceptive and interoceptive sensations. When
the action is related to joints, fascia, and muscles, it produces
proprioception; when the action, usually unconscious, is related
to internal organs such as the heart and guts, it produces
interoception. Conscious (and unconscious) inference therefore
entails continuous sampling and resampling of the sensory
data, sometimes ignoring and other times augmenting what it
samples, to produce plausible inferences about the world and
predictive regulations.
Consider the relationship between X1 and S4 in Figure 1 .
X1 is an external object in the environment. S4 is a sensory
organ, which inﬂuences internal states to produce statistically
plausible percepts regarding X1. The structure of the relationship
between the internal representation of X1 and S4 is multi-layered
and hierarchical; there are continuous interactions between the
top-down predictions of the internal model and the bottom-
up prediction errors that drive belief updating (for example
in the right-hand panel of Figure 2 that unpacks the internal
states in I7). Through these interactions, X1 (external objects)
becomes X1 ′ (percepts). The single set of states in I7 are, in
fact, a collection of internal states with multi-layered hierarchical
deep structures, which dynamically pass signals up and down, as
shown in Figure 2.
Active inference under these deep models attempts to make
meaningful stories from perceptionsóstories or narratives that
necessarily entail some action. For example, inferences about X1′,
automatically inform possible actions to be made on X1 through
the active states of A9 or A10. As such, any action aﬀordances of
X1 inevitably aﬀect the active inference about X1′ reported by S4.
Assume that I see an apple (X1) on a table, and my visual
system (S4) induces belief updating in my hierarchical generative
model (X1 ′). In this situation, the various possibilities of my
actions through A9 (biting, picking it up and smelling, or
throwing it away) inevitably aﬀect the process of active inference
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 5
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
FIGURE 2 |A Markov blanket in the multiscale hierarchical organization of brain networks. The internal state, I7, of a Markov blanket has a hierarchical structure for
minimizing prediction errors. In the right panel, red and bright triangles represent prediction errors from bottom-up sensory signals and black and dark triangles
indicate top-down predictions (updated by prediction errors) under the implicit (deep or hierarchical) generative model. The process of hierarchical prediction, or
deep active inference, may exist at various scales: between brain regions, between smaller nodes within a brain region, and even at the neuronal level. The Markov
blanket is basically scale invariant; the nodes in the model could be cells, neurons, cortical columns, brain areas, organs in the body, individuals, organizations, or
nations. The right panel image was adopted from Park and Friston (2013).
based on S4 (an apple as a percept) and deep within I7 (a delicious
apple with full of meanings and memories, or aﬀordances). This
means that the possibility of my actions on a speciﬁc object
aﬀects my perception of that object. In turn, this is the meaning
of “enactive cognition” or “cognition as embodied action” that
Varela emphasized (Varela et al., 2016).
The active inference process starting from X1 → S4 → I7 →
A9 →X1 evinces the self-referential loop of consciousness. It also
shows that there are two basic functions of consciousness: one
is attention (regarding S4) and the other is intention (regarding
A9). It is notable that much of the information processed under
the Markov blanket, however, may be processed at lower levels of
unconscious inference.
As for consciousness, it is necessary to judge how accurately
the percept (X1 ′) produced by S4 and the story (X1 ′′) produced
by I7 represent the real X1 “out there”; so that it can continuously
update its internal model. The “accuracy” of the perception is
to be judged not by how much the perception coincides with
the actual and objective reality out there, but by how much
such perception contributes to survival and reproduction of
the perceiveróby minimizing prediction errors in all sensory
modalities; including interoceptive domains that underwrite
homeostasis and physiological viability. Theoretically speaking,
there are at least four possible ways that consciousness can call
on to test validity of its inferences and interpretations.
First is to continuously resample the sensory data from S4.
For example, looking at the object again and again, perhaps from
diﬀerent perspectives, to conﬁrm whether it is really an apple.
Second is to obtain other types or modalities of conﬁrmatory
sensory data. That is, comparing the visual data reported from S4
with the tactile or the olfactory data obtained by the other sensory
organs, say, S5.
Third is to get additional information through A9 that
acts on the apple. For example, picking it up and biting it,
which would provide other types of sensory data updating the
previous information.
Fourth is to cross-check whether the story (“This is an
apple”) produced by consciousness is true. To check the
validity of “my” story, consciousness needs stories produced
by “other” consciousnessóthat means a Markov blanket always
needs “other” blankets to complete the inference processes:
As a storyteller, consciousness always presupposes others to
communicate with. Thus, communicability underwrites the
nature of consciousness.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 6
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
This is why we always use language, a social convention, even
when we think to ourselves. If “thinking to myself ” is truly my
own mental process, I would not need to rely on any language, a
tool invented for communicating with other people. The fact that
we have to rely on languages when we think to ourselves implies
that “thinking to oneself ” is not a purely isolated, personal,
private mental process; rather it is inner communication of which
fundamental nature is social.
Inner communication is what consciousness does.
Consciousness always makes stories about one’s own experiences
with languages that can readily be reported to others. Dehaeneó
the neuroscientist unearthing key issues of consciousnessóalso
maintains that “consciousness” is to be distinguished from
vigilance or attention, and the essence of consciousness is
“conscious access.” In other words, consciousness is the agency
that interprets and synthesizes the various experiences to produce
something “reportable to others” (Dehaene, 2014, p. 8–9)óand
therefore, reportable to me.
Consciousness is the process of constantly transforming my
experiences into stories I may tell others (and myself). To validate
my own story, “Oh, here is an apple, ” I need someone to ask
the question: “I see an apple. How about you? What do you
see?” Consciousness, as a process of storytellingóof narrative
sharingópresupposes the existence of others. Vis-à-vis other
people, consciousness transforms itself into self-consciousness,
which is a sense of agency (SoA) that produces my own stories
and sense-making.
If, among the four methods listed above, the ﬁrst three
methods detect serious prediction errors, we could call them
hallucinations. If the fourth method ﬁnds serious errors, we call
them delusions. It is impossible for consciousness to judge on its
own whether the perception it has inferredóor the story it has
producedóis a veridical representation of reality. Consciousness
becomes hallucinatory or delusional if it has a perceptual or
narrative aspect that is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from that of others.
The criteria for evaluating the validity of conscious inference
are not mathematics or logic. It can only be tested through
communication with others. It is to be determined only by how
far one is away from the reports of others’ inferences. If everyone
is hallucinating or delusional, then no one is hallucinating or
delusional. If I were the only creature on this planet, the concepts
of hallucination or delusion would be irrelevantóindeed, I would
not even need the notion of “self, ” as distinct from “other.”
This means that a Markov blanket needs other Markov blankets
to communicate with, to engender selfhood and accompanying
agency. We need another person. We need an alliance. In a
therapeutic situation, we need it all the more.
From the standpoint of conscious inference (I7), important
predictions must be made about the source of sensory
information. Was it me or you who caused this sensation? I feel
my arm is moving: Am I moving my arm or are you pulling it?
I feel my foot is being lifted: Is my foot moving now as a result
of my own leg movement, or is the ground that I am standing on
starting to rise?
Determining the source of my sensations is a crucial issue in
planning my further actions and predicting the consequences.
When I walk with my arms and legs moving, the sensations
from inside and outside are inherently mixed. If the source of
movement or sensory generation is within me, I can plausibly
infer that the movement is caused by an agent, or the “self.” This
is why the self-consciousness of “I” is the inevitable result of the
active inference “I am acting.” Intention to move and attention
to movement are the fundamental sources of the SoA, or self-
consciousness (Friston, 2017b). Intention and attention make up
the self, not the other way around (Friston, 2018). We will see
that guided touch is all about interpreting the intention of the
therapist and directing the attention of the patient.
PAIN AND EMOTIONAL DISORDERS –
THE PROBLEM OF FALSE INFERENCE
On Pain
As a living organism, the human body cannot avoid constantly
falling into surprising states, which cause certain (uncomfortable)
interoceptive sensations. This “unpleasant feeling” is beneﬁcial
for survival as it urges active inference to respond to surprising
situations and to restore balance by acting to sample familiar
(comfortable) sensations. Some of the unpleasant feelings are
interpreted as negative emotions (anxiety, panic, depression, and
anger), others as pain. It is important, especially for therapists,
to note that pain and emotions are the results of inference about
interoceptive sensory data. In many cases, chronic pain occurs
without any particular physiological reasons, which are often
called functional or medically unexplained symptoms (MUS)
(Calsius et al., 2016).
According to Friston (2017a), the sensory organs and the
nervous system maintain a sort of gain control that emphasizes
the important information while ignoring imprecise signals (e.g.,
sensory noise). However, when the gain control system is not
working properly, the gain or “volume” of the miscellaneous
sensory signals gets exaggerated and gains access to higher
levels of processing and implicit inference. A lot of interoceptive
sensory data that should have been ignored suddenly turn into
salient and urgent signals, to be interpreted as signs of change
that requires consciousness explanation. As a result, the patient
experience things (i.e., perceives or infers) pain and emotional
disturbances as the best explanation for interoceptive prediction
errors that would normally be attenuated. In short, a failure to
predict the precision of interoceptive prediction errors means it
would be impossible to ignore certain sensations. And anything
that cannot be ignored has to be explained.
From the perspective of active inferenceóand the
accompanying precision control (Friston, 2017a)ówe can
read persistent functional symptoms and emotional disorders
as a failure to neuromodulate the gain of sensory prediction
errors. In other words, an inability to gate, attenuate or ﬁlter
sensations in the usual way. Sensory attenuation is a vital part
of action; perhaps the best example in saccadic suppression;
namely, the attenuation of visual information during saccadic
eye movements. Most chronic pain is a result of an inability
to attenuate interoceptive prediction errors and attentional
hypersensitivity to imprecise (i.e., noisy) nociceptive signals.
Persistent functional symptoms may be caused by a mismatch
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 7
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
between the prediction of pain [= p(pain | sensation)] and
the likelihood of pain [= p(sensation | pain)]. Patients tend to
interpret harmless or irrelevant sensations as evidence for pain.
It is a failure to shift attention from the sensation that underlies
the experience of pain (Hechler et al., 2016). In other words, a
failure of disattention, rather than a failure of attentionóa loss
of ability to attenuate, and as such, a loss of capacity to render
one’s body comfortably invisible. Thus, bodily symptoms should
be considered in the context of “action and attention selection
dynamics” (Pezzulo et al., 2019).
On Emotion
The same is true with emotional disorders. Patients with
emotional regulation disorders, such as anxiety or depression
tend to interpret meaningless sensations as the “somatic
markers” of the negative emotions (Damasio, 1999). For
a healthy normal person, such prediction errors would be
immediately corrected through cross-checking with other
sensory information. However, the Markov blanket of patients
would not be able to attenuate prediction errors optimally; rather,
it augments all kinds of sensory prediction errors and gets caught
up in a vortex of increasing anxiety that it is a situation of great
uncertainty, anger, or angst.
There may be various physiological causes of this particular
malfunction of inference, such as metabolic or immunologic
issues, or hormonal imbalances and neurotransmitter
imbalances. Of course, past trauma and traumatic memories can
also cause false inference; particularly if the precision of prior
beliefs (established during a traumatic experience) cannot be
attenuated or revised. On this view, chronic pain and emotional
regulation disorder share a common causeóa failure to attenuate
precision (Limanowski and Friston, 2020). Therefore, the basic
approaches for treating pain and emotion should share one
feature: discarding the old and bad inference patterns and
introducing new and good explanations for the interoceptive
signals. Crucially, this will rest on re-establishing attentional
control and selecting the right sensory data, on which to base
new hypotheses about the embodied self.
Traditionally, psychology has viewed emotion as a preparatory
stage for speciﬁc goal-directed behaviors (Moors and Fischer,
2019). But modern neuroscientists and psychologists regard
emotion itself as a speciﬁc type of action: for example, Llinás
(2002) considers emotion as a ﬁxed action pattern, Seth and
Friston (2016) consider emotion as derived from active inference
based on interoceptive data, and Barrett (2017) as an integrated
adaptive behavior of the body for allostasis.
According to Barrett’s integrative and constructivist approach,
which is largely based on the prediction model and enactivism,
emotions arise from interoceptive signals occurring during
allostasis processes that regulate the body’s metabolism and
energy. In other words, emotions are natural results of surviving
in the environment as a human being with a body (Barrett et al.,
2016).
From the enactivism perspective, Barrett strongly criticizes
the notion of distinctive and individual emotions, such as fear
and anger, each having their own entity. She maintains that
emotions arise in the process of the body’s overall active inference
and the nature of all negative emotions are formally identical.
The distinctive negative emotions have merely been socio-
culturally assigned and constructed (Barrett, 2017). Thus, it is
likely that any treatments aimed at controlling an “individual”
emotion will prove ineﬀective. Rather, it will be of great help to
attenuate prediction errors that drive inference processes in the
interoceptive and proprioceptive domains.
Redeployment of Attention
Traditionally, pain has been regarded as a sign of some
physiological problems. Therefore, if the broken parts of the body
are ﬁxed, with drugs or other treatments, the pain should go
away. For some cases, especially with acute pain, this mechanistic
understanding of pain would work. But there are many cases
that the traditional mechanistic view cannot explain: for example,
pain can be felt without any bodily dysfunctions; pain may
disappear with placebo or even with sham treatments.
Active inference, however, can readily explain these
phenomena. Pain occurs when our brain interprets the
body as being in pain (Ongaro and Kaptchuk, 2019). Pain is
created by the interaction between the internal (generative)
model and incoming sensations. The dynamic relationship
between the painful experience (and reported symptoms) and
the objective status of the body are always diﬀerent, depending
on the individual, context, and culture (Van den Bergh et al.,
2017).
If emotional disorders and chronic pain are caused by
aberrant active inference processes, the treatment should focus
on correcting the old and bad habits of inaccurate inference, by
guiding the patient’s inference, not to pay too much attention to
imprecise sensory data. This can be done by drawing attention
from unattenuated sensations. This is what Friston (2017a) calls
“redeployment of attention, ” or recovering the ability of ignoring
not-so-important sensory data. In this way, the inference system,
or generative model, may attenuate and silence the volume of
unnecessary sensory data, which could be mistakenly interpreted
as pain or negative emotions.
It should be noted that the concept of (redeployment of)
attention is distinct from the notion of distraction at a subjective
or cognitive level. The term attention – in the active inference
paradigm – refers to (usually sub-personal) encoding of the
precision (i.e., conﬁdence) of random variables, rather than to
any cognitive attention at the conscious level (c.f., the distinction
between exogenous and endogenous attention). As such, “paying
attention to the sensory data” does not necessarily mean any
intended and conscious attention. It is rather sub-personal
and unconscious automated attentional selection at the lower
(e.g., sensory) levels of the neuronal hierarchy. In short, the
(re)deployment of attention is not something we consciously
intend to do (as with saccadic suppression), but it can be learned
(and possibly mentalised) through training.
A good example of such attentional redeployment training
is mindfulness (sati) meditation, or mindful awareness training
(Siegel, 2020). Sati meditation is all about paying attention to
one’s own perception, sensations, feelings in and out of the
body, that happen in the here and now. In sati meditation, one
is supposed to pay clear attention not only to the sensations
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 8
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
themselves, but also to the ways in which the sensations are
processed by the self. With my eyes, I am looking at the current
events unfolding in front of me, and at the same time, I am also
looking, with my mind, at the fact that I am experiencing the
events. In short, it is about experiencing those experiences.
For sati meditation, breathing is one of the most eﬀective
tools for attention training, because breathing is a continuous
and never-ending event that is always happening to me, here
and now, with or without my intention. Paying attention to
breathing means paying attention to the bodily sensations
that breathing brings about; namely, the subtle movements
of the abdomen and breast, which often leads to relaxations
of the muscles. Our intended attention to breathing, thus,
leads us to pay attention naturally to the unusual interoceptive
and proprioceptive sensations that one seldom experiences in
everyday life (Cayoun and Shires, 2020). This is why sati
meditation is an eﬀective way of redeploying attention and why
it has helped so many people with pains and negative emotions
throughout history.
Another type of eﬀective practice in sati meditation is body
scan, which is paying attention to one’s own bodily sensations in
real time. Researchers have conﬁrmed that paying attention to
one’s own bodily sensations, or “body awareness, ” is a bottom-
up process anchored in an interoceptive-insular pathway (IIP),
which is intimately connected with autonomic and emotional
brain areas, as well as verbal and non-verbal memory (Calsius
et al., 2016). A proper manual body work may also activate
this IIP and restore fascia covering the muscles and the internal
organs, which are potent interoceptive generators.
Besides the redeployment of attention, implanting a new
prediction model could be another eﬀective way of treating
chronic pain and emotional regulation disorders. If patients
ﬁrmly believe that certain behaviors would relieve the pain, then
they will get better from just enacting those behaviors; if you take
a drug believing that it will work, or perform a “ritual of healing”
that you believe it will work, active inference interprets even a
slightest change in your interoceptive sensations as a sign of “pain
relief ” and the pain will subside (Von Mohr and Fotopoulou,
2018). As a narrative paradigm, the patient’s “belief ” is the
generative model at the highest level of hierarchical inference. As
a conscious inference, it contextualizes the processing at the lower
levelsóthrough attentional redeploymentóas we see in placebo
eﬀects and “rituals of healing.”
To liberate the patients from emotional regulation disorder or
chronic pain, it is necessary to change the automatic inference
and story-telling processes and provide the patients with accurate
and healthy guidelines for reinterpretation of their interoceptive
data. In other words, it is necessary to bring about a change
in deep inference that automatically interprets certain sensory
information in a certain way and makes certain stories (such
as pain, anxiety, or trauma) less plausible than alternative states
of being. This rests on changing interpretations and regulatory
predictions in the inference system. To achieve this, it is
necessary to neutralize, or weaken, the pre-existing storyteller
and introduce a new narrative. The question then is how
to eﬀectively install a new generative model. To answer that
question, we need to consider the nature of inference as well as
the structure of the inference process more closely.
WHAT IS “INFERENCE?”
Abduction: The Basic Logical Structure
of Inference
Active inference tells us that our brain is actively and constantly
producing perceptions, meanings, and stories about the world.
The logical structure of this meaning-production process is what
Peirce calls “hypothetical inference” or “abduction.” One of the
purposes of the present paper is to formalize the logical structure
of active inference as abduction.
In studying Aristotle’s logical argument types, Peirce (1994)
discovered a less known type of argument, abduction, distinct
from the well-known typesódeduction and induction. The
logical structure of deduction proceeds in the order of Rule
(major premise)→Case (minor premise)→Result (conclusion).
A familiar example is: If there is a rule that “All men are mortal, ”
and there is a case that “Enoch is a man, ” then the conclusion
“Enoch will die” is drawn as a result for sure (Peirce, 1994, CP
2.620).
Abduction also starts with the Rule like deduction, “All men
are mortal, ” but it sees the Result, “Enoch is dead, ” ﬁrst and then
it jumps to the conclusion, the Case of “Enoch is a man.” As we
can see here, the conclusion of abduction is not quite as reliable
as that of deduction or induction: Enoch is not necessarily a man;
it could be the name of a dog or a cat. In fact, the nature of
abduction is always a “fair guess, ” a prediction, a probability, a
hypothesis, or an inference.
Peirce believed that abduction was the same form of argument
that Aristotle described “incompletely under the name ofapagögé
in Volume 2, Chapter 25 of Prior Analytics” (Peirce, 1994,
CP 2.776). In fact, Aristotle’s argument named apagögé had
almost disappeared from human history. According to Peirce,
this was entirely due to “the stupid Apellicon” (Peirce, 1994,
CP 5.144). After Aristotle’s death, his manuscripts did not see
the light of the world for over 200 years. It was Apellicon
of Teos, the rich book-collector, who bought the manuscripts
for a large sum of money. Apellicon served as the ﬁrst and
self-appointed editor of Aristotle’s vast writings, supplementing
damaged texts on his own.
According to Peirce, this “stupid Apellicon” put the wrong
words in place of the unrecognizable words at his disposal; as
a result, he made it impossible to understand what Aristotle’s
apagögé was all about. Later, Aristotle’s writings were moved to
Rome and passed on to Tyrannion, a renowned scholar and
outstanding grammarian, who declared that “Apellicon’s editing
was excessively bad” (Peirce, 1994, CP 7.234). Peirce argued that
Aristotle evidently described the hypothetical inference under
the term of apagögé, which had been dormant for more than
2,000 years. Peirce translated the term into an English word
“abduction.”
The Rule in Abduction as Prior
Knowledge
Many good examples of abduction can be found in detective
stories. By just glancing at a woman for the ﬁrst time, Sherlock
Holmes instantly knew that she was a typist (Doyle, 1892).
Later, Holmes explained to his amazed friend Watson that he
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 9
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
noticed two lines of traces in the woman’s sleeves, which meant
that she would have pressed her wrists on the desk probably
for typewriting. He told Watson that he relied as always on
deduction; but actually, all of his reasoning was abductive, not
deductive. He also emphasized that his reasoning relied on his
abilities of observation in detail. But more precisely speaking,
the core of Holmes’s wonderful reasoning lies in his ability to
infer or interpret the meanings of the clues, or active inference,
rather than in “observation.” Consider the structure of Holmes’s
reasoning:
Rule – A lot of typewriting leaves two lines of
traces on the sleeves.
Result – The woman’s sleeve shows two lines of traces.
∴ Case – The woman is a typist.
The Rule is the previous knowledge that Holmes already had
(i.e., the prior beliefs of the generative model); Result is what
he observed (i.e., incoming sensory data); Case is his conclusion
based on his guessing, or inference (i.e., perception). This is a
typical abduction. If Holmes did deduction, the orders of his
reasoning would be Rule → Case → Result: in other words,
Holmes already knew that the woman was a typist and concluded
that her sleeves would have two lines of traces. If Holmes knows
who the criminals are and reasons about the clues, then he does
deduction. But Holmes always starts with the clues, interprets the
meanings, and identiﬁes the criminals, just like the brain’s active
inference system. That is abduction.
In terms of certainty, deduction is secure and reliable, but
produces no new information. On the other hand, abduction is
weak, unreliable, and uncertain, and as such, it may produce new
information. But it may go wrong. The woman was not a typist,
and she had just borrowed the jacket from his sister; or she might
have had some compulsive habit of pressing her wrists on the
tables. In a sense, the real “adventure” that Holmes was willing
to take was abduction.
According to Peirce, all scientiﬁc discoveries were also the
results of abduction. For example, Kepler’s discovery of the
planetary motions in elliptical orbits was also the result of
abduction. The elliptical orbit was just one possibility out
of many, if not inﬁnite, possible shapes that could connect
the observed positions of the planets. Many other shapes
could have connected the points just like there were many
possible other reasons why the sleeves had two lines of traces.
Surprisingly, however, Kepler inferred, like Holmes, that the
planets would move following the smooth and beautiful elliptical
orbits. Kepler’s discovery was a product of adventurous and
imaginative guessing, or abduction, rather than an inevitable
conclusion of observation.
To process the abductive inferences, we need the Rule, or
prior knowledge in Bayesian inference that corresponds to a
prior probability distribution or belief. For example, to interpret
the meaning of the wet road, we must have the knowledge,
or the “Rule, ” that “When it rains, the ground gets wet.” Only
after that, when we come across the “Result” of “The ground
is wet, ” we may infer the “Case” that “It must have rained.”
In other words, we interpret the meanings based on what we
believe a priori . The same is true with the Markov blanket
system’s general perception processes: the meanings and stories it
produces from the sensory data all depend on its prior knowledge,
or the Rule. If we want to change the ways in which the
Markov blanket infers the meanings of sensory experiences, we
need to change the “Rule, ” or the internal models that generate
predictions; especially, predictions of precision that underwrite
sensory attenuation and attention.
To Change the Inference Process,
Change the Rule
The idea that our brain uses inference to perceive an object was
ﬁrst put forward some 150 years ago by physicist and physiologist
Helmholtz, a little ahead of Peirce. Helmholtz conceptualized
the unconscious and the automatic inference processes in visual
perception as “unconscious inference” (Helmholtz, 1925/1867).
According to Helmholtz, visual perception has its own rules
beyond the control of human consciousness. To our eyes, the
Sun appears to rise in the east and set in the west. Even if we
know for sure that the Earth rotates and the Sun remains still,
our knowledge does not aﬀect our visual perception. The Sun
always rises and sets. Helmholtz contends that the automatic and
unconscious inference in perception evidently shows that sensory
information is not assimilated by consciousness processes in our
mind, but rather in the lower levels of the sensory nervous system.
Helmholtz argued that the unconscious inference was based
on “induction.” Peirce also acknowledged the existence of the
inference process in perception, but he challenged Helmholtz’s
view by emphasizing that the logical structure of perception is not
induction, but abduction (Peirce, 1994, CP 8.62–90). According
to Peirce, to perceive a rose as a rose, the brain needs to do
abduction. First, before seeing a rose, we need to already know
that “roses have such and such shapes and colors” (Rule). Then,
when we come across “something that looks like such and such”
(Result), we apply our prior knowledge to the visual perception
data and infer that “Oh, here is a rose” (Case). The prior
knowledge, or the Rule as a prior probability distribution, is given
by our accumulated previous experiences with roses and other
ﬂowers (Peirce, 1994, CP 3.642).
Helmholtz’s idea, which grasped the essence of the brain as an
“inference machine, ” was revived as one of the basic algorithms
for machine learning through an article entitled “The Helmholtz
machine” (Dayan et al., 1995). The idea that a generative model
can aﬀect sensory processing was ﬁrst proposed by Helmholtz,
so this model was called “Helmholtz machine” (Hinton et al.,
1995). The implication of the Helmholtz machine is that if we can
change the generative model, we may change the ways in which
we interpret sensory data. Thus, we may treat chronic pain and
emotional disorders by changing the generative models used by
patients. In terms of Peirce’s abduction, changing the generative
model means changing the “Rule” to be applied to the “Result”
for a new “Case, ” where the Rule is prior knowledge or belief, the
Result is incoming interoceptive sensations, and the Case is the
meaning of the sensory data.
To treat chronic pain and emotional disorders, the
therapist should provide the patients with two diﬀerent
kinds of information: one is the sensory data to be processed
unconsciously, and the other is a new generative model to
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 10
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
be used in the top-down prediction process. The former can
be given by hands-on, or manual touch, and the latter can
be installed by verbal communication, to instantiate a shared
narrative about the meaning of touch. In terms of abduction, the
therapist would provide the Rule with conceptual form through
verbal communication and the Result with manual touch at the
same time. The therapist should provide novel sensory data that
the patients are not familiar with, so that the patients’ generative
model has to learn new explanations and new ways of inferring
the causes of interoceptive stimuli (e.g., aﬃliative touch). This is
why we need verbally guided touch in therapy. Now the question
should be: Why guided touch is an eﬀective way of altering the
generative models, or installing the new “Rules, ” in a patient’s
consciousness?
GUIDED TOUCH – AN EFFECTIVE WAY
OF INTERVENING THE INFERENCE
SYSTEM
Why Guided Touch (Touch With Verbal
Communication)?
We would propose that the new generative models can be directly
transferred from the internal states of the agent-practitioner to
the internal states of the agent-patient via verbal communication
without passing through the up-and-downs of hierarchical layers
of the sensory-and-active states. Guided touch, or touch with
verbal communication, is therapists’ verbal interactions with
patients. It may take a form of simple explanation or casual
conversation, but the essence of verbal guidance is generally to
suggest new ways of inferring and interpreting.
Guided touch provides the patients with some sensory data
along with the contextual information for interpretation in a
healthier way. We may regard the verbal communication in
guided touch as a dyadic exchange of linguistic communication,
or “pure communication, ” which would produce “a
synchronization or alignment of belief states that circumvent any
reference to external states of the world” (Friston et al., 2020).
In non-guided touch therapies, patients may fail to interpret
the meaning of the sensory data as intended by the therapist. If,
however, the therapist provides the patient with a guidance of
verbal communication, then the patient may adopt the therapist’s
verbal communication as a scaﬀold for a new generative model of
how somatosensory and interoceptive sensations are generatedó
and attended to.
In touch with verbal guidance therapy, the therapist is
supposed to simultaneously provide the sensory signals to be
processed through the bottom-up route (touch) and the top-
down priors to be evinced through the top-down route (verbal
communication). This could make a particularly eﬀective touch
therapy, as the purpose of touch is to help the patients to learn
new habits of sense-making, under their Markov blankets. In
terms of abduction, guidance with verbal communication is the
“Rule” and touch is the “Result.” By providing the Rule and the
Result simultaneously, guided touch would train the patient’s
active inference system to establish a healthier explanation
for – and assimilation of – interoceptive and proprioceptive
sensory signals.
By replacement of generative models, we mean establishing
a new set of (habitual) interpretations or hypotheses. In other
words, equipping the patient with a new set of explanations for
their sensations that goes beyond simply nuancing or “updating
prior” beliefs under dysfunctional interpretations. We would
argue that these new interpretations or hypotheses correspond to
the “Rules” that underlie the generation of sensory inputórules
that have to be abductively discovered. This is why a patient needs
a therapist who enables the discovery of a new generative model.
For the replacement of the generative models with new ones, we
can consider one or a combination of the three strategies: the
ﬁrst is ﬂattening prior beliefs; the second is altering the SoA; and
the third is implanting a new set of “Rules” (prior knowledge for
storytelling) for inference.
Flattening Prior Beliefs
Guided touch consists of the two components: touch and
talk. Thus, guided touch would work in both directions
simultaneously: By providing the novel sensory data, touch
intervenes in the prediction processes from lower to higher
levels. By providing evidence for novel generative models,
talk intervenes in the prediction processes from higher to
lower levels; thereby applying selective pressure from bottom-
up and top-down at the same time. In this situation, sensory
signals caused by touch will be instantly, and possibly self-
evidently, interpreted with the generative model installed under
the therapist’s guidance. We can read this as “ﬂattening prior
beliefs, ” following the concept of “self-ﬂattening” (Limanowski
and Friston, 2020). Guided touch would reduce the depth of
active inference and “ﬂatten, ” and as such, attenuate the old
habit of inference, or the generative model of the agency-patient.
The ﬂattening in question here corresponds to reducing the
precision of prior beliefs such that all high-level explanations
for narratives are aﬀorded the same conﬁdence; leading to a
ﬂat landscape of priors, in which one can more easily explore
alternative hypotheses.
Regarding ﬂattening prior beliefs, guided touch has similar
eﬀects to mindful meditation insofar as in both cases the
precision of prior beliefs is reduced; thereby ﬂattening the free
energy landscape and allowing other priors to be explored
(“ﬂat priors” is a term from statistics which means, a priori ,
any hypothesis is equally likely). “Mindfulness” is a somewhat
misleading translation of “ sati, ” which should be translated to
“awareness.” Mindful meditation, or sati, refers to a structured
set of training for paying attention to sensory signals, without
invoking any mental commentaries, value judgment, or narrative.
Redirecting attention or precision to sensory information
implicitly reduces the precision of prior beliefs and therefore
instantiates ﬂat priors. In guided touch therapy, sensations
supplied by the therapists’ touch attract attention and reduce
the precision of pre-existing priors; thereby allowing alternative
hypotheses to be explored. In other words, the patients would be
led to pay bare attention, as in mindful meditation.
In sati practices, meditators attempt to observe how they
feel at the present moment, physically and mentally, whatever
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 11
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
it is as it is, without adding any interpretations, mental
commentary, or narratives (Kabat-Zinn et al., 1985). The
traditional sati meditation is all about “ﬂattening” deep active
inference processes, which attenuate the precision of narratives
at the highest level, ego or self-consciousnessóthe allegedly
fundamental source of human suﬀering. Sati practices also
emphasize concentration of attention on “breathing with the
whole body, ” which is a very eﬀective way of redeploying
attention from deep to sensory levels.
Training for ﬂattening or attenuating the precision of prior
beliefs can be done with two types of sensory data: One is with
on interoceptive sensations, by paying attention to the sensations
generated by the heart, gut, or any other internal organs.
Traditional sati meditation with breathing exercises usually aims
at paying bare attention to these interoceptive sensations. The
other is with proprioceptive sensations by paying attention to the
feelings from one’s own limb or torso movements. Traditional
Asian contemplative practices, such as tai chi, qigong, and yoga,
all aim at paying bare attention to the proprioceptive sensations.
Payne and Crane-Godreau (2013) created a program named
Meditative Movement (MM) by combining qigong, tai chi, and
yoga to show that this type of exercise is an eﬀective treatment
for depression and anxiety. Levine also created a trauma therapy
program named SE based on the modern somatic exercises to
show that paying attention to interoceptive and proprioceptive
sensations is an eﬀective therapeutic tool for trauma and chronic
stress (Payne et al., 2015).
Altering the Sense of Agency
The goal of therapeutic touch is to provide the patient with
a new habit of predicting interoceptive and proprioceptive
sensations. For that purpose, it is necessary to attenuate not
only certain precisions but also functions of the agent-patient,
or the storyteller of the patient. In other words, for an
eﬀective touch therapy, we want not only redeployment of
attention but alteration of the patient’s generative models at
the higher levels.
Self awareness is part of our generative models that generates
a mental commentary on all that we experienceóand creates
intentions for all actions. To replace an existing generative model
with a new one, we need to either weaken or ﬂatten the existing
generative model. In other words, it is necessary to suspend
the existing routine of storytelling at least for a short period of
time. The classical example of suspending the existing generative
model can be found in hypnotic suggestions. The mechanism
of hypnosis can be explained by active inference theory (Jensen
et al., 2017; Jamieson, 2018). In hypnotic states, deep active
inference is temporarily stopped; the self-consciousness, or
the mental commentary producer, is also temporarily absent.
The existing generative model has been discarded, but a new
generative model is not yet ready. This is the best window of
opportunity through which new storytelling can be installed.
At this moment, if the hypnotist provides a suggestion, the
internal model of the subject would adopt the suggestion as one’s
own storytelling.
Being hypnotized means being in a state of accepting
suggestions (stories) from outside as one’s own narrative. If a
person’s existing generative model gets weakened or ﬂattened,
it is more likely the person is ready to entertain stories from
outsideóthe person becomes more “suggestible” – and this is
the moment of “the alteration of the sense of agency (SoA)”
(Martin and Pacherie, 2019). If we can weaken the patient’s
generative model, the guidance, or verbal communication, during
touch would have stronger eﬀects in replacing the old habit of
interpretation. To install a new generative model, we need to
weaken the existing generative models ﬁrst. Then, the question is:
How can we suspend, attenuate, or ﬂatten the existing generative
model?
It may sound surprising, but the answer lies in a “surprise.”
We may consider guided touch within a therapeutic alliance
as a form of dyadic interaction, like a conversation, which
consists of exchanging verbal and non-verbal behaviors. The two
parties in a dyadic interaction rely on the assumptions that the
other party would cooperate following the conventions deﬁned
by their own relationships, common sense, and culture (Kim
and Kim, 2008). A good example is the cooperative principle
(Grice, 1975) that can be found in conversational communication
in common social settings. In such a dyadic interaction, it is
well-known that a sudden out-of-context behavior of the one
party would cause a temporary suspension of the generative
model of the other. Regarding this point, we may get an
insightful clue from a technique of hypnosis and the tradition
of Zen meditation.
Instant Hypnosis: A Way of Suspending Generative
Models
Consider an instant hypnotic induction involving a handshake.
When I meet someone, if I reach for a handshake, I know the
person will respond by holding my hand gently and look into my
eyes with a friendly smile. Assume that I am meeting you for the
ﬁrst time. When I greet you, if you come to me with a smile and
start to extend your hand, I will instantly interpret that gesture as
a sign of the beginning of the handshake; surely, I will also reach
out my hand as an almost automatic response. At that moment, I
am quite conﬁdent what will happen next: I predict a handshake.
The handshake process starts; when your hand and my hand
are about to contact, my sensory states and active statesó
as well as my generative model at the various hierarchical
levelsóare all engaged in the expected handshake process with
full of conﬁdence in the predictionsósoon my hand will get
the sensations of the handshake, my arms will be shaken by
the handshake, my eyes will see your smile of handshake,
my ears will hear your greeting words of handshake, and I
will do all the necessary actions for the handshake. All my
Markov blanket systems will engage in the familiar handshake
process; all levels of the active inference systems are so conﬁdent
about their predictions that they prepare little for any possible
prediction errors.
At that very moment, you (hypnotist) suddenly grab my wrist,
instead of my hand, gently but swiftly, and lift my hand to my face
in a way that my palm faces my eyes in close proximity. Suddenly,
I see nothing but my palm. If this happens very quickly, it will
instantly produce massive prediction errors and overwhelming
surprises beyond the control of my inference system; unexpected
out-of-context sensory data are ﬂooding in; I know the existing
generative models are not working here anymore, so I must
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 12
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
discard them; but what other generative models would be
relevant here? How do I interpret this situation? I do not know.
My whole active inference systems halt for a moment. This is
the moment practically no generative models are functioning
and deep active inference collapses. My prior beliefs become
almost empty or ﬂatónothing but the discarded generative
models, weakened agency, and muted ongoing storyteller (self-
consciousness).
This is the very moment when I come extremely suggestibleó
my generative models can be easily replaced by the other party’s
suggestions. So, hypnotists have been using this sort of window
for the instant induction for a long time. Probably hypnotists do
not have the concepts, nor the intention, of ﬂattened generative
models or emptied agency. But our active inference model can
explain quite reasonably why the “confusion techniques” like
“handshake instant induction” have been eﬀective for hypnosis
(Erickson, 1964).
Zen: Another Way of Suspending the Generative
Model
Interestingly, the abrupt out-of-context linguistic interactions are
at the core of traditional Zen meditation, the ultimate goal of
which is to achieve enlightenment through discarding the ego.
In Koan, the legendary scriptures of the dialogues between the
Zen masters and the monks, most conversations conclude with
the masters’ abrupt and seemingly out-of-context answers and
behaviors. Some of the well-known examples are:
A monk asked Zhaozhou, the famous Zen master:
“What is the meaning of Bodhidharma’s coming to China from
the West (India)?”
Zhaozhou answered: “There is a cypress tree standing in the
front garden” (Heine, 2020).
Another example:
A monk asked Master Dongshan: “What is Buddha?”
And the master answered: “Three pounds of ﬂax”
(Kubose, 1973).
It is said that the monks were suddenly enlightened after
soliciting these nonsensical answers. Besides these kinds of
dialogues, the masters would suddenly yell at the monks, slam
the door in the face and walk away, or even unexpectedly
beat the monks with a stick. After these nonsensical out-of-
context interactions, the monks would instantly be enlightened.
In the Zen tradition, that is the moment of enlightenment,
when the pre-existing ego (the storyteller, self-consciousness,
or in our terms, the pre-existing generative model) instantly
vanishes, and the monks realize the true self with an
altered SoA.
The point here is not to suggest that hypnosis or Zen
meditation should be incorporated into guided touch therapy.
The goal of guided touch is in no way like hypnosis nor to
Zen. We are just exploring the possibilities of guided touch in
weakening the patient’s generative models and altering her SoA.
The instant hypnotic induction technique with handshake and
the traditional Zen stories suggests that touch with some out-
of-context verbal communication may eﬀectively attenuate the
patient’s agency and facilitate the replacement of the patient’s
pre-existing generative models.
Implanting a New Set of “Rules” for
Inference: Placebo as Inner
Communication
As we have seen in the structure of abduction, inference starts
with the “Rule, ” or the prior knowledge for interpretation
and storytelling. The “Rule” usually takes the form of inner
communication. Something taken for granted is a good example
of the “Rule” in abduction. The studies on placebo and nocebo
eﬀects have shown that inner communication can inﬂuence the
ways in which the human body reacts to stimuli such as new drugs
and treatments (Mommaerts and Devroey, 2012).
Inner communication has both characteristics of stories
and thoughts. Thinking to oneself–or, “verbal thought” – is
an archetype of inner communication along with talking to
oneself, in the sense of an internal narrative (Vygotsky, 2012).
Inner communication may take various forms–such as thoughts,
beliefs, mental commentaries, inner voice, intrapersonal
communication, and imagined interactions (Honeycutt, 2002).
More often than not, inner communication is not something that
we do intentionally; rather, it is the inner narrative we entertain,
with or without our intentions; our thoughts are not what we do,
but rather what happens to us. As such, we cannot possibly plan
exactly what we will be thinking in ﬁve minutes from now. The
same is true with what we believe. These “beliefs” or “thinking to
oneself ” are the fundamental basis of placebo and nocebo eﬀects.
Many studies have shown that placebos change the body,
not just psychologically, but physiologically and biologically. The
biggest challenge in developing a new drug is to beat placebos,
which almost always have strong and signiﬁcant eﬀects. It is
no joke to say that placebos are the most eﬀective, safe, and
side-eﬀect free drugs.
Placebos can reduce pain to the same extent as morphine. In
a double-blind placebo study with 74 patientsówho underwent
extraction of impacted mandibular third molarsóplacebo
(saline), 4, 6, 8, 12 mg of morphine were administered. The degree
of pain relief by the placebo was found to be equivalent between
4 and 6 mg of morphine (Levine et al., 1981).
Placebos have proven their eﬀectiveness in surgery as well as in
medicine. In a double-blind study with a total of 180 patientsó
with osteoarthritis of the kneeówere randomly divided into the
three groups to receive arthroscopic débridement, arthroscopic
lavage, and placebo surgery, respectively. Patients in the placebo
group received skin incisions and underwent a simulated
débridement without insertion of the arthroscope. As a result
of follow-up for 2 years, the mean scores on the Knee-Speciﬁc
Pain Scale were similar across the three groups. Furthermore, all
three groups showed similar knee health recovery, and walking
and stair climbing were also performed to a similar degree
(Moseley et al., 2002).
Placebo eﬀects depend on what stories the participants tell
themselves: inner communication matters. In a double-blind
study with 82 healthy paid volunteers, a new pain reliever
(purported opioid analgesic) was administered. All participants
received identical placebo pills, but half of the participants were
informed that the drug had a regular price of $2.50 per pill
and the other half that the price had been discounted to $0.10
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 13
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
per pill. Electrical shocks to the wrist were given twice for
each participant, before and after taking the pill, to assess the
change in pain. Reduction in pain was reported by 85.4% of the
regular-price group and by 61.0% of the discounted price group
(Waber et al., 2008). The result shows that simple beliefs, or
inner communication, that “expensive pills would have stronger
eﬀects” caused the diﬀerence.
The belief that the medications one takes may have harmful
side eﬀects also has a powerful eﬀect. If placebo takers are
warned of possible negative eﬀects, say, “This is a newly
developed medication for lowering blood pressure, but it might
cause headaches and stomach pains for some people, ” then
many of them would report headaches and stomach pains.
This is a nocebo eﬀect (Hansen and Zech, 2019). If one is
certain he is going to die soon, his longevity is shortened. If
people of old age believe that they will soon get sick and die,
they appear to have a shortened lifespan. According to the
Ohio Longitudinal Study of Aging and Retirement (OLSAR),
people with negative prejudices against aging shortened their
life expectancy by an average of 7.5 years. Those who had
positive self-perceptions of aging, like “Things are getting better
(not worse) with aging”; “I am as good as last year, ” and so
on, lived longer and the diﬀerence was statistically signiﬁcant
(Levy et al., 2002).
The phenomenon that one’s inner communication has a
powerful eﬀect on one’s own body suggests that the stories and
the meanings produced by the consciousness, or the generative
model at the highest level, would inﬂuence the inference
processes at the lower levels. This means that the patient’s
thoughts about the eﬀect of touch therapy will have a signiﬁcant
bearing on the outcome of touch therapy. Here, the patient’s
thoughts are a “Rule” of the abduction that determines how the
patient interprets the sensory information provided by touch
therapy. Once the existing generative model is weakened or
suspended, a new generative model, or new Rules for abduction
can be installed, and the content of the Rule should reﬂect the
desired eﬀects of the touch therapy.
HYPOTHESES AND SUGGESTED
TREATMENT CONDITIONS FOR
EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES
Treatment Conditions for Experimental
Studies
For investigating the eﬀects of the guided touch through
experimental studies, we propose the following treatment
conditions:
Treatment 1: Control
The therapist oﬀers simple verbal descriptions regarding
the touch. This type of treatment would work as the
control condition.
For example: “Now we are releasing the tension of this group
of muscles”
“This touch will relax your right trapezius.”
Treatment 2: Redeployment of Attention
To realign the precision or gain control mechanism of active
inference, the therapist asks a series of questions directing the
patient’s attention to a wide range of focal points. The patients will
be told that they do not have to answer the questions verbally. The
patients will be encouraged to pay clear and distinct attention, or
bare attention, to the mentioned parts of their bodies.
For example: “How do you feel here?”
“Can you recognize the diﬀerence between this and that?”
Treatment 3: Flattening Prior Beliefs
In this treatment, the sensory signals caused by touch will
be instantly interpreted under the generative model installed
via the therapist’s verbal guidance. The therapist will provide
verbal guidance and touch simultaneously; the patient will
update their interpretational framework in the form of
imageries, which would allow the patient to interpret the touch
signals in a novel way.
For example: “Imagine this part of fascia getting relaxed and
elongated like an old rubber band.”
“Your lower back is now getting full of soft and colorful
bubbles that are gently ﬂoating around.”
Treatment 4: Weakening Pre-existing Generative
Models
Sudden and abrupt out of context comments will induce
irresolvable prediction errors, and as a result, attenuate
the precision of prior beliefs. Right before the “out of
context comments, ” the therapist will give some usual and
familiar explanations. The underlined sentences are the “out of
context comments.” Actual touch will temporarily stop while
out of context verbal communication is provided; however,
immediately after the out of context comments, when the
patient becomes more suggestible, a new set of interpretational
frameworks will be given along with touch.
For Example: “Today we will focus on your lower back
muscles.... How do you feel these days?
They say there is a calm desert on the dark side of the moon.”
“Sure, your lower back muscles have very strong tension. I
once had a white Labrador, but now I have a golden retriever.”
Treatment 5: Installing New Generative Models
At the highest level of the active inference system, or self-
consciousness, the generative model exists in the form of ongoing
inner communication. An eﬀective way of replacing the pre-
existing generative models with a new narrative would be guided
inner communication. With their manual touch, the therapists
would ask the patients to silently repeatóthree timesówhat they
say sentence by sentence. The patients are supposed to do the
inner communication within their mind only without necessarily
speaking out, but whispering would be also ﬁne.
For Example: “Repeat after me silently, only in your mind”
“I am happy now” “I am relaxed.”
“I am feeling the warm sensations on my shoulder.”
“I am looking at the source of the pain in my shoulder.”
“I see the pain is fading away.”
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 14
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
Dependent Variables
The possible eﬀects to be measured, or the dependent variables
are as follows: self-report measures on psychological and
behavioral variables (aﬀective scales, behavioral responses, etc.)
and subjective relief from chronic pain (Von Korﬀ et al.,
1992); biomarkers related to the autonomic nerve system and
emotional responses such as heart rate, heart rate variability
indices (Appelhans and Luecken, 2006), galvanic skin response,
and EMG; and responses to artiﬁcially induced pain (Yucel et al.,
2005) or inﬂammation (Rosenkranz et al., 2013).
Hypotheses for Experimental Studies
One can design multiple experimental studies by combining
the treatment conditions above. Based on active inference and
the prediction model, the present paper proposes the following
hypotheses:
H1: Guided touch therapies inducing redeployment of
attention (Treatment 2) would show stronger eﬀects in
relieving chronic pain and negative emotions than touch with
simple verbal descriptions (Treatment 1).
H2: Guided touch therapies which “ﬂatten” prior beliefs
(Treatment 3) would show stronger eﬀects in relieving chronic
pain and negative emotions than touch with simple verbal
descriptions (Treatment 1).
H3: Our assumption is that the “out of context comments”
would make patients more suggestible by attenuating the
precision of pre-existing generative models (i.e., prior beliefs),
and consequently, would increase the eﬀect size of Treatment
5. Thus, the eﬀect size of Treatment 5 immediately after
Treatment 4 would be greater than that of Treatment 5
immediately after Treatment 1.
CONCLUSION
According to active inference theory, the essence of touch
in manual therapy is the provision of sensory data for
(re)interpretation by a patient. To teach the patient a new way of
interpreting interoceptive and proprioceptive signals, therapists
should install a complementary set of prior beliefsóto revise
generative modelsóthrough verbal communication.
The nature of inference is abduction. To change the
conclusion of an inference, it is necessary to change the “Rule, ”
or the prior knowledge underwriting the generative model:
pre-existing generative models should be replaced with new
narratives. To facilitate such replacement, the present paper
proposes that we should weaken pre-existing generative models,
through ﬂattening prior beliefs, altering the SoA, and enabling
a redeployment of attention. Then, a new generative model can
eﬃciently be installed through inner communication, along with
touch as the sensory evidence for this new narrative.
Based on these arguments, we propose several hypotheses for a
series of empirical studies, which would test not only our theories
but the relevance of active inference in general at the behavioral
level. If the behavioral studies support our hypotheses, one could
pursue further studies, investigating functional connectivity
among distributed neuronal responses (Kyeong et al., 2017,
2020).
Active inference and predictive coding models are currently
shaping behavioral sciences as well as neuroscience (Hutchinson
and Barrett, 2019). Recent studies on meditation, for example,
have already incorporated the active inference perspectives (Lutz
et al., 2019; Deane et al., 2020; Sandved-Smith et al., 2021). If
touch with verbal guidance is proven to be eﬀective, that would
facilitate new approaches based on the active inference model
for studying not only meditation but hypnosis, placebo, and self-
consciousness as a storyteller. Furthermore, it would open up new
possibilities of employing inner communication interventions,
including self-talk training, for a wide range of mental as well as
physical therapies (Kim et al., 2021).
Some of the other signiﬁcant implications are as follows:
First, it opens new theoretical horizons for traditional therapies
and psychiatric treatments in general. A deep active inference
perspective suggests that therapies and psychiatric treatments,
whether talk-based, touch-based, cognitive or behavioral, all
fundamentally depend on how patients’ bodies and minds
interpret therapists’ messages, whether they are given through
verbal communication or touch sensations. The concepts of
attenuation of gain control, revision or replacement of generative
models, ﬂattening prior beliefs, weakening the generative models
and altering the SoA would have signiﬁcant implications for
various types of therapies treating PTSD, anxiety disorder
and depression, especially involving somatic movements and
interoceptive meditation.
Second, as the guided touch aims at establishing “new” ways of
sense-making and “new” corporeal narratives, this study would
also have some implications for dopaminergic circuit related
studies, ranging from reinforcement theory and motivation
to Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease. Friston et al. (2009)
once suggested that “dopamine (encoding) does not encode the
prediction error of value but the value of prediction error”.
And “dopamine balances bottom-up sensory information and
top-down prior beliefs when making hierarchical inferences
(predictions) about cues that have aﬀordance.... [W]e can confuse
agents by changing the context (order) in which cues are
presented” (Friston et al., 2012). Some of the recent studies
support this view: FitzGerald et al. (2015); Gardner et al.
(2018), Gershman and Uchida (2019). As such, the sudden
“out of context” interactions should have some relevance
to the dopamine system and its encoding of the “value of
prediction error, ” as they are novel stimuli provoking massive
prediction errors.
Third, by combining imagery, inner communication, and
“out-of-context” (intended surprise) methods, this study
may open new possibilities for aﬀective guided-based touch
techniques for proprioceptive and interoceptive multi-modal
stimuli. And these new touch techniques would have some
theoretical as well as practical implications for the deep active
inference in shared and synchronized Markov blankets.
Finally, if this study demonstrates some eﬀectiveness of guided
touch, we may produce a series of standardized guided touch
programs with recorded voices of experienced and renowned
therapists. If therapists use the recorded guidance, while they
perform their manual touch cares, patients will receive quite
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 15
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
standardized high quality guided touch therapy. In the long
run, we hope, the standardization of the guidance will lead the
ﬁeld toward the standardization of manual touch practices as
well. This could make a milestone for developing standardized
frameworks for therapeutic alliance in the ﬁelds of chronic pain
and emotional disorder.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
JK wrote the ﬁrst draft of the manuscript, which KF thoroughly
revised and edited. All authors contributed to the conception of
the manuscript, ﬁrst discussion from which the main idea of this
manuscript emerged, revised the manuscript, and approved and
were accountable for the submitted manuscript.
FUNDING
This research was supported by the Brain Research Program
through the National Research Foundation of Korea
(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (NRF-
2017M3C7A1030750).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
JK would like to thank Professor Hae-Jeong Park (Yonsei
University College of Medicine) for allowing him to be a part of
the on-going fMRI study projects for years.
REFERENCES
Appelhans, B. M., and Luecken, L. J. (2006). Heart rate variability as an index of
regulated emotional responding. Rev. Gen. Psychol. 10, 229–240. doi: 10.1037/
1089-2680.10.3.229
Barrett, L. F. (2017). The theory of constructed emotion: an active inference
account of interoception and categorization. Soc. Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 12,
1–23. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsw154
Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., and Hamilton, P. (2016). An active inference theory
of allostasis and interoception in depression. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.
371:20160011. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0011
Bearman, D., and Shafarman, S. (1999). The Feldenkrais method in the treatment
of chronic pain: a study of eﬃcacy and cost eﬀectiveness. Am. J. Pain Manag. 9,
22–27.
Bohlen, L., Shaw, R., Cerritelli, F., and Esteves, J. E. (2021). Osteopathy and mental
health: an embodied, predictive, and interoceptive framework. Front. Psychol.
12:767005. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.767005
Burleson, M. H., and Quigley, K. S. (2021). Social interoception and social allostasis
through touch: legacy of the somatovisceral aﬀerence model of emotion. Soc.
Neurosci. 16, 92–102. doi: 10.1080/17470919.2019.1702095
Cacioppo, J. T., Berntson, G. G., and Klein, D. J. (1992). “What is an emotion?
The role of somatovisceral aﬀerence, with special emphasis on somatovisceral
“illusions”, ” inReview of Personality and Social Psychology: Emotion and Social
Behavior, Vol. 14, ed. M. S. Clark (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications),
63–98.
Calsius, J., De Bie, J., Hertogen, R., and Meesen, R. (2016). Touching the lived
body in patients with medically unexplained symptoms. How an integration
of hands-on bodywork and body awareness in psychotherapy may help
people with alexithymia. Front. Psychol. 7:253. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.0
0253
Carneiro, ÉM., Oliveira, L. F. A., da Silva, D. A. A., Sousa, J. B. F., Timóteo, R. P.,
Neto, O. B., et al. (2020). Eﬀects of the laying on of hands on anxiety, stress
and autonomic response of employees in a hospital: a double-blind randomized
controlled trial. Complement. Therap. Med.52:102475. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2020.
102475
Cayoun, B. A., and Shires, A. G. (2020). Co-emergence reinforcement and its
relevance to interoceptive desensitization in mindfulness and therapies aiming
at transdiagnostic eﬃcacy. Front. Psychol. 11:545945. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.
545945
Cerritelli, F., Chiacchiaretta, P., Gambi, F., Perrucci, M. G., Barassi, G., Visciano,
C., et al. (2020). Eﬀect of manual approaches with osteopathic modality on
brain correlates of interoception: an fMRI study.Sci. Rep. 10:3214. doi: 10.1038/
s41598-020-60253-6
Damasio, A. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making
of Consciousness. New York, NY: Harcourt Brace.
Dayan, P., Hinton, G. E., Neal, R. M., and Zemel, R. S. (1995). The Helmholtz
machine. Neural Comput. 7, 889–904.
Deane, G., Miller, M., and Wilkinson, S. (2020). Losing ourselves: active inference,
depersonalization, and meditation. Front. Psychol. 11:539726. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2020.539726
Dehaene, S. (2014). Consciousness and the Brain: Deciphering How the Brain Codes
our Thoughts. New York, NY: Penguin.
Doyle, A. C. (1892). The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes. (Adventure 3: A Case of
Identity). London: George Newnes Ltd.
Erickson, M. H. (1964). The confusion technique in hypnosis.Am. J. Clin. Hypnosis
6, 183–207. doi: 10.1080/00029157.1964.10402343
Esteves, J. E., Cerritelli, F., Kim, J., and Friston, K. J. (2022). Osteopathic care as
(En) active inference: a theoretical framework for developing an integrative
hypothesis in osteopathy. Front. Psychol. 13:812926. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.
812926
Fisher, J. (2019). Sensorimotor psychotherapy in the treatment of trauma. Pract.
Innov. 4, 156–165. doi: 10.1037/pri0000096
FitzGerald, T. H., Dolan, R. J., and Friston, K. (2015). Dopamine, reward learning,
and active inference. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 9:136. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2015.
00136
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. J. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy 14,
2100–2121. doi: 10.3390/e14112100
Friston, K. J. (2013). Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 10:20130475.
Friston, K. J. (2017b). “I am therefore I think, ” in The Unconscious : A Bridge
Between Psychoanalysis and Cognitive Neuroscience, eds M. Leuzinger-Bohleber,
S. Arnold, and M. Solms (London: Routledge), 113–137.
Friston, K. J. (2017a). Precision psychiatry. Biol.Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci.
Neuroimaging 2, 640–643.
Friston, K. J. (2018). Am I self-conscious?(or does self-organization entail self-
consciousness?). Front. Psychol. 9:579. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00579
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., and Kiebel, S. J. (2009). Reinforcement learning or
active inference? PLoS One 4:e6421. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006421
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., Kilner, J., and Kiebel, S. J. (2010). Action and behavior:
a free-energy formulation. Biol. Cybern. 102, 227–260. doi: 10.1007/s00422-
010-0364-z
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., Yuﬁk, Y., Sajid, N., Price, C. J., and Holmes, E.
(2020). Generative models, linguistic communication and active inference.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 118, 42–64. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.
07.005
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 16
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
Friston, K. J., Shiner, T., FitzGerald, T., Galea, J. M., Adams, R., Brown, H.,
et al. (2012). Dopamine, aﬀordance and active inference. PLoS Comput. Biol.
8:e1002327. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002327I
Gale, N. K. (2011). From body-talk to body-stories: body work in complementary
and alternative medicine. Sociol. Health Ill. 33, 237–251. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-
9566.2010.01291.x
Gardner, M. P., Schoenbaum, G., and Gershman, S. J. (2018). Rethinking dopamine
as generalized prediction error. Proc. Biol. Sci. 285:20181645. doi: 10.1098/rspb.
2018.1645
Gershman, S. J., and Uchida, N. (2019). Believing in dopamine. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
20, 703–714. doi: 10.1038/s41583-019-0220-7
Grice, H. P. (1975). “Logic and conversation, ” in Speech acts, eds P. Cole and J.
Morgan (Leiden: Brill), 41–58. doi: 10.1163/9789004368811_003
Guest, D., and Parker, J. (2022). Clinical considerations regarding the use of touch
in psychotherapy. Bioenerget. Anal. 32, 123–134. doi: 10.30820/0743-4804-
2022-32-123
Hansen, E., and Zech, N. (2019). Nocebo eﬀects and negative suggestions in
daily clinical practice–forms, impact and approaches to avoid them. Front.
Pharmacol. 10:77. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2019.00077
Hechler, T., Endres, D., and Thorwart, A. (2016). Why harmless sensations
might hurt in individuals with chronic pain: about heightened prediction and
perception of pain in the mind. Front. Psychol. 7:1638. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.
01638
Heine, S. (2020). Flowers Blooming on a Withered Tree: Giun’s Verse Comments on
Dogen’s Treasury of the True Dharma Eye. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Helmholtz, H. V. (1925/1867). Treatise on Physiological Optics . Rochester, NY:
Optical Society of America.
Hinton, G. E., Dayan, P., Frey, B. J., and Neal, R. M. (1995). The “wake-sleep”
algorithm for unsupervised neural networks. Science 268, 1158–1161. doi: 10.
1126/science.7761831
Honeycutt, J. M. (2002). Imagined Interactions: Daydreaming about
Communication. New York, NY: Hampton Press.
Hutchinson, J. B., and Barrett, L. F. (2019). The power of predictions: an emerging
paradigm for psychological research. Curr. Direct. Psychol. Sci. 28, 280–291.
doi: 10.1177/0963721419831992
Jamieson, G. A. (2018). Expectancies of the future in hypnotic suggestions.Psychol.
Conscious. Theory Res. Pract. 5, 258–277.
Jensen, M. P., Jamieson, G. A., Lutz, A., Mazzoni, G., McGeown, W. J.,
Santarcangelo, E. L., et al. (2017). New directions in hypnosis research:
strategies for advancing the cognitive and clinical neuroscience of hypnosis.
Neurosci. Conscious. 2017:nix004. doi: 10.1093/nc/nix004
Kabat-Zinn, J., Lipworth, L., and Burney, R. (1985). The clinical use of mindfulness
meditation for the self-regulation of chronic pain. J. Behav. Med. 8, 163–190.
doi: 10.1007/BF00845519
Kim, J., and Kim, E. J. (2008). Theorizing dialogic deliberation: everyday political
talk as communicative action and dialogue. Commun. Theory 18, 51–70. doi:
10.1111/j.1468-2885.2007.00313.x
Kim, J., Kwon, J. H., Kim, J., Kim, E. J., Kim, H. E., Kyeong, S., et al. (2021).
The eﬀects of positive or negative self-talk on the alteration of brain functional
connectivity by performing cognitive tasks. Sci. Rep. 11:14873. doi: 10.1038/
s41598-021-94328-9
Kirchhoﬀ, M. D., and Kiverstein, J. (2021). How to determine the boundaries of
the mind: a Markov blanket proposal. Synthese 198, 4791–4810. doi: 10.1007/
s11229-019-02370-y
Kirchhoﬀ, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., and Kiverstein, J. (2018). The
Markov blankets of life: autonomy, active inference and the free energy
principle. J. R. Soc. Interface 15:20170792. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0792
Kiverstein, J., Kirchhoﬀ, M. D., and Thacker, M. (2022). An embodied predictive
processing theory of pain experience.Rev. Phil. Psych.doi: 10.1007/s13164-022-
00616-2 [Epub ahead of print].
Kubose, G. M. (1973). Zen Koans. Chicago, IL: Henry Regnery Company.
Kyeong, S., Kim, J., Kim, D. J., Kim, H. E., and Kim, J. J. (2017). Eﬀects of
gratitude meditation on neural network functional connectivity and brain-heart
coupling. Sci. Rep. 7:5058. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-05520-9
Kyeong, S., Kim, J., Kim, J., Kim, E. J., Kim, H. E., and Kim, J. J. (2020). Diﬀerences
in the modulation of functional connectivity by self-talk tasks between people
with low and high life satisfaction. Neuroimage 217:116929. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2020.116929
Levine, J. D., Gordon, N. C., Smith, R., and Fields, H. L. (1981). Analgesic responses
to morphine and placebo in individuals with postoperative pain. Pain 10,
379–389. doi: 10.1016/0304-3959(81)90099-3
Levy, B. R., Slade, M. D., Kunkel, S. R., and Kasl, S. V. (2002). Longevity increased
by positive self-perceptions of aging. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 83, 261–270. doi:
10.1037//0022-3514.83.2.261
Limanowski, J., and Friston, K. (2020). Attenuating oneself: an active inference
perspective on “selﬂess” experiences.Philos. Mind Sci. 1:6.
Llinás, R. R. (2002). I of the Vortex: From Neurons to Self . Cambridge, MA: MIT
press.
Lutz, A., Mattout, J., and Pagnoni, G. (2019). The epistemic and pragmatic value of
non-action: a predictive coding perspective on meditation. Curr. Opin. Psychol.
28, 166–171. doi: 10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.12.019
Martin, J. R., and Pacherie, E. (2019). Alterations of agency in hypnosis: a new
predictive coding model. Psychol. Rev. 126, 133–152. doi: 10.1037/rev0000134
McParlin, Z., Cerritelli, F., Friston, K. J., and Esteves, J. E. (2022). Therapeutic
alliance as active inference: the role of therapeutic touch and synchrony. Front.
Psychol. 13:783694. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.783694
Micozzi, M. S. (2018). “Bodywork, healing touch, and touch therapies, ” in
Fundamentals of Complementary, Alternative, and Integrative Medicine , 6th
Edn. ed. M. S. Micozzi (St. Louis, MO: Elsevier), 232–240.
Mommaerts, J. L., and Devroey, D. (2012). The placebo eﬀect: how the
subconscious ﬁts in.Perspect. Biol. Med.55, 43–58. doi: 10.1353/pbm.2012.0005
Moors, A., and Fischer, M. (2019). Demystifying the role of emotion in behaviour:
toward a goal-directed account.Cogn. Emot. 33, 94–100. doi: 10.1080/02699931.
2018.1510381
Moseley, J. B., O’Malley, K., Petersen, N. J., Menke, T. J., Brody, B. A., Kuykendall,
D. H., et al. (2002). A controlled trial of arthroscopic surgery for osteoarthritis
of the knee. N. Engl. J. Med. 347, 81–88.
Norman, G. J., Berntson, G. G., and Cacioppo, J. T. (2014). Emotion,
somatovisceral aﬀerence, and autonomic regulation. Emot. Rev. 6, 113–123.
doi: 10.1177/1754073913512006
Ongaro, G., and Kaptchuk, T. J. (2019). Symptom perception, placebo eﬀects, and
the Bayesian brain. Pain 160, 1–4. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001367
Park, H. J., and Friston, K. (2013). Structural and functional brain networks: from
connections to cognition. Science 342:1238411. doi: 10.1126/science.1238411
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., and Friston, K. J. (2022). Active Inference: The Free Energy
Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Payne, P., and Crane-Godreau, M. A. (2013). Meditative movement for depression
and anxiety. Front. Psychiatry 4:71. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2013.00071
Payne, P., Levine, P. A., and Crane-Godreau, M. A. (2015). Somatic experiencing:
using interoception and proprioception as core elements of trauma therapy.
Front. Psychol. 6:93. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00093
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible
Inference. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Peirce, C. S. (1994). The Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. Electronic
Edition, Vol. 1-8. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pezzulo, G., Maisto, D., Barca, L., and Van den Bergh, O. (2019). Perception
and Misperception of Bodily Symptoms from an Active Inference Perspective:
Modelling the Case of Panic Disorder. Semantics , Vol. 3. New York, NY:
Academic Press, 41–58.
Ramstead, M. J., Constant, A., Badcock, P. B., and Friston, K. J. (2019). Variational
ecology and the physics of sentient systems. Phys. Life Rev. 31, 188–205. doi:
10.1016/j.plrev.2018.12.002
Rosenkranz, M. A., Davidson, R. J., MacCoon, D. G., Sheridan, J. F., Kalin, N. H.,
and Lutz, A. (2013). A comparison of mindfulness-based stress reduction and
an active control in modulation of neurogenic inﬂammation. Brain Behav.
Immun. 27, 174–184. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.10.013
Sandved-Smith, L., Hesp, C., Mattout, J., Friston, K., Lutz, A., and Ramstead,
M. J. (2021). Towards a computational phenomenology of mental action:
modelling meta-awareness and attentional control with deep parametric
active inference. Neurosci. Conscious. 2021:niab035. doi: 10.1093/nc/ni
ab035
Seth, A. K., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the
emotional brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 371:20160007. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2016.0007
Siegel, D. (2020). Aware: The Science and Practice of Presence: The Groundbreaking
Meditation Practice. New York, NY: TarcherPerigee.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 16 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952
fpsyg-13-828952 May 16, 2022 Time: 16:6 # 17
Kim et al. Active Inference and Guided Touch
Van den Bergh, O., Witthöft, M., Petersen, S., and Brown, R. J. (2017). Symptoms
and the body: taking the inferential leap. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 74, 185–203.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.01.015
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., and Rosch, E. (2016). The Embodied Mind: Cognitive
Science and Human Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Von Korﬀ, M., Ormel, J., Keefe, F. J., and Dworkin, S. F. (1992). Grading
the severity of chronic pain. Pain 50, 133–149. doi: 10.1016/0304-3959(92)90
154-4
Von Mohr, M., and Fotopoulou, A. (2018). “The cutaneous borders of
interoception: active and social inference of pain and pleasure on the skin, ” in
The Interoceptive Mind: From Homeostasis to Awareness, eds M. Tsakiris and H.
De Preester (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 102–120.
Vygotsky, L. (2012). Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Waber, R. L., Shiv, B., Carmon, Z., and Ariely, D. (2008). Commercial features of
placebo and therapeutic. JAMA 299, 1016–1017. doi: 10.1001/jama.299.9.1016
Yucel, A., Ozyalcin, S., Talu, G. K., Kiziltan, E., Yucel, B., Andersen, O. K., et al.
(2005). The eﬀect of venlafaxine on ongoing and experimentally induced pain
in neuropathic pain patients: a double blind, placebo controlled study. Eur. J.
Pain 9, 407–416. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpain.2004.09.009
Conﬂict of Interest: JE was employed by the Malta ICOM Educational Ltd.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note:All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Kim, Esteves, Cerritelli and Friston. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with
these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 17 May 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 828952