Science and sanity: A social epistemology of
misinformation, disinformation, and the
limits of knowledge
Laurence J. Kirmayer
Abstract
Recent challenges to scientiﬁc authority in relation to the COVID pandemic, climate change, and the proliferation of con-
spiracy theories raise questions about the nature of knowledge and conviction. This article considers problems of social
epistemology that are central to current predicaments about popular or public knowledge and the status of science. From
the perspective of social epistemology, knowing and believing are not simply individual cognitive processes but based on
participation in social systems, networks, and niches. As such, knowledge and conviction can be understood in terms of
the dynamics of epistemic communities, which create speciﬁc forms of authority, norms, and practices that include styles
of reasoning, habits of thought and modes of legitimation. Efforts to understand the dynamics of delusion and pathological
conviction have something useful to teach us about our vulnerability as knowers and believers. However, this individual
psychological account needs to be supplemented with a broader social view of the politics of knowledge that can inform
efforts to create a healthy information ecology and strengthen the civil institutions that allow us to ground our action in
well-informed picture of the world oriented toward mutual recognition, respect, diversity, and coexistence.
Keywords
social epistemology, ways of knowing, cognitive biases, epistemic communities, social media, misinformation,
disinformation, delusions, conspiracy theories, science education
You’re confounded by leaders as authentic as Princess
Caraboo and the scrap metal Lustig sold as the Eiffel
Tower. Oh, how they chant their chants:War is peace,
freedom is slavery— and most importantly— ignorance is
strength. That’s right: the less you know, the more indignant.
The less you know, the more protected. The chorus is no less
than: Say it loud, I’m here and I’m proud. Doesn’t that sound
familiar? Take a breath. Let the chorus go silent, walk away
on a path of your own design and determination, even if you
lose your way a few times during the journey. Don’tb e
afraid of the loneliness. (Obejas, 2021, p. 55)
This breathless epigraph comes from a prose-poem by the
Cuban-American writer Achy Obejas that speaks to the
crisis of truth in our time: impostors everywhere,narish-
keit— a Yiddish word that means nonsense, foolishness or
sheer stupidity— on heavy rotation, and knowledge for-
aging on the internet devolved to become a kind of
epistemic dumpster diving. Though some of the concern
with misinformation may be exaggerated (Altay et al.,
2023), deliberate efforts to undermine the news media
and scientiﬁc expertise are threatening the institutions of
civil society (Adler & Drieschova, 2021). The problems
we have with truth have a long lineage, but their current
form is largely due to the deliberate exploitation of new
social media to advance commercial or political agendas.
This has prompted efforts to develop the discipline of agno-
tology, studying how ignorance is actively produced to
serve the interests of corporations or others in power, creat-
ing confusion about basic facts, impeding policy and public
health interventions, and resulting in loss of life (Proctor,
2008). Even with more benign intentions, though, deter-
mining who and what to trust has become more challenging
owing, in large part, to the rapidly growing scale of
Division of Social & T ranscultural Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal,
Canada
Corresponding author:
Laurence J. Kirmayer, Division of Social & T ranscultural Psychiatry, McGill
University, 1033 Pine Ave. West., Montreal, Quebec H3A 1A1, Canada.
Email: laurence.kirmayer@mcgill.ca
Article
T ranscultural Psychiatry
2024, Vol. 61(5) 795–808
© The Author(s) 2024
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/13634615241296301
journals.sagepub.com/home/tps
connectivity and the ways that information is packaged and
presented through social media (Butcher, 2021; O’Connor
& Weatherall, 2019; Wang et al., 2019). This has been
aggravated by increasingly polarized and confrontational
rhetoric and fractiousness that have directly attacked the
usual reliable sources and, indeed, the basic institutions of
civil society (Habermas, 2023; Olaniran & Williams,
2020). The situation prompts consideration from cultural
psychiatry because it troubles our patients (and ourselves)
and overlaps with basic questions of pluralism, relativism
and epistemic justice. And, though, I hesitate to apply a psy-
chiatric vocabulary to social problems (which usually
amounts to little more than name calling), it does look
like a form of collective pathology. What is going on and
what can we do about it?
My title comes from the work of the mid-20th century
scholar Alfred Korzybski, who saw in science and mathem-
atics a way to improve common habits of thought and instill
greater rationality into human thinking and decision making
(Korzybski, 1958). He founded the discipline of General
Semantics, which aimed to give an account of how we
produce meaning that would have prescriptive value for
civil society and human survival.
1 One of his famous aphor-
isms is “the map is not the territory” (Korzybski, 1941).
This helpful reminder encourages us to distinguish our
models and metaphors from the world we traverse, but it
was upended by Marshall McLuhan, and later constructi-
vists, who insisted that the medium is the message
(McLuhan, 1964). We now recognize that maps and meta-
phors create new (virtual) territories that we increasingly
inhabit (Siegert, 2011). In this time of infoglut and polariza-
tion with internet bubbles and echo chambers, masking and
doxing, the territories and topologies of media pose excep-
tional challenges to adaptation and survival. This
encourages us to look at the ways in which knowledge
and reasoning are embedded in social contexts.
Social epistemology draws attention to the social embed-
ding and production of knowledge (Bueter, 2019; Fricker et
al., 2020; Goldman, 1987; Goldman & Whitcomb, 2011).
2
Knowing and believing are not simply individual cognitive
processes but are based on participation in social systems
and forms of life. As such, knowing is intertwined with
social structure and process, which can be understood in
terms of the dynamics of cultures and subcultures, networks
and niches, styles of reasoning or habits of thought, and epi-
stemic communities.
In this article, I want to consider problems of social epis-
temology that are central to our current predicament: How
do we know what to believe? What are the sources of
trust, epistemic authority, and styles of reasoning? How
do we decide when and where to forage for information?
How do we change our beliefs in response to new evidence,
challenge or critique? How do we decide what can and
cannot be known? What are the consequences for forms
of social life and civil society of cultural pluralism that
gives rise to different ways of knowing and warranting
truth claims? Finally, how do these broad questions inter-
sect with the concerns of cultural psychiatry?
Rationality, irrationality and belief
Many psychiatric disorders involve pathologies of belief
(Davies & Coltheart, 2000). We may believe things that
are unfounded or distorted in ways that impede our func-
tioning— as the cognitive theories of depression and
anxiety suggest— or the underlying mechanisms of belief
and conviction may be impaired in ways that make it
hard for us to navigate the world, as seen in paranoia or
delusional disorder (Connors & Halligan, 2017). The rela-
tionship between these forms of pathology and conspiracy
theories— whether common or idiosyncratic and far-
fetched— has been the focus of much debate (Bortolotti,
2024; Cassam, 2019; Douglas & Sutton, 2023; Galbraith,
2021; Gold & Gold, 2015). The ability to recognize real
conspiracies may be adaptive and is certainly politically
essential. Common ‘garden-variety’ conspiracy theories
may simply reﬂect our constant search for patterns to
explain troubling events, which is heightened in times of
crisis and confusion. But pervasive conspiracy theories
that undermine the person ’s self-con ﬁdence, trust in
others, and social institutions are maladaptive for both indi-
viduals and societies, and may reﬂect cognitive, affective or
social pathology.
Analytic philosophers have approached belief in terms
of propositional attitudes; that is, as a matter of the qualiﬁ-
cation, stance or attitude that one takes toward certain state-
ments or claims about oneself and the world (Kelly, 2002).
The challenge then is characterizing precisely what this
stance adds to the statement itself. If I say,“I believe the
sun is shining,” how does that differ from saying simply,
“The sun is shining”? The former seems to convey add-
itional information about my position— depending on prag-
matic context, emphasis or in ﬂection, this might be a
declaration of commitment or a qualiﬁcation or even an
equivocation. Pragmatically, this has to do not simply
with questions of truth but with epistemic questions about
the source and type of conviction associated with knowl-
edge claims and experience.
There is evidence from cognitive and social psychology
of the limits of this approach, which fails to capture the
ways that beliefs actually function, including how they
are formed, applied, and persist or change in the face of
new information, counter-evidence, or social in ﬂuence.
Moreover, the forms of rationality assumed by these
models do not capture much of the structure of everyday
practical reasoning, which involves bounded or limited
rationality, many types of cognitive bias, as well as strong
dependence on context and emotion (Bortolotti, 2015,
2020; Gigerenzer, 2020; Henrich et al., 2001; Kahneman,
2011; Nilsson, 2014). Efforts to develop more accurate
796 Transcultural Psychiatry 61(5)
and inclusive accounts of the nature of reasoning lead to an
emphasis on framing, context-sensitivity and an ecological
view of knowledge and conviction as always socially situ-
ated and dependent on networks of meaning and practice
(Fiedler & Wänke, 2009). This, in turn, requires rethinking
our view of beliefs. Instead of being codiﬁed in explicit pro-
positions, many or most beliefs involve implicit assump-
tions about how the world works, engagements with
particular epistemic practices, commitments to social rela-
tionships and institutions, tacit background knowledge,
and cultural ontologies. Because of their embodiment and
enactment as epistemic practices, and their embedding in
social relationships and institutions, direct challenges to
beliefs or counter-evidence are often met with various
forms of resistance or rejection (Festinger, 1956;
Kirmayer, 1990; Klintman, 2022).
Traces of the view of belief as propositional knowledge
and attitudes can be found in anthropology. Allan Young
(1981, 1982) critiqued the implicit rationality of the
explanatory model perspective in medical anthropology,
which assumed that people could give reasoned and coher-
ent accounts of illness causes, mechanisms and outcomes,
when, in fact, people often reason analogically from proto-
types or work metonymically with the tacit structures of
everyday experience. Byron Good (1993) described the
implicit rationality of biomedicine itself, noting the contrast
between medicine, which claims a basis in scientiﬁc facts,
and patients’ culturally based interpretations, which are
termed “beliefs”. The assumption is that“we” (as practi-
tioners of a rational scientiﬁc medicine) have knowledge,
whereas “they” (as participants in a cultural system with a
folk ontology) merely have beliefs. While conveying the
facts of biomedicine, this asymmetry leads to discounting
and discrediting other knowledges or merely tolerating
others’ practices as the more or less unfortunate conse-
quence of their (ill-founded, at times even unintelligible)
convictions. A growing literature on epistemic injustice
documents the problems in clinical communication and
ethical practice that arise from this assumption (Crichton
et al., 2017). In the case of psychiatry, where much of our
theory is grounded in cultural concepts of the person that
vary across cultures, the one-sided promotion of mental
health literacy can contribute to epistemic injustice as part
of a broader project of cultural proselytization.
The recognition that cultures include systems of knowl-
edge and practice that may be grounded in alternative ontol-
ogies has led to recent challenges to the dominance of
scientiﬁc rationality as the paradigm within which diversity
must be understood. Challenges to the dominant episteme
come from those concerned to redress the colonial suppres-
sion and annihilation of alternate worldviews, ways of
knowing, and systems of values (Aikenhead & Ogawa,
2007; R’boul, 2022). Alternative frameworks come from
intercultural philosophy, postcolonial studies, and other dis-
ciplines that challenge the dominance of science, which is
usually framed as a western institution (Elshakry, 2010).
Yet there is much in science (as an institution and form of
social practice) that seems to offer us unique values, virtues,
tools and protocols of wide applicability. How can we rec-
oncile cultural and epistemic diversity with the need to have
a ﬁrm empirical grounding in many domains of activity, a
rational deliberative process to resolve disagreements, and
maintain a cohesive and inclusive pluralistic civil society?
This challenge is especially urgent when faced with whole-
sale rejection of scientiﬁcally based public health measures
or widespread beliefs in outlandish conspiracy theories.
An ecosocial view of knowledge and
knowing
Generally, a bare concept of norms abstracted from their
social context is not sufﬁcient to judge whether knowledge
claims or beliefs are well-founded, dubious or pathological.
To get a better picture of the origins and grounding of
everyday beliefs, misinformation, or engagement with con-
spiracy theories, as well as pathological phenomena like
delusions, it is useful to make use of notions of embodi-
ment, enactment, embedding and extension that are core
concepts of 4E cognitive science (Kirmayer & Ramstead,
2017). Here, embodiment stands for the ways that the
body (our anatomy and physiology and the resultant phe-
nomenology) shapes experience— as well as the way our
engagements with the world reshape our bodies. As a
result of processes of embodiment, everyday knowledge
and conviction are often conveyed through bodily felt
experiences that seem unmediated. Their very immediacy
warrants their veridicality. The concept of enactment
emphasizes that our bodily experience is not simply a
process of building up a picture of the world, but one of
active engagement with the world in ways that aim to main-
tain our functioning and achieve our goals. Cognition and
perception serve action through ongoing sensorimotor
cycles that include brain, body and world. What is experi-
enced as unmediated, in fact, arises from these cycles.
The processes of embodiment and enactment then are
embedded and extended; that is, they always occur in a
nested series of contexts: the body itself and its interocep-
tive processes and possibilities for sensory orientation and
movement; our immediate environment and relationships
with others; and the larger social networks and niches
through which we collaborate with others. The human envir-
onmental niche is fundamentally social: co-constructed
through interactions with others. The social environment
provides a wide array of cultural affordances, potential
modes of perception and action that depend on understand
the cultural meanings and scripts (Ramstead et al., 2016).
We learn how to perceive and act with cultural affordances
through developmental processes that involve speci ﬁc
regimes of attention. In effect, we learn to think with and
Kirmayer 797
through other minds, whether present as people in our local
world, or accessed through the structures and traces other
people leave in our institutions and landscape (Veissière
et al., 2020).
Accounting for the cultural shaping of experience then
requires that we move beyond the individual-centric view
that dominates psychology and psychiatry. Culture is not
entirely a matter of personal agency— indeed, it is mostly
not a matter of the agency of the person at hand but of
others— historical forebears, family, clan, community,
institutional authorities— all manner of others who frame
one’s life and to whom one must answer. Of course,
those others are constrained, in turn, by a social system
with its history, exigencies, imperatives and momentum.
Understanding how this larger landscape of meaning inter-
acts with our efforts to make sense of the world is a central
concern for cultural psychiatry and points toward a situated
view of mind, brain and person.
Conviction, active inference and the
Bayesian brain
Current views of the brain emphasize that its primary and
most general function is to maintain the life and viability
of the individual by predicting changes in the environment
(Clark, 2015). The same methods of Bayesian prediction
that govern basic cognition may also account for other
aspects of self-regulation and allostasis (Pezzulo et al.,
2015). The notion of predictive processing has been elabo-
rated in models of active inference, in which the aim is not
only to update models to more accurately predict the envir-
onment, but to act on our body and the world to make them
more closely conform to our needs and goals. The active
inference process is driven by discrepancies between pre-
diction and observation that lead to updating of predictions,
corrective actions to make the body or world conﬁrm to
expectations, and information foraging to identify resources
that allow better prediction. Crucially, in active inference,
sources of information about the world are also associated
with weightings of their precision or reliability (Parr
et al., 2022). In computational models of cognition,
changes in the weighting of expectations or of external
sources of information can lead to forms ofﬁxed belief
analogous to delusions (Adams et al., 2022).
Although framed as a theory of individual organismic
survival and adaption, the boundaries of the cognizing
agent in active inference areﬂexible. In modeling, these
boundaries are formalized as Markov blankets, boundaries
across which one has only limited statistical information
about events from which the actual (hidden) states of the
world must be inferred. The Markov blankets of human
cognition can be ﬂexibly extended to include our bodily
extensions (glasses, gains, books, computers) and inter-
action with others (Clark, 2017; Kirchhoff & Kiverstein,
2019). In particular, humans are constituted as knowers in
relationship to each other, co-generating and sharing
experiences, facts, hypotheses, and conjectures about the
world. This exchange occurs not through an even-handed
sharing of all information with everyone, but within speciﬁc
social institutions, communities, niches or networks. In
some cases, these networks may constitute epistemic com-
munities— deﬁned and delimited by commitments to spe-
ciﬁc ways of knowing (Knorr-Cetina, 2007). These
communities may form in response to shared cultures, iden-
tities, and interests and also in response or resistance to
dominant epistemes (McHugh, 2017). Characterizing the
dynamics involved in the production and circulation of
knowledge involves understanding the networks that
connect (and isolate people) and the epistemic spaces or
niches they occupy (Navin, 2013).
3
The active inference framework introduced above can be
extended to include the dynamics of epistemic communities
(Figure 1). These communities are composed of individual
knowers who operate with the same principles and who are
coupled with each other in ways that result in strong mutual
inﬂuence. This can lead to local consensus but also, in some
instances, to increasing polarization of views within and
between communities.
Epistemic communities (as a group of active inference
agents united by shared priors and objects of attention or
concern) can inﬂuence an active inference agent extrinsic
to their group in three main ways: (a) by installing new
priors that inﬂuence the expectations and information for-
aging of the individuals; (b) by inﬂuencing the channels
of communication through which the individual observes
the world; and (c) by acting on the world itself (in both
direct and indirect ways, that is, for example, by inﬂuencing
others) to change the underlying processes. This very
general framework provides ways to approach our current
predicament and clarify what is new and challenging in
contemporary ecologies of information. In particular, the
dynamics of epistemic bubbles (in which we are exposed
to the views of only those who are like-minded) and echo
chambers (in which we discount the epistemic authority
of those who do not share our identity or allegiances)
(Nguyen, 2020)— both of which may re ﬂect our own
agency as well as the effects of social media platform algo-
rithms and manipulations— can be modeled as features of
these ecologies (Albarracin et al., 2022).
The priors that epistemic communities install may
concern purported facts about the world (the election was
stolen), but also ontologies (there are hidden cabals that
control the world); and epistemic assumptions about the
availability and reliability of speciﬁc sources of information
in general or for speciﬁc domains (e.g., reliable information
on climate change is provided by scientists, religious
leaders, the leader of my political party, or rich business-
men). Observations of the world depend on background
knowledge, position, and perspective, but also on access
798 Transcultural Psychiatry 61(5)
to information, which is mediated by our social network,
access to experts, and social institutions. This is increasingly
dominated by social media. Finally, epistemic communities
can work behind the scenes to reconﬁgure the world to
change the landscape within which we forage for informa-
tion. This can occur by changing the dominant theories
and metaphors that inﬂuence the reception of information
or by changing the architecture and algorithmic regulation
of inter-community networks and communication. This
may hive us off in separate communities or distort the rep-
resentativeness of the environments we are able to explore
(epistemic gerrymandering). Unfortunately, the resultant
landscape can be much smaller than or disconnected from
the larger contexts that actually determine our fate, as indi-
viduals and as a species.
Social epistemology and the pandemic’s
“new normal”
The prolonged uncertainty, anxiety, and restrictive public
health measures associated with COVID were described
as “the new normal” (Corpuz, 2021). “New” carries the
connotations of novelty, singularity, and uniqueness,
whereas “normal”here stands for normalization, a response
to the persistent situation of crisis, which hides the social,
cultural, and political production of everydayness
(Sunstein, 2021). This new normal confronted us with a
set of problems in social epistemology.
A social perspective on epistemology begins with the
recognition that knowing and believing are not simply indi-
vidual cognitive process but fundamentally based on par-
ticipation in forms of life. As such, knowing is
intertwined with social structure and process, which can
be understood in terms of culture, social niche, habits,
and community. This includes features that are presented
to us as cultural affordances — potential modes of our
local niches or larger social contexts that depend on cultural
practices. The social dimensions of epistemology also
concern the politics of knowledge as power (Foucault,
2007; Han, 2018). Both the local and distal ecologies of
knowledge and the dynamics of power contribute to how
and what we know or can know.
The pandemic threw into high relief a set of longstand-
ing questions about epistemic authority associated with
modernity, secularization, and industrialization. Epistemic
authority is used to warrant attention to and action on
Figure 1. Active inference and the inﬂuence of epistemic communities. The lower part of theﬁgure (adapted from Parr et al., 2022, p.
24, MIT Press, CC) represents the process by which individuals infer the state of the world through active inference. Thisﬁgure adds
another layer labeled“epistemic community” that consists of groups of interacting individuals engaged in active inference under speciﬁc
regimes of attention. Epistemic communities inﬂuence this process in three ways: (a) installing priors about the world (e.g., as a
dangerous place, full of threats, untrustworthy leaders, and unreliable sources of information); (b) shaping the process of observation of
the world (e.g., through media exposure); and (c) creating events and processes in the world (e.g., real conspiracies or insurrections).
Kirmayer 799
social problems— amplifying the sense of danger, risk, vul-
nerability and urgency, and the potential for corrective
action, which then drive epistemic authority. The displace-
ment of religion and its spiritual and institutional authority
by science and technology, characteristic of modernity, has
been a partial process that has worked well only for a
segment of the population. Science education in the
general population is limited and the inevitable uncertain-
ties in researchﬁndings undermine conﬁdence in its author-
ity among those who do not grasp its epistemology (Covitt
& Anderson, 2022). For this and other reasons having to do
with identity and community, many people turn to other
sources of authority to resolve uncertainty in decision
making about major life events. The pandemic had features
that presented speciﬁc epistemic conundrums: large scale
(the pan in pandemic); massive uncertainty, inconsistency,
contradiction, and confusion; the illusion of a simple causal
agent (the virus), which implied there ought to be simple
explanations of causality and corresponding attributions
of responsibility and blame, as well as simple solutions;
the rapid spread of (dis)information through the internet
and other media in what was termed an“infodemic” (The
Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2020; Zielinski, 2021).
4
In the case of the pandemic, settling on basic“facts”
including the scope of the pandemic, its origins, and appro-
priate prevention or treatment on which to base action
posed many challenges, reﬂecting the pace and methodo-
logical limitations of scientiﬁc research. Questions persisted
about the scale, magnitude, incidence, rate of spread of the
infection, the origins of the virus, and effective methods of
prevention and treatment. There was great uncertainty
about the number of cases: the reporting of incidence
rates was technically challenging, and there was deliberate
hiding, minimizing or manipulation of thoseﬁgures for pol-
itical reasons (Billig & Marinho, 2023). Counting depends
on diagnosis, which involves case ﬁnding and accurate
testing; asymptomatic cases were common; estimates of
surplus deaths could include indirect effects of both
pandemic and response, including mitigation efforts
(reluctance to go to hospital, impacts of social isolation,
etc.) (Ibrahim, 2020; Manski & Molinari, 2021; Russell
et al., 2020).
Origin stories are the fount of myth making and the
COVID-19 pandemic was no exception. Claims about the
origins of the virus were driven by political interests and
concerns— and deliberate attempts to assign or de ﬂect
blame. Genetic epidemiological strategies for establish
origin take time and data. Conspiracy theories were rife
(bat caves, pangolins, animal markets, research labs, bio-
weapons) (Birchall & Knight, 2023; Freeman et al., 2022;
Nattrass, 2023; Stein et al., 2021; Sturm & Albrecht,
2021). Although some of these conspiracy theories had
nuggets of truth, many were far-fetched. And even if
some potentially relevant elements were identi ﬁed, an
adequate account would have to consider the interaction
of multiple factors rather than the single“big” revelation
that captures public attention.
Public health efforts to slow the spread of infection
depend on probabilistic reasoning and reducing the risk of
an event that may not happen. The beneﬁcial effects of
social distancing, use of protective equipment, limitations
on mobility and other measures were delayed and general,
whereas the inconvenience, loss and harms of these inter-
ventions for the general public were immediate and speciﬁc.
Opposition to masks and social distancing was based partly
on concern about the negative effects of these preventive
measures, partly on mistrust of authorities (again framed
not so much against professions but against what was per-
ceived or portrayed as partisan politics), and partly on the
proliferation of internet misinformation (Caceres et al.,
2022; Gabarron et al., 2021; Tasnim et al., 2020). We
have basic emotional systems of evaluation and response
related to infection that play a role in pandemic response
(the laws of contagion, the mechanisms of disgust, purity
and danger) (cf. Curtis, 2013; Curtis & de Barra, 2018),
and ordinarily these would be sufﬁcient to motivate pre-
ventive measures. But, for many, overarching social and
political concerns trumped more basic threat perception
and response.
5
In the case of vaccine resistance, anxieties about bio-
logical interventions and increasingly elaborate conspiracy
theories played a role for many people (Birchall & Knight,
2023). Most medical interventions are directly beneﬁcial to
individuals. In the case of public health prevention mea-
sures, the beneﬁts are mainly to others. Public health direc-
tives on masking, social distancing and the use of public
spaces were viewed through the lens of libertarian civil
society and the commons, and denounced as infringements
on freedom and liberty (Sunstein, 2021). In the US and
some other neoliberal regimes, the notion of the common
good seemed to have worn thin or to have been deliberately
undermined by right-wing ideologues.
The COVID pandemic saw many claims of efﬁcacy for
untried, implausible or obviously dangerous treatments
(e.g., hydroxychloroquine, ivermectin, bleach!) (Ghai
et al., 2024; Perlis et al., 2023; Pilkington, 2020).
Determining effective treatments for speci ﬁc types of
disease poses its own distinct epistemic challenges. When
rates of infection or recovery are not well known, establish-
ing the beneﬁt of interventions in observational studies is
limited by the absence of comparisons or controls. In
open trials, placebo effects may shroud the ability to
detect speciﬁce fﬁcacy. Ultimately, determining efﬁcacy
requires clinical trials, which take time and large
numbers. Despite the lack of such information— and, even-
tually, clear indication of lack of efﬁcacy— many people
endorsed and tried these treatments based on advocacy by
politically motivated endorsements and presentations on
social media. In practice, of course, people often follow
advice of friends and neighbors either from conviction or
800 Transcultural Psychiatry 61(5)
a “why not”strategy— which may be benign unless it leads
them to reject effective treatments or suffer from serious
side effects from unproven interventions. In this case, the
severity of the potential illness, the endorsement by
highly partisan mediaﬁgures, and wishful thinking resulted
in continued interest in dubious or ineffective treatments
despite the weight of scientiﬁc evidence and professional
opinion against them.
Although the COVID pandemic highlighted problems in
the social production and dissemination of knowledge, we
face similar epistemic dilemmas in many other arenas,
including the proliferation of disinformation and deliberate
“fake news”(especially by those who accuse others of it) (J.
Rose, 2020). In the US, this has included disinformation
campaigns related to the global climate crisis, advocacy
for gun rights as a pillar of collective identity despite the
devastating effects of gun violence, increasing right-wing
and white supremacist radicalization, and systematic
attempts to disqualify political opponents, undermine the
democratic political process and sabotage the peaceful
transfer of power (Galison & Proctor, 2020; Michaels,
2006; Oreskes & Conway, 2008). Though each has a dis-
tinct history and trajectory, these arenas or campaigns of
ignorance and disinformation share some common features
reﬂecting the impact of the internet and social media in
increasing the speed, breadth and reach of particular
voices and positions from the margins (L. Rose & Bartoli,
2020) and the rise of populist politics and the erosion of
the values of liberalism and inclusion (Habermas, 2023).
All of this is driven by the structural violence and social
inequities that amplify economic disparities (Milanovic,
2016) and occurs against the backdrop of the global
climate crisis that feeds a general sense of impending catas-
trophe (Bould, 2021).
The scale and scope of these changes and the corrosive
effects on civil society point to the urgency to think
through the intersection of politics, information ecologies,
and epistemic values in multiple domains. It useful to ask
what is common or unique to the different issues around
which we see epistemic conﬂict and polarization, including
climate change, gun violence, and political polarization itself.
Ecologies of information: grounding
knowledge in empiricism, community, and
critique
The spread of information and the ways it is taken up by dif-
ferent individuals or groups can be tracked as a kind of epi-
demiology of representations (Sperber, 1985). The analogy
with epidemiology and contagion is inexact, however,
because individuals are active information foragers and
ideas are not discrete, fungible units of information or fac-
toids, but generative images and metaphors that are linked
to larger narratives that are part of particular ideologies
and institutions. In effect, information comes prepackaged
with interpretations, framed in particular ways that make
them emotionally charged, and associated with speciﬁc
identities, afﬁliations, and social positions. Certain kinds
of stories are especially appealing and more likely to“go
viral” because they tap into common cognitive biases
(Boudry et al., 2015), as well as pre-existing prejudice or
ideologies (Cassam, 2019) and hence mobilize strong
affect, identiﬁcation, and social positioning.
This is well illustrated by the long tradition of paranoid
thinking in US politics (Hofstadter, 1965). As a cognitive
and interpretive style, this paranoia is based on the convic-
tion that there are hidden, malevolent forces at work in the
world and the realization that, in novelist Thomas
Pynchon’s words, “everything is connected” (Pynchon,
1973) through “other orders behind the visible” (Bersani,
1989)— indeed, “God is the original conspiracy theory”
(Sanders, 1975). In recent years, a particular version of
this conspiracy-oriented worldview has become increas-
ingly popular and mainstream, and has been largely
adopted as a style (and even an explicit platform) by the
Republican Party (Appelrouth, 2017). The irony is that
those who like to call themselves“conservative” increas-
ingly adopt attitudes to truth and public debate that are
radical and highly corrosive to civil society and antithetical
to conservative values and institutions.
6 This does not
mean, I should add, that those who subscribe to such con-
spiracy theories are clinically paranoid.
7 The pathology
here is social not psychiatric.
All systems of belief (or sporadic beliefs) invoke author-
ity structures. Epistemic authority itself may be warranted
by different means from the knowledge it warrants (e.g.,
group afﬁliations, religious commitments, ethnic identities).
This might lead us to adopt styles of reasoning that are
based on the ex-cathedra statements of an authorityﬁgure
but, more interestingly, it could lead us to ground our con-
victions in appeals to bodily feelings or intuitions that are,
in fact, the outcome of implicitly installed biases of atten-
tion and evaluation. So, we trust CNN, MSNBC or Fox
News according to our tribal allegiances (which we may
experience as aesthetic preferences), but then receive a
barrage of images and stories that reorganize our expecta-
tions and information foraging in the virtual worlds of
screens and beyond. The dilemma is that, although we
may be aware of our initial choice of allegiance (and able
to give a reasoned account of why we chose it), the conse-
quences of this choice are largely implicit and outside con-
scious control. This points to the need for critical analysis of
the dynamics of media exposure and efforts to uncover the
design of the algorithms that capture and canalize our atten-
tion (Hari, 2022; O’Neil, 2016).
We are living in local and global information ecologies
that have toxic effects for individuals, communities, and
global civil society. This involves both intentional exploit-
ation of misinformation and deliberate production of
Kirmayer 801
disinformation (Adler & Drieschova, 2021; Cosentino,
2020), as well as unintended and unanticipated effects of
connectivity through the vehicles of social media. The
media platforms themselves continue to grow, with govern-
mental limited regulation, despite their harmful effects,
because they provide enormous economic gain for corpora-
tions and individuals.
In our current information ecology, the sources of infor-
mation are proliferating while trust in traditional sources is
fast eroding— through direct challenges and efforts at dis-
qualiﬁcation as well as deliberate exploitation of the
dynamics of information foraging. Responding to this epi-
stemic challenge requires rethinking the social basis or
facilitators of empiricism, rationality, deliberation, and
decision making both in terms of adaptive value and contri-
bution to forms of life that we value ethically and
aesthetically.
In this context, it seems important to revisit the claims
for science as a social institution and practice that has some-
thing vital to offer civil society beyond advances in technol-
ogy. This requires characterizing what is speciﬁc to science
as a social epistemic practice (Pigliucci, 2015; Pigliucci &
Boudry, 2013). As Harry Collins and colleagues argue,
science has some speciﬁc values and virtues that recom-
mend it as a crucial element in any form of life we
imagine might speak to our current predicament (Collins,
2023; Collins & Evans, 2017; Collins et al., 2020; Collins
& Pinch, 1998, 2008). The epistemic virtues of science
include: recognition of the unﬁnished, incomplete, and ten-
tative nature of knowledge that leaves room to discover new
facts, models, and metaphors and better understand their
implications; tolerance of uncertainty, avoiding premature
foreclosure; an intolerance of ambiguity, pushing for clari-
ﬁcation so that competing views can be compared and
tested; a willingness to adhere to rigid rules of argument,
demonstration, and accountability, so that it is possible to
learn from unexpected consequences; an openness to cri-
tique through reasoned argument and counter-evidence;
and a commitment to conservatism, keeping what works
and requiring that it be subsumed by new more accurate
or encompassing frameworks.
8
None of these values are unique to science but taken
together they mark off a particular form of life and inten-
tional community that offers a contrast with the narrow
interest driven activities of partisan politics, marketing
and religious indoctrination. These virtues are too important
to be discounted as simply reﬂecting the interests of a par-
ticular cultural or historical group (Collins & Evans, 2017).
Pluralism and the ethics of knowing
The trustworthiness and objectivity of science results from
speciﬁc kinds of social process that include openness, trans-
parency, and commitment to truth (Collins, 2024; Oreskes,
2019). The interplay of diverse voices and critical
perspectives is an essential part of this process. Oreskes
argues that“objectivity is maximized… when the commu-
nity is sufﬁciently diverse that a broad range of views can
be developed, heard, and appropriately considered ”
(2019, p. 6). But when sources of epistemic authority
differ and make claims that are in direct conﬂict, we may
face serious challenges inﬁnding common ground.
Cultural communities may build their collective identity
around particular bodies of knowledge and ways of
knowing that seem incommensurable with the frameworks
of biomedicine. The dilemma for intercultural work is that
in the case of epistemic communities, knowledge claims
are not simply statements of (believed in) fact, but simultan-
eously expressions (afﬁrmations) of identity and commit-
ments to a way of life or survivance of a community
(Kirmayer, 2012). This means that challenges to the cred-
ibility of knowledge become challenges to the legitimacy
or viability of the community. Further, for those who see
epistemic commitments as central to identity, the knowl-
edge claims of others are prima facie evidence of their
own identities and allegiances. This undercuts the possibil-
ity of a shared understanding of“the facts”and hence of the
potential to resolve conﬂicts about matters of fact as a pre-
requisite to debate about the implications of alternative
courses of action, which can be weighted in terms of hier-
archies of values and desired outcomes.
Current efforts to respect Indigenous knowledges in
healthcare research and clinical decision making provide
an arena in which some of the challenges of reconciling
alternative epistemologies can be clearly seen (Cohen-
Fournier et al., 2021). Responding to the history of margin-
alization and oppression, Indigenous scholars have advo-
cated for the value of Indigenous knowledges and ways
of knowing. Sometimes these knowledges are described
as fundamentally empirical; that is, based on practical
knowledge, observation, and experiment to ﬁnd what
works. In other instances, knowledge claims are based on
appeals to the depth of oral tradition and practices, traced
back to creation stories, or connected to a sacred relation-
ship with the land, nonhuman others or the creator. These
forms of warranting truth are based on particular ontologies,
identities, and commitments to communities, or ways of
life that may not be shared with or even available to
others. Though originally rooted in a particular culture
and place, these knowledges have been put into wider cir-
culation through exchanges between communities and,
increasingly, through the internet. To some extent, this cir-
culation de-territorializes this knowledge, detaching it from
its speciﬁc connections to land and place and encouraging
others toﬁnd parallels with their own life situations.
Whatever their warrants, however, these bodies of
knowledge cannot address all of the concerns raised by
a health problem (like COVID) or an anthropogenic catas-
trophe (like climate change) for several reasons: (a) they are
originally based on small-scale societies and local contexts
802 Transcultural Psychiatry 61(5)
that may not be generalizable to other scales and contexts;
(b) they may be valued not for their practical efﬁcacy, but
for the ways they afﬁrm identities and worldviews that
have intrinsic value for the culture and community; (c)
they may be consistent with a relational ethos that is a
good foundation for a community but that does not expli-
citly address the problem of cultural diversity in the larger
society. Blanket acceptance of diverse epistemologies can
not go very far in resolving the conﬂicts that arise in health-
care and politics where too much is at stake.
Part of the problem may be the way we use current
models of rationality and decision making to understand
popular beliefs and practices. The analysis of rationality is
a blunt instrument for distinguishing problematic healthcare
decisions. There are issues of the moral weighing of person
versus public risk that also need toﬁgure in our evaluation
of others’positions. Whatever their logic, the errant deci-
sion making on display in responses to the pandemic and
in current political polarization seems to reﬂect ideological
commitments that conﬂate political power with epistemic
authority. In the case of the US, there may be an underlying
faith in the“marketplace of ideas”as a path to truth. But as
political philosopher Wendy Brown suggests, “Both
Nietzsche and Weber would groan at the marketplace of
ideas often hailed as truth ’s determinant today, as if
markets and truth were ever related, as if markets secure
and reﬁne rather than abuse and degrade truth, and as if tar-
geting and trolling had not become permanent features of
all marketplaces, including those of ideas” (Brown, 2023,
p. 30–31). The same distortions plague public attitudes
toward science in healthcare and encourage us to be skep-
tical about claims for authoritative knowledge that are
driven by commercial interests or ideologies.
Similar skepticism should apply to claims that certain
practices (or medicines) are well-founded because they
have stood the test of time— as if time itself is the arbiter
of truth. In the case of cultural traditions or practices this
amounts to a forme fruste of social Darwinism: survival
of the practices that are theﬁttest. But we do well to remem-
ber that Darwinian ﬁtness is reproductive ﬁtness; on this
analogy practices that contribute directly or indirectly to
reproductive ﬁtness may persist and, if replicable, prevail
over time. This means that practices that contribute to
other distal or disparate goals or values may not be selected
for. Even when there is a net gain in reproductiveﬁtness, it
does not mean the beneﬁts are evenly distributed. In fact,
practices persist for many reasons including theirﬁt with
social structures and systems of power that are resistant to
change. It is a commonplace, that practices that are
harmful to some or many persist for long periods, provided
only that they beneﬁt those in power. The duration of per-
sistence reﬂects the speed with which the negative effects
spread and how decisive they are for the population.
Using a hair pomade that causes cancer might be popular
for a long time if it confers aesthetic advantages in sexual
selection, and binding feet in ways that impede mobility
may work for a privileged class able to be carried about.
So the claim that
“this medicine must work because it has
been used for millennia” is compelling only if there have
been explicit empirical tests (proto-science), alternatives
are available and have been compared and found wanting,
and there is an unimpeded path from evidence of effective-
ness to the decision to use the medicine. In reality, compet-
ing values and concerns other than therapeutic efﬁcacy may
contribute to the persistence of healing practices. These
other uses of knowledge must be considered to make
sense of the value and limitations of epistemic pluralism.
Many competing knowledge claims can be resolved by rec-
ognizing that they have different domains of application or
goals. What at ﬁrst appears incommensurable may then
then become complementary.
Conclusion
Science can provide a partial antidote to the toxic brew of
lies, misdirection, and conspiracy theories that impede
effective public health and pollute political rhetoric. The
problem we face is not with deﬁcient rationality per se,
but with a lack of background knowledge and erosion of
trust in institutions that can provide reliable information.
These are consequences of education and civic engagement,
but also of the overarching ecology of knowledge and infor-
mation in which we are embedded. Rather than focusing on
individuals’irrationality, then the“solution lies with man-
aging the epistemic environment” (Levy, 2023, p. 944).
Thinking in terms of ecologies of knowledge may allow
us to work out the dynamics of epistemic communities
both in their internal consequences for the decision
making of participants and in their externalities, which
manifest as forms of civil society that can allow equity,
diversity, and deliberative democracy.
The analysis of epistemic communities suggests three
broad approaches oriented toward speciﬁc targets: (a) alter-
ing the priors that govern individual cognition, action, and
perception; (b) regulating the channels through which we
access and receive information about the world; and (c)
working toward social change that reduces structural vio-
lence and repairs and protects the forms of social life that
enable coexistence.
The ways we perceive the world depend on our knowl-
edge and expectations or cognitive priors and these result
from life experience including education and participation
in public debate. This points to the need to improve educa-
tion about the epistemic virtues of science as an institution
committed to systematic inquiry, truthfulness, transparency,
accountability, tolerance of uncertainty, recognition of cog-
nitive and social biases, and evidence-based reasoned cri-
tique. Education about other institutions (government,
law, healthcare) can also foster the trust in institutions in
ways that foster civil society and deliberative democracy.
Kirmayer 803
Social media have powerful effects on how we access
information about the world. Far from offering broad
vistas, they have become narrow portals manipulated by
political and commercial interests, using algorithms that
seek to monetize human attention by capitalizing on our
emotional and epistemic vulnerabilities. Regulating social
media and the internet is thus an urgent priority. This regu-
lation must allow us to uncover hidden interests and inter-
dict (and prosecute) malign actors. Such regulation
requires state interventions; it cannot be left to corporations
that are in fundamental conﬂicts of interest. In addition to
curtailing these deliberate attacks on civil society and indi-
vidual well-being, we need to clarify the inadvertent conse-
quences of the scale and speed of the internet and counteract
the ampliﬁcation of misinformation and promotion of disin-
formation that contribute to harmful polarization.
Strengthening civil society will also require direct action
to counter deliberate efforts to discredit and destroy demo-
cratic institutions. This includes uncovering and dismantling
real conspiracies (like election interference by foreign gov-
ernments and their proxies; see: Henschke et al., 2020)
and taking legal action against antidemocratic actors.
Tracing disaffection and ressentiment to its roots, we need
to address the growing inequalities and inequities in local
and global society that lead to marginalization and exclu-
sion. Most basically, we need to create spaces of inclusion
in which we can engage in the kinds of open dialogue that
promote mutual recognition and respect for the other.
Acknowledgments
This paper was prepared for the McGill Advanced Study Institute
in Cultural Psychiatry on “The Fragility of Truth: Social
Epistemology in a Time of Polarization and Pandemic,” which
took place June 28–30, 2022. I thank the workshop and conference
participants for their helpful comments on earlier versions of this
paper.
Declaration of conﬂicting interests
The author declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author received noﬁnancial support for the research, author-
ship, and/or publication of this article.
ORCID iD
Laurence J. Kirmayer https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6228-1739
Notes
1. Korzybski (1958) argued for the importance of
“non-Aristotelian” logics in which the law of the excluded
middle does not hold; that is, logics in which truth is multiva-
lued, multidimensional, probabilistic or fuzzy. A variety of
such systems have been developed, including fuzzy set
theory with relevance to reasoning about natural categories
(Sadegh-Zadeh, 2000). These logics take on new signiﬁcance
in the light of discussions of alternate epistemologies (Reiter,
2020) and efforts to develop quantum–theory-like models of
cognition (Pothos & Busmeyer, 2022).
2. There are several distinct approaches under the broad banner of
social epistemology that vary in their views of the ability of
science or other social institutions to produce “truth”
(Niiniluoto, 2020).
3. The notion of epistemic communities then needs to consider
history, geography and above all, politics. In the wired world
of social media, epistemic communities do not respect national
boundaries, but follow the lines of social media consumption.
For example, the uptake of conspiracy theories in Canada
reﬂects consumption of online material from US X (formerly
Twitter) accounts (Bridgman et al., 2022).
4. For a critique of the infodemic metaphor see: Simon and
Camargo (2023). The spread of misinformation reﬂects both
social and psychological dynamics that differ in many ways
from the spread of an infectious disease (Greenspan &
Loftus, 2021; La Rocca et al., 2023).
5. Disgust can amplify these social and political dynamics as well
(Kam, 2019).
6. On rescuing the word “conservative” for its rightful use
meaning to preserve, protect, and uphold what needs to be
(ought to be) conserved of traditions over time, see
“Rescuing conservatism: A defense of existing value ” in
Cohen, 2012, pp. 143 –174). Of course, this conservatism
requires constant adaptation to changing contexts so that
what is preserved is value not empty form.
7. Indeed, Alsuhibani et al. (2022) describe differences in some of
the personality traits and characteristics associated with para-
noia and those associated with the tendency to endorse conspir-
acy theories. Then too, narcissistic personality traits may lead
individuals to see the world mainly in terms of its ability
shore up their fragile self-esteem resulting in a style of
thought that sociologist Fred Goldner called “pronoia”
(Kirmayer, 1983).
8. For discussions of the virtues of science from social–historical,
epistemic, political, and pragmatic perspectives see: Collins,
2023; Gellner, 2013; Lapsley & Chaloner, 2020: Laudan,
2012; Oreskes, 2019; Van Dongen & Paul, 2017.
References
Adams, R. A., Vincent, P., Benrimoh, D., Friston, K. J., & Parr, T.
(2022). Everything is connected: Inference and attractors in
delusions. Schizophrenia Research, 245,5 –22. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.schres.2021.07.032
Adler, E., & Drieschova, A. (2021). The epistemological chal-
lenge of truth subversion to the liberal international order.
International Organization, 75(2), 359–386. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S0020818320000533
Aikenhead, G. S., & Ogawa, M. (2007). Indigenous knowledge
and science revisited.Cultural Studies of Science Education,
2(3), 539–620. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11422-007-9067-8
Albarracin, M., Demekas, D., Ramstead, M. J., & Heins, C.
(2022). Epistemic communities under active inference.
Entropy, 24(4), 476. https://doi.org/10.3390/e24040476
Alsuhibani, A., Shevlin, M., Freeman, D., Sheaves, B., & Bentall,
R. P. (2022). Why conspiracy theorists are not always
804 Transcultural Psychiatry 61(5)
paranoid: Conspiracy theories and paranoia form separate factors
with distinct psychological predictors. PloS One , 17(4),
e0259053. https:/ /doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0259053
Altay, S., Berriche, M., & Acerbi, A. (2023). Misinformation on
misinformation: Conceptual and methodological challenges.
Social Media + Society, 9(1), 1–13. 20563051221150412.
https://doi.org/10.1177/20563051221150412
Appelrouth, S. (2017). The paranoid style revisited:
Pseudo-conservatism in the 21st century. Journal of
Historical Sociology, 30(2), 342–368. https://doi.org/10.1111/
johs.12095
Bersani, L. (1989). Pynchon, paranoia, and literature.
Representations, 25,9 9–118. https://doi.org/10.2307/2928469
Billig, M., & Marinho, C. (2023). Preventing the political manipu-
lation of COVID-19 statistics: The importance of going beyond
diplomatic language. Language in Society, 52(5), 733–755.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0047404522000367
Birchall, C., & Knight, P. (2023).Conspiracy Theories in the Time
of COVID-19. Taylor & Francis.
Bortolotti, K. (2015).Irrationality. Polity.
Bortolotti, L. (2020).The epistemic innocence of irrational beliefs.
Oxford University Press.
Bortolotti, L. (2024). Is it pathological to believe conspiracy the-
ories? Transcultural Psychiatry , 56(4). https://doi.org/
10.1177/13634615231187243
Boudry, M., Blancke, S., & Pigliucci, M. (2015). What makes
weird beliefs thrive? The epidemiology of pseudoscience.
Philosophical Psychology, 28(8), 1177–1198. https://doi.org/
10.1080/09515089.2014.971946
Bould, M. (2021). The Anthropocene Unconscious: Climate
Catastrophe Culture. Verso Books.
Bridgman, A., Lavigne, M., Baker, M., Bergeron, T., Bohonos,
D., Burton, A., & Loewen, P. J. (2022).Mis- and disinforma-
tion during the 2021 Canadian Federal Election . Media
Ecosystem Observatory, Centre for Media, Technology and
Democracy, McGill University.
Brown, W. (2023). Nihilistic times: thinking with Max Weber.
Harvard University Press.
Bueter, A. (2019). Social epistemology and psychiatry. In Bluhm,
R., & Tekin, S. (Eds.),Bloomsbury companion to philosophy
of psychiatry(pp. 485–503). Bloomsbury.
Butcher, P. (2021). COVID-19 as a turning point in theﬁght
against disinformation. Nature Electronics, 4(1), 7–9. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41928-020-00532-2
Caceres, M. M. F., Sosa, J. P., Lawrence, J. A., Sestacovschi, C.,
Tidd-Johnson, A., Rasool, M. H. U., & Fernandez, J. P. (2022).
The impact of misinformation on the COVID-19 pandemic.
AIMS Public Health , 9(2), 262. https://doi.org/10.3934/
publichealth.2022018
Cassam, Q. (2019).Conspiracy theories. John Wiley & Sons.
Clark, A. (2015).Surﬁng uncertainty: Prediction, action, and the
embodied mind. Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2017). How to knit your own Markov blanket: Resisting
the second law with metamorphic minds. In Metzinger, T., &
Weise, W. (Eds.), Philosophy and predictive processing
(Vol. 3, pp. 1–19). MIND Group. https://doi.org/10.15502/
9783958573031
Cohen-Fournier, S. M., Brass, G., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2021).
Decolonizing health care: Challenges of cultural and epistemic
pluralism in medical decision-making with indigenous com-
munities. Bioethics, 35(8), 767–778. https://doi.org/10.1111/
bioe.12946
Cohen, G. A. (2012). Finding oneself in the other. Princeton
University Press.
Collins, H. M. (2023). The most important thing about science is
values. Interdisciplinary Science Reviews, 48(2), 264–275.
https://doi.org/10.1080/03080188.2022.2150414
Collins, H. M. (2024). Establishing veritocracy: Society, truth, and
science. Transcultural Psychiatry, 61(5), 783–794. https://
doi.org/10.1177/1363461524126072
Collins, H. M., & Evans, R. (2017). Why democracies need
science. John Wiley & Sons.
Collins, H. M., Evans, R., Durant, D., & Weinel, M. (2020).
Experts and the Will of the People. Palgrave Macmillan.
Collins, H. M., & Pinch, T. (1998).The Golem: What you should
know about science. Cambridge University Press.
Collins, H. M., & Pinch, T. (2008).Dr. Golem: How to think about
medicine. University of Chicago Press.
Connors, M. H., & Halligan, P. W. (2017). Belief and belief for-
mation: Insights from delusions. In Angel, H. F., Oviedo, L.,
Paloutzian, R. F., Runehov, A. L., & Seitz, R. J. (Eds.),
Processes of believing: The acquisition, maintenance, and
change in creditions(pp. 153–165). Springer.
Corpuz, J. C. G. (2021). Adapting to the culture of‘new normal’:A n
emerging response to COVID-19.Journal of Public Health,
43(2), e344–e345. https://doi.org/10.1093/pubmed/fdab057
Cosentino, G. (2020). Social media and the post-truth world
order: the global dynamics of disinformation. Springer Nature.
Covitt, B. A., & Anderson, C. W. (2022). Untangling trustworthi-
ness and uncertainty in science: Implications for science educa-
tion. Science & Education, 31(5), 1155–
1180. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11191-022-00322-6
Crichton, P., Carel, H., & Kidd, I. J. (2017). Epistemic injustice in
psychiatry. BJPsych Bulletin, 41(2), 65–70. https://doi.org/10.
1192/pb.bp.115.050682
Curtis, V. (2013). Don’t look, don’t touch: The science behind
revulsion. OUP Oxford.
Curtis, V., & de Barra, M. (2018). The structure and function of
pathogen disgust. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, 373(1751), 20170208. https://
doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2017.0208
Davies, M., & Coltheart, M. (2000). Introduction: Pathologies of
belief. Mind & Language , 15(1), 1–46. https://doi.org/10.
1111/1468-0017.00122
Douglas, K. M., & Sutton, R. M. (2023). What are conspiracy the-
ories? A de ﬁnitional approach to their correlates, conse-
quences, and communication.Annual Review of Psychology,
74, 271–298. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-032420-
031329
Elshakry, M. (2010). When science became western:
Historiographical reﬂections. Isis, 101(1), 98–109. https://doi.
org/10.1086/652691
Festinger, L. (1956). When Prophecy Fails . University of
Minnesota Press.
Fiedler, K., & Wänke, M. (2009). The cognitive-ecological approach
to rationality in social psychology.Social Cognition, 27(5), 699–
732. https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2009.27.5.699
Foucault, M. (2007).The Politics of Truth. Semiotext (e).
Kirmayer 805
Freeman, D., Waite, F., Rosebrock, L., Petit, A., Causier, C., East,
A., & Lambe, S. (2022). Coronavirus conspiracy beliefs, mis-
trust, and compliance with government guidelines in England.
Psychological Medicine, 52(2), 251–263. https://doi.org/10.
1017/S0033291720001890
Fricker, M., Graham, P. J., Henderson, D., & Pedersen, N. J., &
Wyatt, J. (Eds.) (2020). The Routledge handbook of social
epistemology. Routledge.
Gabarron, E., Oyeyemi, S. O., & Wynn, R. (2021).
COVID-19-related misinformation on social media: A system-
atic review.Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 99(6),
455. https://doi.org/10.2471/BLT.20.276782
Galbraith, N. (2021). Delusions and pathologies of belief: Making
sense of conspiracy beliefs via the psychosis continuum. In
Cardella, V., & Gangemi, A. (Eds.), Psychopathology and
philosophy of mind: What mental disorders can tell US
about our minds(pp. 117–144). Routledge.
Galison, P., & Proctor, R. (2020). Agnotology in action: A dia-
logue. In Kourany, J., & Carrier, M. (Eds.),Science and the
production of ignorance: When the quest for knowledge is
thwarted. MIT Press.
Gellner, E. (2013). Postmodernism, reason and religion .
Routledge.
Ghai, A., Sabour, E., Salonga, R., Ho, R., & Apollonio, D. E.
(2024). Exposures to bleach, peroxide, disinfectants, antima-
larials, and ivermectin reported to the California poison
control system before and during the COVID-19 pandemic,
2015–2021. Public Health Reports, 139(1), 112–119. https://
doi.org/10.1177/00333549231201679
Gigerenzer, G. (2020). What is bounded rationality? InRoutledge
handbook of bounded rationality(pp. 55–69). Routledge.
Gold, J., & Gold, I. (2015).Suspicious minds: How culture shapes
madness. Simon and Schuster.
Goldman, A. I. (1987). Foundations of social epistemics.Synthese,
73(1), 109–144. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00485444
Goldman, A., & Whitcomb, D.2011).Social epistemology: essen-
tial readings. Oxford University Press.
Good, B. J. (1993). Medicine, rationality and experience: an
anthropological perspective. Cambridge University Press.
Greenspan, R. L., & Loftus, E. F. (2021). Pandemics and info-
demics: Research on the effects of misinformation on
memory. Human Behavior and Emerging Technologies, 3(1),
8–12. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbe2.228
Habermas, J. (2023).A new structural transformation of the public
sphere and deliberative politics. John Wiley & Sons.
Han, B. C. (2018).What is power?John Wiley & Sons.
Hari, J. (2022). Stolen Focus: Why You Can’t Pay Attention.
Bloomsbury Publishing.
Henrich, J., Albers, W., Boyd, R., Gigerenzer, G., McCabe, K. A.,
Ockenfels, A., & Young, H. P. (2001). What is the role of
culture in bounded rationality? In Gigerenzer, G., & Selten,
R. (Eds.), Bounded rationality: The adaptive toolbox.
Dahlem workshop report(pp. 343
–359). MIT Press.
Henschke, A., Sussex, M., & O’Connor, C. (2020). Countering
foreign interference: Election integrity lessons for liberal dem-
ocracies. Journal of Cyber Policy, 5(2), 180–198. https://doi.
org/10.1080/23738871.2020.1797136
Hofstadter, R. (1965). The Paranoid Style in American Politics
and Other Essays. Vintage Books.
Ibrahim, N. K. (2020). Epidemiologic surveillance for controlling
COVID-19 pandemic: Types, challenges and implications.
Journal of Infection and Public Health, 13(11), 1630–1638.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiph.2020.07.019
Kahneman, D. (2011).Thinking, fast and slow. Macmillan.
Kam, C. D. (2019). Infectious disease, disgust, and imagining the
other. The Journal of Politics, 81(4), 1371–1387. https://doi.
org/10.1086/704438
Kelly, T. (2002). The rationality of belief and some other propos-
itional attitudes. Philosophical Studies, 110, 163–196. https://
doi.org/10.1023/A:1020212716425
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Kiverstein, J. (2019).Extended consciousness
and predictive processing: A third-wave view. Routledge.
Kirmayer, L. J. (1983). Paranoia and pronoia: The visionary and
the banal. Social Problems, 31(2), 170–179. https://doi.org/
10.2307/800208
Kirmayer, L. J. (1990). Resistance, reactance, and reluctance to
change: A cognitive attributional approach to strategic inter-
ventions. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy , 4(2), 83.
https://doi.org/10.1891/0889-8391.4.2.83
Kirmayer, L. J. (2012). Cultural competence and evidence-
based practice in mental health: Epistemic communities
and the politics of pluralism. Social Science & Medicine,
75(2), 249 –256. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2012.
03.018
Kirmayer, L. J., & Ramstead, M. J. (2017). Embodiment and
enactment in cultural psychiatry. In Tewes, C., Durt, C., &
Fuchs, T. (Eds.), Embodiment, enaction, and culture:
Investigating the constitution of the shared world(pp. 397–
422). MIT Press.
Klintman, M. (2022). Knowledge resistance. In Gross, M., &
McGoey, L. (Eds.), Routledge international handbook of
ignorance studies(pp. 323–333). Routledge. (2015).
Knorr-Cetina, K. (2007). Culture in global knowledge societies:
Knowledge cultures and epistemic cultures.Interdisciplinary
Science Reviews , 32(4), 361 –375. https://doi.org/10.1179/
030801807X163571
Korzybski, A. (1941). General semantics, psychiatry, psychother-
apy and prevention.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 98(2),
203–214. https://doi.org/10.1176/ajp.98.2.203
Korzybski, A. (1958). Science and sanity: An introduction to
non-Aristotelian systems and general semantics. Institute of
General Semantics.
The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020). [Editorial] the COVID-19
infodemic. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 20(8), 875. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30565-X
Lapsley, D., & Chaloner, D. (2020). Post-truth and science iden-
tity: A virtue-based approach to science education.
Educational Psychologist, 55(3), 132–143. https://doi.org/10.
1080/00461520.2020.1778480
La Rocca, G., Carignan, M. E., & Artieri, G. B. (eds) (2023).
Infodemic Disorder: COVID-19 Coping Strategies in
Europe, Canada and Mexico. Springer Nature.
Laudan, L. (2012).Science and Relativism. University of Chicago
Press.
Levy, N. (2023). Echoes of covid misinformation.Philosophical
Psychology, 36(5), 931–948.
Manski, C. F., & Molinari, F. (2021). Estimating the COVID-19
infection rate: Anatomy of an inference problem.Journal of
806 Transcultural Psychiatry 61(5)
Econometrics, 220(1), 181 –192. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jeconom.2020.04.041
McHugh, N. A. (2017). Epistemic communities and institutions. In
Kidd, I. J., Medina, J., & Polhaus, G. (Eds.),The Routledge
handbook of epistemic injustice(pp. 270–278). Routledge.
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding media: The extensions of
man. Routledge.
Michaels, D. (2006). Manufactured uncertainty: Protecting public
health in the age of contested science and product defense.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1076(1), 149–
162. https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1371.058
Milanovic, B. (2016). Global inequality. Harvard University
Press.
Nattrass, N. (2023). Promoting conspiracy theory: From AIDS to
COVID-19. Global Public Health, 18(1), 2172199. https://doi.
org/10.1080/17441692.2023.2172199
Navin, M. (2013). Competing epistemic spaces: How social epis-
temology helps explain and evaluate vaccine denialism.Social
Theory and Practice, 39(2), 241–264. https://doi.org/10.5840/
soctheorpract201339214
Nguyen, C. T. (2020). Echo chambers and epistemic bubbles.
Episteme, 17(2), 141–161. https://doi.org/10.1017/epi.2018.32
Niiniluoto, I. (2020). Social aspects of scienti ﬁc knowledge.
Synthese, 197(1), 447 –468. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-
018-1868-7
Nilsson, N. J. (2014).Understanding beliefs. MIT Press.
Obejas, A. (2021).Boomerang. Beacon Press.
O’Connor, C., & Weatherall, J. O. (2019).The misinformation
age. Yale University Press.
Olaniran, B., & Williams, I. (2020). Social media effects:
Hijacking democracy and civility in civic engagement. In
Jones, J., & Trice, M. (Eds.),Platforms, protests, and the chal-
lenge of networked democracy. Rhetoric, politics and
society (pp. 77 –94). Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-030-36525-7_5
O’Neil, C. (2016).Weapons of math destruction: How big data
increases inequality and threatens democracy. Broadway Books.
Oreskes, N. (2019).Why trust science?Princeton University Press.
Oreskes, N., & Conway, E. M. (2008). Challenging knowledge: How
climate science became a victim of the cold war. In Proctor, R. N.,
& Schiebinger, L. (Eds.),Agnotology: The making and unmaking
of ignorance(pp. 55–89). Stanford University Press.
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., & Friston, K. J. (2022).Active inference: the
free energy principle in mind, brain, and behavior. MIT Press.
Perlis, R. H., Trujillo, K. L., Green, J., Safarpour, A., Druckman,
J. N., Santillana, M., & Lazer, D. (2023). Misinformation, trust,
and use of ivermectin and hydroxychloroquine for COVID-19.
JAMA Health Forum, 4(9), e233257. https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamahealthforum.2023.3257
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. (2015). Active inference,
homeostatic regulation and adaptive behavioural control.
Progress in Neurobiology , 134,1 7 –35. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.pneurobio.2015.09.001
Pigliucci, M. (2015). Scientism and pseudoscience: A philosoph-
ical commentary. Journal of Bioethical Inquiry, 12(4), 569–
575. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11673-015-9665-1
Pigliucci, M., & Boudry, M.2013).Philosophy of pseudoscience:
Reconsidering the demarcation problem . University of
Chicago Press.
Pilkington, E. (2020). Revealed: Leader of group peddling bleach
as coronavirus‘cure’wrote to Trump this week.The Guardian,
April 24, 2020. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/
24/revealed-leader-group-peddling-bleach-cure-lobbied-trump-
coronavirus
Pothos, E. M., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2022). Quantum cognition.
Annual Review of Psychology, 73(1), 749–778. https://doi.
org/10.1146/annurev-psych-033020-123501
Proctor, R. N. (2008). Agnotology: A missing term to describe the
cultural production of ignorance (and its study). In Proctor,
R .N . ,&S c h i e b i n g e r ,L .( E d s . ) ,Agnotology: The making and
unmaking of ignorance(pp. 1–33). Stanford University Press.
Pynchon, T. (1973).Gravity’s rainbow. Viking.
Ramstead, M. J., Veissière, S. P., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2016). Cultural
affordances: Scaffolding local worlds through shared intentional-
ity and regimes of attention.Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 1090.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01090
R’boul, H. (2022). Postcolonial interventions in intercultural com-
munication knowledge: Meta-intercultural ontologies, decolo-
nial knowledges and epistemological polylogue. Journal of
International and Intercultural Communication, 15(1), 75–
93. https://doi.org/10.1080/17513057.2020.1829676
Reiter, B. (2020). Fuzzy epistemology: Decolonizing the social
sciences. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 50(1),
103–118. https://doi.org/10.1111/jtsb.12229
Rose, J. (2020). To believe or not to believe: An epistemic explor-
ation of fake news, truth, and the limits of knowing.Postdigital
Science and Education, 2(1), 202–216. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s42438-019-00068-5
Rose, L., & Bartoli, T. (2020). Agnotology and the epistemology
of ignorance: A framework for the propagation of ignorance as
a consequence of technology in a Balkanized media ecosystem.
Postdigital Science and Education, 2(1), 184
–201. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s42438-019-00084-5
Russell, T. W., Golding, N., Hellewell, J., Abbott, S., Wright, L.,
Pearson, C. A., & Kucharski, A. J. (2020). Reconstructing the
early global dynamics of under-ascertained COVID-19 cases
and infections. BMC Medicine, 18(1), 332. https://doi.org/10.
1186/s12916-020-01790-9
Sadegh-Zadeh, K. (2000). Fuzzy health, illness, and disease.The
Journal of Medicine and Philosophy, 25(5), 605–638. https://
doi.org/10.1076/0360-5310(200010)25:5;1-W;FT605
Sanders, S. (1975). Pynchon’s paranoid history.Twentieth Century
Literature, 21(2), 177–192. https://doi.org/10.2307/440707
Siegert, B. (2011). The map is the territory.Radical Philosophy,
169(Series 1), 13–16. https://www.radicalphilosophyarchive.-
com/issue-ﬁles/rp169_article3_mapistheterritory_siegert.pdf
Simon, F. M., & Camargo, C. Q. (2023). Autopsy of a metaphor:
The origins, use and blind spots of the‘infodemic’. New Media
& Society , 25(8), 2219 –2240. https://doi.org/10.1177/
14614448211031908
Sperber, D. (1985). Anthropology and psychology: Towards an
epidemiology of representations. Man, 20(1), 73–89. https://
doi.org/10.2307/2802222
Stein, R. A., Ometa, O., Shetty, S. P., Katz, A., Popitiu, M. I., &
Brotherton, R. (2021). Conspiracy theories in the era
of COVID-19: A tale of two pandemics. International
Journal of Clinical Practice, 75(2). https://doi.org/10.1111/
ijcp.13778
Kirmayer 807
Sturm, T., & Albrecht, T. (2021). Constituent COVID-19 apoca-
lypses: Contagious conspiracism, 5G, and viral vaccinations.
Anthropology & Medicine, 28(1), 122–139. https://doi.org/10.
1080/13648470.2020.1833684
Sunstein, C. R. (2021).This is not normal: The politics of every-
day expectations. Yale University Press.
Tasnim, S., Hossain, M. M., & Mazumder, H. (2020). Impact of
rumors and misinformation on COVID-19 in social media.
Journal of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, 53(3),
171–174. https://doi.org/10.3961/jpmph.20.094
Van Dongen, J., & Paul, H. (2017). Introduction: Epistemic
virtues in the sciences and the humanities. In Van Dongen,
J., & Paul, H. (Eds.),Epistemic virtues in the sciences and
the humanities(pp. 1–10). Springer International Publishing.
Veissière, S. P., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J., Friston, K. J., &
Kirmayer, L. J. (2020). Thinking through other minds: A vari-
ational approach to cognition and culture. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences , 43, e90. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0140525X19001213
Wang, Y., McKee, M., Torbica, A., & Stuckler, D. (2019).
Systematic literature review on the spread of health-related
misinformation on social media. Social Science &
Medicine , 240, 112552. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
socscimed.2019.112552
Young, A. (1981). When rational men fall sick: An inquiry into
some assumptions made by medical anthropologists.Culture,
Medicine and Psychiatry, 5(4), 317–335. https://doi.org/10.
1007/BF00054773
Young, A. (1982). Rational men and the explanatory model
approach. Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry , 6(1), 57–71.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00049471
Zielinski, C. (2021). Infodemics and infodemiology: A short
history, a long future. Revista Panamericana de Salud
Publica, 45, e40. https://doi.org/10.26633/RPSP.2021.40
Laurence J. Kirmayer, MD, FRCPC, FCAHS, FRSC is
Distinguished James McGill Professor and Director
Division of Social and Transcultural Psychiatry, McGill
University. He directs the Culture & Mental Health
Research Unit at the Institute of Community and Family
Psychiatry, Jewish General Hospital, in Montreal, where
he conducts research on culturally responsive mental
health services and the philosophy of psychiatry. His pub-
lications include Healing and the Invention of Metaphor:
Toward a Poetics of Illness Experience (Cambridge
University Press,forthcoming) and the co-edited volumes:
Cultural Consultation: Encountering the Other in Mental
Health Care ; Re-Visioning Psychiatry: Cultural
Phenomenology, Critical Neuroscience ; and Global
Mental Health ; Culture, Mind and Brain: Emerging
Concepts, Methods, and Applications. He is a Fellow of
the Canadian Academy of Health Sciences and the Royal
Society of Canada.
808 Transcultural Psychiatry 61(5)