Vol.:(0123456789)1 3
Topoi (2020) 39:559–574 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-018-9561-5
Free Energy and the Self: An Ecological–Enactive Interpretation
Julian Kiverstein1
Published online: 12 April 2018 
© The Author(s) 2018
Abstract
According to the free energy principle all living systems aim to minimise free energy in their sensory exchanges with the 
environment. Processes of free energy minimisation are thus ubiquitous in the biological world. Indeed it has been argued 
that even plants engage in free energy minimisation. Not all living things however feel alive. How then did the feeling of 
being alive get started? In line with the arguments of the phenomenologists, I will claim that every feeling must be felt by 
someone. It must have mineness built into it if it is to feel a particular way. The question I take up in this paper asks how 
mineness might have arisen out of processes of free energy minimisation, given that many systems that keep themselves alive 
lack mineness. The hypothesis I develop in this paper is that the life of an organism can be seen as an inferential process. 
Every living system embodies a probability distribution conditioned on a model of the sensory, physiological, and morpho-
logical states that are highly probably given the life it leads and the niche it inhabits. I argue for an ecological and enactive 
interpretation of free energy. I show how once the life of an organism reaches a certain level of complexity mineness emerges 
as an intrinsic part of the process of life itself.
Keywords Free energy principle · Mineness · Minimal self · Ecological enactive · Active inference · Relational self · 
Multisensory integration · Bayesian brain
1 Introduction
Every conscious experience is an experience for someone, 
the self or subject of this experience. Feelings are felt by 
someone, thoughts are thought by someone, and experiences 
are experienced by someone. Self-consciousness is not some 
extra property added to consciousness but is intrinsic to it. 
It is a part of its very mode of being of conscious experi -
ence that it presents the world as appearing a certain way 
for someone, for me or you (Sartre 2003, p. 100). Self-con-
sciousness is not the outcome of introspection or reflection. 
It is not something that only occurs under exceptional cir -
cumstances, when a person deliberately makes a conscious 
episode they are undergoing into the object of their atten -
tion. Instead self-consciousness “is a feature characterising 
the experiential dimension as such, no matter what worldly 
entities we might otherwise be intentionally directed at” 
(Zahavi 2014, p. 27). Self-consciousness is an invariant, 
always present, ubiquitous feature of our consciousness of 
the world. It is in other words a part of the phenomenologi-
cal structure of conscious experience.
This basic form of self-awareness I will henceforth refer 
to as “mineness”. It refers to the feature of experience 
whereby every experience is an experience for a self. With-
out this feature of mineness there would be nothing it is like 
to perceive. Perception would lack phenomenality.1 The per-
ceptual episode wouldn’t make anything in the world mani-
fest. Sensations wouldn’t feel like anything because they 
wouldn’t be sensed by anyone. It is only because feelings 
are felt, experiences are experienced and so on that these 
episodes present the world as appearing or feeling a certain 
way. Experiences owe their very phenomenality—their mak-
ing things manifest to someone—in part to their mineness.
The view of mineness I will develop in this paper starts 
from the following three interrelated theses:
 * Julian Kiverstein 
 j.d.kiverstein@amc.uva.nl
1 Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
1 I first encountered this account of phenomenal experience in Dan 
Zahavi’s writings—see e.g. Zahavi (2005, 2014, 2017). Zahavi shows 
how his use of the term “mineness” to characterise phenomenal expe -
rience can be traced back to the writings of the phenomenological 
philosophers at the beginning of the twentieth century. See also Gal -
lagher (2000, 2005), Legrand (2006, 2012), Thompson (2007).
560 J. Kiverstein 
1 3
1. Phenomenal experiences owe their phenomenality to 
their being episodes that occur for someone, a subject 
or self that is self-aware.
2. “Mineness” is a form of basic or minimal self-awareness 
intrinsic to phenomenal experiences.
3. Every experience has minimal self-awareness built into 
it as a part of its phenomenological or intentional struc-
ture. Experiences can only present the world as appear-
ing a certain way because they are experiences for a self, 
me or you.
I will henceforth refer to this view as the “phenomeno-
logical theory of selfhood” (abbreviated to “the phenomeno-
logical theory”). The phenomenological theory implies that 
any naturalistic explanation of phenomenal consciousness in 
the terms of psychology and the neurosciences will need to 
explain how mineness can be intrinsic to phenomenal con-
sciousness. Minimal self-awareness is a part of what makes 
a mental state a phenomenally conscious mental state. Any 
naturalistic explanation of consciousness must include an 
explanation of the intimate relationship between being a self 
and being phenomenally conscious of the world.
In what follows I will propose such a naturalistic expla-
nation that takes selfhood to emerge out of self-organising 
biological processes. Organisms maintain their organisa -
tion in their sensory exchanges with the environment. They 
seem to resist a tendency to disorder that otherwise applies 
to physical systems more generally (Friston and Stephan 
2007). They do not randomly explore the space of possi-
ble sensory and physiological states. Instead they regulate 
their interactions with the environment so as to ensure that 
they visit and revisit a limited range of sensory and physi-
ological states (Friston 2010). They keep themselves in the 
sensory and physiological states that define the conditions 
of their existence. Hearts beat rhythmically, body tempera-
ture tends to stay within certain bounds, animals engage in 
regular routines and habitual behaviours. When these regular 
rhythms of life are disturbed (for instance by the sudden 
appearance of a predator leading to an increase in heart rate 
and breathing), the organism takes measures to return their 
bodily processes to the highly probable, regular rhythms that 
are expected. They engage in fight or flight (Friston 2017).
The hypothesis I develop in this paper is that the life of an 
organism can be seen as an inferential process. Every living 
system embodies a probability distribution conditioned on 
a model of the sensory, physiological, and morphological 
states that are highly probably given the life it leads and 
the niche it inhabits. The organism embodies in its biologi-
cal organisation a hierarchically structured model of its own 
existence in its environment, or equivalently its being-in-the-
world. Consider for instance how dancers come to embody 
in their muscles the activities they repeatedly engage in as 
dancers.
2 As a model of its own existence, the organism can 
accurately predict the sensory consequences of its own inter-
actions with the environment over multiple temporal and 
spatial scales. In this way, the organism will be able to main-
tain its organisation in its sensory and energetic exchanges 
with the environment, keeping itself in the narrow range of 
sensory and physiological states it needs to occupy given 
the kind of life it leads. However, in a constantly changing 
environment replete with sensory noise, what the organism 
expects to happen in its sensory encounters with the envi-
ronment will often not come to fruition. The predictions it 
makes will fail to match its incoming flow of sensory infor-
mation, and the organism will need to adapt its organisation 
accordingly. Thus, in order to maintain its organisation in its 
sensory exchanges with the environment, the organism will 
need to keep the discrepancy between the predictions of its 
model and what actually ensues to a minimum, or what is 
technically referred to as “prediction error”.
Processes of prediction-error minimisation are however 
ubiquitous in the biological world. Indeed it has been argued 
that even plants engage in prediction-error minimisation 
(Calvo and Friston 2017). Not all living things however feel 
alive. Plants almost certainly don’t. Bacteria are capable of 
a minimal form of purposive agency (Fulda 2017; Di Paolo 
et al. 2017). Since they lack a brain for regulating the chang-
ing internal states of their bodies, they probably also lack 
feeling (Thompson 2015, pp. 335–336). What about insects 
that continue behaving in the same way when they have suf-
fered severe injuries? They too most likely lack feeling inso-
far as their behaviour seems to be unaffected by damage to 
their bodies. However, it is an assumption of this paper (to 
be unpacked further in Sect.  2 below) that all living beings 
engage in prediction-error minimisation. For as I have 
already indicated in the introduction, there is an intimate 
connection between a living system’s ability to maintain its 
own organisation (a process known as “autopoiesis”) and 
prediction error minimisation.
3 But how then did the feeling 
of being alive get started?
This is of course among the central puzzles in the sci-
ence of consciousness, and no one yet has the full solu-
tion. In line with the arguments of the phenomenologists, 
I’ve claimed that every feeling must be felt by someone. It 
must have mineness built into it if it is to feel a particular 
way. The question I take up in this paper asks how mine-
ness might have arisen out of processes of prediction-error 
2 My thanks to Erik Rietveld for this example.
3 For more discussion of the connection between autopoiesis and 
prediction-error minimisation (see Allen and Friston 2017; Kirchhoff  
2017; Kirchhoff and Froese 2017; Bruineberg et al. 2017).
561Free Energy and the Self: An Ecological–Enactive Interpretation  
1 3
minimisation, given that many systems that keep themselves 
alive lack mineness?4
In Sect. 1 I take up this question by speculating about how 
subjectivity might have emerged early in evolutionary his-
tory out of processes of action control. I show how subjec-
tivity might be thought of as tied to processes of purposive 
agency on the one hand, and sensorimotor integration on the 
other. Neither of these ingredients suffices individually for 
subjectivity but when they work together as a single cog-
nitive package I suggest the result might plausibly be the 
beginnings of a subjective mental life. The key question is 
how these two capacities might have come to be combined. 
I suggest the connection between life and probabilistic infer-
ence might provide the answer to this question. In Sect.  2 I 
explain why it might make sense to understand life in terms 
of inference. I introduce the free energy principle, according 
to which any living system will aim to minimise free energy 
in its sensory exchanges with the environment. Section  3 
shows how such a process of free energy minimisation is 
accomplished through a process referred to as “active infer-
ence”. I explain how active inference is best understood in 
ecological and enactive terms. The sensory and physiologi-
cal states the organism expects to occupy relate to its way of 
life in its niche, and the affordances it provides for animals 
with this way of life. Prediction-error should therefore be 
understood in terms of the coupled dynamics of the ani-
mal in its eco-niche that lead towards dynamic equilibrium 
(Bruineberg and Rietveld 2014; Bruineberg et al. 2017). 
Active inference doesn’t however suffice to explain mine-
ness, since every living system will keep its own free energy 
to a minimum through a process of active inference. Sec-
tion 4 therefore takes up the question of what would need 
to be added to active inference to yield mineness. I look 
to recent theoretical work by Karl Friston for an answer to 
this question (Friston 2017, 2018). It follows from Friston’s 
arguments that once an organism reaches the level of com-
plexity so that it can act to minimise its own expected free 
energy, mineness will emerge as intrinsic to the process of 
life itself. Section 5 closes the paper by engaging with recent 
attempts that have been made in the cognitive neuroscience 
literature to understand the self in terms of active inference. 
I argue that if these proposals are to explain mineness, they 
are best interpreted in ecological and enactive terms. I close 
by showing how the resulting account of mineness supports 
a relational theory of the self. This is because on this eco-
logical and enactive reading of active inference the organism 
and its environment are co-specifying, and co-determining.
5 
The argument of this paper is that any organism capable of 
action control of the right complexity will also be a self. 
Since organisms are best understood in relation to their envi-
ronment, so also are selves.
6
2  The Origin of Feeling
In his famous paper on the reflex arc, John Dewey described 
how perception and action form a circuit in which “the motor 
response determines the stimulus, just as truly as sensory 
stimulus determines movement” (Dewey 1896). Motor 
behaviour determines sensation in the sense of controlling 
or regulating the sensory information the perceptual systems 
detect. The activity of the organism determines the sensory 
information that flows back into the brain as it purposefully 
engages with its environment. What I want to take from 
Dewey is his emphasis on the active control of the flow of 
sensory information. In what follows I will explore the pos-
sibility that mineness may have its origins in processes of 
action control.
7 Feeling relates to action possibilities pro -
vided by the environment that matter to the organism. Think 
here of inner feelings of pleasure and pain as core examples 
of what I have in mind. The occurrence of these episodes 
literally demands that the organism do something. They 
inform the organism that something important is happening 
4 Such a hypothesis has been developed in the cognitive neurosci-
ence literature in important papers by Seth (2013), Apps and Tsakiris 
(2014), Limanowski and Blankenburg (2013). I draw on their argu-
ments in what follows but develop their ideas in a somewhat different 
direction in defending an ecological and enactive interpretation of the 
free energy principle.
5 Gibson explains this co-determination of the animal and its envi-
ronment well when he writes: “The fact is worth remembering 
because it is often neglected that the words animal and environment 
make an inseparable pair. Each term implies the other. No animal 
could exist without an environment surrounding it. Equally, although 
not so obvious, an environment implies an animal (or at least an 
organism) to be surrounded” (Gibson 1979, p. 4).
6 My account differs in some respects from recent work on the rela-
tional self that take the self to be relationally constituted because of 
intersubjective relations between infants and caregivers. Such inter -
subjective relations have been shown to play a crucial role in shaping 
early experiences of being embodied through for instance experiences 
of affective touch (Fotopoulou and Tsakiris 2017; Ciaunica and Foto-
poulou 2017). I briefly discuss the relation of my account of mineness 
to these relational theories in my concluding comments.
7 See Godfrey-Smith (2016, p. 96) for a related proposal. An anon-
ymous reviewer reminded me that the seeds of this idea were also 
present in first generation Cybernetics and in the control theory of 
perception (Powers 1973). The central idea of the control theory of 
perception is articulated above—it is that action is for the control 
of perception rather than the other way around. (See also Anderson 
2014, Chap. 5). In a different context in discussing the porousness of 
the boundaries of the self, Clark (2003) also argues for a conceptual 
connection between being a self and action control. Clark’s interest 
is with the question of what makes it the case that something that 
lies outside of the body can nevertheless fall within the boundaries 
that demarcate the self from the rest of the world. The answer Clark 
returns to this questions appeals to the control the person has over an 
external resource.
562 J. Kiverstein 
1 3
and that taking appropriate action is a matter of imperative 
(Klein 2015).
Feeling I suggest, is tied to an animal’s practical engage-
ment with its environment. As the nervous systems of organ-
ism grew in complexity, so also did the repertoire of action 
possibilities available to them. Their subjective mental life 
gradually underwent transformation. I am thus in agreement 
with what Peter Godfrey-Smith calls the “transformation 
view” of subjective experience. The transformation view 
holds that subjective experience emerged in evolution-
ary history before such late-emerging cognitive processes 
as working memory, global workspaces and multisensory 
integration. These cognitive functions may be implicated in 
the types of subjective experience humans enjoy, but they 
should be thought of as transformations and complexifica-
tions of the types of subjective experience found in more 
simple lifeforms much earlier in time.
8
The capacity for purposive agency may be necessary for 
subjective experience but it isn’t sufficient. Being selectively 
and differentially moved to respond will only yield feeling 
or subjective experience if the bodily states that move the 
organism are bodily states for  the organism. This is to say 
they must have “mineness”. It is here that sensory feedback 
gets to do important work. Mineness has been hypothesised 
to have its biological roots in the integration of sensorimo-
tor efference and reafferent feedback (Christoff et al. 2011; 
Thompson 2015). As the organism is moved to engage with 
the relevant affordances of her environment, her movements 
are met with sensory feedback in the form of propriocep-
tion, kinesthesis, vision and other forms of exteroception. 
There are systematic, predictable relationships that hold 
between movement and the sensory feedback that is the 
consequence of those movements. This anchoring of move-
ments in sensory feedback has been argued to be “self-spec-
ifying” (Christoff et al. 2011). Thus to rehearse an example 
of Christoff and colleagues, when I bite into a lemon and 
experience the sour taste of the lemon, my activity of bit-
ing has systematic effects on my olfactory and gustatory 
senses—I taste and smell the lemon. I can see the lemon in 
my hand, and I can feel my teeth biting into it. Processes of 
sensorimotor integration in which action is integrated with 
its sensory effects are “self-specifying” because the sensory 
feedback that is integrated with motor behaviour arises from 
the organism’s own activities. Sensorimotor integration thus 
forms the biological basis for “a unique egocentric perspec-
tive in perception and action.” (Christoff et al. 2011, p. 106).
Processes of homeostasis are also self-specifying. Home-
ostasis refers to the self-regulatory processes that ensure the 
internal states of the organism that relate to the preserva-
tion of its life remain within a tightly restricted range of 
possible values. Think of the maintenance of blood sugar 
levels or of bodily temperature. Regulation will often come 
in the form of the activities of the organism—for example, 
finding a blanket or lighting a fire to warm the body when 
returning home on a cold winter’s day. These activities have 
systematic effects on the internal conditions of the body (e.g. 
bodily temperature), and tracking such systematic relation-
ship between efference (action) and reafferance (sensory 
effects of action) is a self-specifying process. It supports 
“an implicit feeling of the body’s internal condition in per -
ception and action” (Christoff et al. 2011, p. 106).
Now I suggest that neither sensorimotor integration nor 
purposive agency suffices for subjective experience when 
considered as separate processes that function in isolation. 
However, consider what might happen when these processes 
are considered as working together as parts of single pack -
age? Purposive agency is driven by the organism’s concern 
to maintain its own viability in its practical engagement with 
the environment. Basic drives will include bodily needs 
that relate to temperature, hunger, and so on. Now combine 
actions that are driven by such basic needs with a capacity 
for tracking systematic relationships between perceiving and 
acting. Cycles of perception and action will systematically 
relate efference to reafferance so as to establish a point of 
view on the world. These cycles of perception and action 
will be motivated by the organism’s concern for how it’s 
fairing in the world. The environment will thus show up as 
offering action possibilities for  the organism that matter to 
the organism in some way. I suggest the organism will then 
qualify as a subject of experience.
A key assumption of this paper is that mineness may have 
first emerged in the physical world when lifeforms began to 
control and regulate their activities based on what they care 
about as living beings. How might sensorimotor integration 
and purposive agency be combined so as to work together 
for an organism? It is in answering this question that I sug-
gest it might be helpful to think about living systems as 
modelling their own existence in an attempt to continuously 
keep their own free energy to a minimum. In the next section 
I explain why it might make sense to understand life in terms 
of inference. This will allow us to get the core idea of free 
energy minimisation in play.
8 Exactly when in the history of life feeling first emerged needn’t 
concern us further. Perhaps bacteria are capable of some minimal 
degree of feeling to the extent that they are capable of purposive 
agency (see Fulda 2017). Godfrey-Smith speculates simple experi-
ence may have begun in the Cambrian era that saw an explosion of 
lifeforms capable of “richer forms of engagement with the world”. 
Ediacaran animals he suggests may have had nervous systems that 
were primarily taken up with sensorimotor coordination which they 
could achieve without much in the way of control (Godfrey-Smith 
2016, pp. 96–97).
563Free Energy and the Self: An Ecological–Enactive Interpretation  
1 3
3  The Free Energy Principle Introduced
In my introduction I suggested that organisms can be thought 
of as embodying in their biological organisation a model of 
their own existence. The organism is defined by the bodily 
states that it needs to maintain within certain bounds if it is 
to continue to exist. For example, the core body temperature 
of humans fluctuates around 37 °C. Such a body temperature 
is on average and over time highly probable since it is the 
temperature the human body needs to maintain at a constant 
level if it is to remain healthy. Deviate too far from such an 
equilibrium (by for instance remaining outdoors in a sub-
zero environment for too long), and this can prove danger -
ous. The agent must take immediate measures to ensure their 
body temperature returns to its local equilibrium. There is 
thus a set of internal bodily states (exteroceptive and intero-
ceptive) that the organism expects given its phenotype and 
the eco-niche it lives in, or what I will henceforth refer to as 
its existence (or way of life). The bodily states the organism 
expects are the bodily states that are highly probable given 
its existence. The organism’s expectations “model” its exist-
ence in the sense of explaining or accounting for its contin-
ued existence. The organism continues to exist by ensuring 
that it remains in bodily states that are highly probable on 
average and over time and avoids bodily states that it has a 
low-probability of finding itself in because were it to regu-
larly frequent such states over time it would cease to exist.
The organism thus embodies in its biological organisa-
tion a model of its own existence. The organism is a model 
of itself in its eco-niche, it is what I will call a “self-model”, 
where the organism should be understood in relation to its 
niche. The organism and its environment form a comple-
mentary pair (Gibson 1979; Bruineberg et al. 2017). As I 
will use the term, a “self-model” is not yet a model of a 
self.
9 All organisms are self-models in my sense of the term 
because they have a biological organisation that models their 
own existence. However, as we’ve just seen in Sect.  1, not 
all organisms are selves. What needs to be added to a self-
model for an organism to qualify as a self is mineness. I’ve 
suggested the special ingredient that yields mineness might 
be a cognitive package that combines purposive agency with 
sensorimotor integration. My aim in this paper is to explicate 
how a self-model might come to generate mineness. This I 
will do by using the theory of the organism as a self-model 
to explain how purposive agency and sensorimotor integra-
tion might be combined.
Let us begin first by clarifying why it makes sense to 
think of the organism as having a biological organisation 
that accounts for or explains its own existence. We’ve seen 
how the internal bodily states the organism expects are those 
it must actively maintain within a tightly restricted range 
of values as long as the organism succeeds in sustaining 
its way of life (Friston and Stephan 2007; Friston 2010). 
They are the possible bodily states the organism must visit 
and repeatedly revisit if it is to maintain the way of life it 
embodies. The organism’s existence can thus be defined as 
a probability density conditioned on a “self-model” which 
identifies the bodily states it is highly likely to find the 
organism occupying on average and in the long run given its 
way of life (Hohwy 2017, p. 2). Life is a process of inferring 
a model that identifies the bodily states the organism has 
a high probability of finding itself in given its way of life. 
When the organism occupies such highly probable bodily 
states, it can thus be said to maximise the evidence for the 
self-model it has inferred as the explanation of its own exist-
ence. Bodily states count as evidence for a self-model when 
the self-model can explain or account for them. Highly prob-
able bodily states maximise the likelihood of a self-model. 
They do so for the following reason. As long as the organism 
behaves so as to keep itself in the internal bodily states it 
expects to be in, the organism will count as having a biologi-
cal organisation that stays well-adapted to its environment. 
Its internal bodily states will maximise the likelihood that its 
biological organisation is a good self-model, a model of its 
existence that keeps the organism well-adapted to its niche.
10
Now consider what happens when the organism finds 
itself occupying bodily states that fail to provide evidence 
for the self-model it embodies. These are internal bodily 
states that are unlikely or surprising given its continued 
existence. If the organism were to repeatedly visit such states 
over the long run this would threaten its viability, and may 
in the end lead to death. The term “surprise” is being used 
here in an information-theoretic sense. It is the negative log 
probability associated with a bodily state. Surprise increases 
as a function of the improbability of the organism finding 
itself in such a bodily state. The average surprise over time 
is entropy or disorder (Friston 2012). Bodily states that are 
surprising have a low probability of occurring over time 
because an organism that regularly frequented them would 
be dispersed nearly everywhere leading to its own untimely 
9 Here I depart from standard terminology as employed in Metzinger 
(2003, 2009) for instance. My non-standard use of the term has the 
virtue of keeping the door open for non-representational accounts of 
the self, which I will eventually argue will prove necessary if we are 
to explain mineness in terms of processes of free energy minimisa-
tion.
10 Natural selection can thus be cast as a process of self-model selec-
tion (Campbell 2016; Ramstead et al. 2017). The organism’s pheno-
type can be thought of as a self-model, and natural selection as the 
process of selecting self-models with the greatest evidence (i.e. that 
best account for the bodily states the organism occupies on average 
and in the long run). The self-model that is maximally supported 
by evidence is the self-model that does the best job of adapting the 
organism to its environment.
564 J. Kiverstein 
1 3
demise, its disintegration, dissipation and dispersal into the 
environment.
The organism however has no direct way of knowing 
which of its bodily states it should expect to occupy on 
average, and in the long run. To know this it would have to 
somehow be able to evaluate an intractable number of pos-
sible states of being, so as to assess of its possible states of 
being which it is most likely to occupy on average and over 
time. The way organisms get around this otherwise intracta-
ble problem is by using what is referred to as “free energy” 
a knowable quantity that can be used to bound surprise, the 
probability of finding itself in low-probability bodily states. 
This is a trick the organism can depend upon because free 
energy can be shown mathematically to be an upper-bound 
on surprise (i.e. free energy is always greater than surprise) 
(Friston 2010). Thus so long as the organism keeps free 
energy to a minimum the organism will also succeed in 
avoiding occupying surprising (or low-probability) bodily 
states. But what is free energy?
Thermodynamic free energy refers to the energy avail-
able in a physical system (for instance a gas) that can be 
put to useful work. For example, consider a collection of 
gas molecules with the same kinetic energy. Only part of 
this energy is available to do work. This depends upon the 
entropy or ‘orderliness’ of molecular motion. For example, a 
low entropy system would correspond to molecules all mov-
ing in one direction (i.e., like a wind). This means that nearly 
all the energy is available to do work (i.e., turn a turbine). 
Conversely, if the entropy is high—and all the molecules are 
moving in random directions—there is no useful work to be 
harnessed.
11 Free energy correlates with unpredictability. 
The more unpredictable the location of particles, the more 
free energy there is overall in the gas to be put to work. 
This is because the behaviour of the particles in the gas is 
relatively disorderly. Conversely the more predictable the 
position of the particles, the more certain we can be of a 
particle’s location at any given time. The energy available 
within the gas is not being used to disperse particles across 
space randomly, leading to unpredictability, but is instead 
already being put to work.
The notion of “free energy” I will employ in this paper is 
however not thermodynamic free energy as it applies to for 
instance the behaviour of the particles in a gas. It is instead 
informational  free energy, a measure of the probability of 
bodily states conditioned on a self-model. In what follows 
I will be using the term “free energy” in this information-
theoretic sense (Tribus 1961; Friston 2010).
Free energy as I will employ the term is the useful work 
a self-model does in predicting an organism’s bodily states 
in its sensory exchanges with the environment. The better 
the self-model performs at predicting the organism’s bodily 
states, the lower the free energy associated with this model. 
Reducing free energy thus amounts to improving the fit of 
the self-model to the data—the organism’s bodily states that 
arise in its sensory exchanges with the environment. If the 
organism is to maintain its own viability, it should aim to 
keep free energy to a minimum. It should aim to be a self-
model that succeeds in predicting its own bodily states, or 
equivalently that keeps the discrepancy between its predicted 
and current bodily states to a minimum. In doing so it will 
ensure that it remains in bodily states that are likely given 
the kind of life it leads, and avoids finding itself in bodily 
states that are unlikely because they are a threat to its way 
of life.
The free energy principle states that all quantities that 
can change in living organisms will change in such a way as 
to minimise free energy expected under a particular course 
of action. The organism’s adaptive behaviour is the process 
of optimising the parameters of its self-model so that the 
organism does better and better at adapting to the random 
fluctuations of its environment. Over time the organism aims 
to keep to a minimum the discrepancies between the predic-
tions of its self-model and the bodily states it finds itself 
occupying as a consequence of interacting with the environ-
ment. It does so through a process of optimising the param-
eters of its model that serve as the basis for its predictions. 
In this way the organism ensures that it has an internal global 
dynamics that allow it to stay well-adapted to its environ-
ment. In the next section I explain how this process of opti-
misation works through introducing the concept of active 
inference. I show how active inference is best understood in 
ecological and enactive terms. This will then provide us with 
all the conceptual tools needed to explain how purposive 
agency and sensorimotor integration can be combined in a 
free energy minimising system so as to deliver mineness.
4  Active Inference: The Ecological 
and Enactive Interpretation
It is through active inference that the organism keeps free 
energy to a minimum in its interactions with the environ-
ment. We’ve seen how the living system is a self-model—it 
is defined by the bodily states that on average and over time 
it has a high probability of instantiating. In its interactions 
with the environment the organism samples the world so 
as to gather evidence that maximizes the likelihood of the 
self-model it has become. Action is understood here as the 
organism’s means of reducing free energy—the organism 
predicts the bodily states it expects to occupy based on its 
self-model and then acts so to fulfill its predictions. Sup-
pose for instance you are feeling hungry. This feeling arises 
11 I thank an anonymous reviewer for help with the notion of thermo-
dynamic free energy and its relation to variational free energy.
565Free Energy and the Self: An Ecological–Enactive Interpretation  
1 3
because your body predicts being well-nourished—this is 
among the highly probable bodily states your body is fortu-
nate to be able to expect. It therefore registers a mismatch 
between its predictions and the body’s current energy levels. 
This prediction is held constant and not updated because 
the prediction error is treated by the body as one it ought 
to pay attention to.
12 The ensuing actions serve to reduce 
this discrepancy through finding and eating some food. It 
exploits opportunities the environment offers for restoring 
your body’s energy levels to their expected equilibrium state.
The self-model can thus be thought of as regulating the 
coupling of the agent to the environment through perception 
action cycles, and doing so in such a way as to (on aver -
age and over time) keep free energy to a minimum. What 
needs to be accounted for by the self-model is the generation 
of observations in the form of changing exteroceptive and 
interoceptive bodily states, (or what I will continue to abbre-
viate as “bodily states”). Such an account is inferred through 
learning statistical regularities that map bodily states onto 
actions and hidden environmental causes. The self-model is 
a model of causal and statistical structure that maps relations 
of dependence between states of the environment, actions of 
the organism and the sensory consequences of those actions. 
But it is through cycles of perception and action that such 
observations are generated. Thus the self-model should be 
thought of as the outcome of a process of inferring the causal 
dynamics of agent–environment interactions.
The self-model is not an agent-neutral model of the hid-
den environmental causes of sensory input. It is not a model 
of the hidden causal structure in the environment of the sort 
a scientist might construct (Bruineberg et al. 2017). It is a 
model of patterns of agent–environment interactions that 
are most likely to minimise free energy. Sensory input is 
generated by an agent’s actions performed in a particular sit-
uation as the agent acts upon possibilities for action provided 
by its environment. Thus it is on the basis of the actions the 
agent performs that inferences are made about the hidden 
causes of sensory input. It is the environmental causes of 
sensory input in relation to the organism’s own actions that 
is being inferred by the generative model.
Affordances are possibilities for action the environment 
offers to agents with the necessary abilities. Thus putting all 
of this together we can say the self-model is a model of the 
agent’s selective engagement with affordances (Bruineberg 
and Rietveld 2014). The organism’s actions aim at keeping 
its own free energy—the free energy associated with the 
self-model—to a minimum on average and over time. The 
actions that are inferred by the self-model are actions that 
contribute in the long run to keeping its own free energy to 
a minimum—that is to ensuring the organism remains in the 
bodily states it expects to occupy given its way of life in the 
niche it inhabits.
Through active inference—that is to say through cycles 
of perception and action in which the organism engages with 
the relevant affordances of its environment—the organism 
actively and continuously produces a distinction between 
itself and its environment. In the enactive theory, living sys-
tems are characterized in terms of autonomy (Varela 1979; 
Thompson 2007; Moreno and Mossio 2015; Di Paolo et al. 
2017). An autonomous system is defined as a system that has 
the properties of (1) operational closure and (2) precarious-
ness. Operational closure is a property of networks made up 
of processes that stand in mutually enabling relations. This 
has the consequence that the self-production of the network 
as a concrete unity and its distinction from the surrounding 
environment is due to the mutually enabling relations that 
hold between the processes of which the network is com-
posed. The component processes are mutually enabling in 
the sense that the individual processes depend on each other 
recursively for their ongoing generation and re-generation 
(Moreno and Mossio 2015). The operational closure of the 
network is “precarious” in the sense that the activity of each 
individual constituent process is sustained through its rela-
tions to other constituent processes. Considered as an iso -
lated process it will tend to run down and compromise the 
organization of the network as a whole.
According to the free energy principle, the autonomy of 
living systems is a consequence of the inferential processes 
of free energy minimisation (Kirchhoff 2017; Allen and 
Friston 2017; Kirchhoff and Froese 2017). Through active 
inference the organism establishes and sustains a boundary 
[technically referred to as a Markov blanket
13 (Friston 2013; 
12 For an extended treatment of the role of attention in free energy 
minimisation see Feldman and Friston (2010). Briefly, attention in 
this framework is understood in terms of precision–estimation where 
precision relates to the reliability of a prediction error signal. When a 
prediction error signal is assigned a low probability because the brain 
has low confidence in the signal, top-down predictions are allowed 
to influence future processing and control what the organism does 
next. Conversely, when prediction error signals are estimated to be 
reliable and are assigned a high-probability, further processing will 
be influenced by this prediction error either through acting so as to 
generate bodily states that match with predictions, or by updating 
top-down predictions of the self-model. Attention is thus assigned the 
role of modulating the relative influence of prediction error signals 
in relation to top-down predictions based on estimations of uncer -
tainty. Attention will undoubtedly prove to be an important part of 
the account of consciousness and mineness I am developing in this 
paper. It plays a crucial role in minimisation of expected free energy 
which will be shown in Sect.  4 to be associated with consciousness. 
Unfortunately, exploring the relation between attention and mineness 
is beyond the scope of what I can do in this paper. On the role of pre-
cision–estimation in processes of expected free energy minimisation 
see Kiverstein et al. (2017).
13 The concept of the Markov blanket is borrowed from causal graph 
theory where it refers to a set of nodes that make up a network such 
that for a given node X, the behavior of X can be fully predicted by 
knowing the states of the other nodes that make up the network. The 
566 J. Kiverstein 
1 3
Hohwy 2016; Kirchhoff 2017)] separating their own internal 
dynamics from their external surroundings. The boundary is 
brought about through the circular causal interactions of per-
ception and action as the organism engages with the relevant 
affordances of its environment. It is only if the boundary is 
sustained over time that the organism will avoid its own dis-
sipation. This maintaining of the boundary is a consequence 
of the organism maximising the evidence for a self-model, 
or equivalently minimising its own free energy. Its cycles 
of perception and action are as we have been explaining, 
driven by this imperative. Allen and Friston express this 
idea eloquently:
Simply put, an organism persists in virtue of having 
internal states which cause surprise-minimising, evi-
dence maximising actions; these in turn maintain the 
partitions (of internal dynamics from the external sur-
roundings) which is a necessary condition for exist-
ence. (Allen and Friston 2017, p. 16, parentheses are 
my addition).
Thus, the free energy principle tells us how living systems 
might sustain their own operational closure under precarious 
conditions in their dynamic coupling with the environment. 
Organisms do so by acting so as to keep the free energy 
of the self-model they instantiate to a minimum. Given a 
dynamic environment in which all manner of unpredictable 
occurrences take place there is never any guarantee of suc-
cess. The organism must continuously adjust its internal 
dynamics to the random fluctuations of its environment. This 
can be done in two ways, either by acting so as to fulfil the 
organism’s predictions or by updating the self-model so as 
to change what the organism expects so as to better reflect 
the dynamics of the organism’s coupling to the environment. 
Either way the organism regulates its coupling to the envi-
ronment so as to bring about the conditions of its own exist-
ence. The organism is the author of its own bodily states; it 
“actively brings about the conditions of its own survival” 
(Allen and Friston 2017, p. 16). In acting so as to minimise 
the discrepancy between the predictions of the self-model 
and the events that ensue, it is maximising the evidence for 
the self-model it has become. Since what is being modelled 
is the organism’s own existence, what this amounts to is 
the organism acting so as to maximise the probability of its 
own existence.
Any system that has autonomy will also qualify as an 
agent that has its own individual point of view upon the 
world (Di Paolo et al. 2017). Relative to this point of view 
the environment has affective significance in terms of how 
it bears on the organism’s self-produced identity. Organ-
isms enact values, purposes and norms which are of their 
own making in the sense that they originate in processes of 
self-individuation (i.e. free energy minimisation) to which 
the organism owes its existence. The organism in its prac -
tical engagement with the environment makes distinctions 
between good and bad, better or worse, risk or opportunity 
(Di Paolo 2005; Thompson 2007; Rietveld 2008; Kiverstein 
et al. 2017). Perception and action are thus laden with affect: 
they possess an affective significance that stems from the 
organism’s need to preserve its own operational closure 
under precarious conditions. Perception includes evalua-
tions of how the organism is fairing in the world and where 
the opportunities and threats are to be found. An organism’s 
affective states attune them to what is salient.
We can thus think of active inference in terms of readi-
ness for action (Kiverstein 2017). What the agent is ready 
to act on are relevant affordances. The relevance of an affor-
dance is determined by the organism’s need to preserve its 
own operational closure. It should be noted that the concept 
of operational closure generalises well beyond homeosta-
sis—it doesn’t only relate to the internal physiological con-
ditions of the body such as glucose and oxygen levels in the 
blood, breathing, body temperature, heart rate, and so on. 
Autonomy operates at multiple, interacting levels of organi-
sation as organisms grow in complexity. As the organisation 
of the autonomous system becomes less bound to its imme-
diate metabolic needs, so the possible meaningful relations 
the organism can stand in to the environment becomes less 
tightly bound to the here and now. The organism becomes 
sensitive to tendencies and trajectories that constitute the 
dynamical configurations of the organism–environment 
system, and their consequences for its precarious existence 
(Di Paolo et al. 2017, pp. 228–229). It becomes sensitive to 
the tendencies and trajectories in the evolution of its own 
states that stretch steadily further through time. The nervous 
system can then be thought of as generating and sustaining 
stable and recurrent patterns of sensorimotor engagement 
with the environment. These patterns of engagement with 
the environment exhibit just the same properties of opera -
tional closure and precariousness as we find in the more 
basic processes of homeostasis. The argument of this sec-
tion is that patterns of sensorimotor engagement owe their 
operational closure to processes of free energy minimisation.
Given the connection between autonomy and free energy 
minimization I have been drawing out in this section, it fol-
lows that the organism’s norms and purposes have their 
roots in active inference. In active inference, it is the actions 
that will contribute to the sustaining of the organism’s 
Footnote 13 (continued)
states of neighbouring nodes fix the state of the target node in a way 
that is not conditioned by (i.e. is conditionally independent from) 
all other states of the system. The nodes of the network in this sense 
constitute a Markov blanket around them that shields them from the 
activity in the rest of the system (Pearl 1988).
567Free Energy and the Self: An Ecological–Enactive Interpretation  
1 3
operational closure in its coupling to a dynamically chang-
ing environment that are inferred. We can see this by briefly 
considering how free energy as a mathematical quantity is 
kept to a minimum through active inference. Free energy is 
a function of two probability distributions. The “generative 
density” is a probability distribution that specifies the joint 
probability of sensory states S and states of the environ-
ment E conditioned on a self-model M. It maps the statistical 
relations that hold between the bodily states the organism 
expects itself to be in as a consequence of acting on the 
affordances of its econiche. The recognitional or variational 
density is typically explained as “encoding” the organism’s 
approximate posterior beliefs about the hidden environmen-
tal causes of its bodily states. I’ve argued above however that 
in active inference the organism is not so much inferring 
the hidden external causes of its observations but is instead 
inferring the causal dynamics of agent–environment inter -
actions. Thus, recasting this talk of the variational density 
as “encoding beliefs” in ecological and enactive terms, I 
suggest we think of the recognitional or variational den-
sity as the states of action readiness that relate to relevant 
affordances. What is inferred is thus the expected surprise 
associated with bodily states that arise as a consequence of 
responding to relevant affordances.
14 The quantity of free 
energy is determined by the generative density, the recogni-
tional density and the current sensory states. Through active 
inference, each of these quantities changes in such a way to 
minimise free energy expected under a course of action.
15
The central idea of the ecological enactive interpretation 
of active inference is that this process of active inference 
doesn’t depend only on what is happening inside of the 
brain. It is instead to be understood at the level of the global 
dynamics of the whole organism as the organism regulates 
its coupling to the environment in such a way as to sus-
tain its own operational closure across multiple levels of 
organisation.
We are finally in a position to assess how mineness might 
be understood in terms of active inference. I suggested above 
in Sect.  1 that mineness emerges in systems that combine 
their own purposive agency with processes of sensorimotor 
integration. We saw how cycles of perception and action 
(which I’ve just been explaining in terms of processes of 
active inference) are self-specifying. They are self-specify -
ing because of the systematic relation between sensing and 
moving realised through the perception–action cycle. As the 
organism moves so its movements have consequences for 
what it senses, and what it senses has consequences for how 
the organism moves. Sensing and moving are in this way co-
determining. By systematically tracking the relation of what 
it senses (reafferent feedback) to how it is moving (efference) 
the organism’s perception comes to be self-specifying. Its 
perception comes to be anchored to a particular body, the 
organism’s own body, and thus to a particular individual 
perspective on the world.
I’ve argued however that self-specifying perceptual states 
are not sufficient for mineness. In addition what is needed 
is that the movements of the organism be “purposive”: they 
must be under the organism’s control, regulated on the basis 
of the organism’s own internal bodily conditions. Interocep-
tion is responsible for the organism’s sense of the physi-
ological condition of its own body from the inside such as 
hunger or fatigue. It provides the organism with a “feeling 
from within” of its own body as the perspective from which 
it practically engages with the world. As we’ve just seen, 
it is relative to this perspective that engagement with the 
environment can be going well or badly, can be risky or 
provide opportunities for fulfilment. I’ve been arguing that 
it is the sustaining of operational closure at multiple levels 
of autonomy through processes of free-energy minimisa-
tion that binds and integrates interoception together with 
processes of perception and action.
Consider as an example the alertness and concentration 
I need to sustain as I write this paper. We can think of this 
in terms of the self-model generating a top-down prediction 
that meets up with bottom-up sensory inputs that reflect my 
current state of fatigue and tiredness. My body may then 
take action to restore my desired level of alterness by pre-
dicting that I have a mug of coffee in my hand since this is 
how I typically deal with lack of concentration at this time of 
day. Motor control processes will then initiate the actions of 
making coffee that fulfil the prediction that I currently have 
a cup of coffee in my hand. If all goes well the prediction 
that I am alert and focussed will turn out to be self-fulfilling. 
Notice however that this is a prediction that doesn’t only 
concern the inner states of my body. It is a prediction that 
ties together my internal physiological condition in the form 
of my level of fatigue with my perception and action in such 
a way as to minimise overall prediction error across the sen-
sory hierarchy.
The ecological enactive interpretation of active inference 
I have developed in this section thus shows how processes of 
sensorimotor integration of the type that delivers self-spec-
ifying perception and purposive agency could be combined 
in a single cognitive package. This single cognitive package 
is a natural consequence of active inference as the means by 
14 My thanks again to an anonymous reviewer for this suggested for -
mulation.
15 This necessarily entails a prediction of the future as discussed in 
Sect. 3. Interestingly, it turns out that expected free energy can always 
be expressed in terms of epistemic and pragmatic affordances. The 
epistemic part resolves uncertainty about the niche–agent interac-
tion; while the pragmatic part rests upon the prior beliefs of the agent 
that constitute its self-model. I thank an anonymous reviewer for 
this important observation. For further discussion see Friston et  al. 
(2015).
568 J. Kiverstein 
1 3
which the organism sustains its own operational closure in 
dynamically coupling to its eco-niche. Can we end the paper 
here then and conclude that active inference is what deliv -
ers mineness? Can we say that any living system must have 
a basic form of self-awareness because any living system 
must sustain its own operational closure through free energy 
minimisation? Unfortunately, such a conclusion would seem 
premature. All living systems as we began by noting must 
engage in free energy minimisation. This much follows from 
the free energy principle. They will do so through processes 
of active inference. But not all living systems are conscious. 
Thus active inference cannot be sufficient for mineness. 
Something extra must still be needed.
5  Inferring Ourselves?
Karl Friston has recently argued that any conscious creature 
must be able to make inferences about the consequences of 
its own actions in the future (Friston 2017, 2018). It must be 
capable of making what he describes as “temporally thick” 
inferences. “Temporal thickness” refers to the capacity to 
make inferences not only about the present but also about the 
past and the future. In order to be conscious Friston suggests 
an organism must be able to project itself through time—it 
must be able to select actions that minimise its expected 
or future uncertainty. It is the prospective dimension of 
active inference that he takes to be crucial for conscious-
ness. Such a living system that is able to engage in “proac-
tive, purposeful inference about its own future” based on 
a temporally thick self-model will be able to infer actions 
that will minimise the surprise expected as a consequence 
of its actions (Friston 2017, 2018).
16 Consciousness may 
be associated with processes of active inference that selects 
actions which minimise non-actual but possible future sur -
prise. A conscious creature can infer actions based on its 
own future prospects. Loss of consciousness is due to loss 
of the temporal thickness of a self-model such as can be 
found in a deep coma (Friston 2017). Interestingly one of the 
tests for a minimal consciousness is the ability to engage in 
imaginary actions such as playing tennis (Owen et al. 2006; 
Shea and Bayne 2010). On Friston’s proposal this would 
make good sense as a test for minimal consciousness. The 
ability to engage in this kind of imagination is a sign of the 
re-emergence of a temporally thick self-model.
Friston’s hypothesis that temporal thickness may be what 
needs to be added to active inference to yield mineness 
makes good sense in the light of what was claimed earlier 
about autonomy operating at multiple levels of organisation. 
There it was argued that as organisms grew in the complex-
ity of their biological organisation, so the possible meaning-
ful relations they could take up to the environment likewise 
expanded beyond the here and now. Minimal agents such as 
bacteria regulate their coupling to the environment on the 
basis of metabolic relevance. They move away from poten-
tially noxious substances and towards concentrations of nutri-
tion but are confined to acting more or less in the here and 
now. But more complex agents are not only sensitive to the 
conditions of the environment here and now. They are able to 
sustain recurrent patterns of interaction with the environment 
and are sensitive to the possible evolution of the agent–envi-
ronment system and the consequences of this evolution for 
their own precarious existence. Temporally thick inference 
thus emerges naturally out of growth in the complexity of an 
organism’s existence. Friston’s hypothesis is thus very much 
in keeping with the claim I made in Sect.  1 that mineness 
emerged relative early in evolutionary history because of a 
connection between action control and subjectivity.
Along convergent lines to Friston, Gallagher (2017) has 
recently argued enactive perception must have a temporal 
thickness. As my hand move towards the cup of coffee I 
am reaching to grasp, my arm goes through a sequence of 
different postures. At each moment my movement is unfold-
ing along a trajectory because of the cup I am aiming to 
reach. There is thus a retaining in perceptual presence of the 
cup’s affordances—its possibilities for action—to which my 
movements are coordinating and adjusting. At the same time 
my movements are unfolding in a way that anticipates my 
taking hold of the cup of coffee to drink from it. My move-
ments thus unfold along a particular trajectory based both 
on a retention of my body’s configuration in relation to the 
environment, and an anticipation of where my movement 
is heading next. Similarly, perception is not a “knife-edge 
impression of the present.” Perception instead arises with 
what Gallagher describes as an “empty anticipation” that 
is either fulfilled or not fulfilled. This empty anticipation is 
in turn constrained by what Gallagher calls “retention” of 
what was just anticipated (following Husserl).
17 Temporality 
16 The term “surprise” is being used here in the information-theoretic 
sense as outlined above to refer to bodily states that have a low prob-
ability of occurring on average and over time. Surprising states are 
unpredictable and they threaten the organism’s integrity should the 
organism find itself in them.
17 In this paper Gallagher is developing an enactive interpretation of 
Husserl’s genetic analysis of the phenomenological structure of inter -
nal time consciousness. In Husserl’s analysis every conscious experi-
ence has a threefold temporal structure (Husserl 1991). It comprises 
a retentional part that presents the subject with what has just past, a 
primal impression that is constantly arising anew in the now, and a 
protentional or anticipatory element that is directed at what is about 
to happen in the near future. Husserl’s phenomenological analysis 
of time consciousness has been shown by Dan Zahavi to account for 
how every conscious experience can include a dimension of mineness 
(Zahavi 2005). This is because what is retained is an entire phase of 
experience that has just past with its own threefold temporal struc-
ture. Retention thus makes it the case that every experience is always 
569Free Energy and the Self: An Ecological–Enactive Interpretation  
1 3
is what explains the directedness of both consciousness and 
action towards something in the environment. Conscious-
ness as enactive is to be understood as an “I can” that is as 
an “apprehension of the possibilities or affordances in the 
present.” (Gallagher 2017, p. 13) There would be no engage-
ment with affordances were perception to only present an 
animal with a knife-edge present. To apprehend and be sen-
sitive to possibilities, a perceiving animal needs prospec-
tion—it needs to have experiences that reach out into the 
future anticipating what could be. This is just what it takes to 
perceive possibilities. Gallagher does not spell out whether 
perception of possibilities would be possible without reten-
tion. However since what is retained is just the fulfilled or 
unfulfilled protention that has just past, we can infer that it 
would not. Perception without retention would be perception 
that is unconstrained by what was previously anticipated. 
But we have just argued that there can be no perception of 
possibilities without prospection.
Friston’s proposal to explain consciousness in terms of 
temporally thick self-models fits well the argument of this 
paper. Can we conclude then that the self that is intrinsic to 
conscious experience is the product of inferential processes? 
Do I infer my existence as a self? There is an important 
sense in which such a conclusion is indeed implied by the 
theory currently under consideration. I’ve argued that living 
systems embody a probability distribution conditioned on a 
model that identifies the bodily states the organism regularly 
occupies, and indeed must occupy if it is to continue to exist. 
This probability distribution is thus conditioned on a model 
that is inferred as the best explanation of the organism’s 
own existence in its eco-niche. But if this characterisation of 
life as an inferential process is correct, it follows that selves 
must likewise be the outcome of inferential processes. What 
Friston adds to the ecological and enactive interpretation 
of active inference I’ve been developing is the requirement 
that the self-model have temporal thickness. But we’ve seen 
that this requirement falls naturally out of the growing com-
plexity of organisms as they acquire the capacity to sustain 
operational closure over longer time scales. The temporal 
thickness requirement seems to follow straightforwardly 
from the ecological and enactive account I have proposed.
However, one might worry that the resulting account of 
mineness as a conclusion of probabilistic inference implies 
the possibility of making all kinds of mistakes about our -
selves. Isn’t such a conclusion at least prima facie in tension 
with thinking of mineness as intrinsic to the structure of 
conscious experience of the world? In the final section I will 
consider and respond to this objection.
6  Are Experiences Logically Immune to Error 
Through Misidentification?
The question of whether I am the subject of a given expe-
rience ordinarily doesn’t arise. My experiences have what 
some philosophers have called the logical feature of immu-
nity to error through misidentification (Shoemaker 1968 ; 
Gallagher 2000). They have this feature because of the 
peculiar experiential access I have to my own experience. I 
can access my experiences from the inside immediately and 
directly without the need for self-identification. I can do so 
because my experiences have what I’ve been calling “mine-
ness” built into them intrinsically.
To see this further, contrast the following two scenarios. 
In the first I observe my body in the mirror. I am the object  
of a conscious experience. In order to recognise myself I 
have to identify myself with the person seen in the mirror. 
There is however the logical possibility of making a mistake, 
or even of failing to recognise oneself, as in Mach’s famous 
story of the shabby pedagogue. Mach recounts the story of 
climbing onto a tram and thinking to himself about someone 
he saw at the other end of the tram: “That man is a shabby 
pedagogue” (Mach 1914). Later he realised that the man he 
was looking at was in fact a reflection of himself in a mirror 
at the back of the tram. Mach failed to recognise himself 
when seeing his image reflected in the mirror.
In the second scenario, I am the subject of a conscious 
experience. I am currently in pain. There is no question 
about whether the pain belongs to me or someone else. This 
is not something about which I can be mistaken. That I am 
the subject of this experience is settled by the very phenom-
enological structure of the experiences. My pain experience 
is an experience for me  first and foremost, and for others 
only secondarily.
Does the view of the self that follows from the free energy 
perspective require us to revise the core claim of the phe-
nomenological theory that experiences are logically immune 
to error through misidentification?
As already suggested at the end of the last section, it 
might be thought one must answer this question affirma-
tively. Consider the rubber hand illusion for instance. The 
brain treats the rubber hand as part of the subject’s body as 
result of processes that infer the model of the body that best 
accounts for current multisensory stimulation. This results 
in me misidentifying something as being mine (the rubber 
hand) that is not mine. Experiments like the rubber hand 
illusion seem to show that our experience of what is mine 
and what is not mine is highly flexible and malleable. We are 
all too willing it seems to succumb to “weird metamorphoses 
itself experienced. This intriguing convergence of ideas is something 
I hope to return to in future work.
Footnote 17 (continued)
570 J. Kiverstein 
1 3
of our customary ways of experiencing our bodies” (Hohwy 
2013, p. 236).
In the rubber hand illusion, surprise is evoked by simulta-
neously feeling one’s hand being touched and observing touch 
to an external object. The hand the subjects sees receiving 
tactile stimulation is different from the hand she feels being 
touched. The hand she sees receiving tactile stimulation is the 
rubber hand. The hand she feels is her own hand. There are 
thus two possible hypotheses that might possibly make sense 
of this incongruent sensory information. The first correctly 
hypotheses that vision and touch are taking place on different 
hands at different locations. My own hand is a part of me, 
the rubber hand is not. The second incorrectly hypotheses 
that vision and touch are taking place at the same location in 
the same hand. To explain away the prediction error arising 
from the incongruent multisensory information the brain must 
infer a hypothesis about the current features of the self that 
minimise overall surprise. The conclusion the brain reaches is 
that vision and touch are taking place at the same location in 
the same hand. This hypothesis best fits one’s current sensory 
information and one’s prior beliefs because it does the best 
job of resolving the conflicting sensory information relative to 
other of the subject’s beliefs. The subject believes for instance 
that multisensory inputs tend to occur in one and the same 
object. Giving up on this belief would generate more predic-
tion error in the long run. The belief that the rubber hand is 
not a part of my body is thus ignored. It is weighted as less 
probable than a hypothesis that takes the rubber hand to be a 
part of me (Hohwy and Paton 2010; Hohwy 2013, Apps and 
Tsakiris 2014; Limanowski and Blankenburg 2013).
Jakob Hohwy has argued that in active inference the brain 
models its causal interventions in the world based on the 
assumption of a single, coherent bodily trajectory that gives 
rise to a single coherent flow of multisensory input (Hohwy 
2013, chap. 10 and 11; also see; Michael and Hohwy 2018). 
The brain adopts this assumption because it cannot use two 
or more conflicting hypotheses as its basis for sampling the 
world. It thus needs to select a single hypothesis that has 
the highest overall posterior probability about the state of 
the body in relation to the world in active inference. Some-
times this requires the brain to opt for a hypothesis about 
the self that is blatantly false. The brain prefers such a false 
hypothesis because it does the best overall job of combin-
ing what is already believed with current evidence so as to 
reduce overall prediction error. This is the case as we have 
seen in the rubber hand illusion. According to Hohwy the 
self is among the hidden causes of sensory input the brain 
must represent as a part of the process of inferring a model 
that does the best job of explaining away prediction errors.
Katerina Fotopoulou has defended a similar proposal in a 
series of recent papers (Ciaunica and Fotopoulou 2017; Foto-
poulou and Tsakiris 2017). She has argued for an explana-
tion of such representations of the self as the outcome of a 
process she calls “embodied mentalisation”—“the inferential 
brain process by which primary sensorimotor and multisen-
sory signals are progressively integrated and schematised to 
form multiple, predictive models of our embodied states in 
given environments” (Fotopoulou and Tsakiris 2017, p. 8). 
For example, the sensory flows of information that originate 
in one’s own body tend to stand in relations of temporal syn-
chrony. Thus when two or more sensations belonging to dif-
ferent sense modalities (say touch and vision as in the rubber 
hand illusion) are observed to stand in relations of temporal 
synchrony, the brain will infer that the source of these sensory 
signals is most likely the subject’s own body. Fotopoulou refers 
to this process as “mentalisation” because the organisation and 
schematisation of bodily signals applies to any body, not only 
my body but also to the bodies of others (Ciaunica and Foto-
poulou 2017, p. 6). The same inferential processes that lead 
to self-consciousness also lead to the understanding of others 
because the body that one infers as most likely one’s own is 
just one embodied subject among others. In her work mineness 
is explained as emerging out of such inferential processes of 
organising and schematising multisensory bodily state. Some 
of these multisensory signals originate from inside of the body 
and some from physical contact with what is outside of us. The 
self is just “the most parsimonious and accurate explanation for 
sensory inputs” (Fotopoulou and Tsakiris 2017, p. 10).
Along similar lines to these authors, I’ve been arguing 
that mineness is rooted in processes of active inference in 
which the organism acts so as to minimise its own expected 
future surprise. Must I agree with them that the self is just 
the outcome of the brain’s abductive inferences? Such a con-
clusion doesn’t sit well with my phenomenological starting 
point in this paper. Far from showing that mineness is intrin-
sic to phenomenal consciousness, the idea of the self as an 
inferential construct seems to threaten and provide a chal-
lenge to the phenomenological theory. The phenomenologi-
cal theory requires that experiences be logically immune to 
error through misidentification. Experiences do not require 
us to identify ourselves as their subjects because they have 
mineness intrinsically built into them. But the upshot of the 
inferentialist account of the self is that experiences lack this 
feature of immunity to error, or at best they have this fea-
ture only contingently, not logically (Gallagher 2012). We 
can make all kinds of mistakes about what is or is not mine 
or me, and we can do so precisely because mineness is the 
outcome of inference.
I will finish up by showing how the ecological and enac-
tive interpretation of active inference I have been developing 
does not have this consequence. The self is not a hidden 
cause of sensory input that stands in need of inference in 
a way that makes trouble for the logical immunity claim.
18 
18 I am extremely grateful to an anonymous reviewer for pressing me 
to say more on this point. Their probing questions helped me to refine 
the differences between my own ecological–enactive interpretation 
571Free Energy and the Self: An Ecological–Enactive Interpretation  
1 3
Consider again the rubber hand illusion. When the subject 
makes a mistake about the position of her hand mistaking 
the position of her own hand for the position of the rubber 
hand she does so by switching perspectives on her body. Her 
perspective on her own hand is non-observational. Her own 
hand is the hand through which she can take hold of things 
and make use of them. The rubber hand is one she relates 
to from an observer’s standpoint. It is something she can 
observe from a spectator’s standpoint.
Recall the distinction with which I began this section 
between an experience in which I am the object of an expe-
rience, and an experience in which I occupy the subject 
position. In the case of my own arm, I have an experience 
of my body as subject. My arm is a part of my first-person 
perspective on the world. It is that through which I experi-
ence the world. In the second case, I have an experience of 
my body as object. I can make a mistake about whether a 
body or a part of my body that I see is my body just as we 
saw earlier in the example from Mach. This kind of mis-
take arises because identification of which body is my body 
seems to be required. However in the case of experiencing 
my body as subject no such identification is required. What 
proprioception and kinesthesis deliver is the sense I have of 
what I can do with my body in space. They form the basis 
for my body’s readiness for action in relation to relevant 
affordances.
In the rubber hand illusion it is the recognition of what 
is a part of my body that is at stake. Recognition that targets 
my body does indeed result in awareness of my body, but it 
is an awareness of my body as an object among other object. 
This is more or less made explicit in the enfacement illusion 
in which one looks in a mirror and observes the face of a 
stranger being stroked in synchrony with one’s own face 
(Tajadura-Jimenez et al. 2012). The enfacement illusion 
occurs when you misrecognise the reflection of someone 
else’s face as your own face because of processes of multi-
sensory integration. In both the rubber hand and enfacement 
illusions you have an illusory experience of your body as 
an object.
What is being investigated in these studies is, I am sug -
gesting, an awareness of the body as object. As Shaun Gal-
lagher has nicely shown immunity to error through misiden-
tification may well fail for this type of awareness of the body 
without such a result implying that it fails more generally for 
the awareness we have of ourselves as subjects (Gallagher 
2012). Such a conclusion would follow if awareness of the 
body as subject or mineness was also a hypothesis arrived 
at through a process of inference to the best explanation, 
the brain’s best guess about the cause of its current sensory 
input. Does this follow from the argument that has been 
given?
I’ve argued that mineness is intrinsic to life in organisms 
of sufficient complexity. Life is indeed an inferential pro -
cess—it is a probability distribution conditioned on a self-
model. Should we conclude then that life is just a hypothesis 
constructed by an organism’s brain—the brain’s best guess 
about the hidden causes of its current sensory input?
I suggest this is the wrong conclusion to draw from the 
arguments of this paper. Recall that I have argued that a 
consequence of free energy minimisation is that the organ-
ism sustains its operational closure across multiple levels of 
autonomy. It thereby relates to a meaningful environment 
of action possibilities because the environment is made up 
of possibilities that bear either positively or negatively on 
its processes of self-individuation. The consequence of free 
energy minimisation is thus the sustaining of operational 
closure across multiple levels of biological organisation. It 
is the bringing forth or enactment of domains of affective 
significance in which distinctions can be made between pos-
sibilities that are good or bad for the organism.
Mineness is I’ve argued intrinsic to processes of free 
energy minimisation that sustain autonomy once these 
processes have reached the right level of complexity. More 
specifically, once an organism is capable of acting so as to 
minimise its own expected free energy, such a living process 
will now have developed its own lived first person perspec-
tive on its environment. An organism will then experience 
its environment through its body. Its body will serve as the 
origin of an egocentric spatial framework from which it 
relates to its surroundings. It will undergo intentional states 
that are directed at the world, and that are at one and the 
same time also for itself, in the sense of being self-conscious 
(Sartre 2003).
7  Conclusion
The key issue we’ve arrived at in this final section is whether 
the inferential processes that form the basis for life have 
to be understood in representational terms. It is commonly 
taken for granted, and sometimes explicitly argued that 
Bayesian inference is a process that is carried out on proba-
bilistic representations.
19 Bayesian inference is understood 
as something that neural processes approximate by updating 
the prior beliefs the brain encodes in its patterns of neural 
19 See e.g. Gladziejewski (2016) and Kiefer and Hohwy (2017) for 
detailed arguments to this effect.
and other theorists that have also offered explanations of the self in 
terms of processes and free energy minimisation (e.g. Hohwy 2013; 
Apps and Tsakiris 2014; Fotopoulou and Tsakiris 2017).
Footnote 18 (continued)
572 J. Kiverstein 
1 3
activation based on new sensory evidence so to maximise 
the probability of a posterior hypothesis.
I have been arguing for an ecological and enactive inter-
pretation of the free energy principle in this paper. On my 
interpretation it is the life of the organism in its eco-niche 
that is understood as an approximation of Bayesian infer -
ence, not only the processes in the organism’s brain. The 
organism is a self-model that acts so that on average and 
over time it avoids surprise, engaging with the environment 
selectively so as to maximise the evidence for its self-model 
as a model of its own existence. A self-model maps statisti-
cal relationships that hold among bodily states, the organ-
ism’s actions, and the affordances of its econiche. It maps 
the statistical structure of organism–environment interac-
tions, not the hidden causes of sensory input conceived of 
independent of the agent. Minimising free energy is achieved 
through the process of active inference. A consequence of 
active inference is that the organism is able to sustain its own 
operational closure at multiple levels of biological organisa-
tion all the way up to the recurrent patterns of interaction 
and engagement with the affordances of the environment.
I’ve argued that processes of free energy minimisation 
of the right complexity may thus be sufficient for the emer -
gence of mineness. Free-energy minimisation is however 
something the organism accomplishes through a process of 
active inference—an inferential process that unfolds within 
an organism–environment system. It follows that lifeforms 
that have mineness as a consequence of active inference 
likewise have to be understood in relation to the eco-niche 
they inhabit. The forms of operational closure they sustain 
through their activities relate to their way of life in their 
niche.
The human way of life is socio-cultural. People regulate 
their interactions with the environment more generally based 
on what they care about, and how the world matters to them 
(e.g. their friends and family, the work projects, rituals and 
social practices they take part in). Humans don’t only expect 
bodily states that are consistent with maintaining their inter-
nal physiological milieu within a constrained range of values 
through homeostasis (Seth 2013). They expect to occupy 
bodily states that relate to their way of life more generally—
the habits and practices they engage in regularly and repeat-
edly. In other words, human agents expect to occupy bodily 
states that relate to their own flourishing in the niche they 
construct in part through cultural and social practices. They 
allow themselves to be drawn into action by relevant affor -
dances that sustain their values and what matters to them. 
The result of free-energy minimisation is that they further 
their own flourishing both as individuals, but also crucially 
in relation to others.
This paper is part of a special issue on the topic of the 
relational self. Thus it is appropriate to close with a brief 
comment on the implications of the arguments of this paper 
for a relational theory of the self. The bodily self has been 
argued to be a relational self because it is inferred on the 
basis of processes of embodied mentalisation that integrate 
bodily signals including signals that come from the outside 
from other bodies in close physical proximity (Ciaunica 
and Fotopoulou 2017; Fotopoulou and Tsakiris 2017). The 
processes of multisensory integration that lead to the devel-
opment of bodily self-awareness in infants include the inte-
gration of signals that arise from interpersonal touch (e.g. 
hugging, breastfeeding, carrying etc.). The bodily signals 
that are organised and schematised in processes of embodied 
mentalisation thus need not originate exclusively from inside 
of the body, but will include signals that originate from the 
infant’s affective bodily contact with its caregivers.
It might be objected that the account of embodied mental-
isation proposed by Fotopoulou and her colleagues implies 
a neurocentric account of the self that is very much at odds 
with the arguments of this paper. Embodied mentalisation is 
after all a process of schematising multisensory information 
that occurs within the brain of an individual. However, if the 
arguments of this paper are along the right lines embodied 
mentalisation as a process of free energy minimisation is 
better interpreted in ecological–enactive terms. The intero-
ceptive bodily signals that are organised and schematised 
are the bodily states that need to be kept within a tightly 
restricted range of values as part of the process of sustaining 
operational closure. The self that emerges out of processes 
of free energy minimisation is a relational self because self 
and other are co-dependent and co-determining. The upshot 
of Fotopoulou’s important research is that the self that is 
implied by processes of free energy minimisation is not an 
isolated individual but a self that cares deeply about its inter-
actions with others. The self that is sustained through free 
energy minimisation receives its nourishment and grows out 
of its interpersonal relationships.
Funding This research was funded by the European Research Council 
Starting Grant awarded to Prof. Erik Rietveld (Grant Number 679190).
Compliance with Ethical Standards 
Conflict of interest No conflict of interest.
Research Involving Human and Animal Participants This article does 
not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed 
by any of the authors.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Crea-
tive Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creat iveco 
mmons .org/licen ses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribu-
tion, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the 
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
573Free Energy and the Self: An Ecological–Enactive Interpretation  
1 3
References
Allen M, Friston K (2017) From cognitivism to autopoiesis: towards a 
computational framework for the embodied mind. Synthese. https 
://doi.org/10.1007/s1122 9-016-1288-5
Anderson M (2014) After phrenology: neural reuse and the interactive 
brain. MIT Press, Cambridge
Apps M, Tsakiris M (2014) The free energy self: a predictive coding 
account of self-recognition. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 41:85–97
Bruineberg J, Rietveld E (2014) Self-organisation, free energy mini-
misation, and optimal grip on a field of affordances. Front Hum 
Neurosci 8:599
Bruineberg J, Kiverstein J, Rietveld E (2017) The anticipating brain 
is not a scientist. The free energy principle from an ecological-
enactive perspective. Synthese. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122  
9-016-1239-1
Calvo P, Friston K (2017) Predicting green: really radical (plant) pre-
dictive processing. J R Soc Interface 14(131):1742–5662
Campbell JO (2016) Universal darwinism as a process of Bayesian 
inference. Front Hum Neurosci 10:49
Christoff K, Cosmelli D, Legrand D, Thompson E (2011) Speci-
fying the self for cognitive neuroscience. Trends Cogn Sci 
15(3):104–112
Ciaunica A, Fotopoulou K (2017) The touched self. Psychological and 
philosophical perspectives on proximal intersubjectivity and the 
self. In: Durt C, Fuchs T, Tewes C (eds) Embodiment, enaction 
and culture: investigating the constitution of the shared world. 
MIT Press, Cambridge
Clark A (2003) Natural born cyborgs: minds, technologies and the 
future of human intelligence. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Dewey J (1896) The reflex arc concept in psychology. Psychol Rev 
3:357–370
Di Paolo E (2005) Autopoiesis, adaptivity, teleology and agency. Phe-
nomenol Cogn Sci 4:429–452
Di Paolo E, Buhrmann T, Barandiaran XE (2017) Sensorimotor life: an 
enactive proposal. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Feldman H, Friston K (2010) Attention, uncertainty and free energy. 
Front Hum Neurosci 2(4):215
Fotopoulou K, Tsakiris M (2017) Mentalising homeostasis: the social 
origins of interoceptive inference. Neuropsychoanalysis 19:71–76
Friston K (2010) The free energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat 
Rev Neurosci 11(2):127–138
Friston K (2012) A free energy principle for biological systems. 
Entropy 14(11):2100–2121
Friston K (2013) Life as we know it. J R Soc Interface 10:20130475
Friston K (2017). The mathematics of mind time. Aeon. https ://aeon.
co/essay s/consc iousn ess-is-not-a-thing -but-a-proce ss-of-infer ence
Friston K (2018) Am I self-conscious. Front Theor Philos Psychol. 
(Manuscript under review)
Friston K, Stephan K (2007) Free energy and the brain. Synthese 
159(3):417–458
Friston K, Rigoli F, Ognibene D, Mathys C, Fitzgerald T, Pezzulo G 
(2015) Active inference and epistemic value. Cogn Neurosci. https 
://doi.org/10.1080/17588 928.2015.10200 53
Fulda FC (2017) Natural agency: the case of bacterial cognition. J Am 
Philos Assoc 3:1–22
Gallagher S (2000) Philosophical conceptions of the self: implications 
for cognitive science. Trends Cogn Sci 4(1):14–21
Gallagher S (2005) How the body shapes the mind. Oxford University 
Press, Oxford
Gallagher S (2012) First-person perspective and immunity to error 
through misidentification. In: Miguens, Preyer (eds) Conscious-
ness and subjectivity. Ontos Verlag, Frankfurt, pp 187–214
Gallagher S (2017) The past, present and future of time consciousness: 
from husserl to varela and beyond. Constr Found 13(1): 91–97.
Gibson JJ (1979) The ecological approach to visual perception. 
Houghton Lifflin, Boston
Gladziejewski P (2016) Predictive coding and representationalism. 
Synthese 193(2):559–582
Godfrey-Smith P (2016) Other minds: the octopus and the evolution of 
intelligent life. Harper Collins, London
Hohwy J (2013) The predictive mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Hohwy J (2016) The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 50(2):259–285
Hohwy, J. (2017). How to entrain your evil demon. In: Metzinger T, 
Wiese W (eds) Philosophy and predictive Processing. MIND 
Group, Frankfurt am Main. https ://doi.org/10.15502 /97839 58573 
048
Hohwy J, Paton B (2010) Explaining away the body: experiences of 
supernaturally caused touch and touch on non-hand objects within 
the rubber hand illusion. PLoS ONE 5(2):e9416
Husserl E (1991) On the phenomenology of the consciousness of 
internal time (1893–1917). (trans: Brough J). Kluwer Academic, 
Dordrecht
Kiefer A, Hohwy J (2017) Content and misrepresentation in hierarchi-
cal generative models. Synthese. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122  
9-017-1435-7
Kirchhoff M (2017) Autopoiesis, free energy and the life-mind continu-
ity thesis. Synthese. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1122 9-016-1100-6
Kirchhoff M, Froese T (2017) Where there is life there is mind: in sup-
port of a strong life-mind continuity thesis. Entropy 19(169):1–18
Kiverstein J, Miller M, Rietveld E (2017) The feeling of grip: novelty, 
error dynamics and the predictive brain. Synthese. https ://doi.
org/10.3389/fnhum .2015.00237 
Klein C (2015) What the body commands: an imperative theory of 
pain. MIT Press, Cambridge
Legrand D (2006) The bodily self: the sensorimotor roots of pre-reflex-
ive self-consciousness. Phenomenol Cogn Sci 5:89–118
Legrand D (2012) Self-consciousness and world-consciousness. In: 
Zahavi D (ed) The Oxford handbook of contemporary phenom -
enology. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Limanowski J, Blankenburg F (2013) Minimal self-models and the free 
energy principle. Front Hum Neurosci 7:547
Mach E (1914) The analysis of sensations and the relation of the physi-
cal to the psychical. Open Court, Chicago
Metzinger T (2003) Being no-one: the self-model theory of subjectiv-
ity. MIT Press, Cambridge
Metzinger T (2009) The ego tunnel: the science of the mind and the 
myth of the self. Basic Books, New York
Michael J, Hohwy J (2018) Why should any body have a self? In: De 
Vignemont F, Alsmith A (eds) The subject’s matter: self-con-
sciousness and the body. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Moreno A, Mossio M (2015) Biological autonomy: a philosophical and 
theoretical enquiry. Springer, Berlin
Owen AM, Coleman MR, Boly M, Davis MH, Laureys S, Pickard 
JD (2006) Detecting awareness in the vegetative state. Science 
315:1221
Pearl J (1988) Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks 
of plausible inference. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco
Powers W (1973) Behaviour: the control of perception. Aldine, 
Chicago
Ramstead MJD, Badcock PB, Friston KJ (2017) Answering Schrod-
inger’s question: a free energy formulation. Phys Life Rev 24:1–16
Rietveld E (2008) Situated normativity: the normative aspect of embod-
ied cognition in unreflective action. Mind 117(468):973–1001
Sartre J-P (2003) Being and nothingness: an essay in phenomenological 
ontology (trans: Barnes HE). Routledge, London
Seth A (2013) Interoceptive inference, emotion and the embodied self. 
Trends Cogn Sci 17(11):565–573
574 J. Kiverstein 
1 3
Shea N, Bayne T (2010) The vegetative state and the science of con-
sciousness. Br J Philos Sci 61:459–484
Shoemaker S (1968) Self-reference and self-awareness. J Philos 
65:555–567
Tajadura-Jiménez A, Longo MR, Coleman R, Tsakiris M (2012) The 
person in the mirror: using the enfacement illusion to investigate 
the experiential structure of self-identification. Conscious Cogn 
21(4):1725–1738
Thompson E (2007) Mind in life: biology, phenomenology and the 
sciences of mind. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Thompson E (2015) Waking, dreaming, being: self and consciousness 
in neuroscience, meditation and philosophy. Columbia University 
Press, New York
Tribus M (1961) Thermodynamics and thermostatics: an introduction 
to energy, information and states of matter with engineering appli-
cations. D. Van Nostrand, New York
Varela FJ (1979) Principles of biological autonomy. North Holland, 
New York
Zahavi D (2005) Subjectivity and selfhood: investigating the first-
person perspective. MIT Press, Cambridge
Zahavi D (2014) Self and other: exploring subjectivity, empathy and 
shame. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Zahavi D (2017) Thin, thinner, thinnest: defining the minimal self. 
In: Durt C, Fuchs T, Tewes C (eds) Embodiment, enaction and 
culture: investigating the constitution of the shared world. MIT 
Press, Cambridge