Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2025, 2025(1), niae040
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niae040
Research Article
Flow and intuition: a systems neuroscience comparison
Steven Kotler1, Darius Parvizi-Wayne
 2,*, Michael Mannino1,3, Karl Friston
 4,5
1Flow Research Collective, Gardnerville, Nevada, USA
2Department of Philosophy, Macquarie University, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
3Artifical Intelligence Center, Miami Dade College, Miami, Florida, USA
4VERSES AI Research Lab, Los Angeles, CA, United States
5Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom
Steven Kotler and Darius Parvizi-Wayne contributed equally to this paper and should be considered joint first authors.
*Corresponding author. Philosophy, Macquarie University, 17 Wally’s Walk, Macquarie University, Sydney, New South Wales 2113, Australia.
E-mail: Darius.parviziwayne@hdr.mq.edu.au
Abstract 
This paper explores the relationship between intuition and flow from a neurodynamics perspective. Flow and intuition represent two 
cognitive phenomena rooted in nonconscious information processing; however, there are clear differences in both their phenomenal 
characteristics and, more broadly, their contribution to action and cognition. We propose, extrapolating from dual processing theory, 
that intuition serves as a rapid, nonconscious decision-making process, while flow facilitates this process in action, achieving opti-
mal cognitive control and performance without [conscious] deliberation. By exploring these points of convergence between flow and 
intuition, we also attempt to reconcile the apparent paradox of the presence of enhanced intuition in flow, which is also a state of 
heightened cognitive control. To do so, we utilize a revised dual-processing framework, which allows us to productively align and dif-
ferentiate flow and intuition (including intuition in flow). Furthermore, we draw on recent work examining flow from an active inference 
perspective. Our account not only heightens understanding of human cognition and consciousness, but also raises new questions for 
future research, aiming to deepen our comprehension of how flow and intuition can be harnessed to elevate human performance and 
wellbeing.
Keywords: flow; intuition; active inference; consciousness; dual-processing; habits
Introduction
Intuition and flow are two related, yet distinct, cognitive phe-
nomena that both involve the processing of information. In 
the language of neural dynamics—and for the purposes of this 
paper—‘information processing’ will be defined as the process by 
which organisms take in information about the world through 
sensory organs, learn statistical regularities about that informa-
tion, and use those regularities to navigate and interact with 
the environment ( Varley et al. 2023 ). As we will discuss below, 
according to the active inference framework this can be cast as 
a reduction of uncertainty or, more technically, surprisal given 
a generative model ( Friston 2010 , Friston et  al. 2016 , Kirchhoff 
et al. 2018 ). When you have an intuition about a possible next 
action—for example, the familiar gut sense of ‘don’t walk down 
that alley’—your intuition is guiding you away from unpredicted 
observations (uncertainty) and towards those observations that 
you—because of the thing that you are—prefer. From the perspec-
tive of active inference, those preferred observations just are the 
predictions (or priors) that make up the agent’s generative model 
(i.e. probabilistic expectations; Smith et al. 2022). In flow, which 
can be defined as ‘an optimal state of consciousness’ ( Csikszent-
mihalyi 2000), rapid flows of skilful action are deployed to achieve 
the sensory outcomes the agent prefers. In other words, flow, like 
intuition, subtends the requisite minimization of uncertainty (cf., 
free energy) (Parvizi-Wayne et al. 2024).
Before discussing these technical points further, it is worth 
offering a brief introduction to what flow and intuition are. A flow 
state is an ‘almost automatic, effortless, yet highly focused state 
of consciousness’ (Csikszentmihalyi 1997, p. 110) that defines the 
experience of a skilled actor exercising their expertise within a suf-
ficiently challenging task (Nakamura and Csikszentmihalyi 2009, 
2014). Phenomenologically, one of the hallmarks of flow is a sense 
of always knowing what to do next, which is described formally as 
a ‘sense of control’ or expertise.
Neurophysiologically, this is underwritten by the activation 
of neural networks associated with cognitive control and goal-
directedness (Huskey et al. 2018 , 2022, Kotler et al. 2022 ). This 
sense-knowing appears within the action-perception cycle, as an 
embodied signal that co-arises with the behaviour itself. In other 
words, we know what to do and are already doing it by the time 
Received 29 May 2024; Revised 17 October 2024; Accepted 28 November 2024
© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which 
permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
2 Kotler et al.
we realize that we know—which is what psychologists mean by 
‘the merger of action and awareness’, another of flow’s hallmark 
experiential characteristics (Gold and Ciorciari 2020, Kotler et al. 
2022, Shepherd 2022). This points to flow as a particularly notewor-
thy state of consciousness, which is characterized by, among other 
things, total immersion in a challenging task, a distortion of time 
perception, and an elimination of reflective self-awareness (Csik-
szentmihalyi 1990, 1997, Nakamura and Csikszentmihalyi 2009 , 
2014, Christandl et  al. 2018 , Abuhamdeh 2020 , Parvizi-Wayne 
2024, Parvizi-Wayne et al. 2024).
Intuition, conversely, is a form of nonconscious cognition 
‘resulting in a spontaneous tendency toward a hunch or hypothe-
sis’ (Zander et al. 2016, p. 2; cf., Fridland and Stichter 2021, Hogarth 
2001, Lufityanto et al. 2016, Topolinski and Strack 2008). Further-
more, intuitions are based on implicit or tacit knowledge acquired 
throughout a lifetime (Bowers et al. 1990). Finally, they often man-
ifest as affective tendencies towards action—i.e. a felt go or no-go 
signal strong enough to draw the individual into action ( Gigeren-
zer 2008), and can thus be contrasted with insights, which Zander 
et al. (2016) (p. 3) describe as ‘the sudden and unexpected understand-
ing of a previously incomprehensible problem or concept’ (italics 
original). Note that insights, while sharing characteristics with 
intuitions, often involve a more dramatic cognitive shift and, inter-
estingly, tend to be more accurate than analytic solutions ( Salvi 
et al. 2016). From an active inference perspective, insights could 
be conceptualized as sudden, large reductions in the uncertainty 
entailed by the likelihood mappings. This aligns with the sub-
jective experience of certainty and clarity often reported during 
insight moments (Laukkonen et al. 2023). Unfortunately, a further 
discussion concerning the difference between insight and intu-
ition, and their description within the active inference framework, 
is beyond the scope of this paper (cf., Zander et al. 2016, Friston 
et al. 2017, Laukkonen et al. 2023).
We propose that flow relies upon many aspects of intuitive 
decision-making, including a sense of ‘knowing’ what to do with-
out conscious (declarative) analysis. Kotler (2006, 2014) reported 
anecdotally that subjects in flow report intuition being clearer 
and more accurate than normal, but this idea has neither been 
formally tested nor empirically explained. Little research has 
explored the relationship between flow and intuition, especially 
at the neurobiological level. That said, Järvilehto (2016 , p. 96) 
has examined the question psychologically and pointed out that 
‘both flow and intuition concern our capacity for cognition and 
action without heavy input from reflective and conscious cogni-
tive mechanisms’. He posits that flow is intuition in action, and 
intuition is cognition in flow. Furthermore, within the context of 
dual processing theory (DPT), Järvilehto (2016) argues that both 
intuition and flow involve so-called system 1 cognitive processing, 
which is typically described as fast, non-conscious and parallel, 
differing from so-called system 2 cognitive processing, which is 
typically described as slow, conscious and serial ( Sloman 1996 , 
Evans 2003, Kahneman 2011, Da Silva 2023). In this paper, we will 
address these claims, attempting to extend them into cognitive 
neurodynamics, where, in recent years, researchers have begun 
to explore the neurobiology of both flow and intuition ( Volz and 
von Cramon 2006, Volz et al. 2008, Klasen et al. 2012, de Manzano 
et al. 2013, Horr et al. 2014, Ulrich et al. 2014, Lufityanto et al. 2016, 
Zander et al. 2016, Huskey et al. 2018). However, no one has yet 
compared these data nor attempted to unravel the relationship 
between these two processes. This leaves many interesting open 
research questions. For example, as intuitive processes appear to 
be active in the state of flow, can nonconscious information pro-
cessing be governed by cognitive control mechanisms? In other 
words, if flow is intuition in action, as Järvilehto (2016) purports, 
it is unclear how intuition as nonconscious processing and flow 
as a state of high cognitive control can be reconciled, given that 
controlled processes are generally thought to be conscious and 
deliberative (i.e. system 2) (Evans and Stanovich 2013, p. 225).
Using the tripartite model of cognition proposed by Shea and 
Frith (2016), as well as the active inference model of flow provided 
by Parvizi-Wayne et al. (2024), we will endeavour to resolve this 
seemingly challenging dilemma, demonstrating that the intuitive 
aspect of flow is in fact that which renders it a state of cogni-
tive control. Furthermore, we will highlight the importance of 
conscious representations in flow and intuition—as well as intu-
ition in flow—insofar as they facilitate the information integration 
necessary for a form of adaptive behavioural control capable of 
unfolding in the absence of deliberative reasoning.
Bringing systems neuroscience to bear on 
flow and intuition
From the perspective of systems neuroscience, both flow and 
intuition appear to alter functional connectivity and information 
integration. In previous research, we argued that both phenomena 
can be empirically and theoretically explained by two prominent 
theories, namely, active inference and dynamic systems theory 
(and especially the latter’s focus on the notion of metastability) 
(Kotler et al. 2022). In this paper, we will focus primarily on the 
contributions of active inference.
In brief, active inference is a corollary of the free-energy princi-
ple (FEP), which states that any thing (e.g. the cognizing organism), 
which persists through time, has a defining set of characteris-
tic states (i.e. an attracting set) ( Ramstead et al. 2023). Through 
the introduction of a statistical boundary demarcating the organ-
ism from its environment—known as a Markov blanket—the FEP 
states that the internal states of an agent can be described as if 
they are inferring external states that are hidden from the agent 
(by its Markov blanket) (Pearl 1988, Friston 2009, 2010, 2019, Kirch-
hoff et al. 2018 ). More specifically, internal (and active blanket) 
states appear to be minimizing an information theoretic term 
known as variational free energy (VFE), which acts as an upper 
bound on surprisal, Shannon self-information, or—in the long 
term—entropy (since entropy is the path integral of surprisal) 
(Shannon 1948, Friston 2013). Crucially, the minimization of VFE 
is formally equivalent to maximizing [a lower bound on] the evi-
dence for the generative model entailed by the agent in question 
(technically the maximization of the marginal likelihood of an 
observation, given a generative model). This means that active 
inference is frequently referred to as a process of self-evidencing 
(Hohwy 2016). By minimizing VFE, the agent is implicitly return-
ing to its characteristic states or attracting set. These states thus 
require a high probability, as it seeks evidence for its model of its 
world or niche ( Friston 2009, 2010, 2019, Ramstead et al. 2019 ). 
Furthermore, the active inference framework has been employed 
in neurobiological explanations of insight and creativity ( Friston 
et al. 2017, Priorelli and Stoianov 2023, Constant et al. 2024).
The application of the FEP to sentient behaviour generally 
assumes particular kinds of agents that infer their own actions. 
This planning as inference ( Attias 2003, Botvinick and Toussaint 
2012, Da Costa et  al. 2020 ) is based upon expected free energy 
(EFE); namely, the free energy that would be expected under a par-
ticular course of action or plan (note that every policy or plan is 
appraised in terms of its EFE. In other words, EFE is an attribute of a 
plan, policy, action or choice). This makes an agent endowed with a 
temporally deep generative model particularly adaptive, because 
Flow and intuition  3
it can take actions in the present to minimize the likelihood of 
experiencing dyshomeostatic—or ego-dystonic—outcomes in the 
future. For example, I will take an umbrella with me if I notice 
that it is raining outside, because this will reduce the likelihood of 
getting wet. This anticipatory planning is frequently described in 
terms of allostasis (Sterling 2012, Pezzulo et al. 2015, 2018, Corco-
ran and Hohwy 2018). Interestingly, EFE can be expressed in terms 
of expected information gain and expected value, where value is 
simply the log probability of being in an attracting state. This pro-
vides a straightforward (Bayesian) mechanics that explains both 
information-seeking (epistemic) and goal-seeking (instrumental) 
behaviour, in terms of responding to epistemic and instrumen-
tal affordances, where affordances can be understood in the tra-
ditional Gibsonian manner as action possibilities latent in the 
environment (Gibson 1979, Friston et al. 2012, Friston 2022),
A final aspect of active (planning as) inference is the poten-
tial to acquire habits by repeatedly observing one’s own responses 
to cues with epistemic or instrumental affordance ( Pezzulo et al. 
2015, Friston et al. 2016, Maisto et al. 2019). In other words, plans 
or policies can be learned if they are suitably cued by any con-
text that can be inferred. As the precision weight afforded priors 
over policies increases, habitual priors predominate in planning—
and subsequent action selection—relative to the more deliberative 
policy priors, afforded by their expected free energy.
Recently, Parvizi-Wayne et al. (2024) offered an active inference 
account of flow to ground the phenomenal characteristics of the 
flow state in computational terms (e.g. neuronal dynamics as a 
gradient flow on the VFE). They propose that flow is a cognitive 
state characterized by intense focus on a task, the inhibition of 
deep counterfactual planning and the maximization of expected 
value, leading to the elimination of reflective self-awareness. This 
is achieved by shifting attention (cf. precision weight Parvizi-
Wayne 2024a) to immediate, task-specific demands, which, in flow, 
fluctuate rapidly and can only be attended to, given a prerequisite 
level of expertise. The paper also distinguished flow from habitual 
(mental) actions, highlighting flow’s unique nature of delibera-
tive yet effortless engagement in activities that demand rapid and 
skilful responses. In this state, the brain adopts temporally ‘shal-
low’ but highly precise planning focusing on immediate feedback 
rather than the minimization of future (expected) free energy. 
In the language of another theoretical framework—dynamical 
systems theory—in flow the brain is operating at the ‘edge of crit-
icality’, with rapid access to its repository of learned patterns 
matched by an ability to use these patterns to generate real-time, 
temporally thin predictions about current circumstances ( Hesse 
and Gross 2014, Tognoli and Kelso 2014, Vervaeke et al. 2018, Gross 
2021, Hancock et al. 2022, Toker et al. 2022). In doing so, the flow-
ing cognitive system exhibits a pattern of transient tendencies 
towards stable coordination patterns in an itinerant manner as 
it guides adaptive, flexible, and quick behavioural responses to a 
highly volatile environment.
From the perspective of active inference, intuition can be 
understood as the brain’s nonconscious generation of expecta-
tions about the consequences of different actions, leading to a 
Bayes-optimal navigation of the environment, both in its phys-
ical and mental form ( Freeman 2002 , Buzsáki 2006 ). Based on 
implicit knowledge and past experience, this leads to a certain 
action readiness via precision-weighting dynamics, as the organ-
ism ‘arrives’ at the trajectory that, if fulfilled via action, minimizes 
the path integral of EFE ( Bowers et  al. 1990 , Gigerenzer 2008 , 
Rietveld and Kiverstein 2014 , Friston 2022 ). To foreshadow this 
paper’s thesis, we will suggest that in flow (and perhaps more 
generally), intuition constitutes a habitual mental action which, 
given a relevant contextual cue, optimizes certain aspects of belief 
updating: i.e. by increasing the precision weight of probability 
distributions in the generative model, such as the likelihood, tran-
sition priors, and prior preferences. These three components of 
a generative model are usually denoted by A, B, and C tensors, 
respectively.1 This is aligned with the proposal of Volz and Zander 
(2014), who refer to the type of memory content utilized in intu-
ition as tacitly (in)formed cue-criterion relationships developed over 
the course of a lifetime (cf., Gigerenzer 2008). As Parvizi-Wayne 
et al. (2024)  make clear, it takes time and practice to form such 
mental habits (intuitions).
At this juncture, it is worth distinguishing intuitions, which 
we take to require exposure to cues and consequent responses, 
from instinctual responses, which too seem habitual and yet do 
not require practice or learning: think, for example, of withdraw-
ing one’s hand from a hot stove. Beyond the fact that—unlike 
the type of intuitions employed in canonical flow states—the (e.g. 
infant) agent will enact said reflex at first exposure, another differ-
ence lies in the type of action engendered by the habit. A critical 
aspect of the account of flow in Parvizi-Wayne et al. (2024) is that 
cues in flow do not provoke physical actions directly; rather, they 
increase the precision-weight of certain beliefs encoded in the 
generative model which, in turn, draw the flowing organism into 
physical behaviour. Instinctual responses such as reflexes, on the 
other hand, given their rapidity and involuntary nature, can be 
better understood as physical actions directly engendered by the 
observed cue: in this case, nociceptive input. Technically, this dis-
tinction is modelled by habitual priors (E) that have to be learned 
and prior preferences (C) that underwrite expected free energy. 
Prior preferences can be learnable but certain innate or instinc-
tual preferences may be endowed epigenetically and manifest in 
the absence of experience or learning. This leads to a distinc-
tion between instinctual behaviour driven by the expected cost 
(C) of action (e.g. the cost of not withdrawing one’s hand from a 
hot stove) and intuitive (i.e. habitual) behaviour based upon (E) 
experience (e.g. not touching things that could be hot stoves).
Recall here that what is cultivated through experience is the 
association of a cue (e.g. seeing the hot stove) and a mental action 
which triggers high precision over prior preferences, inducing the 
action-readiness quintessential of intuition. Given that instinctive 
responses lack this intermediary mental action, it is unsurprising 
that the phenomenal character of action-readiness is absent in 
their execution. However, it is worth recognizing that, although we 
conceive of the presence/absence of intermediary habitual mental 
actions in a binary manner, thereby leaving instinctual responses 
in a category of their own kind, apt scepticism has been expressed 
by numerous researchers with respect to the type of dichotomies 
that our conceptual demarcation of intuition and instinct rests on 
(e.g. learnt versus innate; environmental versus genetic) (Johnston 
1987, Oyama et al. 2003, Bateson and Gluckman 2011 , Blumberg 
2017). With respect to this dimension, therefore, we are disinclined 
to dichotomise intuition and instinct in any strong sense, recog-
nising that, as Blumberg (2017, p. 7) puts it, ‘behaviors lie along 
a continuum from highly malleable or plastic to highly rigid or 
robust’.
1 Note that here we are using the language of partially observable Markov 
decision process (POMDP) schema used to describe active inference in discrete 
state space (cf., Friston et al. 2017, Da Costa et al. 2020).
4 Kotler et al.
The theoretical overlap between intuition 
and flow—a DPT perspective
Järvilehto (2016)  offers the first theoretical examination of the 
relationship between intuition and flow, through the lens of DPT. 
Dual process theory posits two separate cognitive systems: sys-
tem 1 and system 2. In brief, system 1 involves fast, parallel and 
non-conscious information processing; system 2 involves slow, 
conscious and serial information processing (Tversky and Kahne-
man 1974, Kahneman and Tversky 1984, Sloman 1996, Stanovich 
and West 1998, 2008, Evans 2003, Kahneman 2011, Da Silva 2023). 
It is important to note that the term ‘dual process’ represents a 
family of theories, not a single monolith (see Evans and Stanovich 
2013). For Evans (2008 , 2010) and Stanovich (2005) , Stanovich 
(2011) encourage the disuse of the labels ‘system 1’ and ‘system 2’, 
given the (false) indication that the two types of processes belong 
to just two neurological systems. For reasons that will become 
apparent, we will continue to speak of system 1 and system 2. 
In any case, it is still widely accepted that there are two dis-
tinct types (or systems) of processing, whereby system 1 refers 
to rapid, automatic, non-conscious processing, whereas system 2 
refers to deliberative, conscious, higher-order reasoning processes 
(Evans and Stanovich 2013 ). Thus, we follow Järvilehto (2016 ,
p. 96), who, recognizing the multitude of sub-theories belonging to 
DPT, concludes nevertheless that ‘System 1 and System 2 suffice 
as abstractions that differentiate non-conscious and conscious 
thought processes’.
From this perspective, Järvilehto (2016, p. 101) argues that intu-
ition rests on ‘ontogenetic System 1 processes that have been 
acquired through experience and practice’. Similarly, he holds that 
flow is ‘a state where System 1 processes are carried out auto-
matically, without the intervention of reflective System 2 (p. 101)’. 
Thus, intuition and flow are put forward as similar phenomena 
that both involve highly automatized nonconscious processing. 
In fact, Järvilehto (2016 , p. 103) takes this further, proposing—
as noted above—that ‘flow can be thought of as intuitive action, 
whereas intuition can be thought of as cognition in flow’.
While this research provides a first hypothesis about the rela-
tionship between intuition and flow, several questions remain: 
Does Järvilehto’s proposal align with the underlying neurobiolog-
ical and neurodynamical account of these processes? Indeed, if, 
as we maintain, flow is a matter of cognitive control underwrit-
ten by activation of the relevant neurological regions, how would 
this fit with flow as intuitive action, i.e. action predicated on 
nonconscious information processing? Indeed, according to DPT, 
nonconscious, system 1 processing is not only automatic but also 
often leads to the wrong answer, and it is only with conscious, 
controlled, system 2 deliberative processing that individuals pro-
duce the correct solution ( Kahneman 2003 ). With this in mind, 
it seems unclear how flow can be the site of expert performance 
as well as intuition, given that system 1—to which intuition puta-
tively belongs—often yields ‘first and hasty attempts’ that need 
to be ‘smooth[ed] out’ by system 2 ( Zander et al. 2016, p. 8; cf., 
Kahneman 2011 , p. 44, p. 188). In other words, it could appear 
that intuition impairs (rather than facilitates) cognitive control 
and goal-seeking and, thus, should have no place in flow states, 
in which goal states are consistently and reiteratively fulfilled.
Furthermore, thinking about DPT more broadly, recall that one 
of the most important claims made by the theory is that system 1’s 
processing is nonconscious, whilst system 2’s processing is con-
scious. This brings up an interesting, yet unanswered, question: 
Does consciousness affect cognition? More specifically: What is 
the relationship between consciousness and cognitive control, and 
how does this relationship relate to intuition and flow? It is to 
these questions that we now turn.
Consciousness and cognitive control in flow 
and intuition
If Järvilehto (2016) is correct, then both intuition and flow involve 
system 1 processes. However, recall that a growing body of evi-
dence suggests that flow is underpinned by co-activation in both 
the cognitive control network and the goal-directed (reward) net-
work (Huskey et al. 2018, 2022), which implies that flow is a prod-
uct of system 2 (cf., Doyle 2017). This conflict further brings into 
question the role of consciousness in these processes, and, in par-
ticular, its contribution to adaptive cognitive control. In flow, per-
formance not only diminishes when people overtly reflect on what 
they are doing, but flow itself is interrupted (cf., Bergamin 2017, 
Beilock et al. 2002, Csikszentmihalyi 2014, p. 138, Dreyfus 2007, 
Shepherd 2022). In other words, the fact that the physio-cognitive 
processes that underwrite flow are non-conscious appears to be a 
prerequisite for its very manifestation, aligning flow with system 
1. Nevertheless, flow is not entirely non-conscious; in fact, its con-
tinuation is underpinned by the flowing individual’s very absorbed 
attention on the given activity’s sensory inputs and outputs. Thus, 
the representations over which those physio-cognitive processes 
occur in flow are conscious, indicating, to put it briefly, that con-
sciousness might be good for something (Rosenthal 2008, Frith and 
Metzinger 2016, Shea and Frith 2016).
More broadly, some researchers argue that consciousness 
might not necessarily enhance cognition, citing evidence that 
well-adapted behaviours can occur without it, and that, in some 
situations, conscious awareness impedes optimal performance 
(Levine et  al. 1996 , Jueptner et  al. 1997 , Fletcher et  al. 2005 , 
Króliczak et  al. 2006 , McKay et  al. 2015 , Frith and Metzinger 
2016). However, in other cases, the evidence shows that con-
sciousness aids cognition and that when System 2 thinking is 
compromised by cognitive load, subjects make errors in perfor-
mance (Jonides 1981, Jacoby et al. 1993, Kahneman 2003, Ericsson 
2006, Schwiedrzik et al. 2011, Maciejovsky et al. 2013, Shea et al. 
2014). In sum, there remains an open question as to the function of 
consciousness, a dilemma which appears particularly pronounced 
with respect to flow states, in which consciousness of the pro-
cesses one is implementing to achieve flow disrupts the very 
experience, whilst consciousness of the sensory inputs and out-
puts circumventing that process is necessary for its emergence 
and maintenance (Gold and Ciorciari 2020).
In resolving this apparent paradox, we can start by noting 
that, in describing the issue at hand, we have implicitly distin-
guished between the non-conscious processing and the conscious 
representations present in flow. This distinction is informed by the 
work of Shea and Frith (2016, p. 1), who, in investigating ‘what is 
consciousness good for?’ distinguish two dimensions underlying 
dual process theories: representation and processing. Recogniz-
ing that the traditional DPT model only focusses on the latter, 
they posit a distinction between what they call ‘type 1’ and ‘type 
2’ cognition with subtle yet important differences from the fore-
running DPT model and the associated notions of system 1 and 
system 2 processing. Their notion of type 1 cognition aligns with 
traditional ideas about system 1 as automatic, load-insensitive 
fast processing. However, they characterize type 1 as operating 
Flow and intuition  5
on conscious representations, whereas system 1 is described as 
generally nonconscious, without regard for the phenomenal sta-
tus of the relevant representations ( Evans 2003 , Hagger 2016 , 
Nadurak 2021 ). Given this, they introduce the concept of type 
0 cognition, which involves nonconscious processing over non-
conscious representations. T ype 2, in turn, matches system 2 as 
controlled, effortful processing, involving both conscious repre-
sentations and conscious processing. In sum, they argue that type 
0 cognition involves both non-conscious representations and non-
controlled processing; type 1 consists of automatic, non-conscious 
processing of conscious representations; and type 2 involves both 
conscious representations and conscious, deliberative processing 
over those representations (Shea and Frith 2016).
For our purposes, Shea and Frith’s (2016) nuanced framework 
is useful in resolving unanswered questions. As mentioned before, 
the nonconscious automatic processing of type 0 and type 1 cog-
nition enables rapid, efficient behaviours in predictable settings 
without requiring conscious, deliberative control; what might 
be termed ‘nonconscious cognitive control’. This type of offline 
operation is constitutive of flow, and it is this aspect which (par-
tially) confirms Järvilehto’s (2016) claim that flow is intuition in 
action—that is, flow, like intuition, involves nonconscious auto-
matic processing. Indeed, as mentioned earlier, deliberative rea-
soning about the underlying processes disrupts flow (Beilock et al. 
2002, Bergamin 2017, Csikszentmihalyi 2014, p. 138, Dreyfus 2007, 
Shepherd 2022). That said, flow is not entirely nonconscious, and 
involves conscious representations of sensory inputs and outputs. 
Thus, flow is an example of type 1 cognition under Shea and 
Frith’s (2016) framework, coupling conscious representations with 
nonconscious processing.
This distinction arguably separates flow from intuition, whose 
representation one might imagine are nonconscious, rendering it 
a form of type 0 cognition. However, recall the example of one’s 
intuition to not go down a dark alley. This is certainly not a non-
conscious process: I must consciously recognize where I am and 
consciously sense (as a product of my non-conscious intuitive pro-
cessing) trepidation and unease, often accompanied by the covert 
self-talk: don’t go in there. From this perspective, intuition is also an 
example of type 1 cognition—or, if one were unwilling to accept its 
affective output as a representation—a type 0 (nonconscious out-
put)/type 1 (conscious input) hybrid (Topolinski and Strack 2009). 
Indeed, as in flow states, individuals are not aware of the cog-
nitive processes going on in the background—i.e. ‘they cannot 
report about the cues they use for making the inference nor about 
potential integration processes’ (Volz and Zander 2014, p. 30).
The question consequently arises as to what the function of 
conscious representations is in flow states and intuition. Herein 
lies the utility of the model proposed by Parvizi-Wayne et al. 
(2024). The reader will be reminded that active inference pos-
tulates a relationship between habitual tendencies (priors over 
policies, denoted by E) and expected free energy (denoted by G) 
in determining action (policy) selection. This can be formulated 
as: 
Q (u) =𝜎 (E − G) (1)
(cf., Parvizi-Wayne and Severs 2024 ). Here, Q( u) represents the 
probability of an action (u) being selected. The equation leverages 
a normalized exponential function (SoftMax function: σ), which 
takes the vectors E and G as its arguments and converts them into 
a probability distribution; in this case, the likelihood of choosing a 
particular action (u). The term E represents habitual priors, which 
can be thought of as the probability of policies cued by specific 
contexts, such that, when one infers oneself to be in a given con-
text, one would select that policy in a non-deliberative fashion 
(Pezzulo et al. 2015 , Friston et al. 2016 , Maisto et al. 2019 ). The 
term G represents the EFE, which, recall, scores how much free 
energy the agent expects to encounter in the future, under each 
policy.
In what follows, we consider action in the more general sense 
to include mental action, which can be regarded as selecting the 
most likely likelihood and transition probabilities that are most 
apt for inferring latent or hidden states of affairs. For example, if 
it is dark I may assign more precision weight to auditory input, 
as opposed to visual input. This is generally discussed in terms 
of selective attention and sensory attenuation, on a psychologi-
cal review. In short, action can be covert as well as overt, which 
means my plans and decisions pertain to covert mental actions 
that can be read as action selection, in the sense of attentional 
selection (Feldman and Friston 2010 , Limanowski and Blanken-
burg 2013 , Limanowski and Friston 2018 , Sandved-Smith et  al. 
2021, Limanowski 2022 ). One can also consider mental actions 
that increase the precision weight of prior preferences, which 
emphasize pragmatic goal-seeking during planning and, indeed, 
increase the precision of habitual priors that themselves pre-
scribe mental actions. In short, any mental action will change 
the precision weight of posterior beliefs and, necessarily, posterior 
predictions that underwrite EFE, namely by altering the precision 
weight of priors over policies based on the planning (G), relative 
to habitual priors (E). In principle, it is therefore possible to have 
deliberative habits and a larger repertoire of implicit attentional 
and intentional sets.
With this difference between E and G in mind, note that Parvizi-
Wayne et al. (2024) hold that flow involves multiple layers of infor-
mation processing. Firstly, there is the partially nonconscious, 
habitual cueing (E) of mental actions that select [the precision 
weight of] belief updating—i.e. by increasing the precision weight 
of the A, B, and C tensors. This aspect of flow appears to be a hybrid 
of type 0 and type 1 cognition, since the flowing individual con-
sciously represents the context (sensory input), which drives the 
(nonconscious) mental action, without consciously representing 
the output (e.g. posterior beliefs; including, beliefs about plans 
and sub-personal intentions)—although this arguably manifests 
phenomenally as an affective form of action readiness, akin to 
trepidation or unease in other contexts ( Rietveld and Kiverstein 
2014). This maps onto our previous categorization of intuition as 
a type 0/type 1 hybrid and suggests that this partially noncon-
scious mental cueing of precision weight is the intuitive aspect of 
flow (Volz and Zander 2014). In fact, nonconscious mental action, 
which is cued by context and draws the agent into action via 
the precision weighting dynamics it engenders, might just be the 
cognitive substrate of intuition.
At the same time, Parvizi-Wayne et al. (2024, p. 15) hold that 
flow is not entirely habitual; rather, there is the ‘activation of full 
active inference’ at the level of state-based and perceptual-based 
inference, where physical action is rooted in the optimization of 
beliefs about states. This is reflected in the fact that the sensori-
motor inputs and outputs circumscribing physical action selection 
in flow are consciously represented. Again, the question concerns 
what consciousness (of representations) facilitates in physical 
action selection (Shea and Frith 2016, p. 3).
Building on work grounding consciousness in information 
integration ( Singer 1998 , Tononi 2008 ), Shea and Frith (2016)  
suggest that consciousness ‘allows representations from previ-
ously unconnected domains to be integrated for computational 
processing’. Such integration isparticularly necessary in flow 
6 Kotler et al.
states, which are marked by the volatile (yet partially predictable) 
environments in which they unfold ( Hohwy 2022). In facilitating 
the integration of information, consciousness allows flowing indi-
viduals to dynamically adjust to task contingencies: for example, 
combining information from the visual domain (the sight of the 
conductor), the tactile domain (the feel of the string on my fingers) 
and the auditory domain (the sound of the melody) affords the 
violin player adaptive control in otherwise challenging contexts. 
This might appear to yield a certain ‘automaticity’ (Dietrich 2004); 
however, this does not imply that the actual unfolding of the flow 
state is nonconscious (Gold and Ciorciari 2020, Shepherd 2022). As 
put by a rock climber in a study by Csikszentmihalyi (2000, p. 43):
It’s like when I was talking about things becoming ‘automatic’… 
almost like an egoless thing in a way– somehow the right thing is 
done without… thinking about it or doing anything at all… It just 
happens… and yet you’re more concentrated.
The last line here illustrates the type 1-ness of flow powerfully: ‘it 
just happens’ refers to the nonconscious automaticity of informa-
tion processing, whereas ‘you’re more concentrated’ implies that 
the inputs and outputs that constitute the flow state are anything 
but nonconscious. In fact, they are maximally conscious, to afford 
the information integration necessary for flow to continue. This is 
not to say that the entire complexity of the flow-inducing context 
is consciously represented. Given how computationally demand-
ing such an operation would be, it is likely that the information the 
integrated conscious representandum holds is reduced in flow or 
rendered simpler (Hillis et al. 2002, Stocker and Simoncelli 2007 , 
Shea and Frith 2016). This might explain why flow states engender 
such a laser-like attentional focus, as irrelevant contextual details 
are pruned from consciousness.
Importantly, note that this sensory input is the same sensory 
input that drives the habitual mental action in flow. Whether one 
wishes to analyse such inputs with respect to the flow state as 
a whole or solely as a cue for mental action ultimately depends 
on the lens of analysis one adopts. In other words, conscious-
ness, in facilitating the integration of information across domains, 
ensures that the contextual cue—which triggers mental actions—
is the correct contextual cue, an example of intuition guiding 
robust cognitive control. Only if  this contextual cue is appropri-
ate can the appropriate action be selected, for the habitual mental 
action driven by the contextual cue sets the heightened precision-
weighting that, according to active inference, is a prerequisite for 
the execution of the type of pragmatic action typical of flow. In 
this way, the apparent paradox of heightened intuition and cog-
nitive control in flow mentioned above is illusory. The control 
constitutive of flow is a result of its intuitive nature.
That said, the outputs of the mental actions and physical 
actions involved in flow are different. Whereas the former is a 
non-conscious increase in precision-weight, the latter is a set of 
sensory observations contingent on the action just performed. 
Thus, the obvious question now pertains to the functional role 
of the conscious output. The answer here is simple: the repre-
sented output at time n just is a represented input at the same 
time ( Hohwy 2022 , Parvizi-Wayne 2024b). This, in turn, acts as 
a contextual cue for the action policy at n + 1, which will pro-
duce another sensory output/input amalgam which sets off the 
next bout of sensorimotor loops (Parvizi-Wayne et al. 2024). Thus, 
the strict distinction Shea and Frith (2016) carve between sensory 
inputs and outputs can be relaxed somewhat in the case of flow, 
in which, due to its diachronic, integrated nature, representational 
outputs just are representational inputs.
Note that our conception of flow as involving rolling sets of con-
textual cues allows us to eschew any picture of flowing agents as 
mechanical zombies constrained by their dispositions to a single 
action path (Hutto and Robertson 2020 , Miyahara and Robertson 
2021, Cappuccio 2023). On the contrary, the breadth of expertise 
invariably possessed by flowing agents opens up multiple novel 
and seemingly creative policies within a single overarching activ-
ity, as each particular environmental contingency acts as a new 
contextual cue that leads, ultimately, to a specific behaviour.
Crucially, the sensory observations that engender the rele-
vant precision weighting dynamics need not be what were exactly 
expected by that agent at the prior timestep; on the contrary, as 
a result of the environmental volatility intrinsic to a flow state, 
the flow experience will likely be replete with prediction errors. 
However, given prerequisite experience on the part of the agent, 
a prediction error need not be a death knell; rather, it might 
simply act as the first (cueing) domino in a sequence of skilled 
actions that can be considered creative or improvizational, but 
is nevertheless still subject to the same belief dynamics which 
underwrite the agent’s capacity to enter into flow. As such, to 
conceptualise the totality of an agent’s (belief-based) embodied 
expertise with respect to a given activity—which typically yields 
flow for them—is to conceptualise a tree-like or fractal structure, 
with multiple divergent yet overlapping threads by which contex-
tual cues and actions are held together. With this picture in mind, 
we can push back on a claim such as ‘it is of the essence of merely 
habitual practices that one performance is a replica of its prede-
cessors’ (Ryle 2009, p. 30); in fact, the very habitual substrate of 
a practice that elicits flow licenses idiosyncratic streams of skil-
ful responses to particular environmental circumstances, even if 
it is the case that one cue is invariably associated with one mental 
action.
Under this conception, the habits (or intuitive aspect) under-
lying flow are not examples of mere reflexive reactivity; they 
are coordinated, world-directed and typifying of the agent’s flexi-
ble responsiveness (Hutto and Robertson 2020). Furthermore, the 
belief architecture we have outlined here permits further flex-
ibility at the level of the physical action, insofar as there are 
multiple ways to achieve the same preferred outcome, some of 
which may be more suitable than others in certain contexts. Thus, 
our account here blurs the line between habits and skills, since 
the former emerges as what Ryle (2009 , p. 30) calls a ‘multi-
track disposition’, underwriting heterogeneous, flexible and often 
improvizational performances in a variety of contexts (cf., Miya-
hara and Robertson 2021).
Finally, it is worth recognizing that, as Parvizi-Wayne et al. 
(2024, p. 18) write, ‘the boundary between flow and not-flow is 
likely highly precarious’. In other words, expert behaviour, espe-
cially that which is marked by a certain degree of novelty and 
exploration—as in musical improvization—may be marked by 
dynamic fluctuations in and out of flow ( Benson 2003, Bergamin 
2017). Within such non-flow moments, the habitual scheme that 
underpins the iterant pursuit of pragmatic affordances is absent, 
and the agent becomes tuned to the possibilities of epistemic 
exploration (and, indeed, may develop epistemic habits). In par-
ticular, the agent will engage in novelty seeking behaviour, which 
in active inference is associated with maximising information gain 
about the model parameters of a generative model, until such a 
policy yields an observation which acts as a contextual cue, draw-
ing the agent back into loops of pragmatic value maximization 
that we have associated with the flow state. For these reasons, 
the account we have been sketching of the flow state as rooted in 
habitual mental action and the pursuit of pragmatic affordances 
Flow and intuition  7
is not out of place in more creative or spontaneous domains, in 
part because ‘flowing’ activity can be genuinely idiosyncratic in 
its concatenated form, in part because the broader context that 
researchers are inclined to associate with flow will likely involve 
moments of non-flow where genuinely exploratory behaviour is 
undertaken.
Note that, crucially, the cognitive control afforded by the con-
scious representations of the sensory inputs-outputs of flow states 
is not supplemented by the even greater degree of control that 
would be added if the process underlying flow were made con-
scious. This can be explained by way of the fact that conscious 
processing is computationally heavy and thus time-consuming, 
as well as susceptible to cognitive load ( Kahneman 2011, p. 28, 
Shea and Frith 2016 ). In volatile, complex environments such as 
those that elicit flow—in which the individual’s planning hori-
zon is constricted and their attention is deployed wholesale on 
the unfolding task dynamics—there is simply not the time nor 
the cognitive bandwidth to deliberatively attend to the underly-
ing process; not, at least, if flow is to continue ( Gigerenzer and 
Sturm 2012 ). Consequently, it is not so much that type 2 cog-
nition would be a useful addendum to flow; in fact, its very 
nature makes it anathema to flow and its defining characteris-
tics. What’s more, flow serves to demonstrate that expertise need 
not rest on deliberative reasoning, which, although necessary in 
the early stages of the individual’s skill acquisition, gives way to 
implicit, procedural knowledge and intuition-as-habitual-mental-
action (Parvizi-Wayne et al. 2024). Given the necessity of conscious 
representations for its achievement, this is not to discount the 
importance of consciousness in flow (or more broadly in cogni-
tive life); rather, it highlights that consciousness, especially when 
disposed onto physio-cognitive processes, brings with it certain 
negative externalities that might otherwise inhibit a phenomenal 
state like flow.
Conclusion
In summary, this paper addresses the possible relationship 
between intuition and flow, positing that these two cognitive 
phenomena share a common ground in nonconscious process-
ing. Furthermore, we have explained, using the formalisms of 
active inference and Shea and Frith’s (2016) tripartite framework 
of cognition, how, as Järvilehto (2016) expresses, flow is intuition 
in action. More specifically, we have proposed that the intuitive 
aspect of flow (and perhaps life more broadly) can be couched in 
the habitual mental action that selects the most likely (likelihood 
and prior) contingencies in a given context. This renders flow the 
zenith of performance and cognitive control without the encum-
brance of conscious deliberation, albeit not without the important 
contribution of conscious representations.
Nevertheless, while our framework emphasizes the adaptive 
function of intuition and flow, it is important to recognize that 
these cognitive states can be suboptimal or maladaptive in cer-
tain circumstances. Intuitions, and related heuristics [e.g. Eureka 
Heuristics (Laukkonen et al. 2023)], can occasionally lead to sub-
optimal inference. In the technical literature, this is clearly evident 
in reversal learning paradigms ( Frank 2005, Peterson et al. 2009, 
Lloyd and Leslie 2013, Friston et al. 2016). In this context, habits are 
formed on the basis of what the agent sees herself doing repeat-
edly, in a given context. However, if habitual priors become overly 
precise—and the context changes—there is a failure to engage 
epistemic foraging (e.g. novelty seeking) because habitual pri-
ors (E) predominate over expected free energy (G). This leads to 
impoverished reversal learning and a pernicious failure of con-
text sensitivity. The same phenomena can also be observed in 
the setting of insights: i.e. ‘aha moments’ and ensuing ‘Eureka’ 
heuristics that can be modelled in terms of structure learning 
(a.k.a., Bayesian model selection). For example, one might commit 
to certain prior beliefs about precise likelihood mappings prema-
turely; effectively, ‘jumping to conclusions’ (Averbeck et al. 2011, 
Moutoussis et  al. 2011 ); see ( Friston et  al. 2017 ) for a numer-
ical example. Similarly, the heightened confidence associated 
with flow states could, albeit occasionally, result in overconfi-
dence.2 However, it is crucial to note that such unfavourable out-
comes are exceptions rather than the rule, particularly given the 
well-documented benefits of flow on performance and wellbeing 
(Kotler et al. 2022).
Indeed, by understanding the phenomenal–computational 
structures and processes underwriting flow and intuition, we can 
appreciate the elegance of the mind’s ability to both ‘think without 
thinking’ and perform optimally without deliberative decision-
making. This synergy between intuition and flow not only enriches 
our comprehension of human cognition, but also sparks a myriad 
of questions for further exploration. Future research, grounded in 
the nuanced understandings proposed by Shea and Frith (2016) , 
will undoubtedly continue to unravel the subtle complexities of 
these phenomena, enhancing our understanding of how we can 
harness flow and intuition to elevate our lives and our perfor-
mance to new levels.
Finally, it is worth recognising that the model used by Shea 
and Frith (2016) is explicitly computational and algorithmic, rely-
ing on notions of inputs, outputs, operations and representations, 
the latter construct putatively defining consciousness per se as 
well as cognition more broadly. In this rather brief treatment, 
we cannot attempt to do justice to the enormity of the histori-
cal debate concerning the viability of this account in explaining 
embodied mental activity; rather, in recognizing the ongoing ten-
sions between different, invested philosophical parties, we simply 
encourage the integration of the claims made here into a nonalgo-
rithmic, embodied, enactivist account. Crucially, such expositions 
should not discount the central point articulated in this paper—
namely, that consciousness is neither an unequivocal good nor 
an unequivocal bad in (intuitive) flow, nor in our coping with the 
world more broadly. This can be the case even if conscious states 
are not held to be representations over which computational 
processes operate.
Conflict of interest:
None declared.
Funding
This research was funded in whole, or in part, by the Well-
come Trust (203147/Z/16/Z). For the purpose of Open Access, the 
author has applied a CC BY public copyright license to any Author 
Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission.
Data availability
The original contributions presented in the study are included 
in the article/supplementary material. Further inquiries can be 
directed to the corresponding author.
2 One of us, S.K., has written about this extensively in his book The Rise of 
Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance.
8 Kotler et al.
References
Abuhamdeh S. Investigating the “flow” experience: key conceptual 
and operational issues. Front Psychol 2020;11:158.
Attias H. Planning by Probabilistic Inference. International Workshop on 
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics Key West, Florida, 2003, 9–16.
Averbeck BB, Evans S , Chouhan V et  al. Probabilistic learning and 
inference in schizophrenia. Schizophr Res 2011;127:115–22.
Bateson P, Gluckman P. Plasticity, Robustness, Development and Evolu-
tion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011.
Beilock S, Carr T, Macmahon C et al. When paying attention becomes 
counterproductive: impact of divided versus skill-focused atten-
tion on novice and experienced performance of sensorimotor 
skills. J Exper Psychol Appl 2002;8:6–16.
Benson BE . The Improvisation of Musical Dialogue . Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2003.
Bergamin JA . Being-in-the-flow: expert coping as beyond both 
thought and automaticity. Phenomenol Cogn Sci 2017;16:403–24.
Blumberg MS. Development evolving: the origins and meanings of 
instinct. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Cogn Sci 2017;8:e1371.
Botvinick M , Toussaint M . Planning as inference. Trends Cogn Sci
2012;16:485–8.
Bowers KS, Regehr G, Balthazard C et al. Intuition in the context of 
discovery. Cognit Psychol 1990;22:72–110.
Buzsáki G . Rhythms of the Brain . New York, USA: Oxford University 
Press, 2006.
Cappuccio ML . Dreyfus is right: knowledge-that limits your skill. 
Synthese 2023;202:85.
Christandl F, Ehrenberg K, Peifer C. Time flows: manipulations of sub-
jective time progression affect recalled flow and performance in 
a subsequent task. J Exp Soc Psychol 2018;74:246–56.
Constant A , Friston KJ , Clark A . Cultivating creativity: predictive 
brains and the enlightened room problem. Philos Trans R Soc B
2024;379:20220415.
Corcoran A, Hohwy J ‘Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy 
principle: Feeling our way forward’. In: Tsakiris M , Helena DP  
(eds.), The Interoceptive Mind: From Homeostasis to Awareness. Oxford: 
Oxford Academic, 2018, 272–92.
Csikszentmihalyi M. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience New 
York, 1990.
Csikszentmihalyi M. Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and 
Invention. New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1997, viii,456.
Csikszentmihalyi M . Beyond Boredom and Anxiety . San Fransisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 2000, 231.
Csikszentmihalyi M . Flow and the Foundations of Positive Psychology: 
The Collected Works of Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. Dordrecht: Springer, 
2014.
Da Costa L , Parr T, Sajid N et al. Active inference on discrete state-
spaces: a synthesis. J Math Psychol 2020;99:102447.
Da Silva S. System 1 vs. system 2 thinking. Psych 2023;5:4.
de Manzano Ö , Cervenka S , Jucaite A  et  al. Individual differ-
ences in the proneness to have flow experiences are linked to 
dopamine D2-receptor availability in the dorsal striatum. Neu-
roImage 2013;67:1–6.
Dietrich A. Neurocognitive mechanisms underlying the experience of 
flow. Conscious Cogn 2004;13:746–61.
Doyle CL. Creative flow as a unique cognitive process. Front Psychol
2017;8:1348.
Dreyfus HL . The return of the myth of the mental. Inquiry: An 
Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy 2007;50:352–65.
Ericsson KA. Protocol analysis and expert thought: concurrent ver-
balizations of thinking during experts’ performance on represen-
tative tasks. In: Ericcson KA, Charness N, Feltovich P, Hoffman R 
(eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Expertise and Expert Performance . 
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006, 223–41.
Evans J. Dual-processing accounts of reasoning, judgment, and social 
cognition. Annu Rev Psychol 2008;59:255–78.
Evans J. Intuition and reasoning: a dual-process perspective. Psychol 
Inq 2010;21:313–26.
Evans JSBT, Stanovich KE. Dual-process theories of higher cognition: 
advancing the debate. Perspect Psychol Sci 2013;8:223–41.
Evans JSTB. In two minds: dual-process accounts of reasoning. Trends 
Cogn Sci 2003;7:454–9.
Feldman H, Friston K. Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy. Front 
Human Neurosci 2010;4:215.
Fletcher PC , Zafiris O , Frith CD  et  al. On the benefits of not 
trying: brain activity and connectivity reflecting the interac-
tions of explicit and implicit sequence learning. Cerebral Cortex
2005;15:1002–15.
Frank MJ. Dynamic dopamine modulation in the basal ganglia: a neu-
rocomputational account of cognitive deficits in medicated and 
nonmedicated Parkinsonism. J Cogn Neurosci 2005;17:51–72.
Freeman WJ . The limbic action-perception cycle controlling goal-
directed animal behavior. Proceedings of the 2002 International 
Joint Conference on Neural Networks. IJCNN’02 (Cat. No.02CH37290) , 
2249–54. vol. 3. 2002.
Fridland E , Stichter M . It just feels right: an account of expert 
intuition. Synthese 2021;199:1327–46.
Friston K . The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain?. 
Trends Cogn Sci 2009;13:293–301.
Friston K. The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nat Rev 
Neurosci 2010;11:127–38.
Friston K. Life as we know it. J Royal Soc Interface 2013;10:20130475.
Friston K . A free energy principle for a particular physics. 
(arXiv:1906.10184). arXiv. 2019.
Friston K. Affordance and active inference. In: Djebbara Z (ed.), Affor-
dances in Everyday Life: A Multidisciplinary Collection of Essays. Cham: 
Springer International Publishing, 2022, 211–9.
Friston K, FitzGerald T, Rigoli F et al. Active inference and learning. 
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2016;68:862–79.
Friston KJ, Lin M, Frith CD et al. Active inference, curiosity and insight. 
Neural Comput 2017;29:2633–83.
Friston KJ, Shiner T, FitzGerald T et  al. Dopamine, affordance and 
active inference. PLOS Comput Biol 2012;8:e1002327.
Frith C, Metzinger T. What’s the Use of Consciousness? How the Stab 
of Conscience Made Us Really Conscious. In: Engel A, Friston K., 
Kragic D (eds.), The Pragmatic Turn: Toward Action-Oriented Views in 
Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2016.
Gibson JJ. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception: Classic Edition. New 
York: Houghton Mifflin, 1979.
Gigerenzer G. Gut Feelings: The Intelligence of the Unconscious. New York, 
NY: Viking, 2008.
Gigerenzer G , Sturm T . How (far) can rationality be naturalized?. 
Synthese 2012;187:243–68.
Gold J, Ciorciari J. A review on the role of the neuroscience of flow 
states in the modern world. Behav Sci 2020;10:137.
Gross T . Not one, but many critical states: a dynamical systems 
perspective. Front Neural Circuits 2021;15:614268.
Hagger MS. Non-conscious processes and dual-process theories in 
health psychology. Health Psychol Rev 2016;10:375–80.
Hancock F , Rosas F , Mediano P  et  al. May the 4C’s be with 
you: an overview of complexity-inspired frameworks for 
analysing resting-state neuroimaging data. J Royal Soc Interface
2022;19:20220214.
Hesse J, Gross T. Self-organized criticality as a fundamental property 
of neural systems. Front Syst Neurosci 2014;8:166.
Flow and intuition  9
Hillis JM , Ernst MO , Banks MS  et  al. Combining sensory informa-
tion: mandatory fusion within, but not between, senses. Science
2002;298:1627–30.
Hogarth RM. Educating Intuition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2001.
Hohwy J. The Self-evidencing brain. Noûs 2016;50:259–85.
Hohwy J. Conscious Self-Evidencing Review of Philosophy and Psychology . 
2022;13:809–828.
Horr NK, Braun C, Volz KG. Feeling before knowing why: the role of 
the orbitofrontal cortex in intuitive judgments—an MEG study. 
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 2014;14:1271–85.
Huskey R , Keene JR , Wilcox S  et  al. Flexible and modular brain 
network dynamics characterize flow experiences during media 
use: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. J Commun
2022;72:6–32.
Huskey R , Wilcox S , Weber R . Network neuroscience reveals 
distinct neuromarkers of flow during media use. J Commun
2018;68:872–95.
Hutto D , Robertson I . Clarifying the Character of Habits: Under-
standing what and how they explain. In: Fausto C  and Testa 
I (eds.), Habit: Pragmatist Approaches from Cognitive Neurosciences 
to Social Sciences . New York: Cambridge University Press, 2020,
204–222.
Jacoby LL, Toth JP, Yonelinas AP. Separating conscious and uncon-
scious influences of memory: measuring recollection. J Exp Psychol 
Gen 1993;122:139–54.
Järvilehto L. Intuition and flow. In: Harmat L, Andersen FO, Ullen F, 
Wright J, Sadlo G (eds), Flow Experience: Empirical Research and Appli-
cations. Cham: Springer International Publishing/Springer Nature, 
2016, 95–104
Johnston TD . The persistence of dichotomies in the study of 
behavioral-development. Dev Rev 1987;7:149–82.
Jonides J. Voluntary versus automatic control over the mind’s eye 
movement. In: Long JB , Baddeley AD (eds), Attention and perfor-
mance IX. Hillsdale, NJ, 1981, 187–203.
Jueptner M, Stephan KM , Frith CD  et  al. Anatomy of motor learn-
ing. I. Frontal cortex and attention to action. J Neurophysiol
1997;77:1313–24.
Kahneman D . A perspective on judgment and choice: mapping 
bounded rationality. Am Psychol 2003;58:697–720.
Kahneman D. Thinking, Fast and Slow . New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux, 2011, 499.
Kahneman D , Tversky A. Choices, values, and frames. Am Psychol
1984;39:341–50.
Kirchhoff M , Parr T , Palacios E  et  al. The Markov blankets of life: 
autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle. J Royal 
Soc Interface 2018;15:20170792.
Klasen M, Weber R, Kircher TTJ et al. Neural contributions to flow 
experience during video game playing. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci
2012;7:485–95.
Kotler S. West of Jesus: Surfing, Science and the Origins of Belief. New York: 
Bloomsbury USA, 2006.
Kotler S. The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human 
Performance, 1st edn. New York: Amazon Publishing, 2014.
Kotler S , Mannino M , Kelso S  et  al. First few seconds for 
flow: A comprehensive proposal of the neurobiology and neu-
rodynamics of state onset. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2022;143:
104956.
Króliczak G , Heard P , Goodale MA  et  al. Dissociation of percep-
tion and action unmasked by the hollow-face illusion. Brain Res
2006;1080:9–16.
Laukkonen RE, Webb M, Salvi C  et  al. Insight and the selection of 
ideas. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2023;153:105363.
Levine GM , Halberstadt JB , Goldstone RL . Reasoning and the 
weighting of attributes in attitude judgments. J Pers Soc Psychol
1996;70:230–40.
Limanowski J. Precision control for a flexible body representation. 
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2022;134:104401.
Limanowski J , Blankenburg F . Minimal self-models and the free 
energy principle. Front Human Neurosci 2013;7:547.
Limanowski J , Friston K . ‘Seeing the dark’: grounding phenome-
nal transparency and opacity in precision estimation for active 
inference. Front Psychol 2018;9:643.
Lloyd K , Leslie DS . Context-dependent decision-making: a simple 
Bayesian model. J R Soc Interface 2013;10:20130069.
Lufityanto G, Donkin C, Pearson J. Measuring intuition: nonconscious 
emotional information boosts decision accuracy and confidence. 
Psychol Sci 2016;27:622–34.
Maciejovsky B, Sutter M, Budescu DV et al. Teams make you smarter: 
how exposure to teams improves individual decisions in proba-
bility and reasoning tasks. Manage Sci 2013;59:1255–70.
Maisto D, Friston K, Pezzulo G. Caching mechanisms for habit forma-
tion in active inference. Neurocomputing 2019;359:298–314.
McKay B, Wulf G, Lewthwaite R et al. The self: your own worst enemy? 
A test of the self-invoking trigger hypothesis. Q J Exp Psychol (2006)
2015;68:1910–9.
Miyahara K, Robertson I. The pragmatic intelligence of habits. Topoi
2021;40:597–60.
Moutoussis M , Bentall RP , El-Deredy W  et  al. Bayesian modelling 
of Jumping-to-Conclusions bias in delusional patients. Cogn Neu-
ropsychiatry 2011;16:422–47.
Nadurak V. Dual-process theory as a theory of the classification of 
information processing acts. Diametros 2021;18:70.
Nakamura J , Csikszentmihalyi M . Flow Theory and research. In: 
Lopez SJ, Snyder CR (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Positive Psychol-
ogy. New York: Oxford University Press, 2009, 195–206.
Nakamura J, Csikszentmihalyi M. The concept of flow. In: Csikszent-
mihalyi M  (ed.), Flow and the Foundations of Positive Psychology: 
The Collected Works of Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. Dordrecht: Springer 
Netherlands,2014, 239–63.
Oyama S, Griffiths PE, Gray RD. Cycles of Contingency: Developmental 
Systems and Evolution. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003.
Parvizi-Wayne D. Distrusting the policy: how inference over action 
shapes our experience of temporality in flow states and life more 
broadly, 2024.
Parvizi-Wayne D. How preferences enslave attention: calling into 
question the endogenous/exogenous dichotomy from an active 
inference perspective. Phenom Cogn Sci 2024.
Parvizi-Wayne D, Sandved Smith L, Pitliya R et al. Forgetting ourselves 
in flow: an active inference account of flow states and how we 
experience ourselves within them. Front Psychol 2024;15:1354719.
Parvizi-Wayne D, Severs L. When the interoceptive and conceptual 
clash: the case of oppositional phenomenal self-modelling in 
Tourette syndrome. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 2024;24:660–80.
Pearl J. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible 
Inference. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988, xix,552.
Peterson DA , Elliott C , Song DD  et  al. Probabilistic reversal 
learning is impaired in Parkinson’s disease. Neuroscience 2009;
163:1092–101.
Pezzulo G , Rigoli F , Friston K . Active inference, homeostatic 
regulation and adaptive behavioural control. Prog Neurobiol
2015;134:17–35.
Pezzulo G, Rigoli F, Friston KJ. Hierarchical active inference: a theory 
of motivated control. Trends Cogn Sci 2018;22:294–306.
Priorelli M, Stoianov IP. Flexible intentions: an active inference the-
ory. Front Comput Neurosci 2023;17:1128694.
10 Kotler et al.
Ramstead MJD , Constant A , Badcock PB  et  al. Variational ecol-
ogy and the physics of sentient systems. Physics of Life Reviews
2019;31:188–205.
Ramstead MJD , Sakthivadivel DAR , Heins C  et  al. On Bayesian 
mechanics: a physics of and by beliefs. Interface Focus
2023;13:20220029.
Rietveld E, Kiverstein J. A rich landscape of affordances. Ecol Psychol
2014;26:325–52.
Rosenthal DM . Consciousness and its function. Neuropsychologia
2008;46:829–40.
Ryle G. The Concept of Mind. Oxon: Routledge, 2009.
Salvi C, Bricolo E, Kounios J et al. Insight solutions are correct more 
often than analytic solutions. Think Reason 2016;22:443–60.
Sandved-Smith L, Hesp C, Mattout J et al. Towards a computational 
phenomenology of mental action: modelling meta-awareness 
and attentional control with deep parametric active inference. 
Neurosci Conscious 2021;2021:niab018.
Schwiedrzik CM, Singer W, Melloni L. Subjective and objective learn-
ing effects dissociate in space and in time. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2011;108:4506–11.
Shannon CE . A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst
Tech J 1948;27:379–423.
Shea N, Boldt A, Bang D et al. Supra-personal cognitive control and 
metacognition. Trends Cogn Sci 2014;18:186–93.
Shea N , Frith CD . Dual-process theories and consciousness: the 
case for ‘T ype Zero’ cognition. Neurosci Conscious 2016;2016:
niw005.
Shepherd J. Flow and the dynamics of conscious thought. Phenomenol 
Cogn Sci 2022;21:969–88.
Singer W. Consciousness and the structure of neuronal representa-
tions. Philos Trans R Soc B 1998;353:1829–40.
Sloman SA. The empirical case for two systems of reasoning. Psychol 
Bull 1996;119:3–22.
Smith R , Friston KJ , Whyte CJ . A step-by-step tutorial on active 
inference and its application to empirical data. J Math Psychol
2022;107:102632.
Stanovich K. Rationality and the Reflective Mind . New York: OUP, USA, 
2011.
Stanovich KE. The Robot’s Rebellion: Finding Meaning in the Age of Darwin. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
Stanovich KE, West RF. Individual differences in rational thought. J 
Exp Psychol Gen 1998;127:161–88.
Stanovich KE , West RF. On the relative independence of thinking 
biases and cognitive ability. J Pers Soc Psychol 2008;94:672–95.
Sterling P. Allostasis: a model of predictive regulation. Physiol Behav
2012;106:5–15.
Stocker AA, Simoncelli EP. A Bayesian model of conditioned percep-
tion. Adv Neural Inform Proc Syst 2007;2007:1409–16.
Tognoli E, Kelso JAS. The metastable brain. Neuron 2014;81:35–48.
Toker D, Pappas I , Lendner J  et  al. Consciousness is supported by 
near-critical slow cortical electrodynamics. Proc Natl Acad Sci
2022;119:e2024455119.
Tononi G. Consciousness as integrated information: a provisional 
manifesto. Biol Bull 2008;215:216–42.
Topolinski S, Strack F. Where there’s a will – there’s no intuition. The 
unintentional basis of semantic coherence judgments. J Mem Lang
2008;58:1032–48.
Topolinski S, Strack F. Scanning the “fringe” of consciousness: what 
is felt and what is not felt in intuitions about semantic coherence. 
Consci Cogn 2009;18:608–18.
Tversky A, Kahneman D. Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and 
biases. Science 1974;185:1124–31.
Ulrich M, Keller J, Hoenig K et al. Neural correlates of experimentally 
induced flow experiences. NeuroImage 2014;86:194–202.
Varley TF, Sporns O , Schaffelhofer S  et  al. Information-processing 
dynamics in neural networks of macaque cerebral cortex 
reflect cognitive state and behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2023;120:e2207677120.
Vervaeke J, Ferraro L, and Herrera-Bennett A. Flow as spontaneous 
thought: insight and implicit learning. In: Christoff K and Fox KCR 
(eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Spontaneous Thought: Mind-Wandering, 
Creativity, and Dreaming. New York: Oxford University Press, 2018.
Volz KG, Rübsamen R , von Cramon DY . Cortical regions activated 
by the subjective sense of perceptual coherence of environmen-
tal sounds: a proposal for a neuroscience of intuition. Cogn Affect 
Behav Neurosci 2008;8:318–28.
Volz KG, von Cramon DY. What neuroscience can tell about intuitive 
processes in the context of perceptual discovery. J Cogn Neurosci
2006;18:2077–87.
Volz KG , Zander T . Primed for intuition?. Neurosci Decis Mak
2014;1:26–34.
Zander T, Öllinger M, Volz KG. Intuition and insight: two processes 
that build on each other or fundamentally differ?. Front Psychol
2016;7:1395.