Computational analysis of electron transfer
kinetics for CO2 reduction with organic
photoredox catalysts
Kareesa J. Kron,† Samantha J. Gomez,†,‡ Robert J. Cave,¶ and Shaama
Mallikarjun Sharada∗,†,§
†Mork Family Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, 90089, United States
‡Bravo Medical Magnet High School, Los Angeles, California, 90033, United States
¶Department of Chemistry, Harvey Mudd College, Claremont, California, 91711, United
States
§Department of Chemistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California,
90089, United States
E-mail: ssharada@usc.edu
Abstract
We present a fundamental description of the electron transfer (ET) step from substi-
tuted oligo(p-phenylene) (OPP) radical anions to CO2, with the larger goal of assessing
the viability of underexplored, organic photoredox routes for utilization of anthro-
pogenic CO 2. This work varies the electrophilicity of para-substituents to OPP and
probes the dependence of rate coeﬃcients and interfragment interactions on the sub-
stituent Hammett parameter, σp, using constrained density functional theory (CDFT)
and energy decomposition analysis (EDA). Large electronic coupling elements across
1
substituents indicate an adiabatic electron transfer process for reactants at contact.
As one might intuitively expect, free energy changes dominate trends in ET rate co-
eﬃcients in most cases, and rates increase with substituent electron-donating ability.
However, we observe an unexpected dip in rate coeﬃcients for the most electron-
donating groups, due to the combined impact of ﬂattening free energies and a steep
increase in reorganization energies. Our analysis shows that ﬂattening OPP LUMO
levels lower the marginal increase in free energy with decreasing σp. Reorganization
energies do not exhibit a direct dependence on σp. They are higher for substituents
containing lone pairs of electrons since substituent orientation varies with OPP charge.
EDA reveals that interfragment orbital relaxation, or charge transfer interaction, plays
a critical role in stabilizing the vertically excited charge transfer state. Subsequent re-
laxation to the ﬁnal state geometry lowers charge transfer stabilization. A concurrent
increase in long-range electrostatic interactions is observed, which are more favorable
for electron-withdrawing substituents. Our study therefore suggests that while a wide
range of ET rates are observed, there is an upper limit to rate enhancements achievable
by tuning substituent electrophilicity.
Introduction
There is a pressing need today to combat rising levels of anthropogenic carbon dioxide ow-
ing to its detrimental impact on climate and the environment. 1 Light-driven chemistry with
photoredox catalysts opens up sustainable, less energy-intensive routes towards utilization
of CO 2 via conversion into useful precursors and products. Recent years have witnessed
signiﬁcant progress in the development of metal-based photocatalysts for CO 2 reduction.2–7
Metal-free, organic catalytic routes for CO 2 utilization, on the other hand, are less explored
even though they have the potential for lower environmental risk relative to their transition
metal counterparts, 8,9 in addition to structural ﬂexibility and tunability. 10–12 Organic pho-
toredox catalysts utilize visible or ultraviolet light to access excited states. These excited
2
states are subsequently quenched to create highly reactive radical species that are capable
of carrying out otherwise thermally demanding chemical transformations. 10,13–16
Oligo(p-phenylenes) (OPPs) were ﬁrst proposed as promising candidates for photoredox
reduction of CO 2 in 1992 by Matsuoka and coworkers. 17 More recently, studies demon-
strated amino acid synthesis and styrene hydrocarboxylation from CO 2 using OPPs. 18,19
Owing to their potential applications in areas besides catalysis including photoactive ma-
terials such as organic light-emitting diodes, the excited state properties of OPPs are well-
characterized.20–27 Several studies also probe the sensitivity of OPP excitations to torsional
changes, chain length, and isomeric forms.20,23,28 However, fundamental computational stud-
ies of electron transfer (ET) from excited states or quenched radicals are largely restricted
to intramolecular processes for semiconductor applications. 29,30 This work therefore aims
to determine driving forces for ET from OPP to CO 2 and utilize the outcomes to identify
structural modiﬁcations necessary for achieving rate enhancements.
 
R
R
OPP* CO
O
CO Ohv
n
Et3N Et3N
OPP
Figure 1: Proposed photoredox catalytic cycle – OPPs are excited by UV/Vis light (>290nm)
and subsequently reduced to radical anions by a sacriﬁcial electron donor such as triethy-
lamine. CO 2 reduction by the anion regenerates OPP. 31
The ET mechanism is based on the catalytic cycle proposed by Wada and coworkers,
shown in Figure 1. 31 OPP forms an excited state singlet, OPP*, upon absorbing light.
This excited state is quenched to create a radical anion using a sacriﬁcial donor such as
triethylamine, Et3N. The radical anion is highly reducing and therefore capable of initiating
reduction of CO 2 by transferring an electron. This ET step also serves to regenerate OPP.
3
Experimental studies further report sensitivity of reaction rates and yields to oligomer chain
length, choice of solvent, and added cations. 17,31
Our objective is to probe driving forces for the ET step that reduces CO 2 by tuning the
electron density of terphenyl (OPP with 3 phenyl rings) through the addition of terminal
substituents of varying electrophilicity. This work is along similar lines to a recent study of
ET properties of pyrene-based photocatalysts. 32 We utilize constrained density functional
theory (CDFT) 33 to calculate rate coeﬃcients for ET and energy decomposition analysis
(EDA)34 to characterize interactions between the catalyst and substrate fragments during
key stages of ET. Physical intuition dictates that increasing substituent electron-donating
character decreases the reduction potential of the resulting radical anion (in other words,
the reaction free energy becomes more negative) and therefore increases ET rates. While
we show that this is generally true, free energies plateau beyond a Hammett parameter ( σp)
of -0.75, a consequence of ﬂattening OPP LUMO levels. Further, an unexpected reduction
in ET rates is observed for strongly electron-donating groups, stemming from an increase
in reorganization energies. Free energies can be correlated directly to substituent Hammett
parameter. On the other hand, reorganization energies are impacted by torsional rotations of
substituents, with larger values observed for substituents containing lone pairs of electrons.
We utilize EDA to understand both free energies and reorganization energies from the per-
spective of catalyst-substrate interactions that constitute initial, ﬁnal, and vertically excited
charge transfer (VCT) states. While the fragments interact only weakly in the initial states,
charge transfer (or interfragment relaxation) and electrostatics govern interfragment inter-
action diﬀerences across substituents in the VCT and ﬁnal states, respectively. This analysis
therefore demonstrates that while ET rates can be tuned using substituent electrophilicity,
trends are not monotonic due to a combination of factors, not all of which are determined
by electrophilicity.
4
Methods
All DFT 35,36 simulations are carried out using the ab initio quantum chemistry software,
Q-Chem 5.2.1. 37 Terphenyl (OPP) with 20 distinct substituents of varying electrophilicity
are chosen as model systems to calculate ET rates. Terphenyl is chosen as the representative
OPP since it does not suﬀer from solubility issues observed with longer chains. 17 All calcu-
lations are carried out at the B3LYP/6-311G** level of theory 38 along with the polarizable
continuum model (PCM) 39–41 to represent the solvation environment of CH 2Cl2 (dielectric
= 8.93, optical dielectric = 2.02834). Dispersion eﬀects are captured using Grimme’s D3
correction with Becke-Johnson (BJ) damping (D3-BJ). 42,43 The choice of level of theory is
guided by benchmarking time-dependent DFT (TDDFT) 44,45 excitation energies with prior
experiments and theory (Table 1, Supporting Information, SI). 20,46
In the limit of weak interactions, the electron transfer rate is calculated using the non-
adiabatic limit by Marcus: 47
k=
√ π
λkBT
(J2
¯h
)
e
−∆G∗
kBT (1)
where kB is Boltzmann’s constant, temperature T is 298.15 K to simulate experimental
conditions,17 ¯his Planck’s constant, and λis reorganization energy. J is the charge coupling
constant, also known as the charge transfer integral or diabatic coupling.Jis calculated using
Conﬁguration Interaction with CDFT (CDFT-CI) based on the initial state geometry. 48 We
ﬁnd (vida infra) that calculatedJvalues are large, indicating that ET is adiabatic. Therefore,
instead of Marcus Theory, we utilize the rate coeﬃcient expression for adiabatic ET proposed
by Brunschwig and coworkers:49
k= νe−∆G∗
RT (2)
ν is a weighted average of vibrational frequencies for modes that contribute to the reaction
coordinate, usually approximated as 10 13 sec−1. Since we probe substituent eﬀects, we
calculate relative rates with unsubstituted OPP (denoted by subscriptH) as reference, k/kH.
5
The ET barrier, ∆ G∗, is given by
∆G∗ = λ
4
(
1 + ∆G
λ
)2
(3)
∆Gis the free energy change associated with the ET reaction step. ∆ Gand λare calculated
using CDFT based on the energy proﬁle depicted in Figure 2. CDFT33 is utilized to calculate
energies of
•Initial state: OPP ·– + CO2
•Final state: OPP + CO ·–
2
•Vertically excited charge transfer or VCT state: Electron is transferred to CO 2 but
geometry is still that of the initial state
Figure 2: A qualitative energy vs. reaction coordinate representation for the ET step where
the pink curve represents the adiabatic limit arising from strong coupling: The black curve
reﬂects the charge distribution of the initial state (reactant complex) and blue represents
that of the ﬁnal state (product complex). ∆ G is the free energy diﬀerence between the two
states and λ corresponds to the energy of reorganization of solute and solvent.
Figure 2 illustrates geometries of initial and ﬁnal states. In the initial state, the quenched
radical anion, OPP·– , exhibits a ﬂattened geometry in agreement with prior studies.17 In the
6
presence of bent CO · –
2 in the ﬁnal state, substituted OPP adopts either an alternating struc-
ture, wherein phenyl rings exhibit alternating tilts, or a helical structure in which each phenyl
ring is twisted relative to its predecessor. 20,23,50 These structures are typically diﬀerent from
isolated, ground state OPP geometries. However, the two ground state conﬁgurations are
very similar in energy (Table 3, SI) and exhibit negligible diﬀerences in excitation energies.
Therefore, lowest energy conformers for each state are taken into account while reporting
excitation energies and ET kinetics. In addition, the conﬁguration of CO 2 depicted in the
reactant shown in Figure 2 is one of two possible arrangements of CO 2 with respect to ter-
phenyl. For some substituents, a second minimum is identiﬁed where CO 2 resides over the
central phenyl. Although these minima cannot be determined for all systems, their energies
are very similar to the oﬀ-center reactants (Table 4, SI). Therefore, we utilize the oﬀ-center
structures for all substituents. ∆ G is calculated as the energy diﬀerence between ﬁnal and
initial states, and λas the diﬀerence between the VCT and ﬁnal states.51 λis calculated using
the Q-Chem implementation of the state-speciﬁc model for non-equilibrium solvation. 52–56
Table 5 of SI shows, through a limited analysis of functional dependence, that λ values are
not signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the choice of level of theory. Both ∆ G and λ are approximated
as electronic energies. This is because thermochemical corrections cannot be reliably esti-
mated for the VCT geometries owing to the presence of several imaginary frequencies in their
vibrational spectra. These imaginary frequencies are not observed for the product or the
reactant state. However, the implicit solvation model ensures that free energies of solvation
are accurately represented.
The second generation absolutely localized molecular orbital-EDA (ALMO-EDA) 34,57–61
is employed to characterize electronic interactions between the catalyst and CO 2 in the
initial, ﬁnal, and VCT states. EDA describes electronic interactions ( EINT ) between two
fragments by breaking them into their constituents:
EINT = EPRP + EFRZ + EPOL + ECT (4)
7
EPRP is the energy required to prepare the two fragment geometries separately. EFRZ , is the
energy diﬀerence between the sum of isolated fragments’ energies and energies of fragments
when they are brought to their equilibrium separation without electronic relaxation. Frozen
interactions are further broken down into electrostatics, Pauli repulsions, and dispersion:
EFRZ = EELEC + EPAULI + EDISP (5)
After the two fragments are brought together, they are allowed to polarize each other with-
out any inter-fragment mixing. This polarization energy is denoted as EPOL . The ﬁnal term,
ECT , corresponds to inter-fragment mixing and relaxation, or charge transfer. Since EDA
that includes solvation eﬀects is currently still under development in Q-Chem, interfragment
interactions are calculated in the gas phase. We expect that inclusion of solvent eﬀects in
EDA will lead to stabilization of excess charge and therefore lead to a reduction in electro-
static contributions compared to the gas phase. However, our main focus is on how these
interactions vary with OPP substituents. The impact of solvation on these trends is expected
to be small. Moreover, given the large size of OPP, we believe its charge distribution will be
only modestly aﬀected by the absence of solvent.
Results and Discussion
For the twenty systems chosen in this study, we analyze the impact of substituent elec-
trophilicity, characterized by the para-substituted Hammett parameter (σp),62,63 on all terms
constituting the Marcus rate expression as well as the resulting trends in rate coeﬃcients.
All results are reported in Table 6 of SI.
Free energy: ∆G
Figure 3 depicts variations in ∆ G, λ, and resulting ∆ G∗ (Equation 3) as a function of σp
for ET across all substituted OPP systems. The driving force, ∆ G (Figure 3(A)), becomes
8
more favorable with decreasing σp, which is intuitive since increased electron-donating abil-
ity of substituents enhances the reduction potential of OPP ·– . However, ∆ G plateaus for
electron-donating substituents with σp lower than -0.75. As a result, it is not immediately
apparent whether its dependence on σp is linear. Since the coeﬃcient of determination, R2,
only increases with increasing number of ﬁtting parameters, R2 is not a suitable indicator
for model selection. Instead, we utilize the modiﬁed Akiake Information Criterion (AICc)
to identify whether trends in ∆ Gare linear, quadratic, or higher order with respect to σp.64
A quadratic model with respect to σp emerges as the optimal trade-oﬀ between model sim-
plicity and goodness of ﬁt. All ﬁtting curves reported in our analysis correspond to models
determined using AICc.
Figure 3: Trends in (A) ∆ G (R2 = 0.90), (B) λ, and (C) ∆ G∗ (R2 = 0.88), plotted vs.
Hammett parameter, σp. From left to right in each plot, electron-withdrawing ability of the
substituent increases. Trendlines to ﬁt the data are determined using the AICc criterion. 64
To identify the origins of this quadratic dependence, we examine the molecular orbitals
9
of OPP·– . For all substituted OPPs, trends in the highest singly occupied molecular orbital
(SOMO) energy of the radical anion OPP·– closely follow LUMO energies of the correspond-
ing neutral OPP. Therefore, we utilize DFT to calculate the HOMO and LUMO levels of
substituted, neutral OPPs. While we are aware that HOMO-LUMO gaps are typically un-
derestimated with DFT, 65 our goal is to uncover substituent dependence of LUMO rather
than calculate these gaps accurately. The results, reported in Figure 4, show variation in
HOMO and LUMO energies with σp and the quadratic ﬁtting curves determined using AICc.
Figure 4: HOMO (red) and LUMO (blue) energies (eV) vs. σp for substituted OPPs. Inset:
canonical molecular HOMO and LUMO for unsubstituted OPP. Trendlines, based on AICc,
reﬂect quadratic dependence on σp (R2
HOMO = 0.94,R2
LUMO = 0.90). A qualitative depiction
of regions of varying extents of orbital mixing is also shown. The boxes shown here are
qualitative pending future analysis with variational EDA.
The linear regions of HOMO and LUMO curves in Figure 4 are straightforward to in-
terpret. Electron-donating groups make it easier to remove an electron from the molecule
or, in other words, lower the ionization potential by raising HOMO. Conversely, electron-
withdrawing groups make it easier to accept an electron by lowering LUMO levels. To un-
derstand the plateaus in LUMO and HOMO levels for strongly electron-donating and with-
drawing groups, respectively, we turn to a recent study by Mao and coworkers.66 The authors
adapt a variational EDA procedure to quantify the impact of substituents on photophysical
properties of naphthalene. The CT component of EDA between substituent and naphthalene
10
is broken down into constituent occupied-occupied, virtual-virtual, and occupied-virtual mix-
ing (OOM, VVM, and OVM, respectively) of the fragment orbitals. They observe that OOM
between substituent and parent molecule is stronger for electron-donating groups (speciﬁ-
cally N(CH 3)2, the strongest donor in this study) leading to an elevated HOMO energy,
while VVM is stronger for electron-withdrawing groups leading to a lower LUMO energy.
As shown above in Figure 4 in boxes B and C, we observed a similar increase in HOMO levels
for electron-donating groups and LUMO levels for electron-withdrawing groups, respectively.
Mao and coworkers also ﬁnd that VVM contributes negligibly to LUMO levels for strongly
electron-donating groups in the same way that OOM does not signiﬁcantly shift HOMO
levels for electron-withdrawing groups – represented by boxes A and D in Figure 4. The
ﬁnal type of mixing, OVM, counteracts the dominant shifts observed for electron-donating
groups and electron-withdrawing groups, but the authors observe OOM (VVM) is larger
than OVM for strongly electron-donating (withdrawing) groups. LUMO trends in between
these extremes are the consequence of trade-oﬀs between VVM and OVM. While a detailed
analysis of excited states of substituted OPPs using variational EDA constitutes future work,
we believe that the trends we see here are similar, and that plateauing LUMO in Figure 4 is a
consequence of decreasing VVM with increasing electron-donating character. Consequently
SOMO levels of OPP·− also plateau (Table 7, SI), leading to smaller changes in driving force,
∆G, despite the increase in electron-donating ability of substituents.
To characterize the nature of binding between OPP ·– (OPP) and CO 2 (CO ·–
2 ), we de-
compose interactions between the catalyst and substrate fragments in the initial and ﬁnal
states that deﬁne ∆G(Table 8, SI). For the initial states, total interaction energies as well as
their constituent terms are similar across all systems and so their deviation from unsubsti-
tuted OPP is small. EDA results depicted in Figure 5 largely reﬂect interfragment interaction
diﬀerences in the ﬁnal state. In the absence of solvation, electrostatics and charge transfer
dominate diﬀerences in catalyst-substrate interactions between substituents. ∆∆ EELEC is
more negative for electron-withdrawing groups on OPP since they serve to stabilize the an-
11
Figure 5: Gas phase EDA results describing diﬀerences in interfragment interaction energies
between ﬁnal and initial states relative to the interaction energies of unsubstituted OPP:
∆∆EINT (left, R2 = 0.96) and its main contributors, ∆∆ EELEC (middle, R2 = 0.97) and
∆∆ECT (right, R2 = 0.86). Both electrostatic and charge transfer interactions in the ﬁnal
state are more favorable for electron-withdrawing groups.
ionic CO2
·−. Interfragment orbital relaxation is also more favorable for electron-withdrawing
groups in the ﬁnal state, as a result of which ∆∆ ECT decreases with increasing σp. The
strong decrease in ∆∆ ECT from left to right is in line with the LUMO level shifts observed
for electron-withdrawing groups but not donating groups in Figure 4.
Therefore, while a very wide range of ∆Gis observed upon varying σp, plateauing LUMO
levels limit driving forces achievable with strong electron-donating groups. EDA shows
that, in addition to decreasing ∆ G, electron-donating groups destabilize the ﬁnal state and
therefore lower the likelihood of occurrence of the reverse reaction. Though the interactions
are calculated in the gas phase in the absence of solvent eﬀects, we expect overall trends to
be similar in the presence of solvent, with a reduction in magnitude of electrostatic terms
due to dielectric screening.
Reorganization energy: λ
Figure 3 shows that λ, described as the energy diﬀerence between VCT and ﬁnal state
geometries, shows little dependence on electrophilicity. With the exception of N(CH 3)2, re-
organization energies lie in a narrower range (385–405 kJ/mol) compared to ∆ G, with little
12
impact on trends in ∆ G∗ or rate coeﬃcients. Since λ represents the free energy change
associated with structural rearrangement of the solutes and solvent after ET, a closer ex-
amination of key changes to the solvated complex geometry is necessary. The bending of
solvated CO2 to accommodate the additional electron in the product state contributes about
270 kJ/mol to the overall reorganization energy based on isolated CO 2 calculations.
Figure 6: Torsional rotation of the substituent relative to terphenyl in the VCT (top) and
ﬁnal state (bottom) for the N(CH 3)2–substituted system.
Inner sphere reorganization of the catalyst can be broken down into contributions from
terphenyl and the substituent. Though the phenyl rings undergo torsional changes after ET,
these changes are similar across all substituted terphenyls and do not contribute to diﬀerences
in reorganization energies. Figure 6 shows the torsional rotation of the substituent when the
VCT geometry undergoes relaxation to the ﬁnal state. For substituents with lone pairs
of electrons and methyl groups, relaxation involves rotation of the methyl group from its
position perpendicular to the terphenyl plane in the VCT geometry to a position along the
plane in the ﬁnal state. The OPP substituted with N(CH 3)2 undergoes substantial torsional
rotation of the substituent (125 ◦) and consequently has a larger reorganization energy. On
the other hand, the OPP substituted with NO 2 has the smallest substituent and internal
torsional rotations and the smallest reorganization energy.
To further probe substituent eﬀects on the character and extent of interfragment inter-
actions, we use EDA to calculate EINT diﬀerences between VCT and ﬁnal states in the
13
gas phase. Total energies and dominant components are shown in Figure 7 (Table 9, SI).
∆∆ECT dominates ∆∆EINT because stabilization of the additional electron on linear CO2 in
the VCT state is made possible primarily by interfragment orbital relaxation. Unlike overall
reorganization energies, CT contributions depend strongly on substituent electrophilicity.
∆∆ECT is more negative for electron-withdrawing groups since they favor relaxation by
pulling electron density away from the center of OPP, thereby accommodating the addi-
tional electron on CO 2. This stabilization is partially oﬀset by ∆∆ EELEC . Figure 5 and 7
together show that while electron-withdrawing groups lead to favorable electrostatic inter-
actions in the ﬁnal state, electron-donating groups render interactions in the VCT state less
repulsive compared to the ﬁnal state.
Figure 7: Gas phase EDA results describing diﬀerences in interfragment interaction energies
between VCT and ﬁnal states relative to the interaction energies of unsubstituted OPP:
∆∆EINT (left) and its main contributors, ∆∆ ECT (middle) and ∆∆ EELEC (right). While
charge transfer interactions in VCT are more favorable for electron-withdrawing groups,
electrostatics exhibit opposite trends.
We propose a qualitative explanation for the counterintuitive increase in electrostatic
stabilization with electron-donating groups, shown in Figure 7, based on electrostatic poten-
tial (ESP) maps of the VCT geometries for three representative systems – NHCH 3, H, and
NO2. This analysis is along similar lines to molecular quadrupole arguments proposed in the
literature for interpreting π−πand anion-πinteractions.67 ESP maps are shown in Figure 8.
With electron-donating groups, a partial positive charge is created at the substituent, which
14
interacts favorably with the negatively charged substrate fragment in the VCT state. With
increasing electron-withdrawing character, the substituent assumes a net negative charge,
which repels the negative charge on CO 2
·−, leading to more repulsive electrostatic interac-
tions seen in Figure 7. Along similar lines, quadrupole interactions in the initial state are
hypothesized as the reason behind the oﬀ-center orientation of CO 2 over OPP·−. However,
we anticipate these electrostatic eﬀects will be damped upon inclusion of solvation contribu-
tions in EDA. Therefore, charge transfer contributions dominate interfragment interaction
diﬀerences between VCT and ﬁnal states.
Figure 8: Electrostatic potential maps of the VCT state for NHCH3, H, and NO2-substituted
OPPs. Increasing electron-withdrawing character of the substituent introduces repulsive
interactions between partial negative charges in the CO 2
·− and electron-rich substituents.
Therefore, even though interfragment interactions constituting λ depend on substituent
electrophilicity, their overall contribution to λare smaller than structural and solvent relax-
ations. As a result, reorganization energies do not exhibit direct dependence on σp.
Free energy of activation: ∆G∗
As illustrated in Figure 3, trends in ∆G∗ are largely determined by ∆Gfor substituted OPPs.
Since the latter shows only weakly quadratic dependence on σp, AICc identiﬁes a quadratic
(rather than quartic) model as the best ﬁt for ∆ G∗. The barriers are highest for strongly
electron-withdrawing groups and decrease with increasing electron-donating character. For
15
the most electron-donating system, however, a combination of ﬂattening ∆ G and increase
in λ leads to a net increase in ∆ G∗. As a result, the minimum barrier is obtained, not for
the most electron-donating N(CH 3)2, but for the NHCH 3-substituted OPP.
Charge transfer integral: J
The diabatic couplings are all in the range of 295-615 meV, which indicates that the electron
transfer occurs in the adiabatic regime. 49 That this reaction lies in the adiabatic ET regime
was previously unreported and indicates that overall rate coeﬃcients are predominantly
inﬂuenced by the exponential term across all substituents. However, we still explore the
role of substituent in tuning diabatic couplings described by the charge transfer integral,
J. While electron-donating groups lower the diabatic couplings relative to H-substituted
OPP, electron-withdrawing groups lead to small enhancements in J (Table 2, SI). Although
J is known to be a strong function of interfragment separation, 30,68,69 combined changes in
substituents and interfragment separations make it diﬃcult to isolate the role played by σp
in determining J. If this reaction were in the nonadiabatic regime, the small couplings for
electron-donating groups could lead to decreased rates, but the magnitudes of J observed in
our work indicate that couplings are not quenching ET rate coeﬃcients.
Finally, we note that the large coupling values that we obtain would lead to adiabatic
splittings that would lower the estimated Marcus theory activation energy by several tenths
of an eV. We do not include this eﬀect in our calculation of the activation energy or rate
since the diabatic couplings are similar across the series and, were the geometries thermally
averaged, the activation energies would likely be less impacted. Were the energy lowering
due to coupling included, there would be little impact on the conclusions we draw here.
ET rate coeﬃcients: k
Since the exponential ∆G∗ term determines the rate coeﬃcient, trends in ln(k) reﬂect ∆G∗,
with a quadratic dependence on σp observed in Figure 9. The k values shown in Table 6
16
Figure 9: Variation of natural logarithm of the ET rate coeﬃcients, referenced to unsubsti-
tuted OPP, ln( k/kH ) (R2 = 0.88), with respect to σp.
of SI are signiﬁcantly lower than expected even though we are unable to carry out a direct
comparison with experiment. For instance, the calculated rate coeﬃcient for unsubstituted
OPP (kH) is ∼1e-7s−1 while prior experiments report reasonable reaction timescales (minutes
to hours).17 However, since we are only interested in trends with substituent electrophilicity,
the sources of uncertainty in calculated rate coeﬃcients are not examined. k values drop
rapidly with increasing electron-withdrawing character of the substituents. In the absence of
signiﬁcant changes in reorganization energy, it is expected thatln(k) plateaus with increasing
electron-donating character. However, a decrease in ln(k) is observed, which is attributable
to the combined impact of ﬂattening ∆ G and steep increase in λ for N(CH3)2. Therefore,
for the range of substituent electrophilicities examined in this work, rate coeﬃcients exhibit
a maximum for NHCH3, and decline with both increasing and decreasing electron-donating
character.
17
Conclusions
The story of electron transfer from organic photoredox catalysts to CO 2 is a complex one.
While the excited state properties of OPPs are well-understood, their viability as green
photoredox catalysts for sustainable chemistry is underexplored. Prior to this study, it
was unknown whether this electron transfer occurred in the weakly-coupled (Marcus) or
strongly-coupled (adiabatic) regime. By calculating the diabatic couplings, we demonstrate
that this electron transfer occurs in the adiabatic regime with rate coeﬃcient trends directly
and exponentially dependent on the reaction barrier. Enhancing ET rates by increasing
electron-donating character of substituents is an intuitive way forward for developing active
photoredox catalysts. However, this method for tuning electronic properties is based on
the assumption that the free energy driving force increases monotonically with increasing
electron-donating character and is the dominant contributor to ET rates. We demonstrate
here that rate coeﬃcients unexpectedly decrease for the most electron-donating substituents.
This is the combined outcome of ﬂattening free energies, caused by a plateau in LUMO levels
of OPP, and increasing reorganization energy driven by large catalyst deformations following
ET. Therefore, while substituent electrophilicity,σp, is used as the independent variable that
describes trends in rate coeﬃcients, it is far from being a complete descriptor. In this study,
for instance, we note that the presence of lone pairs on the substituent, rather than its
electrophilicity, can lead to higher reorganization energies. Therefore, free energy driving
forces cannot be increased indeﬁnitely nor can other components, including reorganization
energies, assumed to be invariant while screening these organic photoredox catalysts for CO2
reduction.
This study also presents a ﬁrst attempt towards characterizing the nature and extent of
interfragment interactions underlying free energy changes in these systems. Our novel use
of EDA shows the evolution of dominant interfragment interactions – charge transfer and
electrostatics – over the course of ET and reorganization. After the electron is transferred
instantaneously from terphenyl to CO2, an VCT state is formed with large, negative charge
18
transfer interactions that become more favorable with increasing electron-withdrawing char-
acter. As the VCT state undergoes nuclear relaxation, the charge transfer interactions
decrease rapidly and electrostatic interactions dominate total interaction energies. These
electrostatic forces are repulsive for electron-donating groups and attractive for electron-
withdrawing groups, indicating that systems with electron-donating groups are less likely to
favorably interact and undergo a reverse reaction. Going forward, we aim to employ EDA
for solvated systems to probe the impact of solvent on interfragment interactions, to more
accurately reﬂect the experimental conditions under which CO 2 reduction occurs. We will
also utilize variational ALMO-EDA to quantify OOM, VVM, and OVM contributions that
lead to plateauing of HOMO and LUMO levels for strongly electron-withdrawing and donat-
ing groups, respectively.66 Given the limitations of σp as the sole catalyst design parameter,
characterization of electronic properties and interfragment interactions using techniques such
as EDA will play a critical role in the identiﬁcation of substituent, chain length, and con-
former combinations that constitute viable organic photoredox catalysts for energy-eﬃcient
and sustainable CO2 conversion and utilization.
Acknowledgement
The authors thank Prof. Jahan Dawlaty (USC) and Dr. Yuezhi Mao (Stanford University)
for helpful suggestions. KJK acknowledges support from USC’s Graduate Fellowship (2018-
19) and the Mork Fellowship (2019-20). SMS acknowledges support from USC’s startup
funds. SJG acknowledges support from the Young Researchers Program at USC. RJC grate-
fully acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation (CHE-1565743) and Har-
vey Mudd College. The authors are also grateful to USC’s High Performance Computing
center for computing resources and technical support.
19
Supporting Information Available
Supporting information contains Cartesian XYZ coordinates for all initial and ﬁnal states,
as well as additional computational data and experimental references.
References
(1) Cerling, T. E.; Dearing, M. D.; Ehleringer, J. R. A history of atmospheric CO 2 and its
eﬀects on plants, animals, and ecosystems ; Springer, 2005.
(2) Li, K.; An, X.; Park, K. H.; Khraisheh, M.; Tang, J. A critical review of CO 2 photo-
conversion: Catalysts and reactors. Catalysis Today 2014, 224, 3–12.
(3) Windle, C. D.; Perutz, R. N. Advances in molecular photocatalytic and electrocatalytic
CO2 reduction. Coordination Chemistry Reviews 2012, 256, 2562–2570.
(4) White, J. L.; Baruch, M. F.; Pander III, J. E.; Hu, Y.; Fortmeyer, I. C.; Park, J. E.;
Zhang, T.; Liao, K.; Gu, J.; Yan, Y., et al. Light-driven heterogeneous reduction of car-
bon dioxide: photocatalysts and photoelectrodes. Chemical reviews 2015, 115, 12888–
12935.
(5) Lian, S.; Kodaimati, M. S.; Dolzhnikov, D. S.; Calzada, R.; Weiss, E. A. Powering
a CO2 reduction catalyst with visible light through multiple sub-picosecond electron
transfers from a quantum dot. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2017, 139,
8931–8938.
(6) Yeung, C. S. Photoredox catalysis as a strategy for CO 2 incorporation: direct access to
carboxylic acids from a renewable feedstock. Angewandte Chemie International Edition
2019, 58, 5492–5502.
(7) Sato, S.; Morikawa, T.; Kajino, T.; Ishitani, O. A highly eﬃcient mononuclear irid-
20
ium complex photocatalyst for CO 2 reduction under visible light. Angewandte Chemie
International Edition 2013, 52, 988–992.
(8) Moore, J. N.; Luoma, S. N. Hazardous wastes from large-scale metal extraction. A case
study. Environmental Science & Technology 1990, 24, 1278–1285.
(9) Tchounwou, P. B.; Yedjou, C. G.; Patlolla, A. K.; Sutton, D. J. Molecular, Clinical and
Environmental Toxicology; Springer, 2012; pp 133–164.
(10) Romero, N. A.; Nicewicz, D. A. Organic photoredox catalysis. Chemical Reviews 2016,
116, 10075–10166.
(11) McCarthy, B. G.; Pearson, R. M.; Lim, C.-H.; Sartor, S. M.; Damrauer, N. H.;
Miyake, G. M. Structure–property relationships for tailoring phenoxazines as reducing
photoredox catalysts. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2018, 140, 5088–5101.
(12) Sprick, R. S.; Jiang, J.-X.; Bonillo, B.; Ren, S.; Ratvijitvech, T.; Guiglion, P.; Zwijnen-
burg, M. A.; Adams, D. J.; Cooper, A. I. Tunable organic photocatalysts for visible-
light-driven hydrogen evolution. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2015, 137,
3265–3270.
(13) Shaw, M. H.; Twilton, J.; MacMillan, D. W. Photoredox catalysis in organic chemistry.
The Journal of Organic Chemistry 2016, 81, 6898–6926.
(14) Prier, C. K.; Rankic, D. A.; MacMillan, D. W. Visible light photoredox catalysis with
transition metal complexes: applications in organic synthesis. Chemical Reviews 2013,
113, 5322–5363.
(15) Xuan, J.; Xiao, W.-J. Visible-light photoredox catalysis. Angewandte Chemie Interna-
tional Edition 2012, 51, 6828–6838.
(16) Du, Y.; Pearson, R. M.; Lim, C.-H.; Sartor, S. M.; Ryan, M. D.; Yang, H.; Dam-
rauer, N. H.; Miyake, G. M. Strongly reducing, visible-light organic photoredox cat-
21
alysts as sustainable alternatives to precious metals. Chemistry–A European Journal
2017, 23, 10962–10968.
(17) Matsuoka, S.; Kohzuki, T.; Pac, C.; Ishida, A.; Takamuku, S.; Kusaba, M.;
Nakashima, N.; Yanagida, S. Photocatalysis of oligo (p-phenylenes): photochemical
reduction of carbon dioxide with triethylamine. The Journal of Physical Chemistry
1992, 96, 4437–4442.
(18) Seo, H.; Katcher, M. H.; Jamison, T. F. Photoredox activation of carbon dioxide for
amino acid synthesis in continuous ﬂow. Nature Chemistry 2017, 9, 453.
(19) Seo, H.; Liu, A.; Jamison, T. F. Direct β-selective hydrocarboxylation of styrenes with
CO2 enabled by continuous ﬂow photoredox catalysis. Journal of the American Chem-
ical Society 2017, 139, 13969–13972.
(20) Guiglion, P.; Zwijnenburg, M. A. Contrasting the optical properties of the diﬀerent iso-
mers of oligophenylene. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2015, 17, 17854–17863.
(21) Ma, J.; Li, S.; Jiang, Y. A time-dependent DFT study on band gaps and eﬀective conju-
gation lengths of polyacetylene, polyphenylene, polypentafulvene, polycyclopentadiene,
polypyrrole, polyfuran, polysilole, polyphosphole, and polythiophene. Macromolecules
2002, 35, 1109–1115.
(22) Ivanov, M. V.; Talipov, M. R.; Boddeda, A.; Abdelwahed, S. H.; Rathore, R. H¨ uckel
Theory+ Reorganization Energy= Marcus–Hush Theory: Breakdown of the 1/n Trend
in π-Conjugated Poly-p-phenylene Cation Radicals Is Explained. The Journal of Phys-
ical Chemistry C 2017, 121, 1552–1561.
(23) Lukeˇ s, V.; Aquino, A. J. A.; Lischka, H.; Kauﬀmann, H.-F. Dependence of optical
properties of oligo-para-phenylenes on torsional modes and chain length. The Journal
of Physical Chemistry B 2007, 111, 7954–7962.
22
(24) Hartley, C. S. Excited-state behavior of ortho-phenylenes. The Journal of Organic
Chemistry 2011, 76, 9188–9191.
(25) Koch, R.; Finnerty, J. J.; Bruhn, T. Theoretical study on the nonlinear optical proper-
ties of phenylenes and inﬂuencing factors.Journal of Physical Organic Chemistry 2008,
21, 954–962.
(26) He, J.; Crase, J. L.; Wadumethrige, S. H.; Thakur, K.; Dai, L.; Zou, S.; Rathore, R.;
Hartley, C. S. ortho-Phenylenes: Unusual conjugated oligomers with a surprisingly
long eﬀective conjugation length. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2010,
132, 13848–13857.
(27) Wenger, O. S. Photoinduced electron and energy transfer in phenylene oligomers.Chem-
ical Society Reviews 2011, 40, 3538–3550.
(28) Panda, A. N.; Plasser, F.; Aquino, A. J.; Burghardt, I.; Lischka, H. Electronically ex-
cited states in poly (p-phenylenevinylene): Vertical excitations and torsional potentials
from high-level Ab initio calculations. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2013, 117,
2181–2189.
(29) Yan, L.; Zhao, Y.; Yu, H.; Hu, Z.; He, Y.; Li, A.; Goto, O.; Yan, C.; Chen, T.; Chen, R.,
et al. Inﬂuence of heteroatoms on the charge mobility of anthracene derivatives.Journal
of Materials Chemistry C 2016, 4, 3517–3522.
(30) Ottonelli, M.; Duce, D.; Thea, S.; Dellepiane, G. The Inﬂuence of the Vinyl Terminal
Group on the Poly (Para-Phenylenevinylene) Charge Transfer Integrals. Journal of
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology 2013, 13, 5186–5193.
(31) Wada, Y.; Kitamura, T.; Yanagida, S. CO2-ﬁxation into organic carbonyl compounds in
visible-light-induced photocatalysis of linear aromatic compounds. Research on Chem-
ical Intermediates 2000, 26, 153–159.
23
(32) Liu, R.; Yang, L.; Yang, T.; Huang, Y.; Barbatti, M.; Jiang, J.; Zhang, G. Modulating
Electron Transfer in an Organic Reaction via Chemical Group Modiﬁcation of the
Photocatalyst. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2019, 10, 5634–5639.
(33) Wu, Q.; Van Voorhis, T. Constrained density functional theory and its application in
long-range electron transfer. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2006, 2,
765–774.
(34) Khaliullin, R. Z.; Cobar, E. A.; Lochan, R. C.; Bell, A. T.; Head-Gordon, M. Unrav-
elling the Origin of Intermolecular Interactions Using Absolutely Localized Molecular
Orbitals. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2007, 111, 8753–8765.
(35) Hohenberg, P.; Kohn, W. Inhomogeneous electron gas. Physical Review 1964, 136,
B864.
(36) Kohn, W.; Sham, L. J. Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation
eﬀects. Physical Review 1965, 140, A1133–A1138.
(37) Shao, Y. et al. Advances in molecular quantum chemistry contained in the Q-Chem 4
program package. Molecular Physics 2015, 113, 184–215.
(38) Becke, A. D. Density-functional thermochemistry. III. The role of exact exchange. The
Journal of Chemical Physics 1993, 98, 5648–5652.
(39) Truong, T. N.; Stefanovich, E. V. A new method for incorporating solvent eﬀect into
the classical, ab initio molecular orbital and density functional theory frameworks for
arbitrary shape cavity. Chemical Physics Letters 1995, 240, 253 – 260.
(40) Barone, V.; Cossi, M. Quantum Calculation of Molecular Energies and Energy Gradi-
ents in Solution by a Conductor Solvent Model. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A
1998, 102, 1995–2001.
24
(41) Cossi, M.; Rega, N.; Scalmani, G.; Barone, V. Energies, structures, and electronic
properties of molecules in solution with the C-PCM solvation model. Journal of Com-
putational Chemistry 24 , 669–681.
(42) Grimme, S.; Ehrlich, S.; Goerigk, L. Eﬀect of the damping function in dispersion cor-
rected density functional theory. Journal of Computational Chemistry 2011, 32, 1456–
1465.
(43) Johnson, E. R.; Becke, A. D. A post-Hartree-Fock model of intermolecular interac-
tions: Inclusion of higher-order corrections. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2006,
124, 174104.
(44) Casida, M. E. Recent Advances In Density Functional Methods: (Part I) ; World Scien-
tiﬁc, 1995; pp 155–192.
(45) Dreuw, A.; Head-Gordon, M. Single-reference ab initio methods for the calculation of
excited states of large molecules. Chemical Reviews 2005, 105, 4009–4037.
(46) Banerjee, M.; Shukla, R.; Rathore, R. Synthesis, optical, and electronic properties
of soluble poly-p-phenylene oligomers as models for molecular wires. Journal of the
American Chemical Society 2009, 131, 1780–1786.
(47) Marcus, R. A. On the theory of oxidation-reduction reactions involving electron trans-
fer. I. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1956, 24, 966–978.
(48) Wu, Q.; Van Voorhis, T. Extracting electron transfer coupling elements from con-
strained density functional theory.The Journal of Chemical Physics 2006, 125, 164105.
(49) Brunschwig, B. S.; Logan, J.; Newton, M. D.; Sutin, N. A semiclassical treatment of
electron-exchange reactions. Application to the hexaaquoiron (II)-hexaaquoiron (III)
system. Journal of the American Chemical Society 1980, 102, 5798–5809.
25
(50) Lukeˇ s, V.; ˇSolc, R.; Barbatti, M.; Elstner, M.; Lischka, H.; Kauﬀmann, H.-F. Tor-
sional potentials and full-dimensional simulation of electronic absorption and ﬂuores-
cence spectra of para-phenylene oligomers using the semiempirical self-consistent charge
density-functional tight binding approach.The Journal of Chemical Physics 2008, 129,
164905.
(51) Wu, Q.; Van Voorhis, T. Direct calculation of electron transfer parameters through
constrained density functional theory. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2006, 110,
9212–9218.
(52) Cammi, R.; Tomasi, J. Nonequilibrium solvation theory for the polarizable contin-
uum model: A new formulation at the SCF level with application to the case of the
frequency-dependent linear electric response function. International Journal of Quan-
tum Chemistry 1995, 56, 465–474.
(53) Cossi, M.; Barone, V. Separation between fast and slow polarizations in continuum
solvation models. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2000, 104, 10614–10622.
(54) Improta, R.; Barone, V.; Scalmani, G.; Frisch, M. J. A state-speciﬁc polarizable con-
tinuum model time dependent density functional theory method for excited state cal-
culations in solution. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2006, 125, 054103.
(55) You, Z.-Q.; Mewes, J.-M.; Dreuw, A.; Herbert, J. M. Comparison of the Marcus and
Pekar partitions in the context of non-equilibrium, polarizable-continuum solvation
models. The Journal of chemical physics 2015, 143, 204104.
(56) Mewes, J.-M.; You, Z.-Q.; Wormit, M.; Kriesche, T.; Herbert, J. M.; Dreuw, A. Ex-
perimental benchmark data and systematic evaluation of two a posteriori, polarizable-
continuum corrections for vertical excitation energies in solution. The Journal of Phys-
ical Chemistry A 2015, 119, 5446–5464.
26
(57) Horn, P. R.; Sundstrom, E. J.; Baker, T. A.; Head-Gordon, M. Unrestricted absolutely
localized molecular orbitals for energy decomposition analysis: Theory and applica-
tions to intermolecular interactions involving radicals.The Journal of Chemical Physics
2013, 138, 134119.
(58) Horn, P. R.; Head-Gordon, M. Polarization contributions to intermolecular interac-
tions revisited with fragment electric-ﬁeld response functions. The Journal of Chemical
Physics 2015, 143, 114111.
(59) Horn, P. R.; Head-Gordon, M. Alternative deﬁnitions of the frozen energy in energy de-
composition analysis of density functional theory calculations. The Journal of Chemical
Physics 2016, 144, 084118.
(60) Horn, P. R.; Mao, Y.; Head-Gordon, M. Deﬁning the contributions of permanent elec-
trostatics, Pauli repulsion, and dispersion in density functional theory calculations of in-
termolecular interaction energies. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2016, 144, 114107.
(61) Horn, P. R.; Mao, Y.; Head-Gordon, M. Probing non-covalent interactions with a second
generation energy decomposition analysis using absolutely localized molecular orbitals.
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2016, 18, 23067–23079.
(62) Hammett, L. P. The eﬀect of structure upon the reactions of organic compounds. Ben-
zene derivatives. Journal of the American Chemical Society 1937, 59, 96–103.
(63) Hansch, C.; Leo, A.; Taft, R. W. A survey of Hammett substituent constants and
resonance and ﬁeld parameters. Chemical Reviews 1991, 91, 165–195.
(64) Burnham, K. P.; Anderson, D. R. Model Selection and Multimodel Inference , 2nd ed.;
Springer: New York, NY, 2002.
(65) Refaely-Abramson, S.; Baer, R.; Kronik, L. Fundamental and excitation gaps in
27
molecules of relevance for organic photovoltaics from an optimally tuned range-
separated hybrid functional. Physical Review B 2011, 84, 075144.
(66) Mao, Y.; Head-Gordon, M.; Shao, Y. Unraveling substituent eﬀects on frontier orbitals
of conjugated molecules using an absolutely localized molecular orbital based analysis.
Chemical Science 2018, 9, 8598–8607.
(67) Neel, A. J.; Hilton, M. J.; Sigman, M. S.; Toste, F. D. Exploiting non-covalent π
interactions for catalyst design. Nature 2017, 543, 637–646.
(68) Miller, N. E.; Wander, M. C.; Cave, R. J. A theoretical study of the electronic coupling
element for electron transfer in water. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 1999, 103,
1084–1093.
(69) Kubas, A.; Hoﬀmann, F.; Heck, A.; Oberhofer, H.; Elstner, M.; Blumberger, J. Elec-
tronic couplings for molecular charge transfer: Benchmarking CDFT, FODFT, and
FODFTB against high-level ab initio calculations. The Journal of Chemical Physics
2014, 140, 104105.
28
Graphical TOC Entry
29