Vol.:(0123456789)
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626 
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13415-025-01334-9
THEORETICAL REVIEW
Born to act: Deferred action and desire as active inference
Valery Krupnik1 
Accepted: 17 July 2025 / Published online: 4 August 2025 
This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the US; foreign copyright protection may apply 2025
Abstract
The active inference framework (AIF) considers the brain as a generative model guiding behavior under the imperative of 
minimizing the model’s variational free energy. Computationally, this is accomplished by hierarchical Bayesian inference. 
The theory views organisms as doxastic agents, which has drawn the criticism of being insufficient to explain conative 
agents motivated by desire. Specifically, it has been noted that the concept of desire is not isomorphic with belief and, 
therefore, fits poorly with AIF. In this paper, we build on previous work that suggests a path to integrating conation in AIF 
and present three arguments. First, the dichotomy between belief and desire is unnecessary. To that end, we define desire as 
a hierarchical inference that starts from a domain-general inference on the agent’s affective dynamics (affective charge) and 
descends to contextualized inference on the precision of action policies. We suggest that this hierarchy is implemented by 
a coordinated activity of the intrinsic brain networks: default mode, action mode, executive, and salient. Second, we argue 
for a central role that deferred action plays in the process of desire by allowing for affect-dependent awareness of the agent’s 
states over different timescales. Third, we suggest that the proposed model of desire and deferred action has ramifications 
for understanding psychopathology, which we frame as the malfunction of deferred action and desire and use obsessive-
compulsive disorder and depression as examples. This view entails that disorders of affect and motivation are subjectively 
desired despite their associated suffering.
Keywords Motivation · Desire · Deferred action · Active inference · Self-efficacy · Obsessive-compulsive disorder · 
Depression
“If in the first act you have hung a pistol on the wall, 
then in the following one it should be fired.” A. Chek-
hov
Motivation is a central phenomenon that psychological 
sciences aim to explain in order to answer the perennial 
question of why people do what they do and not otherwise. 
The predictive processing theories, and specifically active 
inference (AIF), explain motivation by the need to mini-
mize prediction errors (PE) via minimizing the agent’s vari-
ational free energy (Parr et al., 2022). 1 Such minimization, 
as stipulated by the free-energy principle (FEP), is impera-
tive for the very existence of self-organizing nonequilibrium 
systems, which all living organisms are (Friston, 2009). At 
the same time, the limitations of the prediction error-driven 
account of motivation have been noted. One is the assumed 
dichotomy, envisioned in Hume’s philosophy, between belief 
states, that PE dynamics are concerned with, and desire 
states (Colombo, 2016). It is argued that AIF is incompatible 
with Hume’s theory of motivation due to subsuming belief 
and desire under the unified process of minimizing free 
energy. The conflation of belief and desire states has been 
criticized as lacking explanation for certain neurocognitive 
phenomena, such as compulsions in obsessive-compulsive 
disorder (Yon et al., 2020). A more fundamental challenge 
levelled at the predictive processing approach to motivation 
is that predicting a certain state—even a highly likely one—
may not explain why the agent would want to act on this pre-
diction as opposed to merely update the agent’s predictions 
according to the prediction error (Klein, 2018).
Four interrelated arguments have been advanced in 
response to these challenges. One is that certain states are 
prioritized and predicted as highly likely and, therefore, 
 * Valery Krupnik 
 valery.y.krupnik.civ@health.mil
1 Department of Mental Health, US Naval Hospital Camp 
Pendleton, H200 Mercy Circle, Camp Pendleton, CA 92055, 
USA
1 The term motivation, as understood in AIF (and used in this paper), 
stands for the reason to act and applies to behavior at all levels of 
complexity from bacteria to man, which is different from its conven-
tional psychological meaning usually reserved for a conscious dispo-
sition.
1612 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626
actions that are expected to bring them about are predicted 
with a high probability, making these actions “desirable.” 
Such predictions have been called “first priors;” they are 
innate and correspond to the agent’s phenotype-typical 
homeostasis-dependent states (Allen & Tsakiris, 2019). 
First priors can be seen as organizing constraints on the 
agent’s belief space. The second is that AIF incorporates 
desire in its formalism (Smith et al., 2022), where the prob-
ability of an action is proportional to the agent’s confidence 
(precision of the belief about the action) that the action 
will result in the agent’s preferred state. Such states can be 
considered as desirable, thereby making predictions/beliefs 
isomorphic with desire. Furthermore, in their simulated 
agent, the authors illustrate how the strength of desire can 
be represented by the precision parameter. That the preci-
sion parameter can be seen as modelling the strength of a 
desire is the third argument (also made in Schwartenbeck 
et al., 2019) for conation’s fit in AIF. The fourth argument 
advances an enactive-ecological view of conation (Clark, 
2020; Kiverstein et al., 2024), where it is considered as a 
predicted action in the context of environmental affordances 
as opposed to the more abstract folk-psychological notion of 
drive. The strength of desire is thought to be controlled by 
the balance between the agent’s estimate of the precision of 
the intended action and the sensory attenuation of the incom-
ing sensory information (Clark, 2020 ). The role of preci -
sion is further emphasized by Kiverstein et al. (2024) on 
the account that affect plays a central role in the regulation 
of precision. This view makes use of the concept of affec-
tive charge as a regulator of action precision (Hesp et al., 
2021; Smith et al., 2022). Because affect is felt in the body 
and thus scores its homeostatic dynamics, it links action 
precision to these dynamics and, consequently, first priors/
preferences. In sum, this scheme makes a predicted action 
affectively desired in the context of the agent’s ecological 
affordances. These arguments raise the question whether the 
concept of desire is necessary to explain conation or can be 
subsumed under the affect-mediated precision of an action 
policy.
In this paper, we aim to further explore how AIF, as a 
theory of motivation, fits to conative behavior. We consider 
motivation as a hierarchy of inferences comprising the systems 
of minimal or preconative motivation and conation (Figs. 1 
and 2). In turn, we present conation as a hierarchy of its own 
(Fig. 3). In this scheme, at the top of the conative hierarchy 
is what we call raw desire defined as a meta-preference (to 
exist as an idiosyncratic agent) and an inference on affective 
charge. As such, raw desire contextualizes subordinate affec-
tively regulated desires and, further down the hierarchy, the 
minimal motivation (Fig. 3). We describe a putative neural 
architecture supporting this conative hierarchy (Fig. 1). We 
argue 1) that nested under raw desire, conation directly fol-
lows from the FEP, 2) that raw desire is isomorphic with the 
concept of drive and can explain generalized desires anteced-
ent of environmental affordances, and 3) that the idiosyncratic 
hierarchy of conation can explain how agents in similar physi-
ological states with the same first priors and ecological affor-
dances would nevertheless choose different actions to realize 
their desires.
We also propose that for better understanding of motiva-
tion, it is important not only to explain what drives behavior 
but also what drives inaction or deferred action, as we call it 
through the rest of the paper. It needs to be emphasized that 
deferred action, as understood here, is not just a delayed or 
postponed action but an undecided one that may or may not 
happen. We argue that according to the FEP, on which AIF 
is based, action is the default mode of a living organism, and 
that for highly developed organisms (mammals and arguably 
other vertebrates) being allostatic and autopoietic necessarily 
means being conative. Referring back to the above epigraph, 
we maintain that the real question about motivation is not why 
and how the pistol fires—this is what pistols are—but what 
takes it so long. We address how AIF may account for deferred 
action and, consequently, conation, with an emphasis on the 
role of affect. At the end, we consider clinical examples of 
distorted deferred action and desire.
Fig. 1  Structural network of conative behavior. The green represents 
the minimal motivation network; together with the blue and magenta 
it expands to the conation network. The arrows indicate the informa-
tion flow. DMN =default mode network; ECN = executive control 
network; SN = the salience network; AMN = action mode network
1613Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626 
To be is to act
Active inference is a theory of sentient behavior developed 
over the past two decades and proposed as a “unified brain 
theory” (Friston, 2010). At its basis is the free-energy prin-
ciple, which conditions the existence of self-organizing 
nonequilibrium systems on resisting the second law of 
thermodynamics 2 and avoiding decay by minimizing their 
variational free energy (Friston, 2009). Such minimization is 
achieved by avoiding surprising states, that is, states unchar-
acteristic, and therefore unlikely, for a given phenotype. In 
this view, an organism embodies a generative model (GM) 
of itself and its environment, generating predictions about its 
states, in accord with its homeostatic set points, and states of 
the environment, whereas the actual states’ deviation from 
these predictions generates a prediction error. Increase in PE 
results in a greater surprise. Organisms and their environ-
ment are ever-changing entities, and their GM needs con-
stant updating, which happens by comparing the model’s 
prior beliefs (priors) with incoming sensory input. Because 
surprise is usually computationally intractable, GM, instead, 
Fig. 2  The difference between the minimal (preconative) and conative motivation. Arrows indicate the flow of information
Fig. 3  The functional network of desire. The blue and red arrows indicate the prediction-prediction error counterflow. The orange arrows indi-
cate the modulation of precision. The green arrows indicate the exchange of information with the environment. SE = self-efficacy
2 Strictly speaking, the second law only applies to closed systems. 
Its generalization to open systems—considered under the free-energy 
principle—is known as integral fluctuation theorems (Seifert, 2012).
1614 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626
minimizes its variational free energy, which is a tractable 
quantity representing an upper bound on surprise. Thus, an 
organism can reduce its surprise and avoid decay by mini-
mizing its GM’s variational free energy, which also means 
minimizing its prediction errors.
To be a GM of its environment, an organism must be con-
ditionally independent of it, that is, separated by a Markov 
blanket. Otherwise, the organism will dissipate into the envi-
ronment and cease to exist—a state of the highest surprise. 
In this way, the FEP is tautological with existence (Friston, 
2012). Maintaining conditional independence of the ever-
changing environment requires acting on it to regulate the 
exchange of matter and information, lest the organism suc-
cumb to the rising entropy and decay. This implies a hier -
archy of first priors, where the initial prior is existence. The 
next down the hierarchy are priors on actions likely to safe-
guard the existence from the challenges of entropic decay, 
which can be viewed as tautological with the allostatic belief 
in “stability through change3” (McEwen, 2000) or, to para-
phrase, stability through action. These are the foundational 
priors of self-organizing nonequilibrium systems. Whereas 
all organisms belong to this class of systems, only autopoi-
etic ones qualify as organisms.
Evolution can only happen via autopoiesis (Varela et al., 
1974). This principle is encoded in the structure of nuclear 
acids, the essential molecules of life, and is reified in the 
mechanisms of biogenesis. Accordingly, the third founda -
tional prior of organisms is the autopoietic belief. Thus, 
from the free-energy and evolutionary principles it follows 
that the organism GM predicts its continuing existence and 
propagation through action (c.f., the notion of the brain as a 
self-evidencing GM; Hohwy, 2016). Therefore, all allostatic 
autopoietic agents are intrinsically motivated to exist, act, 
adapt, and reproduce. Consequently, we will argue that all 
motivation can be traced to these foundational priors and 
that they underwrite the mechanism of desire. A need to act 
seems like an obvious aspect of motivation; a more interest-
ing one is the emergence in higher-developed organisms of 
the ability to defer and choose action.
The natural history of deferred action
The simplest organisms such as bacteria are not known to 
defer action. They respond to environmental change with 
chemotaxis automatically. Their predictions about the con-
centration of extracellular chemicals translate directly into 
their movement (for an active inference account of bacterial 
chemotaxis, see Corcoran et al., 2020; Krupnik, 2024). Bac-
teria cannot defer action, because sensory signals from their 
receptors are directly transduced to their molecular motor 
(Wadhams & Armitage, 2004); therefore, their “perception” 
is not conditionally independent of their action. Bacterial 
chemotaxis is not a conative behavior (an automatic move-
ment needs no desire), yet it provides for the robust adapta-
tion of the most successful domain of life. This shows that 
although action is necessary for the existence of organisms, 
conation is optional and secondary to it.
The relationship between action and conation fits com-
fortably with the distinction between merely reflexive 
active inference and active inference as planning (Botvinick 
& Toussaint, 2012; Friston et al., 2025). Merely reflexive 
refers to the kind of generalized homeostasis that can be 
explained by acting upon the world to bring about predicted 
sensory consequences in the moment. This can be con-
trasted with active inference based upon inferred policies or 
plans that entail a generative model of the consequences of 
action. Since these consequences are in the future, they—
and future actions upon which they are contingent—become 
random variables that have to be inferred. This introduces 
the capacity for conation in the sense that certain actions can 
be deferred. Mathematically, the move from merely reflexive 
inference to action selection based upon (Bayesian) beliefs 
about policies entails a particular kind of deep generative 
model, in which action per se is distal to internal belief 
updating and thereby becomes an inferred cause of sensory 
consequences (Friston et al., 2023). In short, systems imple-
menting active inference as planning acquire an authentic 
kind of agency in the sense that they have the additional 
capacity to infer and defer their actions.
Conditional independence between perception and action 
appears later in evolution, where these functions are embod-
ied in morphologically and physiologically distinct struc-
tures such as muscle-like contractible tissues and ganglion-
like neural networks. Although these structures are found in 
rather primitive organisms, including worms and jellyfish, 
it is less clear when deferred action evolved. Nevertheless, 
insects already have it. For example, honeybees can watch 
the dance of a scout bee communicating foraging instruc-
tions and defer action until the dance’s end (Frisch, 1993). 
This example shows how deferred action can allow for 
higher-order cognitive processes, such as learning, memory, 
and planning.
AIF offers a straightforward explanation for the mecha-
nism of deferred action. Action in AIF is the fulfillment of 
an agent’s prediction of being in a certain state, such that 
action completion is evidenced by a sensory sensation, e.g., 
proprioceptive. The prediction of raising the leg is con-
firmed by the proprioceptive feeling of the raised leg. This, 
however, is only possible if the proprioceptive sensation of 
3 The meaning of allostasis has been expanded to include its predic-
tive quality, where an organism acts to adapt to an expected environ-
mental challenge, which property likely evolved with the advent of 
multicellularity (Sterling, 2020). 
1615Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626 
the current state is transiently attenuated, because it pre -
sents a prediction error that would otherwise interfere with 
the prediction driving the movement (Brown et al., 2013). 
Because sensory attenuation facilitates the release of action, 
its absence offers a plausible mechanism of action deferral. 
More importantly, AIF provides a model—specifically, the 
deep temporal model (Friston et al., 2018)—that accounts 
for both action initiation and deferral. According to this for-
mulation, the logarithm of the probability of an action (or 
action policy) is proportional to the negative of its expected 
free energy (EFE). expected free energy can be formulated 
as comprising two terms: the epistemic and pragmatic value 
of an action policy. These are often framed as the policies of 
exploration and exploitation, respectively. Notably, explora-
tion can occur through purely mental actions, with physical 
actions deferred. In the above example of a bee dance, defer-
ring an overt physical action while learning the foraging 
instructions allows for epistemic exploration, which is then 
followed by the act of exploitation through physical forag-
ing. In the epigraph to the paper, deferring the pistol shot to 
the second act allows for contextual exploration of the likely 
outcome. Accordingly, we can specify a particular case of 
EFE formulation as comprising epistemic exploration via 
action deferral and pragmatic exploitation via action release.
Sensory attenuation may play an essential role in the 
cycle of epistemic exploration and pragmatic exploita-
tion. Under active inference of a nonreflexive kind, action 
sequences are selected by their ability to minimize EFE or 
expected surprise. Expected surprise can be reduced in two 
ways. Because expected surprise is uncertainty, one way is 
to indulge in epistemic, exploratory behaviors, which are 
intrinsically motivated. The other way to minimize expected 
surprise is by avoiding outcomes that would be surprising 
for the agent in question. This extrinsic motivation is deter-
mined by pragmatic imperatives based upon the agent’s prior 
preferences, i.e., beliefs about outcomes that are typical of 
it. In AIF, these motivations are understood as prior beliefs 
about action policies, and these policies are realized through 
merely reflexive mechanisms.
To realize the intended consequences of action, it is nec-
essary to suspend attention to sensory (e.g., proprioceptive 
in case of motor action) sensations supplying evidence that 
one is not acting. This sensory attenuation can be regarded 
as the complement of selective attention and rests upon the 
attenuation of sensory precision (the precision of sensory 
input). Note that selective attention and sensory attenuation 
are covert actions that enable the merely reflexive mecha-
nism that engenders overt action. In this setting, the preci-
sion of beliefs about policies (i.e., policy precision) can have 
a profound effect on policy selection and ensuing action, 
both covert and overt. Agents, in whom policy precision is 
itself inferred, have a special kind of self-evidencing based 
upon (Bayesian) beliefs about agency and motivation that 
are elaborated later with regard to self-efficacy and affect.
It needs to be clarified that the partition into exploration 
and exploitation does not have to lie between the epistemic 
and overtly physical domains. Overt behavior can be explor-
atory, e.g., roaming for a prey, and exploitative, e.g., chas-
ing it. Likewise, purely mental acts can be partitioned into 
explorative such as epistemic foraging, e.g., using heuristics 
to figure out the best hunting grounds, and exploitative such 
as epistemic consumption, e.g., computing the best trajec-
tory for a chase. Such a partition is determined by the hier -
archy of free-energy minimization processes, where explo-
ration supervenes on exploitation. Sensory attenuation-like 
mechanisms can operate at different levels of cognition form 
proprioceptive (for motor movement) to highly abstract like 
playing chess. To map out a series of moves and counter-
moves, a chess player must be able to “attenuate” his atten-
tion on a current move to plan the next one.
Arguably, the main criticism of the AIF account of moti-
vation is that motivation is not just computed but felt as 
value-laden, which is encoded even linguistically in the com-
mon phrase “I feel like doing such and such.” This criticism 
considers desire as an essentially affective state. Bellow, we 
frame desire and motivation in structure functional terms to 
suggest that AIF accommodates their affective nature.
Desire for what and what for?
Desire is commonly viewed as a mindset that drives the 
agent toward a goal state, something which is desired, in 
other words, a drive or “motivational force” (Colombo, 
2016; Klein, 2018; Yon et al., 2020). It is contrasted with 
a belief state, which represents the world’s regularities and 
supposedly has no motivational force. To take a closer look 
at these presuppositions, we first ask what an agent is driven 
to, that is, what it desires. The intuitive answer is that it 
desires something of value either in the world around, such 
as a candy, or within, such as a good feeling. This, however, 
is a false dichotomy, because the brain has no direct access 
to the outside world, and hence, its only object of desire is its 
internal goal states. According to the free-energy principle, 
the brain’s goal state is its minimal free energy (Friston, 
2010). Because the brain can only exist as part of a body, 
minimization of its—or more precisely its generative mod-
el’s—free energy is predicated on the agent’s being in its 
phenotype-typical states. These states comprise the agent’s 
“first priors” (Allen & Tsakiris, 2019) and are, therefore, 
predicted preferred states, to which all other states are subor-
dinate. This allows AIF to equate desire with prediction and 
account for value by parametrizing it as preference (Smith 
et al., 2022).
1616 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626
Even if a predicted state has a value and is thus desired, 
this still does not answer the question of why desire needs 
to be experienced/felt to be acted upon. To pursue its pre-
ferred/desired states, it is sufficient for an agent to just 
predict them and select an action policy with the minimal 
expected free energy. Habitual or automatic behaviors 
can achieve goal states without desire (Schwartenbeck, 
FitzGerald, Mathys, Wurst et al., 2015b). Indeed, many if 
not most actions are taken without desire and awareness. 
To clarify the distinction we make between motivation 
and desire, here, motivation is viewed as underwriting 
any behavior, whereas we reserve desire for the cona-
tive motivation underwriting deliberate, affect-laden and 
conscious decision-making (Desire ⊇ Motivation). In this 
view, the minimal motivational network (Fig.  1 in green) 
requires no desire to effect habitual or automatic behavior, 
which can be mediated by low level subcortical processes 
sufficient for merely reflexive affective inference. Cona-
tion may require a much deeper GM of the consequences 
of inferred and deferred action. Such a model is likely 
supported by a larger network (Fig.  1) that in addition 
to subcortical regions includes cortical networks such as 
the executive control network (ECN), the salience net-
work (SN), and the default mode network (DMN). These 
are known as intrinsic networks, with SN responsible for 
recruiting attention and processing of emotionally salient 
stimuli; ECN responsible for action selection and planning 
and, consequently, for emotion and impulse control; DMN 
responsible for recruiting attention to the self and inte-
grating and evaluating self-relevant information over long-
term timescales that includes past memories and future 
counterfactuals (Raichle, 2015). The DMN is active during 
“resting state,” when attention is not directed outward, 
and the agent is not engaged in any task. It is believed 
that the SN functions as a switch, turning attention out-
ward and activating the ECN to engage the task at hand. 
Accordingly, the DMN is known to activate in counter -
phase with the SN and ECN. This scheme is known as the 
triple-network hypothesis (Menon, 2019). More recently, 
however, another intrinsic network, the action mode net -
work (AMN), has been identified (Dosenbach et al., 2025).
The AMN is responsible, as its name implies, for turn-
ing on and sustaining the organism in action mode, includ-
ing increased arousal, sustaining an action-congruent 
physiological state, goal maintenance and action planning, 
and viscerosensation. In the authors’ words:
The AMN initiates, maintains, and controls a domain-
general action-mode of brain function in which many 
specific behaviors may be performed, from com-
plex mental tasks to physical actions, wherein AMN 
regions implement all the shared common processes 
these actions require (Dosenbach et al., 2025).
Both DMN and AMN are widely distributed networks; 
DMN is spread out from the prefrontal through posterior 
cingulate cortices and AMN—from the brain stem through 
the supplemental motor area. In their activity, AMN is 
maximally offset from DMN. This structure-functional 
architecture partitions the brain activity into two domain-
general cognitive modes: 
Self-referential and action-oriented, driven by DMN 
and AMN, respectively, with SN and ECN contextu-
alizing them to the task and situation at hand (Fig.  1).
Considering action as the brain’s primary function and 
AMN’s role in its planning, initiating, and sustaining, the 
implied role of DMN is to compute action’s (or inaction’s) 
value for the organism over different timescales. From the 
AIF standpoint, that (Bayesian) value equals the decrease 
in the expected free energy. In other words, desire, in its 
most general sense, can be read as a DMN’s prediction 
of the organism’s state other (with a lower free energy) 
than the current one, which also can be seen as a meta-
preference. Then, AMN’s function is to plan and execute a 
policy likely to bring that state about. This scheme places 
DMN at the top of the conative hierarchy. This also means 
that desire comes later in evolution with the development 
of DMN.
To estimate the value (EFE) of planned action or inac-
tion over large timescales, the DMN would need to infer it 
based on some generalized dynamic parameter. Affective 
charge has been proposed as such a parameter, which is 
a domain-general property of affect that scores the GM’s 
error dynamics, where accelerating and decelerating rates 
of prediction error minimization are associated with, respec-
tively, positive and negative valence (Hesp et al., 2021). By 
extension, affective charge scores the precision or confidence 
associated with the evaluation of policies. This precision is 
inversely related to the expected free energy averaged over 
policies. As such, affective charge reflects the agent’s “sub-
jective fitness” in the sense of the agent’s subjective evalua-
tion of the adaptive value of its behavior. There is empirical 
and modelling evidence (Hesp et al., 2021; Schwartenbeck, 
FitzGerald, Mathys, Dolan, Friston et al., 2015a), suggest-
ing that phasic dopamine discharge encodes fluctuations 
in policy precision, which can be read as affective charge 
dynamics. Heuristically, affective charge reports the agent’s 
confidence about its future brought about by prospective pol-
icies. This makes an increasing affective charge the default 
prior, which can be regarded as a higher-order first prior. 
Simply put, any feeling agent not only expects to exist, but 
to feel good about making its existence, or in other words, it 
feels like acting in a way that evidences its existence. This 
adds another layer to the minimal motivation, where it is 
supported by the temporally deep self-conscious circuit of 
affective desire (Fig.  2). An obvious advantage of such a 
1617Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626 
design is a more robust existence, which would be selected 
for in evolution.
In this scheme, conation/desire 4 is a hierarchy of infer -
ences (Fig. 3). At the top, it starts with raw desire, a domain-
general inference on the dynamics of the agent’s affect. This 
inference is mediated by affective charge, making it a higher, 
third-order inference, because affective charge is itself an 
inference on prediction error dynamics. Simply put, raw 
desire is a conscious expectation to feel better, which is 
realized down the hierarchy by corresponding action poli-
cies. This is similar to a recently proposed affective gradi-
ent hypothesis (Shenhav, 2024), where affect is considered 
as a hierarchically highest source of motivation (although 
in a more nuanced way, where an agent may want to feel 
better along different affective dimensions, i.e., arousal 
and valence). To that, we add the layer of raw desire as 
an explicit inference on affective dynamics that integrates 
arousal and valence in a “feel better” vector. As such, raw 
desire can be seen as the affective aspect of consciousness, 
that is, being conscious of one’s affective dynamics (affec-
tive charge).5 In this scheme, the conscious nature of desire 
follows from the view of affect as an elemental form of con-
sciousness (Solms & Friston, 2018). The putative function 
of affective charge is modulation of the precision of action 
policies, where a higher affective charge renders the pol-
icy more precise (Hesp et al., 2021). In so doing, affective 
charge becomes contextualized by the corresponding action 
policies. This is the step in the hierarchy of desire, where the 
raw desire develops into a contextualized desire (Fig.  3). It 
has been proposed that such contextualization is mediated 
by the hierarchical system of self-efficacy, which spans the 
gamut from epistemic through allostatic self-efficacy (Krup-
nik, 2024). The proposed model of conation makes it an 
autoregulatory closed loop (Fig. 3), starting from raw desire 
as a prior on affective charge and receiving, via affective 
charge dynamics, PE from the outcomes of action policies 
regulated by the affective charge.
Framing desire as the process of inference on affective 
charge makes it affect-dependent and conscious. It also adds 
an interesting twist: at its most abstract level, desire is not 
about affordance-dependent preferred states but is a meta-
preference, to which ecological preferences are subordinate. 
Thus, my raw desire for a candy is not about the candy but 
about me feeling better. This can explain how some behav -
iors, once overlearned, can become desire-independent 
and intrinsically motivating. If we remove desire from the 
conation loop (Figs.  2 and 3), it becomes truncated to the 
minimal motivation, bypassing affect and desire. This way, 
a behavior, once desired, may “run away” by self-perpetu-
ating as predicted with high precision and thus develop into 
a habit as proposed in (Schwartenbeck, FitzGerald, Mathys, 
Wurst et al., 2015b). Habit-formation has implications for 
psychopathology discussed later in the paper. The sug-
gested conceptualization of conative motivation transcends 
the belief-desire dichotomy by making desire a belief about 
affect and, at a lower level of the hierarchy, goal states.
The model offers an extended perspective on conation by 
framing it as a process of self-modeling and self-evidenc-
ing, as does the aforementioned affective gradient hypoth-
esis (Shenhav, 2024 ). An agent inferring the precision of 
policies must have a second-order inference, i.e., affective 
charge or subjective fitness, about that precision. This infer-
ence (about the precision of a policy) is contextualized by 
and conditioned on the agent’s state of mind, which then 
can be viewed as intentional and affective and must itself be 
inferred (a third-order inference) to contextualize the preci-
sion of that policy. Such a hierarchal Bayesian inferential 
process is in line with the AIF account of self-modeling and 
phenomenology (Limanowski & Friston, 2018; Sandved-
Smith et al., 2021). In this scheme, conation follows directly 
from the FEP. If we take its self-evidencing reification 
(Hohwy, 2016), we can say that agents with the minimal 
motivation network must self-evidence (maximize Bayes-
ian model evidence of their GM) to exist, whereas conative 
agents must also desire (a higher-order first prior) to self-
evidence, that is, to feel like evidencing their existence in the 
form and shape they are. To illustrate by using Clark’s exam-
ple (Clark, 2020), I want/desire to go watch a movie, because 
I feel like evidencing my existence as a creature that I am, 
i.e., one that enjoys going to the movies, which can be seen 
as another tautological reification of the FEP. This makes 
both existence and self-evidencing intrinsically desirable, 
which can explain the intuitively paradoxical fear of death 
and aversion to boredom. The fear of death may be consid-
ered paradoxical, because, strictly speaking, death cannot 
be feared; it is an experientially empty state that by itself 
harbors no danger. What may be scary about being dead is 
the loss of the pleasure of existence (a more in-depth account 
of this subject can be found elsewhere; Krupnik, 2025a). 
The aversion to boredom appears paradoxical, because the 
state of mental and physical idleness is not in any way harm-
ful. From the standpoint of raw desire, however, it deprives 
the agent of the pleasure of self-evidencing (via mental or 
physical action).
Note, that my high-order desire for entertainment is linked 
to my homeostatic needs via affect and interoception, thus 
spanning the whole hierarchy of conation from conscious to 
unconscious and closing the conative autoregulatory loop, 
which also means that preaffective systems/organisms are 
also preconative (Fig.  2). The additional layer of conation, 
4 Conation is used interchangeably with desire here to capture both 
its philosophical and psychological aspects.
5 From this perspective, motivation becomes conative, as it reaches 
the level of consciousness.
1618 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626
as we argue below, allows for a more flexible consciousness-
mediated behavior without the agent being overwhelmed 
by the complexity of life-demands and choices, while also 
opening the door for psychopathology, where that flexibility 
is compromised,
The proposed hierarchy of conation allows for general-
ized desires that are subordinate to raw desire but anteced-
ent to environmental affordances. For example, generalized 
epistemic desire for knowledge and certainty (curiosity) 
regardless of particular epistemic affordances. Such a desire 
was modelled by Smith et al. (2022) as the epistemic value 
term in the expected free energy equation. Likewise, one can 
think of the desire for fairness as independent of the con-
text, for entertainment regardless of the kind, or for attach-
ment, happiness and well-being across different timescales 
and situations. 6 Raw desire complements first homeostatic 
priors (Allen & Tsakiris, 2018) in that homeostatic predic-
tions are context-bound, relatively short-term, do not require 
consciousness, and could be satisfied by the minimal motiva-
tion network (Figs. 1 and 2). Extending first priors to broadly 
understood phenotype-typical states as suggested by Smith 
et al. (2022) may not cover generalized desires, because 
they also include learned idiosyncratic beliefs or empirical 
priors (and their precision) about what kind of agent one 
is. Thus, raw desire may be seen as the first prior, that is, 
a desire to exist in the personal trait-specific way, to which 
all other wishes can be traced. This view recapitulates the 
FEP, where all behavior can be traced to the imperative of 
reducing free energy. It also helps understand how and why 
physiologically and genetically similar organisms manifest 
diverse and flexible behaviors under the same circumstances. 
Even monozygotic twins display inter-individual behavioral 
differences within similar settings (von Stumm & Plomin, 
2018), which may speak to the role of empirical priors in 
shaping personhood, including its conative aspects. To sum 
the whole argument up, the proposed model of hierarchical 
conation allows us to answer Clark’s question (Clark, 2020) 
about where desire comes from. It comes from the agent’s 
top-down inference about how it expects/wants to be, which 
is continually updated from bottom up by its environment 
(via active and perceptual inference) about how it can be. 
As an aside, the outlined hierarchy of desire is consistent 
with the notion of the primacy of drives in the drive theory, 
especially its late revision, where drives are considered con-
scious (Solms, 2021).
The existence of certain conative traits and generalized 
conditions, such as impulsivity and anhedonia, respectively, 
appears consistent with the notion of metacognitive raw 
desire. Even though both impulsivity and anhedonia may 
be expected to reside within the reward-processing circuitry, 
DMN has been shown to play a role in both. For example, 
resting-state DMN activity predicts impulsivity or trait-
urgency (Gentili et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2017). Likewise, 
resting-state DMN-SN functional connectivity correlates 
with anhedonia scores (Imperatori et al., 2025), and an 
anhedonia-specific hypoactivation of resting-state DMN 
was found in children with anhedonia (Pornpattananangkul 
et al., 2019). Importantly, deep brain stimulation of the ante-
rior DMN, specifically, the ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
(vmPFC), can reverse the anhedonia-like behavior in an ani-
mal model of depression (Hamani et al., 2012), and stimula-
tion of the medial forebrain bundle in depressed people has 
an anti-anhedonic effect (Boscutti et al., 2025) presumably 
via the activation of the descending vmPFC projections 
(Fenoy et al., 2022). The involvement of DMN in general -
ized aspects of desire can be seen as a higher-order inference 
in the context of the self-model. We can speculate that the 
aforementioned alternating activation of DMN and AMN 
reflects the switch between the self-referential and outward 
ecological desire, respectively. Thus, following the view 
of psychopathology as “optimal inference with suboptimal 
models” (Schwartenbeck, FitzGerald, Mathys, Wurst et al., 
2015b), we may specify a subset of such suboptimal models 
as ones with inflexible precision of desire. It is important to 
acknowledge that DMN’s involvement in trait-like aspects of 
desire is insufficient to conflate its activity with raw desire. 
What is missing is a temporal link, where DMN activation 
precedes a goal-directed desire and an associated dopamine 
discharge in the midbrain. No such data are available, to 
our knowledge, although a brain imaging study to test this 
hypothesis seems plausible.
Turning to the second half of this section’s title, we need 
to explain the putative functional advantage (besides the 
aforementioned evolutionary advantage) of adding desire to 
the minimal motivation network. Several such advantages 
are apparent. One concerns the limitations of the minimal 
network noted by the critics of the purely doxastic view of 
motivation. Given the multitude of environmental demands 
in multiple domains of the state space, it appears that the 
brain GM can be easily overwhelmed unless it prioritizes a 
small subset of goal states (Klein, 2018). An average person 
must act on many goals at different hierarchical levels at the 
same time: driving, planning a meeting, answering (or not) a 
phone call, negotiating the homeostatic needs, etc. Attending 
to each domain may seem straightforward, but prioritizing 
and reconciling these priorities in the dynamic world may 
be computationally challenging. Desire, by virtue of being a 
hierarchical autoregulatory process that is domain-general at 
its highest level, can dynamically optimize the goal state pri-
orities based on their relative affective salience. Moreover, 
6 We would also suggest an intuitively plausible though not empiri-
cally supported state of mind, where one is aware of wanting some-
thing not yet knowing what that is; simply wanting to be in a state 
other than the current one, presumably with a more positive affect.
1619Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626 
as a conscious meta-preference, raw desire can exert flexible 
control over subordinate desires in the context the agent’s 
GM (including the self-model) over different timescales. 
Such temporal depth is another advantage, because it allows 
to make inferences on affective charge over large time scales 
both in the past and future, e.g., one can infer an increased 
affective charge at the memory of the last night’s party or 
a decreased affective charge on the account of one’s own 
mortality. Therefore, the mortality is not just predicted with 
a high probability but experienced as undesirable, and this 
conflict provides an opportunity for a more elaborate cogni-
tive processing. Temporal depth is not particular to desire; it 
is a property of the brain GM (Friston et al., 2018). However, 
desire renders it conative.
A third advantage is the dynamic deconfliction of motiva-
tion. This is different from the discussed above prioritization 
in that conflicting goals (predicted states) can arise within 
the same domain. Such deconfliction is possible owing to 
the proposed hierarchical structure of motivation, where the 
raw desire is linked to goal states indirectly through affec-
tive charge (Fig. 3). Specifically, a preferred affective state, 
which by default (as a first prior) is an increased affective 
charge, may be in conflict with the preferred state. Before 
illustrating this supposition with an example, some general 
considerations are in order. The ultimate function of the 
brain GM is the minimization of the free energy (Friston, 
2010) and not necessarily making the agent feel good. This 
can be paraphrased as a conflict between making an agent 
feel good and making sense. Also, whereas an increased 
affective charge is the default desire, it cannot be indefinite. 
Free energy cannot be zero; therefore, an affective charge 
cannot grow indefinitely, which means that the desire for 
(prediction of) its increase will inevitably come to a con-
tradiction with the free energy dynamics. This means that 
desire is bound to oscillate between inferring positive and 
negative affective trends.
How could an agent desire (predict) a decreased affec-
tive charge, given that it scores the agent’s subjective fit-
ness (Hesp et al., 2021)? That would mean wanting to fail. 
Nevertheless, we argue that the answer is in the hierarchical 
structure and dynamics of motivation. Let us take the fre-
quently invoked in the literature example of hunger. A drop 
in your glucose level signals an allostatic load and generates 
a PE at the allostatic level. The PE is passed up the cogni-
tive hierarchy and is indexed by a decrease of the affective 
charge, which generates a PE at the level of desire (Fig.  3), 
indicating that your GM needs updating. This, as noted 
above, can be accomplished by either perceptual or active 
inference. Engaging active inference, you decrease your 
expected free energy by deciding to look in the fridge but 
find it empty. At this point, your GM has to select a policy on 
a longer timescale to reduce the EFE (e.g., to go to the store 
or skip breakfast and wait until lunchtime). Until that policy 
is executed, however, your hunger grows, and the GM’s cur-
rent free energy is increasing. The only option to reduce it in 
the near term is perceptual inference, i.e., updating the GM 
at the level of raw desire. This would mean predicting/desir-
ing a transient drop in the affective charge (in psychological 
terms, known as distress tolerance). As an old adage has it, 
“things will get worse before they get better.”
While trivial, this example has significant ramifications, 
because counter-hedonic inference can be vitally important. 
Consider a predator that operates on a thin energy margin 
and has to compute whether to conserve its energy while 
tolerating hunger a little longer or to risk wasting it by lung-
ing at the prey under suboptimal conditions. Of note, lower 
distress tolerance is associated with the trait impulsivity 
(Borges et al., 2017).
One can also think of a counterexample of hedonic infer-
ence serving the deconfliction function. In the above hunger 
case, the agent can use an alternative perceptual inference 
strategy by increasing the precision of the hedonic prediction 
thus discounting the hunger PE and temporarily “ignoring” 
it, until the environment provides a suitable affordance (e.g., 
a café on the way to work). Although both strategies have 
the same immediate effect, their long-term consequences are 
different. The counter-hedonic strategy locks the agent in a 
“depressive” proposition conditioned on the future imple-
mentation of a delayed but decided upon policy, such as 
waiting to eat until lunchtime. The hedonic strategy, on the 
contrary, leaves the agent more flexible and open to exploit 
ecological contingencies, such as the aforementioned café or 
a snack vendor. Such contradictory strategies are related to a 
more general model-antimodel Bayesian dialectic explored 
elsewhere (Krupnik, 2025a, b).
The deconfliction function of desire may be especially 
important in high complexity, ambiguous social settings 
with shifting loyalties and alliances. Malfunction of desire, 
on the other hand, may play a role in psychopathology, 
as discussed later in the paper. It is tempting to speculate 
that the emergence of conative motivation was one of the 
evolutionary reasons for the development of DMN, which 
would suggest that simpler, pre-vertebrate organisms that 
lack DMN have no conation, only the minimal motivation.
Deferred action aids the maturation 
of desire
In active inference, motivation is approached from a doxastic 
standpoint that can be expressed as “I do what I believe.” 
The belief is that a certain action will reduce the agent’s 
expected free energy, which is a necessary condition for its 
existence in a phenotype-typical state. Then, an action that 
is most likely to do so is executed. This explanation suffices 
for motivation of simple homeostatic agents such as bacteria, 
1620 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626
in which homeo- or allostatic action is automatically trig-
gered by survival and autopoietic needs, but it may appear 
unsatisfactory for higher-developed organisms with a brain. 
Such organisms have to navigate a vast and rich counterfac-
tual belief space (Wilkinson et al., 2017), where actions are 
often far removed from their survival consequences and are 
not automatic but require elaborate planning and decision-
making. Returning to the hunger example, where I contem-
plate getting food out of the refrigerator, selecting to go for it 
would satisfy the minimal EFE imperative, unless I decide to 
do nothing and stay hungry based on a larger set of predicted 
goal states (e.g., other time commitments, diet, etc.). Later 
in this section, we discuss conditions that release action, 
but now focus on what it takes to get me moving. To do so, 
my action not only has to be the most likely in the current 
context (having the lowest EFE), but I need to want, feel 
like, doing it. In other words, on a phenomenological level, 
I need to have a desire. Note that this implies having both a 
desire for the object and state (food and satiety) as well as 
for the action (foraging).
In a recent AIF development, desire and affect have been 
factored in the EFE equation (Hesp et al., 2021; Smith et al., 
2022). In short, the argument is as follows. The EFE equa-
tion can be written as comprising the risk and ambiguity 
terms (referred to in the previous section as pragmatic and 
epistemic gain, respectively). The risk term scores the prob-
ability of the agent to find/observe itself in a preferred state, 
e.g., satiety, as the outcome of an action. This term then can 
be seen as scoring the desire for a state, as it equates the 
belief about the consequence of an action with the prefer -
ence for a state, thus conferring the value property on the 
belief.
The same logic can be applied to the desire for an action. 
The probability of an action also depends on the agent’s 
confidence that it will bring about the expected outcome. 
Confidence is understood here not in a subpersonal sense 
as encoded in the precision (of an action policy) parameter. 
That precision, as noted in the previous section, depends 
on the agent’s affect, more specifically, affective charge 
(Fig. 3). This explains how the desire to act is both a belief 
and a feeling. Thus, the EFE equation accounts for desire’s 
doxastic, value, and affective aspects. Next, we build on the 
AIF theory of desire to highlight the role of deferred action.
Any action implies inaction (e.g., the aforementioned 
model-antimodel dialectic), which dialectic is transcended 
by motivation and decision-making. Returning to the above 
example, we need to explain why would I not simply adjust 
my GM to expect feeling hungry, sit back, and starve to 
death (an AIF account of self-destruction has been suggested 
before Krupnik & Danilova, 2024).7 The answer is straight-
forward for actions directly related to homeostatic needs, 
because inaction leads to a state of high surprise/EFE and 
thus feels deeply unpleasant and undesirable. It may not, 
however, be so obvious in low-stake decisions, e.g., when 
trying to rest, to go or not to go on social media? To better 
understand such choices, we need to compare the experience 
of action versus deferred action, because the answer mainly 
depends on what an agent feels like doing.
Considering the pragmatic and epistemic gains in the EFE 
equation, the probability of an action depends on a trade-off  
between them (Schwartenbeck et al., 2013), meaning that 
the agent acts to explore or exploit whichever results in the 
lowest EFE. Deferred action, on the contrary, depends exclu-
sively on the epistemic gain (here, we define deferred action 
as contrary to overt physical action, because mental action, 
strictly speaking, never stops). The main argument of this 
paper, therefore, is that deferred action affords the agent an 
opportunity for epistemic exploration and contextualization 
of its raw desire (Fig. 3).
To develop this argument, we refer to the AIF theory 
of motor control, specifically, sensory attenuation (Brown 
et al., 2013). Sensory attenuation, as discussed earlier, is 
necessary for a motor movement that would otherwise be 
inhibited by the prediction error generated by the sensation 
of the current body state. This also entails that the agent 
cannot be conscious of the movement’s sensations during it, 
but only before and after, because it is impossible to be con-
scious of an unfelt sensation. Such awareness would result in 
a series of stop-and-go jerks instead of a smooth trajectory. 
We suggest that such transient suspension of consciousness 
may apply, at a higher level, to decision-making as well, 
where the agent can be conscious of its decision to act before 
and after the action but not during. If so, the function of 
deferred action may be to allow motivation to mature beyond 
the minimal network to the level of conscious desire and 
the default mode network. This is consistent with the fact 
that habitual behavior is often automatic, that is, initiated 
unconsciously without a desire.
Time afforded by deferred action may be required to inte-
grate affect, which is felt viscerally and slowly relative to the 
cortical processing, into the estimate of the EFE of a planned 
action. The dynamics of the affective charge during deferred 
action will determine the planned action’s desirability and, 
therefore, its precision and likelihood. These hypothesized 
dynamics are the meaning of the notion of “feeling like 
doing [something].”
7 This question is related to the paradox of so called “dark room,” 
which is outside this paper’s focus but has been widely discussed in 
the predictive processing literature (Smith et al., 2022).
1621Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626 
On the neural level, the dialectic between action and inac-
tion may be reflected in the interaction between the brain 
intrinsic networks. The executive control and salience net-
works are believed to be responsible for precision estimation 
and action selection (Schwartenbeck, FitzGerald, Mathys, 
Dolan, Friston et al., 2015a), whereas the default mode net-
work is for self-referential and context-specific cognition 
(Raichle, 2015). Accordingly, we would expect upregula -
tion of DMN and downregulation of ECN and AMN during 
deferred action and the reverse dynamics at its initiation, 
which could be tested experimentally as in Sridharan et al. 
(2008). In fact, trait and age-related impulsivity correlates 
with increased functional connectivity between DMN and 
the dorsolateral premotor cortex (part of AMN) responsible 
for action planning (Shannon et al., 2011), which can be 
interpreted as a deficiency in the deferred action’s function. 
There are more conspicuous examples of psychopathology 
that can be viewed as disturbances of deferred action.
Malfunction of deferred action and desire
A substantial and growing literature frames psychopathol-
ogy in the active inference terms, where a central idea is that 
psychiatric disorders manifest aberrant precision estimates 
of the agents’ models of the world, themselves, and their 
actions (Smith et al., 2021). A review of this literature is 
outside this paper’s scope. Instead, we focus on the role that 
deferred action and desire play in these models. There can 
be two kinds of impairment of deferred action: hyper- and 
hypofunction. Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is an 
example of the latter. A core symptom of this disorder is vol-
untary compulsive actions that are associated with negative 
affect (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor -
der, 5th ed. text rev; DSM-5; American Psychiatric Associa-
tion, 2022). Obsessive-compulsive disorder has been identi-
fied as a condition contradicting the active inference account 
of motivation, because compulsive actions, while predicted, 
are undesired, which invokes the belief–desire dichotomy. 
AIF accounts of OCD have been proposed before (Fradkin 
et al., 2020; Kiverstein et al., 2019; Levy, 2018), but we offer 
an alternative interpretation as it relates to motivation and 
desire. For simplicity, we will use the example of compul-
sive handwashing to explain it as impaired deferred action 
and to argue that it is consistent with the AIF view of desire.
From the AIF standpoint, handwashing at the onset of 
OCD is driven by the prediction of the preferred state of the 
decontaminated hands, which makes this state both desired 
and predicted. The precision of this policy is expected to 
increase with time, because it is associated with a tran-
sient relief from distress about the perceived contamination 
(Salkovskis, 1999) and, therefore, with a positive affective 
charge. A central question to answer is why everyone does 
not compulsively wash their hands, because nobody wants 
them contaminated, especially because this policy is socially 
encouraged, which is likely to increase its precision even 
further. Our hypothesis is that OCD patients fail in deferred 
action. Deficiency in deferred action prevents an adequate 
context-specific processing of the alternative inaction policy 
and thus deprives OCD patients of choice. A possible mech-
anism of this deficiency is hyperactive sensory attenuation, 
where patients attenuate their sense of contaminated hands 
and initiate handwashing to be in the predicted decontami-
nated state. This kind of hyperactive sensory attenuation 
can be regarded as the complement of a failure of sensory 
attenuation that can lead to impaired initiation of action in 
psychiatric and neurological conditions (e.g., schizophrenia 
(Adams et al., 2013), delusions and Parkinsonism (Brown 
et al., 2013), stuttering (Usler, 2025 )). In addition, OCD 
patients have low distress tolerance (Laposa et al., 2015) and 
may be unlikely to enact a counter-hedonic inference. If so, 
they would instead, as discussed in the previous section, rely 
on a hyperprecise hedonic prior (no distress) and seek envi-
ronmental affordances, of which there are plenty for hand -
washing. As OCD progresses, and the compulsion cycle gets 
overlearned, the behavior may become “habitisized,” i.e., 
intrinsically motivated (Smith et al., 2022). At this stage, the 
compulsion becomes predicted with a high precision as both 
an expected state and an action policy, which compounds the 
challenge of controlling the compulsion despite the person’s 
conscious desire and effort.
Consistent with this idea, neurological data show that 
OCD patients fail to coordinate the activity of the default 
mode and executive networks. Their DMN fails to down-
regulate during externally focused activity (similarly to the 
above-mentioned impulsive subjects) and instead remains 
constitutively hyperactive (Gonçalves et al., 2017). Moreo-
ver, deep brain stimulation of the ventral striatum was shown 
to restore normal DMN-striatum functional connectivity in 
OCD patients and decrease their symptoms (Figee et al., 
2013). Of note, the progression to habitual compulsion in 
OCD parallels the well-studied progression from impulsiv -
ity to compulsivity in addiction (Dalley et al., 2011; Lee 
et al., 2019).
Interestingly, a deficiency in another kind, that is, intero-
ceptive sensory attenuation has been implicated in OCD. 
Hypoactivity of interoceptive sensory attenuation was sug-
gested as a mechanism of compulsion, where the inability to 
attenuate interoceptive prediction errors results in the sense 
of incomplete action (Roberts et al., 2021). Such failure of 
sensory inhibition has been demonstrated in OCD patients 
(Gentsch et al., 2012). This combination of hyperactive 
exteroceptive and hypoactive interoceptive sensory inhibi-
tion can lock OCD GM in the vicious cycle of a compulsive 
wish/prediction to act without the ability to experience the 
intended outcome. In this case, the model would continue 
1622 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626
predicting but failing to decrease the expected free energy 
via the intended action. Below, we present depression and 
anhedonia as a mirror image of OCD in terms of deferred 
action’s malfunction.
Depression can be seen as a hyperfunctioning deferral 
of action resulting from hypoactive exteroceptive sensory 
attenuation. A lack of desire and pleasure are among cri-
teria for major depressive disorder (DSM-5-TR). Indeci-
siveness and rumination have also been associated with 
depression (Hallenbeck et al., 2022; Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 
2008). Taken together, these symptoms appear to describe 
a deferred action syndrome, where desire is arrested at the 
level of raw desire failing to contextualize into an action 
policy (Fig.  3). The cognitive meaning of depression can 
be interpreted as a belief that no action can plausibly result 
in the agent’s preferred states/observations (Stephan et al., 
2016; Gilbert et al., 2022; Krupnik, 2021, 2024), which is 
also the AIF meaning of hopelessness (Krupnik & Danilova, 
2024), another symptom of depression. Therefore, any action 
policy would have a low precision and be difficult to commit 
to, which can explain the indecision. The negative affective 
charge associated with the agent’s inability to decrease the 
expected free energy (perceived as a low subjective fitness) 
will further depress the agent’s desire in acting, which in 
severe depression, can reach the level of catatonia (Solmi 
et al., 2018). Both negative affectivity and low precision 
can be mediated by decreased dopamine transmission (Hesp 
et al., 2021), which is especially prominent in severe depres-
sion (Dunlop & Nemeroff, 2007). The hypothesized function 
of deferred action, as discussed earlier, is a comprehensive 
context- and affect-dependent estimation of the precision 
of an action policy. This explains rumination as a core fea-
ture of depression (Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 2008) and is 
supported by the observation that depressed people fail to 
disengage their DMN and to fully engage the executive net-
work when involved in externally focused cognition (Belleau 
et al., 2015).
One proposed role for rumination, or “analytical rumi-
nation,” is an adaptive problem-solving meant to help the 
depressed find a solution to their predicament (Andrews 
& Thompson, 2009). In a different, AIF-inspired, point of 
view, rumination is a means of self-evidencing by a depres-
sive generative model (Krupnik, 2024) that simulates/resam-
ples negative outcomes as evidence of its failure. In support 
of this idea, rumination has been shown to associate with 
negative affect (Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 2008). The self-evi-
dence hypothesis aligns with the view of psychopathology 
as “optimal inference with suboptimal models” (Schwarten-
beck et al., 2015b). The depressive GM can be seen as an 
adaptation to allostatic overload—estimated as insurmount-
able—by predicting and fulfilling the GM’s failure in order 
to reduce its EFE.8 In our model, such a strategy would rely 
on counter-hedonic inference with the ensuing discounting 
of environmental affordances. Indeed, depression has been 
linked to a deficit of reward-seeking approach behavior in 
humans and model animals (Alcaro & Panksepp, 2011; Bak-
ker et al., 2017, 2018). Rumination has also been viewed as 
a failure of sensory attenuation that results in the person’s 
inability to initiate action due to focusing on the current 
depressed state and thus overweighting the prediction error 
(Badcock et al., 2017). This is consistent with depression 
seen as deferred action’s hyperfunction due to a hypoactive 
sensory attenuation.
On the interoceptive side, anhedonia can be viewed 
as hyperactive sensory attenuation, a kind of “selective 
[hedonic] interoceptive blindness,” where hedonic predic-
tion errors are underweighted (Krupnik, 2020). Consistent 
with this idea, there is ample evidence for the decreased 
activation of the salience network during reward processing 
in depressed people (Höflich et al., 2019; Kieslich et al., 
2022). At the same time, higher activation of the ventral 
striatum in response to reward PE was found to associ-
ate with less anhedonia (Eckstrand et al., 2019), and deep 
brain stimulation of the medial forebrain bundle (the hub 
of reward and hedonic processing) had a hedonic effect in 
treatment-resistant depression (Boscutti et al., 2025). The 
discounting of hedonic PE would provide evidence for the 
counter-hedonic GM, leading to the reduction of free energy, 
which could explain the relative stability and often chronic 
course of depression. Thus, the vicious cycle of anhedonia, 
contrary to OCD, is wishing/predicting inaction to confirm 
the higher-order counter-hedonic model. Interestingly, in 
a recent study depressed patients with anhedonia outper -
formed depressed patients without it on a reward learning 
task (Min et al. 2024). This is consistent with the present 
model (Fig. 3), which suggests that in the absence (or signifi-
cantly reduced) raw desire, as is the case in anhedonia, the 
agent's GM relies more on contextualized desires and thus 
may learn particular rewards more accurately.
The contrasting perspectives on OCD and depression 
as, respectively, hypo- and hyperfunctional deferred action 
explain the contrasting behavioral interventions for these 
conditions. In OCD, it is response prevention (Reid et al., 
2021), whereas it is behavioral activation for depression 
(Dimidjian et al., 2006). The apparent wisdom of these 
approaches is that by simply engaging in or deferring 
actions, the patients increase their confidence (precision) 
8 The view of psychopathology as optimal inference by a subopti-
mal model can be an answer to the ‘dark room’ paradox mentioned 
earlier. In a mental disorder, the individual is trapped in the cycle of 
minimizing the expected free energy of his generative model (either 
by action as in OCD, or inaction as in depression) by predicting and 
fulfilling outcomes that are contrary to his phenotype-typical needs.
1623Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626 
in those policies, which can then generalize to their meta-
confidence in action vs inaction and lead to adjustment of 
their GM’s parameters.
Framing (raw) desire as inference on affect (Fig. 3) leads 
to certain conclusions about psychopathology. Because of 
the desire-affect link, affective disorders can be considered 
motivational and vice versa. In the above examples, OCD 
and depression are both as evidenced by anxiety and mood 
disturbances in OCD (Goodwin, 2015) and loss of moti-
vation in depression (DSM-5 TR). Another conclusion is 
that disordered motivational-affective states are subjectively 
desired, although not enjoyed. This is because desire, as dis-
cussed earlier, can make counter-hedonic inferences as long 
as they serve the EFE minimization. Thus, in depression, 
patients desire inaction and in OCD compulsion. This con-
clusion reflects the “optimal inference with suboptimal mod-
els” view of psychopathology (Schwartenbeck, FitzGerald, 
Mathys, Wurst et al., 2015b).
Conclusion and future directions
To summarize the main arguments of this paper, we suggest 
that the free-energy and evolutionary principles endow allo-
static and autopoietic systems, which biological organisms 
are, with a belief, which is also motivation, in their existence 
and propagation. In organisms having a brain and affective 
capacity, this belief is felt, and motivation thus develops into 
desire. Owing to its domain-general property (at the most 
abstract level), desire equips organisms with a better ability 
to optimize their behavior in response to the multitude of 
affordances and threats to their existence, thus making it 
more robust. Mechanistically, desire is made possible as well 
as felt and conscious by deferred action. Accordingly, disor-
ders of affect and motivation can be considered as dysregula-
tion of desire and deferred action. This view overcomes the 
belief-desire dichotomy.
Intuitively, motivation is commonly understood as a will 
to act, leaving inaction with a passive role. Here, we treat 
inaction, or more specifically, deferred action as an active 
cognitive state and argue that to better understand desire and 
motivation, we need to consider deferred action’s mecha-
nisms and function. To that end, we approach desire and 
deferred action from the active inference standpoint, draw -
ing an analogy with the AIF mechanics of motor movement 
(Brown et al., 2013). The proposed model adds a nuance to 
the gaining in acceptance view of psychopathology as false 
inference (Friston, 2023) by interpreting pathology, such as 
OCD and depression, as disturbance of deferred action and 
desire. Such a view may provide additional insights for clini-
cal practice.
Despite its implicit inclusion in the AIF formalism, 
deferred action has not, to our knowledge, been explicitly 
modelled in computer simulations. Such modelling could be 
useful for the exploration of the dynamics of motivation and 
decision-making. Better models of motivation could then 
find application in optimization of human activity. Should 
a sentient artificial agent be developed, equipping it with 
deferred action would enable it to self-regulate desire. Per -
haps the most immediate utility of this line of study would 
be the development of a model of impaired deferred action 
for clinical research.
Acknowledgements The author wants to express appreciation to the 
two anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. All claims 
expressed in this article are solely those of the author and do not rep-
resent those of the affiliated organization.
Authors’ contribution Sole authorship.
Funding Open access funding provided by SCELC, Statewide Califor-
nia Electronic Library Consortium.
Availability of data and materials Not applicable.
Code availability Not applicable.
Declarations 
Conflicts of interest/competing interests None.
Ethics approva Not applicable.
Consent to participate Not applicable.
Consent for publication Not applicable.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Adams, R., Stephan, K., Brown, H., Frith, C., & Friston, K. (2013). The 
computational anatomy of psychosis. Frontiers in Psychiatry,4, 
Article 47. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyt. 2013. 00047
Alcaro, A., & Panksepp, J. (2011). The seeking mind: Primal neuro-
affective substrates for appetitive incentive states and their patho-
logical dynamics in addictions and depression. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews,35(9), 1805–1820. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. neubi orev. 2011. 03. 002
Allen, M., & Tsakiris, M. (2018). The body as first prior: Interocep-
tive predictive processing and the. primacy From homeostasis to 
awareness (p. 27). Oxford University Press.
1624 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626
Allen, M., & Tsakiris, M. (2019). The body as first prior: Interocep-
tive predictive processing and the primacy. In H. Tsakiris & H. 
De Preester (Eds.), The interoceptive mind: From homeostasis to 
awareness (pp. 27–45). Oxford University Press.
American Psychiatric Association. (2022). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders (5th. text rev). American Psychiatric 
Publishing.
Andrews, P. W., & Thompson, J. A. (2009). The bright side of being 
blue: Depression as an adaptation for analyzing complex prob-
lems. Psychological Review,116(3), 620–654.
Badcock, P. B., Davey, C. G., Whittle, S., Allen, N. B., & Friston, K. 
J. (2017). The depressed brain: An evolutionary systems theory. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 21(3), 182–194. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. tics. 2017. 01. 005
Bakker, J. M., Goossens, L., Lange, I., Michielse, S., Schruers, K., 
Lieverse, R., Marcelis, M., van Amelsvoort, T., van Os, J., 
Myin-Germeys, I., & Wichers, M. (2017). Real-life validation 
of reduced reward processing in emerging adults with depressive 
symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,  126(6), 713–725. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ abn00 00294
Bakker, J. M., Goossens, L., Kumar, P., Lange, I. M. J., Michielse, 
S., Schruers, K., Bastiaansen, J. A., Lieverse, R., Marcelis, M., 
van Amelsvoort, T., van Os, J., Myin-Germeys, I., Pizzagalli, D. 
A., & Wichers, M. (2018). From laboratory to life: Associating 
brain reward processing with real-life motivated behaviour and 
symptoms of depression in non-help-seeking young adults. Psy-
chological Medicine, 49(14), 2441–2451. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ 
S0033 29171 80034 46
Belleau, E. L., Taubitz, L. E., & Larson, C. L. (2015). Imbalance of 
default mode and regulatory networks during externally focused 
processing in depression. Social Cognitive and Affective Neurosci-
ence, 10(5), 744–751. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ scan/ nsu117
Borges, A. M., Dahne, J., Lim, A. C., & MacPherson, L. (2017). Nega-
tive affect mediates the relation between trait urgency and behav-
ioral distress tolerance. Emotion, 17(4), 707–716. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1037/ emo00 00267
Boscutti, A., Asir, B., Moura, I., Fenoy, A., Quevedo, J., & Soares, J. 
C. (2025). Deep brain stimulation of the medial forebrain bun-
dle: Effects on anhedonia and behavioral activation in treatment-
resistant depression. Brain Stimulation: Basic, Translational, and 
Clinical Research in Neuromodulation, 18(1), 61–63. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/j. brs. 2024. 12. 1186
Botvinick, M., & Toussaint, M. (2012). Planning as inference. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 16(10), 485–488. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
tics. 2012. 08. 006
Brown, H., Adams, R. A., Parees, I., Edwards, M., & Friston, K. 
(2013). Active inference, sensory attenuation and illusions. 
Cognitive Processing, 14(4), 411–427. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s10339- 013- 0571-3
Clark, A. (2020). Beyond desire? Agency, choice, and the predictive 
mind. Australasian Journal of Philosophy,98(1), 1–15. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1080/ 00048 402. 2019. 16026 61
Colombo, M. (2016). Social motivation in computational neuroscience: 
(or, if brains are prediction machines, then the Humean theory of 
motivation is false). In J. Kiverstein (Ed.), The Routledge hand-
book of philosophy of the social mind (pp. 336–356). Routledge. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 4324/ 97813 15530 178
Corcoran, A. W., Pezzulo, G., & Hohwy, J. (2020). From allostatic 
agents to counterfactual cognisers: Active inference, biological 
regulation, and the origins of cognition. Biology and Philoso-
phy,35(3), 1–45. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10539- 020- 09746-2
Dalley, Jeffrey W., Everitt, Barry J., & Robbins, Trevor W. (2011). 
Impulsivity, compulsivity, and top-down cognitive control. Neu-
ron,69(4), 680–694. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. neuron. 2011. 01. 020
Dimidjian, S., Hollon, S. D., Dobson, K. S., Schmaling, K. B., Kohlen-
berg, R. J., Addis, M. E., Gallop, R., McGlinchey, J. B., Markley, 
D. K., Gollan, J. K., Atkins, D. C., Dunner, D. L., & Jacobson, N. 
S. (2006). Randomized trial of behavioral activation, cognitive 
therapy, and antidepressant medication in the acute treatment of 
adults with major depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 74(4), 658–670. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ 0022- 006X. 
74.4. 658
Dosenbach, N. U. F., Raichle, M. E., & Gordon, E. M. (2025). The 
brain’s action-mode network. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,26(3), 
158–168. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41583- 024- 00895-x
Dunlop, B. W., & Nemeroff, C. B. (2007). The role of dopamine in 
the pathophysiology of depression. Archives of General Psychia-
try,64(3), 327–337. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1001/ archp syc. 64.3. 327
Eckstrand, K. L., Forbes, E. E., Bertocci, M. A., Chase, H. W., Green-
berg, T., Lockovich, J., Stiffler, R., Aslam, H. A., Graur, S., Bebko, 
G., & Phillips, M. L. (2019). Anhedonia reduction and the asso-
ciation between left ventral striatal reward response and 6-month 
improvement in life satisfaction among young adults. JAMA Psy-
chiatry, 76(9), 958–965. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1001/ jamap sychi atry. 
2019. 0864
Fenoy, A. J., Schulz, P. E., Sanches, M., Selvaraj, S., Burrows, C. L., 
Asir, B., Conner, C. R., Quevedo, J., & Soares, J. C. (2022). Deep 
brain stimulation of the “medial forebrain bundle”: Sustained effi-
cacy of antidepressant effect over years. Molecular Psychiatry,  
27(5), 2546–2553. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41380- 022- 01504-y
Figee, M., Luigjes, J., Smolders, R., Valencia-Alfonso, C.-E., van 
Wingen, G., de Kwaasteniet, B., Mantione, M., Ooms, P., de 
Koning, P., Vulink, N., Levar, N., Droge, L., van den Munckhof, 
P., Schuurman, P. R., Nederveen, A., van den Brink, W., Maza-
heri, A., Vink, M., & Denys, D. (2013). Deep brain stimulation 
restores frontostriatal network activity in obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. Nature Neuroscience, 16(4), 386–387. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1038/ nn. 3344
Fradkin, I., Adams, R. A., Parr, T., Roiser, J. P., & Huppert, J. D. 
(2020). Searching for an anchor in an unpredictable world: A com-
putational model of obsessive compulsive disorder. Psychological 
Review, 127(5), 672–699. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ rev00 00188
Frisch, K. V. (1993). The dance language and orientation of bees. 
Harvard University Press.
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the 
brain? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(7), 293–301. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/j. tics. 2009. 04. 005
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience,11(2), 127–138. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1038/ nrn27 87
Friston, K. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. 
Entropy, 14(11), 2100–2121. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ e1411 2100
Friston, K. (2023). Computational psychiatry: From synapses to sen-
tience. Molecular Psychiatry, 28(1), 256–268. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1038/ s41380- 022- 01743-z
Friston, K. J., Rosch, R., Parr, T., Price, C., & Bowman, H. (2018). 
Deep temporal models and active inference. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews,90, 486–501. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
neubi orev. 2018. 04. 004
Friston, K., Da Costa, L., Sakthivadivel, D. A. R., Heins, C., Pavliotis, 
G. A., Ramstead, M., & Parr, T. (2023). Path integrals, particular 
kinds, and strange things. Physics of Life Reviews, 47, 35–62. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. plrev. 2023. 08. 016
Friston, K. J., Salvatori, T., Isomura, T., Tschantz, A., Kiefer, A., Ver-
belen, T., Koudahl, M., Paul, A., Parr, T., Razi, A., Kagan, B. J., 
Buckley, C. L., & Ramstead, M. J. D. (2025). Active inference and 
intentional behavior. Neural Computation,37(4), 666–700. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1162/ neco_a_ 01738
Gentili, C., Vanello, N., Podina, I., Popita, R., Voinescu, B., Pietrini, 
P., & David, D. (2020). You do not have to act to be impulsive: 
Brain resting-state activity predicts performance and impulsivity 
1625Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626 
on the Balloon Analogue risk task. Behavioural Brain Research,  
379, 112395. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. bbr. 2019. 112395
Gentsch, A., Schütz-Bosbach, S., Endrass, T., & Kathmann, N. (2012). 
Dysfunctional forward model mechanisms and aberrant sense of 
agency in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biological Psychiatry,  
71(7), 652–659. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. biops ych. 2011. 12. 022
Gilbert, J. R., Wusinich, C., & Zarate, C. A. (2022). A predictive cod-
ing framework for understanding major depression. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience,16, Article 787495. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ 
fnhum. 2022. 787495
Gonçalves, Ó. F., Soares, J. M., Carvalho, S., Leite, J., Ganho-Ávila, 
A., Fernandes-Gonçalves, A., Pocinho, F., Carracedo, A., & Sam-
paio, A. (2017). Patterns of default mode network deactivation in 
obsessive compulsive disorder. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 44468. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ srep4 4468
Goodwin, G. M. (2015). The overlap between anxiety, depression, and 
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Dialogues in Clinical Neurosci-
ence, 17(3), 249–260. https:// doi. org/ 10. 31887/ DCNS. 2015. 17.3/ 
ggood win
Hallenbeck, H. W., Rodebaugh, T. L., & Thompson, R. J. (2022). 
Understanding indecisiveness: Dimensionality of two self-report 
questionnaires and associations with depression and indecision. 
Psychological Assessment, 34(2), 176–187. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1037/ pas00 01072
Hamani, C., Machado, D. C., Hipólide, D. C., Dubiela, F. P., Suchecki, 
D., Macedo, C. E., Tescarollo, F., Martins, U., Covolan, L., & 
Nobrega, J. N. (2012). Deep brain stimulation reverses anhedonic-
like behavior in a chronic model of depression: Role of seroto-
nin and brain derived neurotrophic factor. Biological Psychiatry, 
71(1), 30–35. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. biops ych. 2011. 08. 025
Hesp, C., Smith, R., Parr, T., Allen, M., Friston, K. J., & Ramstead, M. 
J. D. (2021). Deeply felt affect: The emergence of valence in deep 
active inference. Neural Computation, 33(2), 398–446. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1162/ neco_a_ 01341
Höflich, A., Michenthaler, P., Kasper, S., & Lanzenberger, R. (2019). 
Circuit mechanisms of reward, anhedonia, and depression. Inter-
national Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology,22(2), 105–118. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ ijnp/ pyy081
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs, 50(2), 259–285. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ nous. 12062
Imperatori, C., Allegrini, G., Lo Presti, A., Carbone, G. A., Adenzato, 
M., Farina, B., & Ardito, R. B. (2025). Severity of anhedonia 
is associated with hyper-synchronization of the salience-default 
mode network in non-clinical individuals: A resting state EEG 
connectivity study. Journal of Neural Transmission, 132(5), 731–
741. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00702- 025- 02894-3
Kieslich, K., Valton, V., & Roiser, J. P. (2022). Pleasure, reward value, 
prediction error and anhedonia. In D. A. Pizzagalli (Ed.), Anhe-
donia: Preclinical, Translational, and Clinical Integration (pp. 
281–304). Springer International Publishing. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ 7854_ 2021_ 295
Kiverstein, J., Rietveld, E., Slagter, H. A., & Denys, D. (2019). Obses-
sive compulsive disorder: A pathology of self-confidence? Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 23(5), 369–372. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
tics. 2019. 02. 005
Kiverstein, J., Miller, M., & Rietveld, E. (2024). Desire and motiva-
tion in predictive orocessing: An ecological-enactive perspective. 
Review of Philosophy and Psychology https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s13164- 024- 00757-6
Klein, C. (2018). What do predictive coders want? Synthese, 195(6), 
2541–2557. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11229- 016- 1250-6
Krupnik, V. (2020). On a path to integration of the theory and practice 
of depression: Evolution, stress, and predictive processing. In S. 
L. Becker (Ed.), Depression and Anxiety: Prevalence, Risk Fac-
tors and Treatment (pp. 1–55). Nova Science Publishers Inc.
Krupnik, V. (2021). Depression as a failed anxiety: The continuum of 
precision-weighting dysregulation in affective disorders. Fron -
tiers in Psychology, 12, 3054. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyg. 2021. 
657738
Krupnik, V. (2024). I like therefore I can, and I can therefore I like: 
The role of self-efficacy and affect in active inference of allosta-
sis [hypothesis and theory]. Frontiers in Neural Circuits, 18, 
1283372. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fncir. 2024. 12833 72
Krupnik, V. (2025a). Decision-making balance in suicide: An active 
inference account. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 19, 1–22. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 13546 805. 2025. 25046 04
Krupnik, V. (2025b). Bayes meets Hegel: The dialectics of belief 
space and the active inference of suffering. Synthese, 205(3), 101. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11229- 025- 04944-5
Krupnik, V., & Danilova, N. (2024). To be or not to be: The active infer-
ence of suicide. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews,157, 
105531. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. neubi orev. 2023. 105531
Laposa, J. M., Collimore, K. C., Hawley, L. L., & Rector, N. A. (2015). 
Distress tolerance in OCD and anxiety disorders, and its rela-
tionship with anxiety sensitivity and intolerance of uncertainty. 
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 33, 8–14. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
janxd is. 2015. 04. 003
Lee, R. S. C., Hoppenbrouwers, S., & Franken, I. (2019). A systematic 
meta-review of impulsivity and compulsivity in addictive behav-
iors. Neuropsychology Review, 29(1), 14–26. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ s11065- 019- 09402-x
Levy, N. (2018). Obsessive–compulsive disorder as a disorder of atten-
tion. Mind & Language, 33(1), 3–16. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ mila. 
12172
Limanowski, J., & Friston, K. (2018). ‘Seeing the dark’: Grounding 
phenomenal transparency and opacity in precision estimation for 
active inference. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 643. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 3389/ fpsyg. 2018. 00643
McEwen, B. S. (2000). Allostasis and allostatic load: Implications for 
neuropsychopharmacology. Neuropsychopharmacology,22(2), 
108–124. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0893- 133X(99) 00129-3
Menon, B. (2019). Towards a new model of understanding – The triple 
network, psychopathology and the structure of the mind. Medical 
Hypotheses, 133, 109385. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. mehy. 2019. 
109385
Min, S., Mazurka, R., Pizzagalli, D. A., Whitton, A. E., Milev, R. V., 
Bagby, R. M., ... & Harkness, K. L. (2024). Stressful life events 
and reward processing in adults: Moderation by depression and 
anhedonia. Depression and Anxiety, 2024(1), 8853631. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1155/ 2024/ 88536 31
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Wisco, B. E., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2008). 
Rethinking rumination. Perspectives on Psychological Sci-
ence,3(5), 400–424. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1745- 6924. 2008. 
00088.x
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., & Friston, K. J. (2022). Active inference: The 
free energy principle in mind, brain, and behavior. MIT Press.
Pornpattananangkul, N., Leibenluft, E., Pine, D. S., & Stringaris, A. 
(2019). Association between childhood anhedonia and alterations 
in large-scale resting-state networks and task-evoked activation. 
JAMA Psychiatry, 76(6), 624–633. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1001/ jamap 
sychi atry. 2019. 0020
Raichle, M. E. (2015). The brain’s default mode network. Annual 
Review of Neuroscience, 38, 433–447. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1146/ 
annur ev- neuro- 071013- 014030
Reid, J. E., Laws, K. R., Drummond, L., Vismara, M., Grancini, B., 
Mpavaenda, D., & Fineberg, N. A. (2021). Cognitive behavioural 
therapy with exposure and response prevention in the treatment 
of obsessive-compulsive disorder: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Comprehensive 
1626 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2025) 25:1611–1626
Psychiatry, 106, 152223. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. compp sych. 
2021. 152223
Roberts, A. C., Goldstein, R. Z., Badre, D., Balleine, B. W., Critchley, 
H. D., Fotopoulou, A., Frangou, S., Friston, K. J., Maia, T. V., & 
Stein, E. A. (2021). Systems approach to intrusive experiences. 
In P. W. Kalivas & M. P. Paulus (Eds.), Intrusive thinking: From 
molecules to free will (pp. 245–284). MIT Press. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 7551/ mitpr ess/ 13875. 003. 0020
Salkovskis, P. M. (1999). Understanding and treating obsessive—com-
pulsive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37, S29–S52.
Sandved-Smith, L., Hesp, C., Mattout, J., Friston, K., Lutz, A., & Ram-
stead, M. J. D. (2021). Towards a computational phenomenology 
of mental action: Modelling meta-awareness and attentional con-
trol with deep parametric active inference. Neuroscience of Con-
sciousness, 2021(1), niab018. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ nc/ niab0 18
Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T., Dolan, R., & Friston, K. (2013). 
Exploration, novelty, surprise, and free energy minimization. 
Frontiers in Psychology,4, Article 710. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ 
fpsyg. 2013. 00710
Schwartenbeck, P., Passecker, J., Hauser, T. U., FitzGerald, T. H. B., 
Kronbichler, M., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Computational mecha-
nisms of curiosity and goal-directed exploration. eLife,8, Article 
e41703. https:// doi. org/ 10. 7554/ eLife. 41703
Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T. H. B., Mathys, C., Dolan, R., & Fris-
ton, K. (2015a). The dopaminergic midbrain encodes the expected 
certainty about desired outcomes. Cerebral Cortex, 25(10), 3434–
3445. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ cercor/ bhu159
Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T. H. B., Mathys, C., Dolan, R., Wurst, 
F., Kronbichler, M., & Friston, K. (2015b). Optimal inference 
with suboptimal models: Addiction and active Bayesian inference. 
Medical Hypotheses, 84(2), 109–117. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
mehy. 2014. 12. 007
Seifert, U. (2012). Stochastic thermodynamics, fluctuation theorems 
and molecular machines. Reports on Progress in Physics, 75(12), 
126001. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1088/ 0034- 4885/ 75/ 12/ 126001
Shannon, B. J., Raichle, M. E., Snyder, A. Z., Fair, D. A., Mills, K. 
L., Zhang, D., Bache, K., Calhoun, V. D., Nigg, J. T., Nagel, B. 
J., Stevens, A. A., & Kiehl, K. A. (2011). Premotor functional 
connectivity predicts impulsivity in juvenile offenders. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America,108(27), 11241–11245. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1073/ pnas. 
11082 41108
Shenhav, A. (2024). The affective gradient hypothesis: An affect-cen-
tered account of motivated behavior. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
28(12), 1089–1104.
Smith, R., Badcock, P., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Recent advances in 
the application of predictive coding and active inference mod-
els within clinical neuroscience. Psychiatry and Clinical Neuro-
sciences, 75(1), 3–13. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ pcn. 13138
Smith, R., Ramstead, M. J. D., & Kiefer, A. (2022). Active inference 
models do not contradict folk psychology. Synthese, 200(2), 81. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11229- 022- 03480-w
Solmi, M., Pigato, G. G., Roiter, B., Guaglianone, A., Martini, L., 
Fornaro, M., Monaco, F., Carvalho, A. F., Stubbs, B., Veronese, 
N., & Correll, C. U. (2018). Prevalence of catatonia and its mod-
erators in clinical samples: Results from a meta-analysis and meta-
regression analysis. Schizophrenia Bulletin,  44(5), 1133–1150. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ schbul/ sbx157
Solms, M. (2021). Revision of drive theory. Journal of the American 
Psychoanalytic Association, 69(6), 1033–1091. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1177/ 00030 65121 10570 41
Solms, M., & Friston, K. (2018). Solms, M., & Friston, K. (2018). How 
and why consciousness arises: Some considerations from phys-
ics and physiology. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 25(5–6), 
202–238.
Sridharan, D., Levitin, D. J., & Menon, V. (2008). A critical role for 
the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-exec-
utive and default-mode networks. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,105(34), 
12569–12574. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1073/ pnas. 08000 05105
Stephan, K. E., Manjaly, Z. M., Mathys, C. D., Weber, L. A. E., Pali-
wal, S., Gard, T., Tittgemeyer, M., Fleming, S. M., Haker, H., 
Seth, A. K., & Petzschner, F. H. (2016). Allostatic self-efficacy: 
A metacognitive theory of dyshomeostasis-induced fatigue and 
depression [hypothesis and theory]. Frontiers in human neurosci-
ence, 10(550). https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fnhum. 2016. 00550
Sterling, P. (2020). What is health? MIT Press.
Usler, E. (2025). An active inference account of stuttering behavior 
[hypothesis and theory]. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,  19, 
1498423. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fnhum. 2025. 14984 23
Varela, F. G., Maturana, H. R., & Uribe, R. (1974). Autopoiesis: The 
organization of living systems, its characterization and a model. 
Biosystems, 5(4), 187–196. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0303- 2647(74) 
90031-8
von Stumm, S., & Plomin, R. (2018). Monozygotic twin differences 
in school performance are stable and systematic. Developmental 
Science, 21(6), e12694. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ desc. 12694
Wadhams, G. H., & Armitage, J. P. (2004). Making sense of it all: 
Bacterial chemotaxis. Nature Reviews. Molecular Cell Biology,  
5(12), 1024–1037.
Wilkinson, S., Dodgson, G., & Meares, K. (2017). Predictive process-
ing and the varieties of psychological trauma [conceptual analy -
sis]. Frontiers in Psychology,  8(1840). https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ 
fpsyg. 2017. 01840
Yon, D., Heyes, C., & Press, C. (2020). Beliefs and desires in the pre-
dictive brain. Nature Communications, 11(1), 4404. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1038/ s41467- 020- 18332-9
Zhao, J., Tomasi, D., Wiers, C. E., Shokri-Kojori, E., Demiral, ŞB., 
Zhang, Y., Volkow, N. D., & Wang, G.-J. (2017). Correlation 
between traits of emotion-based impulsivity and intrinsic default-
mode network activity. Neural Plasticity, 2017(1), 9297621. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1155/ 2017/ 92976 21
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.