 1 
An active inference approach to second-person neuroscience 
Konrad Lehmann1, Dimitris Bolis2, 3, Maxwell J. D. Ramstead4, 5, 6, Karl J. Friston4, Philipp 
Kanske1,7 
1Clinical Psychology and Behavioral Neuroscience, Faculty of Psychology, Technische 
Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany 
2Independent Max Planck Research Group for Social Neuroscience, Max Planck Institute of 
Psychiatry, Munich, Germany 
3 National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Japan 
4Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London, UK 
5Nested Minds Network, London, UK 
6Spatial Web Foundation, Los Angeles, California, United States 
7Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany 
 
 
Corresponding author: 
Konrad Lehmann 
Clinical Psychology and Behavioral Neuroscience 
Faculty of Psychology 
Technische Universität Dresden 
Chemnitzer Str. 46 
01187 Dresden, Germany 
E-mail: konrad.lehmann@tu-dresden.de
 
  
 2 
Abstract 
Social neuroscience has often been criticized for approaching the investigation of the neural 
processes that enable social interaction and cognition from a passive, d etached, third-person 
perspective, with  participants acting as mere observers of others ’ behavior and making 
judgements based on their observations, without involving any real time social interaction. With 
the emergence of so -called second-person neuroscience, investigators have enriched the field 
with findings that evince the unique complexity of neural activation patterns in actual, real-time 
interaction. This line of work suggests that the kind of social cognition that occurs during social 
interaction is fundamentally different to that unfolding during social observation. However, it 
remains unclear how the neural correlates of social interaction are to be interpreted. Here, we 
leverage the active inference framework to shed light on the mechanisms at pla y during social 
interaction in second-person neuroscience studies. Specifically, we show how counterfactually 
rich mutual predictions, real-time bodily adaptation, and policy selection explain activation in 
the default mode, salience, and frontoparietal ne tworks of the brain, as well as in the basal 
ganglia. We further argue that these processes constitute the crucial neural processes that 
underwrite bona fide social interaction. By placing the experimental approach of second-person 
neuroscience on the theo retical foundation of the active inference framework, we inform the 
field of social neuroscience about the mechanisms of real-life interactions. We thereby hope to 
contribute to the theoretical foundations of empirical second-person neuroscience.   
 
 
  
 3 
Humans are endowed with an intrinsic and irresistible  drive to seek social contact and 
companionship, leading them  to engage in ( sometimes quite complex) interactions and 
relationships with their conspecifics (Tomasello et al., 2 005). Early on, we are shaped by our 
caretakers’ and teachers’ guidance and by our experiences of play and exchange with our peers, 
from which we learn how to connect and get along with each other  (Wertsch, 1979) . 
Unsurprisingly, separation from our social environment affects our wellbeing detrimentally , 
increases the risk of suffering mental and physical health issues significantly , and even raises 
rates of mortality (Cacioppo et al., 2010; Fowler et al., 2013; Hawkley & Cacioppo, 2010; Holt-
Lunstad et al., 2015). 
A large body of research aims to advance our understanding of those neural processes 
and mechanisms that enable social interaction and cognition, albeit  with varying degrees of 
genuine interaction between participants (Hari et al., 2015). The increasingly popular scientific 
approach of second-person neuroscience aims to study social cognition in a manner that 
focusses on human social interaction (Becchio et al., 2010; Di Paolo & De Jaegher, 2012; Hari 
et al., 2015; Hari & Kujala, 2009; Konvalinka & Roepstorff, 2012; Lehmann et al., 2019; 
Redcay & Schilbach, 2019; Schilbach, 2010; Schilbach et al., 2013) . Second-person 
neuroscience aims to  capture the dynamics and mechani sms at play in genuinely  interactive 
human behavior in individuals and groups. To this end, this paradigm deploys  experimental 
setups that provide participants with opportunit ies to engage in reciprocal, ideally real -time 
social interaction (see Fig. 1). This turn—to the study of the neural mechanisms of social 
interaction—may seem like an obvious  one, but it has not been undertaken until recently: in 
fact, due to various technological , but also conceptual limitations, second -person interactive 
methodology remains the exception rather than the rule in neuroscience (cf. Bolis & Schilbach, 
2020a, 2020b; Schilbach et al., 2013).  
Several studies have reported differences in behavioral and neural responses between 
socially interactive (second-person) and observational (third-person) contexts (for reviews, see 
 4 
Feng et al., 2021; Gomez -Marin & Ghazanfar, 2019; Hari et al., 2015; Lehmann et al., 2019; 
Redcay & Schilbach, 2019; Risko et al., 2012, 2016) . To make this more tangible, we discuss 
two examples here. On a behavioral level, Laidlaw and colleagues  (2011) demonstrated that 
social attention, as indexed by gaze behavior, is significantly decreased when a stranger is really 
sitting in a chair across from the participant , compared to when th at stranger is merely being 
displayed on a computer screen and is observed passively. In fact, participants showed more 
inclination to direct their gaze in the direction of an empty chair than when it was occupied by 
a person. Another exemplarily study by Redcay and colleagues (2010) examines the impact of 
interaction at a neural level , by measuring gaze-based interaction between two people , as 
compared to viewing the same visual information without the othe r participant being able to 
respond. In the interactive condition, the neural activation pattern showed a widespread increase 
in activity in the default mode network (DMN), the salience network (SN), and subcortical areas 
including the basal ganglia. 
Despite the reported, fundamental differences between live reciprocal interaction and  
third-person observation, the mechanisms driving these differences are not well understood. As 
an example, when brain activity in the mentalizing network (a term largely used synonymously 
for the default mode network; Schurz et al., 2021) is observed in second-person neuroscience 
studies, researchers oftentimes stat e that the experiment yielded mentalizing activity , even 
though the task made no explicit mentalizing demands on the participants ( e.g., Alkire et al., 
2018; Redcay & Schilbach, 2019) . T his and other similar interpretations of neural activity 
during interactive situations points to a lack of theoretical and methodological principles to help 
explain the cognitive and neural mechanisms of social cognition in social interaction. 
Consequently, the turn to second- person methods  aligns with a recent call for “greater 
theoretical attention to how the emergent properties of an int eraction would be reflected in 
neural activity” (Redcay & Schilbach, 2019) . The interactive approach  of second-person 
neuroscience also helps to address the critique mainly stemming from pragmatist, embodied, 
 5 
and enactive approaches to cognitive science, which have encouraged practitioners in the field 
to focus on the neural and cognitive mechanisms of real-time social interactions, thereby going 
beyond the mere observation of social stimuli  (Engel et al., 2013; Gallagher, 2005; Newen et 
al., 2018; Thompson, 2010; Thompson & Varela, 2001). 
The aim of this paper is to  assemble the theoretical (i.e., computational) toolboxes of 
second-person neuroscience. By doing so, we address the question of what the constituents of 
genuine social interaction are. To do this, we leverage the active inference framework (Friston 
et al., 2011), which is an increasingly popular approach to computational modelling of complex 
systems, based on a variational principle called the free-energy principle (Ramstead et al., 2018, 
2022). The active inference framework provides tools that allow us to model how embodied 
agents interpret and proactively interact with salient features of their environment (Bruineberg, 
Rietveld, et al., 2018; Friston, 2012, 2013b) ; which, in the case of huma ns, crucially includes 
other human agents (Bolis & Schilbach, 2020b; Veissière et al., 2020). Active inference models 
formalize the dynamics of the brain , claiming that it instantiates a generative model : the 
networks of the brain, on this view, produce predictions of what should be sensed next . These 
predictions are compared against sensory input and (subpersonal Bayesian) beliefs—on which  
predictions are based—are updated when error or discrepancy is detected. This results in Bayes-
optimal inference about the most likely cause of the sensory input  (Ramstead et al., 2019) . 
Crucially, the causes of sensory input can include the agents own action, which means actions 
or plans are also inferred; leading to active (planning as) inference (Attias, 2003; Botvinick & 
Toussaint, 2012; Da Costa et al., 2020) . The ideas behind second- person neuroscience and 
active inference fit together naturally : both promote the idea that cognition always involves a 
kind of proactive engagement and prediction of the environment , instead of passive 
consumption of external stimuli (Bolis & Schilbach, 2020b; Friston et al., 2016; Schilbach et 
al., 2013).  
 6 
The remainder of the paper goes as follows . First, we briefly introduce second-person 
approaches in social neuroscience and the active inference framework. Second, we examine the 
idea that a participant’s ability to act towards an interactive partner, results in a recursive and 
counterfactual decision-making (i.e., a kind of deep tree search ) about possible, situationally 
appropriate actions. We review literature that examines  how this generates patterns of  neural 
activity that one observes in second-person neuroscience studies. We then examine how these 
action possibilities recruit brain regions that are thought to be responsible for the regulation of 
the interoceptive and proprioceptive bodily milieu. In the last section, we provide an integrative 
overview of our argument and argue that  the active inference framework provides a novel 
perspective on studying second-person neuroscience. 
 
Second-person approaches in social neuroscience 
The central praxis of second-person approaches in social neuroscience is to remove the barrier 
between the participant and the social stimuli, in such a way that the participant’s role shifts  
from being a passive  observer, to becoming a n active social agent that can be  addressed by 
another participant in real time (Reddy, 2003; Risko et al., 2016; Schilbach et al., 2013) . This 
entails that information can flow from one  participant to another and back . Linguistically 
speaking, in such a social context, another person can be addressed as a “you” (second person 
perspective) rather than referring to this person   as a “she/he/they” (third person perspective) 
(Reddy & Morris, 2004) ; additionally, the subjective first person “ I” is also extended to an 
objective “me” (indicating that “ I” has become the object of attention) and a plural “ we”. 
Classic approaches employing third -person observation typically present static or dynamic 
displays of social stimuli (e.g., pictures or videos of faces, social scenes, Fig. 1a). Contrariwise, 
in a second -person context ( Fig. 1b-e), participants are embedded in a social situation with 
another person, who is aware of the participant. 
 7 
Different manifestations of the  second-person approach in social neuroscience  studies 
vary strongly in the degree to which they resemble real -life social interaction , in terms of 
reciprocity and temporal dynamics (Hari et al., 2015; Redcay & Schilba ch, 2019; Shamay -
Tsoory & Mendelsohn, 2019). One line of research has studied audience effects, investigating 
how people behave when they are an object of another person’s attention ( Fig. 1b & c ) 
(Hamilton & Lind, 2016) . This may be considered as a precursor for reciprocal social 
interaction, and can be subdivided into contexts where (1) a participant is merely observed (Fig. 
1b) (e.g., via camera; Somerville et al., 2013)  and (2) actions of a participant ar e observed – 
typically the results of those actions are visible and mediated via a virtual space (Fig. 1c) (e.g., 
the performance in an estimation task; Müller-Pinzler et al., 2015) . Reciprocal social 
interactions (Fig. 1d & e) can vary in the degree to which information flow is dynamic. On one 
end, we have rather slowly paced tasks, in which participants act sequentially; e.g., the task may 
involve playing a turn-based, dyadic game (e.g., Prisoner’s Dilemma; Engemann et al., 2012; 
Krach et al., 2009) or exchanging chat messages (e.g., Warnell et al., 2017), both of which are 
mediated by a virtual interactional space  (Fig. 1d). On the other end, reciprocal and dynamic 
social interaction allows for simultaneous behavior and is typically realized via a live video-
feed (Fig. 1e) (e.g., Redcay et al., 2010). 
 8 
 
Figure 1.  Exemplary setups for social neuroscience studies. (a) classic approach employing third -person 
observation of a social stimulus. (b) -(e) second-person context where another person is aware of the participant. 
(b)-(c) audience effect setups  in which a participant becomes the object of another person’s attention. (b) mere 
observation of the participant. (c) observation of the participant’s actions, usually visible on a computer screen. 
(d)-(e) setups for reciprocal social interaction. (d) Slowly paced sequential interactions, usually mediated by a 
virtual interactional space. (e) reciprocal and dynamic social interaction. 
 
Active inference 
In the past decades, there has been a shift away from conceptions of the brain as a passive organ 
that merely await s and reactively processes  bottom-up sensory input , to conceptions that 
emphasize the fact that cognition and perception find themselves in a mutual embrace with 
action. These are enactive, ecological, pragmatist, and embodied approaches to the study of the 
brain (Bolis & Schilbach, 2020b; Bruineberg, Kiverstein, et al., 2018; Engel et al., 2015; 
Ramstead et al., 2019; Thompson, 2010). One version of this view casts the brain as a phantastic 
organ that actively generates predictions of its environment (Friston, 2013a). In this model, the 

 9 
dynamics of the brain  are said  to embody or instantiate  a generative model that generates 
predictions that are compared against sensory input, resulting in a Bayes optimal  inference 
about the most likely cause of the sensory input (Ramstead et al., 2019). According to the active 
inference framework, these predictions are compared to sensory input continuously throughout 
the hierarchical networks of the brain (Friston, 2005, 2008; Shipp et al., 2013) . To model the 
extrapersonal and internal (i.e., bodily) world in an optimal way, the brain is thought to 
minimize prediction error throughout the hierarchical generative model. 
            Heuristically, on this view, when predictions and sensory data clash, conflict is resolved 
in one of two ways: either by updating one’s beliefs in a Bayes-optimal manner (perception and 
learning; i.e., changing the internal model to make it more predictive of current sensory input), 
or changing the world to make future data consistent with one’s expectations  (i.e., action)  
(Friston et al., 2010, 2015) . On this vi ew, bodily m ovements (and autonomic responses) are 
mediated by lower level reflexes that fulfil higher level predictions, forecasting how the 
proprioceptive (and interoceptive) sensorium ought to feel (Adams et al., 2013; Seth & Friston, 
2016). This enactive kind of “predictive processing” (Clark, 2015) is thought to take place 
unconsciously at all levels of brain activity, regulating the entire body in its interaction with the 
environment, and allowing it to remain within viable states, those congruent with its survival 
and thriving (Ainley et al., 2016; Allen et al., 2019; Barrett, 2017; Barrett & Simmons, 2015; 
Hohwy & Michael, 2017).  
In this view, the brain is perpetually engaged in a recurrent message passing between 
lower and higher levels of the cortical hierarchy. Here, lower levels operate at smaller spatial 
and shorter temporal scales (e.g., the velocity of a person’s movements , or their fin er facial 
features during speech ), whereas higher levels or deeper l ayers process increasingly abstract 
information at greater spatiotemporal scales (e.g., a person’s temperament and relatively more 
stable personality traits , or the general layout of their  facial morphology ). Accordingly, 
predictions at a higher level of the hierarchy suppress  or resolve prediction errors in lower 
 10 
levels, as one can observe in the phenomenon of repetition suppression (Murray et al., 2002; 
Summerfield et al., 2008) . The balancing act between  sensory and prior prediction errors is 
assumed to be  mediated by neuromodulatory mechanisms of synaptic gain that  encode their 
reliability or precision (H. Feldman & Friston, 2010; Moran et al., 2013; Parr & Friston, 2017). 
This is known as precision weighting . According to one version of this theory, called 
hierarchical predictive coding, deeper layers of the cortical hierarchy issue predictions —
thought to originat e from deep pyramidal cells —about  expectations at a lower level of the 
hierarchy. The resulting prediction errors are , in turn, propagated—by superficial pyrami dal 
cells—to higher levels, updating expectations and ensuing predictions in order to optimize the 
representation of the hidden states of the world and body (Bastos et al., 2012; Friston & Kiebel, 
2009; Shipp, 2016). 
  
Active inference and social action 
The most important way of reducing prediction error is to act upon the environment to change 
the states we want to infer. This is captured very nicely in idiomatic expressions  such as the 
German “Probieren geht über Studieren ” (literally: trying is above studying) or its English 
equivalent “the proof of the pudding is in the eating .” To optimally reduce uncertainty via 
action, one has to select the best one among a variety of possible actions. The obvious problem 
is figuring out which action will reduce an agent’s uncertainty the most.  
 
The role of the default mode network in the exploration of opportunities for action 
In active inference, this problem is often solved via counterfactual processing (Corcoran 
et al., 2020; Friston, 2018; Palmer et al., 2015) , that is, imagining what the next sensory input 
would be, if I were to execute a particular action. Giv en some prior  beliefs about the typical 
sensory consequences of actions, the selection among a variety of actions becomes tractable, as 
an agent must only infer how best to get to preferred and informative sensory data, and to pursue 
 11 
the policy that leads to those preferred sensory states. Going a step further, action selection can 
become “sophisticated”, in the sense that one does not only select actions based on beliefs of 
the sensory consequences , but also based on the consequences of an action for future beliefs 
(Friston et al., 2021; Hesp, Tschantz, et al., 2020) . The sophistication lies in having beliefs 
about beliefs (Costa-Gomes et al., 2001). A simple example would be the following. You want 
to bake a cake for a celebration at work, but you are unsure whether you have eggs in the fridge. 
Checking whether there are eggs in the fridge (action 1) might impact your subsequent beliefs, 
i.e., whether you want to bake a lemon poppy loaf (sensory consequences of action 2a) in case 
you have eggs or a cheesecake (sensory consequences of action 2b) in case you don’t have eggs.  
Potential action trajectories are recursively explored, and their sensory  consequences 
are counterfactually imagined. This process can span over timescales of various durations  and 
underwrites episodic prospection, rumination, catastrophizing, and mind wandering (Atance & 
O’Neill, 2001; Christoff et al., 2016; Seli et al., 2016; Suddendorf & Corballis, 2007). As can 
be seen in Figure 2a , the further the deep decision tree goes into the future , the higher the 
number of possible outcomes. At a neural level, these processes are  thought to involve the 
default mode network (Christoff et al., 2009; Mittner et al., 2016; Spreng et al., 2009). 
So far, we have focused on action selection in monadic contexts (e.g., deciding which 
kind of cake to bake), where pursuing an action does not affect another person. However, in the 
dyadic context of  social interaction , the recursive structure of action selection additionally 
becomes recursively nested (Fig. 2b). In this setting , an action that I carry out becomes the 
sensory observation of my interacti on partner, who knows that I know that he can see the 
consequences of my action (and vice versa). For example, in such a situation I might be hesitant 
to look at my watch (out of curiosity about how long a colleague and I have chatted) as I expect 
that my looking at my watch will lead to my colleague thinking that I intended to signal that I 
don’t have time to chat. Social information processing in an interactive context is accompanied 
by high ambiguity and uncertainty (FeldmanHall & Shenhav, 2019; Wheatley et al., 2019) . 
 12 
Selecting appropriate actions becomes more complex , as there are more paths to compute 
(FeldmanHall & Nassar, 2021; FeldmanHall & Shenhav, 2019)  (Fig. 2b); such extended 
processes gain depth and meaning (Lehmann & Kanske, in press).  
 Thus, in social situations, we both create beliefs about our own beliefs and beliefs about 
others’ beliefs. The cognition of creating beliefs about other s’ beliefs is termed “mentalizing” 
or “theory of mind”1 (Premack & Woodruff, 1978)  and is commonly induced in experiments 
on social cognition 2 (for an overview, see Schurz et al., 2021) . An exemplary and prominent 
task is to have participants view a cartoon and to let them infer what must be the beliefs of the 
displayed characters (Wimmer & Perner, 1983). It goes without saying that the recursive depth 
of belief inference is limited to the first, non-interactive level of participants’ beliefs about the 
beliefs of a cartoon character: the cartoon character obviously cannot reciprocate. In contrast, 
second-person experimental contexts capture the idiosyncrasy of social interaction, namely, 
that the belief of the participant is inferred by another, in the sense that  “I think that you think 
that… ” (Ramstead et al., 2016). Here, belief s and inferences evolve from a kind of one -way 
street, where I monadically predict the mental states of another , to reciprocal predictions 
between interaction partners. In comparison, looking at my watch while trying to infer beliefs 
of cartoon characters would not affect the interpersonal context. Thus, selecting an action in a 
second-person context inevitably crea tes mutual historicity . At this level of complexity, we 
effectively “think through the minds of others,” filtering our own perceptions through what we 
believe are the beliefs of others (Ramstead et al., 2016; Veissière et al., 2020). 
 We argue that the recursive exploration of a deep tree structure in the service of action 
selection is a primary form of information processing in social interaction that is modified by 
the nestedness of reciprocal response. This kind of deep tree search has recently been proposed 
                                                 
1 Addressing critique on the concept of theory of mind, a recent theory has referred to this cognitive process as 
“thinking through other minds” (TTOM) (Veissière et al., 2020). 
2 Sometimes mentalizing or theory of mind is broken down into implicit (spontaneous and unconscious) and 
explicit (controlled and reflective) processes (Evans, 2008). Our considerations apply to both modes; however, 
we note that during real-time social interaction implicit forms of mentalizing are predominant.  
 13 
as a parsimonious explanation for the process es underlying default mode network activity 
(Dohmatob et al., 2020). Cognitive phenomena such as episodic pr ospection, mindwandering, 
language processing, and mentalizing all draw on this primary form of information processing 
and, thus, elicit default mode network activity (Atance & O’Neill, 2001; Bzdok et al., 2012; 
Christoff et al., 2016; Hauser et al., 2002; Price, 2012; Schurz et al., 2014, 2021; Seli et al., 
2016; Suddendorf & Corballis, 2007). Increased default mode network activation during actual, 
second-person interaction (compared to observing others without interacting) can be attributed 
to an increased depth in deep tree search. Importantly, we suggest that the recursive exploration 
of a deep tree structure during social interaction is likely—to a large degree—happening  in an 
automatic and implicit mode , which might make social action exploration seem effortless . 
Contextual or other prior information (e.g., mutual historicity) may provide prior expectations 
that could additionally narrow down hypothetical alternatives. 
Some studies explicitly model recursive interpersonal processes by using dyadic games 
in a virtual interactive space (Fig. 1d)  (Devaine et al., 2014; Hampton et al., 2008; Hill et al., 
2017). Here, the default mode network was shown to be pivotally involved when accounting 
for how our own actions influence the subsequent actions of an opponent  (Hampton et al., 
2008). Disrupting the right temporoparietal junction (TPJ) as part of the default mode network 
(DMN) led to diminished connectivity within the DMN and to deficiencies in estimating how 
one’s own actions affected the opponent’s behavior  (Hill et al., 2017) . Interestingly, the 
engagement of the DMN—within social interaction —varies with the degree to which an 
opponent is perceived as “ having a mind”  (Krach et al., 2008; Takahashi et al., 2015) . 
Opponents to which one ascribes an increased ability to infer mental states (and, thus, to have 
more recursively nested thoughts) elicit a stronger activation within the DMN. 
 
The role of the basal ganglia in action selection 
 14 
Having explored possible action opportunities, raises  a non -trivial question, namely: 
which of those actions should I select ? In the active inference framework, action is usually 
considered as a set of beliefs about which action one is undertaking – also referred to as a policy; 
it models action selection as a kind of self -fulfilling prophecy . As outlined above, social 
information processing is inherently uncertain and ambiguous. Now, a deep tree exploration of 
possible action alternatives and their counterfactually imagined action outcomes might point to 
an action that best resolves ambiguity and resolve uncertainty about the state of affairs.  
Such a disambiguating policy goes along with a high precision, that is, high confidence 
in one’s own beliefs about action outcomes (Corcoran et al., 2020). This precision signaling is 
believed to be carried out via dopaminergic transmission in the basal ganglia (FitzGerald et al., 
2015; Friston et al., 2014; Parr & Friston, 2017, 2018; Schwartenbeck et al., 2015). Indeed, this 
view is substantiated by phylogenetic considerations , according to which a problem as 
fundamental such as action selection must have evolved as early as the appearance of basal 
ganglia (Cisek & Kalaska, 2010) . Dopaminergic signaling may have originally served t o 
arbitrate between local exploitation and long-range exploration (Cisek, 2019; Hills et al., 2015). 
Interestingly, the precision of beliefs about policies determine s how vigorously an action is 
conducted (Carland et al., 2019; Stephan et al., 2016). 
We argue that precision signaling to select actions that have been recursively explored 
in a deep tree search is a core computation that plays a crucial role in a second-person context. 
This computation is carried out or signaled in the basal ganglia , which has been consistently 
shown to activate in a second- person neuroscience studies (for reviews see, Feng et al., 2021; 
Redcay & Schilbach, 2019) . Evidence supports this idea: e.g., in a recent study that involved 
recursive thinking in interpersonal strategic interactions —where participants had to engage in  
higher order belief inferences about another person—both the basal ganglia and the default 
mode network showed heightened activity (Zhen & Yu, 2021). Importantly, we do not consider 
the process of action selection and precision signaling as a purely rational (i.e., context free) 
 15 
process. Instead, it is tightly linked and informed by the affective states of an interacting agent 
that mediate a variety of contextual —an d possibly hedonic —priors  (for a review and formal  
account, see Hesp, Smith, et al., 2020). 
Besides selecting which action is about to bring the most favorable sensory input , it is 
crucial to dec ide when an action ought to be  performed. Due to its ever -evolving nature , 
interactional behavior carries and conveys crucial information based on the timing of an action. 
This makes both the demand on selecting an action and the corresponding counterfactual belief 
updates highly dynamic  (Schirmer, Meck, et al., 2016) . For example, naturally occurring, 
automatic smiles follow a stereotypical temporal pattern  (Schmidt et al., 2003) . Alterations 
thereof may make a smile seem less spontaneous and more forced.  During interpersonal 
conversations, longer than normal gaps  in turn -taking signal a semiotic meaning, such as a 
negative response or trouble in understanding an intended message (Kendrick, 2015; Levinson 
& Torreira, 2015) . Similarly, disgust expressions of longer duration convey a more negative 
valence (Schirmer, Ng, et al., 2016). You might also think of a situation in which you are in a 
conversation with two friends , and you want to tell a story (as it matches the current topic of 
the conversation), but the topic quickl y evolves in another direction (as one of those friends 
tells of something related with a different twist). As a result of the changing context, the story 
that you wanted to tell now seems mis placed. The deep tree in Figure 2 b can be seen as a 
snapshot of a particular time that would contain different actions and, thus, look different in the 
future. Social situations are inherently dynamic and volatile, which adds a layer of uncertainty 
and ambiguity. P recision signaling to select actions that have been recursively explored in a 
deep tree search, thus, also facilitates real-time second-person interactions in the dimension of 
time.  
In this section, we argued that selecting actions requires recursive exploration (and their 
counterfactual imagined sensory depi ction) of action opportunities in the DMN. Importantly, 
due to the nested structure of the recursive exploration in interactive, second-person contexts, 
 16 
the computational demand on action exploration is of higher complexity, which is reflected in 
increased DMN activation. Moreover, we argued that precision weighting to select actions that 
have been recursively explored in a deep tree search goes along with basal ganglia activity. This 
activity is increased in second -person contexts as there are higher demands on selecting an 
action due to higher nested recursion and implicit neuronal dynamics. 
 
 
 
 

 17 
 
Figure 2. Deep tree exploration of possible policies. The deep tree represents allowable actions at various time 
points and their expected sensory outcome. Observations or sensory input is denoted as o and depicted as blue 
circles; actions are denoted as u and depicted as red circles. (a) Deep tree exploration of policies by an agent 
interacting with a static environment. (b) Deep tree exploration of policies by an agent interacting with another 
living system. The recursive nature of policy search additionally becomes nested. Own actions constitute 
observations by another agent (second column) and knowledge about this dependency inf orms policy selection 
on a higher level (third column). For illustrative reasons, we decided to limit the level of sophistication. By 
coupling agents, policy search and selection becomes more complex due to an increased depth.  
 
Active inference and internal action 
In the previous section, we treated deep tree exploration of possible action outcomes —and 
choosing among them—and argued this to be the primary computations behind DMN and basal 
ganglia activity reported in second -person neuroscience studie s. In this section, we  consider 
commonly reported activity in the salience network on the one hand, encompassing the anterior 
cingulate cortex (ACC) and the anterior insula (AI), and frontoparietal network activity on the 

 18 
other hand (for reviews see, Feng et al., 2021; Redcay & Schilbach, 2019). In the following we 
describe the underlying processes under active inference. We argue that these computations are 
closely related to internal bodily processes that have been argued to be neglected in traditional 
spectator approaches (Engel et al., 2013; Fotopoulou & Tsakiris, 2017; Thompson & Varela, 
2001). We organize this section based on the respective brain networks, starting with the 
salience network. 
 
The role of the salience network 
The role of the anterior cingulate cortex (computation of transition uncertainties) 
 In the active inference framework, the relation between actions or beliefs about actions 
(red dots in Fig. 2) and subsequent beliefs about counterfactual observations (blue dots in Fig. 
2) is furnished with uncertainty about state transitions (i.e., ‘How likely is it that a certain state 
changes from state 1 to state 2 following my action?’). The  ACC has  consistently been 
associated with the evaluation of transition probabilities linking actions to states . A nd with 
monitoring whether the observed state transitions matched the preceding action (Akam et al., 
2021; Behrens et al., 2007; Dayan & Yu, 2006; Parr & Friston, 2017, 2018; Payzan-LeNestour 
et al., 2013; Sales et al., 2019) . It is thought that this is realised  via noradrenergic projections 
from the locus coeruleus. Accordingly, administering noradrenergic antagonists has been found 
to impair the processing of transition uncertainty (Marshall et al., 2016). Importantly, transition 
uncertainty (or volatility) can be represented hierarchically . B eyond merely evaluating 
volatility at some time, it is also important to know how this kind of uncertainty fluctuates over 
time and across contexts (Parr & Friston, 2017). 
We argue that in second-person neuroscience studies, the observed increase in neuronal 
activity in the ACC can be explained by appealing to the higher computational demands on the 
evaluation of transition probabilities between actions and states. H igher demand might entail 
more action alternatives to evaluate, which has at least two sources (compared to observational 
 19 
studies): first, the nested recursive structure of deep tree exploration of action; second, the 
dynamic ever-evolving fluctuation in the action opportunities. 
The role of the anterior insula (adaptation of the interoceptive bodily milieu) 
The information that is processed about possible courses of action in the external world 
certainly influences , and is influenced by , internal bodily cycles (e.g., respiratory, visceral, 
gastrointestinal) (Khalsa et al., 2018; Petzschner et al., 2017) . The relation between internal 
cycles and exteroceptive information —which might also be construed as our first -person 
subjective frame (Park & Tallon -Baudry, 2014) —is constantly fluctuating, demanding 
refinement in the budgeting of our bodily resources. For example, when you want to initiate a 
movement (e.g., getting up from a chair) , your bodily systems must  become attuned to the 
demands accompanying the movement (e.g., raising blood pressure to ensure a stable blood 
circulation in an upright position). This alteration of s et points to suit the demands of the 
situation is known as allostasis (Corcoran & Hohwy, 2019; Schulkin & Sterling, 2019; Sterling, 
2012). It is proposed that interoceptive predictions—originating in granular cells  of the anterior 
insula (AI) – function as a set point modulator (Gu et al., 2013) that determines in which range 
a bodily system should operate. Interestingly, both the AI and the ACC are furnished with large 
spindle shaped von Economo neurons (VEN) that are particularly suitable to convey neural 
information over longer distances (i.e. to the body; Allman et al., 2005, 2011; Hodge et al., 
2020). 
The attunement of interoceptive systems to the demands of interacting with the world is 
evident in multiple internal cycles, such as the respiratory tract (Park et al., 2020), the digestive 
system (Levinthal & Strick, 2020), or the visceral system (Allen et al., 2019). Importantly, this 
attunement is bidirectional, suggesting a kind of  circular causality.  For ex ample, voluntary 
movements are more likely conducted during exhalation (Park et al., 2020), while preparing for 
a movement is accompanied by cardiac slowing (J. I. Lacey & Lacey, 1970). On the other hand, 
exteroceptive information that requires higher levels of attention leads to a deceleration of the 
 20 
heart rate, probably downregulating internal noise in order to increase precision of the external 
information (B. C. Lacey & Lacey, 1978; Sokolov, 1963).  
During social interaction, the attunement of internal bodily systems to the environmental 
demands is cru cially caused by demands of the exchange between two agents. For example, 
during a conversation between you and your interlocutor , you might adjust your body (by 
inhaling) in anticipation of a state transition, which is you taking your turn to say something 
(Rochet-Capellan & Fuchs, 2014). Although it is possible to attune to another person via third-
party observation (e.g., when watching somebody who is telling a sad autobiographical story; 
Kanske et al., 2015, 2016) , real interpersonal (second- person) situations generate a stronger 
drive to do so, making the relationship between two social agents more vivid. Accordingly, 
during social interaction, multiple internal systems attune to internal systems of the interactive 
partner, resulting in synchrony (Hoehl et al., 2020; Koole & Tschache r, 2016; Kupper et al., 
2015; Mayo, 2020; Tschacher et al., 2017) . For example, interacting dyads show more stable 
and shared heart rate dynamics than non-interacting dyads (Fusaroli et al., 2016). 
Taken together, we argue that the ACC and AI (i.e., salience network) act in concert to 
(1) compute transition probabilites and track the matching between actions and states , and (2) 
attune internal systems to environmental demands as a result of fluctuating states. 
 
The role of the frontoparietal network in the adaptation of the proprioceptive bodily 
milieu 
Beside interoception, important bodily functions with  regard to second- person 
interaction are captured in the proprioceptive domain, such as the sensorimotor communication 
(Pezzulo et al., 2019) . Sensorimotor communication is the aspect  of comminication that is  
visible to the interactive partner and involves parts of the body (muscular, tendon, and articular) 
that are oriented “toward the world” (Fuchs, 2020). As we have discussed, in active inference, 
instead of conceiving of the motor cortex as an area that issues motor commands, it is rather 
 21 
involved in issuing predictions  (Adams et al., 2013; Hipólito et al., 2021) . Specifically, 
somatomotor predictions about sensory consequences of an action are sen t to the spinal cord, 
where they are compared with ascending  (primary) proprioceptive afferents. The comparison 
of both ascending and descending information results in a prediction error that can be resolved 
by action—i.e., classical motor reflexes in the spirit of the equilibrium point hypothesis   (A. G. 
Feldman, 2009)—fulfilling the issued prediction of the motor cortex. Similar to ACC and AI, 
the motor cortex harbors large spindle shaped neurons (i.e., Betz cells; Rivara et al., 2003) that 
are also suit able to convey information over long range s. Additionally, the somatosensory 
cortex receives information about the sensory consequences of an action, which enables more 
refined predictions for future actions. Together, the somatomotor and somatosensory cor tices 
are constituents of the frontoparietal network
3.  
The recursively nested and dynamically changing nature of social interaction influences 
the prediction of our bodily actions toward the world, that is, toward the interactive partner. As 
the interacti ve partner has a life on their own, which in turn has an influence on us, our 
sensorimotor predictions need to account for a higher level of contextual variability. 
Accordingly, higher levels of dynamicity in motor production go along with an increase of 
activity in the frontoparietal network (Neely et al., 2013). Such results can also be observed in 
sensorimotor interaction within a second-person neuroscience approach (e.g., Chauvigné et al., 
2018; Kokal et al., 2009). For example, Kokal and colleagues (2009) engaged participants in a 
joint action task, in which the participant and another person were required to arrange two sticks 
in a previously indicated assembly. Here, the frontoparietal network showed superadditive 
activation for joint actions as compared to its constituents (observing action and executing 
action alone), suggesting a higher complextiy due to bidirect ionality. Similarly, performing 
                                                 
3 The frontoparietal network (or parts of this network) is often referred to as the mirror neuron system (Rizzolatti & 
Craighero, 2004). Here, we avoid the term as mirroring implies a reactive process, which dissents the notion of prediction or 
expectation inherent to the active inference framework.  
 22 
improvised joint hand movements with another person also activated the frontoparietal network 
(Chauvigné et al., 2018). 
In this section, we have argued that the nested recursive structure of deep tree 
exploration of action and the dynamic,  ever-evolving fluctuation in the action opportunities 
within second-person contexts imposes two things.  First, it leads to  a higher computational 
demand on the evalutation and monitoring of transition probabilites, which elicits higher ACC 
activity. Second, it results in more environmental variability and fluctuating states, which calls 
for an increased attunement of internal (via the AI) and proprioceptive (via the FPN) systems. 
 
Integrating the mechanisms of second-person neuroscience 
In the previous sections , we attempted  to delineate delimited processes underlying social 
interaction within a second-person context. We argued that moving from the detached, spectator 
position (third person) to an interactive, second-person perspective introduces nested, recursive 
exploration of action opportunities that mainly draws on counterfactual simulation in the default 
mode network. Furthermore, the implicit multitude of action opportunities leads to a higher 
demand on selecting a course of action , which engages the basal ganglia. As a result, there 
emerges a higher demand on  Bayesian belief updating in the ACC , which leads to a more 
flexible attunement of interoceptive bodily systems , conveyed via the AI. Similarly, the 
frontoparietal network is engaged in attuning the proprioceptive bodily system , in order to act 
towards the interactive partner. 
However, importantly, these processes should by no means be considered as unfolding 
in an isolated manner. Instead, it is their complex interplay that allows us to master the hurdles 
of interaction and lets us (more or less) smoothly navigate the social environment. A few studies 
investigated the interplay of these processes and delivered valuable insights about their mutual 
influence. Hesp, Tschantz, et al. (2020) examined how the policy selection of an artificial agent 
is influenced by recursively sampled action outcomes . Interestingly, the precision or the 
 23 
confidence about own actions is reduced every time a negative outcome is imagined. The higher 
the engagement in counterfactual iterations, the more often negative outcomes are encountered 
mentally, leading to a  substantive reduction in confidence ; that is, overthinking , rumination, 
and catastrophizing. Tragically, perhaps, this reduction of confidence affects future actions : 
imagined outcomes become negatively biased, resulting in a vicious circle, effectively leading 
to more caution in action selection. 
 Interestingly, altered confidence about own action-models might also affect the degree 
to which an environment is perceived as being volatile. For example, in a simple reversal 
learning task where contingencies between stimuli and subsequent outcomes were manipulated 
to be more or less volatile, Weiss et al. (2019)  let participants either interact with , or merely 
observe, the presented evidence. Having the opportunity to act reliably lead to impressions that 
the environment was stable and less volatile. The relation between volatility and action selection 
can also be looked at from the other direction. For example , volatility expectations have been 
argued to affect policy selection, such that higher environmental volatility leads to adopting 
simpler policies (i.e., habits) that bring along a higher precision on action outcomes in a more 
uncertain world (FitzGerald et al., 2014; Fradkin et al., 2020) . Hesp et al.  (2020) have along 
these lines proposed that action selection becomes dominated by prior policy preferences (i.e., 
habits) when confidence in one’s action model becomes too low. 
 The above mentioned interlocking mechanisms play a role in real social interaction; e.g., 
counterfactually overthinking potential interpersonal actions, and their consequences, might 
diminish one’s confidence in  interpersonal actions , leading to a more passive or apathic 
behavior (Hezemans et al., 2020). This, in turn, would lead to experiencing the social situation 
as more volatile, which promotes the propensity to enact behaviors whose action outcomes are 
predictable; this may contribute to the emergence of depressive symptomology (Badcock et al., 
2017). Predictable action outcomes in social situations can be attained by making oneself more 
 24 
predictable to the interactive partner and, thereby , diminish ing mutual prediction error (i.e., 
prediction error received from the interactive partner; Theriault et al., 2020).  
At a neural level, we can note that truly interactive interpersonal situations (Fig. 1d -e) 
foster the recruitment of all of the brain networks discussed  above (Cavallo et al., 2015; 
Chauvigné et al., 2018;  Rauchbauer et al., 2019; Redcay et al., 2010; Xie et al., 2020) . This 
might give credence to the notion of a complex interplay between the mechanisms relevant to 
social interaction (nested recursion in mutual and reciprocal mental state inferences, inter -and 
intrapersonal bodily attunement, and policy selection). Importantly, in most cases , the brain 
activity that enables social interaction is contrasted with activity derived from either doing a 
task alone or from observing another without interacting. This means that the brain shows more 
widespread activation when being involved in a social interaction. This finding nicely fits 
simulation-based research showing that minimal agents exhibited a higher degree of neural 
complexity when interacting with oth er agents as compared to interacting with “ghosts” 
displaying behavior  that was not influenced by their environment (Candadai et al., 2019; 
Reséndiz-Benhumea et al., 2020, 2021) . Interestingly, the level of neural complexity that one 
observes while interacting with other agents exceeded levels that would be possible to be 
generated by an isolated agent, suggesting that single agents become parts of a dynamically 
extended system (Froese et al., 2013). Although speculative, the increased brain activity during 
social interaction might indicate such a transition from an isolated brain towards a brain being 
part of whole brain-body-environment-body-brain system.  
 
Concluding remarks and future directions 
In this article, we have considered the neural mechanisms of second -person social interaction 
through the lens of active inference. The mechanisms that we have discussed could be framed 
as computational operationalizations of the core intra - and inter -personal phenomena that 
intertwine and enable actual social interactions. We outlined the neural mechanisms that play a 
 25 
role when we move beyond observing and are actually engaged in real -time (second-person) 
social interaction. We argued that being embedded in an interpersonal context introduces the  
interesting phenomenon of nested recursive exploration of action opportunities  that mainly 
draws on counterfactual simulation in the default mode network. Furthermore, the multitude of 
action opportunities that is ever-evolving and fluctuating leads to a higher demand on selecting 
a course of action which is processed in the basal ganglia. As a result, there emerges a higher 
demand on computing transition uncertainties in the ACC which leads to a more flexible 
attunement of interoceptive bodily systems whi ch is conveyed via the AI. Similarly, the 
frontoparietal network is engaged in attuning the proprioceptive bodily system in order to act 
towards the interactive partner. 
Importantly, these processes are involved when going beyond the mere observation of 
social stimuli toward an actual engagement in real- time reciprocal interaction. As such the 
mentioned processes represent important constituents of genuine social interaction. Finally, we 
foregrounded studies that elaborate on possible interaction patterns between the implicit 
mechanisms. 
In order to apply  insights gained from laboratory  experiments to full -blown social 
interaction, research needs to adapt  a second-person neuroscience methodology . Phenomena 
that are unique to true social interaction—such as  the ones operationalized via nested recursion 
in mental state inferences, transition uncertainty, and high demand on action/policy selection—
need to be not only preserved, but explicitly targeted in experimental paradigms. A t least 
arguably, considering these interlocked mechanisms all at once, in nonrestricted and free social 
interaction, might be computationally less tractable. However, the complexity of certain 
parameters could be diminished. For example, paradigms could limit and manipulate action 
possibilities of interacting agents and  thereby, also get a grasp on the level of interpersonal 
volatility. Importantly, neuroimaging data should be complemented by various bodily measures 
such as heart rate, skin conductance response, respiratory rhythm, pupi l dilation to name but a 
 26 
few, but also psychological states (cf. two-person and collective psychophysiology; Bolis et al., 
in press; Bolis & Schilbach, 2018) . Processing these physiological measures from two 
interacting persons might be carried out using m ethods from dynamical systems theory. Here, 
for instance, altering states of synchrony and asynchrony might be cast as state transitions, 
targeting the volatility parameter. Interdisciplinary efforts of psychologists, neuroscientists, and 
engineers or comp uter scientists  could fabricate testable behavioral as well as 
neurophysiological hypothes es derived from generative computational models, harnessing 
advancements from the active inference framework.  A concrete implementation could be 
pursued in the form of a  meta-Bayesian framework, situated in dynamical systems theory ( cf. 
Bolis & Schilbach, 2017; Brandi et al., 2019) . Such a multiscale framework w ill aim to track 
cognition and action via distinct active inference models, which will be targeting each 
individual in a given interaction , but  still potentially fused on a collective (meta -Bayesian 
modeling) level of behavior. Moving the focus from the observation of individual  passive 
observers toward a multiscale tracking of dyads and groups of interactors could even allow to 
assess “whether and  how interpersonal coordination in real -time social interactions might 
actually serve as a prior and modulate the need for inferences about hidden causes of social 
behavior” (Bolis et al., 2017). Such an interpersonal active inference approach might provide a 
formal understanding of not only individual-specific, but also dyadic and group-level dynamics. 
These completely new avenues  of research have  the great potential to leverage our 
understanding of social interaction at various layers – from the individual to the collective. 
  
 27 
References 
Adams, R., Shipp, S., & Friston, K. J. (2013). Predictions not commands: Active inference in 
the motor system. Brain Structure & Function, 218(3), 611–643. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-012-0475-5 
Ainley, V., Apps, M. A. J., Fotopoulou, A., & Tsakiris, M. (2016). ‘Bodily precision’: A 
predictive coding account of individual differences in interoceptive accuracy. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 371(1708), 
20160003. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0003 
Akam, T., Rodrigues-Vaz, I., Marcelo, I., Zhang, X., Pereira, M., Oliveira, R. F., Dayan, P., & 
Costa, R. M. (2021). The anterior cingulate cortex predicts future states to mediate 
model-based action selection. Neuron, 109(1), 149-163.e7. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.10.013 
Alkire, D., Levitas, D., Warnell, K. R., & Redcay, E. (2018). Social interaction recruits 
mentalizing and reward systems in middle childhood. Human Brain Mapping, 39(10), 
3928–3942. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.24221 
Allen, M., Levy, A., Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2019). In the body’s eye: The computational 
anatomy of interoceptive inference. BioRxiv, 603928. https://doi.org/10.1101/603928 
Allman, J. M., Tetreault, N. A., Hakeem, A. Y., Manaye, K. F., Semendeferi, K., Erwin, J. 
M., Park, S., Goubert, V., & Hof, P. R. (2011). The von Economo neurons in fronto-
insular and anterior cingulate cortex. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 
1225, 59–71. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06011.x 
Allman, J. M., Watson, K. K., Tetreault, N. A., & Hakeem, A. Y. (2005). Intuition and 
autism: A possible role for Von Economo neurons. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(8), 
367–373. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2005.06.008 
Atance, C. M., & O’Neill, D. K. (2001). Episodic future thinking. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 5(12), 533–539. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01804-0 
 28 
Attias, H. (2003). Planning by Probabilistic Inference. International Workshop on Artificial 
Intelligence and Statistics, 9–16. https://proceedings.mlr.press/r4/attias03a.html 
Badcock, P. B., Davey, C. G., Whittle, S., Allen, N. B., & Friston, K. J. (2017). The 
Depressed Brain: An Evolutionary Systems Theory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
21(3), 182–194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2017.01.005 
Barrett, L. F. (2017). How Emotions Are Made: The Secret Life of the Brain. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt. 
Barrett, L. F., & Simmons, W. K. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, 16(7), 419–429. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3950 
Bastos, A. M., Usrey, W. M., Adams, R. A., Mangun, G. R., Fries, P., & Friston, K. J. (2012). 
Canonical microcircuits for predictive coding. Neuron, 76(4), 695–711. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.038 
Becchio, C., Sartori, L., & Castiello, U. (2010). Toward you: The social side of actions. 
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19(3), 183–188. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721410370131 
Behrens, T. E. J., Woolrich, M. W., Walton, M. E., & Rushworth, M. F. S. (2007). Learning 
the value of information in an uncertain world. Nature Neuroscience, 10(9), 1214–
1221. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1954 
Bolis, D., Balsters, J., Wenderoth, N., Becchio, C., & Schilbach, L. (2017). Beyond autism: 
Introducing the dialectical misattunement hypothesis and a bayesian account of 
intersubjectivity. Psychopathology, 50(6), 355–372. 
https://doi.org/10.1159/000484353 
Bolis, D., Dumas, G., & Schilbach, L. (in press). Interpersonal attunement in social 
interactions: From collective psychophysiology to inter-personalized psychiatry and 
beyond. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B. 
 29 
Bolis, D., & Schilbach, L. (2017). Beyond one bayesian brain: Modeling intra- and inter-
personal processes during social interaction: commentary on “Mentalizing 
homeostasis: the social origins of interoceptive inference” by Fotopoulou & Tsakiris. 
Neuropsychoanalysis, 19(1), 35–38. https://doi.org/10.1080/15294145.2017.1295215 
Bolis, D., & Schilbach, L. (2018). Observing and participating in social interactions: Action 
perception and action control across the autistic spectrum. Developmental Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 29, 168–175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2017.01.009 
Bolis, D., & Schilbach, L. (2020a). “Through others we become ourselves”: The dialectics of 
predictive coding and active inference. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 43, e90: 25-26. 
Bolis, D., & Schilbach, L. (2020b). ‘I interact therefore i am’: The self as a historical product 
of dialectical attunement. Topoi, 39(3), 521–534. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-018-
9574-0 
Botvinick, M., & Toussaint, M. (2012). Planning as inference. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
16(10), 485–488. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.08.006 
Brandi, M.-L., Kaifel, D., Bolis, D., & Schilbach, L. (2019). The interactive self – a review on 
simulating social interactions to understand the mechanisms of social agency. I-Com, 
18(1), 17–31. https://doi.org/10.1515/icom-2018-0018 
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not a scientist: 
The free-energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective. Synthese, 195(6), 
2417–2444. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1239-1 
Bruineberg, J., Rietveld, E., Parr, T., van Maanen, L., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Free-energy 
minimization in joint agent-environment systems: A niche construction perspective. 
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 455, 161–178. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2018.07.002 
Bzdok, D., Schilbach, L., Vogeley, K., Schneider, K., Laird, A. R., Langner, R., & Eickhoff, 
S. B. (2012). Parsing the neural correlates of moral cognition: ALE meta-analysis on 
 30 
morality, theory of mind, and empathy. Brain Structure and Function, 217(4), 783–
796. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-012-0380-y 
Cacioppo, J. T., Hawkley, L. C., & Thisted, R. A. (2010). Perceived social isolation makes me 
sad: 5-year cross-lagged analyses of loneliness and depressive symptomatology in the 
Chicago Health, Aging, and Social Relations Study. Psychology and Aging, 25(2), 
453–463. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0017216 
Candadai, M., Setzler, M., Izquierdo, E. J., & Froese, T. (2019). Embodied dyadic interaction 
increases complexity of neural dynamics: A minimal agent-based simulation model. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 540. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00540 
Carland, M. A., Thura, D., & Cisek, P. (2019). The urge to decide and act: Implications for 
brain function and dysfunction. The Neuroscientist, 25(5), 491–511. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1073858419841553 
Cavallo, A., Lungu, O., Becchio, C., Ansuini, C., Rustichini, A., & Fadiga, L. (2015). When 
gaze opens the channel for communication: Integrative role of IFG and MPFC. 
NeuroImage, 119, 63–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.06.025 
Chauvigné, L. A. S., Belyk, M., & Brown, S. (2018). Taking two to tango: FMRI analysis of 
improvised joint action with physical contact. PLOS ONE, 13(1), e0191098. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0191098 
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience 
sampling during fMRI reveals default network and executive system contributions to 
mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(21), 8719–
8724. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0900234106 
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., & Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). 
Mind-wandering as spontaneous thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 17(11), 718–731. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2016.113 
 31 
Cisek, P. (2019). Resynthesizing behavior through phylogenetic refinement. Attention, 
Perception, & Psychophysics, 81(7), 2265–2287. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13414-019-
01760-1 
Cisek, P., & Kalaska, J. F. (2010). Neural mechanisms for interacting with a world full of 
action choices. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 33(1), 269–298. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.051508.135409 
Clark, A. (2015). Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind. Oxford 
University Press. 
Corcoran, A. W., & Hohwy, J. (2019). Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy principle: 
Feeling our way forward. The Interoceptive Mind: From Homeostasis to Awareness, 
272–292. 
Corcoran, A. W., Pezzulo, G., & Hohwy, J. (2020). From allostatic agents to counterfactual 
cognisers: Active inference, biological regulation, and the origins of cognition. 
Biology & Philosophy, 35(3), 32. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-020-09746-2 
Costa-Gomes, M., Crawford, V. P., & Broseta, B. (2001). Cognition and Behavior in Normal-
Form Games: An Experimental Study. Econometrica, 69(5), 1193–1235. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-0262.00239 
Da Costa, L., Parr, T., Sajid, N., Veselic, S., Neacsu, V., & Friston, K. (2020). Active 
inference on discrete state-spaces: A synthesis. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 
99, 102447. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2020.102447 
Dayan, P., & Yu, A. J. (2006). Phasic norepinephrine: A neural interrupt signal for 
unexpected events. Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 17(4), 335–350. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09548980601004024 
Devaine, M., Hollard, G., & Daunizeau, J. (2014). The social bayesian brain: Does 
mentalizing make a difference when we learn? PLOS Computational Biology, 10(12), 
e1003992. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003992 
 32 
Di Paolo, E., & De Jaegher, H. (2012). The interactive brain hypothesis. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 6, 163. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2012.00163 
Dohmatob, E., Dumas, G., & Bzdok, D. (2020). Dark control: The default mode network as a 
reinforcement learning agent. Human Brain Mapping, 41(12), 3318–3341. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.25019 
Engel, A. K., Friston, K. J., & Kragic, D. (2015). The pragmatic turn: Toward action-oriented 
views in cognitive science. MIT Press. 
Engel, A. K., Maye, A., Kurthen, M., & König, P. (2013). Where’s the action? The pragmatic 
turn in cognitive science. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(5), 202–209. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.03.006 
Engemann, D., Bzdok, D., Eickhoff, S., Vogeley, K., & Schilbach, L. (2012). Games people 
play—Toward an enactive view of cooperatio n in social neuroscience. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience, 6. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2012.00148 
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of reasoning, judgment, and social 
cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59(1), 255–278. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.59.103006.093629 
Feldman, A. G. (2009). New insights into action–perception coupling. Experimental Brain 
Research, 194(1), 39–58. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-008-1667-3 
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience, 4. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215 
FeldmanHall, O., & Nassar, M. R. (2021). The computational challenge of social learning. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 25(12), 1045–1057. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2021.09.002 
 33 
FeldmanHall, O., & Shenhav, A. (2019). Resolving uncertainty in a social world. Nature 
Human Behaviour, 3(5), 426–435. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0590-x 
Feng, C., Eickhoff, S. B., Li, T., Wang, L., Becker, B., Camilleri, J. A., Hétu, S., & Luo, Y. 
(2021). Common brain networks underlying human social interactions: Evidence from 
large-scale neuroimaging meta-analysis. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.03.025 
FitzGerald, T. H. B., Dolan, R. J., & Friston, K. J. (2014). Model averaging, optimal 
inference, and habit formation. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00457 
FitzGerald, T. H. B., Dolan, R. J., & Friston, K. J. (2015). Dopamine, reward learning, and 
active inference. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 9, 136. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2015.00136 
Fotopoulou, A., & Tsakiris, M. (2017). Mentalizing homeostasis: The social origins of 
interoceptive inference. Neuropsychoanalysis, 00(0), 1–26. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15294145.2017.1294031 
Fowler, J. C., Allen, J. G., Oldham, J. M., & Frueh, B. C. (2013). Exposure to interpersonal 
trauma, attachment insecurity, and depression severity. Journal of Affective Disorders, 
149(1–3), 313–318. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2013.01.045 
Fradkin, I., Adams, R. A., Parr, T., Roiser, J. P., & Huppert, J. D. (2020). Searching for an 
anchor in an unpredictable world: A computational model of obsessive compulsive 
disorder. Psychological Review, 127(5), 672–699. https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000188 
Friston, K. J. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B, 360, 815–836. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2005.1622 
Friston, K. J. (2008). Hierarchical models in the brain. PLOS Computational Biology, 4(11), 
e1000211. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000211 
 34 
Friston, K. J. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy, 14(11), 2100–
2121. https://doi.org/10.3390/e14112100 
Friston, K. J. (2013a). The fantastic organ. Brain, 136(4), 1328–1332. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt038 
Friston, K. J. (2013b). Life as we know it. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 10, 
20130475. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475 
Friston, K. J. (2018). Am I Self-Conscious? (Or Does Self-Organization Entail Self-
Consciousness?). Frontiers in Psychology, 9. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00579 
Friston, K. J., Da Costa, L., Hafner, D., Hesp, C., & Parr, T. (2021). Sophisticated Inference. 
Neural Computation, 33(3), 713–763. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_01351 
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., Kilner, J., & Kiebel, S. J. (2010). Action and behavior: A free-
energy formulation. Biological Cybernetics, 102(3), 227–260. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00422-010-0364-z 
Friston, K. J., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2016). Active 
inference: A process theory. Neural Computation, 29(1), 1–49. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00912 
Friston, K. J., & Kiebel, S. (2009). Predictive coding under the free-energy principle. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 364, 1211–1221. 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2008.0300 
Friston, K. J., Mattout, J., & Kilner, J. (2011). Action understanding and active inference. 
Biological Cybernetics, 104(1), 137–160. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00422-011-0424-z 
Friston, K. J., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., & Pezzulo, G. (2015). 
Active inference and epistemic value. Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(4), 187–214. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053 
 35 
Friston, K. J., Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T., Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T., & Dolan, R. J. 
(2014). The anatomy of choice: Dopamine and decision-making. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B, 369, 20130481. 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0481 
Froese, T., Iizuka, H., & Ikegami, T. (2013). From synthetic modeling of social interaction to 
dynamic theories of brain-body-environment-body-brain systems. Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, 36(4), 420–421. 
Fuchs, T. (2020). The circularity of the embodied mind. Frontiers in Psychology, 11. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01707 
Fusaroli, R., Bjørndahl, J. S., Roepstorff, A., & Tylén, K. (2016). A heart for interaction: 
Shared physiological dynamics and behavioral coordination in a collective, creative 
construction task. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and 
Performance, 42(9), 1297–1310. https://doi.org/10.1037/xhp0000207 
Gallagher, S. (2005). How the body shapes the mind. Oxford University Press. 
Gomez-Marin, A., & Ghazanfar, A. A. (2019). The life of behavior. Neuron, 104(1), 25–36. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.09.017 
Gu, X., Hof, P. R., Friston, K. J., & Fan, J. (2013). Anterior insular cortex and emotional 
awareness. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 521(15), 3371–3388. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.23368 
Hamilton, A. F. de C., & Lind, F. (2016). Audience effects: What can they tell us about social 
neuroscience, theory of mind and autism? Culture and Brain, 4(2), 159–177. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40167-016-0044-5 
Hampton, A. N., Bossaerts, P., & O’Doherty, J. P. (2008). Neural correlates of mentalizing-
related computations during strategic interactions in humans. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 105(18), 6741–6746. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0711099105 
 36 
Hari, R., Henriksson, L., Malinen, S., & Parkkonen, L. (2015). Centrality of social interaction 
in human brain function. Neuron, 88(1), 181–193. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEURON.2015.09.022 
Hari, R., & Kujala, M. V. (2009). Brain basis of human social interaction: From concepts to 
brain imaging. Physiological Reviews, 89(2), 453–479. 
https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00041.2007 
Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N., & Fitch, W. T. (2002). The faculty of language: What is it, who 
has it, and how did it evolve? Science, 298(5598), 1569–1579. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.298.5598.1569 
Hawkley, L. C., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2010). Loneliness matters: A theoretical and empirical 
review of consequences and mechanisms. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 40(2), 218–
227. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12160-010-9210-8 
Hesp, C., Smith, R., Parr, T., Allen, M., Friston, K. J., & Ramstead, M. J. D. (2020). Deeply 
felt affect: The emergence of valence in deep active inference. Neural Computation, 
1–49. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_01341 
Hesp, C., Tschantz, A., Millidge, B., Ramstead, M., Friston, K. J., & Smith, R. (2020). 
Sophisticated affective inference: Simulating anticipatory affective dynamics of 
imagining future events. In T. Verbelen, P. Lanillos, C. L. Buckley, & C. De Boom 
(Eds.), Active Inference (pp. 179–186). Springer International Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-64919-7_18 
Hezemans, F. H., Wolpe, N., & Rowe, J. B. (2020). Apathy is associated with reduced 
precision of prior beliefs about action outcomes. Journal of Experimental Psychology. 
General, 149(9), 1767–1777. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000739 
Hill, C. A., Suzuki, S., Polania, R., Moisa, M., O’Doherty, J. P., & Ruff, C. C. (2017). A 
causal account of the brain network computations underlying strategic social behavior. 
Nature Neuroscience, 20(8), 1142–1149. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4602 
 37 
Hills, T. T., Todd, P. M., Lazer, D., Redish, A. D., & Couzin, I. D. (2015). Exploration versus 
exploitation in space, mind, and society. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(1), 46–54. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2014.10.004 
Hipólito, I., Baltieri, M., Friston, K. J., & Ramstead, M. J. D. (2021). Embodied skillful 
performance: Where the action is. Synthese, 199(1), 4457–4481. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02986-5 
Hodge, R. D., Miller, J. A., Novotny, M., Kalmbach, B. E., Ting, J. T., Bakken, T. E., 
Aevermann, B. D., Barkan, E. R., Berkowitz-Cerasano, M. L., Cobbs, C., Diez-
Fuertes, F., Ding, S.-L., McCorrison, J., Schork, N. J., Shehata, S. I., Smith, K. A., 
Sunkin, S. M., Tran, D. N., Venepally, P., … Lein, E. S. (2020). Transcriptomic 
evidence that von Economo neurons are regionally specialized extratelencephalic-
projecting excitatory neurons. Nature Communications, 11(1), 1172. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-14952-3 
Hoehl, S., Fairhurst, M., & Schirmer, A. (2020). Interactional synchrony: Signals, 
mechanisms and benefits. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, nsaa024. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsaa024 
Hohwy, J., & Michael, J. (2017). Why should any body have a self? PsyArXiv. 
psyarxiv.com/fm4cr 
Holt-Lunstad, J., Smith, T. B., Baker, M., Harris, T., & Stephenson, D. (2015). Loneliness 
and social isolation as risk factors for mortality: A meta-analytic review. Perspectives 
on Psychological Science, 10(2), 227–237. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691614568352 
Kanske, P., Böckler, A., Trautwein, F.-M., Parianen Lesemann, F. H., & Singer, T. (2016). 
Are strong empathizers better mentalizers? Evidence for independence and interaction 
between the routes of social cognition. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 
11(9), 1383–1392. https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsw052 
 38 
Kanske, P., Böckler, A., Trautwein, F.-M., & Singer, T. (2015). Dissecting the social brain: 
Introducing the EmpaToM to reveal distinct neural networks and brain–behavior 
relations for empathy and Theory of Mind. NeuroImage, 122, 6–19. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.07.082 
Kendrick, K. H. (2015). The intersection of turn-taking and repair: The timing of other-
initiations of repair in conversation. Frontiers in Psychology, 6. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00250 
Khalsa, S. S., Adolphs, R., Cameron, O. G., Critchley, H. D., Davenport, P. W., Feinstein, J. 
S., Feusner, J. D., Garfinkel, S. N., Lane, R. D., Mehling, W. E., Meuret, A. E., 
Nemeroff, C. B., Oppenheimer, S., Petzschner, F. H., Pollatos, O., Rhudy, J. L., 
Schramm, L. P., Simmons, W. K., Stein, M. B., … Zucker, N. (2018). Interoception 
and Mental Health: A Roadmap. Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and 
Neuroimaging, 3(6), 501–513. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpsc.2017.12.004 
Kokal, I., Gazzola, V., & Keysers, C. (2009). Acting together in and beyond the mirror 
neuron system. NeuroImage, 47(4), 2046–2056. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.06.010 
Konvalinka, I., & Roepstorff, A. (2012). The two-brain approach: How can mutually 
interacting brains teach us something about social interaction? Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 6, 215. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2012.00215 
Koole, S. L., & Tschacher, W. (2016). Synchrony in psychotherapy: A review and an 
integrative framework for the therapeutic alliance. Frontiers in Psychology, 7. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00862 
Krach, S., Blümel, I., Marjoram, D., Lataster, T., Krabbendam, L., Weber, J., van Os, J., & 
Kircher, T. (2009). Are women better mindreaders? Sex differences in neural 
correlates of mentalizing detected with functional MRI. BMC Neuroscience, 10, 9. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2202-10-9 
 39 
Krach, S., Hegel, F., Wrede, B., Sagerer, G., Binkofski, F., & Kircher, T. (2008). Can 
machines think? Interaction and perspective taking with robots investigated via fMRI. 
PLoS ONE, 3(7), e2597. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0002597 
Kupper, Z., Ramseyer, F., Hoffmann, H., & Tschacher, W. (2015). Nonverbal synchrony in 
social interactions of patients with schizophrenia indicates socio-communicative 
deficits. PLOS ONE, 10(12), e0145882. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0145882 
Lacey, B. C., & Lacey, J. I. (1978). Two-way communication between the heart and the brain: 
Significance of time within the cardiac cycle. American Psychologist, 33(2), 99–113. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.33.2.99 
Lacey, J. I., & Lacey, B. C. (1970). Some autonomic-central nervous system inter-relations. 
Physiological Correlates of Emotion, 205–227. 
Laidlaw, K. E. W., Foulsham, T., Kuhn, G., & Kingstone, A. (2011). Potential social 
interactions are important to social attention. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 108(14), 5548–5553. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1017022108 
Lehmann, K., & Kanske, P. (in press). Empathy, meaning, and the human brain. In A. M. 
García & A. Ibáñez (Eds.), Routledge Handbook of Neurosemiotics. Routledge. 
Lehmann, K., Maliske, L., Böckler, A., & Kanske, P. (2019). Social impairments in mental 
disorders: Recent developments in studying the mechanisms of interactive behavior. 
Clinical Psychology in Europe, 1(2), e33143. https://doi.org/10.32872/cpe.v1i2.33143 
Levinson, S. C., & Torreira, F. (2015). Timing in turn-taking and its implications for 
processing models of language. Frontiers in Psychology, 6. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00731 
Levinthal, D. J., & Strick, P. L. (2020). Multiple areas of the cerebral cortex influence the 
stomach. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(23), 13078–13083. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2002737117 
 40 
Marshall, L., Mathys, C., Ruge, D., Berker, A. O. de, Dayan, P., Stephan, K. E., & Bestmann, 
S. (2016). Pharmacological fingerprints of contextual uncertainty. PLOS Biology, 
14(11), e1002575. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002575 
Mayo, O. (2020). In and out of synchrony— Behavioral and physiological dynamics of dyadic 
interpersonal coordination. March 2019, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13574 
Mittner, M., Hawkins, G. E., Boekel, W., & Forstmann, B. U. (2016). A Neural Model of 
Mind Wandering. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(8), 570–578. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.06.004 
Moran, R. J., Campo, P., Symmonds, M., Stephan, K. E., Dolan, R. J., & Friston, K. J. (2013). 
Free Energy, Precision and Learning: The Role of Cholinergic Neuromodulation. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 33(19), 8227–8236. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4255-12.2013 
Müller-Pinzler, L., Gazzola, V., Keysers, C., Sommer, J., Jansen, A., Frässle, S., Einhäuser, 
W., Paulus, F. M., & Krach, S. (2015). Neural pathways of embarrassment and their 
modulation by social anxiety. NeuroImage, 119, 252–261. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.06.036 
Murray, S. O., Kersten, D., Olshausen, B. A., Schrater, P., & Woods, D. L. (2002). Shape 
perception reduces activity in human primary visual cortex. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 99(23), 15164–15169. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.192579399 
Neely, K. A., Coombes, S. A., Planetta, P. J., & Vaillancourt, D. E. (2013). Segregated and 
overlapping neural circuits exist for the production of static and dynamic precision 
grip force. Human Brain Mapping, 34(3), 698–712. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.21467 
Newen, A., Bruin, L. D., & Gallagher, S. (2018). The Oxford Handbook of 4E Cognition. 
Oxford University Press. 
 41 
Palmer, C. J., Seth, A. K., & Hohwy, J. (2015). The felt presence of other minds: Predictive 
processing, counterfactual predictions, and mentalising in autism. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 36, 376–389. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2015.04.007 
Park, H.-D., Barnoud, C., Trang, H., Kannape, O. A., Schaller, K., & Blanke, O. (2020). 
Breathing is coupled with voluntary action and the cortical readiness potential. Nature 
Communications, 11(1), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-13967-9 
Park, H.-D., & Tallon-Baudry, C. (2014). The neural subjective frame: From bodily signals to 
perceptual consciousness. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 369, 
20130208. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0208 
Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2017). Uncertainty, epistemics and active inference. Journal of The 
Royal Society Interface, 14, 20170376. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0376 
Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2018). The anatomy of inference: Generative models and brain 
structure. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 12, 90. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2018.00090 
Payzan-LeNestour, E., Dunne, S., Bossaerts, P., & O’Doherty, J. P. (2013). The neural 
representation of unexpected uncertainty during value-based decision making. Neuron, 
79(1), 191–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.04.037 
Petzschner, F. H., Weber, L. A. E., Gard, T., & Stephan, K. E. (2017). Computational 
psychosomatics and computational psychiatry: Toward a joint framework for 
differential diagnosis. Biological Psychiatry, 82(6), 421–430. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2017.05.012 
Pezzulo, G., Donnarumma, F., Dindo, H., D’Ausilio, A., Konvalinka, I., & Castelfranchi, C. 
(2019). The body talks: Sensorimotor communication and its brain and kinematic 
signatures. Physics of Life Reviews, 28, 1–21. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2018.06.014 
 42 
Premack, D., & Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1(4), 515–526. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00076512 
Price, C. J. (2012). A review and synthesis of the first 20 years of PET and fMRI studies of 
heard speech, spoken language and reading. NeuroImage, 62(2), 816–847. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.04.062 
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering Schrödinger’s 
question: A free-energy formulation. Physics of Life Reviews, 24, 1–16. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001 
Ramstead, M. J. D., Kirchhoff, M. D., & Friston, K. J. (2019). A tale of two densities: Active 
inference is enactive inference. Adaptive Behavior. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059712319862774 
Ramstead, M. J. D., Sakthivadivel, D. A. R., Heins, C., Koudahl, M., Millidge, B., Da Costa, 
L., Klein, B., & Friston, K. J. (2022). On Bayesian mechanics: A physics of and by 
beliefs (arXiv:2205.11543). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.11543 
Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2016). Cultural Affordances: 
Scaffolding Local Worlds Through Shared Intentionality and Regimes of Attention. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 7. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01090 
Rauchbauer, B., Nazarian, B., Bourhis, M., Ochs, M., Prévot, L., & Chaminade, T. (2019). 
Brain activity during reciprocal social interaction investigated using conversational 
robots as control condition. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 374, 
20180033. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2018.0033 
Redcay, E., Dodell-Feder, D., Pearrow, M. J., Mavros, P. L., Kleiner, M., Gabrieli, J. D. E., & 
Saxe, R. (2010). Live face-to-face interaction during fMRI: A new tool for social 
 43 
cognitive neuroscience. NeuroImage, 50(4), 1639–1647. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.01.052 
Redcay, E., & Schilbach, L. (2019). Using second-person neuroscience to elucidate the 
mechanisms of social interaction. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 20, 495–505. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-019-0179-4 
Reddy, V. (2003). On being the object of attention: Implications for self-other consciousness. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(9), 397–402. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-
6613(03)00191-8 
Reddy, V., & Morris, P. (2004). Participants don’t need theories: Knowing minds in 
engagement. Theory & Psychology, 14(5), 647–665. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0959354304046177 
Reséndiz-Benhumea, G. M., Sangati, E., & Froese, T. (2020). Levels of Coupling in Dyadic 
Interaction: An Analysis of Neural and Behavioral Complexity. 2020 IEEE 
Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), 2250–2256. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/SSCI47803.2020.9308429 
Reséndiz-Benhumea, G. M., Sangati, E., Sangati, F., Keshmiri, S., & Froese, T. (2021). 
Shrunken social brains? A minimal model of the role of social interaction in neural 
complexity. Frontiers in Neurorobotics, 15, 634085. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbot.2021.634085 
Risko, E. F., Laidlaw, K., Freeth, M., Foulsham, T., & Kingstone, A. (2012). Social attention 
with real versus reel stimuli: Toward an empirical approach to concerns about 
ecological validity. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6, 143. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2012.00143 
Risko, E. F., Richardson, D. C., & Kingstone, A. (2016). Breaking the fourth wall of 
cognitive science: Real-world social attention and the dual function of gaze. Current 
 44 
Directions in Psychological Science, 25(1), 70–74. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721415617806 
Rivara, C.-B., Sherwood, C. C., Bouras, C., & Hof, P. R. (2003). Stereologic characterization 
and spatial distribution patterns of Betz cells in the human primary motor cortex. The 
Anatomical Record Part A: Discoveries in Molecular, Cellular, and Evolutionary 
Biology, 270A(2), 137–151. https://doi.org/10.1002/ar.a.10015 
Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron system. Annual Review of 
Neuroscience, 27(1), 169–192. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144230 
Rochet-Capellan, A., & Fuchs, S. (2014). Take a breath and take the turn: How breathing 
meets turns in spontaneous dialogue. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
B, 369, 20130399. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0399 
Sales, A. C., Friston, K. J., Jones, M. W., Pickering, A. E., & Moran, R. J. (2019). Locus 
Coeruleus tracking of prediction errors optimises cognitive flexibility: An active 
inference model. PLOS Computational Biology, 15(1), e1006267. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006267 
Schilbach, L. (2010). A second-person approach to other minds. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 11(6), 449. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2805-c1 
Schilbach, L., Timmermans, B., Reddy, V., Costall, A., Bente, G., Schlicht, T., & Vogeley, K. 
(2013). Toward a second-person neuroscience. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(4), 
393–414. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X12000660 
Schirmer, A., Meck, W. H., & Penney, B. (2016). The Socio-Temporal Brain: Connecting 
People in Time. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(10), 760–772. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.08.002 
 45 
Schirmer, A., Ng, T., Escoffier, N., & Penney, T. B. (2016). Emotional Voices Distort Time: 
Behavioral and Neural Correlates. Timing & Time Perception, 4(1), 79–98. 
https://doi.org/10.1163/22134468-00002058 
Schmidt, K. L., Cohn, J. F., & Tian, Y. (2003). Signal characteristics of spontaneous facial 
expressions: Automatic movement in solitary and social smiles. Biological 
Psychology, 65(1), 49–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0301-0511(03)00098-X 
Schulkin, J., & Sterling, P. (2019). Allostasis: A Brain-Centered , Predictive Mode of 
Physiological Regulation. Trends in Neurosciences, 1–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2019.07.010 
Schurz, M., Radua, J., Aichhorn, M., Richlan, F., & Perner, J. (2014). Fractionating theory of 
mind: A meta-analysis of functional brain imaging studies. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 42, 9–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.01.009 
Schurz, M., Radua, J., Tholen, M. G., Maliske, L., Margulies, D. S., Mars, R. B., Sallet, J., & 
Kanske, P. (2021). Toward a hierarchical model of social cognition: A neuroimaging 
meta-analysis and integrative review of empathy and theory of mind. Psychological 
Bulletin, 147(3), 293–327. https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000303 
Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T. H. B., Mathys, C., Dolan, R., & Friston, K. J. (2015). The 
dopaminergic midbrain encodes the expected certainty about desired outcomes. 
Cerebral Cortex, 25(10), 3434–3445. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhu159 
Seli, P., Risko, E. F., Smilek, D., & Schacter, D. L. (2016). Mind-Wandering With and 
Without Intention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(8), 605–617. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.05.010 
Seth, A. K., & Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371, 20160007. 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0007 
 46 
Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., & Mendelsohn, A. (2019). Real-life neuroscience: An ecological 
approach to brain and behavior research. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 
14(5), 841–859. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691619856350 
Shipp, S. (2016). Neural elements for predictive coding. Frontiers in Psychology, 7. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01792 
Shipp, S., Adams, R. A., & Friston, K. J. (2013). Reflections on agranular architecture: 
Predictive coding in the motor cortex. Trends in Neurosciences, 36(12), 706–716. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2013.09.004 
Sokolov, E. N. (1963). Higher nervous functions: The orienting reflex. Annu. Rev. Physiol., 
25, 545–580. 
Somerville, L. H., Jones, R. M., Ruberry, E. J., Dyke, J. P., Glover, G., & Casey, B. J. (2013). 
The medial prefrontal cortex and the emergence of self-conscious emotion in 
adolescence. Psychological Science, 24(8), 1554–1562. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797613475633 
Spreng, R. N., Mar, R. A., & Kim, A. S. N. (2009). The Common Neural Basis of 
Autobiographical Memory, Prospection, Navigation, Theory of Mind, and the Default 
Mode: A Quantitative Meta-analysis. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(3), 489–
510. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2008.21029 
Stephan, K. E., Manjaly, Z. M., Mathys, C. D., Weber, L. A. E., Paliwal, S., Gard, T., 
Tittgemeyer, M., Fleming, S. M., Haker, H., Seth, A. K., & Petzschner, F. H. (2016). 
Allostatic self-efficacy: A metacognitive theory of dyshomeostasis-induced fatigue 
and depression. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00550 
Sterling, P. (2012). Allostasis: A model of predictive regulation. Physiology & Behavior, 
106(1), 5–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2011.06.004 
 47 
Suddendorf, T., & Corballis, M. C. (2007). The evolution of foresight: What is mental time 
travel, and is it unique to humans? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30(3), 299–313. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X07001975 
Summerfield, C., Monti, J. M. P., Trittschuh, E. H., Mesulam, M.-M., & Egner, T. (2008). 
Neural repetition suppression reflects fulfilled perceptual expectations. Nature 
Neuroscience, 11(9), 1004–1006. 
Takahashi, H., Izuma, K., Matsumoto, M., Matsumoto, K., & Omori, T. (2015). The anterior 
insula tracks behavioral entropy during an interpersonal competitive game. PLoS 
ONE, 10(6), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0123329 
Theriault, J. E., Young, L., & Barrett, L. F. (2021). The sense of should: A biologically-based 
framework for modeling social pressure. Physics of Life Reviews, 36, 100–136. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2020.01.004 
Thompson, E. (2010). Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind. 
Harvard University Press. 
Thompson, E., & Varela, F. J. (2001). Radical embodiment: Neural dynamics and 
consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5(10), 418–425. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01750-2 
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H. (2005). Understanding and 
sharing intentions: The origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
28(5), 675–691. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05000129 
Tschacher, W., Giersch, A., & Friston, K. J. (2017). Embodiment and schizophrenia: A 
review of implications and applications. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 43(4), 745–753. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbw220 
Veissière, S. P. L., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2020). 
Thinking through other minds: A variational approach to cognition and culture. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 43. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X19001213 
 48 
Warnell, K. R., Sadikova, E., & Redcay, E. (2017). Let’s chat: Developmental neural bases of 
social motivation during real-time peer interaction. Developmental Science, 21, 
e12581. https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12581 
Weiss, A., Chambon, V., Drugowitsch, J., & Wyart, V. (2019). Interacting with volatile 
environments stabilizes hidden-state inference and its brain signatures. BioRxiv, 
755223. https://doi.org/10.1101/755223 
Wertsch, J. V. (1979). From Social Interaction to Higher Psychological Processes. A 
Clarification and Application of Vygotsky’s Theory. Human Development, 22(1), 1–
22. https://doi.org/10.1159/000272425 
Wheatley, T., Boncz, A., Toni, I., & Stolk, A. (2019). Beyond the isolated brain: The promise 
and challenge of interacting minds. Neuron, 103(2), 186–188. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.05.009 
Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining 
function of wrong beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception. Cognition, 
13(1), 103–128. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0277(83)90004-5 
Xie, H., Karipidis, I. I., Howell, A., Schreier, M., Sheau, K. E., Manchanda, M. K., Ayub, R., 
Glover, G. H., Jung, M., Reiss, A. L., & Saggar, M. (2020). Finding the neural 
correlates of collaboration using a three-person fMRI hyperscanning paradigm. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(37), 23066–23072. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1917407117 
Zhen, S., & Yu, R. (2021). Neural correlates of recursive thinking during interpersonal 
strategic interactions. Human Brain Mapping, 42(7), 2128–2146. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.25355 
 