Review 
The many roles of precision in action  
Authors: Jakub Limanowski1, Rick Adams2,3, James Kilner2, and Thomas Parr4 
1Institute of Psychology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany 
2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, London, UK   
3Centre for Medical Image Computing, University College London, London, UK   
4Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 
Corresponding author email address: jakub.limanowski@uni-greifswald.de  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial interests. 
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by a Freigeist Fellowship of the VolkswagenStiftung to JL 
(AZ 97-932). TP is supported by an NIHR Academic Clinical Fellowship (ref: ACF-2023-13-013) 
  
The many roles of precision in action 
 
2 
 
Abstract: Active inference describes (Bayes optimal) behaviour as motivated by the minimisation of 
surprise of one’s sensory observations , through optimisation of  a generative model of the hidden 
causes of one’s sensory data in the brain. One of active inference’s key appeals is its conceptualisation 
of precision as biasing neuronal communication and thus inference  within generative models . The 
importance of precision in perceptual inference  is evident —many studies have demonstrated the 
importance of getting precision estimates right for norm al (healthy) sensation and perception. Here, 
we highlight the many roles precision plays in action; i.e., the key processes in action that rely on 
adequate estimates of precision —from decision making and action planning to the initiation and 
control of muscle movement itself. Thereby, we focus on  the recent development of hierarchical 
“mixed” models—generative models spanning multiple levels of discrete (categorical) and continuous 
active inference. These kinds of models open up new perspectives on the unified description of 
hierarchical computation in action. We shall highlight how these models reflect the many roles of 
precision in action —from planning to execution —and the associated pat hologies if precision 
estimation goes wrong. Thereby we shall also discuss the potential biological implementation of the 
associated message passing, focusing on the role of neuromodulatory systems in mediating different 
kinds of precision in action. 
 
  
The many roles of precision in action 
 
3 
 
Introduction 
Active inference is a normative framework describing (Bayes optimal) behaviour and cognition as 
motivated by the minimisation of surprise of one’s sensory observations (Parr et al., 2022). 
Importantly, active inference can be formulated as a pro cess theory; i.e., a mechanistic account of 
behaviour and the underlying brain functions. Central to this formulation of the active inference 
framework is the idea that the brain employs  and optimises a generative (predictive or “forward”) 
model of the hidden causes of the sensory data it receives, approximating Bayesian inference (Friston, 
2005). As such, it falls into the category of Bayesian brain or “predictive processing” approaches—but 
it has a special place among those due to its scope and the detail  of its formulation, including the 
mathematics of message passing and belief updating and their potential neurobiological 
implementation in cortical hierarchies (Parr et al., 2022; cf. Bastos et al., 2012; Shipp, 2016).  
Most notably, active inference extends beyond perceptual inference to explain action and behaviour 
in terms of inference within generative models; i.e., motor control is described as inference and model 
optimization. Thus, actions are generated to fulfil prediction s, in parallel with th e updating of 
predictions through perceptual inference.  As such, active inference is a unique framework with 
intriguing predictions and assumptions about how the brain controls action and behaviour, which has 
attracted not only theoretical and experimental  neuroscientists, but also psychologists and 
philosophers (Hohwy, 2013 ; Limanowski & Blankenburg, 2013;  Apps & Tsakiris, 2014; Clark, 2015; 
Metzinger & Wiese, 2017; Seth & Tsakiris, 2018; Allen et al. 2020).  
One of active inference’s key appeals is its conceptualisation of precision as defined within generative 
models, and its possible implementation in neuronal circuits.  Precision, in short, it is a form of 
confidence in the reliability of (neuronal) signals, which therefore has the capacity to bias or modulate 
neuronal communication and inference in the brain  (Friston, 2005; cf. Yu & Dayan, 2005; Ma et al., 
2023). In other words, precision encodes “How much do I trust this information”. What exactly this 
means in each case —what it implies functi onally—depends on the kind of information, the kind of 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
4 
 
computation, and the kind of brain region or network at play. Generative world models comprise a set 
of prior and conditional probability distributions whose inversion determines these computations. 
Precision is an attribute of all of these distributions and is associated with their inverse variance or 
negentropy. Thus, precision can thus mean the gain applied to corrective signals i.e. prediction errors, 
at the level of sensation and movement—a notion that is important in engineering and motor control 
(e.g., Ciria et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2023 ). Neurobiologically, this gain might manifest in population 
level synaptic gains—which appear to be the loci of action of various neurochemical modulators (Shine 
et al., 2021 ; Parr & Friston, 2017 ; cf. Yu & Dayan, 2005 ). At other levels, precision can mean a 
confidence estimate in which of several  world models is “correct” ( Metzinger, 2004; Limanowski & 
Friston, 2018; Jordan, 2023 ). Both notions can be combined i n hierarchical models for action —a 
particular promise of the active inference framework. 
A key characteristic independently of level or kind of computation is that precision must be estimated; 
i.e., the brain does not know from sensory signals alone how reliable they or its models are. Beliefs 
about precision are formed through inference by the generative model (sometimes called “second -
order inference” to contrast it with inference about the causes of sensation per se; Feldman and 
Friston 2010, Kanai, Komura et al. 2015, Parr, Benrimoh et al. 2018 a). It is imperative for the brain to 
get these beliefs (precision estimates) right, otherwise many pathologies  of action and perception 
emerge (Friston 2017; see below).  Many papers have discussed the role of precision in perceptual 
inference—demonstrating the importance of getting precision estimates right for normal (healthy) 
sensation and perception (e.g., Corlett et al., 2009; Fletcher & Frith, 2009; Adams et al., 2012; Edwards 
et al., 2013; Yon & Frith, 2021).  
Here, we want to highlight the many roles precision plays in action; i.e., the many key processes in 
action that rely on adequate estimates of precision —from decision ma king and planning to the 
production of movement . We shall give a brief overview of empirical findings demonstrating the 
importance of precision estimation at various levels of action—from decision making and planning to 
the production of movement. Secondly , we shall discuss recent methodological developments in the 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
5 
 
generative models for active inference, which  demonstrate the value of the precision concept in 
action. The concept of precision was, of course, not invented for or within the active inference (o r 
predictive coding) framework. Still, in large parts thanks to work by Karl Friston and his group, there 
are now very elegant ways to mathematically model precision in its various roles within generative 
models for active inference. Furthermore, these methods allow us to link the underlying equations to 
neuronal activity. We shall briefly introduce the key concepts of modelling precision (as the associated 
generative models have been introduced in great detail elsewhere (see e.g. Friston et al., 2017; Parr  
et al., 2022; Hodson et al., 2024 ; cf. Ma et al., 2023 ), we shall give a non-mathematical overview). Of 
particular interest to us are recent developments of so-called “mixed” models—hierarchical generative 
models spanning multiple levels of discrete (categorical) and continuous active inference. These kinds 
of models open up new perspectives on the unified description of computations in action, spanning 
mechanisms from decision making and action planning to overt movement.  We shall highlight how  
these models reflect the many roles of precision in action —from planning to execution —and the 
associated pathologies if precision estimation goes wrong. Thereby we shall also discuss the potential 
biological implementation of the associated message passing, focusing on the role of neuromodulatory 
systems in mediating precision. 
Precision at different levels of action 
To highlight the importance of  inference about precision and uncertainty in action, let’s imagine an 
example: You are a quarterback in possession of the football, and you want to make the optimal play 
to score your team some points. You must make some decision, such as: Which of the many plays you 
and your team have st udied during training shall you initiate? Should you pass the ball now —or first 
run to a better spot? Then, of course, you must throw the pass in the best possible way; which means 
you must guide your muscle movements, correct your movement in response to sudden changes in 
the game such as a hostile player tackling you etc. On top of this all, you must constantly monitor the 
game—which you will probably use your vision and audition for. Sometimes you can perhaps not very 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
6 
 
clearly see where your selected team mate is, but you hear them yelling  instructions—so you focus  
your attention more on what you hear. Figure 1 illustrates this example. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Some processes of an action where precision estimates are essential. A toy example of a quarterback passing the 
football to a specific teammate indicating several important components of (active) inference that rely on adequate estimates 
of precision. The underlying computations cover processes ranging from decision making (e.g., Which play do I select? Where 
should I run to in order to be able to pass optimally?) to overt movement (Contractions of the appropriate arm muscles 
throughout the throwing movement) —and certainly many more that are not shown, including motivationa l factors and 
habits, action understanding, joint action, and communication. Precision plays a key role in all of these processes of 
inference—but a somewhat different one depending on the exact nature of inference.  For instance, at “higher”, cognitive 
levels, the player must decide which of several pre -studied plays he initiates. Here, one can describe precision as the 
confidence in the selected (optimal) sequence of actions. At “lower”, sensorimotor levels, precision can be described as a 
multiplicative g ain on sensory signals . This can mean  implementing sensory attention when selectively focusing on one 
particular teammate; and a similar bias  in determining the weights of sensory cues during multisensory integration . 
Multisensory integration is essential to guide action; e.g., integrating visual and proprioceptive body position information to 
guide movement, or integrating seen and heard information about my teammates’ location. Not last, this notion of precision 
is key to how muscle movement is produced and controlled along the active inference framework: as sensory attenuation is 
a prerequisite for the enaction of motor predictions . Note that some of the illustrated processes can be cast as based on 
discrete or even categorical inference (such as deciding  on one among several plays), whereas others require inference in 
continuous time to track continuous trajectories of sensory data coming from the world (such as guiding a movement or 
attending to data from a particular sensory channel). Active inference o ffers a framework to model action through the 
combination of discrete and continuous state space models (Fig. 2), thus capturing the interplay between the illustrated 
cognitive vs sensorimotor processes, and the different roles of precision therein. See main text for details. 
 
This toy example is by no means thought to capture the entirety of action planning and motor control. 
It simply illustrates that there are many different (e.g., sensory vs motor vs cognitive) processes in 
action that depend on adequate estimates of precision. Thereby, precision can mean different things, 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
7 
 
from an estimate of confidence in some selected action policy to a multiplicative gain applied to 
continuous sensory signals  (see Fig. 1 legend) . Active inference thereby offers a way t o account for 
these potential differences by formalizing action in hierarchical, “mixed” models. Roughly, these 
models comprise layers where inference operates in discrete time steps—or continually. 
To understand why this is important, consider the fact that most decision making and action planning 
seem to be discrete or  even categorical in nature ; e.g., preparing a sequence of steps followed by 
throwing a pass; or choosing one among several alternative pre -studied plays. Conversely, sensation, 
attention, and movement generate continuous data : to play optimally, we need to know where our 
teammates are now, and where they will be next—in other words, we need to track their continuously 
changing states in the world . The same holds for guiding muscle movements . This is fundamentally 
different from categorical decisions such as selecting the optimal play among several alternatives, and 
from selecting the sequence of actions required to initiate the play , before actually committing to it. 
In the active inference framework, the underlying inference can be formalized slightly differently ; 
operating in terms of discrete or continuous states (Fig. 2). These different formalizations are, on the 
one hand, more parsimonious for certain kinds of decisions or control; on t he other hand, they also 
intuitively map onto differences in the associated mental or physical processes. We shall now give a 
brief, non -technical overview of the generative models used to capture this  (for mathematical 
treatments, see Friston, Parr et al. 2017). 
To understand this, it should be noted that, historically, active inference has been modelled as motor 
control in continuous time (using generalized coordinates of motion; i.e., speed, acceleration, jerk 
etc.), based on an extension of predictive coding formulations of perceptual inference to include 
movement via spinal reflex arcs (Friston et al., 2010, 2012a; Adams et al., 2013). Resulting from recent 
developments, the generative models used for active inference can be set up in an alternative way; 
i.e., they can also be formalized as operating in discrete states—put simply, modelling inference (belief 
updating) about processes that evolve in “steps” rather than continually.  This notion of active 
inference follows a specific formulation of partially observable Markov decision processes, thus, 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
8 
 
featuring a  notably different computational architecture from e.g. predictive coding or variational 
filtering. A notable distinction is the possibility to specify multiple alternative (counterfactual) goals 
and action sequences and to evaluate them based on their expected free energy, thus defining active 
inference as planning rather than motor control per se (Friston et al., 2017; cf. Botvinick & Toussaint, 
2012). The discrete and continuous state space formulations are not mutually exclusive (for a 
comprehensive comparison see Hodson et al., 2024) . Both conform to the free energy principle  and 
can be described in terms of belief updating and model optimisation.  The Bayesian message passing 
of both formulations can be plausibly associated with the neuronal populations  in the cortical 
column—while neural activity represents different quantities in each model (posterior probabilities in 
discrete-time models vs the statistics of probability densities in continuous-time models), precision can 
be linked to the gain afforded  to synaptic inputs onto superficial pyramidal cell populations in both 
approaches (Bastos et al., 2012; Parr & Friston, 2017). However, each kind of model is best suited to a 
different set of computational problems that an active inference agent needs to solve and, as we shall 
see below, their combination is what is needed to adequately capture action in its entire richness. 
Precision in sensation and movement (continuous inference) 
Sensation and movement production are inherently intertwined, which is particularly emphasized in 
the active inference framework—where sensation guides perceptual decision making for action, which 
again generates new sensory data. Importantly, the world generates sensory signals continually—and 
to move within it, our brain should control our muscles continually as well. Therefore, the sensory and 
motor processes at the interface with the environment (the associated message passing) are elegantly 
captured by continuous state space models; i.e., predictive models generating data (e.g., trajectories) 
in continuous time. A simple way to represent a trajectory in continuous time is in terms of generalized 
coordinates of motion (speed, acceleration, jerk etc.) , which has been the formulation of c hoice in 
these models (Parr et al., 2022). In other words, these models capture the brain’s inference of how its 
sensations were cause d by continuous states of the world (Parr & Friston, 2017). As noted, t his has 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
9 
 
been the classical way of modelling active inference in predictive coding schemes; i.e., through a 
dynamic minimization of continuous prediction error signals (Friston & Kiebel, 2009; Bastos et al., 
2012; Shipp, 2016).  
Precision, in these formulations, has the function of scaling forward prediction errors at each level by 
their estimated reliability; i.e., sensory signals that are believed to be less noisy (more reliable) are 
afforded a greater weight ( Friston & Kiebel, 2009 ). Evidence for the functional role of precision 
weighting of prediction errors has been obtained in electrophysiological and imaging studies and 
through mathematical simulations (e.g., Kok et al., 2012; Auksztulewicz et al., 2015;  Feldman and 
Friston 2010; Friston and Frith 2015). This intuitively links precision at these levels of inference to the 
concept of sensory attention and attenuation (Feldman & Friston, 2010; Brown et al., 2013; Parr & 
Friston, 2017). Much empirical and theoretical work has focused on this role of precision as sensory 
gain (e.g., Adams et al., 2012; Friston et al., 2012a,b; Brown et al., 2013; Edwards et al., 2013; Parées 
et al., 2014; Palmer et al., 2016; Limanowski & Friston, 2018,2020a). In the following, we focus on three 
important aspects of action, in which precision—formalized as continuous gain control—is assigned a 
key role : multisensory body representation, movement production , and self-other distinction or 
agency. 
Sensory attention and attenuation in multisensory body representation 
Although not being a ‘motor’ process,  multisensory integration is crucial for planning and guiding 
action, because it ensures a coherent and more precise estimate of the state of the body (effector) for 
guiding action. Thereby, it is well established that a more accurate state estimate can be reached by 
combining information from multiple sensory modalities (Ernst & Bülthoff, 2004; Körding et al., 2007). 
For instance, the quarterback in Figure 1 may combine visual and somatosensory (haptic and 
proprioceptive) information to grasp the football in a way that will allow e.g. adding a specific spin to 
the throw (although this is probably something that benefits novices; expert players will likely not need 
to look at their arm or the ball anymore). Precision, in its role as sensory gain, can up- or down-weight 
sensory signals, thus augmenting or attenuating their impact on inference; i.e., on cue combination 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
10 
 
and the resulting multisensory estimate. In brief, the combined estimate will be biased toward s the 
more precise (“reliable”) sense. That multisensory integration (or cue integration) can be biased by 
precision estimates has been demonstrated and reviewed extensively elsewhere (Beauchamp et al., 
2010; Fetsch et al., 2012; Meijer et al., 2020; Ma et  al., 2023). This assumption is also at the core of 
Bayesian approaches to body ownership (Apps & Tsakiris, 2014; Limanowski & Blankenburg, 2013; 
Noel et al., 2018; Allen & Friston, 2018; Seth & Tsakiris, 2018; Bertoni et al., 2023). Here, a particularly 
intriguing example is the so -named rubber hand illusion (Botvinick & Cohen, 1998), in which a 
participant experiences illusory ownership over a visible fake hand placed next to the real, unseen 
hand; and exhibits a recalibration of the perceived real hand position towards the fake hand. Bayesian 
models have captured the illusion based on a “dominance” of relatively more precise visual over (less 
precise) proprioceptive hand position estimates, which, together with a strong prior for having one 
hand only, leads to inference that the seen hand is “mine” (Samad et al., 2015; Chancel et al., 2022 ). 
Intriguingly, electrophysiological and brain imaging studies suggest that the brain could enhance the 
natural differences in precision between vision and proprioception to better resolve the multisensory 
conflict during the rubber hand illusion. In brief, these studies suggest that somatosensory information 
from the hand side subject to the illusion is selectively attenuated, while visual information in general 
seems to be up-weighted (Zeller et al., 2016; Limanowski & Blankenburg, 2016). This would suggest a 
key role of top-down precision control in shaping the body representation, e.g., under unusual conflicts 
as in the rubber hand illusion (Limanowski, 2022a). 
Presumably, a similar  sensory bias of the multisensory body representation by precision can also 
operate when we act. For instance, the relative weighing of visual vs proprioceptive signals for the 
estimation of the body’s (effector’s) state can be biased top-down to augment visuomotor adaptation 
and learning. Several studies have suggested that, despite the importance of sensory prediction errors 
for motor learning, somatosensory attenuation during the early learning phase of visuomotor conflicts 
may enhance visuomotor adaptation—presumably by speeding up intersensory recalibration  (e.g., 
Bernier et al., 2009; reviewed in Limanowski, 2022a). Moreover, we could show that participants can 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
11 
 
deliberately change the relative weight assigned to visual vs proprioceptive body position, depending 
on their behavioural relevance during visuomotor conflict tasks; and that those changes can be seen 
in hemodynamic and oscillatory responses over the corresponding sensory cortices , much like one 
would expect gain control to operate along predictive coding formulations  (Limanowski & Friston, 
2020b,c). This further underwrites t he importance of tuning precision e stimates for flexible body 
representation; i.e., the context-dependent weighting and integration of (incongruent) seen and felt 
body position for action (cf. Maselli et al., 2022; Bertoni et al., 2023). 
Sensory attenuation for movement initiation 
The second key role of precision as sensory gain pertains to movement production itself. This originates 
from active inference formulations based on an extension of predictive coding schemes  with motor 
reflexes. To understand this, we need to briefly introduc e the key assumption of those formulations 
that movement is produced through the minimization of proprioceptive prediction errors (Friston et 
al., 2010, 2012 a; cf. Adams et al., 2013; Shipp et al., 2013; Palmer et al., 2016 ): As noted above , in 
predictive processing approaches based on predictive coding, the model’s beliefs (probabilistic 
representations) capture statistical regularities in the environment and are, in turn, optimised by 
accommodating prediction errors—this corresponds to perceptual inference. Active inference extends 
this idea to include movement ; i.e., behaviour is explained in terms of inference on the causes of 
proprioceptive sensations (Adams et al., 2013). Thus, descending signals from the primary motor 
cortex are conceptualised as prop rioceptive predictions (i.e., about dynamic muscle or joint states ; 
Adams et al., 2013 ; Parr et al., 2022 ). Spinal reflex arcs, i.e., monosynaptic  (or in some cases, 
polysynaptic) loops of primary sensory afferents and motor neurons in the spinal cord, are  then 
thought to minimise the error between predicted and actual proprioceptive states —whereby they 
cause muscle movements that approximate the predicted joint state (Friston et al., 2010, 2011). Thus, 
the agent is now equipped with a complementary way to deal with prediction errors, as it can now act 
on the environment to directly reduce them. In other words: it can change the world (i.e., its sensory 
input)—instead of changing its mind (Parr et al., 2022).  
The many roles of precision in action 
 
12 
 
It should be noted that this ‘enaction’ of proprioceptive predictions by the motor system is among the 
points of disagreement between active inference and optimal motor control (Friston, 2011; Pickering 
& Clark, 2014). In short, the assumption that descending signals from the M1 are propriocept ive 
“predictions” rather than motor “commands” eliminates the need for a cortical “inverse” model, which 
in optimal control formulations computes the motor commands required to reach the action goal 
(Friston, 2011). Instead, the “pure forward model” approa ch of active inference (Parr et al., 2022; 
Pickering & Clark, 2014) relegates the inverse model to spinal reflex arcs, which reduce the prediction 
error resulting from the mismatch of predicted and actual proprioceptive data (Adams et al., 2013 ; 
Shipp et al., 2013). Despite these differences, however, both accounts are largely compatible, as they 
converge on the notion that actions (and movements) are predicted and controlled largely by internal 
generative (“forward”) models in the brain (cf. Pickering & Clark, 2014; Priorelli et al., 2023). Likewise, 
both accounts emphasize the importance of sensory attenuation —albeit with different underlying 
mechanisms. 
Here, active inference entertains one unique assumption; namely, that sensory attenuation is required 
to move. This results from the conceptualization of  behaviour in terms of inference on the causes of 
proprioceptive sensations; where  the spinal reflex arc minimiz es proprioceptive prediction errors 
(Adams et al., 2013; Shipp et al., 2013).  Not that descending proprioceptive predictions, as assumed 
by active inference to drive muscle movements (see above), are per se counterfactual; i.e., I am not 
really moving, and not actually receiving those proprioceptive signals that the descending ‘mot or’ 
signals predict. Along the classical formulation of (perceptual) inference, the resulting prediction error 
should be accommodated by updating the model beliefs; i.e., changing my predictions. This would 
result in immobility, however. The solution to th is problem is thought to lie in sensory attenuation ; 
i.e., by selectively suppressing the precision afforded to proprioceptive signals. The descending 
proprioceptive predictions are now thought to be relatively dominant; the organism does not update 
them, but chooses another way to directly minimise the prediction error: It changes the proprioceptive 
data itself. This means nothing else than that the organism moves, thus generating the predicted 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
13 
 
proprioceptive trajectory. Therefore, in active inference, sen sory attenuation is a requirement for 
movement initiation to the extent that a failure to correctly initiate or maintain movement can be 
modelled as a failure of adequate sensory attenuation. Indeed, there is considerable experimental 
evidence demonstrating sensory attenuation during movements and at the time of movement 
initiation consistent with active inference . For movements,  somatosensory attenuation has typically 
been studied using electrical stimulation of the median nerve. This produces a somatosensory evoked 
potential (SSEP) recordable at multiple levels of the somatosensory pathway to provide a measure of 
the magnitude of the afferent volley. Cortical EEG recordings have shown that there is a suppression 
of the primary and secondary complexes of the SSEP during active and passive movement (Rushton et 
al., 1981). Attenuation of SSEPs has also been shown during motor preparation before EMG onset of 
active movement (Starr and Cohen, 1985;  Jiang et al., 1990;  Seki and Fetz, 2012).  Furthermore, 
patients with Parkinson’s Disease, who have bradykinesia (a deficit in movement initiation and 
maintenance of movement) show sign ificantly reduced or no attenuation of the pr imary SSEP 
component when dopaminergic OFF medication but this is restored when ON medicati on (Macerollo 
et al. 2016).  
Thus, in active inference, sensory attenuation is the complement of sensory attention: To produce 
movement, the agent has to  attend away from proprioceptive data by attenuating their gain —
decreasing the confidence in them. Note this does not mean that the agent is uncertain about motor 
control or movement itself, but, momentarily, about its sensations (Palmer et al., 2016). This may be 
mediated by low frequency neuronal synchronization (Palmer et al., 2016; cf. Bastos et al., 2015).  
Interestingly, this account offers an explanation for certain phenomena observed under visuo -
proprioceptive conflicts as in the rubber hand illusion  (see above); i.e., the generation of apparently 
involuntary unsee n hand movements towards the location of a displaced fake hand ( observed 
empirically and replicated in simulations by Lanillos et al. , 2021 ). In brief,  in the active inference 
approach, the seen hand location could bias proprioceptive predictions of the fe lt, unseen hand 
position; the involuntary hand movements can be seen as an ‘enaction’ of those proprioceptive 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
14 
 
predictions ( Limanowski, 2022 b). Something similar  may also happen in motor contagion  and 
visuomotor interference—and related confusions of ‘agency’. 
Sensory attenuation of reafference and its relation to agency 
It is well known that sensory reafference (self-generated movement feedback) is relatively suppressed 
(e.g., Palmer et al., 2016; Limanowski et al., 2020a ). Within the active inference framework, this can 
be explained by the fact that the precision of the corresponding sensory signals is attenuated (see 
above). This implies a key role of precision control (sensory attenuation) in self-other distinction (Kilner 
et al., 2007; Friston & Fri th, 2015; Limanowski, 2022 a). Disturbances of agency are a particularly 
impressive case in which, within the active inference framework, the central role of sensory 
attenuation for self-other distinction  becomes evident. Here, we roughly define ‘agency’ as  the 
experience or feeling of being in control of “one’s” actions; i.e., a self-attribution of movement and its 
sensory consequences. Many accounts of pathological behaviour have focused on aberrant predictive 
mechanisms; e.g., casting psychosis as predict ion failure (Fletcher & Frith, 2009; Bansal et al., 2018; 
Corlett et al., 2009; Adams et al., 2012). In short, along active inference, the distinction between self 
and other in part relies on the fact that “self-generated” sensations (i.e., those predicted by the motor 
system) are attenuated —in order to allow movement, see above —whereas externally generated 
sensations are not ( Brown et al., 2013 ; Friston & Frith, 2015 ). Thus, a relatively attenuated 
proprioceptive sensation can be a cue that I am performing a voluntary act—enhanced proprioceptive 
signals would, conversely, signal that someone or something else caused my movement  (Friston & 
Frith, 2015). This renders precision estimation a key feature of self-other distinction in social settings. 
Correspondingly, simulation studies have shown that  a number of characteristic phenomena in 
schizophrenia/psychosis can be explained by an imbalance in precision between higher hierarchical 
areas (where it is too low) and lower – e.g., primary sensory – areas (where it is too high). These include 
impaired smooth pursuit eye movements, reduced evoked responses to unexpected stimuli in sensory 
oddball tasks, reduced sensitivity to some visual illusions, and – in particular – a loss of attenuation of 
self-generated sensations (reviewed in Adams et al., 2013). The latter has been demonstrated in the 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
15 
 
force-matching task (Shergill et al., 2005), although note that self -produced sensations could be 
magnified both by reduced attenuation (increased precision) and/or by impaired prediction (increased 
prediction errors) – few studies test both possibilities. Asimakidou et al. (2022) found evidence of both 
problems in schizotypy. Heightened sensations, including from somatic senses, can often result  in 
delusions about foreign objects or external influences on the body in schizophrenia. Interestingly, 
patients with functional neurological disorder – who suffer from symptoms such as paralysis or 
dystonia without evidence of neurological damage – also show reduced sensory attenuation in the 
force-matching task (Parées et al., 2014), implying that loss of agency (for self -generated motor 
symptoms) may have a similar mechanism across these disorders (Edwards et al., 2013).   
A final interesting showcase of the importance of precision for self -agency and self-other distinction 
can be found in the phenomena of motor contagion or visuomotor interference: As mentioned , the 
relative precision assigned to visual and proprioceptive information determines its impac t on the 
brain’s multisensory estimate of hand posture and position (see above). Getting the balance between 
these two senses right is key for bodily identification and self -other distinction; as it determines 
whether a seen movement is simply observed (other body) or whether it is executed (own body; Kilner 
et al., 2007; Shipp et al., 2013; Friston & Frith, 2015) . This explains why observing incongruent 
movements of conspecifics biases our own movement execution (Kilner et al., 2003; Press et al., 2011; 
Limanowski & Friston, 2020c; Gonzales -Franco et al., 2020).  Similarly, new -borns first show a 
pronounced imitation of observed movements, which is explained by an automatic activation of a body 
representation that does not yet distinguish between self (i.e., movements associated with visual and 
proprioceptive consequences) and other (i.e., movements associated with only visual consequences; 
Seth & Tsakiris, 2018; Ciaunica et al., 2021). In certain psychiatric and neurological conditions, such as 
catatonic schizophrenia, Tourette’s syndrome, or after prefrontal lesions, a similar ‘echopraxia’ can be 
observed. This can be thought of as a loss of control. In active inference formulations, specifically, it 
implies a loss of control over one’s expectations of sensory precision—resulting in aberrant attention 
and attenuation; i.e., an inadequate weighting of sensory evidence that causes an automatic update 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
16 
 
of a body model and, in the worst case, may lead to explicit misattributions of agency and pathological 
self-experience (cf. Ciaunica et al., 2022; Harris et al., 2023; Limanowski & Friston, 2020a). This renders 
the execution of control over sensory precision (the context -dependent selective emphasis or 
suppression of sensory evidence; i.e. sensory attention and attenuation) a key mechanism of bodily 
self-identification and self-other distinction (Limanowski, 2022a). But, at the same time, it enables us 
to be empathetic and to understand our conspecifics’ action intentions (Friston & Frith, 2015). 
Precision in action planning (discrete inference and mixed models) 
Above, we summarised how body movements are produced according to continuous (active) 
inference. This can be seen as “driving action selection in the present to change currently available 
sensory data” (Parr et al., 2022, p. 9). In contrast to this, an alternative formulation of active inference 
accommodates planning; i.e., inference to select the optimal course of action in the future (Friston et 
al., 2017; cf. Botvinick & Toussaint, 2012). 
The prominent way of modelling this is as inference in discrete time; e.g., via hidden Markov models 
or partially observable Markov decision processes (see Fig. 2A). Roughly, the  corresponding models 
comprise policies (which represent sequences of actions), hidden states, and observable sensory data 
generated by the latter. As states evolve over time according to transition matrices, each action plan 
(policy) can be evaluated in terms of how likely it is to generate preferred observations . This 
anticipated fulfilment of preferences is evaluated as part of the policy’s  expected free energy (for 
details, see e.g. Friston et al., 2017; Parr et al., 2017). The other aspect of expected free energy deals 
with a prior belief that policy selection will lead to resolution of any uncertainty —offering an 
exploratory complement to the ‘exploitative’ preference fulfilment.  In these formulations, precision 
can be associated with beliefs about uncertainty in the mapping of outcomes onto hidden states, in 
the state transitions, or about action policies (Parr & Friston, 2017). As we shall see below, these 
different forms of uncertainty can be elegantly linked to different processes of action planning. 
 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
17 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Continuous, discrete, and mixed models for (active) inference. A: Inference in continuous time via a continuous 
state space model in terms of generalized coordinates of motion. This kind of model generates data ( i.e., trajectories) in 
continuous time; using generalized coordinates of motion (speed, acceleration, jerk etc .) to represent the trajectory.  The 
details of this model are explained in Friston et al., (2017).  The key point here is that a continuous trajectory of sensory 
observations o (o’, o’’ , …; corresponding to speed, acceleration, etc.) is modelled as caused by a hidden state x and its 
derivatives (x’,x’’,…; where the interactions between the temporal derivatives are determined by an equation of motion f 
prescribed by a hidden cause v) through a nonlinear mapping g, plus random fluctuations ω. This elegantly captures the fact 
that the world generates sensory inputs continually, and, furthermore, that we act upon the world through continuous muscle 
movements. For this reason, these formulations are typically used to model sensation and movement, for instance, based on 
prediction error minimisation  in predictive coding  schemes. B: Inference in a discrete state space formulation. The key 
difference to the model shown in (A) is that we are seeing a sequence of three distinct hidden states s1-s3, which each generate 
corresponding an observable outcome o1-o3 through a matrix A specifying the likelihood mapping. The states are linked by 
transition matrices B, which in turn depend on the current policy (sequence of actions encoded by π; G represents the 
probability distribution over policies based on expected free energy; D represents the initial state, see Friston et al., 2017) . 
In contrast to the trajectory generated by the model in (A), this model generates data in discrete steps. These  formulations 
lend themselves to model discrete or even categorical inference of the sort that, presumably, guides decision making or 
action planning. C: “Mixed” model of action comprising a discrete state space level sitting “on top” of, and linked to  a 
continuous state space level, each displayed as a Bayesian network. The upper, discrete level generates “chunks” of data in 
discrete-time (the Bayesian network represents conditional dependencies) and thus models categorical decisions or discrete 
action plans; the low er, continuous level generates data in continuous -time (the Bayesian network represents generalized 
coordinates of motion). The link between the levels happens as the outcomes of the discrete model determine a hidden cause 
that prescribes the generalized motion of continuous hidden states, generating continuous sensation. Here, the upper level 
could select an optimal action sequence (such as a particular throwing movement),  which allows to generate muscle 
movements through proprioceptive predictions via the lower level (thus actually throwing the football). Precision estimates 
play an important, but different role in several computations at both levels of this model (see Fig. 1 and main text). Adapted 
from Friston et al., (2017, Figs. 1, 5, and 8) under the CC-BY 4.0 licence. 
 
 
 

The many roles of precision in action 
 
18 
 
The preference for a different formulation arises from the fact that, in contrast to continuous -time 
joint movements and the sensations driving them, decision making and action planning are categorical 
in nature; therefore, their underlying processes are very intuitively modelled in discrete-time (Friston 
et al., 2013; Schwartenbeck et al., 2019). In fact, one can even argue that very soon after leaving the 
level of sensory receptors, one can speak of discretized representations in the neuronal hierarchy; such 
as, for example, classical receptive fields (Parr et al., 2022). 
Naturally, practically all actions require planning and moving; i.e., inference in discrete and continuous 
state spaces—even our simple example in Figure 1 re quires the selection of an optimal action policy 
and the enaction of the movement i.e., the predicted proprioceptive states.  How can this be 
accommodated—how can these levels interact? This has recently been addressed within the active 
inference framework through the development of hierarchical, “mixed” generative models (Friston et 
al., 2017). These models encompass more than one level of belief updating, encompassing both 
discrete and continuous state spaces (see Fig. 2B for an example). These kinds of m odels are needed 
to capture inference underlying action; because action entails several processes ranging from discrete 
(categorical) decisions to continuous sensation and movement (see Fig. 1). Thus, in such mixed models, 
discrete inference will occupy th e higher levels of the hierarchy, while continuous inference will 
underwrite sensation and movement. This means that the lowest level of these models will necessarily 
be continuous—because it is the agent’s interface with the world in continuous time (Parr et al., 2022). 
Yet, these continuous levels must link to categorical states, as discrete action planning is informed by 
continuous sensory data; and (discretely) select ed actions generate sequences of (continuous) 
movements. 
In discrete as well as continuous formulations (Fig. 2A-B), precision is thought to be implemented via 
the weighting of synaptic inputs. But  the locus of this synaptic weighting varies depending upon the 
probability distribution with which that precision is associated.  In other words:  While the role of 
precision as synaptic gain control is universal, the association of precision with different distributions 
in the (brain’s) generative model means that ‘precision’ will mean something slightly different at each 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
19 
 
level of the model hierarchy. For those precisions associated with likelihoods (i.e., conditional 
distributions linking hierarchical levels) we might anticipate an effect on superficial pyramidal cells that 
mediate the ascending connections from one cortical region to another. However, for precisions over 
(for example) policies we might pursue, the relevant synapses might be expected in the basal ganglia, 
where monoamines such as dopamine can  modulate the actions selected.  Fast changes in synaptic 
efficacy such as these (as opposed to slower processes like learning) can plausibly be linked to the 
action of neuromodulatory systems in the brain (see below). 
In line with this , we have recently applied such a  hierarchical mixed  model to capture the 
computational architecture underlying sequential, goal-directed pointing movements—encompassing 
multiple discrete levels modelling target selection and action planning, and a continuous level 
generating joint (arm) movements (Parr et al., 2021). By applying simulated lesions to different 
precision parameters , we could reproduce behavio ural changes res embling those associated with 
either anatomical lesions or neuromodulatory pathologies ; mapping the computational architecture 
onto the known anatomy of movement (Fig. 3A).  We briefly summarize the main findings in the 
following. 
The idea behind this work was to simulate a simple task in which movement planning and execution 
are necessary but can be disambiguated from one another. Three targets were placed in fixed locations 
in a 3D space with one highlighted as the target to aim f or. Periodically, the highlighted target would 
change. The highest level of the generative model dealt with transitions between the highlighted target 
states, with each time-step predicting a short sequence of discrete positions for one’s hand at the level 
below. Finally, the discrete hand positions at each time were used to predict short trajectories in 
continuous time, using the generalised coordinates of motion apparatus alluded to above. During the 
inversion of this model, the expected free energy was used to select alternative hand positions, which, 
via the continuous model  at the lowest level , led to proprioceptive predictions that were fulfilled 
through (reflexive) actions. 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
20 
 
Several forms of precision were important here. At the continuous level, this included two key types 
of precision. The first was the inverse variance of the anticipated sensory data  (“sensory precision”). 
When this was increased —as if the descending corticospinal tracts that attenuate precision during 
movement (see above) were inter rupted—we found relatively normal movement, but greatly 
exaggerated tendon reflexes elicited by introducing an unexpected proprioceptive stimulus  (see Fig. 
3B). This is typical of so -called ‘upper motor neuron’ pathologies which range from stroke  (Wilson, 
Gandevia et al. 1999) to motor neuron disease (Christensen, Nielsen et al. 2003). The second precision 
at the continuous level determined the anticipated smoothness of sensory fluctuations (i.e., th eir 
autocorrelation over time). Augmentation of this precision resulted in hypermetric and ataxic -like 
behaviour of the sort associated with cerebellar syndromes (Holmes 1917, Hore, Wild et al. 1991). 
Neither of the above precision parameters affected the ability to decide upon the correct (highlighted) 
target—just the execut ion of the movement to reach that target. In contrast, manipulations to 
decrement of the precision of policy selection led to an almost akinetic picture, in which no target 
could be selected with any degree of confidence and the simulated arm remained some where in the 
middle. This might reflect the difficulty in motor initiation seen in Parkinsonian patients with dopamine 
depletion (Albin, Young et al. 1989). Finally, we found that reducing the precision that linked between 
the highest hierarchical level —dealing with changes in the highlighted target —and the level dealing 
with discrete sequences of hand positions resulted in a form of perseveration, in which every change 
in target position was associated with a very delayed (but ultimately successful) change in the motor 
plan to reach the new target. We might think of this form of precision attenuation as the effect of a 
frontal disconnection syndrome  (Leonard, Milner et al. 1988) —with disconnection being the most 
extreme form of loss of synaptic gain  (Geschwind 1974, Parr and Friston 2020) . Figure 3B shows the 
respective simulated pointing trajectories. 
In sum, the hierarchical, mixed models  briefly introduced here offer a great tool to investigate the 
neurocomputational basis of action. Specifically, they provide the possibility to simulate lesions to 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
21 
 
certain brain systems —e.g., those tentatively associated with the implementation of precisi on, as 
described in the following section. 
 
 
Figure 3: Using hierarchical active inference to simulate action and its pathologies. A: Mapping inferential message passing 
onto the known anatomy of movement. Here, to simulate pointing movements to three visual targets, we used a hierarchical 
mixed model with two linked discrete levels, inferring pointing sequences and intermediate attracting points for movement, 
respectively; the lower level linked to a continuous level as in Fig. 2.  The top schematic (small A) shows the mapping of two 
discrete levels of the mixed model, concerned with target and action selection, onto fronto -parietal cortices and structures 
of the basal ganglia. The bottom schematic (small B) shows the relationship between the lower discr ete level and the 
continuous level of the model, which ultimately issues proprioceptive predictions that are enacted by movement  through 
spinal reflexes in continuous time.  For details, see Parr et al. (2021).  B: This architecture was used to simulate  pointing 
movements to three visual targets under different synthetic lesions. The black lines in the left plots show the trajectory of 
the simulated arm; the red spheres represent the sequence of attracting points selected by the  (lower) discrete model that 
determine short trajectories for the continuous model (reminiscent of the concept of motor “chunking”). The right plots show 
the corresponding changes in shoulder rotation and flexion, and elbow flexion. From top to bottom: Overestimation of 
sensory precision did not impair movement, but exaggerated tendon reflexes (not shown) . Reducing the  precision of the 
beliefs about action policy selection  produced “akinetik”, small amplitude movements . Overestimation of the anticipated 
smoothness of sensory fluc tuations over time  produced hypermetric overshoots at the end of each movement . Finally, 
reducing the precision associated with linking the discrete model levels concerned with target and a ction policy selection, 
respectively, produced an apparent confusion whenever the target position changed. A and B reprinted from Parr et al. (2021, 
Fig. 6 and Fig. 5, respectively) under the CC-BY 4.0 licence. 
  

The many roles of precision in action 
 
22 
 
How are different kinds of precision implemented in the brain? 
One of the appealing characteristics of a ctive inference is that it can be a process theory ; i.e., a 
mechanistic description of how Bayesian message passing can be mapped onto neurobiological 
computations (Parr et al., 2022).  Among other things, t his allows to generate empirically testable 
predictions based on the assumed generative model that our brains are using—which may ultimately 
inform the construction of artificial agents (Ciria et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2023; Matsumoto et al., this 
issue). Thus, the inferential (Bayesian) message passing in active inference can be elegantly mapped 
onto the canonical cortical microcircuit (Bastos et al., 2012; Shipp , 2016). This can be achieved for 
continuous-time formulations, as in predictive coding, and discrete-time formulations such as partially 
observable Markov decision processes—albeit with some subtle differences (Parr et al., 2022; Hodson 
et al., 2024). 
In both formulations, p recision estimation can be cast as gain control —reflecting the confidence in 
probability distributions; e.g., the weight aff orded to prediction error signals or the confidence in a 
policy or likelihood mapping . The associated f ast changes in synaptic efficacy (as opposed to  those 
related to slower learning processes) can, in principle, be linked to neuromodulation (Parr et al., 2017, 
2022; Shine et al., 2021; cf. Lee & Dan, 2012 ). In particular, the focus on neuromodulation allows a 
very intuitive distinction between the different kinds of precision in action (as depicted in Fig. 1 and 
Fig. 2; cf. Yu & Dayan, 2005; Parr & Friston, 2017). 
Among the numerous neurotransmitters of the central nervous system, some have received particular 
attention in this formulation ; with respect to precision and uncertainty, those are acetylcholine, 
dopamine, and noradrenaline or norepinephrine (Yu & Dayan, 2005; Deco & Thiele, 2009; Marshall et 
al., 2016; Burk et al., 2018) . The  cholinergic, dopaminergic , and noradrenergic  systems are often 
referred to as ‘neuromodulatory’ systems, in contrast to neurotransmitters that classically are assigned 
a primarily excitatory or inhibitory role, such as Glutamate or GABA (although these can also influence 
attentional processes by acting on e.g. cholinergic projections , cf. Burk et al., 2018 ). This is due to 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
23 
 
several characteristics of the respective neurons and their synaptic effects; for instance, in contrast to 
e.g. Glutamate or GABA, neurons producing acetylcholine, dopamine, and noradrenaline are 
predominantly located in a few nuclei in the brainstem, from where they have more or less widespread 
connections to large parts of the brain (Yu & Dayan, 2005; Lee & Dan, 2012). This means that a single 
neuron can influence processes in many (e.g. cortical) neurons simultaneously—a role that lends itself 
to a global modulatory mechanism such as precision (Parr & Friston, 2017). Figure 3 shows a schematic 
of the main cholinergic, dopaminergic, and noradrenergic pathways of the brain.  
 
 
Figure 4: Neuromodulatory systems associated 
with precision  in action . The cholinergic, 
dopaminergic, and noradrenergic pathways have 
been linked to mediating different kinds of 
precision or uncertainty . Within the active 
inference framework, these neuromodulators can 
be linked to the precision afforded to sensory 
signals, act ion policies  and control , and model 
predictions (about the dynamics of changes in the 
environment), respectively. Figure reprinted from 
Parr et al. (2018 b, Fig. 4)  under the CC -BY 4.0 
licence. VTA = ventral tegmental area, SNc = 
substantia nigra pars compacta. 
 
 
Broadly, the cholinergic system can be seen as a top-down control mechanism, ultimately originating 
from the prefrontal cortex  through its control over cholinergic neurons e.g. in the basal forebrain , 
which modulates processing in sensory cortices (Deco & Thiele, 2009). Correspondingly, one of its likely 
roles is in the control of (selective) attention (Bauer et al., 2012a; Moran et al., 2013). Thus, it has been 
established that cholinergic neuromodulation can be modelled as enhancing sensory or ‘ex pected’ 
precision (Yu & Dayan, 2005; Moran et al., 2013) . In discrete-time models, this would correspond to 
the likelihood precision; i.e., how confident one is that hidden states will cause certain observable 
outcomes (Parr & Friston, 2017).  In our example (Fig. 1), cholinergic modulation would be at play at 
the lower, sensorimotor levels such as sensory attention and attenuation. 

The many roles of precision in action 
 
24 
 
The dopaminergic system has classically been linked to movement production and action selection, in 
large parts because its mai n pathways target predominantly motor structures in the basal ganglia 
(Friston et al., 2012; Parr et al., 2021 ). Active inference models have correspondingly clearly linked 
dopaminergic activity to the precision of cues that afford action (Friston et al., 2012); which, in discrete-
time formulations, corresponds to the precision of action policies—i.e., the confidence in action plans 
(Schwartenbeck et al., 2015; Parr & Friston, 2017 ). In our example, dopaminergic modulation would 
influence the selection of a specific play and movement. 
Finally, the noradrenergic system seems to encode the certainty in (precision of) model predictions ; 
where noradrenergic responses of the brainstem locus coeruleus signal low certainty. Put differently, 
a substantially increased noradrenergic signalling from the locus coeruleus would signal “global model 
failure” (Jordan, 2023) in light of unexpected errors (Yu & Dayan, 2005); i.e., it signals that the current 
model is gravely wrong and needs updating in light of incoming sensory evidence. This becomes 
relevant in learning and model updating (Sales et al., 2019), particularly when learning depends on the 
estimated volatility of the environment —where a hype rnoradrenergic state may lead to over -
reactivity to environmental changes, as potentially the case in autism spectrum disorder  (Lawson et 
al., 2017). One way to conceptualise this is that noradrenaline deals with confidence in how predictably 
the world cha nges (i.e., it signals precision in transition probabilities) —a view that is evidenced by 
modelling of pupillometric data during online manipulation of volatility (Vincent, Parr et al. 2019). 
Joint investigations of all three  of the above  neuromodulatory systems are still rare, but a  recent 
computational study using pharmacological manipulations of all three neuromodulators  overall 
confirmed the association of acetylcholine with uncertainty about cue -outcome associations; 
dopamine with action selection; and noradrenaline with learning from unexpected changes (Marshall 
et al., 2016). The role of serotonin in attention and precision is less clear (Burk et al., 2018; Doya et al., 
2021), but it may be linked to preferences or the precision of interoceptive likelihoods (Parr et al., 
2022). In sum, there are still many outstanding questions about the neuromodulatory mechanisms of 
precision to be asked by future work. 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
25 
 
Of course, neuromodulation is only one possible way to mediate precision estimates; for instance, they 
could also be computed and communicated  through the induction of oscillatory coherence  i.e. 
synchronization between cortical areas (Shipp, 2016; Palmer et al., 2016; cf. Spyropoulos et al., 2024). 
For instance, low frequency oscillations in the ‘alpha’ range have classically been assigned a functional 
role in mediating top-down (selective) sensory attention (Fries et al., 2001; Bastos et al., 2015). I.e., in 
many studies, attention to stimuli in various sensory modalities has been linked to a suppression of 
alpha power in the respective sensory cortical areas ( besides augmenting gamma power ). Similar 
attentional suppression has been observed over sensory cortices in the neighbouring ‘beta’ frequency 
range (Bauer et al., 2012a,b; Limanowski et al., 2020b). However, beta oscillations originating from the 
motor system seem to have a different functional role: Thus, Palmer et al. (2016, 2019) proposed that 
the desynchronization in the beta range typically observed during movement reflects an increased 
uncertainty in the current proprioceptive signals. In other words, this interpretation assigns 
sensorimotor beta oscillations  a role in sensory attenuation, in line with the assumption that an 
attenuation of proprioceptive signals is required to move (see above). This  interpretation of motor 
beta oscillations as mediating sensory attenuation nicely complements the role of sensory alpha/beta 
oscillations in sensory attention.  
Importantly, the association of different kinds of precision with different neuromodulators and the 
synchronization of different frequency band is not mutually exclusive . On the contrary, there is good 
evidence to assume a related mechanism; where, for example, cholinergic mechanisms could mediate 
the attention-related synchronisation of neuronal populations via its inhibitory effect on interneurons 
(Deco & Thiele, 2009 ; Bau er et al., 2012a ). More work is certainly needed to establish such a 
relationship, and to draw a clear precision -related functional distinction between different 
neuromodulators and neuronal synchronization in different frequency bands, but the above studi es 
are valuable first steps. 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
26 
 
Conclusion and outlook 
To conclude, the precision concept has proven a very valuable concept on many levels of 
understanding brain function and behaviour, from cognitive control and decision making to 
psychophysical sensory attenuation and motor reflexes. However, the reviewed contributions have, of 
course, not solved all questions—and opened up new ones—so there remains work to do. 
A major line of open questions surely pertains to the implementation of active inference and precision 
in the brain. Some of the assumptions of the f ramework are not undisputed, and there is a need for 
properly designed empirical studies that contrast them with other accounts of brain function and 
motor control (cf. Mikulasch et al., 2023; for a review, see Hodson et al., 2024; Shipp, 2016).  For 
instance, gain modulation may be associated with more (different) computations than changing 
precision (Rao, 2024; cf. Stroud et al., 2018). An exciting empirical research direction is the link 
between neuromodulators, neuronal synchronization, and different kin ds of precision discussed 
above. One specific question in this line of research pertains to the timing of precision in active 
sampling; i.e., involving the coordination of action and effector movements operating on different time 
scales (Parr & Friston, 20 17b; Parr & Limanowski, 2023) and a potential ‘entrainment’ of sensory 
attention by behavioural rhythms (Lakatos et al., 2008; Wang & Limanowski, 2023). We did not discuss 
inference underlying the balance between explorative and exploitative behaviour; but it is surely an 
important decision for action where adequate precision estimates (e.g., as confidence in control) are 
essential and determine behavioural flexibility, switching between tasks, and balancing the impact of 
habits vs goals in action planning (Schwartenbeck et al., 2019; Perrykkad et al., 2021, 2022).  
In the field of schizophrenia/psychosis research, a crucial open question is the mechanism behind the 
various precision changes that one can infer from behaviour. For example, higher hierarchi cal (e.g., 
prefrontal or hippocampal) loss of precision could be due to reduced synaptic gain from NMDA 
receptor dysfunction (Adams et al., 2022 a), or reduced neuromodulation – e.g., of prefrontal cortex 
by dopamine 1 receptors (Slifstein et al., 2015) or muscarinic receptors (Scarr et al., 2009) – but 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
27 
 
reduced attenuation in sensory areas may be due to disinhibition (loss of interneuron function) or 
poorly understood actions of dopamine in sensory striatum (V ilares & Kording , 2017). Conversely, 
other studies have found that striatal dopamine activity seems to strengthen the precision of prior 
beliefs about sensations, not sensory input ( Cassidy et al., 2018; Schmack et al., 2021 ): a possible 
mechanism for hallucinations, and likely contributory factor to delusions (Adams et al. 2022b).  
A very important field to which the concept of precision in generative models can contribute on many 
levels are cyber -physical interactions; i.e., interactions involving the control over robotic or virtual 
bodies (avatars). Robotics itself is a specific field of application, where Bayesian (active) inference can 
be implemented to control action (Ciria et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2023; Matsumoto et al., this issue). 
Thus equipping artificial agents with separate estimates in e.g. action policies and likelihood mappings 
may prove useful for generating truly human -like behaviour. This includes social -cognitive processes 
like action understanding, agency attribution, and joint action; which all rely on learning the 
appropriate balance between sensory attention and attenuation (Kilner et al., 2007; Press et al., 2011; 
Friston & Frith, 2015). 
More generally, cyber-physical interaction means learning control over alternative bodies—and, often, 
in different ‘realities’, as adopting control over a virtual or remote-controlled robotic body will provide 
the user with different sensory information and different degrees of freedom for movement. Thus, the 
adoption of a virtual or robotic body can be likened to a switch to a different reality; a different world 
and a different body representation (Limanowski, 2022a). This poses many complex problems to the 
embodied self (Seth & Tsakiris, 2018 ; Krugwasser et al., 2019; Wen & Imamizu, 2022), including how 
to adjust one’s precision estimates on several levels of inference for optimal behaviour and flexibility.  
We have already emphasized the importance of tuning precision estimates for aiding visuomotor 
adaptation; i.e., the integration  of novel seen and felt bodily information  for action (see above and 
Bauer et al., 2012a,b; Gonzales-Franco et al., 2020; Limanowski, 2022a). The same likely factors into 
adaptation to a different sensorimotor mapping in cyber-physical interactions. Furthermore, precision 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
28 
 
can act as sensory attention and attenuation  to enhance immersion : An attenuation of distracting 
signals from the ‘physical reality’ could help attend to those of the desired (virtual) reality; this can 
mean simple things such as a person playing virtual reality games ignoring the weight or limited field 
of view of the virtual reality headset,  or visuomotor lags introduced by systematic delays in the 
hardware. But it is unknown what the limits and consequences of this learning are. For instance, in 
which of these cases is the model (body representation) adjusted, when is a new model learned—and 
how efficiently can we switch between models? One interesting question is whether there is some sort 
of sensory attenuation when switching between physical and virtual body representations (or vice 
versa), similar to what has been discussed for movement initiation above. There are further potential 
roles of precision in cyber-physical interaction, related to  more ‘perceptual’ inference. For instance, 
estimates of interoceptive precision can mediate a sense o f “presence”, such as being in the virtual 
reality (cf. Seth et al., 2012; Allen et al., 2022). This could perhaps link to a higher-level role of precision 
as model certainty (see above); undermining the sense that  current world- and self-model is ‘right’ 
(Metzinger, 2004; Limanowski & Blankenburg, 2013). Thus, there are many possible roles of precision 
when switching between physical and virtual body representations —and correspondingly many 
theoretical and empirical questions that can and should be addressed from within the active inference 
framework. 
  
The many roles of precision in action 
 
29 
 
References 
Adams, R. A., L. U. Perrinet and K. Friston (2012). "Smooth Pursuit and Visual Occlusion: Active Inference and Oculomotor 
Control in Schizophrenia." PLOS ONE 7(10): e47502 
Adams, R. A., Shipp, S., & Friston, K. J. (2013). Predictions not commands: active inference in the motor system. Brain Structure 
and Function, 218, 611-643. 
Adams, R. A., Stephan, K. E., Brown, H. R., Frith, C. D., & Friston, K. J. (2013). The computational anatomy of 
psychosis. Frontiers in psychiatry, 4, 47. 
Adams, R. A., Pinotsis, D., Tsirlis, K., Unruh, L., Mahajan, A., Horas, A. M., ... & Anticevic, A. (2022a). Computational modeling 
of electroencephalography and functional magnetic resonance imaging paradigms indicates a co nsistent loss of 
pyramidal cell synaptic gain in schizophrenia. Biological psychiatry, 91(2), 202-215.  
Adams, R. A., Vincent, P., Benrimoh, D., Friston, K. J., & Parr, T. (2022b). Everything is connected: inference and attractor s in 
delusions. Schizophrenia research, 245, 5-22. 
Albin, R. L., A. B. Young and J. B. Penney (1989). "The functional anatomy of basal ganglia disorders." Trends in neurosciences 
12(10): 366-375. 
Allen, M., & Friston, K. J. (2018). From cognitivism to autopoiesis: towards a computat ional framework for the embodied 
mind. Synthese, 195(6), 2459-2482. 
Asimakidou, E., Job, X., & Kilteni, K. (2022). The positive dimension of schizotypy is associated with a reduced attenuation and 
precision of self-generated touch. Schizophrenia, 8(1), 57. 
Auksztulewicz, R., & Friston, K. (2015). Attentional enhancement of auditory mismatch responses: a DCM/MEG study. 
Cerebral cortex, 25(11), 4273-4283. 
Bansal, S., Ford, J. M., & Spering, M. (2018). The function and failure of sensory predictions. Annals of the New York Academy 
of Sciences, 1426(1), 199-220. 
Bastos, Andre M., Usrey, W. M., Adams, R. A., Mangun, G. R., Fries, P., & Friston, K. J. (2012). Canonical Microcircuits for 
Predictive Coding. Neuron, 76(4), 695–711.  
Bastos, A. M., Vezoli, J., Bosman, C. A., Schoffelen, J. M., Oostenveld, R., Dowdall, J. R., ... & Fries, P. (2015). Visual areas exert 
feedforward and feedback influences through distinct frequency channels. Neuron, 85(2), 390-401. 
Bauer, M., Kluge, C., Bach, D., Bradbury, D., Heinze, H. J., Dolan, R. J., & Driver, J. (2012a). Cholinergic enhancement of visual 
attention and neural oscillations in the human brain. Current Biology, 22(5), 397-402. 
Bauer, M., Kennett, S., & Driver, J. (2012b). Attentional selection of location and modality in vision and touch modulates low-
frequency activity in associated sensory cortices. Journal of neurophysiology, 107(9), 2342-2351. 
Beauchamp MS, Pasalar S, & Ro T. (2010). Neural substrates of reliability -weighted visual-tactile multisensory integration. 
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 4, 25.  
Bertoni, T., Mastria, G., Akulenko, N., Perrin, H., Zbinden, B., Bassolino, M., & Serino, A. (2023). The self and the Bayesia n 
brain: Testing probabilistic models of body ownership through a self-localization task. cortex, 167, 247-272. 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
30 
 
Botvinick, M., & Toussaint, M. (2012). Planning as inference. Trends in cognitive sciences, 16(10), 485-488.Brown, H., Friston, 
K., & Bestmann, S. (2011). Active inference, attention, and motor preparation. Frontiers in psychology, 2, 218. 
Brown, H., Adams, R. A., Parees, I., Edwards, M., & Friston, K. (2013). Active inference, sensory attenuation and illusions. 
Cognitive processing, 14(4), 411-427. 
Burk, J. A., Blumenthal, S. A., & Maness, E. B. (2018). Neuropharmacology of attention. European journal of pharmacology, 
835, 162-168. 
Cassidy, C. M., Balsam, P. D., Weinstein, J. J., Rosengard, R. J., Slifstein, M., Daw, N. D., ... & Horga, G. (2018). A perceptual 
inference mechanism for hallucinations linked to striatal dopamine. Current Biology, 28(4), 503-514. 
Chancel, M., Ehrsson, H. H., & Ma, W. J. (2022). Uncertainty-based inference of a common cause for body ownership. Elife, 
11, e77221. 
Christensen, P. B., J. F. Nielsen and T. Sinkjær (2003). "Quantification of hyperreflexia in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
by the soleus stretch reflex." Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor Neuron Disorders 4(2): 106-111. 
Ciaunica, A., Constant, A., Preissl, H., & Fotopoulou, K. (2021). The first prior: from co-embodiment to co-homeostasis in early 
life. Consciousness and cognition, 91, 103117. 
Ciaunica, A., Seth, A., Limanowski, J., Hesp, C., & Friston, K. J. (2022). I overthink —Therefore I am not: An active inference 
account of altered sense of self and agency in depersonalisation disorder. Consciousness and cognition, 101, 103320. 
Ciria, A., Schillaci, G., Pezzulo, G., Hafner, V. V., & Lara, B. (2021). Predictive processing in cognitive robotics: a review. Neural 
Computation, 33(5), 1402-1432. 
Clark, A. (2015). Surfing uncertainty: Prediction, action, and the embodied mind. Oxford University Press. 
Corlett, P. R., Frith, C. D., & Fletcher, P. C. (2009). From drugs to deprivation: a Bayesian framework for understanding models 
of psychosis. Psychopharmacology, 206, 515-530. 
Cohen, L.G., & Starr, A. (1987) Localization, timing and specificity of gating of somatosensory evoked potentials during active 
movement in man. Brain. ;110:451–467.  
Deco, G., & Thiele, A. (2009). Attention –oscillations and neuropharmacology. European journal of neuroscience, 30(3), 347 -
354.  
Doya, K., Miyazaki, K. W., & Miyazaki, K. (2021). Serotonergic modulation of cognitive computations. Current Opinion in 
Behavioral Sciences, 38, 116-123. 
Edwards, M. J., Adams, R. A., Brown, H., Pareés, I., & Friston, K. J. (2012). A Bayesian account of ‘hysteria’.  Brain, 135(11), 
3495-3512. 
Ernst, M. O., & Bülthoff, H. H. (2004). Merging the senses into a robust percept. Trends in cognitive sciences, 8(4), 162-169. 
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, Uncertainty, and Free-Energy. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 4.  
Fetsch, C. R., Pouget, A., DeAngelis, G. C., & Angelaki, D. E. (2012). Neural correlates of reliability-based cue weighting during 
multisensory integration. Nature neuroscience, 15(1), 146-154. 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
31 
 
Fletcher, P. C., and Frith, C. D. (2009). Perceiving is believing: a Bayesian approach to explaining the positive symptoms of  
schizophrenia. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 48–58. 
Fries, P., Reynolds, J. H., Rorie, A. E., & Desimone, R. (2001). Modulation of oscillatory neuronal synchronization by select ive 
visual attention. Science, 291(5508), 1560-1563. 
Friston, K. (2005). A theory of cortical responses.  Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
sciences, 360(1456), 815-836. 
Friston, K. J. (2017). "Precision psychiatry." Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging 2(8): 640-643. 
Friston, K. J., Harrison, L., & Penny, W. (2003). Dynamic causal modelling. Neuroimage, 19(4), 1273-1302. 
Friston, K., & Kiebel, S. (2009). Predictive coding under the free -energy principle. Philosophical transactions of the Royal 
Society B: Biological sciences, 364(1521), 1211-1221. 
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., Kilner, J., & Kiebel, S. J. (2010). Action and behavior: a free -energy formulation.  Biological 
cybernetics, 102, 227-260. 
Friston, K. (2011). What is optimal about motor control?. Neuron, 72(3), 488-498. 
Friston, K. J., Shiner, T., FitzGerald, T., Galea, J. M., Adams, R., Brown, H., ... & Bestmann, S. (2012 a). Dopamine, affordance 
and active inference. PLoS computational biology, 8(1), e1002327. 
Friston, K., R. Adams, L. Perrinet and M. Breakspear (2012b). "Perceptions as Hypotheses: Saccades as Experiments." Frontiers 
in Psychology 3(151). 
Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T., Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T., & Dolan, R. J. (2013). The anatomy of choice: active 
inference and agency. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 7, 598. 
Friston, K., & Frith, C. (2015). A duet for one. Consciousness and cognition, 36, 390-405. 
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., & de Vries, B. (2017). The graphical brain: belief propagation and active inference.  Network 
neuroscience, 1(4), 381-414. 
Geschwind, N. (1974). Disconnexion syndromes in animals and man, Springer. 
Gonzalez-Franco, M., Cohn, B., Ofek, E., Burin, D., & Maselli, A. (2020, March). The self-avatar follower effect in virtual reality. 
In 2020 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR) (pp. 18-25). IEEE. 
Harris, D. J., Wilkinson, S., & Ellmers, T. J. (2023). From fear of falling to choking under pressure: a predictive processin g 
perspective of disrupted motor control under anxiety. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 148, 105115. 
Mehta, M., & Smith, R. (2023). The empirical status of predictive coding and active inference.  Neuroscience & Biobehavioral 
Reviews, 105473. 
Holmes, G. (1917). "THE SYMPTOMS OF ACUTE CEREBELLAR INJURIES DUE TO GUNSHOT INJURIES." Brain 40(4): 461-535. 
Hohwy, J. (2013). The predictive mind. OUP Oxford. 
Hore, J., B. Wild and H. Diener (1991). "Cerebellar dysmetria at the elbow, wrist, and fingers." Journal of neurophysio logy 
65(3): 563-571. 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
32 
 
Idei, H., Ohata, W., Yamashita, Y., Ogata, T., & Tani, J. (2022). Emergence of sensory attenuation based upon the free-energy 
principle. Scientific reports, 12(1), 14542. 
Jordan, R. (2023). The locus coeruleus as a global model failure system. Trends in Neurosciences. 
Kanai, R., Y. Komura, S. Shipp and K. Friston (2015). "Cerebral hierarchies: predictive processing, precision and the pulvinar." 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 370(1668). 
Kilner, J. M., Paulignan, Y., & Blakemore, S. J. (2003). An Interference Effect of Observed Biological Movement on Action. 
Current Biology, 13(6), 522–525. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0960-9822(03)00165-9 
Kilner, J. M., Friston, K. J., & Frith, C. D. (2007). Predictive coding: an account of the mirror neuron system.  Cognitive 
processing, 8, 159-166. 
Kok, P., Rahnev, D., Jehee, J. F. M., Lau, H. C., & de Lange, F. P. (2012). Attention Reverses the Effect of Prediction in Silencing 
Sensory Signals. Cerebral Cortex, 22(9), 2197–2206. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhr310 
Körding, K. P., Beierholm, U., Ma, W. J., Quartz, S., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Shams, L. (2007). Causal inference in multisensory 
perception. PLoS one, 2(9), e943. 
Krugwasser, A. R., Harel, E. V., & Salomon, R. (2019). The boundaries of the self: The sense of agency across different 
sensorimotor aspects. Journal of Vision, 19(4), 14-14. 
Lakatos, P., Karmos, G., Mehta, A. D., Ulbert, I., & Schroeder, C. E. (2008). Entrainment of neuronal oscillations as a mechanism 
of attentional selection. science, 320(5872), 110-113. 
Lanillos, P., Franklin, S., Maselli, A., & Franklin, D. W. (2021). Active strategies for multisensory conflict suppression in the 
virtual hand illusion. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 22844. 
Lawson, R. P., Bisby, J., Nord, C. L., Burgess, N., & Rees, G. (2021). The computational, pharmacological, and physiological 
determinants of sensory learning under uncertainty. Current Biology, 31(1), 163-172. 
Lee, S. H., & Dan, Y. (2012). Neuromodulation of brain states. Neuron, 76(1), 209-222.  
Leonard, G., B. Milner and L. Jones (1988). "Performance on unimanual and bimanual tapping tasks by patients with lesions 
of the frontal or temporal lobe." Neuropsychologia 26(1): 79-91.# 
Limanowski, J., & Blankenburg, F. (2013). Minimal self-models and the free energy principle. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 
7. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00547 
Limanowski, J. (2017). (Dis-) attending to the Body: Action and Self -experience in the Active Inference Framework . Frankfurt 
am Main: Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz. 
Limanowski, J., & Friston, K. (2018). ‘Seeing the dark’: grounding phenomenal transparency and opacity in precision 
estimation for active inference. Frontiers in psychology, 9, 643.  
Limanowski, J., & Friston, K. (2020 a). Attenuating oneself: An active inference perspective on “selfless” 
experiences. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(I), 1-16. 
Limanowski, J., & Friston, K. (2020b). Attentional Modulation of Vision Versus Proprioception During Action. Cerebral Cortex, 
30(3), 1637–1648. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhz192 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
33 
 
Limanowski, J., & Friston, K. (2020 c). Active inference under visuo -proprioceptive conflict: Simulation and empirical results. 
Scientific Reports, 10(1), 4010. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-61097-w 
Limanowski, J., Lopes, P., Keck, J., Baudisch, P., Friston, K., & Blankenburg, F. (2020a). Action-dependent processing of touch 
in the human parietal operculum and posterior insula. Cerebral Cortex, 30(2), 607-617. 
Limanowski, J., Litvak, V., & Friston, K. (2020 b). Cortical beta oscillations reflect the contextual gating of visual action 
feedback. NeuroImage, 222, 117267. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117267 
Limanowski, J. (2022 a). Precision control for a flexible body representation.  Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 134, 
104401. 
Limanowski, J. (2022b). Enacting Proprioceptive Predictions in the Rubber Hand Illusion. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 16, 
839890. 
Ma, W. J., Kording, K. P., & Goldreich, D. (2023). Bayesian models of perception and action: An introduction. MIT press. 
Macerollo, A., Chen, J. C., Pareés, I., Kassavetis, P., Kilner, J. M., & Edwards, M. J. (2015). Sensory attenuation assessed by 
sensory evoked potentials in functional movement disorders. PLoS One, 10(6), e0129507. 
Macerollo, A., Chen, J. C., Korlipara, P., Foltynie, T., Rothwell, J., Edwards, M. J., & Kilner, J. M. (2016). Dopaminergic treatment 
modulates sensory attenuation at the onset of the movement in Parkinson's disease: A test of a new framework for 
bradykinesia. Movement disorders : official journal of the Movement Disorder Society, 31(1), 143–146. 
Marshall, L., Mathys, C., Ruge, D., De Berker, A. O., Dayan, P., Stephan, K. E., & Bestmann, S. (2016). Pharmacological 
fingerprints of contextual uncertainty. PLoS Biology, 14(11), e1002575. 
Maselli, A., Lanillos, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2022). Active inference unifies intentional and conflict-resolution imperatives of motor 
control. PLoS computational biology, 18(6), e1010095. 
Matsumoto, T., Ohata, W., & Tani, J. (2023). Incremental Learning of Goal -Directed Actions in a Dynamic Environment by a 
Robot Using Active Inference. Entropy, 25(11), 1506. 
Meijer, D., & Noppeney, U. (2020). Computational models of multisensory integration. Multisensory perception, 113-133. 
Metzinger, T. (2004). Being no one: The self-model theory of subjectivity. mit Press. 
Metzinger, T., & Wiese, W. (2017). Philosophy and predictive processing. Frankfurt am main: MIND Group. 
Mikulasch, F. A., Rudelt, L., Wibral, M., & Priesemann, V. (2023). Where is the error? Hierarchical predictive coding through 
dendritic error computation. Trends in Neurosciences, 46(1), 45-59.  
Moran, R. J., Campo, P., Symmonds, M., Stephan, K. E., Dolan, R. J., & Friston, K. J. (2013). Free energy, precision and learning: 
the role of cholinergic neuromodulation. Journal of Neuroscience, 33(19), 8227-8236. 
Noel, J. P., Blanke, O., & Serino, A. (2018). From multisensory integration in peripersonal space to bodily self‐consciousness: 
from statistical regularities to statistical inference. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1426(1), 146-165. 
Pareés, I., Brown, H., Nuruki, A., Adams, R. A., Davare, M., Bhatia, K. P., ... & Edwards, M. J. (2014). Loss of sensory attenuation 
in patients with functional (psychogenic) movement disorders. Brain, 137(11), 2916-2921. 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
34 
 
Palmer, C. E., Auksztulewicz, R., Ondobaka, S., & Kilner, J. M. (2019). Sensorimotor beta power reflects the precision-weighting 
afforded to sensory prediction errors. NeuroImage, 200, 59–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.06.034 
Palmer, C., Zapparoli, L., & Kilner, J. M. (2016 a). A New Framework to Explain Sensorim otor Beta Oscillations. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 20(5), 321–323. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.03.007 
Palmer, C. J., Lawson, R. P., & Hohwy, J. (2017). Bayesian approaches to autism: Towards volatility, action, and 
behavior. Psychological bulletin, 143(5), 521. 
Palmer, C. E., Davare, M., & Kilner, J. M. (2016b). Physiological and perceptual sensory attenuation have different underlying 
neurophysiological correlates. Journal of neuroscience, 36(42), 10803-10812.  
Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2017). Uncertainty, epistemics and active inference.  Journal of the Royal Society Interface , 14(136), 
20170376. 
Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2017b). The active construction of the visual world. Neuropsychologia, 104, 92-101. 
Parr, T., D. Benrimoh, P. Vincent and K. Friston (2018a). "Precision and false perceptual inference." Front. Integr. Neurosci. 
Parr, T., Rees, G., & Friston, K. J. (2018 b). Computational neuropsychology and Bayesian inference. Frontiers in human 
neuroscience, 12, 61. 
Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Attention or salience? Current Opinion in Psychology , 29, 1 –5. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.10.006 
Parr, T. and K. J. Friston (2020). "Disconnection and Diaschisis: Active  Inference in Neuropsychology." The Philosophy and 
Science of Predictive Processing: 171. 
Parr, T., Limanowski, J., Rawji, V., & Friston, K. (2021). The computational neurology of movement under active inference. 
Brain, awab085. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awab085 
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., & Friston, K. J. (2022). Active inference: the free energy principle in mind, brain, and behavior. MIT Press. 
Parr, T., & Limanowski, J. (2023). Synchronising our internal clocks. Comment on:" An active inference model of hierarchical 
action understanding, learning and imitation" by Proietti et al. Physics of Life Reviews, 46, 258-260. 
Perrykkad, K., Lawson, R. P., Jamadar, S., & Hohwy, J. (2021). The effect of unce rtainty on prediction error in the action 
perception loop. Cognition, 210, 104598. 
Perrykkad, K., Robinson, J. E., & Hohwy, J. (2023). Foraging for the self: Environment selection for agency inference. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 30(2), 608-620. 
Pickering, M. J., & Clark, A. (2014). Getting ahead: forward models and their place in cognitive architecture. Trends in cognitive 
sciences, 18(9), 451-456. 
Priorelli, M., Maggiore, F., Maselli, A., Donnarumma, F., Maisto, D., Mannella, F., ... & Pezzulo, G. (2023). Modeling motor 
control in continuous-time Active Inference: a survey. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems. 
Rao, R. P. (2024). A sensory–motor theory of the neocortex. Nature Neuroscience, 27(7), 1221-1235. 
Rushton, D.N., Rothwell, J.C., & Craggs, M.D. (1981) Gating of somatosensory evoked potentials during different kinds of 
movement in man. Brain. 104:465–491 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
35 
 
Sales, A. C., Friston, K. J., Jones, M. W., Pickering, A. E., & Moran, R. J. (2019). Locus Coeruleus tracking of prediction errors 
optimises cognitive flexibility: An Active Inference model. PLoS computational biology, 15(1), e1006267. 
Samad, M., Chung, A. J., & Shams, L. (2015). Perception of Body Ownership Is Driven by Bayesian Sensory Inference. PLOS 
ONE, 10(2), e0117178. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0117178 
Scarr, E., Cowie, T. F., Kanellakis, S., Sundram, S., Pantelis, C., & Dean, B. (2009). Decreased cortical muscarinic receptor s 
define a subgroup of subjects with schizophrenia. Molecular psychiatry, 14(11), 1017-1023. 
Schmack, K., Bosc, M., Ott, T., Sturgill, J. F., & Kepecs, A. (2021). Striatal dopamine mediates hallucination -like perception in 
mice. Science, 372(6537), eabf4740. 
Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T. H., Mathys, C., Dolan, R., & Friston, K. (2015). The dopaminergic midbrain encodes the 
expected certainty about desired outcomes. Cerebral cortex, 25(10), 3434-3445.  
Schwartenbeck, P., Passecker, J., Hauser, T. U., FitzGerald, T. H., Kronbichler, M., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Computational 
mechanisms of curiosity and goal-directed exploration. elife, 8, e41703. 
Seki. K., & Fetz, E.E. (2012) Gating of sensory input at spinal and cortical levels during preparation and execution of voluntary 
movement. J Neurosci. 32:890–902 
Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K., & Critchley, H. D. (2012). An interoceptive predictive coding model of conscious presence. Frontiers in 
psychology, 2, 395. 
Seth, A. K., & Tsakiris, M. (2018). Being a beast machine: The somatic basis of selfhood. Trends in cognitive sciences, 22(11), 
969-981. 
Shine, J. M., Müller, E. J., Munn, B., Cabral, J., Moran, R. J., & Breakspear, M. (2021). Computational models link cellular 
mechanisms of neuromodulation to large-scale neural dynamics. Nature neuroscience, 24(6), 765-776. 
Shipp, S., Adams, R. A., & Friston, K. J. (2013). Reflections on agranular architecture: predictive coding in the motor corte x. 
Trends in neurosciences, 36(12), 706-716. 
Shipp, S. (2016). Neural elements for predictive coding. Frontiers in psychology, 7, 215410. 
Slifstein, M., Van De Giessen, E., Van Snellenberg, J., Thompson, J. L., Narendran, R., Gil, R., ... & Abi-Dargham, A. (2015). 
Deficits in prefrontal cortical and extrastriatal dopamine release in schizophrenia: a positron emission tomographic 
functional magnetic resonance imaging study. JAMA psychiatry, 72(4), 316-324. 
Spyropoulos, G., Schneider, M., van Kempen, J., Gieselmann, M. A., Thiele, A., & Vinck, M. (2024). Distinct feedforward and 
feedback pathways for cell-type specific attention effects. Neuron. 
Starr A, Cohen LG  (1985). “Gating” of somatosensory evoked potentials begins before the onset of voluntary movement in 
man. Brain Res. 348:183–186 
Sterzer, P., Adams, R. A., Fletcher, P., Frith, C., Lawrie, S. M., Muckli, L., ... & Corlett, P. R. (2018). The predictive coding account 
of psychosis. Biological psychiatry, 84(9), 634-643. 
Stroud, J. P., Porter, M. A., Hennequin, G., & Vogels , T. P. (2018). Motor primitives in space and time via targeted gain 
modulation in cortical networks. Nature neuroscience, 21(12), 1774-1783. 
The many roles of precision in action 
 
36 
 
Vilares, I., & Kording, K. P. (2017). Dopaminergic medication increases reliance on current information in Parkinson’s disease. 
Nature human behaviour, 1(8), 0129. 
Vincent, P., T. Parr, D. Benrimoh and K. J. Friston (2019). "With an eye on uncertainty: Modelling pupillary responses to 
environmental volatility." PLOS Computational Biology 15(7): e1007126. 
Wang, P., & Limanowski, J. (2023). Phasic modulation of beta power at movement -related frequencies during visuomotor 
conflict. Journal of Neurophysiology, 130(5), 1367-1372.  
Waszak, F., Cardoso -Leite, P., & Hughes, G. (2012). Action effect anticipation: n europhysiological basis and functional 
consequences. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(2), 943-959. 
Wen, W., & Imamizu, H. (2022). The sense of agency in perception, behaviour and human –machine interactions. Nature 
Reviews Psychology, 1(4), 211-222. 
Wilson, L. R., S. C. Gandevia, J. T. Inglis, J. M. Gracies and D. Burke (1999). "Muscle spindle activity in the affected upper limb 
after a unilateral stroke." Brain 122(11): 2079-2088. 
Yon, D., & Frith, C. D. (2021). Precision and the Bayesian brain. Current Biology, 31(17), R1026-R1032. 
Yu, A. J., & Dayan, P. (2005). Uncertainty, neuromodulation, and attention. Neuron, 46(4), 681-692.  
Yuan, K., Sajid, N., Friston, K., & Li, Z. (2023). Hierarchical generative modelling for autonomous robots.  Nature Machine 
Intelligence, 5(12), 1402-1414. 
Zeller, D., Friston, K. J., & Classen, J. (2016). Dynamic causal modeling of touch-evoked potentials in the rubber hand illusion. 
NeuroImage, 138, 266–273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.05.065 
 
 
 