 
Neurocomputational impairments in disambiguation of context as a 
key determinant of post-traumatic psychopathology 
 
Adam Linson 
School of Computing & Communications, Faculty of STEM, Open University, Edinburgh, UK, 
adam.linson@open.ac.uk 
Heidi Anderson 
Shields & Stripes, North Carolina, USA 
Karl Friston 
Department of Imaging Neuroscience, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University 
College London, London, UK 
Michael Moutoussis 
Department of Imaging Neuroscience, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University 
College London, London, UK 
 
(7-July-2025) 
 
Abstract 
We combine theoretical biology and systems neuroscience to relate the mechanisms of post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) models to biopsychosocial complexity. Moving beyond fear 
conditioning, extinction and habits formed by associative learning, we consid er conserved 
neuromodulatory mechanisms related to harm expectation, defensive mobilisation, and 
context (in)sensitivity. Our account of harm-mitigating, neurobehavioural responses furnishes 
a mechanistic understanding of maladaptive behaviour and impaired  belief-updating, which 
are often underspecified in conceptual analyses. Grounded in neurobiological evidence , we 
specify PTSD -related impairment in terms of Bayesian belief -updating, and establish an 
adaptive/maladaptive boundary using active inference and simulation studies . The ensuing 
model plausibly illustrates PTSD pathogenesis, which remains understudied relative to 
aetiology. We locate pathogenesis in maladaptive precision following traumatic learning, 
characterised by aberrant Bayesian credit assignment. Future scient ific and clinical studies 
can test the validity of these insights, which could underwrite our understanding of the 
phenomenology, diagnostics and ultimately treatment intervention in post-traumatic disorders. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 2 
During traumatic experiences, the imperative to mitigate against severe harm requires an 
intense mobilisation of biological subsystems, an ‘emergency response mode’. 1,2 However,  
multiple factors involved in the traumatic experience, its traumatic memory and the 
experience-dependent plasticity of the traumatised person can lead this emergency response 
mode to become persistent, that is, maladaptive. Here, we focus on modelling post-traumatic 
pathogenesis as the process by which a trauma schema (or ‘mode’) becomes persistent and, 
in turn, causes a wide range of post -traumatic stress syndromes (PTSS), including those 
related to mental imagery (e.g., ‘flashbacks’). The modelling also illustrates the process of 
returning to a pre -traumatic response mode, to sugg est how PTSS treatment interventions 
could target the root cause of symptoms. In contrast to reductionist accounts that can lead to 
over-medicalisation, this computational approach is consistent with a biopsychosocial 
understanding of post-traumatic disorders. 
 
The present work models conserved neuromodulatory and sensorimotor mechanisms related 
to harm expectation, defensive mobilisation, 3,4 and the associative learning of causes and 
consequences (model -based learning). 5,6 The modelling remains compatible with multiple 
accounts of fear and extinction,7–10 without relying on these constructs, by shifting the focus to 
the general construct of harm. Perceptibly harmful administrations of pain, electric shock, 
restraint, etc., are common to experimental paradigms of fear conditioning and extinction in 
(non-human) animals. A capacity for harm perception, expectation, and mitigation is 
necessarily evolutionarily conserved, as an abundance of harm negatively impacts the survival 
of individuals and species. 
 
The notion of expectation has been readily operationalised using a range of comparable 
theories including Hebbian learning, spike -timing dependent plasticity (STDP), predictive 
coding, and embodied cognition frameworks broadly known under ‘Bayesian brain’ or 
‘predictive processing’ descriptions, sometimes specified as active inference (applied here). 
These theoretical approaches relate to methodologies for understanding and measuring 
correspondences between neural substrates and behaviour. Computational psy chiatry 
commonly incorporates these methodologies, 11 found in an emerging body of research on 
understanding traumatic experience and PTSS.1,12–14 
 
Neurobehavioural response patterns necessary for survival form the basis of our PTSD 
modelling. The sequence of agent -environment interactions engaging these neural 
mechanisms are: (1) learning about the sources of harm in multiple contexts; (2) learning when 
harm is probable; (3) making a (fallible) judgement about the likelihood of imminent harm; and 
(4) responding defensively only when harm is likely. Grounded in the anticipation of harm 
under varied conditions, the model remains consistent with experime ntal studies of fear 
conditioning and extinction in animal models,9 in addition to observational and case studies of 
human PTSD and related clinical trials. 15 Nevertheless, we argue that probabilistic learning 
about contexts is central to understanding post-traumatic impairments,5,16 beyond associative 
(model-free) mechanisms often used to describe traumatic learning. 
 
From this perspective, there are extensive commonalities between non -traumatic and 
traumatic experiences. By drawing on the sciences of visual attention, multimodal perception, 
memory, and sleep, and combining them with neuromodulatory systems neuroscience , we 
articulate a general neuropsychological and neurobehavioral account that illustrates a putative 
pathogenesis of disorders related to sequelae of traumatic stress including PTSD and CPTSD. 
This account informs a novel neurocomputational model that highlights biopsychosocial 
dynamics relevant to diagnosis and treatment of these disorders. 
Overview 
A brief formulation of our analysis is linked below to modelling (see Results) and background 
literature (see Online Methods). Throughout, we underscore contiguities between realistic 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 3 
experiential narratives and common experimental paradigms (e.g., psychophysics). This 
approach extends our theoretical account beyond neurobiology and facilitates future empirical 
testing.17 
 
From the standpoint of an individual in a new situation, there may be ambiguity as to whether 
the surrounding context is one in which harm is likely (harmful context) or unlikely (harmless 
context). Ordinarily, determinations of context (harmful vs. harmle ss) are made by gathering 
sensory evidence to reach a decision. The belief that I am in one context and not the other 
should ideally persist to some extent as a (contextual) prior belief, but should also decay, in 
order to strike a balance between (a) maintaining the belief that I am still in the same context 
and (b) re-assessing whether the context has changed. 
 
Our theory describes PTSD pathogenesis as a process by which the balance between 
harmless and harmful contextual priors is lost. Here, the prior belief in a harmful context grows 
(in precision) beyond a critical tipping point. Once reached, the aforementioned decay rate is 
insufficient for rebalancing with contextual priors for harmless context. 
 
Following traumatic exposure to a harmful context, the imbalance occurs depending on 
resilience or vulnerability. For a resilient phenotype, the learning rate for harmful context is 
sufficient to preclude an imbalance between contextual priors. In contrast, if prior beliefs about 
the presence of a harmful context become unduly strong, then opportunities for re-assessing 
context will be continually foregone. The foregoing of contextual re-assessment will persist for 
harmless contexts, due to the (false) beli ef they are harmful. Moreover, without re -
assessment, a (false) conclusion that the context is harmful will in turn be (mis)counted as 
new (false) evidence that the context is indeed harmful – thus continually strengthening the 
false contextual belief in a positive feedback loop, a ‘vicious circle’. This miscounting can be 
described as part of a confirmation bias in perceptual decision -making modelled by 
hierarchical approximate inference.18 
 
If PTSD pathogenesis occurs, a possible treatment intervention relates to the provision of 
evidence that I am in a harmless context, rather than a harmful one as believed a priori. For 
the treatment to succeed, I must accumulate enough evidence to update my contextual priors. 
Only then can I seek out novel situations and determine their true context, rather than giving 
undue weight to the harmful prior. 
 
Below, we introduce a neuromodulatory circuit for a mechanistic understanding of PTSD -
related phenomena. We then illustrate PTSD pathogenesis and treatment in model -based 
simulation studies (see Results). To draw on the literature that supports our account, we also 
present an interlinked cognitive psychological framing of processes and mechanisms related 
to context recognition (see Online Methods). Under this framing, we identify context ual 
interactions with what is widely understood as Visual Working Memory (VWM). We also cover 
contextual interactions between long -term memory (LTM) and task -related generalisation. 
Interested readers may wish to have this general cognitive psychological description in place 
first as a foundation. 
Neuromodulatory circuits and PTSD pathogenesis 
We first focus on putative functional neuroanatomy, to hypothesize the neural pathways that 
subserve the psychological, cognitive, and physiological processes involved in our account. 
As an initial step, we draw connections between PTSS and a pontine neuro modulatory 
subsystem. We then provide a schema that brings this subsystem into correspondence with 
non-pathological and pathological neurobehavioral dynamics and relate these to psychiatric 
diagnostic criteria. Finally, we elaborate a long -range circuit re levant to pathogenesis and 
treatment of PTSD. 
 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 4 
The reticular activating system (RAS) in the brainstem, implicated in sleep -wake cycle 
regulation, is a neurobiological locus of a range of sleep disorders connected to psychiatric 
conditions.19–21 Under typical functioning, excitatory cholinergic projections from the 
pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus (PPtg) to the locus coeruleus (LC) stimulate an inhibitory 
noradrenergic projection from the LC to the PPtg. In this PPtg -LC (excitation -inhibition) 
interaction, acetylcholine (ACh) and noradrenaline (NA) are mutually stabilising, resulting in a 
balance characteristic of attentive wakefulness. At the initiation of sleep, the PPtg continues 
to emit ACh but temporarily ceases excitation of the LC, resulting in a marked rise in ACh and 
diminishment of NA. If, however, this pontine ACh/NA subsystem is at an (aberrant) elevated 
tonic level, one would expect sleep to involve vivid trauma replay nightmares (elevated ACh) 
and gross body movements (elevated NA), both of which are characteristic of PTSD.21–25 
 
The elevated tonic level may be held over from an adaptive (i.e., situationally apt) phasic 
elevation during a wakeful traumatic experience. During such an event, phasic elevation would 
aid harm mitigation efforts by increasing ACh for selective sensory gain and increasing NA for 
rapid behavioural response. Known PTSS are depicted in Fig. 1, in relation to ACh and NA 
levels. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1. Across the central axis, the difference in relative ACh and NA levels in awake and asleep 
states is depicted (diagonal dotted lines). Green is used to indicate unimpaired tonic levels that raise 
to phasic levels during a traumatic experience and return t o unimpaired tonic levels (green) for a 
resilient individual (movement along the grey arrows). A vulnerable individual may remain at elevated 
phasic levels (red) such that they become tonic. The text boxes indicate corresponding consequences 
of ACh and NA when unelevated or elevated, including PTSD symptoms under impaired tonic 
elevation (awake and asleep). 
 
Following such an event, phasic levels should fall ahead of healthy sleep, such that memory 
can be re -encoded and re -organised in relation to event boundaries. Future reactions to 
trauma cues in new contexts could deploy attention to the sensory periphery to update beliefs 
about the veridical context (see Fig. 8, boxes A and 4A). However, if the phasic increase has 
not subsided prior to sleep, then disrupted sleep can hinder memory re -encoding and re -
organisation, resulting in stronger subsequent activation during traumatic recall. This overly 
strong reactivation can provide sufficient evidence for a false context such that belief-updating 
about veridical conditions is hindered by peripheral sensory attenuation (see Fig. 8, boxes B1, 
B2, and 4B). If the phasic elevation endures, it can become effectively a new elevated tonic 
baseline, with wakeful hypervigilance and hyperarousal. Fig. 2 illustrates how phasic elevation 
can become tonic elevation, and relates this to PTSD diagnostic criteria. 
 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 5 
 
FIGURE 2. PTSS are natural, but their unwarranted persistence is pathological. Extreme task 
demands, as when life is at stake, elicit intense physiological responses, with physiological indicators 
peaking at high values (a time-course of sympathetic nervous system activation: increased heart rate 
(HR) and HR variability, blood pressu re, breathing rate, adrenaline levels, vigorous motor 
preparation, etc.). How long it takes a defensive mobilisation to fully subside will depend on the 
elicited response (i) strength and (ii) the rate of response decay following a transition from a high to 
low probability of harm. An additional factor is (iii) the baseline immediately preceding the response, 
a local rather than global minimum (‘pre-response baseline’). If defences are already partly mobilised, 
as when on high alert, the distance between the pre-response baseline and peak mobilisation will be 
reduced (upper right arrows). 
 
For a diagnosis of post -traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), the prototypical disorder of its kind, 
symptoms must last “longer than a month” according to the DSM -5 but “at least several weeks” 
according to the ICD -11. From a computational point of view, the o ptimal decay rate should be 
determined by the persistence of high probability of harm. If, say, serious harm is likely to occur within 
three weeks, high alert should not stop within one week. Hence, we must not pathologize the initial 
occurrence of PTSD sy mptoms, but focus on how their nature increases the risk of unwarranted, 
maladaptive persistence. 
 
We postulate a critical relationship between a ‘return slope’ (B) and its intercepting a threshold 
separating extreme from ordinary arousal. This intercept characterises the transition out of PTSS  – 
the time axis would be set differently in different diagnostic classifications and related to different 
neurobiological indicators (e.g., neurochemical and connectome properties 26). Resilience can then 
be related to the ability to clearly infer that one no longer faces an increased likelihood of harm, and 
rapidly return to the psychophysiological baseline  if so (ability to ‘bounce back’) . A vulnerability to 
PTSS can be characterised with an inappropriately sluggish decay of arousal. Vulnerability factors 
may include genetic predispositions and lifespan events such as earlier psychological trauma or 
physical traumatic brain injury (TBI). 
 
The wide arrows indicate neuromodulatory responses as temporal increases and decreases in 
pontine acetylcholine (ACh) and noradrenaline (NA) levels (see Fig. 1 for corresponding symptoms 
and Fig. 3 for the circuit that controls these changes). Behaviourally, the responses relate to a 
naturalistic account of tasks (the term ‘task’ is used to link to experimental studies), divided into 
conventional tasks (e.g., securing food to satisfy hunger) and ‘extreme’ tasks (e.g., protecting oneself 
from serious harm). Following an extreme task (e.g., surviving a life-threatening encounter), defences 
may persist in a mobilised state (red, ‘elevated range’). Subsequent conventional tasks that would 
not have elicited a peak response when initiated at a low pre-response baseline instead elicit a peak 
response, as they are continually initiated at a high pre-response baseline (upper right arrows). The 
high pre-response baseline will be maintained continuously given a slow decay rate (‘vulnerable’) and 
subsequent encounters with re levant sensory cues (described below). Thus, responses in 
conventional situations may frequently reach peak defensive mobilisation, constituting PTSS. 
 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 6 
One ‘upstream’ reason the pontine ACh-NA subsystem may be disordered in wake and sleep 
is reduced activation of the serotonergic (5HT) inhibitory ‘brake’ from the Dorsal Raphe 
Nucleus (DRN). The inhibition and disinhibition emerges through a complex interplay of GABA 
and glutamate (Glu.) from the prefrontal cortex (PFC), limbic systems (LS), and basal ganglia 
(BG).27 Notably, altered GABA and Glu. levels and ratios have been found in PTSD impairment 
in contrast to unimpaired controls. 28 Taken together, thes e findings suggest a long -range 
circuit, by which forebrain interactions across the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) can dampen 
DRN activity, thereby reducing the inhibitory influence of 5HT on pontine subsystems including 
the RAS, and especially the PPtg a nd LC. The PPtg and LC neuronal populations are the 
primary emitters of ACh and NA, respectively, with innervation throughout the brain in addition 
to reciprocal projections. 
 
Excessive strength of the initial encoding of a traumatic experience is suggested by the 
increase in cholinergic stimulation from the PPtg to the Ventral Tegmental Area (VTA) and 
Substantia Nigra (SN). This ACh stimulation in turn stimulates a dopaminergic (DA) pathway 
to the forebrain (PFC, LS, and other parts of the BG). A DA surge is known to increase memory 
plasticity and encoding strength, especially during emotionally significant experience.29–31 The 
full circuit is depicted in Fig. 3. 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 3 . Neuromodulatory circuit. The neuromodulators  noradrenaline (NA) and acetylcholine 
(Ach) are emitted in the pons. Cholinergic neuronal pathways from the pedunculopontine tegmental 
nucleus (PPtg) produce ACh and also have an excitatory connection to the locus coeruleus (LC). LC 
excitation produces NA that in turn has an inhibitory effect on th e PPtg. This reciprocal relationship 
in the pons stabilises the ratio of NA and ACh perfusing the forebrain while awake. When asleep, the 
PPtg ceases excitation of the LC, allowing NA levels to drop and ACh to rise (‘sleep ‘switch’’). 
 
With a stabilised ratio of NA to ACh, their baseline levels rise and fall jointly. The joint levels are 
modulated by the serotonergic projection from the midbrain dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) to the pons. 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 7 
Increased serotonin (5HT) inhibits the pontine subsystem activity, thereby reducing its NA and ACh 
output. Conversely, decreased 5HT from the DRN disinhibits the pontine subsystem activity, allowing 
NA and ACh levels to rise. 
 
The DRN is excited or inhibited by the interaction between glutamate (Glu.) and gamma-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA), via glutamatergic and GABAergic projections from a richly interconnected network 
situated primarily in the forebrain. This forebrain network (with some outer nodes) is comprised of the 
prefrontal cortex (PFC), limbic system (LS), and the basal ganglia (BG), and also includes the anterior 
cingulate cortex (ACC) (unlabelled). When a harmless context is inferred via the forebrain network, 
the DRN ‘brake’ is applied; its serotonergic projections increase the 5HT input to the pons, inhibiting 
NA and ACh levels. When a harmful context is inferred, the DRN is inhibited (the ‘brake’ is released). 
In turn, the decreased 5HT input disinhibits the pontine sub system, leading NA and ACh levels to 
rise. 
 
PTSD pathogenesis can be understood in relation to the circuit diagram as follows. A current 
or recalled traumatic experience releases the DRN ‘brake’ to raise ACh/NA for enhanced 
harm-mitigation (defensive response). A current harmful context will be strongly encoded with 
the potential to be easily cued. Later on, however, a resilient individual may experience cued 
traumatic recall, but with insufficient strength to resolve uncertainty about the present. This 
leads to peripheral sensory sampling, belief -updating about the veridical present, and 
subsequent applying of the DRN ‘brake’ to lower ACh/NA (see Fig. 2). 
 
In a vulnerable individual, the overly strong recall of a harmful context may cascade through 
elevated ACh/NA, stimulated forebrain Glu. perfusion, and increased top-down excitement of 
VWM. Blending present visual sensation and recalled imagery in VWM (as described in Online 
Methods) can lead to false contextual inference with rapidly evinced behaviours that an agent 
(falsely) believes are contextually apt. Thus, instead of an exploratory policy to resolve 
uncertainty about context, an exploitation policy i s selected; namely, peripheral sensory 
attenuation and vigorous defence (e.g., fight or flight). This is consistent with a role for ACh 
enhancing attention to significant cues,32,33 amounting to hypervigilance (readily cuing harmful 
context), while NA simultaneously enhances motor responsivity,34 amounting to hyperarousal 
(see Fig. 1).  
Results 
Neurocomputational simulations 
We developed a neurocomputational model of interacting systems perspectives schematised 
here (see above and Online Methods): the neurocognition of trauma associations  including 
learning, memory, and context; the phenomenology and symptoms of PTSD and their relation 
to treatment intervention; and the neurobehavioural dynamics of and a neuromodulatory circuit 
for defensive mobilisation. We show that our neurocomputational implementation explains (i) 
natural waning of PTSS in resilient individuals under condit ions of ordinary stress, (ii) 
persistence of such symptoms in predisposed individuals in similar conditions, (iii) recovery of 
context disambiguation through a learning -based intervention, and (iv) the limited role of 
symptom reduction through monoaminergic therapy on its own. 
 
We simulated PTSD pathogenesis and treatment intervention based on a generative model 
that refines, extends, and operationalises previous work. 1,11,12 The simulation studies use a 
generative model (Fig. 4) to reproduce the pathogenesis of PTSD following a traumatic 
encounter and a successful and unsuccessful intervention. The learning and behavioural 
dynamics of the system are driven by uncertainty reso lution (implemented as free energy 
minimisation). 
 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 8 
 
FIGURE 4. See main text for description. 
 
In Fig. 4, the contextual priors (labelled D) condition the initial state, which generates a 
contextually ambiguous observation (triangle). During the initial traumatic experience, the 
system advances along the horizontal arrow from the initial state to the second state. The 
state sequence is controlled by an exploratory scene sampling policy (‘two eyes’ pictogram) 
to resolve uncertainty about the context. This second state generates adverse (surprising) 
observations that can include a range of ‘harmful’ sensations, among them pain (e.g., being 
struck by shrapnel) and visual scenes that inflict moral injury (e.g., bearing witness to extreme 
suffering). The observation allows for a veridical contextual inference, updating the prior 
probability (red D) that one is in the harmful context. 
 
Following the harmful traumatic experience, in a new harmless context, one begins in the initial 
state conditioned by the green D. This start state also generates a contextually ambiguous 
observation (triangle). In other words, the initial observation (triangle) is insufficient to 
disambiguate between the two alternative start states. The exploratory policy would progress 
the state sequence along the horizontal line to generate context -specific observations 
(squares). This disambiguates the two contexts, le ading to a veridical inference of the 
harmless context. 
 
However, if one begins in the ‘squares’ initial state (conditioned by the green D), and the 
contextual prior of the past (traumatic) context is unduly precise, it is sufficient to resolve the 
uncertainty about the context, such that the exploratory policy is not selected (it is falsely 
believed to be uninformative due to overly informa tive prior beliefs). This results in false 
contextual inference and selection of the (peripheral) sensory attenuation policy (‘partly 
covered eyes’ pictogram). We emphasise that this form of sensory attenuation is consistent 
with hypervigilance, amounting to rapid shifting of foreground focus without resolving 
contextual uncertainty. 
 
From a first-person perspective, there is enough information that one is in the harmful context, 
even though from a third-person perspective, one is in the harmless context. Moreover, under 
the sensory attenuation policy, the foreground focus state (‘magni fying glass’ pictogram) 
generates the same observation irrespective of context. Like the initial observation, the focal 
observation is insufficient to disambiguate context, so the agent never learns they are in the 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 9 
harmless context. As long as the sensory attenuation policy is selected, no amount of 
observations will render prior beliefs obsolete, as in typical Bayesian learning. In past work, 
we proposed that in vulnerable brains, Bayesian learning ‘breaks’ because of an impairment 
in the ability to accumulate evidence that a context is benign (counterfactual blocking). Our 
simulation studies suggest that the specific weights of learning and forgetting, through which 
the memories of encounters with harmful and harmle ss contexts accumulate, interact with 
learning history to stabilise the inappropriate beliefs (see below and Fig. 6). 
 
A second aspect of the generative model (Fig. 5) does not drive the simulation dynamics but 
is included to illustrate a secondary process important for re -experiencing symptoms. It 
emerges from policy selection under the core model definition (Fig. 4). In this secondary 
process, high precision on a contextual prior can lead to a blend of sensation and imagery in 
VWM indicative of flashback phenomenology. A trauma -associated cue (triangle) can elicit 
multiple contexts (harmful and harmless) without sufficient information to disambiguate them. 
Under relatively balanced priors, the exploratory policy is selected (see Fig. 8 boxes 4A and 
A). High sensory precision can be allocated to the periphery, even when there is sparse 
contextual information ( see Fig. 8 box 3). This allows for ‘bottom up’ sensory evidence 
accumulation about the present harmless context. Under highly imbalanced priors, with undue 
precision on the harmful context, the sensory attenuation policy is selected. This places low 
sensory p recision on the periphery, allowing for VWM to be partly excited by ‘top down’ 
recalled imagery, i.e., from the past harmful context (see Fig. 8 boxes 4B and B 1-2). In other 
words, a focal visual sensation would be congruent with focal mental imagery; this congruency 
combined with peripheral sensory attenuation and strong contextual imagery  could meet a 
subjective ‘reality threshold’, amenable to experimental study in a reality testing paradigm.35 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5. See main text for description. 
 
In Fig. 6, we see the evolution of contextual priors in a resilient (left) and vulnerable (right) 
system. Each system starts with two attractor basins that represent the initial priors D, with 
harmless (left) and harmful (right). Following a short sequence of harmful trials (that represent 
a traumatic experience) – followed by an extended sequence of randomly allocated harmful 
and harmless trials (50/50) – we see how the resilient system is able to garner veridical 
contextual information and update its priors. This leads to balanced priors that bias the system 
towards the exploratory policy for learning the true state of the world. In the vulnerable system, 
we see what amounts to a ‘vicious circle’ that characterises PTSD and related stress 
disorders: the sensory attenuation policy prevents learning about the harmless context, which 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 10 
biases the system towards the sensory attenuation policy, and so on, in a self-reinforcing loop. 
 
The resulting landscapes at the conclusion of both the resilient and vulnerable processes are 
consistent with recent neural recordings of macaque perceptual decision -making.36 In the 
macaque study, neurons accumulate evidence for two alternative visual fixation target options 
preceding a saccade-to-target action. When there is ambiguity between the targets, decision 
time is longer, as sensory evidence accumulates to resolve the ambiguity. When there is bias 
towards one option, the decision time to reach a c ommitment (action) is faster, and the bias 
functions as greater ‘pre-accumulated’, or notional, evidence. 
 
Our case is not about alternative perceptual targets, but the interpretation is similar. 37 
Following a cue (triangle) common to two contexts (squares and crosses), if there is 
insufficient evidence to resolve which context is present, then more evidence accumulation is 
required to resolve the ambiguity (higher decision time to commit). In our m odel, this is 
achieved by an additional timestep of peripheral sensory sampling, to accumulate contextual 
evidence for either squares or crosses (see Fig. 8, boxes 4A  and A). However, if there is a 
strong bias for one context (crosses), the contextual inference for crosses is made 
immediately, even if this amounts to committing to the incorrect decision when the true context 
is otherwise, i.e., false inference (see Fig. 8, boxes 4B and B1-2). 
 
In Fig. 6, the basin shape represents the contextual priors. The decision trajectory for resolving 
ambiguity must either continue to sensory sampling given the decision manifold under 
insufficient prior evidence (unstable equilibrium) or can forgo further sensory evidence due to 
a collapse into a single stable basin. The basins are illustrative data visualisations based on 
plots of the Dirichlet distribution D; they can be interpreted formally as the (free) energy 
landscape of a combined integration and decision-making network.38 
 
 
t55 
critical tipping point (bifurcation of resilient and vulnerable systems) 
 
 
 
t100 
resilient system saddle-point manifold emerges (dynamic instability), 
vulnerable system converging to a single attractor basin (asymptotic stability) 
 
 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 11 
 
t168 
resilient system maintains sensitivity to present scene, 
vulnerable system requires increasingly more energy to escape basin of attraction 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6. See main text for description. 
 
In Fig. 7, we show that a successful intervention is one that restores context -sensitivity to 
behaviour, which facilitates the rebalancing of prior probabilities. This success may be 
facilitated with or without psychopharmacological support. For example, SSRIs may be used 
therapeutically to improve the potential for new learning. 
 
However, psychotropic drugs (including SSRIs, benzodiazepines, or excessive alcohol 
consumption) can also show illusory success when they blunt context-sensitivity in ways that 
reduce PTSS, without new learning. Interventions of this sort are modelled via changing the 
precision of the likelihood mappings (representing sensory precision) and transition priors 
(representing prior precision). Numerically, these interventions were simulated by lowering 
precision in the corresponding A and B tensors (under a gen erative model based upon a 
partially observed Markov decision process). 
 
The disappearance of symptoms in the absence of context -sensitivity is insufficient to 
rebalance priors, leading symptomatic behaviour to return at equal or greater strength upon 
cessation of chemical intake. Conversely, cessation of (e.g.) a psychotherapeutic treatment 
that has restored context-sensitivity even before priors are fully rebalanced has the potential 
to lead eventually to rebalanced priors. This contrast between successful and unsuccessful 
PTSD treatment closely matches randomised controlled trial (RCT) results.15 
 
Each diagram in Figure 7a-e can be interpreted as follows: 
● The numbers along the bottom axis indicate the trial number in blocks of 60, comprising two 
alternative sequences of 180 trials (3 blocks of 60 each). The sequences are clarified in the 
captions beneath each block. (Summary: 7a depicts the initial 60 trial s, with two alternative 
continuations of 2x 60-trial blocks, either to 7b-7c or 7d-7e. In other words, the 60 trials of 7a 
are in common to both sequences, and 7b and 7d begin with an alternative trial 61 of 180; 
7c and 7e begin with an alternative trial 121 of 180.) 
● The top row indicates whether it is a harmless (□) or harmful (+) trial. 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 12 
● The four ‘internal’ rows (with greyscale boxes) indicate the policy selection for each trial. A 
trial is comprised of three time-steps: a start state, and two policy selections that advance to 
a middle and final state, respectively. (Fig. 4 depicts the pathways from the start state to the 
middle state, and the final time step allows the agent to remain in the middle state for the 
final state, or move to the alternative non-start state.)  
The four available policies are all the permutations and combinations of the two actions: 
👀=exploratory sensing (of the periphery) and 
🫣=sensory attenuation (of the periphery). In 
the rows below, from top-to-bottom, the policy for two timesteps is: 
👀-
👀(row 1), 
🫣-
🫣(row 2), 
👀-
🫣(row 3), 
🫣-
👀(row 4). The grayscale within each trial 
column indicates the progressive resolution of uncertainty by belief-updating (within the 
policy space) until policy selection. 
 
 
Figure 7a. Initial sequence of trials. Trial 1-5: harmless condition (□), 6-16: harmful condition (+). 17-
60: random. Without intervention, the sequence continues in the manner of trials 50-60 (i.e., repeated 
selection of sensory attenuation policy under any conditi on). The evolution of contextual priors for 
this continuation without intervention (from trials 1-60 above and 61-180) is shown in the vulnerable 
system in Fig. 6. 
 
 
Figure 7b. Simulated treatment option to restore context-sensitivity. Controlled exposure to harmless 
condition for 60 trials. Towards the end of the sequence, the exploratory policy begins to emerge and 
the contextual priors begin rebalancing. This can be understood in terms of Fig. 6, as a shift from a 
vulnerable individual (that continues along the vulnerable trajectory in the simulation with no 
intervention) to what resembles the resilient individual (who never develops the imbalanced priors in 
the simulation). 
 
 
Figure 7c. Following the treatment intervention simulated in Fig. 7b, the remaining trials continue at 
random (harmless or harmful), maintaining balanced priors and appropriate context-sensitive policy 
selection. 
 
 
Figure 7d.  This sequence is an alternative progression following the 60 trials of Fig. 7a. It 
approximates the effects of (e.g.) SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) or alcohol in 
lowering the precision of sensory information and action. At the same time, the trials are random to 
illustrate the absence of a controlled environment.39 The kind of response vigour seen in Fig. 7a trials 
50-60 is diminished here, indicated by more grayscale (low precision policy selection) and a wider 
range of selected policies, which can be interpreted as a reduction in PTSS. 
 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 13 
 
Figure 7e. This sequence continues from Fig. 7d with the same random alternations of conditions, 
but with a restoration of the initial sensory and action precision from Fig. 7a, representing the 
cessation of chemical intake (e.g., SSRIs or alcohol). In the Fig. 7d trials, the contextual priors were 
not rebalanced, so here, the context -insensitivity governs the policy selection. As described in the 
main paper, an exploratory policy is falsely ruled out as unnecessary, given what is falsely taken as 
sufficient information about context from the prior. This means that even in the harmless trials (□), 
the sensory attenuation policy is selected. In line with the full analysis in the main paper, this amounts 
to a self-reinforcing neuromodulatory ‘vicious circle’ of defensive policy selection and counterfactual 
blocking. 
 
 
Figure 7f. Evolution of contextual priors (vulnerable), with alternative interventions in trials 61 -120. 
Gradually converging plot lines (blue) depict the trial sequence of Fig. 7a-b-c, with a simulated inter-
mediary phase of no chemical intervention under a controlled environment (e.g., psychotherapeutic 
treatment). Diverging plot lines (orange) depict the trial sequence of Fig. 7a -d-e, with a simulated 
intermediary phase of chemical intervention (e.g., SSRIs or alcohol) under an uncontrolled 
environment (simulated by lowering precision in the A and B tensors). 
 
Discussion 
The analysis and modelling presented here serves to formalise concepts that often remain 
underspecified in the narrative literature on PTSD and related psychopathology. In this work, 
context refers to elements of the sensory or cognitive periphery that provide evidence for the 
states of affairs prior to belief-updating. Belief-updating here refers to inferring – and learning 
about – the causes of sensations through neuronal message passing and experience -
dependent plasticity, respectively. Our simulations demonstrate the interdependence between 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 14 
inference and learning, and how biased inference can lead to aberrant learning and a failure 
to recognise changes in context. It is this failure we associate with the psychopathology of 
PTSD. Biased inference in this instance manifests as a failure of responding to epistemic 
affordances that leads to a failure to recognise the context has changed. 
 
This kind of failure sits on a critical tipping point, leading to a phenomenal description of the 
ensuing inferences in terms of bistability, that can be related to the notion of canalisation in 
psychopathology.40 While attractor basins are used in different ways to indicate neuronal 
dynamics, here, we have shown that plasticity can create unstable basins that bias the system 
toward sensory evidence accumulation to resolve ambiguity about the causes of sensations. 
In contrast, a collapse or canalisation into a single basin can cause a trajectory initiated by a 
sensory cue to become inescapably bound by the basin; resolving uncertainty through precise 
– but false – beliefs about the causes of sensations. Crucially, th is resolution is self -
maintaining because it precludes epistemic foraging or information seeking; thereby 
instantiating a vicious circle of confirmation bias. Restoring plasticity can make the system 
amenable to new learning, thus rebalancing priors and re storing the collapsed basin. The 
saddle point between basins corresponds to a reinstatement of context-sensitivity.  
 
In a context where harm is highly likely, such as a combat zone, it is adaptive to have elevated 
ACh and NA, to remain vigilant against possible harm , and rapidly mobilize a defensive 
response for mitigating harm. Essentially, it is context -sensitive to be in a heightened alert 
state, ‘better safe than sorry’. After a transition into a context where harm is unlikely, it does 
not mean harm is impossible. A home neighbourhood may be largely harmless, but 
occasionally harms can arise. Thus, context-sensitivity requires sensory disambiguation on a 
case-by-case bas is, as  a tap on the shoulder could be from a friend or foe. It would be 
maladaptive to immediately respond to a shoulder tap with a vigorous fight/flight response, as 
this would be unwarranted if it were a friend. Yet, it would also be maladaptive to be ‘fearless’ 
and disregard learning whether the tap is indeed from a foe, which warrants self-protection.  
 
We have provided modelling-informed analysis of PTSD pathogenesis and related sequelae 
of traumatic stress and their relationship to diagnostic criteria in terms of vulnerability and 
resilience. Our key hypothesis is that the balance of plasticity -enhancement and plasticity -
decay for aversive events is greater in the vulnerable. We have also provided several novel 
auxiliary hypotheses that can be tested in controlled experiments  (see above and Online 
Methods). 
 
Our analysis also provides a way to understand learning -based treatment mechanisms and 
how they might relate to (e.g.) monoaminergic interventions and substance abuse.  
Specifically, pharmacological interventions may enhance psychotherapies that support 
learning contextual disambiguation, through allocating attention to evidence for benign causes 
of current events, including aversive ones. This is a putative mechanism of action of 
entactogen-assisted psychotherapy. The combination of psychotherapy and psycho -
pharmacology may be indispensable in some cases (e.g., due to TBI -related structural 
damage). At the same time, our account is consistent with the position that in other cases, 
psychotherapy could provide sufficient PTSD treatment on its own. 
 
For onset prevention, the model suggests that arbitrary aspects of the environment during the 
post-traumatic period could hinder or induce impairment, depending on how strongly and/or 
frequently sensory cues mobilise a defensive response. For example, imme diate debriefing 
following a traumatic experience could unduly remobilise a defensive response and strengthen 
memory of the adverse context. Social factors (e.g., support groups, transition homes) would 
have the potential to counterbalance adverse cued responses by strengthening the inference 
of a present harmless context. Overall, our analysis lends support to biopsychosocial 
approaches to diagnosing and treating PTSD, or preventing its onset. 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 15 
Online Methods 
The foregoing account is interlinked with cognitive psychology concepts and supporting 
literature here. We use example scenarios for thematic organisation. Subsections progress 
through contextual mechanisms and processes, visual working memory (VWM), long -term 
memory (LTM) and generalisation, traumatic memory, and sleep. 
Recognition dynamics involving foreground and background elements 
Consider the example of being in a room with red wallpaper and a table with a deck of playing 
cards on it. This example can be linked to disparate literature using several terminological 
variations; namely, the room and wallpaper properties can be understood variously as context, 
background, scene, sensory periphery and/or global visual field. When interacting with the 
deck of cards, the deck can be considered a foreground or salient element, an object of 
attentional or sensory focus and/or part of the loca l visual field. In what follows, we treat the 
terms within each set as synonymous, acknowledging that some research operationalises 
distinctions internal to each set. 
 
In an ordinary setting, relative to an agent’s attentional focus and interaction, there are often 
focal elements that are salient (i.e., foreground) and surrounding scene components that can 
be categorized as ‘context’ (i.e., background). In any such event , there also may be 
experiential and affective relationships between the agent and salient elements (e.g., the cards 
were a gift from a friend). How agent -environment interactions during an event unfold in 
perception will impinge on how they are encoded in  memory, including salient foreground, 
contextual background, affective, and goal-direct aspects (e.g., implicit or explicit reward). In 
turn, how they are recalled from memory will also differ according to these encoded aspects 
and the recall circumstances. 
 
Experimental studies often manipulate foreground and background elements as stimulus and 
context, to investigate neuropsychological processes – for example, by displaying sequences 
of images to isolate a phenomenon of interest. One finding is that recognition of a paired object 
and scene mutually reinforce each other.41 A pairing can be learned by repeated exposure to 
examples (‘training’), such as a red room with a deck of cards and a blue room with a large 
matchbox. After training, seeing a deck of cards will lead to fast recognition of the red room 
(inference from obj ect to context), and vice versa, from room colour to table contents 
(inference from context to object). 
 
It is also the case that scenes can be recognised based on global texture. For example, the 
red room may be full of round tables and chairs, while the blue room has rows of theatre seats. 
These scenes not only have dimensional features (red vs. blue) with recognisable objects 
(table seating vs. rows), but also a global textural stimulus array that combines into a gestalt 
and facilitates rapid recognition.42 Global context also can be multimodal, such that different 
ambient sounds in each room (auditory back ground), once learned, facilitate faster visual 
recognition.43,44 
 
All of the above forms of recognition (stimulus -context associations) can be recast as 
disambiguation in probabilistic inference. On -going predictions govern visual scanning 
(sensory sampling) to accumulate evidence that lowers the uncertainty about a give n 
hypothesis. This describes the unimpaired ‘machinery’ that gives rise to PTSD when deployed 
suboptimally. 
 
Continuing with the unimpaired scenario, when there is an element in common across multiple 
contexts, such as a curtain hanging in both the red and blue rooms, visually focussing on the 
curtain provides an ambiguous indication of what room I am in. If I hypothesise that I am in 
the blue room, I predict I will see rows of seats when I scan the room. Seeing round tables 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 16 
violates my prediction and resolves my uncertainty. I now infer I am in the red room. (The 
caption to Fig. 8 illustrates this example.) 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 8. Two panels with a common element (△) and different backgrounds (□ vs. +) are labelled 1 and 2, 
respectively. After sufficient training to gain familiarity with panels 1 and 2, seeing the triangle in panel 3 suggests 
two alternative possibilities: it ambiguously matches panel 1 or 2. For this figure, it is stipulated that the veridical 
match is between panels 1 and 3. Even if panel 3 is predicted to match panel 2, attention can be directed to the 
periphery for sensory sampling (illustrated in panel 4A), to accumulate evidence about the veridical context. 
Once sensory evidence at the periphery is accumulated, it resolves the ambiguity of the background scene, 
leading to the inference that panel 3 context matches panel 1. A combination of sensory attenuation a t the 
periphery with sensory focus on foreground, and high precision on recall of panel 2 – illustrated in panel 4B – 
can inform context disambiguation in favour of a false inference that panel 3 matches panel 2. See further below 
for a description of boxes A and B1-2. 
 
Multimodal (polysensory) behavioural interaction with elements of the environment is also 
relevant to stimulus-context association. Seeing an approaching object that looks as if it will 
soon hit me may coactivate the tactile sensation of being hit.3,45 Thus, visual recognition is not 
limited to a purely abstract mental activity, but can be continuous with overt behaviours 
embedded in a context. For example, in a park, a defensive posture may be apt to protect 
oneself from being harmed by an apparently a pproaching ball initially seen at a distance. 4,46 
Yet an equivalent visual sensation may cause an inapt defensive ‘flinch’ response during an 
immersive sports videogame when there will be no tactile impact. 
 
This scenario also describes the unimpaired ‘machinery’ that gives rise to PTSD when it is 
impaired. A defensive reaction to current conditions can be understood as a consequence of 
prediction under a probabilistic (generative) model, as opposed to a stimu lus-response 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 17 
account.47 Under the active inference formulation, one is effectively working backwards from 
a future time point of feeling tactile pain to the current time point of an approaching projectile. 
Inferences are made about the underlying (hidden) states that generate th e sequence of 
sensations (e.g., the projectile approach will appear as a growing ball and lead to damaging 
impact causing pain). On this basis, an action is selected that has the best chance of 
preventing a surprising outcome, i.e., being hit by a ball. 
 
The context of the park vs. the videogame is relevant to the learned state sequence and 
resulting sensory outcome. When playing the videogame, what appears to be an incoming 
ball is a foreground cue that can lead to a false inference about the background c ontext. If I 
(falsely) infer I am in the park, I expect the ball will hit me and cause a painful outcome. Thus, 
from a first -person perspective, a defensive flinch is apt (Bayes optimal), even though it is 
inapt to an observer who (correctly) infers I am playing a videogame. 
 
Technically, this can be understood in terms of the complete class theorem; 48,49 namely, for 
every pair of behaviours and loss functions there are some prior beliefs that render my 
behaviour Bayes optimal. Our focus in this work is on prior beliefs about the context in which 
I am behaving. Next, we connect false inference about contex t to post -traumatic sensory 
attenuation. 
Between ‘bottom-up’ and ‘top-down’: Visual working memory (VWM) 
In a cluttered scene – akin to a naturalistic environment – individual object recognition may be 
diminished for most objects, especially when scanning a scene with unfocused attention. 
However, preferred (i.e., familiar or unsurprising) objects may remain undiminished despite 
clutter,50 which can explain a ‘pop -out’ effect when scanning a crowd and spotting a familiar 
face. This preferential recognition occurs in the ventral stream, which has been found to be 
impaired in PTSD, resulting in a form of sensory  attenuation.51 A puzzle about sensory 
attenuation in PTSD is how it might relate to hypervigilance, a form of sensory hyperactivity. 
This puzzle can be solved from the account we elucidate here.  
 
Psychology and neuroimaging studies operationalise various load concepts (attentional, 
perceptual, cognitive, working memory) to focus on specific differences (e.g., visual pathways 
vs. attention networks). Yet the common ground among them is a resource model that can be 
mapped to neuronal populations with biophysical limits. For example, all neurons within a 
population can be tuned to a single stimulus, or a subset is tuned to (e.g.) another stimulus. 
 
From a technical perspective, this resource allocation is an emergent property of active 
inference in the following sense: the objective of active inference is to maximise the evidence 
for generative models of the lived world. Evidence (a.k.a., marginal li kelihood) can be 
decomposed into accuracy and complexity. Therefore, model selection necessarily entails a 
minimisation of complexity, which can be read as minimising the degrees of freedom used to 
provide an accurate account of the sensorium. 52–54 This mi nimisation can be read as 
complying with Occam’s principle and manifests as an apparent constraint on the allocation 
of representational resources (e.g., the quantisation of representations, implicit in receptive 
fields). Our current modelling does not aim  to disentangle different aspects of resource 
allocation within active inference. For our purposes, it suffices to say that mitigating harm in a 
traumatic encounter commonly requires visuospatial attention and sensorimotor coordination; 
namely, efficient active vision.55–58 
 
Visual working memory (VWM) is a useful construct for centring on load -limited interactions 
related to visuospatial sensorimotor task demands. We treat VWM as a limited neuronal 
population susceptible to ‘bottom -up’ (sensory driven) and ‘top -down’ (recalle d imagery 
driven) excitation. 59–61 Given a sensory contribution, some findings on visual pathways 
unconcerned with VWM indirectly bear on our model. For instance, there is empirical support 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 18 
for reduced processing of peripheral visual stimuli under higher task demands, i.e., higher 
cognitive load; this includes the direct interaction between optical information and visual 
cortices.62–64 In our account, the reduced influence of sensory evidence on VWM in some 
PTSS phenomena corresponds to an increased contribution of recalled context ual imagery. 
(We model this as an explore/exploit trade -off mediated by the precision afforded new 
observations and prior expectations.) 
 
In PTSD, increased bottom-up gain has been found to co-exist with increased top-down gain.65 
Two connectivity pathways, from vision (bottom -up) and mental imagery (top -down)59,60 can 
be understood as converging in VWM. 61 Even if a visual element in VWM is absent from a 
‘bottom-up’ sampling of the scene, VWM can robustly maintain visual information ‘top-down’, 
as if the item were present. 66 Moreover, the top-down influence of mental imagery on VWM 
can affect and distort concurrent bottom-up visual perception.67 
 
In line with the scenario of a looming projectile above, VWM is not necessarily detached from 
motor behaviour. Mental imagery of a scene can even influence oculomotor movement, 
inducing saccades to fixation points that match saccades in perception of the same scene.68,69 
One can also pursue similar arguments to explain rapid eye movements during dreaming in 
REM sleep.70 This coupling could explain why altered eye moments (as in EMDR therapy) 
would disrupt the vividness of mental imagery, and in turn reduce the magnitude of affective 
response to mental imagery of a traumatic experience.71 
 
A synthesis of the above evidence points to a possible explanation for ‘flashback’ 
phenomenology: high sensory precision or gain (modulated by ACh22, discussed in the main 
text) can facilitate visual attention to scene elements with enhanced salience (trauma 
reminders or ‘cues’) that are rapidly identified and rapidly elicit a trauma -context association. 
The traumatic context is characterised as one with a high probability of ca uses of harm 
(‘harmful context’).16 The on-going imperatives of harm -mitigation requires flexibly attending 
to ‘task-relevant’ stimuli; i.e., sampling the visual scene to maximise information gain (a.k.a., 
Bayesian surprise).72–75 This aspect of active vis ion follows the metaphor of an attentional 
‘spotlight’ that must rapidly shift among momentary foreground elements. With each shift, the 
remaining background scene is relegated to a diminished ‘task -irrelevant’ periphery.64 This 
restlessly roving spotlight would be indicative of hypervigilance, with increased sensory gain 
on a focal element and corresponding attenuation of the sensory periphery. 
 
As we illustrate with our model simulations (see Results), under active inference, the sensory 
periphery is uninformative about context (from a traumatised first-person standpoint) because 
of high precision on the prior probability of the harmful context. In terms of belief -updating, 
given the (false) belief one is in a harmful context that matches traumatic recall, a strong top-
down influence of trauma scene imagery on VWM – concurrent with foreground perception – 
can cause a distortive blend of the present scene and a past traumatic event. 
 
These imagery-based elements would continuously support misperception and misrecognition 
of the current scene, allowing attention to be maintained on a significant foreground element 
while hindering attention to – and subsequent belief updating about – context (Fig. 8, box 4B). 
In turn, a behavioural response is elicited that would be appropriate to a repeat traumatic 
encounter, but is inappropriate to the veridical conditions. This formulation of sensory 
attenuation theory thus provides a testable hypothes is for the neurocognitive machinery of 
‘flashback’ phenomenology, in that cued traumatic recall is predicted to attenuate peripheral 
sensing more than focal sensing (e.g., in a target/distractor paradigm). The theory also 
provides a testable hypothesis related to another common PTSD symptom, the exaggerated 
startle response (ESR); namely, that alternatively valenced contexts for the same probe 
stimulus should differentially affect startle parameters for PTSD -impaired individuals to a 
lesser degree than those without.76 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 19 
Between past and present: From memory to generalisation 
An encounter with a hostile person or adverse place would be important to remember for harm 
mitigation in a subsequent encounter. On one hand, the widely accepted psychological 
account of this experiential process moves in a bottom-up fashion from perception to VWM to 
short-term and/or long-term memory (STM and LTM), and in top-down fashion from memory 
to recall and/or recognition. On the other hand, widely accepted hierarchical predictive 
processing accounts cast this overall process as involving a vast nu mber of feedback and 
feedforward re-entrant loops throughout the brain. This speaks to a strong correspondence 
between the psychological constructs and interacting yet discrete neuronal populations 
involved in active sensing and learning.29,61,77 Thus, our neurocomputational (active inference) 
model is compatible with both psychological and neurophysiological modes of explanation.47,78 
From this perspective, we draw on typically disconnected findings on PTSD including cognitive 
psychology and biological psy chiatry, and related work on unimpaired mechanisms and 
processes. 
 
In light of the above literature, it is clear that we can learn to associate foreground elements 
with background scenes, and foreground and background can independently activate one 
another. Such co-activation also applies to elements of episodic memories.  Events involving 
multiple observed elements (e.g., specific visual landmarks, faces, ambient sounds, etc.) are 
experienced and encoded together. If an element overlaps between events (a sunset viewed 
on two separate holiday destinations), a memory of both events may be partly activated when 
seeing another sunset. That is, similar neuronal representations may be partially coactivated 
(e.g., 50-50).  
 
An additional sensory stimulus associated with one memory but not the other (a specific scent) 
can in turn facilitate a (non-pathological) ‘flashback’ of the distinctive event memory.79,80 This 
could describe the famous Proustian phenomenological effect of having a madeleine with tea 
and being mentally transported to a vivid childhood scene as if it were present again. The 
‘winner takes all’ convergence on a decision amounts to an inference : inhibiting ruled out 
representations and disinhibiting a selected one.81 
 
Cognitive psychological and neurobehavioural experiments are often designed to mimic a 
naturalistic progression that involves event -based experience, memory, generalisation, and 
recall. These can amount to learning that a task (e.g., pulling a lever) has a  desirable (i.e., 
familiar or preferred) result in one context and an undesirable (ambiguous or surprising) result 
in another. Learning about the task and the context can allow a contextual cue to elicit the 
learned context -relevant interactions (e.g., app roach vs. avoid). Human and nonhuman 
primate studies and computational simulations indicate that such task and context information 
is differentially encoded in memory.82–84 
 
Hippocampal dynamics are implicated in both generalised task guidance and episodic 
recall.29,80,85 This interaction between generalised task-oriented behaviour and context-specific 
episodic memories offers another example of unimpaired ‘machinery’ involved in PTSD 
impairment. For example, if you move heavy boxes, you may learn a generalisable task -
relevant strategy for how to lift, hold, and carry. Months later, when moving furniture, an 
association between the two contexts can help guide your behaviour. At  the same time, the 
association may also lead to recalling specific episodic moments (‘flashes’) from moving 
boxes.86 The contextual similarity between both events allows for generalising the task 
behaviour, while the contextual break between them facilitates their ability to co-exist in distinct 
event memories.85,87,88 Our modelling (see main text) shows how a harmful context can elicit 
defensive behaviour and simultaneously promote introspective attention to event memory. (In 
the computational neuroanatomy of active inference, context is encoded in a D vector and 
associated with neuronal representations in the hippocampus.89,90) 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 20 
Impaired context disambiguation in post-traumatic pathology 
Non-pathological ‘flashes’ can have a similar genesis as pathological ‘flashbacks’ (a common 
PTSD symptom). Consider what may occur if a quotidian but non -ubiquitous object is part of 
a traumatic event, say, a readily available jacket worn by an aggressor in a hostile encounter. 
There is a potential for a later encounter with someone else wearing the same type of jacket 
to elicit a traumatic memory. 
 
Pursuing the above example, a resilient individual – who experienced the traumatic event – 
may form an initial trauma association with the jacket, which co-exists with other memories of 
seeing the same type of jacket on others. The association may be weakened over time, as the 
jacket cue is neuronally linked across distinct event boundaries. A repeat encounter with the 
cue is thus insufficient to disambiguate co -activated memories, so they do not become vivid 
or ‘capture’ attention. Attention is easily depl oyed to the sensory periphery to accumulate 
evidence about the present external surroundings. It is unlikely the present situation will be 
confused with the past event. 
 
An illustration is given in Fig. 8, with a triangle standing in for the jacket. In Fig. 8 box A, the 
triangle is in common to both circles, depicting event memories as guiding contexts. Seeing 
the triangle evokes both events, with a square or cross context, respectively. Deploying 
attention to the sensory periphery (Fig. 8, box 4A) resolves the uncertainty about the present 
context. 
 
Using the same example, a vulnerable individual may find the jacket cue capable of fully 
activating the trauma recollection, at the expense of any competing associations (Fig. 8, filled-
in circle in box B1; the contrast to B2 is explained below). This full ‘winner takes all’ activation 
can predominate in VWM, increasing recall vividness and associated affective and motor 
responses, intermingled with present perception (i.e., flashback; Fig. 8, box 4B). The present 
salient object (triangle/jacket) interacts with the recalled traumatic context, mutually reinforcing 
the belief that the past event is present, in other words, a re -experiencing. This suggests a 
further testable hypothesis about post -traumatic impairment that differentiates between an 
active inference account, which predicts increased weight on trauma -encoded context, and 
dual representation theory, which predicts decreased weight.91 
 
Under a sensory (periphery) attenuation policy, the vulnerable person does not learn about 
the veridical context. This reinforces a pathological persistent belief of being in the harmful 
context, given the cue (as illustrated in our model simulation  in the  main text ). If re -
experiencing is itself self-categorized as injurious, deliberate experiential avoidance will further 
impair learning. But even without deliberate experiential avoidance, the re -experiencing 
dynamics that limit peripheral awareness ultimately block inference and learning about benign 
causes of sensations (counterfactual blocking). 11 In contrast, if counterfactual evaluation of 
context is not blocked, it becomes possible to recognise the veridical context. Even minor 
indications that I am not in harmful context, if sustained (e.g., with adequate social support92), 
can facilitate a gradual updating and rebalancing of contextual priors that restores appropriate 
context-sensitivity. This rebalancing can be understood in terms of experience -dependent 
neuroplasticity. 
 
In naturalistic conditions, the restored context-sensitivity would be adaptive as opposed to an 
‘extinguished fear’ that could be maladaptive. For example, one may be momentarily 
susceptible to harm in an alleyway near home, even though the home context ha s a low 
likelihood of harm overall. A cue (jacket) that indicates a possible harmful encounter can be 
confirmed by rapid exploratory sensing (friend or foe) leading to an equally rapid decision 
selecting or deselecting defensive behaviour. 
 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 21 
Recent findings show that stressful initial recall (as could be expected in a post -traumatic 
period) can prevent the formation of new engrams of the event memory.93 Without typical post-
consolidation processes, subsequent trauma recall can reactivate the original experience -
encoded memory trace, consistent with traumatic re-experiencing, in contrast to non-traumatic 
unpleasant memory recall.94 Fig. 8, boxes B1 and B2, illustrate two ways in which the strength 
of an adverse event memory (dark grey circles) c an furnish non -veridical context in a 
pathological flashback. Both can result in what is depicted in Fig. 8 box 4B at the expense of 
Fig. 8 box 4A, namely, an overly precise top-down influence on VWM concurrent with bottom-
up peripheral sensory attenuation (of contextual information). At the same time, high sensory 
gain on the foreground (triangle/jacket) both cues the traumatic recall and maintains the task-
guiding past-as-present dynamic. (Our computational model does not distinguish between Fig. 
8 box B1 and B2, but future work could illustrate the relevant hippocampal differences.) 
Traumatic memory and sleep 
Our analysis and modelling provides fresh insight into the finding that dysregulated sleep 
following traumatic experience predicts the development of PTSD. 95 As described above, 
stressful recall results in the maintenance of a wakeful trauma experience memory trace that 
is reactivated on recall but not re -encoded.93 There is another opportunity for re -encoding 
during sleep. Successful re -encoding facilitates a closed event boundary with selected 
associations neuronally linked across events (for instance, the jacket from the above example; 
see Fig. 8 box A and B1).88 However, if following a traumatic experience, subsequent sleep is 
disrupted, then the original traumatic memory trace may continue to be maintained (Fig. 8 box 
B2).24 
 
In a healthy scenario, memories are repeatedly re-activated (‘retrieved’) and re-encoded in a 
new set of synaptic connections that are activated when recalling the original event. 96 The 
healthy progression depends upon unstressed retrieval and sufficient NREM sleep, both of 
which may face interference following acute or extended traumatic experience. 93,95,97 For 
example, early life stress can lead to a memory trace (neuronal ensemble) being preferentially 
re-activated during related adult stress,98 suggesting a contributing factor to CPTSD.  
 
In the initial days following an event, some elements of the event -correlated neuronal 
ensemble overlap between its initial encoding and subsequent re -encoding. In a healthy 
progression, the re -encoded ensemble eliminates overlap with the originally encode d 
ensemble. This process can be understood formally as information compression or model 
reduction to minimise complexity (i.e., maximise model evidence in the absence of sensory 
input),70 differentially driven by time and experiential learning factors. 99 These factors are 
captured indirectly (abstractly) by our modelling: the time factor can be understood as a decay 
rate which is potentially too low in a person vulnerable to post -traumatic syndromes. If there 
is insufficient decay over time, alternative syn aptic weights can be strengthened by learning 
(e.g., in treatment intervention). In principle, this learning could reduce excessive re-activation 
of the original ensemble, which may subsequently support its re-encoding. 
 
A single nightmare or even a period of nightmares (e.g., following a bereavement) is not 
necessarily pathological, but may contribute to a period of intrusive cued re -activations in a 
manner suggested by our model. While our framing and modelling deliberately excludes fear 
and extinction, related work analyses nightmares in terms of fear extinction linked to 
‘decontextualization’ and ‘recontextualization’’.100 These terms can be re-interpreted using our 
model as follows. If there is a cue in common to multiple memories, an overly precise 
contextual prior for ‘harmful’ may preferentially activate a traumatic memory that gives rise to 
a nightmare. Weakening the p rior (synaptic strength) may reduce cued re -activation of that 
memory, akin to decontextualization of the cue. Strengthening a competing contextual prior 
for ‘harmless’ may then allow preferential activation of non -traumatic memories, akin to 
recontextualization of the cue. 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 22 
References 
1. Linson, A., Parr, T. & Friston, K. J. Active inference, stressors, and psychological trauma: 
A neuroethological model of (mal) adaptive explore-exploit dynamics in ecological context. 
Behav. Brain Res. 380, 112421 (2020). 
2. Miles, S. R. et al. Hyperarousal symptoms linger after successful PTSD treatment in active 
duty military. Psychol. Trauma Theory Res. Pract. Policy 15, 1398–1405 (2023). 
3. Cooke, D. F. & Graziano, M. S. A. Sensorimotor Integration in the Precentral Gyrus: 
Polysensory Neurons and Defensive Movements. J. Neurophysiol. 91, 1648–1660 (2004). 
4. Cooke, D. F. & Graziano, M. S. A. Super -Flinchers and Nerves of Steel: Defensive 
Movements Altered by Chemical Manipulation of a Cortical Motor Area. Neuron 43, 585–
593 (2004). 
5. Cisler, J. M., Dunsmoor, J. E., Fonzo, G. A. & Nemeroff, C. B. Latent -state and model-
based learning in PTSD. Trends Neurosci. 47, 150–162 (2024). 
6. Tsuda, B., Pate, S. C., Tye, K. M., Siegelmann, H. T. & Sejnowski, T. J. Neuromodulators 
generate multiple context -relevant behaviors in a recurrent neural network by shifting 
activity flows in hyperchannels. bioRxiv 2021.05.31.446462 (2024) 
doi:10.1101/2021.05.31.446462. 
7. Mobbs, D., Hagan, C. C., Dalgleish, T., Silston, B. & Prévost, C. The ecology of human 
fear: survival optimization and the nervous system. Front. Neurosci. 9, (2015). 
8. Maren, S., Phan, K. L. & Liberzon, I. The contextual brain: implications for fear 
conditioning, extinction and psychopathology. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14, 417–428 (2013). 
9. VanElzakker, M. B., Kathryn Dahlgren, M., Caroline Davis, F., Dubois, S. & Shin, L. M. 
From Pavlov to PTSD: The extinction of conditioned fear in rodents, humans, and anxiety 
disorders. Extinction 113, 3–18 (2014). 
10. Bouyeure, A. et al. Distinct representational properties of cues and contexts shape fear 
learning and extinction. (2025) doi:10.7554/elife.105126.1. 
11. Moutoussis, M., Shahar, N., Hauser, T. U. & Dolan, R. J. Computation in Psychotherapy, 
or How Computational Psychiatry Can Aid Learning -Based Psychological Therapies. 
Comput. Psychiatry (2018) doi:10.1162/CPSY_a_00014. 
12. Linson, A. & Friston, K. Reframing PTSD for computational psychiatry with the active 
inference framework. Cognit. Neuropsychiatry 24, 347–368 (2019). 
13. Seriès, P. Post -traumatic stress disorder as a disorder of prediction. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 
334–336 (2019). 
14. Seriès, P., Veerapa, E. & Jardri, R. Can computational models help elucidate the link 
between complex trauma and hallucinations? Hallucinations Neurobiol. Patient Exp. 265, 
66–73 (2024). 
15. Van der Kolk, B. et al. A randomized clinical trial of EMDR, fluoxetine and pill placebo in 
the treatment of PTSD: Treatment effects and long-term maintenance. J. Clin. Psychiatry 
68, 37–46 (2007). 
16. Kaye, A. P., Rao, M. G., Kwan, A. C., Ressler, K. J. & Krystal, J. H. A computational model 
for learning from repeated traumatic experiences under uncertainty. Cogn. Affect. Behav. 
Neurosci. 23, 894–904 (2023). 
17. Harnett, N. G., Fleming, L. L., Clancy, K. J., Ressler, K. J. & Rosso, I. M. Affective Visual 
Circuit Dysfunction in Trauma and Stress-Related Disorders. Biol. Psychiatry 97, 405–416 
(2025). 
18. Lange, R. D., Chattoraj, A., Beck, J. M., Yates, J. L. & Haefner, R. M. A confirmation bias 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 23 
in perceptual decision-making due to hierarchical approximate inference. PLOS Comput. 
Biol. 17, e1009517 (2021). 
19. Garcia-Rill, E. Disorders of the reticular activating system. Med. Hypotheses 49, 379–387 
(1997). 
20. Hobson, J. A., Gott, J. A. & Friston, K. J. Minds and Brains, Sleep and Psychiatry. 
Psychiatr. Res. Clin. Pract. 3, 12–28 (2021). 
21. Mendoza Alvarez, M. et al.  Systematic review: REM sleep, dysphoric dreams and 
nightmares as transdiagnostic features of psychiatric disorders with emotion dysregulation 
- Clinical implications. Sleep Med. 127, 1–15 (2025). 
22. Krueger, J. & Disney, A. A. Structure and function of dual -source cholinergic modulation 
in early vision. J. Comp. Neurol. 527, 738–750 (2019). 
23. Garcia-Rill, E. Chapter 5 - Posttraumatic stress and anxiety, the role of arousal. in Arousal 
in Neurological and Psychiatric Diseases  (ed. Garcia-Rill, E.) 67 –81 (Academic Press, 
2019). doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-817992-5.00005-2. 
24. Mellman, T. A., Kulick-Bell, R., Ashlock, L. E. & Nolan, B. Sleep events among veterans 
with combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry 152, 110–115 (1995). 
25. Gott, J. A., Stücker, S., Kanske, P., Haaker, J. & Dresler, M. Acetylcholine and 
metacognition during sleep. Conscious. Cogn. 117, 103608 (2024). 
26. Ben-Zion, Z. et al. Connectome-Based Predictive Modeling of PTSD Development Among 
Recent Trauma Survivors. JAMA Netw. Open 8, e250331 (2025). 
27. Zhou, L. et al. Organization of Functional Long-Range Circuits Controlling the Activity of 
Serotonergic Neurons in the Dorsal Raphe Nucleus. Cell Rep. 18, 3018–3032 (2017). 
28. Michels, L. et al.  Prefrontal GABA and glutathione imbalance in posttraumatic stress 
disorder: Preliminary findings. Psychiatry Res. Neuroimaging 224, 288–295 (2014). 
29. Shohamy, D. & Adcock, R. A. Dopamine and adaptive memory. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 
464–472 (2010). 
30. Nyberg, L. et al.  Dopamine D2 receptor availability is linked to hippocampal –caudate 
functional connectivity and episodic memory. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, 7918 –7923 
(2016). 
31. Schott, B. H. et al. The Dopaminergic Midbrain Participates in Human Episodic Memory 
Formation: Evidence from Genetic Imaging. J. Neurosci. 26, 1407 (2006). 
32. Bentley, P., Vuilleumier, P., Thiel, C. M., Driver, J. & Dolan, R. J. Cholinergic enhancement 
modulates neural correlates of selective attention and emotional processing. NeuroImage 
20, 58–70 (2003). 
33. Picciotto, M. R., Higley, M. J. & Mineur, Y. S. Acetylcholine as a Neuromodulator: 
Cholinergic Signaling Shapes Nervous System Function and Behavior. Neuron 76, 116–
129 (2012). 
34. Naegeli, C. et al.  Locus Coeruleus Activity Mediates Hyperresponsiveness in 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 83, 254–262 (2018). 
35. Dijkstra, N., von Rein, T., Kok, P. & Fleming, S. M. A neural basis for distinguishing 
imagination from reality. Neuron (2025) doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2025.05.015. 
36. Monsalve-Mercado, M. M., Stine, G. M., Shadlen, M. N.  & Miller, K. D. The geometry of 
the neural state space of decisions. bioRxiv 2025.01.24.634806 (2025) 
doi:10.1101/2025.01.24.634806. 
37. Mirza, M. B., Adams, R. A., Friston, K. & Parr, T. Introducing a Bayesian model of selective 
attention based on active inference. Sci. Rep. 9, 13915 (2019). 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 24 
38. Khona, M. & Fiete, I. R. Attractor and integrator networks in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 
23, 744–766 (2022). 
39. Chiarotti, F., Viglione, A., Giuliani, A. & Branchi, I. Citalopram amplifies the influence of 
living conditions on mood in depressed patients enrolled in the STAR*D study. Transl. 
Psychiatry 7, e1066–e1066 (2017). 
40. Carhart-Harris, R. L. et al.  Canalization and plasticity in psychopathology. 
Neuropharmacology 226, 109398 (2023). 
41. Brandman, T. & Peelen, M. V. Objects sharpen visual scene representations: evidence 
from MEG decoding. Cereb. Cortex 33, 9524–9531 (2023). 
42. Brady, T. F., Shafer-Skelton, A. & Alvarez, G. A. Global ensemble texture representations 
are critical to rapid scene perception. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 43, 1160–
1176 (2017). 
43. Williams, J. R., Markov, Y. A., Tiurina, N. A. & Störmer, V. S. What You See Is What You 
Hear: Sounds Alter the Contents of Visual Perception. Psychol. Sci. 33, 2109 –2122 
(2022). 
44. Wright, T. M., Pelphrey, K. A., Allison, T., McKeown, M. J. & McCarthy, G. Polysensory 
Interactions along Lateral Temporal Regions Evoked by Audiovisual Speech. Cereb. 
Cortex 13, 1034–1043 (2003). 
45. Beauchamp, M. S., Yasar, N. E., Frye, R. E. & Ro, T. Touch, sound and vision in human 
superior temporal sulcus. NeuroImage 41, 1011–1020 (2008). 
46. Butter, C. M., Buchtel, H. A. & Santucci, R. Spatial attentional shifts: Further evidence for 
the role of polysensory mechanisms using visual and tactile stimuli. Neuropsychologia 27, 
1231–1240 (1989). 
47. Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P. & Pezzulo, G. Active inference: a 
process theory. Neural Comput. 29, 1–49 (2017). 
48. Wald, A. An Essentially Complete Class of Admissible Decision Functions. Ann. Math. 
Stat. 18, 549–555 (1947). 
49. Brown, L. D. A Complete Class Theorem for Statistical Problems with Finite Sample 
Spaces. Ann. Stat. 9, 1289–1300 (1981). 
50. Reddy, L. & Kanwisher, N. Category Selectivity in the Ventral Visual Pathway Confers 
Robustness to Clutter and Diverted Attention. Curr. Biol. 17, 2067–2072 (2007). 
51. Mueller-Pfeiffer, C. et al.  Atypical visual processing in posttraumatic stress disorder. 
NeuroImage Clin. 3, 531–538 (2013). 
52. Da Costa, L. et al.  Active inference on discrete state -spaces: A synthesis. J. Math. 
Psychol. 99, 102447 (2020). 
53. Parr, T., Da Costa, L. & Friston, K. Markov blankets, information geometry and stochastic 
thermodynamics. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 378, 20190159 (2019). 
54. Da Costa, L., Parr, T., Sengupta, B. & Friston, K. Neural Dynamics under Active Inference: 
Plausibility and Efficiency of Information Processing. Entropy 23, (2021). 
55. Wurtz, R. H., McAlonan, K., Cavanaugh, J. & Berman, R. A. Thalamic pathways for active 
vision. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 177–184 (2011). 
56. Parr, T. & Friston, K. J. The active construction of the visual world. Neuropsychologia 104, 
92–101 (2017). 
57. Mirza, M. B., Adams, R. A., Mathys, C. & Friston, K. J. Human visual exploration reduces 
uncertainty about the sensed world. PLOS ONE 13, e0190429 (2018). 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 25 
58. Rao, R. P. N., Gklezakos, D. C. & Sathish, V. Active Predictive Coding: A Unifying Neural 
Model for Active Perception, Compositional Learning, and Hierarchical Planning. Neural 
Comput. 36, 1–32 (2023). 
59. Dijkstra, N., Zeidman, P., Ondobaka, S., van Gerven, M. A. J. & Friston, K. Distinct Top -
down and Bottom-up Brain Connectivity During Visual Perception and Imagery. Sci. Rep. 
7, 5677 (2017). 
60. Albers, A. M., Kok, P., Toni, I., Dijkerman, H. C. & de Lange, F. P. Shared Representations 
for Working Memory and Mental Imagery in Early Visual Cortex. Curr. Biol. 23, 1427–1431 
(2013). 
61. Tomić, I. & Bays, P. M. A dynamic neural resource model bridges sensory and working 
memory. eLife 12, RP91034 (2024). 
62. Schwartz, S. et al. Attentional Load and Sensory Competition in Human Vision: Modulation 
of fMRI Responses by Load at Fixation during Task-irrelevant Stimulation in the Peripheral 
Visual Field. Cereb. Cortex 15, 770–786 (2005). 
63. Stolte, M., Bahrami, B. & Lavie, N. High perceptual load leads to both reduced gain and 
broader orientation tuning. J. Vis. 14, 9–9 (2014). 
64. Torralbo, A., Kelley, T. A., Rees, G. & Lavie, N. Attention induced neural response trade-
off in retinotopic cortex under load. Sci. Rep. 6, 33041 (2016). 
65. Clancy, K., Ding, M., Bernat, E., Schmidt, N. B. & Li, W. Restless ‘rest’: intrinsic sensory 
hyperactivity and disinhibition in post -traumatic stress disorder. Brain 140, 2041 –2050 
(2017). 
66. Harrison, S. A. & Tong, F. Decoding reveals the contents of visual working memory in 
early visual areas. Nature 458, 632–635 (2009). 
67. Teng, C. & Kravitz, D. J. Visual working memory directly alters perception. Nat. Hum. 
Behav. 3, 827–836 (2019). 
68. S. A. Brandt & L. W. Stark. Spontaneous Eye Movements During Visual Imagery Reflect 
the Content of the Visual Scene. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 9, 27–38 (1997). 
69. Spivey, M. J. & Geng, J. J. Oculomotor mechanisms activated by imagery and memory: 
eye movements to absent objects. Psychol. Res. 65, 235–241 (2001). 
70. Hobson, J. A. & Friston, K. J. Waking and dreaming consciousness: Neurobiological and 
functional considerations. Prog. Neurobiol. 98, 82–98 (2012). 
71. Andrade, J., Kavanagh, D. & Baddeley, A. Eye-movements and visual imagery: A working 
memory approach to the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder. Br. J. Clin. Psychol. 
36, 209–223 (1997). 
72. Itti, L. & Baldi, P. Bayesian surprise attracts human attention. Vis. Atten. Psychophys. 
Electrophysiol. Neuroimaging 49, 1295–1306 (2009). 
73. Sun, Y., Gomez, F. & Schmidhuber, J. Planning to Be Surprised: Optimal Bayesian 
Exploration in Dynamic Environments. in Artificial General Intelligence (eds. Schmidhuber, 
J., Thórisson, K. R. & Looks, M.) 41 –51 (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 
2011). 
74. Parr, T. & Friston, K. J. Working memory, attention, and salience in active inference. Sci. 
Rep. 7, 14678 (2017). 
75. Parr, T. & Friston, K. J. Attention or salience? Atten. Percept. 29, 1–5 (2019). 
76. Bradley, M. M., Cuthbert, B. N. & Lang, P. J. Pictures as prepulse: Attention and emotion 
in startle modification. Psychophysiology 30, 541–545 (1993). 
77. Cotton, K. & Ricker, T. J. Examining the relationship between working memory 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 26 
consolidation and long-term consolidation. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 29, 1625–1648 (2022). 
78. Smith, R., Friston, K. J. & Whyte, C. J. A step -by-step tutorial on active inference and its 
application to empirical data. J. Math. Psychol. 107, 102632 (2022). 
79. Horner, A. J. & Burgess, N. The associative structure of memory for multi-element events. 
J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 142, 1370–1383 (2013). 
80. Horner, A. J., Bisby, J. A., Bush, D., Lin, W.-J. & Burgess, N. Evidence for holistic episodic 
recollection via hippocampal pattern completion. Nat. Commun. 6, 7462 (2015). 
81. Koolschijn, R. S. et al. Memory recall involves a transient break in excitatory -inhibitory 
balance. eLife 10, e70071 (2021). 
82. Holton, E., Braun, L., Thompson, J. A. F., Grohn, J. & Summerfield, C. Humans and neural 
networks show similar patterns of transfer and interference during continual learning. 
Preprint at https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/98ksw_v1 (2025). 
83. Park, J., Holmes, C. D. & Snyder, L. H. Compositional architecture: Orthogonal neural 
codes for task context and spatial memory in prefrontal cortex. bioRxiv 2025.02.25.640211 
(2025) doi:10.1101/2025.02.25.640211. 
84. Wills, T. J., Lever, C., Cacucci, F., Burgess, N. & O’Keefe, J. Attractor Dynamics in the 
Hippocampal Representation of the Local Environment. Science 308, 873–876 (2005). 
85. McKenzie, S. et al.  Hippocampal Representation of Related and Opposing Memories 
Develop within Distinct, Hierarchically Organized Neural Schemas. Neuron 83, 202–215 
(2014). 
86. Ólafsdóttir, H. F., Carpenter, F. & Barry, C. Task Demands Predict a Dynamic Switch in 
the Content of Awake Hippocampal Replay. Neuron 96, 925-935.e6 (2017). 
87. Favila, S. E., Chanales, A. J. H. & Kuhl, B. A. Experience-dependent hippocampal pattern 
differentiation prevents interference during subsequent learning. Nat. Commun. 7, 11066 
(2016). 
88. Zotow, E., Bisby, J. A. & Burgess, N. Behavioral evidence for pattern separation in human 
episodic memory. Learn. Mem. 27, 301–309 (2020). 
89. Friston, K. et al. Active inference and learning. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 68, 862–879 
(2016). 
90. Friston, K. & Buzsáki, G. The Functional Anatomy of Time: What and When in the Brain. 
Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 500–511 (2016). 
91. Brewin, C. R. & Burgess, N. Contextualisation in the revised dual representation theory of 
PTSD: A response to Pearson and colleagues. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry 45, 217–
219 (2014). 
92. Sarto-Jackson, I. The Making and Breaking of Minds: How Social Interactions Shape the 
Human Mind. (Vernon Press, 2022). 
93. Heinbockel, H., Wagner, A. D. & Schwabe, L. Post -retrieval stress impairs subsequent 
memory depending on hippocampal memory trace reinstatement during reactivation. Sci. 
Adv. 10, eadm7504. 
94. Perl, O. et al. Neural patterns differentiate traumatic from sad autobiographical memories 
in PTSD. Nat. Neurosci. 26, 2226–2236 (2023). 
95. Mellman, T. A., Bustamante, V., Fins, A. I., Pigeon, W. R. & Nolan, B. REM Sleep and the 
Early Development of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry 159, 1696–1701 
(2002). 
96. Chang, H. et al. Sleep microstructure organizes memory replay. Nature 637, 1161–1169 
(2025). 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL POST-TRAUMATIC CONTEXT 27 
97. Bollmann, L., Baracskay, P., Stella, F. & Csicsvari, J. Sleep stages antagonistically 
modulate reactivation drift. Neuron (2025) doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2025.02.025. 
98. Balouek, J. -A. et al.  Reactivation of Early -Life Stress -Sensitive Neuronal Ensembles 
Contributes to Lifelong Stress Hypersensitivity. J. Neurosci. 43, 5996 (2023). 
99. Geva, N., Deitch, D., Rubin, A. & Ziv, Y. Time and experience differentially affect distinct 
aspects of hippocampal representational drift. Neuron 111, 2357-2366.e5 (2023). 
100. McNamara, P., Wildman, W. J., Hodulik, G. & Rohr, D. A neurocomputational theory 
of nightmares: the role of formal properties of nightmare images. SLEEP Adv. 2, zpab009 
(2021). 
Acknowledgements 
AL received research funding support from the Open University School of Computing & 
Communications, and was hosted during manuscript editing by the Konrad Lorenz Institute for Evolution 
& Cognition Research. KF is supported by funding from the Wellcome Trust (Ref: 226793/Z/22/Z). The 
Functional Imaging Laboratory is funded by a Wellcome Discovery Grant. 
Supplementary information 
Simulations were performed in Matlab using a standard routine, spm_MDP_VB_X.m, included with the 
SPM software (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/). Code available upon reasonable request  (will be 
included in version of record). No Generative AI was used in the creation of this manuscript. 
.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 10, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.07.663473doi: bioRxiv preprint 