https://doi.org/10.14311/APP.2022.38.0470
Acta Polytechnica CTU Proceedings38:470–477, 2022 © 2022TheAuthor(s).Licensedundera CC-BY 4.0 licence
Published by theCzech Technical University in Prague
USE OF ENERGY PROFILE INDICATORS TO DETERMINE THE
EXPECTED RANGE OF HEATING ENERGY CONSUMPTION
Tobias Loga∗, Britta Stein, Guillaume Behem
IWU – Institut Wohnen und Umwelt, Institute for Housing and Environment, Rheinstraße 65, DE-64295
Darmstadt, Germany
∗ corresponding author: t.loga@iwu.de
Abstract. A small set of query variables designed to collect information about the energy-related
features of residential buildings is presented. These “energy profile indicators” include information about
those visible characteristics of a building which have a notable impact on its energy performance and
are simple to assess. The queries are an interesting source for a rough energy performance calculation
for single buildings as well as for housing portfolios or housing stocks.
A method has been developed to transform the energy profile indicators into input data for
a physical calculation model. It consists of procedures to estimate the envelope area, U-values, and
efficiency values of the heat supply system. To all model input variables an uncertainty is assigned. If
information from a query is not available, the model input is set to a state representing the average
building stock and the uncertainty of this quantity is adjusted to a value reflecting the variance in the
stock. The resulting uncertainty of the calculated energy use is determined.
Examples of the application of the method are given to show the influence of different unknown
quantities including occupant behaviour. Experiences on the coherence with metered consumption are
reported.
Keywords: Monitoring indicators, building stock, surveys, statistical evaluation, realistic physical
model, uncertainties, target/actual comparison.
1. Introduction
Various activities in the building sector aim at gath-
ering building data, executing energy performance
calculations and assessing the metered energy con-
sumption, often in the context of Energy Performance
Certificates (EPCs). However, huge challenges are
faced when cross-section and longitudinal analyses are
needed to get an overall view of the refurbishment
progress and energy consumption of housing stocks.
This is not only due to data gaps but also to the
used calculation methods and software applications
focussing on official proof of requirements and rat-
ing. The detailedness and complexity of input data,
recurrent revisions of the regulatory framework, but
also the lack of software applications to store, calcu-
late and analyse multi-building data are barriers for
aggregation and statistical evaluation.
The idea of the concept presented in this paper
is to tackle these challenges by introducing an addi-
tional level of energy assessment addressing evaluation
purposes. The overall objectives are:
• Facilitate the collection and maintenance of informa-
tion about energy-related features of housing stocks,
allowing for an assessment of the overall state of
refurbishment, annual refurbishment rates and for
a comparison with milestones on the refurbishment
path.
• Provide reliable estimates of the energy consump-
tion of single buildings and of housing stocks for
different levels of insulation and various heat supply
system types to be used for prognoses in the context
of refurbishment scenarios.
• Enable a target/actual comparison of the consump-
tion after implementation of refurbishment mea-
sures for single buildings and also for housing stocks.
In order to reach these aims, a methodical frame-
work has been developed within the research project
MOBASY, consisting of two parts [1]:
(1.) A set of monitoring indicators representing those
visible characteristics of buildings that have the
most important effect on its energy performance,
suitable for use in questionnaires and quick on-site
inspections.
(2.) An energy performance calculation using the men-
tioned monitoring indicators as input data and pro-
viding a realistic bandwidth of the expected energy
consumption, reflecting the uncertainty of the data
acquisition (uncertain or unavailable information)
and of the model input data (thermal properties of
materials and components, occupant behaviour, cli-
mate) depending on the specific field of application
(assessment of past consumption or prognosis).
This paper gives an overview of the monitoring in-
dicators (“energy profile indicators”), and of the prin-
ciples of the uncertainty assessment attached to the
realistic energy performance calculation (“simple com-
bined physics-probability model”). The influence of
470
vol. 38/2022 Use of energy profile indicators to determine the expected range ...
Characteristics of Indicators (query variables)
Building size and form Living space, number of attached buildings, number of full storeys,
heating situation in attic and basement, number of dwellings
Thermal properties of the
opaque envelope (categories:
roof, ceiling, wall, floor)
Building: year of construction;
Per envelope category: existent insulation upgrade, year of insula-
tion upgrade, insulation thickness + covered fraction
Thermal properties of windows
(two types)
Per window type: Number of panes, low-e coating existent, type of
window frame, year of installation, fraction of the second window
type, if applicable
Heat supply system (heating /
DHW)
Heat generators (type, specification, year of installation), thermal
solar system, heat storages (type, location inside or outside of
thermalenvelope), heatdistribution(type, insulationlevel, location
inside or outside of thermal envelope)
Further systems Ventilation system (with / without heat recovery), PV system
(with / without electrical storage)
Table 1.Overview of energy profile indicators for residential buildings.
the origin and detailedness of data on the uncertainty
of the estimated energy consumption is illustrated for
a single- and a multi-family house. Furthermore, re-
sults are presented from the application of the method
to a housing stock sample, providing statistical infor-
mation on the energy-related state, on the estimated
and actual consumption.
2. Energy profile indicators
A set of “energy profile indicators” has been developed
in [2], then continuously further refined and applied
in several projects for portfolio assessment and quality
assurance (examples: [3, 4]). The indicators have
also been used in house owner surveys in 2009 [5]
and 2016 [6] on the basis of random sampling1 to get
an image of the refurbishment state and progress of
the German residential building stock. Table 1 gives
an overview of the query variables.
These indicators represent the physical characteris-
tics of a building that have the biggest impact on its
energy use for heating and domestic hot water (DHW).
The variables are designed to gather information by
asking (technically informed) building owners and by
executing on-site inspections of residential buildings.
For these purposes, a two-page questionnaire [7] and
a structured data table [8] have been developed.
Energy profile indicators provide information that
can be used to estimate the energy consumption of
a building. For this purpose, a transformation to
a physical model including an uncertainty assessment
has been developed.
3. Simple combined
physics-probability model
There are different approaches to quantify the uncer-
tainties of the building energy assessment [9]. The
1The 2016 evaluation is based on about 17000 evaluable
questionnaires (18% of ca. 92000 queries sent to a random
sample of German house owners) [6].
concept presented here uses forward uncertainty, that
tries to quantify the uncertainty in the calculation
outputs propagated from uncertain input variables
through mathematical models. Due to the stationary,
quasi-linear energy calculation model, a very simple,
non-sampling probabilistic method can be employed,
assuming normal distributions and applying the Gaus-
sian error propagation law.
3.1. Principle
The principle of the indicator-based energy perfor-
mance calculation is shown in Figure 1. The first
step is a transformation of energy profile indicators
to input variables of the physical model. As a result,
a “calculation value” is provided for each quantity,
directly used by the energy performance calculation
(“model input variables”), and an “uncertainty range”
is attributed, which represents the span of values that
might include the actual (unknown) real value.
Preferably, the parameters of the transformation
should be derived from empirical data of large build-
ing stock samples. However, for certain quantities
extended surveys or large measurement campaigns
are not available. In these cases, the calculation value
and uncertainty range can only be estimated. A prag-
matic way to do this is to ask an expert: Which
is the highest, which is the lowest value that might
be present and still be seen as “not unusual”? The
average of both is the calculation value, half the dif-
ference between both represents an indicator of the
uncertainty. As an important means for transparency
and inducement for continuous improvement of the
method, the derivation of calculation values and un-
certainties must be documented for each variable.
Thecalculationvaluesareusedasinputforthephys-
ical model to determine the theoretical energy con-
sumption. In a separate calculation, the uncertainty
of the calculated energy consumption is determined by
combining the effect of the uncertainties of all input
471
T. Loga, B. Stein, G. Behem Acta Polytechnica CTU Proceedings
Figure 1. Principle of the combined physics-probability model based on energy profile indicators.
values. Gaussian error propagation law (square root
of the added-up squares of the uncertainties caused
by each single variable) is used for this purpose. Since
most of the probability density distributions of in-
put variables are assumed to be symmetrical and the
energy balance procedure used (seasonal method) is
mainly linear, the systematic deviations produced by
this simplification are assumed to be small. The re-
sult of this combined probability-physics model is an
expectation value and an expectation range of the
energy use for heating and DHW.
3.2. Systematic uncertainty assessment
The uncertainty of the energy performance calculation
is in principle depending on the type of data source
and on the completeness of information (see Figure 2).
Type of data source: Information provided by build-
ing owners is a useful data source, however inspections
can provide additional information and thus reduce
the uncertainty. More trustworthy are design data
from refurbishment planning (including issued EPCs),
at best if the implementation is secured by quality
assurance (QA).
Completeness of information: Information can be
missing from all mentioned data sources (even in
a quality assured planning process). When typical
or average values from the building stock are used
instead the uncertainty of the calculation increases.
This global principle has been translated into an al-
gorithm: For each model input variable five uncer-
taintyclassesAtoEaredefinedwithrulesforselection
and uncertainty values to be used. As an example,
Table 2 shows the uncertainty assessment of the in-
sulation thickness, applied separately for all opaque
envelope categories. Analogue definitions are available
for the other input variables2.
2These are: envelope area, U-values of original constructions,
insulated fractions by envelope type, thermal conductivities
Figure 2. Influences on the uncertainty of an energy
performance calculation.
The method presented in this paper is focussing on
data from building owners and from on-site inspec-
tions, associated with uncertainty classes C and D.
These data sources facilitate the energy assessment
of a large number of buildings – as a start from files
and records – updates can be provided in the course
of insulation by envelope type, U-value of windows, thermal
bridging surcharge, heating degree days, annual solar radiation,
effective passive solar aperture, internal heat load, efficiency
of ventilation heat recovery, DHW heat need, efficiency of
heating system, efficiency of DHW system. Tabled values and
explanations in English language are displayed at the end of
the supplemental document [10]. A detailed description of the
algorithms for a selection of variables is given in Annex D of [1]
(German language).
472
vol. 38/2022 Use of energy profile indicators to determine the expected range ...
Uncertainty Description Uncertainty of
Class insulation thickness ∗
Relative Absolute
A Insulation thickness from design data, quality assured 5% 0.5cm
B Insulation thickness from design data 10% 1cm
C Insulation thickness determined by inspection on-site
/ record or statement of building owner
25% 2cm
D Insulation available; insulation thickness unknown;
use of average values from the building stock differ-
entiated by implementation period
40% 5cm
E Insulation thickness and year of implementation un-
known; use of average values from the building stock
(all buildings)
50% 8cm
∗ Relevant for the calculation is the minimum in cm, derived from the relative and absolute uncertainty.
Table 2.Example of uncertainty classification for an input variable (insulation thickness).
of on-site investigations. Even if input is missing
for some indicators (class E), the estimation of the
actual energy use of the sample or portfolio can be
commenced – with corresponding larger expectation
ranges. If available, design data with or without qual-
ity assurance (classes A or B) can also be integrated.
The improvement achieved by gradually adding reli-
able data from inspections and from quality assured
refurbishments will result in narrowed ranges of the
expected energy use.
3.3. Mechanisms of the energy
performance calculation based on
energy profile indicators
Following the above-described principles, a coherent
method for an energy performance calculation by
use of energy profile indicators has been developed
and implemented in form of an Excel-Workbook and
an R script (description of the method in [1]). Core
aspects are the estimation of the thermal envelope
area [11] and of the U-values [12]. The energy perfor-
mance calculation is based on the TABULA seasonal
method [13], using climate data differentiated by post-
code: In the first instance, the physical model is cal-
culated by use of the local long-term average climate
(of the past 20 years). For performing target/actual
comparisons for specific years, calculated heat losses
and gains are calibrated by the actual temperatures
and solar radiation of the metering period.
4. Showcase: Influence of
different parameters on the
uncertainty of the estimated
consumption
For a single building, the described method allows
a prognosis of the energy consumption, providing
an estimation value (result of the physical model)
and an estimation range (result of the uncertainty
assessment). The actual consumption is expected to
be found within the estimation range, however in rarer
cases it can also go beyond that.
Table 3 shows examples of expectation ranges for
a single-family and a multi-family house (SFH, MFH),
depending on the state of refurbishment, on the data
acquisition type and on the utilisation of the build-
ings. These are results from the combined physics-
probability model with uncertainty assessment as de-
scribed above. The examples are intended to illustrate
the uncertainty of the consumption estimate based
on energy profile indicators (house owner statement)
as opposed to those based on design data, consider-
ing particularly the influence of unknown occupant
behaviour.
For the variants 1.1 to 1.3 the calculation is as-
sumed to be based on energy profile indicators, with
input from house owners. For the single-family house,
the relative uncertainty of the calculated energy use
for heating and DHW is±35% before (var. 1.1) and
±72% after a deep refurbishment with passive house
components (var. 1.2). The relative increase is mainly
caused by the influence of occupant behaviour. How-
ever, the state of the building is much better defined af-
ter refurbishment, so the absolute uncertainty caused
by the envelope is only±25kWh/(m2a) compared
to ±52kWh/(m2a) before refurbishment. If the real
climate conditions of the climate zone are used, the un-
certainty of the energy demand caused by the climate
is reduced from±26% (var. 1.2) to±19%, (var. 1.3),
having only a small effect on the total uncertainty.
In variant 1.4, design data from the planning of the
refurbishment (detailed calculation of envelope area,
of U-values, and of supply system performance) and
long-term climate data are used. This is the typical
pattern of energy performance certificates, issued in
the context of modernisation. It reduces the total
uncertainty from about±70 to±60%. The effect is
rather small due to the predominating large uncer-
tainties of utilisation and climate. Variant 1.5 shows
a situation where the design data are quality-assured
(update of information about actual implementation
473
T. Loga, B. Stein, G. Behem Acta Polytechnica CTU Proceedings
Exemplary
building SFH (single-family house) [1958–1968] MFH (multi-family house) [1958–1968]
State of
refurbishment
Unrefur-
bished Refurbished (passive house components) Unrefur-
bished Refurbished (passive house components)
Type of data
source Ex post (house owner statement) Design
data
Design
data +
QA
Ex post (house owner statement) Design
data
Design
data +
QA
Climate long-term average specific
year
long-
term
average
specific
year long-term average specific
year
long-
term
average
specific
year
Occupant
behaviour unknown
detailed
measure-
ments∗
unknown
detailed
measure-
ments∗
Variant 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5
Calculated energy
use (natural gas)
[kWh/(m2a)]
Energy use∗∗
•Heating 203 50 50 50 50 156 31 31 31 31
•DHW 25 9 9 9 9 26 15 15 15 15
Sum 228 59 59 59 59 183 45 45 45 45
Uncertainty∗∗∗
•Envelope ±23% ±42% ±42% ±15% ±7% ±17% ±29% ±29% ±12% ±5%
•System ±9% ±10% ±10% ±7% ±5% ±9% ±12% ±12% ±10% ±6%
•Utilisation ±19% ±52% ±52% ±52% ±13% ±4% ±14% ±14% ±14% ±4%
•Climate∗∗∗∗ ±16% ±26% ±19% ±26% ±13% ±16% ±33% ±24% ±30% ±10%
Total ±35% ±72% ±70% ±60% ±20% ±26% ±47% ±42% ±37% ±14%
∗ Indoor temperatures and windows opening have been measured, e.g. in a research project (assumption for the shown case: building has utilisation close to the
average of all buildings); however, internal heat sources and external shading have not been measured or modelled in detail.
∗∗ Natural gas, in kWh/(m2a); calculation with simple probability-physics model.
∗∗∗ Relative uncertainty, related to energy use for heating and DHW.
∗∗∗∗ Including uncertainty of external shading (assumption for all variants: No detailed assessment of the reduction of passive solar gains caused by surrounding trees
and buildings or by use of shutters etc.).
Table 3.Estimation of the actual energy consumption before and after deep refurbishment for two example buildings
and assigned uncertainty, depending on the type of data source and measurements (A PDF demonstrating the
calculation flow for the 10 building variants can be viewed in the supplemental document mentioned above [10]).
474
vol. 38/2022 Use of energy profile indicators to determine the expected range ...
during refurbishment) and where the utilisation and
the climate are measured in detail, for example in the
framework of a research project. In this case, the un-
certainty of the consumption estimate can be reduced
to ±20%3.
For the multi-family house with 24 flats (var. 2.1
to 2.5), the effect of the utilisation uncertainty is sig-
nificantly smaller because of stochastic effects (com-
pensation between flats with high and low intensity
of usage).
It may be noted that a very deep refurbishment
has been assumed here, resulting in very low en-
ergy consumption and causing large relative un-
certainties. However, the absolute uncertainty of
about ±40kWh/(m2a) for SFH (var. 1.3) and of
±20kWh/(m2a) for MFH (var. 2.3) is not changing
much for less ambitious refurbishments, resulting in
smaller relative uncertainties (see results for the build-
ing sample presented in the following chapter). If
design data are not available for such a deep refurbish-
ment, the thermal envelope’s uncertainty is predomi-
nated by the unknown effects of thermal bridging. If
a characterisation is possible (for example as a result
of on-site inspection: no relevant constructive weak-
nesses), the uncertainty of the energy use caused by
the envelope can be reduced from±29% to ±16%
(MFH, var. 2.3), the total uncertainty reduced from
±42% to ±34%.
These uncertainties of consumption estimates are
valid with view at a single building. However, if
large building samples or stocks are considered, the
uncertainty of the predicted total consumption (and
thus the uncertainty of the average) is reduced to 1/10
of the shown values for 100 buildings and to 1/100 for
10000 buildings.
In summary, the expectation ranges of the energy
consumption determined by quantifying input uncer-
tainties seem rather large, especially for single-family
houses. This is not only true for the calculation based
on energy profile indicators but also for the EPC
calculation based on design data. For both, the pre-
dominating factors determining the uncertainty of
the prognosis of an annual consumption are unknown
occupant behaviour and climate conditions.
5. Application on a sample of
apartment blocks from housing
companies
In the following, the application of the combined
probability-physics model on a housing sample from
three housing companies is reported. The energy pro-
file indicators and the metered energy consumption
values were collected for 155 building entities (mostly
3The type of energy calculation procedure has only a very
small effect (for example the seasonal method has only an
uncertainty of±2% compared to the monthly method [14]).
Thus, nearly the same uncertainties would result if a high-
resolution simulation programme was used.
large building blocks) with 3329 apartments4. The
energy characteristics of the building sample com-
prise a wide span from unrefurbished to deep renova-
tions [12], which also includes the use of passive house
components and installation of ventilation systems
with heat recovery.
In two of the three companies, a large effort was
required to collect the information from individual
building-related files. In the third company, however,
energy profile indicators were already introduced in
2008 for the complete portfolio and since then main-
tained and updated [3]. These data could therefore be
used directly. For some of the buildings, the indicators
were collected during a quick on-site inspection – the
typical effort was half an hour per building.
Table 4 shows the results for a subset where me-
tered consumption is available for both, heating and
DHW. As a parameter for the theoretical heat loss the
“thermal conductance” is defined, which is the heat
loss of the building per Kelvin temperature difference,
related to the reference floor area.
It can be stated that the average actual consump-
tion by conductance class is very close to the calcu-
lation model averages (the ratio average actual to
average theoretical energy use varies from 95% to
115% per class). The standard deviations of the ac-
tual energy consumption and the average uncertainty
of calculation are in similar ranges.
In summary, the method seems quite suitable for
modelling the consumption of housing stocks and for
evaluating measures of different depths with respect to
their actual effect. One conclusion that can be drawn
from this is, for example, that the average energy
consumption for heating and DHW of the class with
best insulation level is about one third of that with
the worst.
6. Conclusions
A method has been developed that is based on a set of
monitoring indicators collectable by a questionnaire
or a quick on-site examination. These “energy profile
indicators” are used as input for an energy perfor-
mance calculation to determine an expected range
of actual energy consumption. Examples show how
the uncertainty of consumption prognosis depends on
information about data source and data completeness.
Moreover, the methodology was applied to a sample
of multi-family buildings involving statistical evalua-
tions. For different levels of insulation, the estimated
as well as the actually measured consumption were
determined, with the actual consumption by conduc-
tance class being very close to the calculation model
averages.
Future work should focus on the expansion of the
database to include also single-family houses and dif-
ferent heat supply systems, especially heat pumps and
solar systems.
4The datasets of the sample can be viewed at the Excel
workbook mentioned above [8].
475
T. Loga, B. Stein, G. Behem Acta Polytechnica CTU Proceedings
Thermal conductance class∗ Range W/(m 2K) 0.01–0.80 0.81–1.00 1.01–1.20 1.21–1.50 1.51–2.00 2.01–
Equivalent insulation thickness
of opaque elements∗∗ Average cm 31.6 21.5 12.1 13.0 2.4 2.7
U-value of windows Average W/(m 2K) 0.80 1.29 1.52 2.62 2.68 2.68
Availability of mechanical
ventilation with heat recoveryPercentage 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%
Calculated energy use for
heating and DHW (comparison
value)∗∗∗
Average kWh/(m2a) 50 73 96 103 143 163
Std. dev. kWh/(m2a) ±7 ±5 ±10 ±11 ±14 ±20
Av. uncert. kWh/(m2a) ±16 ±20 ±22 ±27 ±39 ±43
Actual energy use for heating
and DHW (metering)
Average kWh/(m2a) 50 78 110 110 135 148
Std. dev. kWh/(m2a) ±9 ±21 ±15 ±21 ±16 ±23
Ratio actual / calculated energy
use 0.99 1.07 1.15 1.07 0.95 0.91
Frequency
Number of building n = 15 n = 10 n = 8 n = 23 n = 5 n = 11datasets
Number of annual n = 28 n = 25 n = 21 n = 46 n = 10 n = 22consumption values
∗ The “thermal conductance” is the heat transfer coefficient by transmission and ventilation, related to the reference floor area of the building.
∗∗ Thermal resistance of opaque envelope, expressed in cm insulation with 0.035W/(m·K) thermal conductivity.
∗∗∗Energy use, calculated by the combined probability-physics model, balance scope and climate consistent with metering (example: if heat is metered in the
apartments the heat losses of the central heat distribution system are disregarded in this comparison).
Table 4. Comparison of theoretical and actual consumption for a building sample (heating + DHW). Averages,
uncertainties and standard deviations differentiated by thermal conductance class. (Status of database analysis:
2022-02-17).
In practice, the simplification of data input, the abil-
ity to adequately consider data gaps and uncertainties
and the output of estimation ranges may provide ben-
efits for different purposes:
• Individual houses (occupants, owners, energy con-
sultants, ...):
▷ The small effort to provide the indicators for
an existing house makes it a useful method in
energy advice campaigns. The current energy
consumption can be interpreted and assessed.
Achievable consumption bandwidths after refur-
bishment can be provided for the investigated
house.
▷ For refurbished buildings as well as for new build,
the method provides a target range of the en-
ergy consumption. The occupant or owner can
compare the actual consumption against this in-
dividual benchmark. If the consumption is above
the expectation range, the implemented measures,
the operating conditions, and the occupant be-
haviour can be checked and improved, if necessary.
Besides, measurements of the actual utilisation
conditions and of the local climate during the con-
sumption period can help to significantly narrow
down the expectation range.
▷ Energy profile indicators can be attached to EPC
issuing (e.g. “statistic forms”, XML-files). This
enables a plausibility control of the energy per-
formance calculated for the EPC, for issuers as
well as for inspectors on quality assurance.
▷ The fact that visually provable indicators are
used is also a benefit for application cases in the
context of pricing rules, dependent on energy per-
formance (building value, financing, sales, rents,
...) and for grant applications.
• Housing portfolios (housing companies, energy ser-
vice and billing companies, ...):
▷ The collection and regular update of energy per-
formance indicators provides a basis to determine
the current level of insulation and the current
fraction of efficient/renewable systems for the
entire stock as well as the respective annual im-
provement rates. These achievements can e.g. be
compared with the climate protection targets for
the portfolio or for the national stock.
▷ The average estimated and, if available, ac-
tual consumption values and ranges per conduc-
tance class are benchmarks that can be useful in
the preparation of refurbishments, especially in
the communication with tenants, to strengthen
the confidence in the actual effect of the measures.
▷ By matching consumption values of single build-
ings against the benchmarks, cases with sus-
piciously high consumption can be identified.
An uptake of low-cost measures can improve the
situation, similar to the target/actual comparison
described for individual buildings.
▷ The calculation for all buildings of a portfolio
may also be used as building stock model for
developing refurbishment strategies.
• National housing stock (energy experts, authorities,
energy agencies, ...):
▷ By using the energy profile indicators for
a random-sample-based house owner survey, the
achievements regarding levels of insulation and
fractions of efficient/renewable systems can be
determined for the national housing stock, similar
to the evaluation of the energy profile database
of a housing portfolio.
476
vol. 38/2022 Use of energy profile indicators to determine the expected range ...
▷ In addition, the random sample can be used in
national building stock models in form of a mi-
crosimulation model or by aggregation to average
buildings to forecast the development of energy
use by energy carrier and calculate different al-
ternative scenarios.
▷ In the context of national information campaigns,
the publication of benchmarks consisting of aver-
age consumption values and typical spreads for
different insulation categories can provide use-
ful information for occupants and owners that
inspires confidence in different types of measures.
Acknowledgements
The work described in this paper is part of the research
project MOBASY, supported by the German govern-
ment (Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Cli-
mate Action (reg. N °: 03SBE0004A); project dura-
tion: 11/2017–10/2022; more information at: https:
//www.iwu.de/forschung/energie/2017/mobasy/). The
analysis of the housing sample has been implemented in
collaboration with three German housing companies: bau-
verein AG Darmstadt, Wohnbau Gießen and Nassauische
Heimstätte Wohnstadt Frankfurt/Main. We very much
appreciate the support and cooperation.
References
[1] T. Loga, M. Großklos, A. Müller, et al.
Realbilanzierung für den Verbrauch-Bedarf-Vergleich
(MOBASY Teilbericht). Tech. rep., Darmstadt, 2021.
ISBN 978-3-941140-67-7.
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.22472.24328/1
[2] T. Loga, N. Diefenbach, J. Knissel, R. Born.
Entwicklung eines vereinfachten, statistisch
abgesicherten Verfahrens zur Erhebung von
Gebäudedaten für die Erstellung des Energieprofils von
Gebäuden („Kurzverfahren Energieprofil“). Tech. rep.,
Darmstadt, 2005. ISBN 3-932074-76-9.
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.20794.52160
[3] T. Loga, M. Repp, S. Swiderek. Verbrauchsbenchmarks
– ein Soll-Ist-Vergleich für Wohnungsunternehmen. In
12. EffizienzTagung Bauen + Modernisieren 2020. 2020.
[2022-03-02]. https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/350710240_Verbrauchsbenchmarks_-
_ein_Soll-Ist-Vergleich_fur_Wohnungsunternehmen
[4] T. Loga, K. Müller. Evaluation of the TABULA
database – Comparison of typical buildings and heat
supply systems from 12 European countries, IWU,
Darmstadt, 2012. TABULA Work Report, [2022-03-02].
http://www.building-
typology.eu/downloads/public/docs/report/
TABULA_WorkReport_EvaluationDatabase.pdf
[5] N. Diefenbach, H. Cischinsky, M. Rodenfels, K.-D.
Clausnitzer. Datenbasis Gebäudebestand.
Datenerhebung zur energetischen Qualität und zu den
Modernisierungstrends im deutschen
Wohngebäudebestand, IWU, Darmstadt, 2010.
[2022-10-06]. https://www.iwu.de/fileadmin/
publikationen/gebaeudebestand/datenbasis/
Endbericht_Datenbasis.pdf
[6] H. Cischinsky, N. Diefenbach. Datenerhebung
Wohngebäudebestand 2016, IWU, Darmstadt, 2018.
[2022-10-06]. https://www.iwu.de/fileadmin/
publikationen/gebaeudebestand/2018_IWU_
CischinskyEtDiefenbach_Datenerhebung-
Wohngeb%C3%A4udebestand-2016.pdf
[7] T. Loga. Energy profile. questionnaires thermal
envelope and heat supply system, IWU, Darmstadt, 2021.
[2022-03-02]. Completed with example data:https:
//www.iwu.de/fileadmin/tools/energyprofile/
EnergyProfile_Forms_BuildingSystem_ENG.pdf
Template with active form fields:https://www.iwu.de/
fileadmin/tools/energyprofile/EnergyProfile_
FormBuildingSystem_DataCapture.pdf
[8] T. Loga. Energy profile indicators. data table,
showcase, IWU, Darmstadt, 2021. [2022-03-02].
https://www.iwu.de/fileadmin/tools/
energyprofile/EnergyProfileIndicators_
DataTable_Showcase_ENG.xlsx
[9] W. Tian, Y. Heo, P. de Wilde, et al. A review of
uncertainty analysis in building energy assessment.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews93:285–301,
2018. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.05.029
[10] T. Loga, B. Stein, G. Behem. CESB22 – Annex of
the paper: Use of energy profile indicators to determine
the expected range of heating energy consumption,
CESB22 Prague, Documentation of the example
building calculations, 2022. [2022-03-02].
https://www.iwu.de/fileadmin/publikationen/
energie/mobasy/CESB22_EnergyProfileIndicators_
Annex_ShowcaseExamples_CalculationFlow.pdf
[11] T. Loga, N. Diefenbach, J. Knissel. Entwicklung
eines Flächenschätzverfahrens zur Abschätzung von
Bauteilflächen als Grundlage für die energetische
Bewertung von Wohngebäuden.Bauphysik 27(2):102–
116, 2005.https://doi.org/10.1002/bapi.200590017
[12] T. Loga, G. Behem. Target/actual comparison and
benchmarking used to safeguard low energy consumption
in refurbished housing stocks. InProceedings of the
eceee Summer Study 2021, pp. 461–471. 2021.
[2022-03-02]. https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/355124720_Targetactual_comparison_
and_benchmarking_used_to_safeguard_low_energy_
consumption_in_refurbished_housing_stocks
[13] T. Loga, N. Diefenbach. TABULA calculation
method – Energy use for heating and domestic hot
water. Reference calculation and adaptation to the
typical level of measured consumption, IWU, Darmstadt,
2013. TABULA documentation, [2022-03-02].
https://episcope.eu/fileadmin/tabula/public/
docs/report/TABULA_CommonCalculationMethod.pdf
[14] T. Loga. Heizgrenztemperaturen für Gebäude
unterschiedlicher energetischer Standards. Abschätzung
der Heizgrenztemperaturen und Bilanzzeiten für das
Heizperiodenbilanzverfahren nach EN 832/DIN V
4108-6. Bauphysik 25(1):2–14, 2003.
https://doi.org/10.1002/bapi.200300020
477