6. Expected impact of the African 
Continental Free Trade Area on food 
security
Jamie MacLeod
Intra-African trade is a  highly important component of Africa’s agricultural 
trade. Much of this trade comprises goods such as vegetables, fish, vegetable 
oils, fruits and diary (which tend to have greater earning potential than other 
agricultural or food products), as detailed in Chapter 5. Intra-African trade 
in agricultural machinery and fertilisers is also significant while that in staple 
foods, such as millet, sorghum and rice, is relatively limited according to offi-
cial trade flows, though likely higher once small-scale informal trade is taken 
into account. The effort to establish a continent-wide free trade area in the  
form of the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) is driven by  
the recognition that a liberalised trade regime across the continent could drive 
further growth in intra-African trade including informal trade formalisation 
as tariffs not already covered by regional trade agreements and non-tariff bar-
riers fall.
This is the background against which this chapter estimates the potential 
impact of the AfCFTA on the agriculture sector by means of a detailed partial 
equilibrium model using recently available tariff schedules for African coun-
tries. The impact is forecast to be relatively small over the short-run timespan 
that is covered by the modelling approach. Intra-African trade in the sector 
as a whole is expected to increase by 5.4 per cent, equivalent to $1,015 million 
annually, in a scenario of full tariff liberalisation under the AfCFTA. These 
results are modest, but consistent across all tests of the model to param -
eter sensitivity analyses, and reflect a scenario in which all trade is liberal -
ised, without recourse to product exclusions (in reality some of this trade 
may be excluded from liberalisation and the impact of the AfCFTA may be  
limited further).
How to cite this book chapter: 
MacLeod, Jamie (2025) ‘Expected impact of the African Continental Free  
Trade Area on food security’ , in: Luke, David (ed) How Africa Eats:  
Trade, Food Security and Climate Risks, London: LSE Press, pp. 125–157.  
https://doi.org/10.31389/lsepress.hae.f License: CC-BY-NC 4.0
126 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
Why are the results modest? The technical answer is that trade modelling, 
such as that deployed in this chapter, relies on amplifying existing trade and 
there is simply not that much existing formal trade between African coun -
tries. Intra-African suppliers account for just 16 per cent of Africa’s imports 
of agricultural and food products. Most of that existing trade already flows 
through Africa’s pre-existing free trade arrangements of the regional eco -
nomic communities (RECs), so the tariffs faced by that trade are also already 
low, averaging just 2.9 per cent (on an import-weighted basis).
Nevertheless, where the AfCFTA will have most impact, in the immediate 
term, is on trade in relatively higher unit-value products including fish and 
seafood, vegetables, preparations of cereals, vegetable oils, fruits and dairy. 
There are also relatively sizeable opportunities for exports of sugar and coffee. 
In the upstream part of the value chain, there are important opportunities for 
exporters of agricultural machinery and fertilisers.
What these results suggest is that, if the AfCFTA is going to substantially 
boost the agriculture sector and food security in Africa, it needs to go far 
beyond merely reducing tariffs. This aligns with the results of other model -
ling assessments, such as those by the World Bank (2020), the IMF (2019), 
and the ECA (2021). While less detailed or focused on agriculture specifi -
cally, those complementary assessments suggest that much of the impact of 
the AfCFTA will arise only if it can be effectively used as a tool for reducing 
non-tariff barriers and stimulating investment. Such non-tariff barriers are 
found to be higher in the agriculture sector than in other sectors on aver -
age (UNECA et al. 2019). Y et, unlike reducing tariff barriers, these benefits  
of the AfCFTA are not automatic and will require much more work to unpeel 
the layers of non-tariff challenges facing African traders. Chapter 7 identifies 
and discusses pathways for the AfCFTA to discipline non-tariff barriers, one 
aspect of this work.
6.1 Assessing the impact of the African Continental Free 
Trade Area on the agriculture sector
The analysis uses a partial equilibrium modelling approach (a full elaboration 
of the model is included in Appendix A). Partial equilibrium models special-
ise in providing detail on one part or sector of the economy over the short to 
medium term. They can incorporate the latest tariff schedules and trade flows 
and provide detailed analysis, which makes them suitable for assessing prod-
uct-specific impacts within the agriculture sector. This also allows the analysis 
to use the most recently available tariff schedules for African countries and 
recent trade data. It should nevertheless be considered as best reflecting short-
run first-order effects, after which general equilibrium effects are likely to be 
increasingly important.
Examples of partial equilibrium models in the context of the AfCFTA 
include those by Mulugeta (2020) on Ethiopia, Bayale, Ibrahim and 
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
127
Atta-Mensah (2022) on Ghana, Fouda Ekobena et al. (2021) on Central 
Africa, Oyelami (2021) on Nigeria, Seti and Daw (2022) on the South African 
agricultural sector, Lunenborg and Roberts (2021) on the Economic Com -
munity of West African States (ECOW AS) region and Ossadzifo Wonyra and 
Bayale (2022) on Togo. Like those assessments, this one focuses on the short 
run and does not account for broader economy-wide linkages that would tend 
to be more important over a longer time horizon, including linkages between 
factor incomes and expenditures and broader macroeconomic adjustments, 
such as changes to the exchange rate, investment rates, or constraints within 
 endowment markets.
The model simulates the response of imports and other variables to 
changes in the tariff rate. The underlying model assumes imperfect substi -
tution between different import sources (what is known as the Armington 
assumption). Goods imported from different countries, although similar, are 
imperfect substitutes (maize from Kenya is an imperfect substitute for maize 
from Uganda). Within this assumption the representative consumer deter -
mines the level of imports of a good through a two-stage process. First, given  
an import price index, they choose the level of total spending on a ‘compos -
ite import good’ (say, imported maize). The relationship between changes in  
the import price index and the impact on total imports is determined by a 
given ‘demand elasticity’ . Then, within this composite good, they allocate 
spending among the different sources of the good, depending on the rela -
tive price of each source (say, choose more rice from Tanzania and less from 
Egypt). The extent of the between-source allocative response to a change in 
the relative price is determined by the ‘substitution elasticity’ . A full specifica-
tion of the model is given in Appendix A.
The model is designed to reduce tariffs only on intra-African trade that is 
not covered by pre-existing free trade arrangements, such as those of the RECs. 
In other words, Article 19 of the AfCFTA, Conflict and Inconsistency with 
Regional Arrangements of the Protocol on Trade in Goods, is fully applied, 
meaning that trade under pre-existing intra-African preferential trade agree-
ments will continue to be governed by those pre-existing arrangements.1
6.2 Structure of existing African trade and tariffs
The results of the model are driven primarily by the shape and form of pre-ex-
isting tariffs and trade flows. Table 6.1 shows what these are.2
To understand the eventual results of the model, it is important to appre -
ciate a differentiation between two types of intra-African trade. The first is 
intra-African trade in its entirely. This involves both trade within pre-existing 
regional trade arrangements, such as that between Kenya and Uganda within 
the East African Community (EAC), as well as trade between regional arrange-
ments, such as from Kenya in the EAC to Ghana in ECOW AS. The second is 
the subset of intra-African trade that is not already covered by pre-existing 
128 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
regional trade agreements. This would concern only the latter, that is, to use 
our example, trade between Kenya in the EAC and Ghana in ECOW AS.
If we consider intra-African trade in its entirety , the average imported-  
weighted tariffs on intra-African trade are relatively low, at 1.9 per cent, com-
pared to 9 per cent faced by imports from outside the continent. This is because 
the majority of intra-African trade already flows through pre-existing regional 
trade arrangements. Kenya (currently) trades much more with its East African 
neighbours than with African countries further afield, like Ghana.
If we consider instead only intra-African trade that is not already covered 
by regional trade agreements, tariffs are much higher. The average import-
weighted tariff faced by intra-African exports outside of regional trade 
agreements is considerably higher, at 18 per cent for vegetable products  and 
19 per cent for foodstuffs. These tariffs are substantial and it is this trade that 
is scheduled to be liberalised by the AfCFTA and which will drive the results 
of the modelling.
The intra-African tariffs for the Harmonised System (HS) sector headings 
associated with agriculture are among the highest of the different sector head-
ings. Tariffs on intra-African trade of ‘foodstuffs’ are the highest.
Those on vegetable products  are fourth highest, behind the textiles and 
apparel and miscellaneous sections. Nevertheless, tariffs are not especially 
high, on an import-weighted basis, for any of this trade.
Table 6.1 also shows existing trade flows. These are important for the results 
of the modelling because what such models do is to effectively scale up (or 
down) existing trade flows, in line with the impact that the model estimates 
that tariff reforms will have on those flows. The more pre-existing trade there 
is, the more there is for the model to scale.
What the model cannot do is predict the creation of wholly new trade flows. 
In the 2017–2019 reference period for the model, total intra-African trade aver-
aged $87 billion a year, while total imports from external suppliers outside the 
continent amounted to $513 billion. This puts intra-African trade as a share of 
total African imports at around 14.5 per cent, consistent with other estimates 
(ECA 2021). Intra-African trade flows in the foodstuffs section amounted to 
$6.8 billion, while those of vegetable products amounted to $5.2 billion. This 
means that the intra-African share of trade in these sections is 25 per cent and 
11 per cent, respectively. To put that into context, intra-African trade is stronger 
than for the average across all trade (which was 14.5 per cent) in foodstuffs, 
and weaker in trade in vegetable products. In the context of the model, this 
means that there is both ample demand that could be met and replaced by 
 intra-African suppliers but also that scaling up production to meet this demand 
could prove more difficult for vegetable products.
Table 6.2 narrows down the focus to the different parts of the agricul -
ture value chain (as introduced in Chapters 2 and 3). As a reminder, foods 
include products like grains, tubers, meats and fish. Agricultural raw mate -
rials include cocoa beans, cotton, coffee, spices, wood and rubber. Agricul -
tural inputs are mostly fertilisers and herbicides. Agricultural capital goods 
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
129
are tractors, agricultural machinery (such as seeders, harvesters and dryers) 
and agricultural tools.
The agriculture sector faces higher tariffs than other HS sections on aver -
age. The average import-weighted tariff on intra-African imports (in their 
entirety, including both those within and outside regional trade agreements) 
Table 6.1: Tariffs and existing trade flows, by HS section, 2017–2019
Simple 
average 
tariffs 
(%)
Average import-
weighted tariffs (%)†
Existing trade 
flows (US$bn)
Intra- 
African* External
Intra- 
African External
Animal and animal 
products 16.7 2.8 13 3.1 13
Vegetable products 14.7 3.1 8 5.2 41
Foodstuffs 25.1 3.8 22 6.8 21
Mineral products 5.4 0.8 2 23.6 71
Chemicals and allied 
industries 5.6 1.8 6 7.7 47
Plastics/rubbers 10.2 2.6 10 2.8 27
Raw hides, skins, 
leather and furs 13.1 1.9 22 0.1 2
Wood and wood 
products 11.1 2.2 10 2.4 16
Textiles and apparel 17.3 3.2 19 2.7 30
Footwear/headgear 20.0 2.9 20 0.5 4
Stone/glass 14.2 1.4 15 7.3 10
Metals 10.4 1.4 11 10.8 42
Machinery/electrical 7.0 2.3 7 6.2 109
Transportation 8.3 2.3 12 6.4 60
Miscellaneous 11.9 3.6 11 1.3 19
TOTAL 11.6 1.9 9 87 513
Source: Author, based on the Centre d’études prospectives et d’informations internation-
ales’s (CEPII) Base pour l’ Analyse du Commerce International (Database for the analysis 
of international trade) (BACI) trade dataset and tariffs reported in the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) Integrated Database and International Trade Centre (ITC) MAcMap 
database for the latest available years.
Notes: * If intra-African tariffs seem unusually low, it is because it includes intra-REC free 
trade area (FTA) trade which for the purpose of the model is simulated as being zero, i.e. 
it will be unaffected by the AfCFTA in accordance with Article 19.
† Average import-weighting is used here as an intuitive and transparent aggregation 
method but, being endogenous, should not be interpreted as indicative of effective 
protection. This does not affect the modelling, which is conducted at the HS6 level of 
disaggregation.
130 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
within the agriculture sector is 2.9 per cent (compared to 1.9 per cent for all 
imports). As would be expected, given that most tariff schedules aim to sup -
port productivity, average tariffs are lower on agricultural inputs  and capital 
goods and higher on final consumption goods.
Data on existing trade flows shows that total African import demand is 
largest for foods. Intra-African imports of foods are 11 times that of intra-Af-
rican imports of agricultural raw materials. This is the part of the value chain 
where most value currently exists and where, in the modelling results, we will 
expect to see the largest nominal potential value in the AfCFTA.
Africa is highly reliant upon capital imported from outside the continent. 
Intra-African suppliers account for only 9 per cent of all imports of agricul -
tural capital (such as tractors, agricultural machinery and tools) imported by 
African countries (Figure 6.1). In contrast, 28 per cent of import demand for 
agricultural inputs, 18 per cent of import demand for agricultural raw mate -
rials and 16 per cent of import demand for food is met with intra-African 
suppliers. By comparing these shares with the average intra-African share in 
total trade, which as mentioned above was 14.5 per cent, we determine that 
African countries trade more among themselves in agricultural goods than in 
other products.
Table 6.3 provides further disaggregation by the main products traded 
under each part of the agriculture value chain. Cells are shaded in green or 
blue according to their relative values.
The AfCFTA will have the greatest effect where it will be reducing high 
tariffs on intra-African trade, where there exists some intra-African trade to 
scale up, and where there is ample external trade to substitute away from. We 
can already identify where the AfCFTA is likely to have most impact. This 
Table 6.2: Tariffs and existing trade flows, by segment of the agricultural 
sector, 2017–2019
Simple 
average 
tariffs 
(%)
Average import-
weighted tariffs (%)
Existing trade flows 
(US$bn)
 Intra- 
African External
Intra- 
African External
All food 17.9 3.3 13 13.5 71
Agricultural raw 
materials 9.8 3.4  9  2.2  9
Agricultural 
capital 4.9 1.5  6  1.0 10
Agricultural inputs 2.3 1.0  3  2.1  5
TOTAL 2.9 11 19 96
Source: Author, based on the CEPII-BACI trade dataset and tariffs reported in the WTO 
Integrated Database and ITC MAcMap database for the latest available years.
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
131
Source: Author, based on the CEPII-BACI trade dataset and tariffs reported in the WTO 
Integrated Database and ITC MAcMap database for the latest available years.
Figure 6.1: Africa’s agricultural trade by source (US$ billion, current 
prices), 2017–2019
includes products with relatively high existing intra-African tariffs and exist-
ing intra-African trade flows. Prime examples are fish and seafood, vegeta -
bles, sugar, coffee and fruits.
We can also identify where intra-African trade is unlikely to be substan -
tially affected by the tariff reductions under the AfCFTA. This is the case with 
products where either tariffs on intra-African trade are already very low or 
existing intra-African trade is too small to be substantially scaled up. For 
instance, wheat is one of the most important imports yet intra-African trade 
is very small, despite low prevailing intra-African tariffs. Tariff reductions 
under the AfCFTA are unlikely, in themselves, to remedy such circumstances. 
Similarly, tariffs are already low (on average) on intra-African trade in millet, 
soya beans, animal food and fodder, tea, agricultural capital and inputs.3
The key points of this section are threefold. First, average import-weighted 
tariffs on intra-African trade are low because most of this trade is already cov-
ered by Africa’s pre-existing regional free trade arrangements (such as those 
of the EAC or ECOW AS). Second, within the agriculture value chain section, 
tariffs are highest on final consumption goods, including fish and seafood, 
vegetables, sugar, coffee and fruits. We will expect the AfCFTA to have the 
strongest impact on these products. Third, Africa is also, in general, highly 
dependent on imports from outside the continent of food security crops like 
wheat and maize. Low prevailing tariffs on these products suggest that tariff  
reductions under the AfCFTA will have little impact, however, on boosting 
intra-African trade in these products.
132 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
Table 6.3: Tariffs and existing trade flows, by segment of the agricultural 
sector, 2017–2019
Average import-
weighted tariffs (%)
Existing trade flows 
(US$bn)
Intra- 
African External
Intra- 
African External
All food
Vegetables 2.9 17 0.7  3
Wheat 2.6 6 0.4 15
Beef 1.3 13 0.2  2
Dairy 1.7 9 0.5  4
Fish and seafood 6.4 12 1.9  4
Fruits 6.6 27 0.8  1
Maize 3.1 4 0.5  4
Millet 1.0 9 0.01  0.04
Palm oil 1.0 14 0.6  5
Preparations of 
cereals 3.4 15 0.7  3
Sorghum 0.9 7 0.1  0.1
Soya beans 0.1 2 0.03  1
Vegetable oils 2.5 9 0.5  3
Beverages 2.6 63 0.9  2
Sugar 3.1 17 1.4  5
Citrus fruit 6.8 20 0.1  0
Tobacco 4.3 19 1.0  2
Nuts 5.9 21 0.0  0
Poultry 1.7 25 0.2  2
Rice 0.2 8 0.3  6
Other food 1.8 16 2.7  9
All foods 3.3 13 13.5 71
Agricultural 
raw  
materials
Coffee 10.0 13 0.3  1
Tea 0.7 9 0.4  1
Cocoa 5.9 18 0.2  1
Wood 1.1 4 0.4  3
Flowers 6.6 24 0  0
Fibres 4.2 12 0.2  3
Cotton 0.2 1 0.2  0
(Continued)
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
133
6.3 Impact of the African Continental Free Trade Area
Aggregate results are presented in Table 6.4 for all HS section headings. The 
AfCFTA is estimated to have the potential to boost total intra-African trade 
by 5.7 per cent, equivalent to almost $5 billion, in the short term. All exports 
within the continent must by definition be equal to all imports from within 
the continent; therefore, intra-African trade here can be considered equiva -
lently to exports or imports.
The relatively low impact of the AfCFTA from tariff elimination alone is 
consistent with estimates from other partial equilibrium models (Bayale, Ibra-
him and Atta-Mensah 2022; Fouda Ekobena et al. 2021; Lunenborg and Rob-
erts 2021; Mulugeta 2020; Oyelami 2021; Seti and Daw 2022). These focus on 
the shorter to medium term and tend to forecast somewhat lower magnitudes 
of impact than general equilibrium models. Assumptions on the impact of the 
AfCFTA on non-tariff barrier reductions and trade facilitation improvements 
account for much of the much larger estimated effects of the AfCFTA in the 
Table 6.3: (Continued)
Average import-
weighted tariffs (%)
Existing trade flows 
(US$bn)
Intra- 
African External
Intra- 
African External
Agricultural 
raw  
materials
Other  
agricultural raw 
materials 3.4 7 0.5  2
All agricultural 
raw materials 3.4 9 2.2  9
Agricultural 
capital
Machinery 1.8 5 0.7  7
Tools 0.3 12 0.01  0.1
Tractors 0.5 9 0.2  3
All agricultural 
capital 1.5 6 1.0 10
Agricultural 
inputs
Fertilisers 1.0 2 1.8  3
Insecticides 1.3 5 0.3  2
All agricultural 
inputs 1.0 3 2.1  5
TOTAL 2.9 11 19 96
Source: Author, based on the CEPII-BACI trade dataset and tariffs reported in the WTO 
Integrated Database and ITC MAcMap database for the latest available years.
Notes: Table is shaded with darker cells showing larger values. Green denotes cells relating 
to intra-African trade and blue denotes cells relating to imports from outside the continent.
134 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
general equilibrium models of the IMF (2019), the World Bank (2020; 2022) 
and the ECA (2021).4
Not all increases in trade brought about by the AfCFTA are ‘new’ . In many 
instances, the intra-African trade boosted by the AfCFTA arises from trade 
diverted away from other suppliers – what is known as ‘trade diversion’ . This 
includes both suppliers within the continent (such as intra-REC trade that 
Table 6.4: Impact of the AfCFTA, by HS section
AfCFTA impact
Increase in 
intra-African trade Trade diversion
Total 
change 
in 
imports 
(US$m)
Nominal 
(US$m)
Per cent 
(%)
from 
existing 
intra- 
African 
suppliers 
(US$m)
from 
world 
sup-
pliers 
(US$m)
Animal and animal 
products 152 4.9 −23 −81 71
Vegetable products 281 5.4 −34 −184 97
Foodstuffs 411 6.0 −32 −228 183
Mineral products 764 3.2 −51 −552 212
Chemicals and allied 
industries 432 5.6 −46 −271 161
Plastics/rubbers 287 10.3 −12 −200 88
Raw hides, skins, 
leather and furs 9 7.8 −0.2 −6 3
Wood and wood 
products 155 6.4 −13 −94 62
Textiles and apparel 286 10.7 −14 −186 99
Footwear/headgear 43 9.3 −2.1 −27 16
Stone/glass 222 3.0 −88 −94 127
Metals 535 5.0 −25 −354 181
Machinery/electrical 759 12.3 −21 −572 187
Transportation 427 6.7 −118 −255 173
Miscellaneous 194 15.5 −5 −137 57
TOTAL 4957 5.7 −485 −3241 1716
Notes: The model and data used to generate these results are outlined in Appendix A. 
The results show the impact of full liberalisation across all products and countries, rather 
than make assumptions about the products that some countries may exclude from 
liberalisation. Elasticity sensitivity analysis is shown in Appendix B.
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
135
would now face competition from other African suppliers from outside these 
RECs) and ‘world suppliers’ from outside the continent.
Table 6.4 shows the estimated degree of trade diversion. This is the amount 
of trade that switches from a previous importing partner to a new partner 
as a result of the change in tariffs making new intra-African suppliers more 
competitive. In this context, trade diversion is split to show the trade that has 
been diverted away from intra-African and world suppliers, by HS section. 
For instance, some maize imports from Uganda to Kenya might be replaced 
by new imports of maize from South Africa as a result of the AfCFTA, which 
would be counted as trade diversion from existing intra-African suppliers. 
Other maize imports into Kenya from India might also be replaced by South 
Africa, which would be considered to have been diverted from world sup -
pliers. Though the AfCFTA is expected to result in trade diversion between 
African suppliers, this is small.
About two-thirds of the increase is expected to come from trade diverted 
from outside the continent and the remainder (22 per cent) from trade creation. 
The relatively small share of trade diversion between African suppliers owes to 
the relatively small share of African suppliers in current import flows. In other 
words, there is little pre-existing intra-African trade to be diverted away from.
Consistent with modelling efforts by other authors (ECA 2021; IMF 2019; 
World Bank 2020; World Bank 2022), this model forecasts that the AfCFTA 
will stimulate the largest increases in intra-African trade in manufacturing. 
This importantly helps the AfCFTA to contribute to Africa’s structural trans-
formation and industrialisation, an explicit objective of the Agreement Estab-
lishing the African Continental Free Trade Area.5 The forecast impact on the 
agricultural sector is nevertheless still important, with intra-African trade in 
foodstuffs, vegetable products and animal and animal products increasing by 
6 per cent, 5.4 per cent and 4.9 per cent, respectively.
Impact of the African Continental Free Trade Area on the agriculture 
sector by value chain segment
A detailed breakdown of the results for each segment of the agriculture value 
chain is shown in Table 6.5. In absolute terms, the AfCFTA boosts intra-African 
trade most in the downstream part of the value chain concerned with foods. 
The gains to trade in food are larger, in absolute terms, than all other parts of 
the value chain combined. The reason the gains are so much higher in this part 
of the value chain is that it is the part of the value chain that currently faces the 
high tariffs, where the value of imports is largest, and where African producers 
already have some capacity and existing trade flows to scale up.
Intra-African trade gains are smallest, in absolute terms, for trade in inputs 
and capital. Tariffs are already relatively low in these parts of the value chain 
so the benefit of tariff liberalisation under the AfCFTA will be less noticeable. 
Nevertheless, in percentage terms, the impact on agricultural capital is quite 
large, at 8.2 per cent.
136 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
Impact by main agricultural products
Table 6.6  further disaggregates results for the agriculture value chain by 
main products. This helps to identify the key products driving the impact of  
the AfCFTA.
The most substantial potential for intra-African trade gains is found in the 
foods part of the value chain. Within this part of the value chain, there is most 
potential for the AfCFTA to boost intra-African trade in fish and seafood, 
sugar, fruit, tobacco, preparations of cereals, vegetables, vegetable oils, bever-
ages and dairy. There are also relatively sizeable opportunities for exports of 
coffee. Among the more value-added products there are important opportu-
nities for exporters of agricultural machinery and fertilisers.
What is also of note is the relatively small impact the AfCFTA is forecast to 
have on trade in staple/food security crops, including wheat, maize, millet, 
sorghum and soya beans. This is because these are products for which aver -
age tariffs are already low, meaning that tariff reductions resulting from the 
AfCFTA can only have a minimal effect. Only other interventions, such as 
reducing non-tariff barriers, could have the potential to have a transformative 
impact on intra-African trade in such goods.
Table 6.5: Impact of the AfCFTA, by segment of the agriculture  
value chain
AfCFTA impact
Increase in intra- 
African trade Trade diversion
Total 
change in 
imports 
(US$m) 
Nominal 
(US$m)
Per cent 
(%)
from 
existing 
intra- 
African 
suppliers 
(US$m)
from 
world 
suppliers 
(US$m)
All foods 715 5.3 −84 −402 313
Agricultural 
raw materials
160 7.5 −8 −111 50
Agricultural 
capital 81 8.2 −3 −62 19
Agricultural 
inputs
58 2.8 −4 −34 24
TOTAL 1015 5.4 −99 −609 406
Notes: The model and data used to generate these results are outlined in Appendix A. 
The results show the impact of full liberalisation across all products and countries,  
rather than make assumptions about the products that some countries may exclude 
from liberalisation.
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
137
Table 6.6: Impact of the AfCFTA on the agriculture sector,  
by main products
AfCFTA impact
Increase in intra- 
African trade Trade diversion
Total 
change 
in 
imports 
(US$m)
 
Nominal 
(US$m)
Per cent 
(%)
from 
existing 
intra- 
African 
suppliers 
(US$m)
from 
world 
suppliers 
(US$m)
Vegetables 31 4.1 −3 −18 12
Wheat 15 3.6 −8 −8 8
Beef 6 4.2 −0.4 −4 3
Dairy 25 4.7 −1 −15 10
Fish and seafood 147 7.8 −23 −62 85
Fruit 54 7.0 −9 −26 28
Maize 16 3.3 −6 −7 9
Millet 0 1.0 −0.1 −0.1 0
Palm oil 17 2.6 −2 −12 5
Preparations of 
cereals 48 7.0 −3 −31 17
Sorghum 1 1.8 −0.1 −1 0
Soya beans 0.05 0.1 −0.2 −0.02 0
Vegetable oils 38 8.3 −1 −29 9
Beverages 28 3.2 −3 −12 16
Sugar 107 7.6 −8 −72 35
Citrus fruit 3 5.1 −1 −1 3
Tobacco 48 4.6 −4 −18 30
Nuts 4 10.2 0 −2 2
Poultry 16 10.1 −1 −12 4
Rice 3 0.9 −1 −3 1
Other food 108 4.0 −10 −70 37
All foods 715 5.3 −84 −402 313
(Continued)
138 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
AfCFTA impact
Increase in intra- 
African trade Trade diversion
Total 
change 
in 
imports 
(US$m)
 
Nominal 
(US$m)
Per cent 
(%)
from 
existing 
intra- 
African 
suppliers 
(US$m)
from 
world 
suppliers 
(US$m)
Coffee 73 25.9 −1 −58 16
Tea 5 1.3 −1 −3 2
Cocoa 15 7.8 −1 −8 7
Wood 7 1.8 −2 −3 5
Flowers 1 10.2 0 −1 0
Fibres 28 16.4 0 −19 9
Cotton 1 0.5 −1 −1 0
Other agri-
cultural raw 
materials 29 5.9 −1 −18 11
All agricultural 
commodities 160 7.5 −8 −111 50
Machinery 75 10.0 −3 −57 17
Tools 0.2 1.7 −0.02 −0.1 0
Tractors 6 2.7 −0.2 −5 1
All agricultural 
capital 81 8.2 −3 −62 19
Fertilisers 42 2.3 −3 −22 20
Insecticides 16 5.6 −0.2 −12 4
All agricultural 
inputs 58 2.8 −4 −34 24
TOTAL 1015 5.4 −99 −609 406
Notes: The model and data used to generate these results are outlined in Appendix A. 
The results show the impact of full liberalisation across all products and countries, rather 
than make assumptions about the products that some countries may exclude from 
liberalisation. Elasticity sensitivity analysis is shown in Appendix B. Table is shaded, with 
darker cells showing larger values.
Table 6.6: (Continued)
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
139
6.4 Country-level impacts
This section breaks down the results at the country level, showing the potential 
impact of the AfCFTA on intra-African imports by the segments of the agricul-
ture value chain. These results are driven by the prevailing structure of tariffs 
and trade. The greatest impact is seen in countries (and value chain segments) 
where both existing intra-African trade and tariffs are large. This makes sense; 
it is exactly those tariffs on that trade that the AfCFTA will liberalise.
East Africa
In East Africa, the impact of the AfCFTA on the agriculture sector is forecast 
to be largest in absolute terms in Ethiopia. Ethiopia does not fully implement 
any of the REC FTAs (it reportedly applies just a 10 per cent reduction to tariffs 
on imports from Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) 
members), and so has much higher average tariffs on intra-African trade 
than most other countries in the region. It also has, in general, higher tariffs than 
many other countries and is a relatively large economy by regional standards.
Much of the relatively large forecast increase in imports into Kenya are prod-
ucts from South Africa , including fruits, sugar and agricultural machinery, 
Notes: The model and data used to generate these results are outlined in Appendix A. 
The results show the impact of full liberalisation across all products and countries, rather 
than make assumptions about the products that some countries may exclude from 
liberalisation. We use the regional classification provided by United Nations Department 
of Economic and Social Affairs (UN DESA n.d.).
Figure 6.2: Forecast increase in intra-African imports as a result of 
the AfCFTA in Eastern Africa, by country and value chain segment 
(US$ million)

140 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
Notes: The model and data used to generate these results are outlined in Appendix A. The 
results show the impact of full liberalisation across all products and countries, rather than 
make assumptions about the products that some countries may exclude from liberalisation.
Figure 6.3: Forecast increase in intra-African imports as a result of 
the AfCFTA in Central Africa, by country and value chain segment 
(US$ million)
but also maize from Egypt. Kenya is a gateway to the region that already has 
trade flows existing with other parts of the continent. For Tanzania, the main 
increases in imports are sugar, vegetable oils, preparations of cereals, machin-
ery, and insecticides from Egypt.
The impact of the AfCFTA is forecast to be marginal on agriculture imports 
for the other countries of East Africa, as shown in Figure 6.2 (which comprises 
all countries based on the UN definition of East Africa). This is because most 
of their intra-African trade already occurs through pre-existing REC FTAs 
(especially the EAC and COMESA) or because, in the case of the Seychelles  
and Mauritius, they already have very low most-favoured nation (MFN) tar -
iffs on these products.
Central Africa
In Central Africa, the AfCFTA is forecast to have the most potential for 
increasing agriculture imports into Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) 
and Cameroon, two of the larger markets in the region that both trade with 
their neighbours outside the Economic Community of Central African States 
free trade area, as shown in Figure 6.3. A large share of this increase would 
be imports from South Africa  because, while the DRC is a member of the 
Southern African Development Community (SADC), it does not implement 
the SADC FTA, which would otherwise cover this trade.
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
141
Much of the potential new agriculture imports to Central Africa is fish and 
seafood, especially from West Africa but also Southern and North Africa. 
Other important imports are preparations of cereals, vegetables, fruits and 
sugar, also from Southern and North Africa.
North Africa
In North Africa, most of the potential for increased intra-African agriculture 
trade is in  Algeria (see Figure 6.4). The AfCFTA would see a reduction in 
tariffs applied by Algeria on products from several of its neighbouring North 
African countries, but also other countries around the continent, from which 
it imports coffee, fruits, fish and seafood and tobacco.
For Morocco, Sudan and Tunisia, the increases in imports come from around 
the continent and involve coffee, fish and seafood, agricultural machinery, 
fruits, beef, sugar and coffee.
Increased imports into Egypt might seem surprisingly low, given the size of the 
Egyptian economy. This is because many agriculture imports into Egypt from 
other African countries are already duty-free, owing to its participation in both 
the COMESA agreement or the Agadir and Pan-Arab FTA arrangements with 
its North African neighbours. As such, the AfCFTA does little to boost agricul-
ture imports into Egypt. Libya has very low tariffs to begin with, and so there is 
little scope for improvements in market access offered through the AfCFTA. As 
a result, the AfCFTA does little to boost intra-African trade to Libya.
Notes: The model and data used to generate these results are outlined in Appendix A. The 
results show the impact of full liberalisation across all products and countries, rather than 
make assumptions about the products that some countries may exclude from liberalisation.
Figure 6.4: Forecast increase in intra-African imports as a result of the 
AfCFTA in North Africa, by country and value chain segment (US$ million)

142 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
Southern Africa
South Africa is by far the largest economy in the Southern Africa region and 
unsurprisingly accounts for most of the potential for agriculture imports 
under the AfCFTA ( Figure 6.5 ). Important potential for new imports into 
South Africa includes fruit, fish and seafood from North Africa, coffee and 
vegetables from East Africa, and fish and seafood from West Africa. Never -
theless, the impact of the AfCFTA on imports into South Africa is surprisingly 
modest, possibly owing to how highly competitive its domestic economy is.
Eswatini, Namibia, Lesotho and Botswana already import most of their 
intra-African agriculture goods from South Africa duty-free under the  
Southern African Customs Union trading arrangements. As a result,  
the AfCFTA does very little to increase their intra-African imports. For 
these countries, the AfCFTA also does not appear to create substantial trad e 
diversion away from imports from South Africa to other economies else -
where in the continent.
West Africa
Increases in  imports to West Africa driven by liberalised trade with other 
parts of the continent will be significant ( Figure 6.6). Although Nigeria is by 
far the largest economy in West Africa, increases in intra-African imports 
Notes: The model and data used to generate these results are outlined in Appendix A. 
The results show the impact of full liberalisation across all products and countries, rather 
than make assumptions about the products that some countries may exclude from 
liberalisation.
Figure 6.5: Forecast increase in intra-African imports as a result of 
the AfCFTA in Southern Africa, by country and value chain segment 
(US$ million)

EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
143
are only forecast to be marginally larger for Nigeria than for other West 
African countries, such as Ghana , Mauritania , Côte d’Ivoire  and Senegal.  
This stems from the pre-existing intra-African trade flows, which are rel -
atively limited for Nigeria. Most Nigerian food imports are sourced from 
outside the continent, for instance.
Important new intra-Africa imports into West Africa include sugar, fruits, 
dairy, vegetables and agricultural machinery from South Africa, and dairy, 
fish and seafood and fertiliser from North Africa.
Summary
A detailed partial equilibrium model was used to simulate the impact of the 
AfCFTA. This allowed its effects to be forecast at a highly detailed level of 
disaggregation to show likely implications for different segments of the agri -
culture value chain and for specific products.
The impact of the AfCFTA on intra-African trade is relatively modest. That 
is because much of that trade is already liberalised through pre-existing sub -
regional trade agreements across the continent, such as those of the EAC, 
COMESA, SADC, ECOW AS, the Pan-Arab FTA and the Agadir Agreement. 
It is through these subregional arrangements that most of Africa’s current 
intra-African trade in the agriculture sector flows.
Notes: The model and data used to generate these results are outlined in Appendix A. 
The results show the impact of full liberalisation across all products and countries, rather 
than make assumptions about the products that some countries may exclude from 
liberalisation.
Figure 6.6: Forecast increase in imports as a result of the AfCFTA in West 
Africa, by country and value chain segment (US$ million)

144 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
What the AfCFTA is really doing is liberalising the (currently) smaller 
shares of intra-African trade that flow between regions, such as from 
Southern Africa to West Africa, or North Africa to Eastern Africa. Tar -
iffs on these goods are high, averaging 18 per cent for vegetable products 
and 19 per cent for foodstuffs, for instance. It is the liberalisation of this 
trade that drives the modelled estimates and for which we will expect the 
AfCFTA to have most impact.
Where the impact of the AfCFTA is expected to be largest in the agriculture 
sector, in the immediate term, is in the downstream consumable food part 
of the value chain, and especially with higher-unit-value foods like fish and 
seafood, vegetables, preparations of cereals, vegetable oils, fruits and dairy. 
There are also relatively sizeable opportunities for exports of sugar and coffee, 
within agricultural commodities. Though the opportunities for trade  creation 
in the upstream part of the value chain are smaller in total, there are impor -
tant opportunities for exporters of agricultural machinery, fertilisers and 
 pesticides. We might expect South Africa to begin supplying more of the con-
tinent’s needs for agricultural machinery, while more fertilisers and pesticides 
could be expected from North Africa.
The AfCFTA is likely to have less of an impact on trade in staple/food 
security crops, including wheat, maize, rice, millet, sorghum and soya beans. 
These products already have, on average, low tariffs or are traded through 
informal cross-border trade, as well as by suppliers outside the continent. As a 
result, the AfCFTA is expected in the short term to have little direct impact on 
food security through an accessibility channel unless it can go beyond merely 
reducing tariffs. To improve food security, the AfCFTA will need to do more 
to address non-tariff barriers, attract investments, and facilitate a broader 
coordination of relevant policies.
It is also worth raising an inherent limitation of almost all ex ante trade 
models, which is that they must (necessarily) be fed with data on current 
trade flows. They are able to scale up, and down, those trade flows to show 
where demand is created and substituted between import suppliers. However, 
they are unable to simply create new trade flows where they did not previously 
exist. This inherent feature of such modelling might be compared to driving 
looking only in the rear-view mirror, failing to see a possible turning in the 
road ahead. Identifying, and seizing, such wholly new opportunities would be 
at the heart of a more impactful AfCFTA on the agriculture sector and will 
require bold vision by African leaders.
The main conclusion is exactly that. If the AfCFTA is to have a transform -
ative impact on Africa’s agriculture sector it must entail much more than just 
tariff liberalisation (though tariff liberalisation is a starting point that would 
certainly help). The AfCFTA will need to stimulate the creation of wholly new 
patterns of trade through enticing investments, coordinating policies and 
addressing non-tariff barriers, which are often more burdensome than merely 
tariffs for agricultural trade. Part of the solution can also entail leveraging 
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
145
informal cross-border trade, which exists in substantial quantities (Gaarder, 
Luke and Sommer 2021) but is, by its definition, unrecorded and does not 
flow between countries through typical formal trade routes. Chapter 5 dis-
cussed the magnitude of such trade.
Notes
 1 Article 19, paragraph 2 reads: ‘State Parties that are members of other 
regional economic communities, regional trading arrangements and 
custom unions, which have attained among themselves higher levels of 
regional integration than under this Agreement, shall maintain such 
higher levels among themselves. ’
 2 Note that when aggregated, as in Table 6.1, import-weighted tariffs may 
underestimate the restrictiveness of the tariffs when comparing different 
products (since the variance of the tariffs and the import demand elastic-
ities can be different within each grouping). Intuitively, this owes to busi-
nesses importing less of products that are tariffed highly. That does not, 
however, affect the underlying modelling (which is undertaken at the more 
disaggregated HS-6 level, where tariffs are not aggregated to this extent).
 3 However, other measures that are foreseen in the AfCFTA (tackling 
non-tariff barriers and improving preference utilisation) could have a 
significant effect, even where tariffs are low (De Melo, Sorgho and Wag-
ner 2023; United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 2019).
 4 In fact, heroic assumptions about non-tariff barriers, trade facilitation 
and other measures, account for almost 97.5 per cent of the estimated 
impact of the AfCFTA in the models of the World Bank (2022) and the 
IMF (2019).
 5 See Article 3 (e) and (g) of the Agreement Establishing the African Con-
tinental Free Trade Area.
References
Andriamananjara, Soamiely; Brenton, Paul; von Uexküll, Jan Erik;  
Walkenhorst, Peter (2009) ‘ Assessing the Economic Impacts of  
an Economic Partnership Agreement on Nigeria’ , World Bank.  
https://perma.cc/M98Z-E9W5
Agreement Establishing the African Continental Free Trade Area, 2018.
Bayale Nimonka; Ibrahim, Muazu; and Atta‐Mensah, Joseph (2022)  
‘Potential Trade, Welfare and Revenue Implications of the African  
146 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) for Ghana: An Application  
of Partial Equilibrium Model’ , Journal of Public Affairs, vol. 22, no. 1. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pa.2385
Brenton, Paul; Hoppe, M.; and von Uexkull, Jan Erik (2007) ‘Evaluating  
the Revenue Effects of Trade Policy Options for COMESA Countries: The 
Impacts of a Customs Union and an EPA with the European Union’ ,  
The World Bank, Technical Report.
UN DESA (n.d.) ‘Classification and Definition of Regions’ , United  
Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs.  
https://esa.un.org/MigFlows/Definition%20of%20regions.pdf
CEPII (n.d.) ‘Description of BACI’ , CEPII. https://perma.cc/EH9C-YH5X
De Melo, Jaime; Sorgho, Zakaria; and Wagner, Laurent (2023) ‘DP18651 
Reducing Wait Times at Customs: How Implementing the Trade Facili-
tation Agreement (TFA) Can Expand Trade among AfCFTA Countries’ , 
CEPR Discussion Papers, 18651. https://perma.cc/CT4M-TDKH
Dimaranan, Betina V .; McDougall, Robert A.; and Hertel, Thomas W . (2006) 
‘Behavioral Parameters’ , in Global Trade, Assistance, and Production: The 
GTAP 6 Data Base, Center for Global Trade Analysis, Purdue University. 
https://perma.cc/NMJ8-RZYT
ECA (2021) ‘New Assessment of the Economic Impacts of the  
Agreement Establishing the African Continental Free Trade Area  
on Africa’ , United Nations Economic Commission for Africa.  
https://repository.uneca.org/bitstream/handle/10855/46750/b11999160 
.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
ECA, AU and AfDB (2017) Assessing Regional Integration in Africa VIII: 
Bringing the Continental Free Trade Area About. Addis Ababa,  
Ethiopia: United Nations Economic Commission for Africa,  
African Union and African Development Bank.  
https://www.un-ilibrary.org/content/books/9789213615591.
Fouda Ekobena, Simon Y annick; Coulibaly, Adama Ekberg; Keita, Mama; 
and Antonio, Pedro (2021) ‘Potentials of the African Continental Free 
Trade Area: A Combined Partial and General Equilibrium Modeling 
Assessment for Central Africa’ , African Development Review.  
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8268.12594
Gaarder, Erwin; Luke, David; and Sommer, Lily (2021) ‘Towards  
an Estimate of Informal Cross-Border Trade in Africa’ ,  
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa.  
https://repository.uneca.org/handle/10855/46374#:~:text=We%20estimate 
%20that%20the%20value,formal%20trade%20between%20neighbouring 
%20countries
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
147
IMF (2019) ‘The African Continental Free Trade Agreement:  
Welfare Gains Estimates from a General Equilibrium Model’ , IMF . 
https://perma.cc/S9GH-NFSY
ITC (2015) ‘The Invisible Barriers to Trade. How Businesses Experience 
Non-tariff Measures’ , Technical Paper, Doc. No. MAR-15-326.E,  
Geneva: INTRACEN. https://perma.cc/6AJ7-SV3J
Lunenborg, Peter; and Roberts, Thomas (2021) ‘ECOW AS and AfCFTA: 
Potential Short-Run Impact of a Draft ECOW AS Tariff Offer’ , Journal of 
African Trade, vol. 8, no. 2. https://doi.org/10.2991/jat.k.211011.001
MacLeod, Jamie; and Von Uexkull, Jan Erik (2016) ‘ Assessing the Economic 
Impact of the ECOW AS CET and Economic Partnership Agreement on 
Ghana’ , World Bank. https://perma.cc/2ZS2-KV AL
Mulugeta, Tages (2020) ‘The Revenue Implications of African Continental 
Free Trade Area (AFCFTA): In Case of Ethiopia’ (Doctoral dissertation, 
St. Mary’s University). ’ http://197.156.93.91/handle/123456789/6676
Ossadzifo Wonyra, Kwami; and Bayale, Nimonka (2022) ‘ Assessing the 
Potential Effects of The AfCFTA on Togolese Economy: An Application 
of Partial Equilibrium Model’ , Journal of Public Affairs, vol. 22, no. 1. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pa.2377
Oyelami, Lukman O. (2021) ‘Revenue, Welfare and Trade Effects of African 
Continental Free Trade Agreement (AFCFTA) on Nigerian Economy’ , 
Journal of Public Affairs [Preprint]. https://doi.org/10.1002/pa.2645
Seti, Thembalethu M.; and Daw, Olebogeng D. (2022) ‘The Implications of 
the African Continental Free Trade Area on South African Agricultural 
trade: an Application of the Partial Equilibrium Mode’ , South African 
Journal of Economic and Management Sciences, vol. 25, no. 1.  
https://doi.org/10.4102/sajems.v25i1.4302
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (2019) ‘Economic 
Development in Africa Report 2019 Made in Africa Rules of Origin for 
Enhanced Intra-African Trade’ , Geneva: United Nations Conference on 
Trade and Development. https://perma.cc/LJK2-6UR9
World Bank (2020) ‘The African Continental Free Trade Area:  
Economic and Distributional Effects’ , World Bank.  
https://hdl.handle.net/10986/34139
World Bank; Echandi, R. Roberto; Maliszewska, Maryla; and Steenbergen, 
Victor (2022) ‘Making the Most of the African Continental Free Trade 
Area : Leveraging Trade and Foreign Direct Investment to Boost Growth 
and Reduce Poverty’ , World Bank. https://perma.cc/KLL9-VETY
148 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
Appendix A. Model, data and reform scenario
Reform scenario
The reform scenario simulates the AfCFTA with a focus on the agriculture 
sector. In so doing, it intends to show the potential of tariff liberalisation 
under the AfCFTA, rather than other aspects such as decisions over exclusion 
lists, trade facilitation assumptions, reductions in non-tariff barriers, or efforts 
in the areas of trade in services, investment, competition policy, intellectual 
property rights or other areas.1 These supplementary aspects require stronger 
assumptions and researchers use a different approach to model them.
The reform scenario reflects full implementation of the AfCFTA once the 
complete course of any incremental tariff reductions has been applied. It 
applies tariff liberalisation to all goods rather than make assumptions over 
sensitive product and exclusion lists.
What trade models like that used here can do is to scale up, or down, exist-
ing trade flows in proportion to changes in other variables such as tariffs. 
They cannot create wholly new trade flows from nothing. As such, modelling 
exercises such as this one may fail to identify where brand new trade flows 
may emerge between trading partners that did not previously trade certain 
products. That is more likely to happen in instances where a trade agreement 
results in a very large change in some tariffs.
Structure of the dataset
Trade flows data is taken from the BACI dataset of reconciled trade flows pre-
pared by CEPII, which is in turn based on data reported by countries to the 
United Nations Statistical Division Comtrade dataset.
Both exporting and importing countries report data for Comtrade. Th e 
CEPII-BACI dataset reconciles these two mirror sources of reported trad e 
data into a single dataset. This is done through an approach that reflects  
the reliability of different reports of the same trade flows while stripping 
out insurance and freight costs to express all trade data in terms of their 
 free-on-board price. Doing so uses all available information to maximise data 
coverage in instances where reporting may be incomplete or of varying qual-
ities of reliability. This is particularly valuable in trade, such as intra-African 
trade, that comprises flows between less-developed countries, many of which 
have less well-resourced data collection systems in place. It also makes our 
work easier and results more intuitive; what Ghana exports to Kenya becomes 
exactly which Kenya imports from Ghana.
A three-year average of trade flows from 2017 to 2019 is used. These years 
are the most recent consecutive three-year period that can be considered 
to represent ‘normal’ trade flows unaffected by the economic volatility 
of the Covid-19 pandemic. These were also the three years at the time of 
writing with the highest number of observations (distinct combinations  
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
149
of importer–exporter–product with at least one non-zero trade flow) in the 
BACI dataset (CEPII n.d.), indicating superior reported data coverage.
HS revision 2002 was used. Why not the more recent HS revisions 2007, 
2017 or 2022? A number of African countries do not yet report trade 
flows data in more recent HS revisions, meaning that they are excluded  
from data that includes only more recent formats (CEPII n.d.). Using an 
older revision allows the maximum amount of reported trade data to be 
used in the analysis. 2 HS revisions are backward-compatible, meaning that 
data captured in more recent versions can be transposed into older ver -
sions (but not vice versa).
The CEPII-BACI dataset that was chosen for this study results in compre -
hensive coverage of countries and products and relatively reliable coverage 
for countries with less well-resourced reporting systems. It allows analysis at 
the subheading level of the HS, which in turn allows its reconstitution into 
appropriate levels of aggregation for the presentation of our results, including 
at each segment of the agriculture value chain.
Tariff data is drawn from two sources. Where available, data was taken from 
countries’ submissions to the WTO integrated database of applied tariffs for 
all WTO members as well as some countries that have submitted tariff infor-
mation to the WTO but are not WTO members, for instance during ongoing 
accession negotiations.
The most recent year of submitted tariff data was used for each country. 
Typically, this was for the year 2020 or 2021, allowing a highly up-to-date 
analysis of tariff information, although, where unavailable, older tariff sched-
ules were used for a few countries. Such data was available in the HS 2017 
nomenclature for 43 countries and in earlier nomenclatures for a further four 
countries. UN Trade Statistics correspondence tables were used to convert  
all tariff schedules into the 2002 revision in alignment with the trade flows 
data used.
Not all members of the AfCFTA are members of the WTO or have other -
wise submitted tariff schedules to be reported in the WTO integrated data -
base. Tariff data for a further four countries was taken from ITC’s MAcMap 
tariff database.3
No publicly available tariff data was available for four AfCFTA partic -
ipating countries (Eritrea, Sahrawi Republic, Somalia and South Sudan). 
The impact of the AfCFTA on imports into these countries could there -
fore not be calculated. However, exports from these countries into other 
AfCFTA member countries is captured and included in the analysis through  
mirror reporting.
Model specification
In order to calculate the percentage change in the price of good k from 
exporter i due to a change in tariff t, the model uses the following formula:
150 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
( ) ( )
( ) ( )
  
−   + −+∆−     = = =
++
11
11
new old
ii
new old new oldiiwld wldi ii
old old old old
ii ii
wld
pp
ttppp tt
pp tt
p
where superscripts ‘new’ and ‘old’ denote the prices and tariffs before and after 
the policy reform.
The import response is calculated in two consecutive steps. The first step is 
the substitution between different exporters due to changes in their relative 
tariff rates. A given expenditure for imports of good k is reallocated across 
different exporters following the change in relative prices as follows:
γ
γ
= …
= …
∆= +  ∆ 
∑
∑
1, ,
1, ,
1
old
iinES ES oldi
i ii old
i ES oldi
iioldin
i
MpMM
p p M
p
where ES
iM  stands for the imported quantity from i after exporter substitution, 
old
iM  is the imported quantity from i before reform, and γ ES
i  is the exporter 
substitution elasticity for imports from country i.
The second step is the demand effect. It depends on the price change for 
the total basket of imports P, as a result of the price change on imports from 
country i, which is given by:
… …
 ∆∆ = 

∑ ∑,, ,,
old
ii
old old old
in iiin
MpP
P Mp
which, through the elasticity of demand µD, leads to a change in the total 
demand for imports from all sources EDM .
µ∆= +
1ED D old
old
PMM
P
resulting in the new import quantity new
iM  from country i as follows:
…

= +−  
∑,,
old
new ES ED old i
ii old
iin
MM M MM
M
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
151
Structural parameters
The values of exporter substitution and demand elasticities are subject to 
some uncertainty. Three versions of the model were therefore prepared using 
different values for these parameters. In the first ‘low elasticity’ model, lower 
end estimates of exporter and demand elasticities are used. In it, importers are 
less sensitive in their sourcing decisions to tariff-price changes. This results 
in a much smaller estimated impact of the AfCFTA. A second ‘high elastic -
ity’ model was developed for comparison. Finally, a third model relying on 
the elasticities used in the standard Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP) 
model was developed. In this third model, exporter substitution elasticities 
vary across sectors and demand elasticities change depending on the coun -
try that is doing the importing, which is more realistic. The GTAP elasticity 
parameters are closer to, and in fact on average exceed those of, the ‘high 
elasticity model’ . This is because they consider a longer time horizon in which 
consumer decisions have had better chance to adjust to changing prices.
The ‘low elasticity’ and ‘high elasticity’ models benefit in that their results 
are determined entirely by differences in the structure and shape of tariffs 
and trade flows, rather than assumptions over relative differences between 
products and countries’ elasticity parameters (since these are uncertain, 
using a model in which they drive the results in different countries could 
lead to erroneous conclusions being drawn). Their results might be argued 
to be more transparent and are used in different ways by a number of 
authors (Brenton, Hoppe and von Uexkull 2007; ECA, AU and AfDB, 2017; 
Lunenborg and Roberts 2021; MacLeod and von Uexkull 2016; Andria -
mananjara et al. 2009). 4 However, to improve relative comparability with 
most of the existing literature, the results in this paper (unless otherwise 
specified) rely on the third model, which uses the GTAP elasticities. These 
have the advantage of more realistically varying by product and importer 
country though at the cost of making the model somewhat more complex 
and less intuitive. Comparative results for the ‘low elasticity’ and ‘high 
elasticity’ models are included in Appendix B  and details of all elasticity 
parameters included in Appendix C.
In the partial equilibrium model, a preferential liberalisation of a given 
tariff affects not only the overall price level of the good but also the relative 
prices of the different varieties. Through the import demand elasticity and 
the substitution elasticity, this will lead to changes in the aggregate level of 
spending on that good, as well as changes in the composition of the sourcing 
of that good. Both channels affect bilateral trade flows. The model estimates 
the potential impact of a given tariff reform scenario on both source specific 
and total imports, at the HS 6-digit level. This level of disaggregation reduces 
the risk of biases in calculating and operating with average tariff rates across 
groups of products and allows the results to be reconstituted into intuitive 
product categories for the value chain and for the decisions that negotiators 
are making.
152 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
Appendix B. Elasticity sensitivity analysis: comparative low 
and high elasticity models, by HS section
Table 6.7: Low elasticity parameters: Impact of the AfCFTA, by HS section
AfCFTA impact
Increase in intra- 
African trade Trade diversion
Total 
change in 
imports 
(US$m)
 
Nominal 
(US$m)
Per cent 
(%)
from 
existing 
intra- 
African 
suppliers 
(US$m)
from 
world 
suppliers 
(US$m)
Animal and  
animal products 63 2 −8 −25 38
Vegetable products 117 2 −12 −47 69
Foodstuffs 190 3 −13 −80 111
Mineral products 160 1 −10 −73 87
Chemicals and 
allied industries 120 2 −10 −57 63
Plastics/rubbers 74 3 −2 −41 33
Raw hides, skins, 
leather and furs 2 2 −0.1 −1 1
Wood and wood 
products 46 2 −3 −22 24
Textiles and 
apparel 73 3 −2 −35 38
Footwear/headgear 11 2 −0.4 −5 6
Stone/glass 69 1 −17 −22 48
Metals 136 1 −5 −67 69
Machinery/ 
electrical 158 3 −3 −90 68
Transportation 122 2 −20 −54 68
Miscellaneous 45 4 −1 −24 20
TOTAL 1385 2 −106 −642 743
Notes: Low elasticities: substitution elasticity = 1.5, demand elasticity = 0.5, High elastici-
ties: substitution elasticity = 5, demand elasticity = 1. See Andriamananjara et al. (2009).
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
153
Table 6.8: High elasticity parameters: impact of the AfCFTA, by HS section
AfCFTA impact
Increase in intra- 
African trade Trade diversion
Total 
change in 
imports 
(US$m) 
Nominal 
(US$m)
Per cent 
(%)
from 
existing 
intra- 
African 
suppliers 
(US$m)
from 
world 
suppliers 
(US$m)
Animal and  
animal products 167 5 −28 −84 83
Vegetable products 315 6 −39 −159 156
Foodstuffs 522 8 −43 −275 247
Mineral products 458 2 −35 −276 182
Chemicals and 
allied industries 344 5 −35 −204 140
Plastics/rubbers 225 8 −9 −150 75
Raw hides, skins, 
leather and furs 6 6 −0.3 −4 2
Wood and wood 
products 132 5 −11 −79 54
Textiles and 
apparel 211 8 −9 −123 88
Footwear/headgear 30 7 −1.4 −17 13
Stone/glass 181 2 −57 −75 106
Metals 397 4 −18 −243 154
Machinery/ 
electrical 490 8 −12 −336 153
Transportation 348 5 −71 −198 149
Miscellaneous 136 11 −3 −89 47
TOTAL 3962 5 −371 −2312 1650
Notes: Low elasticities: substitution elasticity = 1.5, demand elasticity = 0.5, High elastici-
ties: substitution elasticity = 5, demand elasticity = 1. See Andriamananjara et al. (2009).
154 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
Appendix C. Elasticity parameters
Table 6.9: Substitution elasticity parameters
GTAP 
Sector Description
GTAP Sub-
stitution 
elasticity 
(γ)
Low sub-
stitution 
elasticity 
(γ)
High sub-
stitution 
elasticity 
(γ)
pdr Paddy rice 10.1 1.5 5
wht Wheat 8.9 1.5 5
gro Cereal grains n.e.c. 2.6 1.5 5
v_f Vegetables, fruit, nuts 3.7 1.5 5
osd Oil seeds 4.9 1.5 5
c_b Sugar cane, sugar beet 5.4 1.5 5
pfb Plant-based fibres 5 1.5 5
ocr Crops n.e.c. 6.5 1.5 5
ctl Bovine cattle, sheep and 
goats, 
4 1.5 5
oap Animal products n.e.c. 2.6 1.5 5
rmk Raw milk 7.3 1.5 5
wol Wool, silk-worm cocoons 12.9 1.5 5
frs Forestry 5 1.5 5
fsh Fishing 2.5 1.5 5
coa Coal 6.1 1.5 5
oil Oil 10.4 1.5 5
gas Gas 34.4 1.5 5
omn Minerals n.e.c. 1.8 1.5 5
cmt Bovine meat prods 7.7 1.5 5
omt Meat products n.e.c.4.40 8.8 1.5 5
vol Vegetable oils and fats 6.6 1.5 5
mil Dairy products 7.3 1.5 5
pcr Processed rice 5.2 1.5 5
sgr Sugar 5.4 1.5 5
ofd Food products n.e.c. 4 1.5 5
b_t Beverages and tobacco 
products 
2.3 1.5 5
tex Textiles 7.5 1.5 5
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
155
GTAP 
Sector Description
GTAP Sub-
stitution 
elasticity 
(γ)
Low sub-
stitution 
elasticity 
(γ)
High sub-
stitution 
elasticity 
(γ)
wap Wearing apparel 7.4 1.5 5
lea Leather products 8.1 1.5 5
lum Wood products 6.8 1.5 5
ppp Paper products, publishing 5.9 1.5 5
p_c Petroleum, coal products 4.2 1.5 5
crp Chemical, rubber, plastic 
products 
6.6 1.5 5
nmm Mineral products n.e.c. 5.8 1.5 5
i_s Ferrous metals 5.9 1.5 5
nfm metals n.e.c. 8.4 1.5 5
fmp Metal products 7.5 1.5 5
mvh Motor vehicles and parts 5.6 1.5 5
otn Transport equipment n.e.c. 8.6 1.5 5
ele Electronic equipment 8.8 1.5 5
ome Machinery and equipment 
n.e.c. 
8.1 1.5 5
omf Manufactures n.e.c. 7.5 1.5 5
ely Electricity 5.6 1.5 5
Average 7.0 1.5 5
Note: GTAP 6 elasticity parameters available from Dimaranan, McDougall and Hertel 
(2006).
156 HOW AFRICA EATS
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
Table 6.10: Demand elasticity parameters
GTAP  
Country/ 
region
GTAP demand elasticities (μ) Low 
demand 
elasticity (μ)
High 
elasticity 
(μ)GrainCrops MeatDairy OthFoodBev TextAppar HouseUtils Mnfcs TransComm
EGY 0.61 0.87 0.79 0.92 0.97 1.07 0.99 0.5 1
MAR 0.56 0.88 0.83 0.94 1.01 1.15 1.03 0.5 1
TUN 0.43 0.78 0.81 0.87 0.96 1.15 0.99 0.5 1
XNF 0.52 0.8 0.8 0.88 0.95 1.12 0.98 0.5 1
NGA 0.52 1.28 0.68 1.29 1.31 1.11 1.32 0.5 1
SEN 0.65 0.94 0.81 0.98 1.05 1.09 1.04 0.5 1
XWF 0.68 1.07 0.82 1.09 1.12 1.12 1.14 0.5 1
XCF 0.66 0.97 0.82 1.01 1.05 1.12 1.07 0.5 1
XAC 0.59 1.28 0.7 1.3 1.31 1.11 1.32 0.5 1
ETH 0.37 1.8 0.44 1.81 1.82 1 1.82 0.5 1
MDG 0.58 1.23 0.71 1.25 1.26 1.07 1.27 0.5 1
MWI 0.52 1.41 0.66 1.42 1.43 1.11 1.44 0.5 1
MUS 0.31 0.72 0.79 0.82 0.92 1.09 0.95 0.5 1
MOZ 0.64 1.2 0.76 1.21 1.23 1.12 1.24 0.5 1
TZA 0.69 1.28 0.84 1.3 1.33 1.22 1.34 0.5 1
UGA 0.65 1.34 0.79 1.36 1.37 1.19 1.38 0.5 1
ZMB 0.68 1.1 0.82 1.12 1.15 1.13 1.16 0.5 1
ZWE 0.57 1.15 0.69 1.17 1.18 1.04 1.19 0.5 1
XEC 0.67 1.08 0.82 1.1 1.14 1.14 1.15 0.5 1
BWA 0.46 0.75 0.77 0.83 0.9 1.07 0.93 0.5 1
ZAF 0.31 0.69 0.77 0.8 0.89 1.06 0.92 0.5 1
XSC 0.58 0.82 0.78 0.87 0.93 1.05 0.95 0.5 1
Average 0.56 1.07 0.76 1.11 1.15 1.11 1.16 0.5 1
Note: GTAP 6 elasticity parameters available from Dimaranan, McDougall and Hertel (2006).
EXPECTED IMPACT OF THE A fCFTA ON FOOD SECURITY
157
Notes (appendices)
 1 Though several states have now submitted tariff schedules under the 
AfCFTA, not all have, so it would not make sense to apply tariff sched-
ules for only some countries. 
 2 In test results using HS17, as much as a fifth of intra-African trade was 
missing from the data as compared to the results using HS02, for example.
 3 These countries are Ethiopia, Libya, Sao Tome and Principe and Sudan.
 4 Lunenborg and Roberts (2021) use product-specific demand elasticities 
but common exporter substitution elasticities.