Vol.:(0123456789)
Biology & Philosophy (2022) 37: 34
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-022-09868-9
1 3
Teleosemantics and the free energy principle
Stephen Francis Mann1,2  · Ross Pain2 
Received: 15 September 2021 / Accepted: 12 July 2022 / Published online: 27 July 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
The free energy principle is notoriously difficult to understand. In this paper, we 
relate the principle to a framework that philosophers of biology are familiar with: 
Ruth Millikan’s teleosemantics. We argue that: (i) systems that minimise free energy 
are systems with a proper function; and (ii) Karl Friston’s notion of implicit mod-
elling can be understood in terms of Millikan’s notion of mapping relations. Our 
analysis reveals some surprising formal similarities between the two frameworks, 
and suggests interesting lines of future research. We hope this will aid further philo-
sophical evaluation of the free energy principle.
Keywords Teleosemantics · The free energy principle · Active inference · Proper 
functions · Markov blankets
Introduction
Proponents of the free energy principle have ambitious goals. In its strongest for -
mulations, the imperative to minimize free energy is claimed to provide a unified 
framework for understanding processes of life, mind, and even culture (Friston 2009, 
2010, 2013; Kirchhoff 2018; Kirchhoff et al. 2018; Veissière et al. 2020; Rubin et al. 
2020).
S. F. Mann was supported in part by an ANU University Research Scholarship, and the Australian 
Research Council under Laureate Fellowship Grant FL130100141. Ross Pain was supported by an 
ANU University Research Scholarship, the Australian Research Council under Laureate Fellowship 
Grant FL130100141, and the ANU Futures Scheme.
 * Stephen Francis Mann 
 stephen_mann@eva.mpg.de; stephenfmann@gmail.com
 Ross Pain 
 ross.pain@anu.edu.au
1 Department of Linguistic and Cultural Evolution, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Deutscher Platz 6, 04103 Leipzig, Germany
2 Present Address: School of Philosophy, Australian National University, Level 6, 146 Ellery 
Crescent, Canberra, ACT  0200, Australia
 S. F . Mann, R. Pain 
1 334 Page 2 of 25
These proponents argue that living systems are able to maintain stable boundaries 
by minimizing the unexpectedness of their sensory states. This is achieved by using 
active states to influence sensory states via manipulation of the world and of the 
organism’s place in it. According to the view, it follows that organisms will appear 
to ‘model’ circumstances beyond their boundaries (Friston 2013). This allows a liv -
ing system to remain within a restricted range of ‘attracting states’; states which are 
beneficial to its ongoing success and which collectively make up its phenotype. In 
rough terms, this is the free energy principle.
So a central commitment of the free energy principle is the view that life, at mul-
tiple scales of organization, can be usefully interpreted as implicitly modelling its 
environment. Explaining what it means to implicitly model an environment, and 
how living systems might be interpreted as doing so, will be one of the core tasks of 
this article.
The free energy principle remains on the fringes of mainstream philosophy of 
biology.1 This probably reflects long-standing concerns regarding the application 
of information theory, entropy and thermodynamics to biology, and, more broadly, 
scepticism with respect to the explanatory purchase of grand unified theories (Lev -
ins 1966; Morowitz 1986; Weisberg 2006). We take these concerns to be a serious 
challenge–perhaps the most serious challenge—facing proponents of the free energy 
principle; but for the purposes of this article, we sideline them. Our aim is to investi-
gate the principle at a simpler level of analysis.
There is another reason for the free energy principle’s fringe status. It is expressed 
using complicated mathematics and often obscure terminology. For instance, the 
‘energy’ referenced by the free energy principle is not energy in the standard sense. 
Rather, it is an information-theoretic term. Calling the free energy principle FEP, 
Colombo and Wright (2018) outline the situation as follows:
FEP’s epistemic status remains opaque, along with its exact role in biological 
and neuroscientific theorizing. Conspiring against its accessibility are the var -
ying formalisms and formulations of FEP, the changing scope of application, 
reliance on undefined terms and stipulative definitions, and the lack of clarity 
in the logical structure of the reasoning leading to FEP.
Colombo and Wright (2018, p. 2)
Our goal in this article is to make some progress on this issue. We do so by com-
bining the free energy principle with a framework that philosophers of biology are 
familiar with: teleosemantics. This compare and contrast exercise produces some 
interesting results. In particular, we suggest a correspondence between Karl Fris-
ton’s conditions under which a system will minimize free energy, and Ruth Mil-
likan’s conditions under which a system will possess a direct proper function. Any 
system that ends up persisting in a non-equilibrium steady state via active inference 
is thus a system that has a proper function. Put more colloquially, minimizing free 
1 At the time of writing, the only articles mentioning the free energy principle in Biology & Philosophy 
are associated with this Topical Collection. It has received more attention from philosophers of cognitive 
science (Sprevak 2020; Williams 2021; Hohwy 2020; Bruineberg et al. 2021).
1 3
Teleosemantics and the free energy principle  Page 3 of 25 34
energy gets you proper functions. We can then begin to understand the claim that a 
system implicitly models its environment in terms of Millikan’s notions of mapping 
relations between signals and the environmental circumstances they signify. Our 
goals are modest: the central motivation for integrating the two frameworks is to aid 
further philosophical evaluation of the free energy principle. But our analysis also 
points to important lines of future research.
We proceed as follows. “Teleosemantics and proper functions” section provides a 
brief primer on teleosemantics and the theory of proper functions. “Proper functions 
and free energy minimization” section outlines the structural similarities between 
the free energy principle and proper function. “Signals as internal models” section 
suggests a correspondence between semantic content in simple signals and the sense 
in which systems that minimize free energy can be said to harbour models of their 
environments. “Future research and closing remarks” section outlines some opportu-
nities for further research.
Teleosemantics and proper functions
The literature on teleosemantics is extensive. Here our focus is Millikan’s theory of 
sender–receiver teleosemantics, also known as biosemantics (Millikan 1989). Sig-
nals and proper functions play a central role in her account.
Signals
Teleosemantics defines a signal as an intermediary between a pair of cooperating 
devices: (1) a sender, which produces the intermediary either by performing a behav-
iour or emitting a physical item; and (2) a receiver, which conditions its own behav-
iour on the intermediary. 2 The sender-intermediary-receiver triad is a causal chain 
(Fig. 1). A key feature that differentiates teleosemantics from older causal accounts 
of mental content is that sender and receiver must have proper functions, and must 
be cooperating. A proper function is a causally downstream outcome that a device 
is designed to bring about. We will add more detail to this brief characterisation in 
Fig. 1  The causal chain at the heart of the basic teleosemantic model. A Sender produces an intermedi-
ary, here labelled Signal, on which a Receiver conditions its behaviour. Sender and receiver must cooper-
ate, which is analysed in terms of sharing a proper function
2 Teleosemantics is usually described as a theory of representation; we use ‘signal’ to emphasize the 
liberality of the conditions by which the theory attributes representational status. Other versions of tel-
eosemantics reject the requirement that representations have sender–receiver structure (Neander 2017; 
Shea 2018); it would presumably be misleading to substitute ‘representation’ for ‘signal’ in a discussion 
of those theories.
 S. F . Mann, R. Pain 
1 334 Page 4 of 25
a moment. First we describe the kind of cooperation sender and receiver engage in, 
and why this merits treating the intermediary as a contentful signal.
The receiver has a function to perform, a downstream causal effect it is supposed 
to bring about. In the paradigm case, its success is dependent in part on an external 
circumstance which the receiver cannot directly observe. Conditioning its behaviour 
on the intermediary leads to greater success than acting unconditionally. The core 
commitment of teleosemantics is that explaining this improved success requires pos-
iting a relation between the intermediary and the external success-relevant circum-
stance. According to the theory, this relation is the basic form of semantic content. 
The intermediary is a signalling vehicle (or just ‘signal’, labelled Signal in the fig-
ures), and the external circumstance is its descriptive content (labelled State); see 
Fig. 2. Signals in simple models like this also have directive content, which is intui-
tively characterised as a command to bring about the required value of the effect 
variable (lower dashed line in Fig. 2).
The basic teleosemantic model depicted in Fig.  2 can be applied to phenomena 
throughout biology and cognitive science. Cells emit chemical messages that help 
coordinate and control joint behaviour. Social animals perform overt behaviours 
such as audible calls to assist conspecifics in finding food or avoiding predators. 
Nerve endings transmit electrical pulses via the central nervous system to the motor 
cortex, prompting a reflexive muscular response that protects the body from harm. 
These kinds of situations are very often described in terms of signalling, messaging, 
information or representation, and practitioners in those fields often draw on these 
concepts in giving explanations. One motivation behind teleosemantics is the prom-
ise of a general-purpose model that legitimises these explanatory practices.3
Fig. 2  The basic teleosemantic model. The Receiver has a proper function to bring about some Effect (in 
a causal model, this function would be specified as a requirement to set the effect variable to a certain 
value). However, an external State also has causal influence over the effect. The receiver cannot directly 
condition its behaviour on the value of this state. The Sender, which has as a proper function to help the 
receiver achieve its function, produces a Signal on which the receiver can condition its behaviour. Tel-
eosemantics asserts that when the receiver conditions its behaviour on the signal and is more successful 
than it would have been otherwise, this increased success can only be fully explained by adverting to a 
relation between the signal and the state (upper dashed line). This relation is then the basic representa-
tional relation, or descriptive content. The signal also has directive content, interpreted as a command to 
bring about the required value of the effect variable (lower dashed line). Adapted from Millikan (2004, 
fig. 6.3, p. 78)
3 There are several live issues in the teleosemantic literature that we ignore in this paper. Perhaps the 
most significant is how the basic model applies when sender and receiver do not cooperate, or do not 
cooperate perfectly. The cases discussed in “Proper functions and free energy minimization” and “Sig-
nals as internal models” sections include senders and receivers within single organisms, suggesting they 
will be fully cooperative. There are certainly times when components of organisms do not cooperate 
fully, but our assumption of full cooperation is an idealisation required to get the story off the ground.
1 3
Teleosemantics and the free energy principle  Page 5 of 25 34
Proper functions
There is a clear sense in which many biological devices have a function. They are 
adaptations, having selected effects that contribute to their proliferation. For exam-
ple, the mammalian heart has a selected effect to pump oxygenated blood around 
the body. Hearts that achieve this effect contribute to survival and reproduction of 
the genes that produced them, thereby contributing to the production of more hearts 
in future. A common pattern of biological explanation follows the logic of selec-
tion, explaining a device’s structure and behaviour by referring to the success of 
previous instances of the device. This is adaptationist, or more broadly selectionist, 
explanation.
The teleosemantic term for a selected effect is a proper function. Proper functions 
are not restricted to items produced by genes that proliferate due to natural selection 
acting on genetic lineages. Any device that owes its structure and/or dispositions to 
selection on the effects of certain ‘ancestors’ has a proper function. For example, a 
cognitive capacity in a trained rat to press a lever to retrieve food has lever-pressing 
as a proper function. A lever-pressing disposition has been reinforced (and alterna-
tive behaviours perhaps inhibited) by provision of food. The disposition ‘prolifer -
ates’ because previous manifestations of that disposition were followed by consump-
tion of food. For a disposition to proliferate here means being more likely to occur 
than other possible dispositions. The period of selection—which in this case is a 
period of reinforcement—is confined to a single organism. It is nevertheless selec-
tion in the appropriate sense, because it is a process of differential retention of a 
certain disposition (lever-pressing) over others. In this case, the ‘ancestors’ of pre-
sent lever-pressing behaviour are earlier instances of lever-pressing performed by 
the same rat.4
As a result, different kinds of selection process can give rise to the coopera-
tive system depicted in Fig.  2. Even if a sender–receiver system is not a product 
of genetic selection, it may nonetheless have appropriate functions that recommend 
treating the intermediary as a contentful signal.
4 The question of the relationship between learning processes and natural selection has been much 
discussed and is, we assume, not settled (Skinner 1981; Baigrie 1989; Catania 1999; Hull et al. 2001; 
Kingsbury 2008; Artiga 2010; Watson and Szathmáry 2016). All teleosemantics requires is that there is 
some explanatorily relevant similarity in the processes that give rise to functional behaviours. Millikan 
(1984, §§1–2) defends this claim extensively in giving the definition of proper function. We recapitulate 
key aspects of that definition in “Proper functions and free energy minimization” section.
 S. F . Mann, R. Pain 
1 334 Page 6 of 25
Proper functions and free energy minimization
The argument
With the basic framework of teleosemantics on the table, we can consider its rela-
tionship to the free energy principle. We suggest a satisfaction relation between 
two sets of conditions:
The conditions under which the free energy principle holds for a system sat-
isfy (i.e. are a subset of)
The conditions under which a system with a Markov blanket has a proper 
function (we will introduce the concept of a Markov blanket shortly).
By ‘system’ we are referring primarily to models of real systems. We formulate 
the definition of proper function within a causal modelling framework. The free 
energy principle is typically formulated within a dynamic modelling framework, 
depicted with cyclical models and phase space diagrams, all of which we will 
introduce shortly. Either kind of model can be used to represent a real system 
(Fig.  3). We aim to show that the two sets of conditions coincide with respect 
to such models. There will of course be further questions about which real sys-
tems (if any) those models faithfully depict. Proponents of active inference hope 
that their models capture observable features of real systems, and hence that the 
framework has empirical purchase. Our task here is not to evaluate these hopes 
directly, but to lay out some tools which might aid such an evaluation.
To show that the two sets of conditions are related in the proposed way, we 
must introduce: (i) Markov blankets; (ii) the conditions under which the free 
energy principle holds; and (iii) the conditions under which a system with a 
Markov blanket has a proper function. We first introduce Markov blankets and the 
free energy principle, before demonstrating how proper function relates to both.
Fig. 3  Three ways to model a 
biological system. Causal mod-
els provide a definition of proper 
function. Phase spaces enable 
specification of the free energy 
principle. Cyclical models 
bridge the gap between them

1 3
Teleosemantics and the free energy principle  Page 7 of 25 34
Markov blankets
By the 1980s, statistical modelling techniques were being applied to increasingly 
complex phenomena. Models were apt to include many different variables, all of 
which could be related to each other in complicated probabilistic relationships. As a 
means of depicting these relationships succinctly, a kind of diagram called a Bayes-
ian network was introduced. Bayesian networks depict variables as nodes, and prob-
abilistic relationships between variables as lines drawn between nodes. A Bayesian 
network represents a joint probability distribution factorised into component distri-
butions. Figure 4 is an example of a simple Bayesian network.
Markov blankets appear when we consider the conditional independence of 
nodes with respect to one another. Conditional independence is a ternary relation, 
taking three relata5:
Intuitively, getting information about Z does not yield information about X if you 
already have information about Y. For example, let p(x) be the probability of hav -
ing an accident while driving, p(z) the probability of wearing a coat, and p(y) the 
probability of rain. Although there may be an increase in car accidents when the 
driver is wearing a coat, p(x/uni007C.varz)> p(x), this can be explained by appealing to rain as 
a common cause of both. Knowing that it’s raining means that you know there is an 
increased chance of an accident, but knowing additionally that the driver is wearing 
a coat does not further change this probability: p(x/uni007C.varz,y)= p(x/uni007C.vary). Accidents are con-
ditionally independent of coat-wearing, given rain.
X is conditionally independentof Z , given Y , if for all x,y,z ∶ p(x/uni007C.vary,z)= p(x/uni007C.vary)
Fig. 4  A Markov blanket in a Bayesian network. The network represents the fact that 
a joint probability distribution p(x1 ,x2 ,x3 ,x4 ,x5 ,x6 ) factorises in the following way: 
p(x1 )p(x4 )p(x6 )p(x2 /uni007C.varx1 )p(x3 /uni007C.varx2 ,x4 )p(x5 /uni007C.varx3 ,x6 ) . The Markov blanket of a focal node such as X2 consists of 
all nodes with respect to which X2 is conditionally independent of every other node. With respect to X1 , 
X3 and X4 , the focal node is conditionally independent of all other nodes (i.e. X5 and X6 ). Therefore, the 
Markov blanket of X2 is the set {X1 ,X3 ,X4 }
5 We use capital letters X,  Y, Z to denote statistical variables and lower case letters x,  y, z to denote the 
values of those variables. Conditional independence is a relation between variables, expressed as a cer -
tain equality holding for all values of those variables.
 S. F . Mann, R. Pain 
1 334 Page 8 of 25
A Markov blanket of a focal node X is simply a set of nodes such that X is con-
ditionally independent of every other node in the graph with respect to that set. 
In Fig.  4, a Markov blanket of the focal node X2 is the set of nodes {X1 ,X3 ,X4 }. 
Because of the way conditional independence is defined, knowing the values of the 
nodes in a Markov blanket means you will always know the value of its focal node—
regardless of the value of any other node in the system.
Friston tries to augment the explanatory power of Markov blankets by discussing 
them in a causal rather than merely probabilistic setting (Friston 2013; Kirchhoff  
et al. 2018). Because causal models use the same underlying mathematical object as 
Bayesian networks—an acyclic directed graph—it is possible to carry over formally 
defined concepts from one setting to the other. In causal models, a Markov blanket 
for a particular node is the set of nodes that screen it from causal interactions with 
the rest of the system. As with probabilistic models, the values of the nodes in the 
blanket contain all the information required to know the state of the node in question 
(Fig. 5). Treating a causal model as a representation of a physical scenario, Friston 
interprets Markov blankets as physical boundaries separating the inside of a system 
from its outside. For example, one could treat a causal model as representing the 
interactions between a bacterium and its environment. Friston asserts that the cellu-
lar membrane is well-modelled by a Markov blanket whose focal node corresponds 
to the insides of the cell: “if we consider short-range electrochemical and nuclear 
forces, then a cell membrane forms a Markov blanket for internal intracellular 
states” (Friston 2013, p. 5). This modelling gambit embodies the claim that the bac-
terium’s insides are conditionally independent of everything outside it, with respect 
to its membrane. This is an idealization, obtained by assuming that only short-range 
forces are relevant.
When a biological system is represented as a causal model, it appears to maintain 
a kind of stability within its Markov blanket. This can be contrasted with non-bio-
logical systems that tend to dissipate. Consider for example two systems suspended 
in water: a droplet of ink and a bacterium. The ink will rapidly diffuse. Globules 
initially inside its boundary will very soon come into contact with the water. Mod-
elled causally, the Markov blanket of any node within the droplet will not remain 
intact for long: the boundary diffuses, and nodes previously inside the boundary will 
come into direct contact with the external environment. In contrast, the transaction 
Fig. 5  A Markov blanket in 
a causal model. The Markov 
blanket of the grey node is the 
set of white nodes within the 
dotted circle. These are the 
parents (causal antecedents) and 
children (causal effects) of the 
grey node, as well as the parents 
of its children

1 3
Teleosemantics and the free energy principle  Page 9 of 25 34
of materials and energy between the inside and outside of the bacterium will be 
more or less controlled by its cellular membrane. Part of the process of survival is 
maintaining such a membrane. Modelled causally, the bacterium’s membrane is a 
Markov blanket.
Markov blankets, cyclical models, and phase spaces
To understand the conditions underlying the free energy principle, we first need to 
understand a related but different way of representing Markov blanket systems.
Discussions of the free energy principle do not usually employ causal models. 
Instead, they use diagrams depicting cyclical interactions between a system and its 
environment, as in Fig.  6. These are intended to emphasise the feedback inherent 
in perception-action loops. Causal models disallow cyclical relationships, because 
effects cannot be causally upstream from their causes. So Fig. 6 is not a causal model 
in the strict sense. Nonetheless, its relationship to causal models will be important 
later on.
Using the cyclical model in Fig.  6, biological systems can be decomposed in an 
important way. Continuing the bacterium example, the blanket separates the whole 
bacterium-water scenario into internal and external nodes. Internal nodes are those 
internal to the blanket. External nodes are those external to the blanket. We can fur -
thermore divide the blanket itself into two kinds of node: sensory and active. Sen-
sory nodes are affected by external nodes and only affect internal and active nodes. 
Active nodes are any that affect external nodes (even if they also have internal 
effects). From these definitions, internal nodes are causally segregated from external 
nodes by the blanket.
Let us define the state  of a system as the collection of values of its nodes. For 
example, if each of the sensory, internal and action nodes can take one of two val-
ues, then the overall state of a three-node system is defined as a list of three values:
and there are eight possible states, corresponding to the eight combinations of val-
ues the nodes can take: ⟨0, 0, 0⟩,⟨0, 0, 1⟩,⟨0, 1, 0⟩ and so on.
Over time, as the value of each component node changes, the system as a whole 
changes, moving from state to state. It changes as a result both of the influence of the 
external environment on it, and its own actions. Its states—all the values of its nodes 
state = ⟨sensory node, internal node, action node ⟩
Fig. 6  A cyclical model of 
a Markov blanket system. A 
system with a Markov blanket is 
coupled to its environment via 
sensory input states and action 
output states

 S. F . Mann, R. Pain 
1 334 Page 10 of 25
at any given time—define a phase space. Each point of a phase space completely 
defines the state of a system at a given time. For three nodes each with two possible 
values, the phase space has eight points, which could be envisioned as the vertices 
of a cube. A more realistic model would contain vastly more possible points.
Depending on the dynamics of the entire scenario—blanketed system plus envi-
ronment—the system may visit some of these points more often than others. Sup-
pose we have a cyclical model whose nodes change over time according to a dynam-
ical rule. Suppose also that there is a system within the model that possesses a 
Markov blanket. The system’s nodes constitute a phase space, which we could plot, 
and trace its trajectory (Fig. 7).
Equivalence classes relate the three model types
Drawing a diagram like Fig.  7, and plotting the trajectory of a system, requires that 
it be possible for the system to revisit the same states at different times. This cor -
responds to the cyclical model in Fig.  6 being ‘run forward’ in time according to a 
dynamic rule, its node values being plotted, and it sometimes having the same node 
values at different points in time. Notice that this kind of situation is not strictly pos-
sible in a causal model. Bayesian networks and causal models are acyclic: if you 
trace a path along the graph following the direction of the arrows, you can never 
get back to where you started. The ‘flow of time’ in a causal model is one way; set-
ting nodes to certain values affects downstream nodes but not those upstream. As 
a result, causal models do not inherently support the notion of identity over time. 
A node corresponding to a component of a system at time t need not represent the 
same part of the system at one of its child nodes at time t + 1. Given that we are 
going to represent proper functions using causal models, and the free energy princi-
ple using dynamic cyclical models, this presents a challenge to our attempt to relate 
the two sets of conditions.
Fortunately, there is a way to relate causal models to cyclical models, and thus to 
the kind of phase space diagram in Fig.  7. Each node in the cyclical diagram can be 
mapped to a causally linked chain of time-indexed nodes in an acyclic causal graph 
(Fig.  8). In other words, the cyclic model can be ‘unrolled’ into an acyclic time-
indexed causal graph, which can then be treated as a Bayesian network or causal 
Fig. 7  A phase space diagram depicting a system’s trajectory. The entire rectangle represents the phase 
space of the system, a multidimensional space each point of which denotes a distinct state the system 
could be in. The solid curve represents the system’s trajectory over time. When it enters the region 
defined by the dashed ellipse, it nevers leaves, instead moving around this region. The region is a global 
attractor (The trajectory crosses over itself which would be strictly impossible in a deterministic setting; 
we can imagine a third dimension that the system is moving through)
1 3
Teleosemantics and the free energy principle  Page 11 of 25 34
model. Sometimes more complex diagrams used in the active inference literature 
explicitly adopt this ‘unrolled’ form (see e.g. Friston et al. 2017, Fig. 2, p. 389). In 
the opposite direction, a causal model can be translated into a cyclical model by 
identifying equivalence classes: sets of nodes to be treated as representing the same 
component of the system at different time stages. Identifying equivalent nodes ‘rolls 
up’ the system, producing the cyclical form apparent in Fig. 6.
Furthermore, phase spaces are produced from cyclical models by a similar pro-
cess of identifying equivalence classes. This time, each equivalence class is defined 
in terms of the system being in the same state at different times. Phase space dia-
grams treat all states as identical, plotting them at the same point in the space, 
regardless of the time at which the system reaches that state. In the other direction, 
converting a phase space diagram into a cyclical model requires that a trajectory be 
drawn in the space. This trajectory can then be treated as representing the flow of 
time in the corresponding cyclical model. Figure  9 depicts these formal relation-
ships between the three kinds of model.
Conditions under which the free energy principle holds
We do not need to state the principle itself at this stage, just the conditions under 
which it holds. Consider again our blanketed system depicted in the cyclical model 
(Fig. 6). Because the system’s states change both as a result of its actions and exter -
nal affairs, its trajectory can be explained by reference to both of these things. In 
particular, aspects or patterns in its trajectory could be explained by reference to the 
system’s actions. That is the key idea behind the free energy principle.
Fig. 8  The relationship between 
cyclical models (A) and causal 
models (B). A cyclical model 
can be converted into a causal 
model by ‘unrolling’ it through 
time, treating the same node 
as different at each timestep. 
Conversely, a causal model can 
be converted into a cyclical 
model by identifying equiva-
lence classes of nodes, those 
that represent the same part of 
the system at different timesteps. 
Adapted from figures 3 and 4 of 
Ay and Zahedi (2014, p. 266). 
W environment, S sensors, C 
controller (internal nodes), A 
actuators, t time index, /u1D6FC, /u1D6FD, /u1D70B, /u1D719 
causal effects determined by the 
dynamical rules governing the 
system

 S. F . Mann, R. Pain 
1 334 Page 12 of 25
Suppose our system eventually ends up in a kind of fluctuating cycle, inhabiting a 
distinct set of states that it wanders through but never leaves (Fig. 7, dashed ellipse). 
Friston calls this cycle an “invariant set of states” or a “random global attractor” 
(Friston 2013, p. 3); later it is described as “non-equilibrium steady-state” (Da Costa 
et al. 2021, p. 3). When a system with a Markov blanket converges to an attractor, 
the free energy principle holds for that system.
At first glance it looks as though the lack of identity over time in causal models 
might prevent these conditions being defined. An anonymous reviewer suggested 
to us that since the time-unrolled system does not have downstream nodes that are 
identified with upstream nodes, there is no sense in which the system can ‘revisit’ 
states. There are lots of time slices of a system that look similar, but cannot be iden-
tified (within that causal model) as the same system. And because there is no single 
system moving through different states, a phase space diagram cannot be drawn for 
it; there can be no probability distribution over the different states it occupies, and so 
there is no way to define a non-equilibrium steady-state for it.
It seems to us that this issue is best resolved by emphasising the relations between 
the three kinds of model. Causal models, with time-unrolled collections of nodes, 
are useful for discovering causal effects and pathways. Defining a non-equilibrium 
steady-state is achieved by rolling the model, first into a cyclical model by identify -
ing equivalence classes of nodes, then into a phase space diagram by identifying 
equivalent states. Conditions on the free energy principle are definable via cyclical 
Fig. 9  Three kinds of model can be transformed into each other. Moving from left to right: A trajectory 
within a phase space diagram defines the time flow of a dynamic, cyclical model. The cyclical model can 
then be ‘time-unrolled’ to produce a causal model (see Fig.  8). Moving from right to left: Within a causal 
model, equivalence classes of nodes can be defined, such that treating those nodes as identical ‘re-rolls’ 
the model, allowing the system in question to undergo change over time. Finally, a system in a dynamic, 
cyclical model—which adopts different states at different times—defines a phase space diagram when 
equivalent states are assigned to the same point in the space; the system’s change over time becomes a 
trajectory in the phase space
1 3
Teleosemantics and the free energy principle  Page 13 of 25 34
models and phase spaces, while proper functions (to which we shall soon turn) are 
definable in terms of causal models (Fig.  10). Manipulating our formal depiction of 
a system in order to derive three different descriptions is not inconsistent. It simply 
reveals that the system can be understood in different, yet compatible, ways.
Later we will consider the content of the free energy principle, which describes 
the consequences when the conditions just introduced hold. What matters here is 
that a system can remain within an attractor, and part of what explains why the sys-
tem remains in the attractor is the system’s own active states: how it acts on the 
external world. This is where a connection with proper functions is found.
Conditions on possession of a proper function
To define proper function we need to introduce three prior definitions, all given by 
Millikan (1984). First is a definition of reproduction:
An individual B is a “reproduction” of an individual A iff: 
1. B has some determinate properties p1 ,p2 ,p3 etc., in common with A;
2. That A and B have the properties p1 ,p2 ,p3 etc., in common can be 
explained by a natural law or laws operative in situ;
3. For each property p1 ,p2 ,p3 etc., the laws in situ that explain why B is like 
A in respect to p are laws that correlate a specifiable range of determinates 
under a determinable under which p falls, such that whatever determinate 
Fig. 10  The free energy principle and proper functions are formally defined in terms of different kinds of 
model
 S. F . Mann, R. Pain 
1 334 Page 14 of 25
characterizes A must also characterize B, the direction of causality being 
straight from A to B.
  Excerpted from Millikan (1984, pp. 19–20)
The final condition is a little hard to parse. Intuitively it says that the reason B has 
the properties it does is that A has the properties it does. Millikan paraphrases,
Roughly, the law in situ implies that had A been different with respect to its 
determinate character p within a specifiable range of variation, as a result, B 
would have differed accordingly.
Millikan (1984, p. 20), emphasis original
Although the definition distinguishes individuals A and B, an offspring-parent 
relationship is not strictly required. We propose to let different time-stages of the 
same system, represented by different nodes in a causal model, count as different 
individuals for the purposes of the definition. As a result, unrolling the time-stages 
of Friston’s cycle within its attractor produces a causal model in which causally 
linked ‘copies’ of time-stages count as reproductions of each other. When the sys-
tem returns to a point in phase space, its current time-stage is a “reproduction” of 
its time-stage when it was last at that point. 6 To see that time-stages are reproduc-
tions as defined above, consider each part of the definition in turn. Condition (1) 
is satisfied because B is defined as the system at the same point in the phase space 
as A. One of the things guaranteed by the relation “being at the same point in the 
phase space as” is having properties in common. Indeed, a system’s position in a 
phase space defines property values of the system at that time. Condition (2) is sat-
isfied because the attractor set is determined by the structure of the system and the 
laws governing its time evolution.7 Furthermore, attractor cycles define equivalence 
classes of system states. If system state A had differed, everything in its equivalence 
class would have differed in the same way. So condition (3) holds, and later time-
stages at the same point in state space are reproductions of earlier ones.
The next two preliminary definitions can be given briefly. Again we take Mil-
likan’s strict definitions and interpret them in the context of a causal model. First is 
reproductively established family:
Any set of entities having the same or similar reproductively established char -
acters derived by repetitive reproductions from the same character of the same 
model or models form a first-order reproductively established family.
6 An anonymous reviewer complained (rightly) that our interpretation in this section stretches Millikan’s 
notion of proper function almost to breaking point. Indeed the insistence on reproduction has led to dis-
satisfaction with Millikan’s strict account and has motivated extended definitions of functions underpin-
ning teleosemantics, most notably by Shea (2018, §3). We are stubbornly cleaving to Millikan’s defini-
tion, but we leave open the possibility that alternative definitions do the job better. These issues belong 
also to a wider debate in the philosophy of biology, on which we really do not have space to comment, 
about selected effects, reproduction, and persistence (Bouchard 2014; Bourrat 2021).
7 For example, in Friston (2013) the laws are encapsulated by a differential equation called the Fokker–
Planck equation. In Da Costa et al. (2021) the laws are defined in terms of a stochastic process called the 
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process.
1 3
Teleosemantics and the free energy principle  Page 15 of 25 34
Millikan (1984, p. 23), emphasis original
It should be clear that equivalence classes define groups of nodes that play the role 
of reproductively established families. We might imagine Friston’s system spiral-
ling into its attractor. Each time it passes through a given region of phase space, it 
belongs to the equivalence class defined in terms of the properties that characterise 
that region. The bacterium time-stage at time t in state A—say, with node values 
⟨1, 0, 1⟩—belongs to an equivalence class with any other time-stage, both before and 
after t, that is also in state A.
One more preliminary definition is that of an ancestor:
Any member of a (first-order) reproductively established family from which a 
current member m was derived by reproduction or by successive reproductions 
is an ancestor of m.
Millikan (1984, p. 27)
Every earlier time-stage of the system within the current time-stage’s equivalence 
class counts as an ancestor.
When the above definitions apply, phase-space diagram systems with Markov 
blankets that converge to an attractor correspond to causal-model systems that have 
proper functions. To see this, consider the full definition:
Where m is a member of a reproductively established family R and R has the 
reproductively established [...] character C, m has the function F as a [...] 
proper function iff: 
1. Certain ancestors of m performed F.
2. In part because there existed a direct causal connection between having 
the character C and performance of the function F in the case of these 
ancestors of m, C correlated positively with F over a certain set of items S 
which included these ancestors and other things not having C.
3. One among the legitimate explanations that can be given of the fact that m 
exists makes reference to the fact that C correlated positively with F over 
S, either directly causing reproduction of m or explaining why R was pro-
liferated and hence why m exists.
  Millikan (1984, p. 28)
Before stepping through each of the three conditions, some comments are needed. 
First, a system’s reproductively established character C is the group of properties 
that define reproduction. They are the properties that characterise each equivalence 
class of time-stages. Second, F is a causal effect. That there is a causal link between 
C and F explains proliferation of the family having character C, hence continuing 
occurrence of F.
Finally, the set S  is a contrast class. Persistence of the family can be explained 
by reference to S . To identify a set to play this explanatory role, we need to con-
sider other systems that did not find themselves in attractors. Our earlier exam-
ple of an ink blot in water contrasts with successfully converging systems, but 
 S. F . Mann, R. Pain 
1 334 Page 16 of 25
we are focusing only on models rather than real systems in order to sidestep the 
question of realism that Friston must eventually face up to. For now, we can just 
say that the contrast class consists of models that do not include systems with 
Markov blankets that persist over time. After all, a satisfactory explanation of 
why a system with a Markov blanket persists over time should entail that sys-
tems without one do not persist in the same way.
Friston’s systems satisfy Millikan’s conditions
Now we can show that our Markov blanket system within its attractor possesses 
a proper function. We will show that the boundary itself has a proper function 
to effect certain causal changes in the external state. Let m  be the current time-
stage of the whole blanket system; C  the system’s boundary at the current time-
stage; R the family of previous boundary time-stages in the same equivalence 
class: 
1. Certain ancestors of m performed F.
• YES: let F  be the causal effects of the blanket system on the external 
system. By assumption the system has these effects because the Markov 
blanket can be divided into sensory and active nodes. The relevant causal 
effects are those of the active nodes on external nodes.
2. There is a causal connection C  → F and for this reason C  correlated positively 
with F over a set S, where S includes ancestors of m as well as things that didn’t 
have C.
• YES, because causal effects of the internal nodes on external nodes must 
go through the boundary, so F  must be affected by C . Our system ended 
up in the attractor when other systems did not. We said above that the 
system’s actions are part of what explains why it remains in the attractor; 
therefore, its actions (constituting the causal connection C  → F) are part 
of the reason why the system remained within the attractor (why C  corre-
lated with F  over set S ).
3. Explanation of the existence of m can refer to the positive correlation between C 
and F.
• YES, because the boundary is a causal structure doing real explanatory 
work on Friston’s account.
The variables C  and F will be filled in differently for each system. But they must 
be filled in for the free energy principle to hold. Once they are filled in, F  is a 
proper function of m . There are external causal effects of the boundary that are 
proper functions of the blanketed system. Figure  11 extends Fig.  10 to depict the 
equivalence of these conditions as a consequence of the relationship between 
causal models, cyclical models, and phase space diagrams.
1 3
Teleosemantics and the free energy principle  Page 17 of 25 34
Are functions of time‑stages functions of whole systems?
An anonymous reviewer raised the following problem. We have shown only that 
different time-stages m t of a system have different functions F t . We have not 
shown that the system m  has each of these functions at different times, nor even 
that there is some aggregate function F that the system has. It is not as though we 
have posited a function of a subsystem—say, a face-recognizer in the brain—and 
then posited that same function as belonging to the wider system—the brain. Fur -
thermore, even if we are right to claim that time-stages count as ancestors of each 
other, the system as a whole cannot have its own time-stages as ancestors. It may 
have ancestors, and thereby a selection history, but that would be a different his-
tory to the one we have described.
To respond, we think that if progressive time-stages can be identified as 
belonging to a unified system, then that system ought to be attributed the func-
tions attributed to the time-stages. We agree that the situation is unlike positing 
that the function of a subsystem also belongs to the supersystem, like in the face-
recognizer case. But we do not think our point rests on such an analogy. Rather, 
the relationship between a system and its time stages is even more intimate than 
that between a system and its components. It is difficult to see how we could 
Fig. 11  Conditions on obeying the free energy principle satisfy conditions on possession of a proper 
function. Because phase space diagrams and causal models can be related to each other via equivalence 
classes, the conditions on a phase-diagram system obeying the free energy principle can be shown to sat-
isfy the conditions on a related causal model system possessing a proper function. Real systems faithfully 
depicted by these models would satisfy both sets of conditions. We have not investigated the converse 
satisfaction
 S. F . Mann, R. Pain 
1 334 Page 18 of 25
avoid attributing time-stage functions to the system as a whole. What is doing the 
work here is the assumption, implicit in the association of the three models with 
each other, that the time-stages do indeed belong to the same system. 8
Whether or not a system that has different functions F t at different times thereby 
has some unified function F is a separate issue. It depends how reasonable it is to 
unify all those disparate performances under a single description. This is a ques-
tion that has been discussed in the wider literature on teleosemantics, and we do not 
propose to answer it here (Millikan 1990). We can instead try to make the required 
result plausible with an example. Consider a system that needs to avoid danger (per-
haps a predator or ambient toxin) and can sense one of two conditions: either there 
is danger to the north or to the south. When there is danger to the north it must 
move south, and vice versa. Suppose that at t = 1 there is danger to the north. Then 
a function of its time-stage at F1 is to move south. Now suppose at t = 2 there is 
danger to the south. Then a function of its time-stage at F2 is to move north. These 
are different functions. We suggest that it is not unreasonable to posit a more gen-
eral function, both to the time-stages and to the system as a whole, to move away 
from danger. We posit further that the kinds of examples of functions that could be 
employed to illustrate our account will all be of this nature. The alternative would 
be for a system to have entirely distinct functions at different times, none of which 
could be generalised under a common description. In an environment that demanded 
such disparate activities of a single entity, it is unlikely anything could survive long 
enough to satisfy the conditions on the free energy principle or possession of a 
proper function.
It is time to move on. In the next section we describe how Friston’s and Mil-
likan’s formulations give rise to interesting relations between the internal and exter -
nal states of a system.
Signals as internal models
In this section, we suggest a correspondence between Ruth Millikan’s teleosemantic 
definition of signal and Karl Friston’s purported proof that biological entities will 
appear to model the external world.
First consider implicit modelling on Friston’s account. Friston claims to be able to 
show that the internal state of a blanketed system must appear to model the external 
state (Friston 2013; Da Costa et al. 2021). What does he mean? A physical system 
implicitly models another physical system when the state of the first parametrizes a 
8 This issue is related to the problem of function attribution for merely persisting (i.e. not reproducing) 
systems; see footnote 6. What we require is that differential persistence due to causal effects is sufficient 
for bestowing a proper function. If that requires extending the definition, so be it. The explanation of why 
the system continues to exist appeals to its past actions and contrasts them with systems that did not act 
this way, and so did not persist. That pattern of explanation is what is driving both the free energy prin-
ciple and the definition of proper functions. In the worst case, our argument can be read as a conditional: 
if there is a workable notion of etiological function for merely persisting systems, then conditions on the 
free energy principle satisfy conditions on possession of that kind of function.
1 3
Teleosemantics and the free energy principle  Page 19 of 25 34
distribution over states of the second. This means that the different possible states 
of the first system (the one doing the modelling) can be mapped onto mathematical 
values which determine a probability distribution over the different possible states 
of the second system (the one being modelled). Any two statistically correlated sys-
tems could be said to parametrize distributions over each other in this sense. In the 
example in “Markov blankets” section, the collection of drivers wearing coats could 
be said to implicitly model locations of car crashes. We just need to define a func-
tion that maps from the geographical locations of coat-wearers to a probability dis-
tribution over crashes in those locations. This is not a consequence of any inferential 
or even causal relationship between the two (although in this case they have a com-
mon cause), just a consequence of their statistical relationship.
In the case at hand, the internal state corresponds to a mathematical object which 
expresses the probability that the external state is a certain way. The idea is that 
implicit modelling, via this kind of parametrization, is assigned a stronger explan-
atory role than mere statistical correlation for blanketed systems. Friston and col-
leagues appeal to this implicit model to explain behaviour (Da Costa et al. 2021, §
4). In order to persist within the attractor, the blanket system must match its implicit 
model to the world. So changes in internal states can be explained as the system’s 
attempt to accurately model the external state. Matching the model to the world 
helps the blanket system survive. The implicit model is variously described as “a 
probabilistic representation (recognition density) encoded by the agent...” (Friston 
2009, p. 294), “a probability density over external states [...] that is encoded (para-
metrized) by internal states” (Friston 2013,  p. 4), and “...probabilistic beliefs that 
are implicit in a system’s interactions with its local surroundings” (Kirchhoff et al. 
2018, p. 2).
Now we can state the free energy principle. When the conditions described in 
“Friston’s systems satisfy Millikan’s conditions” section hold, blanket systems will 
“appear to minimize free energy” (Friston 2013, p. 2). Here “free energy” has noth-
ing to do with energy in the traditional, physical sense. It is a statistical property 
rather than a physical one. Free energy describes the unlikelihood of the sensory 
states that the system is currently receiving, where the probability distribution that 
defines this unlikelihood is constructed from the system’s historical trajectory. The 
free energy principle says that systems that persist out of thermodynamic equilib-
rium will appear to minimise this unlikelihood. Intuitively, surviving systems are 
those that inhabit environments similar to those inhabited by their successful ances-
tors. It is as a result of this minimization that the implicit model will come to match 
the world.
With a little more work we can interpret Millikan’s definition of ‘signal’ such that 
there exist representational relations between internal states of the blanket system 
and the world. 9 Above we saw that representational relations come in two kinds: 
descriptive and directive. We suggest that it is possible to treat the internal state as 
9 Millikan calls signals “intentional icons” (Millikan 1984, p. 96ff), and later “representations” (Millikan 
2004, p. 77ff).
 S. F . Mann, R. Pain 
1 334 Page 20 of 25
a signal, and that its descriptive representational relation is comparable to Friston’s 
notion of implicit modelling.
On Millikan’s account, a signal is an intermediary between a coadapted sender 
and receiver. The representational relations borne by the signal to its content can be 
analyzed in terms of its causal effects. The directive content is the effect that should 
be brought about by the receiver (in Fig.  2, this is the Effect variable). The descrip-
tive content—what the signal is usually said to represent—is what would have to be 
the case such that the receiver successfully performs its proper function (in Fig.  2, 
this is the State variable). In other words, the representational content is whatever 
external circumstance must be the case in order for the effects of action to be suc-
cessful in accordance with proper function.
We need to match the sender–receiver framework to our blanket system. This can 
be done by casting the sender as the sensory state, the signal as the inner state, and 
the receiver as the active state (Fig.  12). In our blanket system, sender, signal and 
receiver are clearly coadapted. They are bound within the same Markov blanket that 
has reached an attractor. They have a unified proper function. Although they may 
not be materially distinct, Friston gives a functional analysis that we are assuming 
individuates subsystems by their proper functions. The division of labour between 
sensory, internal and action states is required both for Friston’s mathematical proofs 
and Millikan’s definition.
Continuing with Millikan’s definition, consider the directive mapping relation. 
Suppose the inner state, as affected by the senses, takes some physical form that 
causes the action state to behave in a certain way. The action produces an effect that 
helps keep the blanket system in the attractor. That is, it performs one of its proper 
functions. The external changes are dependent on the form the inner state took. So 
there is a relationship between inner state and external effect, mediated by the active 
state. This is the directive aspect of the inner state:
Directive aspect: the external change caused by the system’s behaviour that 
constitutes its successfully performing its proper function.
Fig. 12  A teleosemantic interpretation of the free energy principle. A Markov blanket system induces 
sender–receiver structure, suggesting a teleosemantic analysis. Friston claims that the inner state will 
implicitly model the external state. Teleosemantics says the inner state, treated as a signal, bears a repre-
sentational relation to the external state
1 3
Teleosemantics and the free energy principle  Page 21 of 25 34
Persistence of the system is explained, in part, by a directive mapping relation that 
relates various different inner states to various different external effects that action is 
supposed to produce.
Consider now the more familiar descriptive representational aspect of the inner 
state. It has to be characterized in a little more detail. It cannot simply be what 
caused the inner state. Instead:
Descriptive aspect: the external state that must obtain for the effects of action 
to successfully perform the system’s proper function.
In simple cases this might well be equivalent to what caused the inner state.
The signal corresponds to what must be the case for action to successfully pro-
duce the required outcome. This suggests that differences in the inner state corre-
spond to differences in the external state: differences in inner state lead to different 
actions, which will be successful if the external state is appropriate (i.e. promotes 
the proliferation of the blanket system) given that action. And one way to describe 
differences in inner state corresponding to differences in external state is to say that 
the inner state is an implicit model of the external state.
On both Millikan’s and Friston’s accounts, there is a system whose survival-
promoting behaviours can be in part explained in terms of the system harbouring 
an implicit model of its surroundings. Friston describes this model in terms of the 
“recognition density” (2009,  p. 293) or “probability density over external states” 
(2013, p. 4). Millikan describes the implicit model as the representational content 
of the inner state considered as a signal. We believe that this concordance between 
their accounts is surprising, and worthy of further study.
A couple of comments are in order before closing. In active inference, there are 
two different kinds of activity: action, which minimizes expected free energy, and 
inference, which minimizes variational free energy. We suspect this corresponds to 
matching the world to the model (acting so the receiver’s proper function is sat-
isfied) and matching the model to the world (updating the signal so its represen-
tational content is correct). A similar claim is made by Hohwy (2013, § 4) in the 
context of predictive processing theories of cognition. In simpler, tightly coupled 
systems, these two kinds of behaviour are barely distinguishable (Fig. 12).
The big difference between the free-energy and proper-functional descriptions of 
a system is the answer given to the question ‘what is the system trying to do?’ Fris-
ton says all systems are minimizing the free energy of their sensory states. Millikan 
says all systems have different proper functions, but at the most abstract level a sys-
tem’s ultimate proper function is not to minimize free energy but to reproduce. From 
one perspective, reproduction is a means to minimizing free energy. From the other, 
minimizing free energy is a means to reproduction.
Future research and closing remarks
Our analysis points to various lines of further research. For example, there is an 
active debate concerning whether or not the free energy principle should be given a 
representational reading (Gładziejewski 2016; Gładziejewski and Miłkowski 2017; 
 S. F . Mann, R. Pain 
1 334 Page 22 of 25
Kiefer and Hohwy 2018), or if it should be understood in enactivist (anti-represen-
tational) terms (Ramstead et al. 2021; Gallagher and Allen 2018; Sims and Pezzulo 
2021). The congruence with teleosemantics here suggests a representational reading. 
Indeed, for proponents of teleosemantics, it might force a representational reading. 
Another line of future research concerns the issue of reduction. Does the free energy 
principle reduce to proper functions, or vice versa? A third observation concerns 
the ever-widening scope of the free energy principle. If the framework encompasses 
domains like culture (Rubin et al. 2020; Veissière et al. 2020), must these domains 
likewise have proper functions?
There is not the scope here to engage in detail with the implications of the formal 
links described in this paper. However, we do want to finish with a brief discus-
sion of one of the most prominent conceptual problems levelled at teleosemantic 
theories, and explore how our analysis might inform a response to this problem. 10 
Broadly, the challenge concerns whether past processes can account for representa-
tional content in the here-and-now. This is typically illustrated by the “Swampman” 
thought experiment. In this case, a random lightning strike in a swamp produces an 
intrinsic duplicate of a human. Our intuitions, it is claimed, indicate that Swamp-
man would act exactly like a person with contentful representational states. But as 
teleosemantic theories rely on history, and Swampman has no history, we cannot 
explain his behaviour by recourse to mental content. This result is thought to push us 
toward internalist theories of function, and hence content. 11 Does our analysis pro-
vide support for the teleosemantic view?
Teleosemantics says that at the immediate point of creation Swampman pos-
sesses neither proper functions nor representational content. So much is familiar. 
Our account emphasises a further point we have not yet seen in the literature: at the 
point of creation, Swampman is not subject to the conditions of the FEP. Swampman 
cannot be said to minimise free energy, because he has no historical trajectory from 
which to construct the probability distributions that define free energy in the first 
place. As Swampman moves around in the world, however, he starts to conform to 
the conditions of the free energy principle: by reliably persisting within his Markov 
blanket, historical tallies of sensory states define the requisite probability distribu-
tions. Over time, it becomes possible to define Swampman’s free energy, and to 
explain his continuing survival by reference to his minimising that quantity. As we 
have seen, any system that meets the conditions of the FEP satisfies the conditions 
10 Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pushing us on this issue.
11 Here we are engaging with the Swampman challenge at a first-order level. But we take very seriously 
second-order, methodological challenges concerning the viability of modally immodest thought experi-
ments. First, there are well-known challenges to this philosophical approach (Machery 2017). Second, 
whether or not you take Swampman seriously will depend on how important you think it is for a philo-
sophical theory to capture all our folk intuitions. If, for instance, we put more weight on the practical 
upshots of our theory, then the fact that it fails to account for our intuitions in some modally extreme 
cases will not matter very much (Woodward 2021, pp. 28–35). In general, we agree with this more prag-
matic approach. We engage with the thought experiment because, as will become clear, we think it nicely 
illustrates the conceptual links between teleosemantics and the free energy principle that we have identi-
fied in the paper.
1 3
Teleosemantics and the free energy principle  Page 23 of 25 34
on possession of a proper function, so this entails that Swampman will slowly start 
to gain proper functions.
As it happens, at least some teleosemanticists have endorsed this result. Nick 
Shea’s account of content, based on a kind of etiological function called task func-
tions, has the same consequence:
As soon as a swamp system starts interacting with its environment and learn-
ing, it will rapidly acquire task functions. So, it won’t be long before there is 
a basis for counting some outcomes as successful and others as unsuccessful, 
and then we can start explaining the success and failure of its behaviour in 
terms of correct and incorrect representation.
Shea (2018, p. 169)
There is clearly much more to be said on these topics. However, this brief discussion 
indicates how the correspondence between the FEP and teleosemantics can be used 
to illuminate one of the key problems in the literature on historical functions. We 
hope further analyses will be forthcoming.
Acknowledgements Thanks to Kim Sterelny and Michael Kirchhoff for comments on earlier drafts, and 
two anonymous reviewers for comments on subsequent versions. SFM would like to thank Russell Gray 
and Iren Hartmann for generously organising a guest researcher position at the Max Planck Institute for 
Evolutionary Anthropology, during which time much of the manuscript was written.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Data availability Not applicable.
Code availability Not applicable.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest The authors declared that they have no conflict of interest.
Ethical approval Not applicable.
Consent to participate Not applicable.
Consent for publication Not applicable.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is 
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission 
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen 
ses/ by/4. 0/.
 S. F . Mann, R. Pain 
1 334 Page 24 of 25
References
Artiga M (2010) Learning and selection processes. THEORIA 25(2):197–209
Ay N, Zahedi K (2014) On the causal structure of the sensorimotor loop. In: Prokopenko M (ed) Guided 
self-organization: inception. Springer, Berlin, pp 261–294
Baigrie BS (1989) Natural selection vs trial and error elimination. Int Stud Philos Sci 3(2):157–172
Bouchard F (2014) Ecosystem evolution is about variation and persistence, not populations and reproduc-
tion. Biol Theory 9(4):382–391
Bourrat P (2021) Function, persistence, and selection: generalizing the selected-effect account of function 
adequately. Stud Hist Philos Sci Part A 90:61–67
Bruineberg J et al (2021) The emperor’s New Markov blankets. Behav Brain Sci. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ 
S0140 525X2 10023 51
Catania A (1999) Thorndike’s legacy: learning, selection, and the law of effect. J Exp Anal Behav 
72(3):425–428
Colombo M, Cory W (2018) First principles in the life sciences: the free-energy principle, organicism, 
and mechanism. Synthese 198:3463–3488
Da Costa L et al (2021) Bayesian mechanics for stationary processes. arXiv Preprint. arXiv: 2106. 13830 
[math-ph, physics:nlin, q-bio]
Friston K (2009) The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain? Trends Cogn Sci 13(7):293–301
Friston K (2010) The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat Rev Neurosci 11(2):127–138
Friston KJ (2013) Life as we know it. J R Soc Interface 10(86):20130475
Friston KJ, Parr T, de Vries B (2017) The graphical brain: belief propagation and active inference. Netw 
Neurosci 1(4):381–414
Gallagher S, Allen M (2018) Active inference, enactivism and the hermeneutics of social cognition. Syn-
these 195(6):2627–2648
Gładziejewski P (2016) Predictive coding and representationalism. Synthese 193(2):559–582
Gładziejewski P, Miłkowski M (2017) Structural representations: causally relevant and different from 
detectors. Biol Philos 32(3):337–355
Hohwy J (2013) The predictive mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Hohwy J (2020) Self-supervision, normativity and the free energy principle. Synthese 199(1–2):1–25
Hull DL, Langman RE, Glenn SS (2001) A general account of selection: biology, immunology, and 
behavior. Behav Brain Sci 24(3):511–573
Kiefer A, Hohwy J (2018) Content and misrepresentation in hierarchical generative models. Synthese 
195(6):2387–2415
Kingsbury J (2008) Learning and selection. Biol Philos 23(4):493–507
Kirchhoff MD (2018) Autopoiesis, free energy, and the life-mind continuity thesis. Synthese 
195(6):2519–2540
Kirchhoff M et al (2018) The Markov blankets of life: autonomy, active inference and the free energy 
principle. J R Soc Interface 15(138):20170792
Levins R (1966) The strategy of model building in population biology. Am Sci 54(4):421–431
Machery E (2017) Philosophy within its proper bounds. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Millikan RG (1984). Language, thought, and other biological categories. MIT, Cambridge
Millikan RG (1989) Biosemantics. J Philos 86(6):281–297
Millikan RG (1990) Truth rules, hoverflies, and the Kripke–Wittgenstein paradox. Philos Rev 
99(3):323–353
Millikan RG (2004) Varieties of meaning. MIT, Cambridge
Morowitz H (1986) Entropy and nonsense. Biol Philos 1(4):473–476
Neander K (2017) A mark of the mental: in defense of informational teleosemantics. MIT, Cambridge
Ramstead MJD et al (2021) Neural and phenotypic representation under the free-energy principle. Neuro-
sci Biobehav Rev 120:109–122
Rubin S et al (2020) Future climates: Markov blankets and active inference in the biosphere. J R Soc 
Interface 17(172):20200503
Shea N (2018) Representation in cognitive science. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Sims M, Pezzulo (2021) Modelling ourselves: what the free energy principle reveals about our implicit 
notions of representation. Synthese 199:7801–7833
Skinner BF (1981) Selection by consequences. Science 213(4507):501–504
Sprevak M (2020) Two kinds of information processing in cognition. Rev Philos Psychol 11:591–611
1 3
Teleosemantics and the free energy principle  Page 25 of 25 34
Veissière SPL et al (2020) Thinking through other minds: a variational approach to cognition and culture. 
Behav Brain Sci 43:e90
Watson RA, Szathmáry E (2016) How can evolution learn? Trends Ecol Evol 31(2):147–157
Weisberg M (2006) Forty years of ‘the strategy’: Levins on model building and idealization. Biol Philos 
21(5):623–645
Williams D (2021) Is the brain an organ for free energy minimisation? Philos Stud. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ s11098- 021- 01722-0
Woodward J (2021) Causation with a human face: normative theory and descriptive psychology. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.