Time Warps
H´ ector M. Manrique1∗, Shanna Dobson2, and Michael J. Walker 3
1Departamento de Psicolog´ ıa y Sociolog´ ıa
Universidad de Zaragoza
Ciudad Escolar, s/n, Teruel 44003, Spain
ORCID: 0000-0002-1943-340X
2Department of Mathematics
University of California, Riverside
Riverside, CA 92521 USA
ORCID: 0000-0001-8818-4841
2Departamento de Zoolog´ ıa y Antropolog´ ıa F´ ısica
Facultad de Biolog´ ıa
Universidad de Murcia
Murcia 30100, Spain
ORCID: 0000-0003-4359-7436
∗Corresponding author: manrique@unizar.es
1
Abstract
Time and space are conflated in time-warps when asleep we dream. Our wakeful cogni-
tive ability to keep them separate indicates different ways of envisaging self-hood. Aware-
ness that dream-time and life-time are separate is itself a propensity of human minds that
has evolved by natural selection with adaptive developments in cerebral neuronal circuitry
that underpin human behavioural complexity. The contrast is highlighted between how
memory of our spatio-temporal experiences appears to be treated by our brain one way
when we are wide-awake and thus well aware of our unfolding personal life-history, and
in a different way when, fast asleep, our dreaming dissolves any such awareness and our
oneiric self-hood seems different from our real-life self-hood. The difference is considered
from two angles. Regarding simultaneous memory-storage for an experience recalled from
alternative perspectives, a theoretical possibility is proposed of a pro-system comparable
to Cantor Ternary Set topology. Regarding the brain, the difference is considered in rela-
tion to the temporo-spatial theory of consciousness and the compatible concept of active
inference forestalling surprisal by minimising variational free energy according to the free
energy principle.
Keywords: consciousness, memory, self-hood, dreaming, profinite sets, pro-system,
pro-objects, surprisal.
1 Introduction
The familiar stages of my everyday 120-minute walk are recoverable from my episodic
memory in orderly sequence that I can imagine easily during my waking hours. Yet when
I awoke from sleep, I recalled having dreamt of experiencing not the sequential stages of
the 120-minute walk, but of having been stuck within the stage that customarily I walk
between minutes 75 and 80, as if in my vivid dream I was stranded in a “time-warp”
walking tirelessly but never advancing. (I think it unlikely, but cannot know, if also I
had been dreaming about the other 115 minutes of my daily walk which on waking up
were not recalled.) It as if space and time were transformed reversibly into one another in
disconcertingly surprising ways.
Psychiatry, psychophysics, and neuroscience are increasing our knowledge rapidly about
how the brain constructs dreams, though some fundamental matters remain unclear, in-
cluding the neuronal basis of “time-warp” and bizarre dreaming about ourself (“oneiric
consciousness”), or the evolution of some aspects of dreaming that are peculiar to humans
(e.g., “lucid dreaming” and “sleep-talking”) and plausibly associated with our awareness
of “self-hood” and ability to talk about it.
Evidently, although it is unclear just how it does so, our brain keeps separate, thank-
fully, its episodic memory of the (often bizarre) experiences of our oneiric unreal self from
2
its episodic memory about our real-life personal narrative that is known to our awake-
self. Daily life would be mayhem if we fought with someone because our awake-self felt
aggrieved by something inflicted on our oneiric self! Natural selection must be thanked
for our avoidance of such disasters, but it is unclear at what level it has acted, because,
if, as is likely, other mammals dream when asleep, dreaming ought to be an archetypical,
genetically-determined, ingrained aspect of mammalian cerebral networks and circadian
biorhythms characterised by regular coupling and uncoupling between awake and oneiric
consciousness.
2 Dreaming and consciousness in our brain
Compatible, coherent, neuroscientific explanations of the cerebral neuronal underpinning of
dreaming are those of psychiatrists Karl Friston and Georg Northoff (e.g., Hobson and Fris-
ton, 2012; Northoff et al., 2023). Neurobiologist Joseph LeDoux has published an eloquent,
authoritative background to the modern neuroscientific study of consciousness (LeDoux,
2020; LeDoux et al., 2022), and the burgeoning scientific literature about dreaming during
normal sleep and induced and pathological states has been reviewed by Scarpelli et al.
(2022). The divisibility of an awake person’s consciousness was shown fifty years ago in
“split-brain” patients whose cerebral hemispheres had been separated surgically (LeDoux
et al., 1977). Therefore, the concept of a particular oneiric consciousness is not unreason-
able, and it is reinforced by psychophysical investigation of “lucid dreaming” (Konkoly et
al., 2021).
It has been proposed
that sleep is a natural optimization process that is disclosed by the nightly re-
moval of precise sensory information; in other words, the brain can take itself
off-line with impunity, so that synaptic plasticity and homoeostasis. . . can re-
duce the complexity it has accrued during wakefulness” (Hobson and Friston,
2012).
Dreaming while asleep shows us that cerebral consciousness is not abolished despite
our greatly diminished awareness of external impingements and ability to respond to them,
hence “unawareness” is a more accurate word to describe the state of the sleeping brain than
is “unconsciousness”. Dreaming is reported to happen more often during lighter, “rapid
eye movement” (REM) sleep than during deeper, non-REM sleep about which nonetheless
there exist reports of dreaming. If dreaming when asleep is characteristic of Mammalia,
whose primordial fossils are over two-hundred million years old, circadian rhythms that
included sleeping likely had characterized their ancestral Vertebrata for at least twice as
long ago. Presumably natural selection was involved in the evolution of both sleep and
dreaming while asleep.
3
Plausibly, physiological homeostatic thermodynamic considerations supported circa-
dian biorhythms that ensured reproductive success (“adaptive”, “Darwinian” fitness). Hob-
son and Friston (2012) considered
sleep in terms of model optimization, under the free energy principle. The basic
idea here is that the brain uses sleep to optimize its generative model of the
world during wakefulness. This is akin to post hoc model selection, in which
redundant parameters are removed to minimize model complexity and provide
a more parsimonious internal model. Whether model optimization of this sort
is sufficient to explain why sleep is subject to evolutionary pressure is not an
easy question to answer; however, this perspective provides a principled expla-
nation for the utility of sleep that underwrites the homoeostatic and autopoietic
imperatives for biological organisms.
They address the matter of,
What is the basic explanation of sleep on offer here? As put nicely by one of our
reviewers: “On the one hand, there is a requirement that the senses are shut
down so complexity can be minimized. On the other hand, there is the idea that
the senses are shut down because there is a learnt regularity about precision –
namely that it drops at night – and that the brain simply continues free energy
minimization under these conditions. Perhaps these ideas can be combined
but, at least initially, they are different: the former says there is evolutionary
pressure to sleep, the latter that sleep is a contingent upshot of the fact our free
energy minimization happens on a planet that spins.” The reviewer favored
the latter explanation and we tend to agree: free energy minimization is all
about making the brain a good model of its environment. This means that the
brain – and indeed the phenotype – cannot be divorced from its environment. In
this setting, natural selection can be regarded as selecting phenotypes (models)
with the lowest free energy—or maximizing free fitness in evolutionary theory. . .
This means that there is no necessary requirement to suppress sensory input to
minimize free energy (or complexity); however, certain species have found a
local optimum in a free fitness landscape. . . that exploits night-time to focus
on minimizing complexity. In this view, sleep is an opportunistic – and highly
effective – process that allows the brain to concentrate on statistical housekeeping
and can be regarded as an example of meta-selection — the selection of selective
processes. In short, evolution has selected brains that sleep and sleep selects
the synaptic connections that constitute brains, where both evolution and sleep
minimize free energy or maximize free fitness (Hobson and Friston, 2012).
Their explanation does not account fully for the part played by dreaming when we sleep.
For instance, how (and why) can dreaming while asleep involve an unnerving, vivid expe-
rience of being stranded in bizarre “time-warps”, sometimes dreamt in colour, sometimes
4
in black-and-white, that are only in part referable to a real-life spatio-temporal narrative
that we can recall from episodic memory when wide awake? Moreover, because our dream
can include music or conversation (even bilingual conversation), oneiric consciousness may
permit cross-modal cerebral processing or recognition of sequences of symbolic referents
independent of ostensive spatial reference that are drawn from long-term memory.
Consideration must be given also to the part played by the frontal pole that is far
bigger in our prefrontal cerebral cortex than in any great ape and unrecognisable in other
Anthropoid Primates (Semendeferi et al., 2011). It is active particularly in controlling
our decisions and plans regarding their alternative advantages or disadvantages, possible
rewards vis-` a-vislikely unwelcome outcomes. LeDoux (2020) proposes that
non-conscious prefrontal representations that fuse sensation and schema-based
memory to make visual stimuli meaningful might also constitute penultimate
states that are antecedent to conscious experiences. . . And in some situations,
especially involving top-down mental modeling, sensory states may not be needed
at all. Better understanding of the penultimate non-conscious state (or states)
in various kinds of conscious experiences is crucial, as conscious experience is
always preceded by such non-conscious events. . . . . . the explanatory scope of
consciousness research might be enriched by recognizing the complex nature of
the connectivity between sensory and memory circuits, and between these and
higher cognitive circuits that mostly involve prefrontal cortex. A virtue of the
model is that it is potentially applicable to any and all kinds of experiences,
whether they involve external stimuli, body states, inner thoughts, or emotions.
All are viewed as being rendered conscious through memory-informed conceptu-
alizations that create nonconscious working memory states, which, in turn, are
antecedent to conscious experiences.
Sometimes we wake up feeling comforted by a “rewarding” dream. At other times we
wake up feeling that our peace of mind has been upset by dreamt details that assail it. Here,
the unnerving illusion of a dream is not unlike the vertiginous disconcertment that is evoked
by the dizzyingly dream-like artistic use of technical intricacy by Maurits Cornelis Escher
(Escher, 2016[1989] or Giovanni Battista Piranesi’s intimidating, exquisitely-detailed draw-
ings of lugubrious imaginary prisons (Angelini and Celli, 2007). Spookiness is an unsettling
experience suffused with an eery intuition that time and space seem somewhat to be out
of joint with regard to our usual everyday experiences.
Bizarre dreams could be frequent outcomes of the cerebral default-mode network that
enhances the predominance of slow, low frequency, brain waves, recorded by electroen-
cephalography (EEG) during REM sleep. These could foster the fusion of various temporal
lobe elements that, plausibly, during wakefulness are held separately when EEG records
indicate higher-frequency, faster waves (Northoff et al., 2023). From the standpoint of the
TTC or “temporo-spatial theory of consciousness” (Northoff and Huang, 2017), Northoff
5
and Zilio (2022) regard the wakeful brain’s register of time and space as involving the
transformation of scale-free ”temporal duration” by an ”intrinsic” autocorrelation mecha-
nism and associating it with ”spatial extension” of ”intrinsically” scale-free space, so as to
attain temporo-spatial ”alignment” of stochastically-grounded sequences of stimuli which
may result in long-term spatio-temporal alignment. Attainment of alignment could be
disrupted by the default-mode network that fosters increasingly slow, low frequency, brain
waves during increasingly deeper sleep, leading to a consequent outcome of dreaming with
bizarre scale-free temporo-spatial experiences.
The reasoning is compatible with empirical data, though the authors accept that their
sufficient explanation does not imply a necessary one (let alone a unique one). It is also
compatible (Northoff et al., 2023, Box 1) with the proposal (Hobson and Friston, 2012)
that REM sleep is a plausible way of optimising the brain’s generative model of the world
by means of neuronal predictive processing, involving a Bayesian model-evidence approach
to error prediction, “active inference” (AI) and minimisation of free energy under the FEP
or “free energy principle” (for AI-FEP, see Parr et al., 2022 and references therein). Fur-
thermore, a fundamental part played by the environment characterises both the TTC and
AI-FEP approaches to understanding the interaction between brain, mind, and behaviour.
An intriguing matter concerns the relation between space and time which seem to be
treated by our brain as aspects of our entanglement with the environment. They are far
from always being treated by the brain as if they are confined exclusively within separate
“silos” bereft of intercommunication. Not only are closed-off “silos” regarded by neurosci-
entists as unlikely entities in the human brain, but also, moreover, our memories of space
and time are interwoven and transposed in the performing and visual arts, dance, song, mu-
sic, poetry, religion, writing, language and everyday speech. From AI-FEP considerations,
and using the information theoretic “surprisal” as coterminous with “surprise” (cf., Parr
et al., 2022), it is a plausible proposal (Manrique and Walker, 2023a,b) that in the genus
Homo there has evolved a broader and more permeable “zone of bounded surprisal” (ZBS)
than those “zones” (ZBS) that are the phylogenetical baggage of other Primates (and all
other Vertebrata). If that be so, then our human ZBS enables many complex behavioural
abilities - including several that involve interpersonal activities unique to our species -
by virtue of the cerebral evolution in Hominoid Primates of the underlying Mammalian
“hierarchically mechanistic mind” (HMM) (Badcock, 2012; cf., Badcock et al., 2019a,b).
Working memory in humans outstrips that of great apes (Read et al., 2022) and undergoes
development during a relatively longer proportion of an individual’s life-span (Manrique et
al., 2024a).
3 Life-time, linearity, self-hood
A significantly differential aspect is human communicative fluency that likely enhanced
technological abilities after perhaps one million years ago or less (Manrique et al., 2024b).
6
The spread of spoken language may have enabled our ancestors’ HMM to interweave space
and time in ways that are unavailable to great apes and which allow us to envisage our life-
time narrative sequentially, as if in a virtual world, rather than disjointedly as disconnected
happenings in disparate spatial contexts. Our spoken utterances have evolved to form
sequences of phonemes and symbolic morphemes that enhance mutual comprehension of
reciprocal interpersonal discourse. We can arrange and re-arrange real-life experiences in
alternative ways that rarely may be envisaged by great apes. Hobson and Friston (2012)
mused that
finding order in the real world may not be the same as finding order in the virtual
world ... This suggests an optimal balance between rehearsing what has already
been learned about the world and exploring new hypotheses and possibilities that
could be experienced. This may, in part, explain the curious nature of dream
content and be related to the creative and synthetic capacity of the brain that
can be harnessed in wakefulness.
Interestingly, speech often occurs when we are dreaming, not only dreamt speech but
also speaking aloud while we dream asleep according to bystanders who hear our words.
Undoubtedly, this must be a uniquely human aspect of dreaming during sleep.
A remarkable aspect of dreams, nevertheless, is that while dreaming our sense of self-
hood is preserved. Even when we lose the ability to recognise that what we are experiencing
is indeed happening, we nonetheless perceive this “unreality” as happening to us. In short,
we are aware of ourself being the subject of experience. More remarkable yet is that so
often we recall what we had dreamt. Why do we store information of things that never
happened?
We experience dreams as episodes that involve us personally. That we recall them
later shows that we had formed episodic memories of them. We regard it appropriate to
refer to consciousness during dreams as oneiric consciousness, to differentiate it from our
consciousness when awake. It is no less appropriate to talk of oneiric episodic memories
about the personal events experienced and recorded while dreaming. Yet the puzzle still
remains: Why does our brain store false episodic events? More to the point: How is the
brain able to keep separate the threads of what our awake-self experiences and stores, from
what our oneiric-self experiences and stores?
This ability to not conflate actual and oneiric personal stored events is extraordinary.
The likely explanation is that the human self is a construction that is linked directly to
episodic recollection. Thus, we accumulate personal experiences that give us a narrative
of who we are. We place things that happened to us personally in an imaginary time-line
in which events are arranged in succession and in a unique, irreversible direction where
things that happened before are placed first in the line. As long as this temporal line is
uninterrupted, our sense of selfhood or of existence across time will remain whole. The
temporal narrative corresponds to the ability of our brain to keep separate the different
7
threads of what the awake-self and the oneiric one experience, whilst at the same time
keeping actual episodic memories separate from – and impervious to the effect of – fictitious
oneiric episodic events. The awake-self stores information in a time-line that is continuous
and flowing in a “forward” direction, whereas the oneiric-self’s recollections are not stored
in relation to any time-frame.
Therefore, no life-history of our oneiric-self ever develops or evolves in parallel to that
of our awake-self. We have actual memories of our infancy and all the different stages
of our lives, and we mark special events to create a narrative of our awake-self’s life. In
contrast, we fail to produce a narrative for our oneiric-self. Things that happen to the
oneiric-self are disconnected to each other, no doubt because they fail to be registered in
a narrative time-line that flows in one direction - they happen off-line, as it were. For
instance, I am unable to recall what my oneiric-self did, felt, or experienced when it was
eighteen-years-old, or how it felt when he reached thirty. Did my oneiric-self experience
a mid-life crisis in his forties? These are meaningless questions because we have failed
to create a narrative for our oneiric-self which is disconnected from the time-line of our
life. Figuratively speaking, the awake-self is recording events in a tape which is running
continuously forward, whereas the tape is stopped when the episodic memories are created
and stored for the oneiric-self.
We change as we mature and grow old whilst retaining the sense of our continuity,
that is to say, the awareness of being ourselves at different ages. This could be on account
of the temporal storage of episodic events in our memory. In other words, we create a
first-person narrative of our lives by storing events that happened to us in a unidirectional
time line, from the earliest event to the latest. The mental ability to re-visit those past
events is what gives us a sense of continuity and integral selfhood as opposed to one of
multiple discontinuous “selfs” that emerged independently at different times. Our self-
aware consciousness reflects a narrative account of our life.
In contrast, there is no sense of ageing connected to our oneiric-self. There is no life-
history for our oneiric-self. We cannot create a time-line to recount the life of our oneiric-self
because it is not autobiographical. That is so, because the things that happened to our
oneiric-self are not stored relative to time. Our oneiric-self shows no awareness of our
unfolding life-history’s time-line. While our awake-self has a history, there is no equivalent
history for our oneiric-self. Plausibly, it is the subjective perception of time by our awake-
self that enables the separation between threads of stored episodic memories about what in
fact happened, and those created by our oneiric-self. In our awake-self, episodic memories
are stored and recalled relative to a particular time in our past, whereas the oneiric episodes
are time-less. This perception of time could also help to explain that in our dreams while
asleep we often experience temporal loops where we feel unable to complete an action, or
are condemned to repeat the same behaviour as though we are trapped in a time-warp. In
dreams, the subjective perception of time is distorted or inexistent. This is because the
cerebral default mode during sleep blocks even that persistent part of the consciousness of
the drowsy awake-self that is not wholly blocked when we day-dream or take hallucinogenic
8
substances.
4 The oneiric-self as a pro-system
It is not unreasonable to regard narrative time as constructed from the recall of stored
episodic memories about waking-state events, which are connected in a topological space,
carrying the standard topology and admitting a linear ordering. Thus, the topology of
our awake-self’s episodic memory of waking-state events is interpretable in formal terms of
the topology of storage. In stark contrast, oneiric-state “events” occur disconnected from
one another in a profinite space that is a compact, Hausdorff topological space, namely,
a profinite Stone Space where “events” dreamt by our oneiric-self are not stored relative
to linear time; hence, a plausible model for dream-time is a ring of p-adic integers, Zp,
considered as a topological space.
The p-adic number system is a non-Archimedean system that is the completion of
the rational numbers Q under the p-adic metric | |p where p denotes a prime number.
Interestingly, p-adic numbers are close if their difference is a high power of p. The p-adic
numbers have no notion of linear ordering and their shape resembles a self-similar set
(Koblitz 1984). Informally, the (ring of) p-adic integers, Zp, are written in base p, and
admit infinite expansions to the left of the decimal point. In particular, p-adic integers
take the form:
P
n≥0 anpn
for 0 ≤ an < p. Addition and multiplication are performed on the p-adic integers with
the carrying method used to add and multiply ordinary integers.
The set of “events” experienced by our oneiric-self can be modelled as a profinite set,
where an “event” is a “complete, instantaneous, experienced event” (Dobson and Fields,
2023). From a formal standpoint, a profinite set (Stone pace) is a compact, Hausdorff,
totally disconnected, topological space. The Hausdorff criterion ensures there is no si-
multaneous experience occurring in the oneiric dream state. That is, every point in the
profinite space uniquely represents an “event” that has occurred oneirically 1.
In order to understand the criterion of total disconnectedness, account must be taken
of another difference between awake-time and dream-time.
A key aspect of the construction of [waking]-time, however, is the assumption
that between any two distinct events experienced by some agent A, other things
happened (i.e. non-agent-specific “events” occurred) that A did not experience,
but some other agent B may have experienced” (Dobson and Fields, 2023).
1A set of events can be rendered countable by using light profinite sets (Clausen and Scholze 2024). It
is possible also to extend the representation to an extremely disconnected profinite set, where the closure
of disjoint open subsets is disjoint.
9
This is not the case for any “event” that is experienced in an oneiric state, because
its “events” are totally disconnected. To understand this, consider the canonical example
of a Stone Space, which is the Cantor Ternary Set that is nowhere dense, has no interior
points, is negligible, and has measure zero (Lapidus and van Frankenhuijsen, 2013). Thus,
if the oneiric-self is composed of “events” that occur in a Stone Space such as the Cantor
Ternary Set, then that oneiric-self would be like Cantor dust and hence negligible. The
self-similarity of the Cantor Ternary Set, i.e. it’s fractal-like behavior (Lapidus and van
Frankenhuijsen, 2013), could represent the “time-loops” experienced by our oneiric-self.
(Figure 1, Figure 2).
Figure 1: Cantor Ternary Set . The Cantor Ternary set is constructed iteratively from
an infinite process as follows: beginning with the closed interval [0,1], remove the open
middle third ( 1
3 , 2
3 ) from it; now remove the open middle third from each of the remaining
line segments [0 , 1
3 ] S[2
3 , 1]. This process is continued infinitely. The Cantor Ternary Set
consists of all points that remain, that are never deleted from the original interval [0,1].
The Cantor Ternary Set is uncountably infinite, having the same number of points as the
interval [0,1] (Lapidus and van Frankenhuijsen, 2013). The image depicts the first seven
steps of the infinite construction. [Image@ Shanna Dobson]
For an alternative explanation, it should be remembered that the p-adic metric induces
a non-Archimedean norm on the rational numbers, Q. A non-Archimedean norm on Q has
the curious property that every point in an open ball is a centre of the ball (Koblitz, 1984).
Thus, absence of a familiar everyday experience could lead to an oneiric experience of a
”loop” phenomenon. Plausibly, therefore, the set of all “events” occurring in an oneiric
10
Figure 2: Self-Similarity of the Cantor Ternary Set . The Cantor Ternary Set exhibits
self-similar behavior; i.e. fractal behavior. That is, it is similar to itself upon magnification
and translation of its pieces. In particular, two copies of the Cantor Ternary set, each
diminished by a factor of 1
3 and translated, produces the original Cantor Ternary Set
(Lapidus and van Frankenhuijsen, 2013). The pink region is a visual depiction of one of
these pieces. [Image@ Shanna Dobson]
11
state is a pro-system, i.e., a system of projective limits, which is a particular inverse system.
(Figure 3).
Figure 3: Inverse System. (Rotman, 2000) Given a partially ordered set I and a category
C, an inverse system inC is an ordered pair ((Mi)i∈I, (ψj
i )j≥i) abbreviated {Mi, ψj
i }, where
(Mi)i∈I is an indexed family of objects in C and (ψj
i : Mj → Mi)j≥i) is an indexed family
of morphisms for which ψj
i = 1Mi for all i, and such that the following diagram commutes
whenever k ≥ j ≥ i.
In brief, waking-state events occur in a connected space admitting a linear ordering; i.e.
a well-defined notion of before and after; a notion which is not admitted in the profinite
setting. Thus, events that occur during our waking state could be stored with linear
ordering. The intuition that the waking-state stores episodic memories in linear time can
be understood topologically as “consistency of typing across a collection of memories is
effectively a gluing condition” (Dobson and Fields, 2023). Nevertheless, cerebral neuronal
microcircuitry has yet to be demonstrated which maintains alternative storage systems and
causes switching between them.
5 Dream and surprisal
Several published studies relate dreamt elements of memory to possible future behaviours.
One such study leads Wamsley (2024) to suggest that “prospective dreams may be an
emergent phenomenon occurring when various fragments of future-relevant episodic and
semantic memory are co-activated and combined in novel ways” such that “offline reac-
tivation of future-relevant past memory could potentially function to help prepare us for
the future”. Because many remembered dreams lack clear-cut prospective relevance, an
over-arching explanation could be that dreaming asleep enables elements held in memory
to be juxtaposed by neuronally-mediated, cerebral, combinations and permutations which
would challenge our common sense when wide-awake, but which have evolved so as to adapt
hierarchically mechanistic minds (HMM) by honing active inference, and the underlying
predictive processing, such that there has developed an exceptionally broad band-width of
12
the phylogenetical human Zone of Bounded Surprisal. From the standpoint of adaptive fit-
ness, it could be advantageous to have access to and awareness of two simultaneous storage
systems of memory about self-hood: one for memory focused on combinations of succes-
sive events in our life-history and another that envisages permutations of temporo-spatially
likely and unlikely experiences or “events”. Plausibly, experiencing bizarre combinations of
real and surreal experiences helps to reduce surprisal. Thus, dreaming could facilitate the
minimisation of free energy and help to broaden the band-width of our ZBS when wide-
awake. Indeed, when we are wide-awake, our retention and awareness of oneiric episodic
memories may help towards the minimisation of free energy during our wakeful hours.
Whenever we experience something so very outlandish, unexpected, and extraordinarily
surprising that it fails to register in our HMM, - because the surprisal is ignored on ac-
count of differing so greatly from anything that had been predicted by our HMM - , then,
to all intents and purposes, it is as if the “something” had not been sampled by the brain at
all. However, if outlandish things have been experienced in dreams, then they cease to be
surprising, whence it should follow that were something extraordinary to happen during our
wakeful hours, the level of surprise evoked might no longer be beyond our phylogenetical
Zone of Bounded Surprisal. Awareness in lucid dreaming and wide-awake awareness of the
difference between our oneiric self and real-life self implies the presence of a metacognitive
mechanism, plausibly involving the frontal pole of the human prefrontal cortex.
13
References
Angelini, P., Celli, G., 2007, Piranesi. Carceri d’Invenzione. Bergamo, Lubrina Bramani
Editore, “Galleria Ceribelli” ISBN 978887766345
Badcock, P.B., 2012, Evolutionary systems theory: A unifying meta-
theory of psychological science. Review of General Psychology, 16(1): 10-23
hrtps://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0026381
Badcock, P.B., Friston, K.J., Ramstead, M.J.D., 2019a, “The hierarchically mechanistic
mind: A free-energy formulation of the human psyche,” Physics of Life Reviews,
31(10):104-121. https//doi.org/j.plrev.2018.10.002
Badcock, P.B., Friston, K.J., Ramstead, M.J.D., Ploeger, A., Hohwy, J., 2019b,
“The hierarchically mechanistic mind: An evolutionary systems theory of the human
brain, cognition, and behavior,” Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience,
19:1319–1351. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13415-019-00721-3
Clausen, D., Scholze, P., 2024 (2019). Lectures on Condensed Mathematics
https://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/scholze/Condensed.pdf
Dobson, S., Fields, C., 2023, “Constructing condensed memories in functorial time.”
Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence (online 24 June 2023)
https//dx.doi.org/10.1080/0952813X.2023.2222374
Escher, M.C., 2016 (1989), M.C. Escher. 1898-1972.The Graphic Work, Cologne,
Taschen, “Basic Art 2.0” ISBN 9783836529846
Hobson, J.A., Friston, K.J., 2012, “Waking and dreaming consciousness: Neu-
robiological and functional considerations”, Progress in Neurobiology, 98:82-98,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.05.003
Koblitz, N., 1984. ” p-adic Numbers, p-adic Analysis, and Zeta-Functions,” New York,
Springer, Graduate Texts in Mathematics (2nd edition).
Konkoly, K.R., Appel, K., Chabani, E., Mangiaruga, A., Gott, J., Mallett, R., Caughran,
B., Witkowski, S., Whitmore, N.W., Mazurek, C.Y., Berent, J.B., Weber, F.D., T¨ urker,
B., Leu-Semenescu, S., Maranci, J.B., Pipa, G., Arnulf, I., Oudiette, D., Dresler, M.,
Paller, K.A., “Real-time dialoque between experimenters and dreamers during REM
sleep,” Current Biology, 31:1417-1427 https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2021.01.026
Lapidus, M.L., and van Frankenhuijsen, M., ”Fractal Geometry, Complex Dimensions
and Zeta Functions: Geometry and Spectra of Fractal Strings,” New York, Springer,
Springer Monographs in Mathematics (2nd edition).
LeDoux, J., 2020, “How does the non-conscious become conscious?” Current Biology,
30:R191-R214, https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2020.01.033
14
LeDoux, J., Michel, M., Lauh, H., 2022, “A little history goes a long way to-
ward understanding why we study consciousness the way we do today”, Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 117(13):6976-6984
https://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1921623117
LeDoux, J.E., Wilson, D.S., Gazzaniga, M.S., 1977, “A divided mind: Observations on
the conscious properties of the separated hemispheres,” Annals of Neurology, 2:417-421
https://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ana.410020513
Manrique, H.M., Friston, K.J., Walker, M.J., 2024a, ““Snakes and Ladders” in paleoan-
thropology: From cognitive surprise to skilfulness a million years ago,” Physics of Life
Reviews, 49:40-70 https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2024.01.004
Manrique, H.M., Read, D.W., Walker, M.J., 2024b, “On some statistical and
cerebral aspects of the limits of Working Memory capacity in Anthropoid Pri-
mates, with particular reference to Pan and Homo, and their significance
for Human Evolution,” Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 158:105543
https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2024.105543
Manrique, H.M., Walker, M.J., 2023a, “To copy or not to copy? That is the question!
From chimpanzees to ¡the foundation of human technological culture,” Physics of Life
Reviews, 45:6-24 https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2023.02.005
Manrique, H.M., Walker, M.J., 2023b, “Bounding surprisal is only part of the
story. . . Reply to comments on “To copy or not to copy? That is the question! From
chimpanzees to the foundation of human technological culture”” Physics of Life Reviews,
47: 279-283 https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2023.11.003
Northoff, G., Huang, Z., 2017, “How do the brain’s time and space medi-
ate consciousness and its different dimensions? Temporo-spatial theory of
consciousness (TTC)”, Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 80:630–645
https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.07.013
Northoff, G., Scalabrini, A., Fogel, S., 2023. Topographic-dynamic reorganisation model
of dreams (TRoD) – A spatiotemporal approach. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 148:105117 https://dx.doi.org.2023.105117
Northoff, G., Zilio, F., 2022. Temporo-spatial Theory of Consciousness (TTC) –
Bridging the gap of neuronal activity and phenomenal states. Behavioural and Brain
Research, 424:113788 https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2022.113788
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G.,Friston,K.J., 2022. Active Inference. The Free Energy Prin-
ciple in Mind, Brain, and Behavior. Cambridge MA, and London, MIT Press
ISBN:9780262045353
Read,D.W., Manrique, H.M., Walker,M.J., 2022. “On the working memory of humans
15
and great apes: strikingly similar or remarkably different?” Neuroscience and Biobe-
havioral Reviews, 134:104496 https://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.12.019
Rotmann, J., 2000. An Introduction to Homological Algebra. Berlin, Springer (Second
edition)
Scarpelli, S., Alfonsi, V., Gorgoni, M, De Gennaro, L., 2022, “What about
dreams? State of the art and open questions”, Journal of Sleep Research, 31:e13609
https://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jsr.13609
Semendeferi, K., Teffer, K., Buxhoeveden, D.P., Parl, M.S., Bludau, S., Amunts,
K., Travis, K., Buckwalter, J., 2011. Spatial organization of neurons in the
frontal pole sets humans apart from great apes. Cerebral Cortex, 21(7):1485-1497
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ceror/bhq191
Wamsley, E.J, 2022. Constructive episodic simulation in dreams. Public Library of
Science One (PLoSONE), 17(3):e0264574 https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0264574
16