“PSITA”: A Protracted Sensory Integration Theory of Autism, based on Primary Intersubjectivity and the Free Energy Principle.  Héctor M. Manrique1* & Michael J. Walker2   1. Department of Psychology and Sociology, University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain  2. Faculty of Biology, University of Murcia, Murcia, Spain                            * Corresponding author:  Héctor M. Manrique Campus Universitario de Teruel Ciudad Escolar, s/n. 44003 Teruel (Spain) E-mail: manrique@unizar.es Tel. +34 – 978 – 645343;  Fax: +34 – 978 – 618103   https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1943-340X   

Abstract  The argument is developed that autism spectrum disorder can be interpreted economically in terms of a deficit in polymodal integration, which limits awareness by babies and infants of the time-contingency for generating their motor responses to information gleaned from witnessing the actions of care-givers. This gives rise to difficulties with imitation and mental attribution. In order to grasp the root of the problem we consider “primary intersubjectivity” from the standpoint of the Free Energy Principle as developed by Karl Friston. In terms of this principle, it can be argued that reduction of predictive errors by both early infants and their care-givers is achievable normally by their reciprocal behavioural exchanges. The ensuing ‘dyadic alignment’ is impeded when a deficit in a baby’s polymodal integration leads to a delayed time-contingent response. This protracted sensory integration theory of autism can be subsumed under the acronym PSITA.     Keywords: Autism, Free Energy Principle, Imitation, Primary Intersubjectivity, Sensory Integration, Theory of Mind.                
1. Introduction  Autism has long been regarded as evincing differences in the integration of, and/or response to sensory information (for a historical review, see Verhoeff, 2013). These differences are now included in the American Psychiatric Association’s classification of Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-5-TRTM (5th ed., text revision, 2013/2022) under “restricted, repetitive patterns of behaviour, interests, and activities”; and described as “Hyper-or-hypo-reactivity to sensory input or unusual interest in sensory aspects of environment (such as apparent indifference to pain/heat/cold, adverse response to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touching of objects, fascination with lights)”. Often these problems seem to stem from sensorimotor integrative failures that can be characterised by poor integration of inputs from distinct modalities (i.e., visual and acoustic), with information from sensory sources, notably visual ones, failing to support apt and prompt motor coordination. These sensory-related features have been regarded usually as separate from — and largely independent of — those deficits in social and mental-state attribution that lie at the core of autism. This is indicated by the fact that abnormal sensory responses were included as a diagnostic criterion only in 2013. Up to this date the classical triad of symptoms (e.g., social cognition, communication, and restricted interests/repetitive behaviours) had taken precedence over other manifestations in the diagnosis of an Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). It will be argued here that this category of sensory-deficit anomalies (i.e., sensorimotor integrative failures) are linked closely to mental-state attribution and may underlie the absence of a full-blown “theory of mind” (ToM), as well as the imitation deficits reported in people on the autistic spectrum.  1.1. Mental-state attribution (MSA) in autistic spectrum disorder (ASD): The “third person” perspective.  The concept of “theory of mind” owes to David Premack and Guy Woodruff (1978), who studied chimpanzees and defined it as the ability to understand one's own and others' mental states. Since then, various definitions have been proposed. In the field of autism, an influential one is that of Baron-Cohen (2001a) who began his article "Theory of mind in normal development and autism" (Prisme 34: 174-183, 2001), as follows: “By theory of mind we mean being able to infer the full range of mental states (beliefs, desires, intentions, imagination, emotions, etc.) that cause action. In brief, having a theory of mind is to be able to reflect on the contents of one’s own and other’s minds. Difficulty in understanding other minds is a core cognitive feature of autism spectrum conditions” (Baron-Cohen, 2001a; cf., Baron-Cohen, 1998, 2001b). Baron-Cohen’s definition dominates research on mental attribution in autism. By their inclusion the words “infer” and “reflect” are close to the tenets of “belief-desire” psychology.   This brings to mind the “third-person” perspective on mental-state attribution (MSA) (Carruthers, 2011; Gopnik, 1993; Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997). The “third-person” perspective on mentalising makes recourse to a variety of theories, each with its own specific principles (e.g., “theory-theory”, ”modularity theory”, etc.), though they share the central notion that possession of a theory about minds, enables us to understand others as intentional agents and to explain and predict our actions and those of others (Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997; Gopnik & Wellman, 1992; Pérez, 2013). This central notion presumes that there are hidden mental phenomena that we cannot access directly but which allow us to infer our actions and those of others. Therefore, a “theory of mind” is considered essential in order for us to understand mental life; without it we would be trapped in a realm of only what we observe about our own and other people's behaviour (e.g., movements and displacements). In other words, we would predict the behaviour of others through what Povinelli and Vonk (2003) call “behavior reading”, which boils down to detecting regularities between stimuli and responses and establishing the corresponding connections – in the manner of a Skinnerian theorist – albeit unable to speak of motivations, intentions, desires, etc. as being causative elements of behaviour. This mode of prediction is reminiscent of Newtonian physics wherein objects, be they inert or alive, are governed by causes and regular physical laws that can be systematised.   
Although the “third-person” perspective of mental attribution is the most widely-recruited conjecture that is held to underlie MSA deficits in autism, a “second-person” perspective nevertheless offers an alternative theoretical approach (Pérez & Gomila, 2021; Reddy, 2008) which points towards unexplored ways to understand MSA and develop new and perhaps more effective therapeutic tools. Moreover, it allows the ascription to a shared common origin of the motor, perceptual and mentalistic disturbances that are observed in autism.  1.2. A “second-person” perspective on mental-state attribution (MSA).  We offer the following parable. In a lost corner of Hokkaido, Japan, master and apprentice are crafting a samurai sword. The forge is a noisy place, so the master does not use verbal instructions to guide the apprentice while the latter is hitting the hot iron (e.g., the sword-to-be). Instead, he uses a hammer to hit the anvil where the hot iron rests and by hitting it with differing force and frequency, communicates to the apprentice how he should hit the blade himself. In essence, what the apprentice does is to imitate the way the master is hitting the anvil. This imitation entails not only matching the form of the master’s behaviour, but also its rhythm.1  The example of the crafting of swords is one of many instances in which human exchanges adopt a kind of “interactive symmetry”. In this example, as in many human exchanges, we see motivation in order to match one’s actions to another’s. A sort of “action dialogue” is established, whereby each participant is sensitive to the other’s actions and tries to match them as accurately as possible. Behavioural matching of form and rhythm is an essential part of many human exchanges, and so also is the taking of turns, which is made possible by being finely-attuned and responsive to the other’s actions. The attuning of behaviour and rhythm, in particular by reciprocity in face-to-face exchanges, is what Trevarthen has called “primary intersubjectivity” (Trevarthen, 1979): it may well open the door to envisaging how minds connect.      A “second-person” perspective ("engagement theory”) holds that MSA can be a process lacking reflective understanding of mental concepts. In other words, sentient agents need not be fully-aware that they are performing a MSA act in order to perform it. “Face-to-face” exchanges, such as interlocking gazes, are interactions between sentient minds that enable three-month-old infants to attune their emotions to those of their care-givers, thereby representing “primary intersubjectivity” (Trevarthen, 1979). This “second-person” perspective indicates that "engagement" is how we apprehend other minds in a basic direct way, without theoretical intermediaries or the need to generate working hypotheses (for comprehensive reviews, see Pérez & Gomila, 2021, and Reddy, 2008). The key to this understanding should be sought in “face-to-face” exchanges where expression is perceived as being directly significant (Gomila, 2002). This form of knowledge of other minds would be prior to “theory of mind”, that is to say, “pre-theoretical”. Such understanding provided by engagement derives from spontaneous interactive responsiveness that is an inevitable consequence of being an integral part of the social situation itself (Reddy, 2008). Hence, such engagement becomes a dialectical process, whereby each participant in the interaction influences the other, and is in turn influenced by the other. In Gomila's words: “The basic idea of the second-person perspective is that in certain situations of personal interaction mental attribution not only is reciprocal, that is to say, that both participants in the interaction interpret the other and are interpreted by the other, but also are aware of that mutual attribution, which conditions, and often determines, the content of the attribution. That is to say, my attribution to another with whom I am in relationship depends on me being aware that he too is attributing mental states to me, insofar as those attributions mediate our interaction. Paradoxically, although putting it in that way seems more complex than first or third person perspectives, in fact it is the perspective that appears first in ontogenetic development” (Gomila, 2002, p. 125, translated by the present authors; cf., Pérez & Gomila, 2021).                                                  1 We are aware that this example would qualify as secondary intersubjectivity (triadic interaction) if we consider that both master and apprentice are sharing attention toward a third external object (the sword-to-be), yet we use it to draw readers’ attention to the symmetry and dialectical nature of the exchange. 
 2. Reciprocity and complementarity in parent-infant behaviour.  Neonates have been reported to imitate basic facial actions of others, such as tongue-protrusion, mouth-opening, and eye-movement (Heimann et al., 1989; Meltzoff & Moore, 1977). How exactly they manage to do this is puzzling, because these acts are opaque in so far as the baby lacks simultaneous visual access to its own face and that of the imitated model. Moreover, there is a lack of experience with mirrors or other artificial devices that otherwise might help a baby to associate what is felt internally with what is seen externally, in relation to its own bodily actions. How far this qualifies as true imitation is debatable because tongue protrusion, the most “imitated” action, is already present in the neonatal behavioural repertoire and occurs with high frequency, which has led to some authors considering that this might at best be a type of primed reflexive response (e.g., contagion) rather than actual imitation (Anisfeld, 1996; Byrne & Russon, 1998). Gradually, infants progress from mirroring basic facial expressions and simple manual acts to imitating a wide array of gestures (including intonation and speech rhythm: Weaver & Fry, 1974). By three months of age, they show signs of reciprocating intentionally (no longer as mere reflexes) actions performed by adults (Stern, 1985/2000; Toda & Fogel, 1993; Trevarthen, 1979). These young Infants begin to discriminate perfect and imperfect contingencies, the latter exemplified by their mothers’ responses to their babies’ own actions (Stern, 1985/2000; Gergely & Watson, 1996;1999). Thus, three-month-old infants manifest no clear preference when shown information regarding their own movements in perfect synchrony (by live-video feedback) versus information of their own movements presented with a slight delay (by delayed-video feedback). However, when they are older than three months a shift is observed towards preferring the delayed-video feedback of their own actions.  In social exchanges where both infant and care-giver reciprocate actions, there is never a perfect contingency between actions initiated by the infant and those mirrored by the adult; therefore, this shift of preferences towards delayed contingent action (Bahrick & Watson, 1985) could reflect a general shift from individualistic to socially-orientated behaviour. In short, this shift of preferences might prepare infants to learn about other intentional agents. That three-month-old Infants detect when adults’ behaviour is contingent on theirs is shown by experiments, respectively, in which mothers were instructed to keep a neutral, unresponsive poker-face while interacting with their infants, and in which recordings of the mothers’ responsive faces made during the face-to-face live exchanges with their infants were played (off-line) to the infants. The effects observed in the aforementioned experiments include an increase in the gestures displayed by infants while trying to re-engage with their apparently “unresponsive” mothers, followed by expressions of disgust, unease or fear, after failing to obtain the expected “contingent” response (Murray & Trevarthen, 1985, 1986; Trevarthen, 1993a,b, 2011; Trevarthen et al., 1981; Tronick, 1989; Tronick et al., 1978,1979). Thus, infants show themselves to be proficient at detecting when the actions of their care-givers are contingent (e.g., in time and/or form) to their own actions; they seem to have acquired basic expectations about how human beings (intentional agents) should behave vis-à-vis other phenomena in their environment (including artificially self-propelled objects and robots).   3. Disturbances of sensorimotor integration in autism: Are they secondary, or primary effects?   The “third-person” perspective has had considerable influence over research into mental-state attribution (MSA) in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). This has been helpful by stimulating debate about “theory of mind” and autism. However, it has also "skewed" the gaze of scientists and clinicians towards a theoretical and epistemological conception of the attribution of meaning framed in terms of “belief-desire” psychology. Thus, in trying to help people to understand mental states, clinicians present them with innumerable vignettes where a character, A, has a certain desire, X, and another character, Y, satisfies that desire, or not, through a gift, Z, that A may expect/want, or not; participants then are asked how A feels. This perspective dismisses the role of motor resonance in the attribution of mental states. Furthermore, this “third-person” perspective is unable to account for the motor difficulties often reported in people with ASD (Bhat et al. 2011; Fournier et al., 2010; Ghaziuddin & Butler, 1998; Green et al., 2009; Pan et al., 2009). For instance, children with ASD 
experience greater postural swaying than do typically developing (TD) children when standing on an unstable surface (e.g., foam), with or without the availability of visual information that might help them to correct their posture. This greater swaying seems to reveal a deficient integration of information from the visual, somatosensory and vestibular systems (Molloy et al., 2003).  In order to investigate this further, a postural illusion of leaning backwards was induced using a vibrator that stimulated bilaterally the dorsal neck muscles at C7 (Morris et al., 2015). When vision was occluded, both ASD and TD adults leaned forwards in response to this illusion of imbalance, yet only TD adults refrained from arching forward when visual access undercut the illusion. In like vein, Lim et al. (2019) reported that autistic adults showed larger postural sway than TD adults along the mediolateral plane in their experimental eyes-open condition, while no differences were reported when both groups kept their eyes shut. Interestingly, Lim and colleagues also found that ASD-participants required more attentional control to keep balance in the eyes-open condition as compared to the TD-group, while again no differences were reported in the eyes-closed condition. These findings in autistic participants imply that, in order to represent body coordinates in relation to the surrounding space, proprioceptive information takes precedence over visual information.  In order to investigate the representation of internal models of action in ASD, Haswell et al. (2009) created a game in which children were to hold out a robotic arm towards a specific target in order to “capture animals that had escaped from a zoo”. The robot produced a force-field that perturbed the children’s arm-reaching action, such that they then needed to learn to correct the movement trajectory in order to capture the animals. In this task, TD children relied on both extrinsic (e.g., visible) and intrinsic (e.g., proprioceptive) information in order to resist force-field disturbances. By contrast, ASD children benefitted from intrinsic information only. Using this approach, or slightly modified versions of it, several researchers have reached a similar conclusion: namely, that the internal models of action of ASD children form a stronger-than-normal association between proprioception and self-generated motor responses, whereas they fail to represent movements accurately in extrinsic coordinates (Haswell. 2009; Izawa et al., 2012; Marko et al., 2015). In the light of those considerations, it is only to be expected that people with ASD will have difficulties in imitating, because imitation requires accurately matching self-generated responses to those perceived “visually” in third parties. Nevertheless, an ability to emulate (i.e., reproduce the result produced by the model observed, but not the exact means to achieve it) should be preserved somewhat, because it does not require an exact match of what is seen in the other’s body to what is felt internally in one´s own: indeed, this is just what empirical studies seem to indicate (Hamilton et al., 2007; Hamilton & Marsh, 2013; Ingersoll, 2008).  It is plausible that in ASD there is dysfunction of cerebral mirror-neuron circuits (Dapretto et al. 2006; Oberman & Ramachandran, 2007; Oberman et al., 2005; Williams et al., 2001). Neuroimaging studies on monkeys show their cerebral mirror-neuron circuits to be responsive to observed goal-directed transitive behaviour (e.g., raising a hand grasping a cup to the mouth), albeit, in marked contrast to humans, unresponsive to observed mimicry of the actions involved in the aforementioned behaviour in the absence of an observable concrete goal (e.g., raising an empty grasped hand to the mouth). Oberman and Ramachandran (2007) suggest that among neurobiological outcomes of human evolution has been an intuitive capacity to infer the underlying intention that is implied by the actions of an actor’s intransitive, self-generated, apparently goal-less mime. What is counter-intuitive to the monkey becomes increasingly less so to typically developing infants. An elegant neurobiological interpretation (Kilner et al., 2007), logically explicable in terms of standard Bayesian analysis, involves cerebral mirror-neuron circuits in predictive coding by which the causes of observed actions may be inferred by minimising prediction errors, and which enables generative models that are inverted during perceptual inference to engage with forward models that facilitate fine-tuned appropriate motor responses in TD infants. Indeed, using the principles of prediction error or variational free energy minimisation, it is possible not only to replicate mirror neuron responses during action and action observation but also to simulate failures of coordination and synchronisation by changing the precision (i.e., influence of) prediction errors during hierarchical (i.e., polymodal), predictive processing (Friston et al., 2011). See also (Bruineberg & Rietveld, 2014).   
 Information about canonical external space can interfere with the accuracy of judgements guided by proprioceptive information. Thus, if someone’s crossed hands are touched in sequence, more mistakes than otherwise are evinced when he asserts which hand was touched first, because of the mismatch between the canonical space perceived visually and that felt internally by touch. This touch-order effect is less pronounced in TD-children under five years old, implying protracted maturation of polymodal integration of information (Pagel et al., 2009; Röder et al., 2013). Whereas contradictory information from external canonical space and the space felt internally (e.g., by touch) seems not to affect younger ASD-participants, it does interfere with the performance of ASD adults (Hense et al., 2015): thus, although polymodal integration occurs very late in ASD, it occurs, nonetheless. In like vein, it is reported that, when compared with TD children, children with ASD sustain their attention longer towards interoceptive information (e.g., heartbeat), and also that they are less prompted to experience the rubber-hand illusion that is produced by synchronous stroking of both a visible rubber hand and the participant’s visually-occluded hand next to it (Botvinick & Cohen, 1998). Such findings indicate that ASD children’s attention is directed mostly inwards whilst visually-gathered external information is subdued (Schauder et al., 2015). Interestingly, most computational accounts of ASD (Peliicano & Burr, 2012; Lawson et al., 2014; Quattroki & Friston, 2014; Van de Cruys et al., 2014; Evers et al., 2014; Gu et al., 2015, Lawson et al., 2017 can be reduced to aberrant precision control that, in psychological terms, can be read as a failure of attentional selection or attenuation (Feldman & Friston, 2010; Brown et al., 2014; Parees et al., 2014).   Taken together, these findings imply that children on the autism spectrum fail to integrate information received through different modalities (e.g., visual versus haptic and/or proprioceptive). Both the protracted susceptibility to error judgements in touch-order tasks, where external and internal coordinates offer conflicting information, and also the relative imperviousness of ASD children to the rubber-hand illusion, indicate that people on the autistic spectrum pay less attention to the external space, in order to make judgements about the movement and position of their own body parts, than to interoceptive information about these. Moreover, compared with their TD counterparts, ASD children seem to need longer time delays in order to connect cross-modal information, especially when referring to audio-visual integration (see Stevenson et al., 2016, for a comprehensive review). Regarding this specific type of multisensory integration (i.e., the binding of acoustic and visual inputs) Feldman and colleagues (Feldman et al., 2018) conducted a meta-analysis in order to quantify how far individuals with ASD differ from their TD peers in audio-visual integration, and reported that, indeed, audio-visual integration is impaired significantly in autism. Interestingly, and, in line with the aforementioned findings about sensorimotor integration, the older the ASD participants are, the less they are impaired, which reinforces the view that in ASD there is an abnormally protracted maturation of multisensory integration. Furthermore, it is significant that participants who show severe difficulty with sensorimotor integration tend also to have considerable difficulty with language and communication, which suggests the likelihood of a link between sensorimotor responsiveness and the social symptoms that are reported in people with autism.   4. Disruption of perception-action coupling and deficits in imitative behaviour in ASD.   It is helpful to give some fundamental definitions in order to understand and interpret the imitative behaviour of people with ASD. The word emulation will refer hereinafter to the imitation of a goal or outcome determined by a demonstrator, such that observers try to “reproduce the completed goal . . . by whatever means” (Tomasello 1990, p. 284). Note that “whatever means” here indicates that the observer need not copy with precision and accuracy the exact execution of the action. The term imitation, by contrast, refers to an observer’s faithful reproduction of the model’s behaviour by re-enactment, with precision and accuracy, of the exact sequence of actions demonstrated (cf., “impersonation” in Byrne & Russon, 1998). Finally, the term mimicry will refer to the spontaneous and automatic copying of facial expressions, which often are coupled with emotions (Fischer & Hess, 2017). Whilst these three definitions perhaps oversimplify the behaviours contained under the 
umbrella of “imitation”, they nevertheless embrace, fittingly and economically, the main findings reported on imitation and ASD that are pertinent to this discussion.    Because there is no consensus as to whether or not imitation is impaired significantly in ASD children (Sevlever & Gillis, 2010) it is fruitful to focus on the kinds of behaviour that are imitated by people on the autistic spectrum. Hobson and Hobson (2008) administered several tasks to children with autism in which they had to copy either the goal-directed actions or the style with which a demonstrator performed them. Participants with autism were similar to TD children in their ability to copy complex goal-directed actions but failed to imitate the style with which those actions were executed. Reflecting on the matter of imitation and ASD, Hamilton (2008) took note that autistic people showed normal performance and normal brain activity on emulation tasks that normally involve an object (e.g., instrumental actions), whilst failing on tasks that require spontaneous copying of low level, kinematic features of an action (e.g., imitation and mimicry). In like vein, a meta-analysis conducted by Edwards (2014) concluded that people with ASD have no great difficulty in emulating outcomes, whilst failing to imitate or mimic their precise form and manner whereby they were achieved. A recent study with autistic pre-schoolers (Mussey & Klinger, 2020) used exact imitation and choice imitation tasks and reported that, when the paradigm allowed for exact imitation, children with ASD showed intact imitation skills. However, in choice imitation tasks, in line with previous studies, children with ASD were less prompted to reproduce the process (path and manner) demonstrated by the examiner than were TD children.  Both typically developing (TD) children (Nadel, 2002; Meltzoff, 2007) and typical adults unconsciously mimic one another’s meaningless actions. In contrast, spontaneous mimicry of meaningless actions (i.e., without pursuing a specific goal) appears to be lacking in children with autism. The inference that perception-action coupling is compromised in ASD is reinforced by the finding of Roley et al. (2015) that, despite their normal visual accuracy, children with autism failed imitative (non-instrumental) tasks that required them to connect what was visually perceived with what was felt internally (e.g., proprioceptively). Rogers et al. (2003) described how autistic toddlers (mean age 34 months) showed important deficits in oral-facial imitation, which in our opinion might be central to engaging in primary intersubjectivity, as we shall discuss later.  These same deficits were not found in older autistic children (mean age 12 years) in a study by Whiten and Brown (1999). Perhaps the mixed results can be explained away by the very protracted multimodal integration observed in autism that we discussed above. If so, the matching of observed and owned gestures (mainly oral-facial) is disrupted in autism at the age at which typically developing infants start to react contingently to the behaviours observed in third-parties (e.g. care-givers). Taken together, those findings imply that fundamental for connecting people’s minds is the contingency in time of external information, gathered visually, with internally, self-generated information of movement or action. This suggests a promising area of study for investigating differences between autistic (ASD) and typically developing (TD) children.    Several questions arise. Why do people with autism find it difficult to imitate non-goal-directed (non-instrumental) behaviours? Does that have to do with an absence of interpersonal engagement, falling therefore in the sphere of motivation? Alternatively, could it be that the perceptual and/or motor anomalies discussed above prevent them from reproducing, both accurately and timely, the gestures and mannerisms that are observable in other people? Regarding the last possibility, might it be that, notwithstanding the inevitably slight dialectical asynchrony, autistic people fail to perceive a contingency, in the timing of active responses, between their felt, self-generated sensorimotor or proprioceptive inputs on the one hand, and, on the other, the actions of external intentional agents registered visually or acoustically?     In ASD, emulation, rather than precise imitation, of observed behaviours may reflect the absence of tight and accurate coupling of self-generated actions with those observed in third-parties; it does not involve reproducing those actions precisely. Mimicry, unlike goal-emulation, contains an element of rhythm, a plausible inference is that attribution of affiliation to third-parties occurs solely when these not only move simultaneously, but also follow the same external rhythm (Manrique et al., 2021). 
When there is a mismatch between the information about internally self-generated actions and those executed by third-parties who are observed externally, it is easy to understand why it is hard for people with ASD to experience entrainment with others (Fitzpatrick et al., 2013, 2016; Hove & Risen, 2009), and hence their failure to establish affiliative bonds.  Whereas developmental psychologists have conducted extensive research into early reciprocal exchanges of “primary intersubjectivity” between infants and care-givers, no direct attempts have been made, to our knowledge, to relate this phenomenon to the workings of the brain as a self-organising adaptive (sentient) system. In the next section, the reciprocal mimicry of facial expressions between infants and their care-givers will be considered in the light of the Free Energy Principle – a formal account of predictive processing in the brain — in order to show that such interactions have distinctive features, not present in other exchanges with the environment, which might provide a key to attributing agency to third-parties.  5. Perception-action iterative cycles and the Free Energy Principle.  The term “primary intersubjectivity” (Trevarthen, 1979; Trevarthen & Aitken, 2001) refers to the reciprocal attuning of behaviours (gestures, vocal utterances, facial displays, etc.) between two individuals whose gaze interlocks. Gergely and Watson (1996) defined a phenomenon that they called “mirror reflection” whereby adults mirror the emotional expressions reflected in infants’ faces, albeit in an exaggerated manner thus providing extended and exaggerated feedback of infants’ emotions (see also, Fonagy et al., 2002). When “primary intersubjectivity” involves mimicking facial expressions (Fischer & Hess, 2017) the external coupling of actions (e.g., activation of facial muscles) is accompanied often with shared experiences of the underlying emotions associated with those expressions. Each of our common emotions (e.g., surprise, fear, happiness, sadness, anger, disgust, etc.) is associated universally with the activation of particular groups of facial muscles, which thus enables human beings (regardless of their ethnicity or nationality) to recognise (infer) the emotion experienced by a fellow human merely by registering the facial expression displayed (Ekman, 1992; Ekman et al., 1972). Mimicry of facial expressions associated with emotional states is an interesting phenomenon. One individual, X, experiences an emotion, Y, (i.e., joy), which is reflected in his face, and another individual, Z, mimics the external facial expression observed in X, and at the same time (particularly if X and Z are connected intimately) Z experiences internally the (albeit attenuated) emotion Y associated with that facial expression. Thereby, two independent individuals, by mimicking each other’s overt behaviour (i.e., facial expression) come to experience (or share) together the same emotional internal state at the same time (i.e., they are “in tune” and “resonate” emotionally, so to speak). We illustrate this phenomenon by recreating a hypothetical exchange between a baby and his mother (see Figure 1).   Readers unfamiliar with the Free Energy Principle as developed by Karl Friston (Friston, 2010) should consult Box 1 for a brief summary of the theory and some implications of it.  By reference to neural active Inference and predictive error regarded from the standpoint of VFE (Friston et al., 2006), it could be worthwhile, from a perspective of “primary intersubjectivity”, to envisage mimicry of facial expressions in terms of the statistical flows of the continual cerebrally-mediated interactions and sensorimotor responses (whether present and positive, or absent and negative) between two human beings (sentient systems), in each of whom there is separation (partitioning) between internal systemic and external non-systemic states that are each “cocooned” as it were. Perhaps such a situation could be analogous to the theoretical physical-mathematical concept of a “Markov Blanket” as a “set of states that statistically isolates (insulates) internal (systemic) from external (non-systemic) states, such that changes in internal states are mediated by the states of the MB. The MB itself can be partitioned into active and sensory states, which are defined by the following relations: internal states do not influence sensory states, and    external states do not influence active states. Now, we should note that the terms ‘active’ and ‘sensory’ are potentially misleading. They are only meant to capture relations of statistical dependence between random variables...  things that we would not readily describe as literally acting or sensing in 
any meaningful sense can still be captured with this formalism…” (Ramstead et al., 2018, p.190). In the case of facial mimicry, random neuronal activity is insulated in each participant’s brain wherein neuronal responses may occur that could evoke motor behaviour, or they may not occur, but in either case there is a “reset” of each sentient system’s hierarchically mechanistic mind.     To stretch the analogy further, each sentient participant, independently, might experience (and even may describe) his or her internal systemic and external non-systemic states as well as the sensory and active states of the latter. Were an internal systemic state experienced by individual X to be her joyfulness, as reflected by her non-systemic active state (activation of her facial muscles associated with joy), this activation could impinge on the external state of her partner, Z, and elicit his display of a facial expression of joy that in his case is non-systemic. His brain then may sample his surroundings in order to check on the accuracy of its inference about what is there and in doing so his sensory states (which are external and non-systemic) may register, visually, the facial expression of X (i.e., her external state). If then he mimics her facial expression his active state (facial muscle activation) may match her active state, and in doing his internal systemic state may approximate to her systemically internal joyful state. Therefore, his mimicry of her renders it possible for these two independent individuals – who are referenced not only by the spatial separation between them, but also in terms of whether neurological activation first occurs on the inside (systemic) or outside (non-systemic) of the respective partitioning in each partner – to come to share the same internal and external states. In particular, if the two partners continue to mimic one another, the reciprocal reflexion of their interacting internal and external states may have the outcome that – notwithstanding any lingering qualitative difference between X’s internal joyful state and her facially-expressed external state – the increasing resemblance between the external states of Z and X (i.e., his and her facial expressions) may evoke “primary intersubjective” coincidence between their internal systemic states resulting in mutual joyfulness. The matter is relevant to interactions between babies and their care-givers. See Fig. 1 for a visual representation.   This physical manifestation of primary intersubjectivity can be captured mathematically in terms of synchronisation in dyadic interactions. Put simply, if the imperatives for an exchange with the world are framed in terms of minimising VFE (i.e., prediction errors) adopting the same generative model allows ‘me to predict you’ and ‘you to predict me’: thereby rendering the world inherently predictable, where ‘you constitute my world’ and ‘I constitute your world’. This kind of dyadic synchronisation or alignment rests upon us both learning the same internal generative or world model. Please see (Friston & Frith, 2015a; 2015b) for simulations and (Tschacher & Haken, 2007; Koole & Tschacher, 2016; Kuper at al., 2016; Tschacher et al., 2017) for a discussion of this kind of dyadic synchronisation in the context of therapeutic interactions in schizophrenia. Clearly, to establish this kind of dyadic alignment requires fast, temporary coordinated predictive processing — and attention to the right sensory cues.  On this view, “Primary intersubjectivity” is reminiscent of the notion of generalised synchrony famously articulated by Christiaan Huygens (1673). He described how two independent clocks, hanging from a firm beam on the same wall, will come to oscillate in perfect synchrony (albeit not necessarily in phase). If we think of the clocks as being within their respective “Markov Blankets”, then the firm beam may be regarded as representing a path by which the active state of one impinges on the sensory states of the other and eventually affects its internal states, resulting in synchrony of both clocks. In this example, the beam plays the role of the blanket states that intervene between internal and external states, where the external state of one clock is the internal state of the other.   In cases of the mimicry of facial expressions associated with internal emotions, muscle activation (reflected in facial expression) may be the equivalent of the firm beam bearing the clocks, thereby linking the internal and external states of a baby with those of its care-giver. Emotional resonance in “primary intersubjectivity” may bear comparison with the “sympathetic” motion of the synchronous pendulum clocks. However, the fundamentally statistical basis of the cerebral neural phenomena demands dissociating the smiles from the bodies: the disembodied grin of Lewis Carroll’s Cheshire 
Cat reminds us of the uncertainty regarding Schrödinger’s cat! Statistical considerations are relevant in so far as the solicitous behaviours of attentive care-givers (e.g., smiles, caresses, or vocalisations) usually involve numerous repeated actions that often fail to induce any response until perseverance achieves one, and likewise the behaviours of infants (e.g., prolonged crying, wailing, or wriggling) often fail to evoke prompt responses from care-givers or bystanders. Furthermore, without continual interaction during weeks, months, or years, typical development is impeded in infants and young children, such as those deprived from social contact or severely neglected from birth. The first year of life comprises 31,500,000 seconds. Only one or two seconds are needed for a smile, tongue-protrusion, or saying “Goo!” A mother carrying a baby in her arms, while walking to foraging locations, affords them more time for face-to-face interaction than is available to a mother ape who moves with her baby clinging to her back and has to stop and squat in order to hold it in her arms for suckling and cuddling (as often do human mothers of course); moreover, apes, once awake, spend a far greater proportion of the day foraging and feeding than do human hunter-gatherers who have more disposable time to interact with one another. Plausibly, the significant additional time available, statistically, to our bipedal precursors may well have favoured natural selection of a human propensity towards “primary intersubjective” responsiveness, which likely involved genetic and epigenetic modification of neurobiology, particularly affecting cerebral development. Unlike humans, as they grow older apes slowly fail to acknowledge or recognise parents and siblings, though sufferers from prosopagnosia and Alzheimer’s disease often have difficulties. Natural selection does not free individual creatures of any species from developmental pathological defects. The developing brains of infants are no more exempt from pathology than are their other developing bodily organs and systems, and ASD could be interpreted as a manifestation of anomalous systemic development. Indeed, clinical signs that indicate ASD have been detected in intra-uterine foetuses (Trevarthen & Delafield-Butt, 2013).     Three-month-old infants can detect that the dynamics of a “primary intersubjective” interaction established with specific phenomena in their surroundings (including self-generated ones in addition to those of other sentient systems differ fundamentally from the dynamics established with regard to any other objects (even robots). In so far as familiar phenomena correspond to a baby’s predictions (fulfil its active inferences) levels of cognitive surprise (”surprisal”) experienced are minimised thereby. This is accomplished particularly through mimicry of facial expression: such responsiveness builds up progressively. The more that the adult and infant interact, the more they are prompted to imitate one another’s facial expressions. As these imitation cycles are repeated, the more skilled the baby becomes in making active inferences that accurately predict the future (almost immediate) (re)-actions of the outside world and in particular of a care-giver. Therefore, the more prolonged the interaction of the adult-infant relationship, the more proficient the infant becomes in reducing cognitive surprise, i.e., minimising “surprisal”.   With regard to the reciprocal mimicry of facial expressions, further scrutiny of “primary intersubjectivity” from the standpoint of active inference and VFE/FEP reveals another peculiarity associated with the phenomenon. It is that where each interacting agent is imitating the other, such a sentient system in trying to reduce its own predictive error may do this by two different pathways: namely, 1) by changing his own predictions to fit better the sensory sampling of the external world, or 2) through action, in other words, the sentient system, instead of changing the prediction, will act so as to fulfil the prediction, thereby reducing the divergence between what is predicted and the reality. The peculiarity of the exchanges — in which each sentient system (intentional agent or interacting party) mimics the behaviour of the other — is that the action of each interacting partner not only serves to reduce its own prediction error, but (indirectly) also the prediction error of the other party. That is to say, as the perception-action cycles undergo iteration, and the reciprocal mimicry continues, there is a progressive reduction of the predictive errors of each interacting party (sentient system) involved in the exchange. Thus, infants will learn from very early in life that there are entities in the environment that behave “uniquely” as if to reduce their predictive errors (those of the infants). Infants will never encounter any such object in their surroundings (apart from humans) whose behaviour is so “bizarre”, and yet so interesting. This will constitute the very first “taste” of other minds for the infant. The fact that infants have been reported to develop affiliative responses 
towards those who mimic them (Meltzoff, 2007), suggests that these kinds of exchanges are indeed rewarding. If we take the VHE/FEP stance as providing a valid basis for interpreting how sentient systems adapt to their environments, then it is unsurprising that infants discover and learn that it is rewarding to be imitated by care-givers, since this imperfect imitation constitutes the only environmental power that is able to reduce their own prediction errors.   Imagine then devastating consequences of being unable to engage in mimicry and synchronous exchange with [m]others, through a failure of precise temporal sensorimotor processing — or a failure to assign the right precision to sensorimotor prediction errors. This would preclude dyadic alignment, generalised synchrony and primary intersubjectivity, and the consequent learning and sharing generative world models. This is the perspective on offer in this paper; namely an aetiology of autism, that emphasises the foundational failures in primary intersubjectivity.  6. Afterthoughts  We wish to offer a few afterthoughts about our theoretical approach to autism. Because it is not affordance-dependent it falls outside an embodied approach to cognition à la Gibson. Neither is it a consequence of mirror-neuron circuitry. We lay stress not on the motor resonance with the other (e.g. the topological overlapping of homologous motor areas controlling bodily movement), instead, on the dynamic (e.g., rhythmical) reciprocal attuning of actions with the other: that is to say, in being able to engage with the perceived behaviour of the other with one’s self-generated behaviour so as to enter into a dialectical process, fundamental to which is motor timing. We argue that by being attuned to the other’s actions, and by regulating self-generated action to engage  with those actions, the outcome is a meeting of minds that is a basic, automatic, and non-reflexive understanding of the other’s mental transitional states. This dynamic attuning with the other can happen with any behaviour, such as when mimicking gestures and mannerisms, as in the so-called “chameleon effect” (Chartrand & Bargh, 1999), or when copying the intonation and prosodic patterns of the other while reading together (Cerda-Oñate et al., 2021). Also, the reciprocal dialectical exchange does not need to share the same sensory modality (e.g. a “Goo” (vocalised) by the infant can find a reciprocal smile of the care-giver; a smile displayed by the infant can evoke the response by an enthusiastic utterance by the care-giver. Time contingency is the crucial aspect underlying these “dialectical” exchanges: both interacting agents follow a common rhythm that serves as a scaffold that connects their minds. Implicit here is the notion that the reciprocal contingent fine-tuning of behaviours between intentional agents reflects an underlying motivation to connect with the other.  We chose to discuss primary intersubjectivity as defined by Trevarthen (1979) because it is paradigmatic of human exchanges that combine contingency (mostly temporal), reciprocity, and multimodal integration. We do not concern ourselves with whether the exchanges between three-month-old babies and their care-givers are genuinely intersubjective. While some authors consider them truly intersubjective (e.g. Nagy, 2008; Reddy, 2008, 2011), other authors are more reluctant to concede that these early reciprocal exchanges possess a genuine intersubjective character (e.g. Gergely & Watson, 1999; Tomasello, 1995). Neither do we want to dwell on whether it is primary intersubjectivity at three months or joint attention and shared intentionality that appears at the end of the first year (see Moll et al., 2021) which has pride of place in order to allow babies to become competent social beings. We do consider, however, three months a relevant transition point when attention and preference of infants shift from not showing any specific inclination to preferentially favouring imperfect contingencies, the latter characterising the contingent behaviours that adult care-givers produce in response to infants´ actions (Bahrick & Watson, 1985). When babies start to pay attention to the actions of adults in relation to their own actions (e.g., to tune in) the seeds of social cognition are planted. Hence, it is not of much concern to us whether this first contingent exchange between babies and care-givers can be truly and fully regarded as intersubjective, what is of concern to us is that these are the first contingent and reciprocal exchanges between babies and other intentional agents that will serve as the scaffold for acquiring ever-more complex skills of social interaction (Pérez & Gomila, 2021; Reddy, 2008).   
7. Closing remarks   We have discussed how visual information is subdued in autistic children, especially in infancy, in favour of interoceptive information. Also, they seem to connect visual information with informational inputs from other sensory modalities (e.g., proprioceptive, auditory) over longer time delays, indicating a deficit in their multisensory integration. It is little wonder then that they often find imitation and mimicry much more difficult than emulation, and show difficulty with motor coordination, on account of their failure to use visual external information to assist them in framing their own bodily actions in relation to the surrounding space, or to match, by accurate and timely imitation, those motor actions displayed by other individuals. Significantly, because visual information is subdued that is gathered by seeing the motor actions of other people (i.e., especially those associated with facial expression), or is delayed in terms of their self-generated motor actions (i.e., motor information associated with facial expression), there can be dramatic effects on their ability to distinguish objects in their surroundings from intentional agents (such as human beings, sentient systems). The lack of recognition of the contingency of their own behaviour with that of those around them (e.g., care-givers who imitate the infant) blocks the ability to detect agency, and thus deters their learning about intentional agents, as well as their ability to resonate emotionally with these intentional agents and to develop a fully-fledged “theory of mind”. When an infant’s information, gathered visually about adults’ facial expressions, is subdued or becomes connected with self-generated motor movements produced over prolonged time-spans by the infant, the time contingency is lost, and engaging in “primary intersubjectivity” is no longer possible: therefore, humans and robots will be perceived as behaving similarly. This might explain why autistic children benefit from interacting with robots that often provide responses that are delayed in time, and they do not seem to mind that the responses from the interacting partner are delayed considerably (Abassi, 2018; Duquette et al., 2008; Penisi et al., 2016).    A protracted sensory integration theory of autism (“PSITA”) attributes ASD mainly to a deficit in polymodal integration, and specifically to an inability by infants to detect the time-contingency of visually-gathered information about a third-party’s movements with their own self-generated motor actions, or to connect visually-gathered information with auditory information. Plausibly, it is why people with ASD commonly show deficits of mental-attribution and difficulties with imitation. We suggest that a VFE/FEP approach is helpful for interpreting “primary intersubjectivity” and opens the way to taking a new look at childhood ASD. More specifically, we argue that imitation between an infant’s and a care-giver’s actions constitutes a unique type of behavioural exchange in which the actions of both serve a double purpose, namely, reducing their predictive errors and those of the opposite partner. We think that a VFE/FEP perspective on developmental aspects in young children may be useful to Developmental Psychology.      
References  American Psychiatric Association (2013/2022) Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-5-TRTM (5th ed., text revision, 2013/2022). Washington D.C.: American Psychiatric Association, “APPI Books” (ISBN: 978-0-89042-576-3).    https://dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425596 Abassi, J. (2018). In-home robots improve social skills in children with autism. JAMA, 320(14) 1425. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2018.14385 Anisfeld, M. (1996). Only tongue protrusion modeling is matched by neonates. Developmental Review, 16 (2), 149–161. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/drev.1996.0006 Badcock, P.B., Friston, K.J., Ramstead, M.J.D., Ploeger, A., & Hohwy, J. (2019). The hierarchically mechanistic mind: an evolutionary systems theory of the human brain, cognition, and behavior. Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience, 19(6): 1319–1351.  https://dx.doi.org/10.3758/s13415-019-00721-3  Bahrick, L.E., & Watson, J.S. (1985). Detection of intermodal proprioceptive-visual contingency as a potential basis of self-perception in infancy. Developmental Psychology, 21(6), 963 –973. https://dx.doi.org/10.1073/0012-1649.21.6.963 Baron-Cohen, S. (1998). The autistic child’s theory of mind: a case of specific developmental delay. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 30 (2), 285-297. https://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.1989.tb00241x Baron-Cohen, S. (2001a). Theory of mind in normal development and autism. Prisme, 34, 174-183. Baron-Cohen, S. (2001b). Theory of mind and autism: a review. International Review of Research in Mental Retardation, 23, 169-184. https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s 0074-7750(00)80010-5 Bhat, A.N., Landa, R.J., & Galloway, J.C. (2011). Current perspectives on motor functioning in infants, children, and adults with autism spectrum disorders. Physical Therapy, 91 (7), 1116–1129. https ://doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20100 294 Botvinick, M., Cohen, J. (1998). Rubber hands “feel” touch that eyes see. Nature, 391(6669), 756. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/35784  Brown, H., Adams, R. A., Parees, I., Edwards, M. & Friston, K (2013). Active inference, sensory attenuation and illusions. Cognitive Processing, 14(4), 411-427. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10339-013-0571-3 Bruineberg, J., & Rietveld, E.  (2014). Self-organization, free energy minimization, and optimal grip on a field of affordances. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 599. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00599 Byrne, R. W., & Russon, A. E. (1998). Learning by imitation: A hierarchical approach. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21(5), 667-684. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X98001745 Carruthers, P. F. (2011) The opacity of mind: an integrative theory of self-knowledge. Oxford University Press. Cerda-Oñate, K., Toledo-Vega, G., & Ordin, M. (2021). Speech rhythm convergence in a dyadic reading task. Speech Communication, 131, 1-12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.specom.2021.04.003  Chartrand, T., Bargh, J. (1999). The chameleon effect: The perception–behavior link and social interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76(6), 893-910. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.76.6.893 Dapretto, M., Davies, M. S., Pfeifer, J. H., Scott, A. A., Sigman, M., Bookheimer, S. Y., & Iacoboni, M. (2006). Understanding emotions in others: Mirror neuron dysfunction in children with autism spectrum disorders. Nature Neuroscience, 9(1), 28-30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn1611 Duquette, A., Michaud, F. y Mercier, H. (2008). Exploring the use of a mobile robot as an imitation agent with children with low-functioning autism. Autonomous Robots, 24(2), 147-157. doi: 10.1007/s10514-007-9056-5 Edwards, L. A. (2014). A meta-analysis of imitation abilities in individuals with autism spectrum disorders. Autism Research, 7(3), 363–380. https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.1379 Ekman, P. (1992). Facial expressions of emotion: new findings, new questions. Psychological Science, 3(1), 34-38. https://dx.doi.org/10.111/j.1467-9280.1992.tb00253x 
Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V., and Ellsworth, P., Eds., (1972). Emotion in the human face: guidelines for research and integration of findings. Pergamon Press, “Pergamon General Psychology Series, Vol. 11” (ISBN: 978-0-08-016643-8).  https://dx.doi.org/10.111/C2013-0-02458-9 Feldman, J.I., Dunham, K., Cassidy, M., Wallace, M.T., Liu, Y., & Woynaroski, T.G. (2018) Audiovisual multisensory integration in individuals with autism spectrum disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 95, 220-234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.09.020   Feldman, H., & Friston, K. J.  (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 4, 215. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215 Fischer, A., Hess, U. (2017). Mimicking emotions. Current Opinion in Psychology, 17, 151-155. https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2017.07.008.  Fitzpatrick, P. A., Diorio, R., Richardson, M. J., & Schmidt, R. C. (2013). Dynamical methods for evaluating the time-dependent unfolding of social coordination in children with autism. Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience, 7, 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2013.00021 Fitzpatrick, P. A., Frazier, J. A., Cochran, D. M., Mitchell, T., Coleman, C., & Schmidt, R. C. (2016). Impairments of social motor synchrony evident in autism spectrum disorder. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 1323. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01323 Fonagy, P., Gergely, G., Jurist, E.L., & Target, M. (2002). Affect regulation, mentalization, and the development of the self. Taylor & Francis, Routledge.    https://dx.doi.org/10.4324/9780429471643 Fournier, K.A., Hass, C.J., Naik, S.K., Lodha, N., & Cauraugh, J.H. (2010). Motor coordination in autism spectrum disorders: a synthesis and meta-analysis. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 40(10), 1227–1240. http://dx.doi. org/10.1007/s10803-010-0981-3. Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2), 127-138. https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787 Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86), 20130475. https://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475 Friston, K., & Ao, P. (2012). "Free Energy, Value, and Attractors". Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine, vol. 2012, Article ID 937860, 27 pages, 2012. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/937860  Friston, K., & Frith, C. (2015a). A Duet for one. Consciousness and Cognition, 36, 390-405. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2014.12.003 Friston, K. J., & Frith, C. D. (2015b). Active inference, communication and hermeneutics. Cortex, 68, 129-143. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2015.03.025 Friston, K., Kilner, J., & Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle for the brain. Journal of Physiology Paris, 100(1-3), 70–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001 Friston, K., Mattout, J., & Kilner, J.  (2011). Action understanding and active inference. Biological Cybernetics, 104(1-2): 137–160. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00422-011-0424-z Gergely, G., & Watson, J.S. (1996). The social biofeedback theory of parental affect-mirroring: the development of emotional self-awareness and self-control in infancy. International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 77 (6), 1181–1212.  Gergely, G., & Watson, J. S. (1999). Early socio–emotional development: Contingency perception and the social-biofeedback model. In P. Rochat (Ed.), Early social cognition: Understanding others in the first months of life (pp. 101–136). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. Ghaziuddin, M., & Butler, E. (1998). Clumsiness in autism and Asperger syndrome: a further report. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 42(1), 43–48. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2788.1998.00065.x Gomila, A. (2002). La perspectiva de la segunda persona de la atribución intencional. Azafea Revista de Filosofía, 4, 123-138. https://dx.doi.org/10.14201/379 Gopnik, A. (1993) How we know our minds: the illusion of first-person knowledge of intentionality. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16(1), 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00028636 Gopnik, A. & Meltzoff, A. (1997) Words, thoughts and theories. MIT Press. Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. (1992). Why the Child’s Theory of Mind Really Is a Theory. Mind & Language, 7(1-2), 145-171. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0017.1992.tb00202.x 
Green, D., Charman, T., Pickles, A., Chandler, S., Loucas, T., Simonoff,  E., & Baird, G. (2009). Impairment in movement skills of children with autistic spectrum disorders. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 51(4), 311-6. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8749.2008.03242.x Gu, X., Eilam-Stock, T., Zhou, T., Anagnostou, E., Kolevzon, A., Soorya, L., Hof, P. R., Friston, K. J., & Fan, J (2015). Autonomic and brain responses associated with empathy deficits in autism spectrum disorder. Hum Brain Mapping, 36(9), 3323-3338. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22840  Hamilton, A.F., & Marsh, L. (2013). Two systems for action comprehension in autism: Mirroring and mentalizing. In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg y M. V. Lombardo (Eds.), Understanding Other Minds. Perspectives from Developmental Social Neuroscience (pp. 380-396). Oxford University Press. Hamilton, A.F., Brindley, R.M., & Frith, U. (2007). Imitation and action understanding in autistic spectrum disorders: how valid is the hypothesis of a deficit in the mirror neuron system? Neuropsychologia, 45(8),1859-1868.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.11.022 Hamilton, A. F. (2008). Emulation and mimicry for social interaction: A theoretical approach to imitation in autism. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61(1),101-115. https://doi.org/10.1080/17470210701508798 Haswell, C.C., Izawa, J., & DoIl, L.R., Mostofsky, S.H., & Shadmehr, R. (2009). Representation of internal models of action in the autistic brain. Nature Neuroscience, 12(8), 970–972. https ://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2356 Heimann, M., Nelson, K. E., & Schaller, J. (1989). Neonatal imitation of tongue protrusion and mouth opening: methodological aspects and evidence of early individual differences. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 30 (2), 90–101. https://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9450.tb01072x Hense, M., Badde, S., Köhne, S., Dziobek, I., Röder, B. (2019). Visual and Proprioceptive Influences on Tactile Spatial Processing in Adults with Autism Spectrum Disorders. Autism Research, 12(12),1745-1757. https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.2202  Hobson, R., & Hobson, J. (2008). Dissociable aspects of imitation: A study in autism. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 101(3), 170–185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2008.04.007  Hove, M.J.,& Risen, J.L. (2009). It's all in the timing: Interpersonal synchrony increases affiliation. Social Cognition, 27(6): 949-96 https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2009.27.6.949 0. Huygens, C. (1673) Horologium oscillatorium, sive De motu pendulorum ad horologia aptato demonstrationes geometricae. F. Muguet. Ingersoll, B. (2008). The effect of context on imitation skills in children with autism. Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders, 2(2), 332–340 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rasd.2007.08.003 Izawa, J., Pekny, S.E., Marko, M.K., Haswell, C., Shadmehr, R., & Mostofsky, S.H. (2012). Motor learning relies on integrated sensory inputs in ADHD, but over-selectively on proprioception in autism spectrum conditions. Autism Research, 5(2), 124-36. https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.1222 Kilner, J.M., Friston, K.J., & Frith, C.C. (2007). Predictive coding: an account of the mirror neuron system. Cognitive Processing, 8(3), 159-166, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10339-007-0170-2. Koole, S. L., & Tschacher, W.  (2016). Synchrony in Psychotherapy: A Review and an Integrative Framework for the Therapeutic Alliance. Frontiers in Psychology, 7,  862-862. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00862 Kupper, Z., Ramseyer, F., Hoffmann, H., & Tschacher, W. (2016). Nonverbal Synchrony in Social Interactions of Patients with Schizophrenia Indicates Socio-Communicative Deficits. PLOS ONE, 10(12): e0145882. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0145882 Lawson, R. P., Mathys, C., & Rees, G. (2017). Adults with autism overestimate the volatility of the sensory environment. Nature Neuroscience, 20(9), 1293-1299. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn.4615 Lawson, R. P., Rees, G., & Friston, K. J. (2014). An aberrant precision account of autism. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 302. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00302 Lim, Y.H., Lee, H.C., Falkmer, T., Allison, G.T., Tan, T., Lee, W.L., & Morris, S.L. (2019). Effect of visual information on postural control in adults with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 49(12), 4731–4739. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1080 3-018-3634-6 
Manrique, H.M., Marín, A., Nieto-Alemán, P.A., Read, D.W., Hernández-Jaramillo, J., García-Palacios, A., & Zeidler, H. (2021). Behavioural mimicry as an indicator of affiliation. Public Library of Science One, 16 (5): e0250105 https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0250105 Marko, M.K., Crocetti, D., Hulst, T., Donchin, O., Shadmehr, R., & Mostofsky, S.H. (2015) Behavioural and neural basis of anomalous motor learning in children with autism. Brain Journal of  Neurology, 138(3), 784–797. https ://doi.org/10.1093/brain /awu39 4 Meltzoff, A.N. (2007) ‘Like me’: a foundation for social cognition. Developmental Science, 10 (1): 126-134. https://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00574x Meltzoff, A.N., & Moore, M.K. (1977). Imitation of facial and manual gestures by human neonates. Science, 198 (4312): 75–78. https://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.897687 Moll, H., Pueschel, E., Qianhui, N., & Little, A. (2021). Sharing Experiences in Infancy: From Primary Intersubjectivity to Shared Intentionality. Frontiers in Psychology, 14. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.667679  Molloy, C.A., Dietrich, K.N., & Bhattacharya, A. (2003). Postural stability in children with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 33(6), 643–652. http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/B:JADD.0000006001.00667.4c Morris, S.L., Foster,  C.J.,  Parsons, R., Falkmer,  M., Falkmer, T., & Rosalie, S.M. (2015). Differences in the use of vision and proprioception for postural control in autism spectrum disorder. Neuroscience, 307, 273–280. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.08.040 Murray, L., & Trevarthen, C. (1985). Emotional regulation of interactions between 2-month-olds and their mothers. In T.M. Field, & N.A., Fox (Eds.), Social perception in infants (pp. 177-197). Ablex. Murray, L., and Trevarthen, C. (1986). The infant's role in mother-infant communication. Journal of Child Language, 13 (1), 15-29. https://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s0305000900000271  Mussey, J.L., & Klinger, L.G. (2020). Imitation in ASD: Performance on an imitation choice task. Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders, 73, 101530. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rasd.2020.101530. Nagy, E. (2008). Innate intersubjectivity: newborns’ sensitivity to communication disturbance. Developmental Psychobiology, 44(6), 1779-1784. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0012665 Nadel, J. (2002). Imitation and imitation recognition: Functional use in preverbal infants and nonverbal children with autism. In A. N. Meltzoff & W. Prinz (Eds.), The imitative mind: Development, evolution, and brain bases (pp. 42–62). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511489969.003. Oberman, L.M, Hubbard, E.M., McCleery, J.P., Altschuler, E.L., Ramachandran, V.S., & Pineda, J.A. (2005). EEG evidence for mirror neuron dysfunction in autism spectrum disorders. Cognitive Brain Research, 24(2):190-8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2005.01.014  Oberman, L.M., & Ramachandran, V.S. (2007). The simulating social mind: the role of the mirror neuron system and simulation in the social and communicative defects of the autism spectrum disorders. Psychological Bulletin,133(2), 310-327. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.133.2.310. Pagel, B., Heed, T., & Röder, B. (2009). Change of reference frame for tactile localization during child development: Reference frame for tactile localization in children. Developmental Science, 12(6), 929–937. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687. 2009.00845.x Pan, C-Y., Tsai, C-L, Chu C-H. (2009). Fundamental movement skills in children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 39(12),1694–1705. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10803-009-0813-5 Parees, I., Brown, H., Nuruki, A., Adams, R. A., Davare, M., Bhatia, K. P., Friston, K., & Edwards, M.J. (2014). Loss of sensory attenuation in patients with functional (psychogenic) movement disorders. Brain, 137(11), 2916-2921. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awu237 Pellicano, E., & Burr, D. (2012). When the world becomes 'too real': a Bayesian explanation of autistic perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(10), 504-510. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.08.009 Penissi, P., Tonacci, A., Tartarisco, G., Billeci, L., Ruta, L., Gangemi, S. &  Pioggia, G. (2016). Autism and Social Robotics: A Systematic Review. Autism Research, 9(2), 165-183. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/aur.1527 
Pérez, D.I., & Gomila, A. (2021). Social cognition and the second person in human interaction. Taylor and Francis, Routledge. Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. (2015). Active Inference, homeostatic regulation and adaptive behavioural control. Progress in Neurobiology, 134, 17-35. https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobio.2015.09.001   Povinelli, D.J., & Vonk, J. (2003). Chimpanzee minds: suspiciously human? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7 (6): 157-160. https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s1364-6613(03)00053-6 Premack, D., & Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1(4), 515-526. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00076512 Quattrocki, E., & Friston, K. (2014). Autism, oxytocin and interoception. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 47, 410-430. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.09.012 Ramstead, M.J.D., Constant, A., Badcock, P.B., & Friston, K.J. (2018). Variational ecology and the physics of sentient systems. Physics of Life Reviews, 31, 188-205. https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2018.12.002 Reddy, V. (2008). How infants know minds. Harvard University Press.  Reddy, V. (2011). “A gaze at grips with me”. In A. Seeman (Ed.), Joint Attention: New Developments in Psychology, Philosophy of Mind, and Social Neuroscience (pp. 137-157). MIT Press. Röder, B., Pagel, B., & Heed, T. (2013). The implicit use of spatial information develops later for crossmodal than for  intramodal temporal processing. Cognition, 126(2), 301–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2012.09.009 Roley, S.S., Mailloux, Z., Parham, L.D., Schaaf R.C., Lane CJ, & Cermak S. (2015). Sensory integration and praxis patterns in children with autism. American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 69(1):6901220010. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2015.012476  Rogers, S., Hepburn, S., Stackhouse, T., & Wehner, E. (2003). Imitation performance in toddlers with autism and those with other developmental disorders. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 44(5), 763–781. https://doi.org/10.1111/1469-7610.00162  Schauder, K. B., Mash, L. E., Bryant, L. K., & Cascio, C. J. (2015). Interoceptive ability and body awareness in ASD. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 131, 193-200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2014.11.002 Stern, D.N. (1985/2000). The interpersonal world of the infant: a view from psychoanalysis and developmental psychology. Basic Books, and London: Routledge.  Stevenson, R. A., Segers, M., Ferber, S., Barense, M. D., Camarata, S., & Wallace, M. T. (2016). Keeping time in the brain: Autism spectrum disorder and audiovisual temporal processing: Audiovisual timing in autism. Autism Research, 9 (7), 720–738. https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.1566 Sevlever, M., & Gillis, J.M. (2010). An examination of the state of imitation research in children with autism: Issues of definition and methodology. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 31(5), 976-984. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ridd.2010.04.014  Tschacher, W., Giersch, A., & Friston, K. (2017). Embodiment and Schizophrenia: A Review of Implications and Applications. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 43(4), 745-753. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbw220 Tschacher, W., & Haken, H. (2007). Intentionality in non-equilibrium systems? The functional aspects of self-organised pattern formation. New Ideas in Psychology, 25(1), 1-15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.newideapsych.2006.09.002  Toda, S., & Fogel, A. (1993). Infant response to the still-face situation at 3 and 6 months. Developmental Psychology, 29(3), 532–538. https://doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.29.3.532 Tomasello, M. (1990). Cultural transmission in the tool use and communicatory signaling of chimpanzees? In S. T. Parker & K. R. Gibson (Eds.), "Language" and intelligence in monkeys and apes: Comparative developmental perspectives (pp. 274–311). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511665486.012 Tomasello, M. (1995). Joint attention as social cognition. In C. Moore & P. J. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in development (pp. 103–130). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Trevarthen, C. (1979). Communication and cooperation in early infancy: A description of primary intersubjectivity. In M. Bullowa (Ed.), Before speech: The beginning of human communication (pp. 321-347). Cambridge University Press. Trevarthen, C. (1993a). The function of emotions in early infant communication and development. In J. Nadel, & L. Camaioni (Eds.), New perspectives in early communicative development (pp. 48-81). Routledge. http://dx.doi.org/10.4324/9781315111322-5 Trevarthen, C. (1993b). The self born in intersubjectivity: an infant communicating. In U. Neisser (Ed.), The perceived self: ecological and interpersonal sources of self-knowledge (pp. 121-173). Cambridge University Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511664007.009  Trevarthen, C. (2011). What is it like to be a person who knows nothing? Defining the active intersubjective mind of a newborn human being. Infant and Child Development, 20, 119-135. https://dx.doi.org/10.1002/icd.689 Trevarthen, C., & Aitken, K. J. (2001). Infant intersubjectivity: research, theory, and clinical applications. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 42(1), 3-48 . https://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1469-7610.00701 Trevarthen, C., & Delafield-Butt, J.T. (2013). Autism as a developmental disorder in intentional movement and affective engagement. Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience, 7: e.49. https://dx.doi.org/fnint.2013.00049 Trevarthen, C., Murray, L., and Hubley, P.A. (1981). Psychology of infants. In J.A. Davis, & J. Dobbing (Eds.), Scientic foundations of paediatrics (pp. 211-274). William Heinemann. Tronick, E.Z. (1989). Emotions and emotional communication in infants. American Psychologist, 44 (2), 112-126. https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066x-44.2.112 Tronick, E.Z., Als, H., & Adamson, L. (1979). Structure of early face-to-face communicative interactions. In M. Bullowa (Ed.) Before speech: the beginning of human communication (pp. 349-372). Cambridge University Press.   Tronick, E.Z., Als, H., Adamson, L., Wise, S., & Brazelton, T.B. (1978). The infant's response to entrapment between contradictory messages in face-to-face interaction. Journal of the American Academy of Child Psychiatry, 17 (1), 1-13. https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0002-7138(09)62273-1 Van de Cruys, S., Evers, K., Van der Hallen, K., Van Eylen, L., Boets, B., de-Wit, L., & Wagemans, J. (2014). Precise minds in uncertain worlds: predictive coding in autism. Psychological Reviews, 121(4), 649-675. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037665  Verhoeff, B. (2013). The autism puzzle: challenging a mechanistic model on conceptual and historical grounds. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine, 8 (1): e17. https://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1747-5341-8-17  Weaver, C.T., & Fry, C.L. (1974). Intonation and fundamental frequency of infants' and parents' vocalizations during social interaction. ERIC #ED101828 (PS-007-523).  Washington D.C.: U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, National Institute of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, IES document/report (3 September 1974), pp.1-9. Whiten, A., & Brown, J. (1999). Imitation and the reading of other minds: perspectives from the study of autism, normal children and non-human primates. In S. Braten (Ed.), Intersubjective communication and emotion in ontogeny: a sourcebook (pp. 260–280). Cambridge University. Williams, J. H., Whiten, A., Suddendorf, T., & Perrett, D. I. (2001). Imitation, mirror neurons and autism. Neuroscience & Biobehaviour Reviews, 25 (4), 287-295. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0149-7634(01)00014-8    
Acknowledgments   We thank Professor Karl Friston for reading the manuscript and offering helpful improvements. We thank Sandra Posada Salazar for producing Figure 1 from our rough sketch   
 Figure 1  Primary intersubjectivity and the sharing of emotions. In vignette A the baby experiences a positive emotion which is Internal (I) and Systemic (S) “Joy-fulness” (J), hence cannot be accessed from the exterior (outside of his “Markov Blanket”). At this point the emotion is, so to speak, "coccooned" in the baby, and both baby and mother are not in-tune. In vignette B the baby Displays his Joyfulness (DJ) that reflects in his face in the form of a smile and hence it is now exterior and non-systemic (can be accessed by the mother). In vi-gnette C the mother registers the exterior display of joyfulness of the baby and this triggers an au-tomatic reflective smile, which is External (E) and Non-Systemic (NS). In vignette D the smile trig-gers an immediate inner feeling of joy in the mother, that is Interior (I) and Systemic (S) and that, notwithstanding some qualitative difference, approaches the feeling of joy experienced by her baby. At this point both baby and mother are in tune and resonate emotionally. In this example, the exterior display (mediated by facial musculature) associated with the emotion of joy is what connects these two sentient creatures and, as it were, dissolves the Markov Blanket that is sepa-rating/isolating their internal states. (The facial display of joy may be comparable with the beam connecting two pendulum clocks which enables eventual synchronisation of their pendular rhythm: if so, then emotional resonance in primary intersubjectivity may be commensurate with the con-cept of sympathetic motion proposed by Christiaan Huygens in the seventeenth century!)   
 Box 1 Complementary notes on primary intersubjectivity and the Free Energy Principle. We argue that the specific form of “primary intersubjectivity” involved in the mimicry of facial expressions by humans can be referred to the concept of the generative “hierarchically mechanistic mind” (Badcock et al., 2019). With regard to sentient creatures, it derives from neurological considerations of variational free energy (VFE) that is a consequence of the Free Energy Principle (FEP). To begin at the beginning, according to the FEP it is through being limited to a restricted number of states that organisms, by minimising the variational free energy (VFE) of their internal states, are able to maintain themselves in non-equilibrium steady states in their worlds. When any system actively makes observations so as to minimise free energy, in so doing it is carrying out active inference and maximising evidence for its world-model. The minimisation is, in effect, a process of Bayesian inference. Because VFE is a function of inputs and their hypothesised causal probability-densities, it affords a variational density for a probabilistic generative model of predictable inputs from hypothetical sources and the marginal likelihood of outcomes. Conveniently, VFE can be analysed using Bayesian statistical methods (Bayesian model evidence, BME), whereby active inference can be described normatively as maximising (a negative free energy bound on the logarithm of) BME. The mathematical formalism is useful because it affords us various complementary interpretations of adaptive (sentient)   behaviour from the standpoint of the epistemic relevance of active inference. Minimising VFE reduces prediction-sensation discrepancies, “prediction errors”, which can be corrected by active sampling of predicted sensory inputs and perceptive modification of predictions. Minimising VFE corresponds to maximising  the likelihood of sensory exchanges for any organic system that can be regarded as engaging in sentient behaviour (Friston, 2013; Friston & Ao, 2012; Pezzulo et al., 2015). By actively adjusting its world into an expected state, an organism can minimise its own VFE. Organisms tend towards achieving intrinsic homeostatic equilibria with their surrounding worlds in which they are exposed to extrinsic impingements that eventually overcome them, and their death results in the freeing and dispersal of energy, causing an increase in entropy overall. Minimising VFE (and hence entropy) is an existential sine qua non in all organisms. An organism’s existence depends on its sensory states registering every impingement. Hence their corresponding entropy over the life of an organism reflects its success in minimising VFE and maintaining its existence by responses that are generated by active inference (be they internal, homeostatic adjustments, or externally-directed, allostatic responses). Sentient creatures belong to a class of self-organising organic systems that buck the trend of the general existential tendency of other cellular organisms towards maintaining a non-equilibrium steady state in the face of novelty, or “surprisal” (a neologism employed in Bayesian mathematical analyses, similar to “self-information” in Information Theory). Complex self-informing sentient systems are able to sustain non-equilibrium, unsteady-states, vis-à-vis extrinsic impingements (“surprisals”). A general FEP explanation satisfies the singularity by emphasising the applicability to all organic systems, be they more or less complex, of “Markov Blanket” formalism which allows minimisation of the difference between an organic system’s model of the world and its sense and associated perception. This difference can be described as "surprise" and is minimised by continuous correction of the system’s world model. Complex self-informing sentient systems that can sustain non-equilibrium unsteady-states, vis-à-vis extrinsic impingements, include evolved organs such as the brains of sentient creatures, including ours. Their cerebral neuronal components of hierarchical neural mechanisms, responsible for generating predictions grounded in prior experience, as well as responses to changing circumstances, which are generated correspondingly by active inference, underpin the concept of the generative “hierarchically mechanistic mind” (Badcock et al., 2019): an “inference engine”, so to speak, that is an evolutionary biological consequence of a propensity that has developed thanks to the genetic and epigenetic processes of natural selection.   
Figure 1  
