“Snakes and Ladders” in Paleoanthropology: From cognitive surprise to skillfulness a million years
ago.
Authors and   affiliations:  
Héctor Marín Manrique, Ph.D.,M.A.
Profesor Titular del Área de Psicología Evolutiva y de la Educación, Departamento de Psicología y Sociología de la Universidad de Zaragoza,
Facultad de Ciencias Sociales del Campus de Teruel, 4003 Teruel, Spain.  Email addresses:  manrique@unizar.es;  manrique.h@gmail.com
Telephone: +34978645340ext861340)
Karl John Friston, Ph.D., M.B., B.S., M.A., F.R.S., F.Med.Sci., F.R.S.B.
Professor of Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, and The Wellcome Centre for Human Imaging, University College London , London
WC1N 3AR, U.K.
Email address: k.friston@ucl.ac.uk.
Telephones: Institute of Neurology: +442034567890; Wellcome Centre: +442034484362
Michael John Walker, D.Phil., B.M., B.Ch., M.A., Dipl.Prehist.Archaeol., F.S.A., F.R.A.I., corresponding author 
Emeritus Professor of Physical Anthropology, Departamento de Zoología y Antropología Física, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Murcia,
Campus Universitario de Espinardo Edificio 20, 30100 Murcia, Spain 
Email addresses: mjwalke@gmail.com;  walker@um.es
Telephones:  +34620267104, +968265608
Abstract 
A scientific paradigmatic account suffices to interpret behavioral evolution in early Homo. Cognitive
surprises,  favoring  anomalous behavioral  propensities  to  sporadic expression,  can  explain “snakes-and-
ladders” appearances and disappearances of Paleolithic skills in the Early and Middle Pleistocene record.
The account applies the principle of stationary action, which underpins the free energy principle, to self-
organizing systems at an evolutionary timescale. Unusual personal attainments, often explained by invoking
progressive ascent of evolutionary phylogenetic “ladders” of cognitive and technical abilities, could be
disregarded  in  a  hominin  community  that  failed  to  imagine  or  articulate  possible  advantages  for  its
survivability. Such failure, as well as diverse fortuitous demographic accidents, could erase from collective
memory the recollection of exceptional individual conduct which disappeared down a “snake”, so to speak,
of the human evolutionary “puzzle”. The puzzle discomforts paleoanthropologists. Some explain it away
with  the  self-justifying  assertion  that separate  paleospecies  of  Homo differentially  possessed  cognitive
abilities that allegedly underlay the differential presence or absence in the Pleistocene archeological record
of traces of particular behavioral outcomes or skills. An alternative methodological perspective, grounded in
the fundamental relationships between organisms and their environments, affords a parsimonious, prosaic,
deflationary account for appearances and disappearances of behavioral outcomes and skills. 
Introduction
Evidence of Early and Middle Pleistocene behavior of the genus Homo, such as stone handaxes or
traces of fire, is distributed in disconcertingly uneven ways across the Old World between 2,000,000 and
200,000  years  ago  (2Ma-0.2Ma).  Paleoanthropologists  and  Paleolithic  archeologists  who  consider  the
irregular regularities and regular irregularities in the substantive records produce various explanations. Some
will be mentioned in passing (a separate review would be needed to provide a historiographical account and
detailed critique of them all). The logic that absence of evidence does not imply evidence of absence fails to
satisfy everyone. Because of the power of his theory of the origin of species by natural selection, Charles
Darwin could use such an argument to justify the presence of chronological gaps in the paleontological
evolutionary record conserved in the Earth’s rocks. By contrast, no overarching theory has been proposed
hitherto that can explain the substantive irregularities in Paleolithic archeology and paleoanthropology. 
Our proposal invokes a methodological paradigm grounded in existential principles that underpin the
evolution of living organisms. It is that some, at least, of the irregular regularities and regular irregularities
of phenomena attributable to  Homo in the Pleistocene record  reflect the kinds of plausibly anomalous
behavioral outcomes that doubtless occurred often in a “snakes-and-ladders” model of evolution in early
members  of  our  genus,  regardless  of  their  skeletal  paleospecific  taxonomy.  Our  proposal  envisages
parsimonious interpretations  for other irregular regularities  and  regular  irregularities  of the Pleistocene
1
record. We argue that it records some behavioral outcomes attributable, plausibly, to individual members of
Homo unable to maintain orthodox behavioral responses when faced with cognitive surprises (surprisal” in
Bayesian terminology). Such individuals may show a particular neurobiological propensity for exploring
unorthodox possibilities. The propensity has evolved further in humans than in great apes which, unlike
even our very young children, seem unable to envisage “how things might be as well as how they actually
are” (Russon,2004:86), whereas by coupling recall of past experience with prospective memory humans are
capable of “blending reality among different potential spheres” (Manrique and Walker,2017:41-53). 
Our argument is grounded in fundamental existential principles that underpin the evolution of living
organisms. Viewed this way, simple artifacts, whether pebble tools, bifacially-flaked stones (e.g.,handaxes),
or sharp-edged flakes, are “the almost inevitable by-products of least-effort flake-production using hard-
hammer percussion” (Shea,2007:219), echoing Ambrose (2001:1749) who considered they “reflect least-
effort strategies”. This observation is especially prescient with regard to interpreting stone artifacts at Early
and Middle Pleistocene Paleolithic sites. (Simple stone artifacts occur in later contexts, e.g.,quarries where
Neolithic axe-heads were prepared, sites where gun-flints were knapped, or where, in twentieth-century
Spain, pickaxes and sledge hammers were wielded at rock outcrops to strike flakes for insertion into wooden
threshing sleds or to break up nodules coated with calcium carbonate burnt for lime in on-site kilns.) 
Two questions arise. First, what is it that could provoke cognitive awareness as to the possibility of
fashioning stone handaxes  in relation to the affordances of raw materials and potential advantages for
minimizing bioenergetic effort? Secondly, what does this say about the irregular appearance of this regular
technique in the Pleistocene spatiotemporal record? 
The  approach  adopted  here  can  be  broadened  to  embrace  the  manipulation  or  modification  of
materials obtained from animals (e.g.,bones, horns, sinews, skins, fleeces, hair, bladders, fats, tusks, milk,
honey, feathers, shells), plants (e.g.,wood, fibers, gourds, oils, resins, pitch, seeds, nuts, spices), minerals
(e.g.,powders, tar, clays, fluxes, metals), and the manipulation, ignition, and heat-control of fire (hearths,
ovens, kilns, furnaces). Increasingly complex extractive and concomitant or consequent procedures appear
in several parts of the world at various times towards the end of the Late Pleistocene, including increased
killing, control, taming, reaping, and breeding of animals and plants, with the development of technologies
such as cordage, matting, basketry, weaponry, spear-throwers, wood-working, carving, archery, harpoons,
traps, nets, hooks, needles,  drilling, digging, reaping-knives and sickles, grinding, polishing, engraving,
sculpting, painting, pottery, plastering,  milling, mining, metallurgy, tree-felling, carpentry, building, water-
craft, machinery, signing-writing, vehicles, cookery, brewing, etc.  Once again, some seem to have arisen
separately and independently, in a “snakes and ladders” fashion, and with different outcomes at different
places and times: a well-known example are wheels, which, in pre-Columbian Mexico (Urcid,2017 and refs.
therein), were attached to 4-wheeled effigies or toys, but neither handcarts nor wheelbarrows were made,
which could have been used easily in low-lying Vera Cruz where wheeled effigies occur. 
The free energy principle (FEP) and the evolution of sentient human behavior
Organisms tend to expend the least energy compatible with survival; this underlies the existential
perspective on biological homeostasis. Adaptable self-organizing systems expend further energy however by
generating both predictions and, via active inference, responses to changing circumstances. Minimizing their
internal entropy postpones death  that causes dissipation of energy and increased entropy at large. This
thermodynamic (or metabolic) account of self-organization can be formulated as a variational principle of
least action, where the action (cf.,effort) is the long-term time average of variational free energy (VFE). VFE
is a cousin  of thermodynamic free energy but affords  a more abstract and general description of self-
organization, in terms of the probability of any organism or phenotype finding itself in a particular state. 
Technically, VFW is a mathematical bound on the negative log (marginal) likelihood of outcomes
experienced  by  an  organism  (or any  system) when exchanging  with  its environment. This means  that
minimizing free energy corresponds to maximizing the likelihood of sensory exchanges for any system that
can be regarded as engaging in sentient behavior (Friston,2013; Friston and Ao,2012). This mathematical
2
formalism is useful because it offers  a number of complementary interpretations of adaptive (sentient)
behavior. At the level of the physics of self-organization it provides a first-principle account of existence,
defined as maintaining a far from equilibrium steady-state when exchanging with the environment.
    
In terms of evolutionary theory, negative free energy can be regarded as adaptive fitness: namely,
scoring the likelihood of a particular phenotype, and being understood as the adaptive ‘fit’ of the phenotype
to its eco-niche (Campbell,2016; Constant et al.,2018; Frank, 2012). We can relate the minimization of VFE
to thermodynamic energetics by noting that VFE can be decomposed into accuracy and a complexity-cost
(Friston,2019).  This  complexity-cost  entails  the  expenditure  of  thermodynamic  energy  via  Landauer’s
principle  (Bennett,2003;  Jatzynski,1997;  Landauer,1961).  In  short,  minimizing  VFE  requires  a
thermodynamically efficient engagement with the eco-niche.
Specifically, VFE can be regarded as an information theoretic measure of how surprising various 
outcomes are, on average, for any organism. An organism that can model and predict its exchange with the 
eco-niche can therefore be said to have adapted to that environment and avoid surprising exchanges 
(e.g.,excursions from homeostatic setpoints) or being in very unlikely states (e.g.,injury, death). This is 
where the notion of cognitive surprise arises, where surprise can be read as a kind of prediction error. In 
information theory the formal term is “surprisal” or “self-information”; namely, the negative log probability 
of an outcome. In Bayesian statistics, the probability of an outcome under an organisms (generative) model 
of how its outcomes were generated is called Bayesian model evidence. In this sense, existence can be 
construed as the result of self-evidencing (Hohwy,2016).
The notion of self-evidencing underwrites much of the following arguments. However, there is an 
important nuance. Certain creatures may have evolved deep generative models with the ability to predict the 
consequences of their action. This kind of creature now has the capacity to entertain counterfactual futures 
under different actions; put simply, it can plan (Attias,2003; Botvinick and Toussaint,2012; Friston et 
al.2017; Millidge,2019). This is a key aspect of active inference under the FEP; namely, actions and plans 
are selected on the basis of minimizing expected free energy (cf.,effort) under that plan. More simply, 
actions are selected to minimize expected surprise by avoiding unlikely states of affairs (e.g.,injury) and 
resolving uncertainty about environmental states generating outcomes. Reducing uncertainty is important 
because it means that sentient behavior, prescribed under a deep generative model of the (future) 
consequences of action, has an epistemic aspect, rendering sentient behavior sensitive to salience and 
novelty. Only systems with this kind of deep generative model will show such exploratory behavior, because
they alone can respond to epistemic affordances and the possibility of answering “What would happen if I 
did that?” (Schmidhuber,2006;Schwartenbeck et al.,2019;Strill and Precup,2012).
Briefly stated, free energy can be regarded as the negative logarithm of input-samples experienced by
self-organizing  systems,  and  its  minimization  underwrites  their  existence  and,  implicitly,  reproductive
success.  Natural  selection  is  gradual  and  conservative.  Faced  by  environmental  interdependencies  and
regularities,  the  integrity  of  generative  self-organizing  systems  is  underwritten  by  adaptive  reciprocity
involving active inference referable to prior expectations entailed by a generative model and endowed by
evolution  (Friston,2010,2013;  Friston  et  al.,2006,2012,2015,2018).  In  terms  of  Bayesian  mechanics,
evolution and natural selection can be regarded as natural “Bayesian model selection”, which is also known
as structure learning in the cognitive sciences (Smith  et al.,2019). Evolution thus develops imperceptibly
and intermittently: biological, technological, and indeed psychosocial (Badcock  et al.,2019; Ramstead  et
al.,2017,2018,2019); the FEP concept is biologically, and especially  neurobiologically relevant, both at
ontogenetic  levels  of  cellular  dynamics,  neural  circuitry,  and  behavior,  and  at  phylogenetic  levels  of
populations evolved through natural selection of biological adaptations and adaptability. 
3
The FEP relates neurobiological evolution, of the brain and memory, to the evolution of prosociality
and cooperative behavior which advance reproductive success (a.k.a.,adaptive value, Darwinian fitness). It
accords with genetic and epigenetic mechanisms sustaining neo-Darwinian evolution, evo-devo theory, and
asynchronous  coevolution  in  Homo of  technology  alongside  anatomy  before  ⁓0.2Ma.  Asynchrony,
otherwise, is explicable only when an intricate Theory of Mind had evolved, enabling faster, non-Darwinian,
selection for social “functionality” (Read  et al.,2009), perhaps enhanced by slowly increasing linguistic
fluency  in  Middle  Pleistocene  Homo.  Statistical  considerations  of  classical  population  genetics  are
incommensurate with notions that Darwinian fitness in Pleistocene Homo increased imperceptibly through
gradual “dual-inheritance” co-evolution, by which genetically inherited changes in adaptive biological traits,
evolving  by  natural  selection,  proceeded  in  well-nigh  invariant  lockstep  with  heritability  of  adaptive
behavioral and technological changes. 
A “propensity to minimize surprise (resp. free-energy) is the consequence of natural selection: self-
organizing systems capable of avoiding such phase-transitions have been selected over those that could not”
(Badcock et al.,2019:1328). Among them is the genus Homo. Although ontogenetic autopoiesis may involve
action-perception cycles that,  vis-à-vis  pre-existing preference, induce cognitive surprises permitting, nay
mandating,  novel  behavioral  outcomes,  a  phylogenetic  consequence  could  include  unawareness  by
companions that those exceptions might allow new cooperative opportunities for minimizing the group’s
VFE1 by performing unaccustomed behavior to attain dubious benefit. Normative confidence in exploitative
pragmatic  priors  usually  trumped  uncertainty  about  explorative  epistemic  surprisals2 (cf.,Badcock  et
al.,2019).  Very  likely this  was  the norm in tiny  bands  of early  Homo, particularly  given our taxon’s
tendency to show greater prosociality and cooperative helpful behavior than even that most prosocial of the
great  apes which  is the bonobo (e.g.,Hamlin  and Wynn,2011; Hamlin  et al.,2007,2010; Krupenye and
Hare,2018). 
Without foresight or fluent communication, innovations often must have disappeared unremarked,
seen as useless and their creators’ “prowess” as misplaced energy and wasting itime needed for satisfying the
group’s existentially implacable energetics. Significantly, in maintaining basal homeostasis nowadays our
resting brain  exhausts  11.2  Watts/kg,  compared  with  1.25  Watts/kg  for  the  whole  body  (Aiello  and
Wheeler,1995), consuming 50% of its  glucose intake, and 20% of its oxygen intake of which 75-80%
powers cerebral neurons (Hyder  et al.,2013). It goes without saying that a million years ago,  H.erectus
activity must have met  greater daily energy requirements, otherwise we ourselves would not exist today.
Doubtless, tried-and-trusted routines predominated, and whoever performed them with daily efficiency was
trusted by the group, whereas eccentric or idiosyncratic conduct was treated with indifference and not
retained in collective memory or lore.  
Snakes and ladders
Such, we suggest, was the fate of various anomalous, idiosyncratic, behavioral activities performed 
by members of Homo during Early Pleistocene and early Middle Pleistocene times. Put simply, idiosyncratic
personal attainments, ostensibly reached, as it were, atop a “ladder” of technical abilities, could well have 
been disregarded by friends and family alike, who failed to imagine or articulate possible advantages that 
might enhance their survival3. Moreover, when percussive actions remove flakes from a stone core, “certain 
core forms may be “spandrels” (after Gould and Lewontin 1979): patterns created inevitably without prior 
hominin intention” (Moore,2010:23); thus, such fortuitous outcomes may not have been regarded by even 
their creator as “tools”, even though archeologists classify them as such from a standpoint of comparative 
morphology. Moreover, interpersonal communication was restricted, and language rudimentary if present. 
Furthermore, lifespan was short, with biological maturity attained earlier than nowadays, which limited the 
development of neurobiological flexibility in what in any case was a small adult brain, barely two-thirds the 
size of ours today. In short, pre-potent, routine behavior in prosocial early Homo plausibly resulted in failure
to become aware of the potential of idiosyncratic enactive outcomes.
4
Such failure, as well as sundry demographic accidents, would thus erase idiosyncratic behavior from
collective memory more often than not. Even when collective memory may have been retained by tiny
hunter-gatherer bands it would have been lost whenever they were extinguished owing to  demographic
vagaries,  such  as  unequal  sex-ratios  of  available  partners,  deaths  during  child-birth  or  resulting  from
sickness or ill-health as a consequence of congenital disability, infection, gum-boils, tooth-loss, or from such
unforeseeable perils as venomous bites/stings, food-poisoning, attacks by predators, or debilitating weakness
when food or water are scarce on account of pestilence, blight, drought, flood, wildfire, frost, snow, or other
violent climatic events. 
There  is  a  difference,  however,  between  a  spatiotemporal  “snakes  and  ladders”  picture  of
disappearances of tiny hunter-gatherer bands and appearances of others, and the “snakes and ladders” model
of individual idiosyncratic or unorthodox activity. Its heterogeneous composition renders the former picture
inappropriate for making predictions that can be compared or contrasted with archeological findings at early
Paleolithic sites, whereas the latter model, by focusing on the information theoretic and energetic constraints
on biological, neurobiological and psychosocial evolution, allows for the consideration of whether by doing
so it may offer a reasonable interpretation of the material record and, in particular, of the uneven distribution
across  the Old World of stone handaxes and evidence of Paleolithic combustion between roughly two
million and two hundred thousand years ago. 
Early Paleolithic enactment and the FEP
Conceivably, some kinds of artifacts that occur sporadically, infrequently, and intermittently in the
early  Paleolithic  record,  and  also  sporadic  evidence  of  fire  in  that  record,  were  simply  outcomes  of
spontaneous enactment  with  raw material. It might have involved both exteroceptive and interoceptive
neural networks, in idiosyncratic behavior, that might or might not reflect creative originality or innovation.
This skeptical critique may offer a way to understanding what lay behind not only early bifacial flaking of
large cutting tools, such as handaxes, but also the opportunistic exploitation of fire or frequenting of caves.
A prosaic approach to interpreting the uneven spatiotemporal record from an FEP standpoint is neither a
“Mickey Mouse” pseudoscientific vacuous pronouncement of the blindingly obvious, nor is it a backwards-
flying “Oozlum-Bird” solipsistic reductio ad absurdum. Instead, it merely inverts that narrative approach to
interpreting the deep past which draws for its inspiration on humane and social studies. In other words,
extrapolating  from  them  conjectures  about  plausible  prehistoric  activities  in  the  Late  (a.k.a.,Upper)
Pleistocene (e.g.,the European  Upper Paleolithic). The inversion subordinates the narrative approach to
critical scrutiny, particularly with regard to existential biological constraints on  much earlier Paleolithic
behavior in the Pleistocene, such that the narrative approach no longer seems to be the most appropriate or
most parsimonious interpretation available.  
The FEP leads to embodied brains that learn Bayesian probabilistic statistical models of the many
regularities in its surroundings. Such brains are generative models that can be construed as hierarchically
mechanistic  minds  (HMM)  that  avoid  surprises  and  resolve  uncertainty  through  exploration.  This
uncertainty could be about the physical aspects of the natural environment, such as stones or wildfire or,
indeed,  conspecifics  generating  sensory  information.  The  marginal  relevance  of  stone  ~3Ma  for  the
existential biological imperative of maintaining homeostatic integrity, and consequent reproductive success
and survival of inarticulate Hominina, plausibly led stones to be regarded as quintessentially predictable and
unsurprising and, crucially, lacking epistemic affordances implicit in tool use. Nonetheless, sporadically,
infrequently,  and  intermittently,  an  individual  could  entertain  more  expressive  (i.e.,deeper)  generative
models and respond to exploratory (epistemic) and exploitative (pragmatic) values (cf.,Friston et al.,2015).
She might discover novel ways of attaining predictable (unsurprising) outcomes, though her behavior, and
its outcome, may well have been disregarded by her companions, who learnt nothing from it, much less
foresaw potential uses for the novelty. All the same, such idiosyncratic behavior may trump prevailing
expectations that normally are unsurprising and therefore favor minimization of VFE, in line with FEP. 
5
As noted above, the minimization of VFE describes an organism’s propensity to adapt by self-
organization and can be understood as upper bounding the average of “surprise”, often described in terms of
prediction  errors.  In  these  systems,  priors  conformed  by  prediction  errors  in  hierarchically  organized
neuronal  circuits  underwrite  active inference.  Hierarchical  self-evidencing  brain  architectures  juxtapose
bottom-up prediction errors, referred from both interoception (e.g.,proprioceptive inputs from joints and, and
somatoceptive inputs such as headache, deep pain, sweating, bowel and bladder contractility, heartbeat,
blood  pressure,  respiration,  glandular  secretions,  hormone  levels)  and  exteroception  (e.g.,sight,  touch,
hearing, smell, taste), with top-down predictions based upon prior expectations (Pezzulo et al.,2015). This
way  of  minimizing  free  energy  (i.e.,prediction  errors)  engendered  by  interoceptive  and  exteroceptive
sensory modalities may undergird self-awareness (Allen and Friston,2018; Friston et al.,2017). On this view,
minimal selfhood emerges as part of a generative model that provides a parsimonious explanation for all the
sensations; namely “these sensations are generated by my body”, especially, interoceptive sensations that
come from the embodied self. This aspect of self-evidencing is potentially important, because the ability to
infer or differentiate itself from non-self is a key aspect of encultured active inference. 
The handiwork of early   Homo   in space and time  
Evolution  by  natural  selection  is  inherently  conservative,  and  emergent  neural  representations
exploited  by  lone  individuals  need  not  have  been  shared  automatically  by  other  minds  in  groups  of
inarticulate Hominina (e.g.,Australopithecus,  Paranthropus,  Kenyanthropus, early  Homo) whose  adaptive
priors guided their action-perception cycles towards adaptive  unsurprising states by way of minimizing
VFE.  Those priors  could  involve  neuroepigenetically-controlled  expressions  of genes,  favoring  routine
expectations (i.e., consolidating habitual behavior) to the detriment of recognizing the epistemic affordances
that  underwrite  curiosity  and  novelty  seeking  behavior.  In  consequence,  some  infrequently  found
technological aspects of behavior (e.g.,tending fire) may well have been isolated instances in the Early and
Middle Pleistocene; until such time as active inference brought about modification of structural priors4,
permitting adoption of novel behavior that hitherto had failed to afford adaptive advantage; plausibly, this
kind of structural modification involved a propensity for neuroepigenetic impingements on cerebral neuronal
circuitry.
How was remembered awareness, retrieved from personal short- and long-term memory, transmitted
as knowledge to others in whose memories it could become embedded, with a degree of fidelity sufficient to
enable intergenerational or intercommunal diffusion? How far was observational learning involved? Neither
biological nor behavioral reproduction were assured in tiny bands of small-brained H.erectus whose early
anatomical and physiological maturity furnished few childhood years for acquiring behavioral alternatives.
Language barely existed. Intercourse between bands was rare, social, or sexual. Risk was ever-present of
extinction, which eradicated accumulated lore and opportunities for observational learning. Unbalanced sex
ratios hampered reproduction of tiny bands. Untimely deaths were commonplace. Knowledgeable elders
were scarce. Precocious consolidation of cerebral circuitry hindered development of the coactivity between
prefrontal and caudal cortices that underlies agile working memory in adolescents (cf.,Finn  et al.,2010),
whilst conservatively  “protective” natural selection  underlay inherent prepotent  impediments in mirror-
neuron  circuits  that  likely  play  a  part  in  imitative  behavior  (Kilner  et  al.,2007;  Rizzolatti  and
Craighero,2004). Plausibly, the aforementioned possibilities led to spatiotemporal “snakes and ladders” in
Pleistocene human evolution, causing mind-numbing technological stasis, impinging with tedious slowness
on multidimensional landscapes wherein might take root a seed of reproductive success (a.k.a.:adaptive
value; Darwinian fitness).
 
Before reflecting further on the neurobiological constraints on behavior and cognition in early Homo,
and the likely consequences ensuing from the FEP, it is appropriate to outline a few aspects of relevance to
that inquiry offered by the early Paleolithic record. The oldest flaked stone artifacts come from the African
Late Pliocene sediments of 3.4Ma. Following the onset 2.58Ma of the Early Pleistocene, cooperative activity
is suggested by sporadic finds of non-local stone suitable for the conchoidal flaking that favors making
sharp-edged  tools.  Stone “handaxes”,  (bifacially-flaked  large  cutting tools, BFLCTs), along with  other
flaked LCTs such as “cleavers” and “picks”, appear first in Africa ~1.76Ma (Asfaw et al.,1992; Beyene et
6
al.,2013; Lepre et al.,2011; Roche et al.,2003), a time when  Homo erectus had supplanted earlier taxa of
Hominina, and  thereafter they pepper the Paleolithic record of Africa and Eurasia, unevenly in time and
space. From the later Early Pleistocene, BFLCTs occur at a few sites in western and southern Asia dating
from 1.5-1Ma. Readers should be aware that nowadays most authorities regard the Early (a.k.a.,Lower)
Pleistocene as lasting from 2.58Ma to 0.772Ma, a time-span characterized by the inverse magnetic polarity
of geological beds, which then gave way to the present normal polarity that has characterized formations of
the Middle Pleistocene and also the Late (a.k.a.,Upper) Pleistocene, the onset of which was around 0.13Ma
at the beginning of the last interglacial period. 
Until recently, BFLCTs had not been recorded in Europe from before the Middle Pleistocene, mainly
post-0.5Ma. Lately, a few examples have been published that were excavated in final Early Pleistocene
contexts  (i.e.,post-1Ma),  in  Mediterranean  regions  of  France  and  Spain,  namely,  at  Bois-de-Riquet
(Bourguignon et al., 2016), Barranc de la Boella (Mosquera et al. 2016; Vallverdú et al. 2014), and Cueva
Negra del Estrecho del Río Quípar, CNERQ (Walker et al. 2016a, 2020) where abundant evidence of
combustion is present 4.5 meters below the surface of the 5-meter-deep sedimentary sequence (Walker et al.
2016b) that was laid down between 0.99and 0.772 Ma. BFLCTs together with evidence of combustion come
from  mid-to-late  Early  Pleistocene  African  sites  when H.erectus was  pre-eminent  and  made  BFLCTs.
Nevertheless, it is unclear by what mechanism transmission of any such conjectural package could have
been  sustained  over  the  spatiotemporal  dimensions  involved.  BFLCTs  were  made  by  early  forms
of Homo during ~1,500,000 years.
 
 Even where several assemblages containing BFLCTs exist in geographic regions ≥500 kilometers
across, assignable to a broadly similar period of  time, perhaps ≥200,000 years long, it is imprudent to infer
that they reflect an unbroken “tradition” of manual behavior, handed down from generation to generation: if
a generation lasts 25 years on average, then 200,000 years imply 8,000 generations, which presents a major
challenge for a “culture history” approach to interpretation (cf.,Bailey 1983; cf.,Shea 2007). Nevertheless,
plausibly some archeological deposits reflect  intergenerational transmission of knapping handaxes, over
centuries  or  millennia,  perhaps  if  linguistic  fluency  increased  during  the  Middle  Pleistocene,  thereby
enhancing  the  reproduction  of  skills  in  particular  ways  that  became  engrained  in  a  social  group
(e.g.,congruent flake-removal from opposing faces of a handaxe: cf.,Wynn,2002; Moore,2016). 
The  argument  proposed  here  about  a  neurobiological  propensity  to  individual  enactment  in
modifying stone, considered from the standpoint of the FEP, is not concerned with a null hypothesis of
innate  “latent”  spontaneity  (Tennie  et  al.,2017).  Instead,  it  is  directed  towards  interpreting  irregular
regularities and regular irregularities, in the Pleistocene “snakes and ladders” record of appearances and
disappearances of BFLCTs.  Given presence of BFLCTs in widely differing biotopes, which likely led to
differential  behavioral  evolution  of  appropriate  subsistence  strategies  and  diets,  there  is  widespread
comparability  of  the  principal  morphological  attributes  of  BFLCTs  of  diverse  petrology  at  sites  with
contrasting  paleoenvironments  and  different  spatiotemporal  contexts  or  paleoanthropological  taxa
(Shea,2007). This renders unlikely any notion (Corbey et al.,2016) of a straightforward Mendelian genetic
basis  favoring  BFLCT  outcomes  by  natural  selection  for  a  specific  behavioral  adaptation.  Possible
accommodative  conjectures  include  interpreting  fundamental  similarity  as  indicative  of  activities  not
requiring direct application of the artifact in the extraction of bioenergetic resources. Those activities could
include demonstrating skillful manual (male?) prowess (Kohn and Mithen,1999; but see Hodgson,2009a and
Nowell and Chang,2009), or simply the removal of sharp stone flakes to use for working bone or wood, such
that BFLCTs were discarded cores (cf.,Noble and Davidson,1996:198).
Notwithstanding  plausible  flexibility  of  purposes  and  manual  techniques  underlying  BFLCT
outcomes, the late Derek Roe, renowned authority on African and European Paleolithic handaxes, who was
Oxford University’s first Professor of Paleolithic Archaeology, and teacher and good friend of one of us
(MJW), who twice visited CNERQ, remarked, that we are “confronted with the phenomenon that some
prehistoric artifact assemblages seem to display a strong tradition of bifacial tool manufacture, whereas in
others, bifaces are virtually absent… Explanation is certainly required, even if it may vary from case to
7
case. If it can ever be satisfactorily shown that such differences relate to chronology, or to a genuine
process of technological evolution, or to the traditional behaviors of different human groups, that would
clearly be of the greatest importance. In the past, assumptions of precisely that kind were frequently made,
although not often carefully argued” (Roe,2002:276). 
Roe’s encouragement of research at Oxford into  the microscopical analysis of stone artifacts led to
pioneering studies by Keeley who found that some Early Pleistocene Paleolithic artifacts from Koobi Fora,
Kenya, were likely used on wood or plants and that some Middle Pleistocene English handaxes were likely
used on animal tissues (Keeley,1980; Keeley and Toth,1981). This was also the conclusion of Mitchell’s
microscopical research on the Middle Pleistocene U.K. Boxgrove handaxes (Mitchell,1995,1997,1998). In
like vein, a residue of adipocere was found adhering to a handaxe from Israel and microscopy indicated
application to animal tissue (Solodenko et al.,2015). There are other studies at African sites, however, that
have identified plant residues including phytoliths on Early Pleistocene handaxes (Domínguez Rodrigo et
al.,2001) and flakes (Herrygers,2002). Early Paleolithic stone artifacts probably were applied in expedient
fashion to a variety of different materials, whether for extracting bioenergetic resources or for modifying the
properties of other materials, such as wood or bone, e.g., the 1.4Ma handaxe on a hippopotamus femur from
Konso in Ethiopia (Suwa et al.,2020). Despite their durability, bone BFLCTs are disconcertingly infrequent
(two Early Pleistocene examples come from Olduvai and a handful are known from Middle Pleistocene sites
in the Levant and Europe); it is hard to envisage them as being exhausted blanks that were discarded after
removal of usable bone flakes. 
A few scholars still subscribe to a long-held conjecture that BFLCTs formed part of a “life-support”
package that early paleospecies of Homo bore as a hall-mark from Africa, perhaps to Spain (cf.,Gibert  et
al.,2016; Vallverdú  et al.,2014). Absence of such a quasi-cultural package at early sites with  H erectus
beyond Africa (e.g.,Dmanisi in Georgia, and East Asian sites with  H.erectus) is then explained  away by
conjecturing that some  H.erectus individuals left Africa before the package arose. Furthermore, there are
European Middle Pleistocene Paleolithic assemblages with thousands of stone artifacts lacking BFLCTs,
e.g.,Vértesszőlős (Hungary), Bilzingsleben (Germany), and Isernia La Pineta (Italy), or have only small
numbers irregularly distributed in different levels or deposits, e.g.,Caune de l’Arago, Terra Amata, Payre,
Lazaret and Orgnac (France), Notarchirico (Italy), Swanscombe (England), Gruta da Aroeira (Portugal), and
the Atapuerca Sima de los Huesos and Gran Dolina (Spain), whereas at other sites BFLCTs show significant
presence, e.g.,Boxgrove (England), though notwithstanding the different representation of BFLCTs, all of
those sites have provided skeletal remains (bones or teeth) of individuals, ultimate descendants of H.erectus,
commonly assigned to  H.heidelbergensis, which often include specimens  with anatomical features  that
presage or belong to H.neanderthalensis. In the late Middle Pleistocene BFLCTs were made by precursors
of  H.sapiens in  Africa  (e.g.,  H.sapiens “idaltu”  from  Herto  in  Ethiopia)  and  Neanderthals  in  Europe.
Probably both used them in similar ways. Nevertheless, the uneven spatiotemporal distribution of BFLCTs
is undeniable.
Plausibly, some early BFLCTs in western Europe, particularly those made on smallish cobbles of
locally-available stone suitable for conchoidal flaking, such as flint, chert, quartzite, limestone, etc., may
owe little, or nothing at all (Mosquera et al.,2016:14; Nicoud,2013:260-261; Walker et al.,2016a:52-56) to
East African techniques of fashioning of BFLCTs from big cobbles or large flakes of volcanic rock, but,
instead,  represent  local  behavioral  responses  for  modifying  stone.  The  technical  skillfulness  of  those
responses  reflects  both  cognitive  versatility  and  manual  dexterity.  BFLCTs  undoubtedly  appeared  at
different times during the Pleistocene (including the Holocene) in widely separated  parts of the world
(Moncel  et  al.,2018a,b,c)  from  Australia  (Brumm  and  Rainey,2011;  McCarthy,1976:21;24  fig.8;
Rainey,1991) to Cuba (Villavicencio Finalé,2004). 
By no means all BFLCTs need to have been made for obtaining bioenergetic resources for human
subsistence, though, regardless of their purposes, their cognitive and manual designs and strategies were
responses  in  common  to  underlying  neurobiological  propensities  shared  by  their  Early  and  Middle
Pleistocene knappers. Early human strategies for obtaining suitable stone were somewhat indiscriminate
8
with regard to ease of striking conchoidal flakes from different kinds of rock. This follows because artifacts
at many sites were made more often on stone from nearby outcrops of rock, less than ideal for flaking than
from outlying ones of more suitable rock. This could reflect a strategy of least effort, given that stone is
heavy, and, furthermore, once made, stone artifacts still have to be carried to wherever they are deployed
(carrying stone is energetic work). Most Paleolithic archeologists  consider that only well into the Late
(Upper) Pleistocene did long-distance transport of stone for flaking become widespread, and many consider
long-distance movement of stone for knapping as having developed specifically in H.sapiens, though late
Middle Pleistocene  H. sapiens  used hand-axes (e.g.,at Herto in Ethiopia) or “Mousterian” flake artifacts
(e.g.,at Irhoud in Morocco and Qafzeh in Israel) comparable with those characteristic of Neanderthal sites. 
Particular tool morphologies can serve several purposes. Plausibly, many or most stone artifacts were
multi-purpose tools. Such eclecticism could well have an analogy in Australia where widespread chipped
stone artifacts,made in recent millennia by skeletally modern people, include certainly eight (A-H) of the
nine basic modes (A-I) for modifying stone by hand which have been defined by Shea (2013, 2017). As well
as BFLCTs there are sporadic instances of flakes struck from prepared cores, comparable in morphology
with European Lower and Middle Paleolithic “Levallois” flakes, and stone blades struck from prismatic
cores,  comparable  with  European  Upper  Paleolithic  blades  (Dortch  and  Bordes,1977;  Moore,2003).
Intriguingly, a BFLCT was reproduced by an Australian Aboriginal knapper unacquainted hitherto with
BFLCTs (Rainey,1997). The infrequency of those sporadic cases, over the space of the Australian continent
and the duration of ≥50,000 years of human presence there, suggests that it is just as plausible that they are
the handiwork of sporadic local enactment by individuals as that they reflect failures of long-term and long-
distance spatiotemporal social transmission. 
Given the implausibility of such transmission in Europe during the far longer timespan of the Middle
Pleistocene, sporadic local enactment by H.heidelbergensis could well have been responsible for puzzling
exceptional finds of what, at first sight, look like impossibly early instances of stone-working techniques
that flowered only much later on. Among such “precocious” finds that have been compared to Mousterian
“Charentian” convex scrapers of the early Late [Upper] Pleistocene) are finds from the early-to-mid Middle
Pleistocene  at  High  Lodge  in  England  (Roe,1981:238-240)  and  Caune  de  l’Arago  in  France  (de
Lumley,1975:776;1976:854; de Lumley-Woodyear,1971:298). Here, a well-fashioned thin quartzite handaxe
with signs of soft-hammer treatment  of its edges  (Barsky,2013:310,fig.3 bottom), excavated  in a layer
immediately above a level dated to ~0.565-0.525Ma, shows that hand-axes could be knapped with care and
attention in Europe before the middle of the Middle Pleistocene, thereby disproving a commonly held view
to the contrary. 
Longitudinal and transverse symmetry is a widespread feature of handaxes. Handaxe symmetry is
seen as early as  ~1.7-1.6Ma (Diez-Martín  et al.,2019).  It is  interpreted often as reflecting  a deliberate
intention to create a preconceived artifact (Shipton et al.,2018), implying a neurobiological propensity for
cognitive awareness, from time to time, that an imagined three-dimensional shape or form, such as that of a
handaxe, could be fashioned from a lump of stone (Wynn 1989:64-74, 2002; cf.,Hodgson 2009b,2015,2019;
Manrique  and  Walker,2017:61-101).  It  is  widely  accepted  by  Paleolithic  archeologists  that  formal
regularities of handaxes mark them out against manually flaked stones lacking those regularities regardless
of whether these come from sites where BLFCTs are present or absent. The double symmetry that is peculiar
to handaxes can be considered in terms of one notional secant plane at a right-angle to another. As already
mentioned, double symmetry is not a general feature of those other LCTs called “cleavers and “picks”,
despite the likelihood that, they were flaked by hand in a similar way to handaxes. 
Another group of manually flaked artifacts that are not LCTs consists of small “muffin”-shape cores
(often but not always discoidal) where a notional secant plane separates two unequal volumes, of which at
least one and sometimes both surfaces were flaked: from one surface only of which one or more usable
flakes were removed, sometimes by repetitive striking. The flakes can be more or less regular in shape
depending  on  the extent to  which the core  had  been  modified or prepared  beforehand,  sometimes by
peripheral knapping of small facets that could favor removal, variously, of triangular, oval, or oblong flakes,
9
by subsequent centripetal or orthogonal flake-removal. Cores were abandoned often, usually when they had
become too small for further removals. Early examples of the technique are attributable to H.erectus because
they have been excavated ~1.6-1.4Ma at African locations that have handaxes (de la Torre et al.,2003,2008).
It is present in Italy ~1.3Ma (Arzarello and Peretto 2010; Arzarello et al. 2012,2015) and at a Spanish site
with a BFLCT ~0.9-0.8Ma (Walker et al. 2013,2016b,2020,2022). A spatiotemporal “snakes and ladders”
scenario is not implausible. Although, to judge from some outcomes, the manual sequences of this flake-
removal technique need  not always have been predetermined or envisaged beforehand  (Diez-Martín  et
al.,2012,2015), as with the tendency mentioned earlier towards increasing congruence of handaxe symmetry
after the mid-Middle Pleistocene, so also there developed thereafter an increasing regularization of the
outcomes of alternative techniques of flake-removal, particularly from prepared cores in some parts of the
world, plausibly fostered by inter-group contact. 
 Strengthening the edges of flakes by secondary knapping (“retouch”) could enhance and prolong
their utility. Such secondary modification is found only sporadically before the Middle Pleistocene but
thenceforth became more frequent; it is seen also on many flakes that had been struck from simpler cores
that had not undergone preparation beforehand. Secondary modification of flakes may have facilitated the
fashioning of wooden spears that appear in the mid-Middle Pleistocene. It also may have facilitated hafting
of stone flakes. By around 0.2Ma stone flakes bearing traces of an adhesive substance (e.g.,tar,pitch) suggest
the hafting of tools. Somewhat later, a few more examples come from the early Late Pleistocene. They
imply an ability to combine three different materials, namely, a stone flake, tar/pitch, and a haft of wood or
bone. Moreover, the elaboration of pitch for adhesive use implies an ability to control heat. The sporadic
intermittent spatiotemporal discoveries are compatible with a “snakes and ladders” interpretation. 
The alternative ways of modifying stones that appeared after 2Ma, namely, on the one hand, to make
LCTs and in particular BFLCTs, and, on the other, to remove usable flakes from cores that also may have
undergone some modification sometimes in order to facilitate their removal, implies that  H.erectus could
carry out two different irreversible chains of the manipulative reduction of stone, implying a capacity for
haptic and  short-term WM, long-term memory (LTM), and prospective memory, beyond that of earlier
Hominina or extant panins. Artifact diversity implies that, at times, H.erectus could recognize not only the
irreversibility  of  their  respective  chains  of  sequential  manual  reduction  of  stone,  but  also  their
correspondence to  distinct morphological sets, which at least is comparable to the kind of “second-order”
cognition that is understood implicitly by preverbal toddlers nowadays who sometimes achieve subsequent
“third-order”  hierarchical  arrangements  (Langer,1998,2000,2006;  cf.,Langer,1980a,b,1986,1996,2001a,b;
Langer  et  al.,2003;  Leslie,1987;  cf.,“second-order  representations”  Leslie,1987;  cf.,“secondary
representations” Perner,1991). Conceivably, heterochronous evolution enhanced such cognitive capacities,
though they may have been less “representational” and more emergent neurobiological phenomena (Van
Rooij  et al.,2002); nevertheless, representation is not incompatible with the concept of a hierarchically
mechanistic mind. Immediate cost-benefit considerations, from the standpoint of the FEP, probably laid a
heavy brake on the adoption of technological innovation. 
The brain of   Homo erectus     
Undoubtedly the “snakes-and-ladders” picture owes much to unforeseeable perils and demographic
imbalances  in  tiny  hunter-gatherer  bands.  Life  was  brutish  and short.  The  H.erectus “Turkana  Boy”
~1.53Ma died ~9 years old, nearing adulthood (Dean,2016; Dean and Smith,2009; Smith,1993) and already
as tall as adults nowadays; our slow-growth childhood and adolescent growth-spurt evolved subsequently
with consequences for cerebral development (Semendeferi and Hanson,2016). His brain-to-body size ratio
was below ours (Ruff and Walker,1993). His cognitive capacity was between australopithecines’ and ours.
Early consolidation of brain circuitry likely constrained his mental agility. Parietal, temporal and frontal
lobes of Early Pleistocene H.erectus brains were smaller than ours. The prefrontal cortex, important when
making choices (Mansouri et al.,2017), was relatively small and narrow when compared against our modern
brain. Moreover, the relatively anterior situation of the precentral sulcus in Turkana Boy (Ponce de León et
al., 2021,esp.fig.S2-F) implies that the expansion of the inferior prefrontal cortex, which can be inferred
from endocasts of later crania, had not yet evolved in the brain of early H.erectus. 
10
Nowadays,  between  ages  12  and  30  human  intracerebral  connectivity  is  enhanced  as  fatty-acid
myelin sheaths envelop axons in white-matter nerve-fiber tracts between gray-matter brain areas. Even if
H.erectus prefrontal  cortices  contained  incipient  tracts  (Sherwood  et  al.,2005), precocious  adulthood
curtailed the cerebral development that in modern people continues (Sherwood and Gómez Robles,2017)
with neuronal myelination beyond age 20 together with the synaptic pruning of neuronal dendritic spines
that seems to enhance cognitive ability (Petanjek et al.,2011). Perhaps protracted corticogenesis evolved in
Homo ~0.5Ma, during the Middle Pleistocene. Moreover, learning can modify myelin development which is
influenced  by  neuronal  action-potential  firing  and  axonal conduction-velocity (Fields,2015;  cf.,Pope  et
al.,2018).  Protracted  maturation  of  prefrontal  neurons  may  induce  experience-dependent  changes  in
prefrontal  neuronal  circuitry  that  support  monitoring  alternative  goals  and  facilitate  corresponding
behavioral modification (Mansouri et al.,2017). There are genetic influences on cortical folding and surface
area in human fetuses (Grasby et al.,2020), and on post-natal development of cortical thickness; plausibly,
differentiation  of genetic effects  of “Wnt”  signal-transduction  pathways (q.v.,Komiya and  Habas,2008)
became pronounced during cerebral neuronal evolution in Homo after ~2Ma. There are well-studied regional
differences in the development of gray matter, which may be prolonged in temporal cortex, perhaps related
to its role in integrating memory, object-recognition, and audio-visual inputs (Gogtay et al.,2004). From the
perspective  of  the  free  energy  principle  these  differences  testify  to  structural  priors  that  inherit  from
epigenetics,  and  contextualize  experience-dependent  learning  (and  planning  as  inference)  at  a  somatic
timescale.
Before 1Ma,  H.erectus’ working  memory (WM) capacity would have been less than ours. Modern
human WM is positively correlated with the developmental extent, between ages 6 and 25, of white-matter
frontostriatal tracts, especially left-sided frontoparietal tracts (Darki and Klingberg,2015; Giedd et al.,1999;
Paus et al.,1999). Left-sided frontal, parietal and temporal cortices are important in memory, language, and
tool-use (Mars  et  al.,2017;  Orban  and  Rizzolatti,2012;  Peeters  et al.,2009; Ramayya  et  al.,2020).  The
complex relationships between short-term WM, long-term memory (LTM), and prospective memory, are the
object of considerable ongoing neuroscientific research. Interaction between modern human WM and long-
term memory (LTM) is a complex matter. Whilst increased maintenance in WM of a stimulus enhances its
later recognition in LTM (Hartshorne and Makovski,2019), if WM capacity is overstretched LTM can be
involved  in  task-performance  (Jenesen  and  Squire,2012),  and,  after  age  ten,  LTM  can  be  involved  in
inhibitory  control  when  updating  encoded  information  (Artuso  and  Palladino  2019).  It  is  imprudent,
therefore, to make simplistic inferences about the relationship between WM and LTM in H.erectus.
It is well-known that neuronal myelination in young adults is complete at different ages in different
parts of the human brain (Flechsig,1920). It develops differentially from before birth (Lebenberg et al.,2019)
and continues beyond late adolescence (Miller et al.,2021; Sherwood and Gómez-Robles,2017; Sowell  et
al.,1999).  By  contrast,  myelination  is  already  complete  in  pubertal  macaques,  and,  although  perhaps
incomplete in pubertal chimpanzees (Sakai  et al.,2010,2011,2012,2013), it is complete in these at sexual
maturity, whereas in modern humans it continues for some years afterwards. The extent to which this could
have happened in Turkana Boy cannot be known, but had he survived to age fifteen it could have been
complete by then. If so, then the range of behavioral options open to him would likely have been narrow.
The  foregoing  thumbnail  sketch,  selected  from  a  voluminous  bibliography,  suggests  that  ontogenetic
limitations of early H.erectus likely had phylogenetic consequences owing to a constrained ability, at most,
to  communicate  idiosyncratic  surprisals  and  consequently  predictable  outcomes  of  possible  alternative
behavioral responses at either individual or communal levels. 
11
Bearing in mind the work in hand
Practicing haptic manual activities is known to enhance neuronal myelination in the brain. Stone-
knapping is haptic behavior. It involves grasping solid objects. When people and chimpanzees grasp things,
cerebral neuroimaging registers more activity in human parietal and occipitotemporal regions than in those
of chimpanzees (Hecht  et al.,2013). Whereas in that respect chimpanzees resemble macaques, they differ
from those in sharing with humans coincident prefrontal somatotopic responses to transitive behavior and
intransitive observation of actions. Humans differ from both species in our arcuate fasciculus white matter
which  underwent  evolutionary  modification  affecting  temporal  lobe  connectivity  and  maybe  linguistic
ability  (Eichert  et  al.,2020),  perhaps  rudimentarily  present  in  H.erectus (cf.,Aboitz  et  al.,2010;
Arbib,2011,2012; Arbib and Rizzolatti,1996; Barnard,2010; Boë  et al.,2019; Petrides and Pandya,2009;
Stout and Chaminade,2007,2009; pace Berwick and Chomsky,2016; Putt et al.,2017). 
Stone-knapping  is  haptic behavior.  Haptic  WM  tasks  (Fuster,1999,2015) enhance cerebral white-
matter  plasticity,  and  white-matter  microstructural  changes  show  positive  correlation  with  cognitive
enhancement  and refinement  of motor behavior (Bengtsson  et al.,2005; Mandl  et  al.,2008; Roberts  et
al.,2010,2013a,2013b;  Scholz  et  al.,2009;  Van  den  Heuvel  et  al.,2008).  Paleolithic  stone-knapping
undoubtedly had similar effects. Cerebral neuroimaging of undergraduates learning to knap BFLCTs shows
changes in superior longitudinal fasciculus white matter between  frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital
cortices  (Hecht  et al.,2013,2015a,b; Stout  et al.,2011), with impingements, that plausibly facilitate rapid
attentional switching, on ventrolateral prefrontal cortices, the right inferior frontal gyrus pars triangularis
involved  with  determining  practical  outcomes,  and  the  inferior  parietal  lobule  where  the  anterior
supramarginal gyrus which appears to contain proportionally more gray matter in humans than in apes is a
cortical area associated with tool-use (Mars  et al.,2017; Orban and Rizzolatti,2012; Peeters  et al.,2009;
Ramayya  et  al.,2010).  The  circumstantial  evidence  seems  to  imply  the  adaptive  evolution  of  human
neurobiological propensities that support prospective memory in toolmaking, together with short-term WM
(including haptic WM), long-term WM, and long-term procedural memory and episodic memory of past
matters and things.  Those propensities were,  and are, phylogenetic outcomes of existential ontogenetic
programs  adapted  through  natural  selection  for  satisfying  the  bioenergetic  requirements  of  organisms.
However, teaching and learning stone-knapping skills are very different from a communicatively-challenged
H.erectus individual’s  spontaneous  enactment  resulting  in  a  disregarded  BFLCT  outcome  of  iterative,
enactive  haptic  lithic  manipulations,  regardless  of  any  neurobiologically-evolved  cognitive/neuronal
propensity for such enactment.
Despite an incipient propensity of cerebral neurons favoring the evolutionary enhancement of both
memory and alertness to alternative perspectives, Turkana Boy likely was mnesically challenged regarding
the requisite prospective memory for the consequences of actions. In late  H.erectus foresight is implied
when by 1.1-0.772Ma handaxes appear at sites where fire was tended, in a South African cave (Berna et
al.,2012) and a Spanish one (Walker et al.,2016b,2020) and at an open-air site in Israel (Alperson-Afil,2012;
Alperson-Afil and Goren-Inbar,2004; Goren-Inbar et al.,2004). Tinder and kindling, stored with foresight,
could be set alight by embers, brought from dying wildfires, and fire in caves was protected from extinction
by bad weather. Only in Africa are earlier signs of combustion recorded in Paleolithic contexts, e.g., at the
open-air site at Chesowanja in Kenya ~1.42Ma (Gowlett et al.,1981; Gowlett and Wrangham,2013) albeit
lacking BFLCTs. Tending fire can provide warmth, light, deterrence of predators, smoking/drying of wood,
skins, and foodstuffs, maybe including roasting/baking thereby gelatinizing starch and enhancing energy-
intake by facilitating digestion and absorption of metabolites while eliminating pathogens (Carmody and
Wrangham,2009; Carmody  et al.,2011; Ragir,2000; Smith  et al.,2015; Wrangham,2009; Wrangham and
Carmody,2010), and genomics hints that cooking began ~0.8Ma (Carmody et al.,2016). A study of the oral
biome preserved  in  dental plaque of  H.sapiens and  H.neanderthalensis (Fellows  Yates  et al.,in  press)
indicates a common tendency to ingest starchy foodstuffs that does not characterize apes and monkeys,
implying an evolutionary trajectory of consumption of energy-rich roots, tubers, and seeds by Pleistocene
Homo.     
12
Nevertheless, before 0.4Ma (400 ka) hard evidence is conspicuous by its absence from Old World
Paleolithic sites of those  fire-pits or hearthstones that could imply mastery of the requisite heat-control
needed for efficient cooking. Sporadic heat treatment of foodstuffs before then was probably inefficient. It
may have appeared, disappeared, and reappeared in “snakes and ladders” fashion. Nonetheless, from a
neurophysiological standpoint it is plausible that energy-rich foodstuffs, especially fatty acids, by enhancing
myelination and neuronal development (Fonseca-Azevedo and Herculano-Housel,2012) in H.erectus brains,
underpinned cerebral enlargement (e.g., in later Middle Pleistocene H.neanderthalensis and H.sapiens), with
evolutionary  development  of  intracerebral  connectivity,  mnesical  (memory)  capacities,  communicative
abilities, and cognitive awareness. These reduced uncertainty around explorative epistemic affordances, and
inspired  greater  confidence  in  possible  outcomes  of  hitherto  disregarded  activities,  thereby  favoring
pragmatic cooperative behavioral responses. 
Memory  informs  our  responses.  Incipient  evolution  of  human  memory  is  suggested  by  Early
Pleistocene Paleolithic finds and fossil Hominina skulls (Australopithecus; Paranthropus; Kenyanthropus;
Homo). Hominina separated ~6Ma from Panina (bonobo; chimpanzee). Neurobiological differences separate
panin from human brains (Ardesch  et al.,2019; Passingham and Smears,2014; Semendeferi  et al.,2011).
They  arose  via  evolutionary  divergence  in  cerebral  corticogenesis.  doubtless  involving  genetic  and
epigenetic transcription factors (cf., Benito-Kwiecinski  et al.,2021; Boyd  et al.,2015; Fiddes  et al.,2018;
Kosik  et al.,2018; Lein  et al.,2017; Suzuki  et al.,2018;  Wilsch-Bräuninger  et al.,2016). Whereas ~4-2Ma
australopithecine brains resembled panins’ in size and shape, H.erectus skulls ~2Ma enclosed bigger brains,
approaching later human sizes and shapes ~0.5Ma. Big brains have high bioenergetic requirements: chewing
foodstuffs facilitates their release, hence, unsurprisingly, brain-size in Pleistocene  Homo increased faster
than tooth-size decreased Gómez-Robles et al.,2017). 
There  were  consequences  for  behavior.  African  Hominina  ~2Ma  seem  to  have  become  aware
sometimes that the physical affordances  of some kinds of stone indicated  that these were suitable for
fashioning BFLCTs  (McHenry  and  de la Torre,2018).  BFLCTs  have been  found  among  Proboscidean
skeletal remains (Leakey,1971:64-66), implying cooperative activities. Getting and fashioning stone for
subsequent use suggest awareness of potential, albeit delayed, advantages for lessening the efforts needed to
acquire  bioenergetic  resources.  Such  behavior  draws  on  short-term  and  long-term  WM,  episodic  and
procedural memory, and prospective memory or forethought, to a degree well beyond the capacity of living
anthropoid apes. Short-term energetic costs when weighed against unpredictable medium-term gains could
have led to such activities being at first infrequent or sporadic rather than widespread or commonplace, and
accrual of reproductive advantage probably developed slowly over several hundred generations.
The process can be referred to the formal terminology of the free energy principle applied to
ecological niche construction (Ramstead  et al.,2017,2019) by saying that selection of adaptive actions by
organisms involves their assessment of the alternatives in terms of the expected free energy expressed as the
combination of epistemic and pragmatic affordances. Of particular relevance to the “snakes and ladders”
interpretation  of  the  Pleistocene  record  is  that  a  mathematical  consequence  of  the  Markov  Blanket
formalism5 underpinning the variational ecology model implies vastly slower rates of selective adaptation at
the  phylogenetic  timescales  than  the ontogenetic timescales  at which  individual  phenotypes,  including
behavioral dynamics, develop within its lifespan, or the timescales of cellular or intracellular responses,
measurable in days, hours, minutes, seconds or even milliseconds. In other words, individuals faced with a
surprisal, for which VFE can be regarded as a proxy, were unlikely to introduce novel behaviors that could
gain a ready foothold within Early Pleistocene communities before communicative skills developed in some
of them, which widened the social scope for active inference and perhaps had evolved by natural selection
within a shared framework of adaptive prior beliefs, favoring alignment of common expectations and joint
activities that affected their ecological niche (Vasil et al.,2020). Development of communicative skills may
well have been uneven in communities that, in any case, were very widely dispersed in time and space, and
it would be unwise to presume that all of those were equally eloquent who were responsible throughout the
Old World for archeological assemblages of the Early and early Middle Pleistocene. 
13
Concluding remarks
Neuroepigenetic phenotypical outcomes, including behavior, need not have evolved hand in hand
with genes shaping skeletal morphology or cerebral neuroanatomy and neurobiology in Pleistocene Homo.
This  follows  because  epigenetic  transmission  is  free  from  some  constraints  on  the  evolution  of
polymorphous genes, which their frequency-dependence can impose in populations of sexually-reproducing
organisms.  Plausibly,  a  neurobiological  propensity  for  brain  circuitry  concerned  with  enhancement  of
memory characterized behavioral evolution in  Homo and involved genetic and neuroepigenetic factors. It
could support our remembering  spontaneous  recursive enactments, e.g.,unusual  stone-flaking outcomes.
Such  priors  impinge  on  individual  (ontogenetic)  and  collective  (phylogenetic)  VFE.  This  provides  a
methodological  FEP  paradigm  for  relating  biological  and  technological  behavior  in  Homo  which  is
grounded in epistemologically sound, scientific principles.   
End-notes
Note that VFE is an extensive quantity. This means that the free energy of an ensemble of conspecifics can
be read as the sum of the free energies of each phenotype, on average over time.
2The expected free energy that drives planning or policy selection can be decomposed into epistemic and
pragmatic  components  that underwrite  exploratory  and  exploitative behavior,  respectively  (Constant  et
al.,2019).  
3In terms of the FEP, this can be read as failing to model or infer the counterfactual outcomes of some
culturally novel behavior, simply because there was no (evolutionarily endowed) generative model at hand
to predict this kind of behavior.
4Structural priors refer to the priors that determine the structure or form of hierarchical generative models in
the brain. Structure learning (a.k.a.,Bayesian model selection) can then be read as the selection of new forms
of generative model; for example, retaining new connections or levels in cortical brain hierarchies.
5“A MB is the set of states that statistically isolates (insulates) internal (systemic) from external (non-
systemic) states, such that changes in internal states are mediated by the states of the MB. The MB itself can
be partitioned into active and sensory states, which are defined by the following relations: internal states do
not influence sensory states, and external states do not influence active states. Now, we should note that the
terms  ‘active’  and  ‘sensory’  are  potentially  misleading.  They  are  only  meant  to  capture  relations  of
statistical dependence between random variables. This will be crucial to our argument..., as things that we
would not readily describe as literally acting or sensing in any meaningful sense can still be captured with
this formalism, since it entails only a statistical enshrouding of systemic states from external ones, and the
systematic statistical partition of the whole organism–niche system.” (Ramstead et al.,2018:190).
References
Aboitiz,F.;Aboitz,S.,et al.,2010.  The phonological loop. A key innovation in human evolution.  Current
Anthropology 51,Suppl.1:S55-S65. 
Aiello,L.C.;Wheeler,P.,1995. The expensive tissue hypothesis:the brain and digestive system in human and
Primate evolution. Current Anthropology 36(2):199-221. 
Allen,M.;Friston.K.J.,2018. From cognitivism to autopoiesis:towards a computational framework for the
embodied mind. Synthèse 195(6):2459–2482. 
Alperson-Afil,N.,2012.  Archaeology  of  fire:methodological  aspects  of  reconstructing  fire  history  of
prehistoric archaeological sites. Earth-Science Reviews 113(3-4):111-119. 
Alperson-Afil,N.;Goren-Inbar,N.(eds.),2010.  The  Acheulian  site  of  Gesher  Benot  Ya‘aqov,  Volume
II:Ancient flames and controlled use of fire. London:Springer. 
Ambrose,S.H.,2001. Paleolithic technology and human evolution. Science 219(5509):1748-1753.
Arbib,M.A.,2011.  From mirror neurons to complex imitation in the evolution of language and tool use.
Annual Review of Anthropology 40:57–73. 
Arbib,M.A.,2012. How the brain got language:the mirror system hypothesis. Oxford and New  York:Oxford
Univ.Press. 
Arbib,M.A.;Rizzolatti,G.,1996.  Neural  expectations:a  possible  evolutionary  path  from  manual  skills  to
language. Communication and Cognition 29(3-4):393–424. 
14
Ardesch,D.J.;Scholtens,L.H.,et  al.,2019.  Evolutionary  expansion  of  connectivity  between  multimodal
association areas in the human brain compared with chimpanzees. PNAS 116(14):7101-7106. 
Artuso,C.;Palladino,P.,2019.  Long-term  memory  effects  on  working  memory  updating  development.
PLoSONE 14(5):e0217697. 
Arzarello, M.;Peretto,C.,2010. Out of Africa:the first evidence of Italian peninsula occupation. Quaternary
International 223:65-70. 
Arzarello,M.;Peretto,C.,et al.,2015. The Pirro Nord site (Apricena, Fg, Southern Italy) in the context of the
first European peopling:convergences and divergences. Quaternary International 389:255-263. 
Arzarello,M.;Pavia,G.,et  al.,2012.  Evidence  of  an  Early  Pleistocene  hominin  presence  at  Pirro  Nord
(Apricena, Foggia, southern Italy):P13 site. Quaternary International 267:56-61.
Asfaw,B.;Beyene,Y.,et al.,1992. The earliest Acheulean from Konso-Gardula. Nature 360(6406):732-735. 
Attias,H.,2003. Planning by probabilistic inference. Proceedings 9th International Workshop on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics,PMLR-R4:9-16. 
Badcock,P.B.;Friston,K.J., et al.,2019. The hierarchically mechanistic mind:an evolutionary systems theory
of  the  human  brain,  cognition,  and  behavior.  Cognitive,  Affective,  &  Behavioral  Neuroscience
19:1319–1351. 
Bailey,G.N.,1983. Concepts of time in Quaternary prehistory. Annual Review of Anthropology 12:165-192. 
Barnard,P.J.,2010. From executive mechanisms underlying perception and action to the parallel processing
of meaning. Current Anthropology 51 Suppl.1:S39-S54. 
Barsky,D.,2013. The Caune de l’Arago stone industries in their stratigraphical context.  Comptes Rendus
Palevol 12:305-325.
Bengtsson,S.L.;Zoltán,N.,et al.,2005.  Extensive piano practicing has regionally specific effects on white
matter development. Nature Neuroscience 8(9):1148–1150. 
Benito-Kwiecisnki,S.;Giandomenico,S.L.,et  al.,2021.  An  early  cell  shape  transition  drives  evolutionary
expansion of the human forebrain. Cell 184:1-19 
Bennett,C.H.,2003. Notes on Landauer's principle, reversible computation, and Maxwell's Demon. Studies
in History and Philosophy of Science Part B:Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
34(3):501-510. 
Berna,F.;Goldberg,P.,et  al.,2012.  Microstratigraphic evidence of in  situ  fire  in  the Acheulean  strata  of
Wonderwerk Cave, Northern Cape province, South Africa. PNAS 109(20):7593–7594. 
Berwick,R.C.;Chomsky,N.,2016. Why only us:language and evolution. Cambridge Mass:MIT Press. 
Beyene,Y.;Katoh,S.,et al.,2013.  The characteristics and chronology of the earliest Acheulean  at Konso,
Ethiopia. PNAS 110(5):1584-1591. 
Boë,L-J.;Sawallis,T.R,et al.,2019. Which way to the dawn of speech? Reanalyzing half a century of debates
and data in light of speech science. Science Advances 5(12):eaaw3916. 
Botvinick,M.;Toussaint,M.,2012. Planning as inference. Trends Cognitive Sciences 16(10):485-488. 
Bourguignon,L.;Barsky,D.,et al.,2016.  The stone tools from stratigraphical unit 4 of the Bois-de-Riquet site
(Lézignan-la-Cèbe, Hérault,  France):a new milestone in the diversity  of the European Acheulian.
Quaternary International 411B:160-181. 
Boyd,J.L.;,Skove,S.L.,et  al.,2015.  Human-chimpanzee  differences  in  a  FZD8  enhancer  alter  cell-cycle
dynamics in the developing neocortex. Current Biology 25(6):772-779. 
Brumm,A.;Rainey,A.,2011.  The  Acheulean  downunder:modern  human  ‘handaxes’  from  the  Barkly
tableland of northern Australia. Lithics,J.Lithic Studies Society 32:49-61.
Campbell,J.O.,2016.  Universal  Darwinism  as  a  process  of  Bayesian  inference.  Frontiers  in  Systems
Neuroscience 10:e49. 
Carmody,R.N.;Dannemann,M.,et al.,2016. Genetic evidence of human adaptation to a cooked diet. Genome
Biology and Evolution 8:1091-1103. 
Carmody,R.N.;Weintraub,G.S.,et  al.,2011.  Energetic  consequences  of  thermal  and  nonthermal  food
processing. PNAS 108(48):19199-19203. 
Carmody,R.N.;Wrangham,R.W .,2009. The energetic significance of cooking. J.Human Evolution 57(4):379-391.
Constant,A.;Ramstead,M.J.D.,et al.,2018. A variational  approach  to  niche construction.  J.Royal Society
Interface 15:e141;20170685.
15
Constant,A.;Ramstead,M.J.D.,et  al.,2019.  Regimes  of  expectations:an  active  inference  model  of  social
conformity and human decision making. Frontiers in Psychology 10:e679. 
Corbey,R.;Jagich,A.,et  al.  2016.,The  Acheuean  handaxe:more like  a  bird’s song  than  a  Beatles’  tune?
Evolutionary Anthropology 25:6-19. 
Darki,F.;Klingberg,T.,2015. The role of fronto-parietal and fronto-striatal networks in the development of
working memory:a longitudinal study. Cerebral Cortex 25(6):1587-1595. 
de la Torre,I.;Mora,R.,et al.,2003. The Oldowan industry of Peninj and its bearing on the reconstruction of
the technological skills of Lower Pleistocene hominids. J.Human Evolution 44(2):203-224. 
de la Torre,I.;Mora,R.,2008.  The early Acheulean in Peninj (Lake Natron, Tanzania).  J.Anthropological
Archaeology 27(2):244-268. 
de  Lumley,H.,1975.  Cultural  evolution  in  France  in  its  paleoecological  setting  during  the  Middle
Pleistocene. In  After the Australopithecines:stratigraphy, ecology and culture change in the Middle
Pleistocene.  Butzer,K.W.;Isaac,G.Ll.(eds.)  Pp.745-788.  Paris  and  The  Hague:Mouton,“World
Archaeology”. 
de Lumley,H.,1976. Les civilisatons Paléolithique inférieur en Languedoc méditerranéen et en Roussillon.
In  La  préhistoire  française.  Tome  I,2.Les  civilisations  paléolithiques  et  mésolithiques  de  la
France,Troisième  partie,La  culture  matérielle  II  Les  civilisations  du  paléolithique  inférieur.  de
Lumley,H.(ed.) Pp.852-874. Paris:Éd.CNRS. 
de Lumley-Woodyear,H.,1971. Le paléolithique inférieur et moyen du Midi mediterranéen dans son cadre
géologique.Tome  II.Bas-Languedoc–Roussillon–Catalogne. Paris:Éd.CNRS,  Gallia  Préhistoire,“Ve
Supplément”.
Dean,M.C.,2016. Measures of maturation in early fossil hominins:events at the first transition from australopiths to
early Homo. Philosophical Transactions Royal Society ser.B 371(1698):e20150234. 
Dean,M.C.;Smith,B.H.,2009. Growth and development of the Nariokotome youth, KNM-WT 15000. In The
first  humans:origin  and  early evolution of the genus  Homo. Grine,  F.E.;Fleagle,J.G.;Leakey,R.E.
(eds.)Pp.101-117.  Dordrecht:Springer  Science+Business  Media,  “Vertebrate  Paleobiology  and
Paleoanthropology Series”. 
Diez-Martín,F.,;Cuartero,F.,et al.,2012. Testing cognitive skills in Early Pleistocene hominins:an analysis of
the concepts of hierarchization and predetermination in the lithic assemblages of Type Section (Peninj,
Tanzania). In Stone tools and fossil bones.Debates in the archaeology of human origins. Domínguez-
Rodrigo,M.(ed.)Pp.245-309. Cambridge and New York:Cambridge University Press. 
Diez-Martín,F.;Sánchez-Yustos,P.,et  al.,2015.  El  yacimiento  achelense  antiguo  EN1-Noolchalai  (Peninj,
lago Natrón, Tanzania):una visión geoarqueológica y tecnológica. Informes y Trabajos Excavaciones
en el Exterior (2013) 12:345-358. Madrid:Ministerio de Educación, Cultura y Deporte.
Diez-Martín,F.;Wynn,T.,et al.,2019.  A faltering  origin  for the Acheulean?  Technological  and cognitive
implications from FLK West (Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania). Quaternary International 526:49-66. 
Domínguez-Rodrigo,M.;Serralonga,J.,et al.,2001. Woodworking activities by early humans:a plant residue
analysis on Acheulian stone tools from Peninj (Tanzania). J.Human Evolution 40(4):289-299. 
Dortch,C.E.;Bordes,F.,1977. Blades and Levallois technology in Western Australia. Quartär 27-28:1-19.
Eichert,N.;Robinson,E.C.,et  al.,2020.  Cross-species  cortical  alignment  identifies  different  types  of
anatomical reorganization in the primate temporal lobe. eLife, 9:e53232. 
Fellows-Yates,J.A.;Velsko,I.M.,et al.,2021,  The evolution and changing ecology of the African hominid
oral microbiome. PNAS 118(20):2021655118.
Fiddes,I.T.;Gerrald,A.,et al.,2018. Human-specific  NOTCH2NL genes affect notch signaling and cortical
neurogenesis. Cell 173(6):1356-1369. 
Fields,R.D.,2015. A new mechanism of nervous system plasticity:activity-dependent myelination.  Nature
Reviews Neuroscience 16(12):756-767. 
Finn,A.S.;Sheridan,M.A.,et al.,2010. Longitudinal evidence for functional specialization of the neural circuit
supporting working memory in the human brain. J.Neuroscience 30(33):11062–11067. 
Flechsig,P.E.,1920.  Anatomie  des  menschlichen  Gehirns  und  Rückenmarks  auf  myelogenetischer
Grundlage. Leipzig:G.Thieme.
Fonseca-Azevedo,K.;Herculano-Houzel,S.,2012.  Metabolic constraint imposes tradeoff between body size
and number of brain neurons in human evolution. PNAS 109(45):18571-18576. 
16
Frank,S.A.,2012. Natural selection. V. How to read the fundamental equations of evolutionary change in
terms of information theory. J.Evolutionary Biology 25(12):2377-2396. 
Friston,K.,2010. The free-energy principle:a unified brain theory?  Nature Reviews Neuroscience 11:127-
138. 
Friston,K.,2013. Life as we know it. J.Royal Society Interface 10:20130475. 
Friston,K.,2019. A free energy principle for particular physics. arXiv:1906.10184. 
Friston,K.;Ao,P.,2012. Free energy, value, and attractors.  Computational and  Mathematical Methods in
Medicine 2012 2012:937860. 
Friston,K.;FitzGerald,T.,et al.,2017. Active inference:a process theory. Neural Computation 29(1):1-49.
Friston,K.;Kilner,J.,et al.,2006. A free energy principle for the brain. J.Physiology Paris 100:70–87. 
Friston,K.J.;Lin,M.,et al.,2017.  Active inference, curiosity and insight.  Neural Computation 29(10):2633-
2683.
Friston,K.;Adams,R.,et  al.,2012.  What  is  value―accumulated  reward  or  evidence?  Frontiers  in
Neurorobotics 6:e11. 
Friston,K.;Rigoli,F.,et al.,2015. Active inference and epistemic value. Cognitive Neuroscience 6(4):187-224.
Friston,K.J.;Rosch,R.,et  al.,2018.  Deep  temporal  models  and  active  inference.  Neuroscience  &
Biobehavioral Reviews 90:486–501. 
Fuster,J.M.,1999[1995]. Memory in the cerebral cortex. An empirical approach to neural networks in the
human and nonhuman Primate. Cambridge,Mass, and London:MIT Press,“A Bradford Book”. 
Fuster,J.M.,2015. The prefrontal cortex (5th edition). Amsterdam:Elsevier-Academic Press. 
Gibert,L.;Scott,G.R.,et al.,2016. Chronology for the Cueva Victoria fossil site (SE Spain):evidence for Early
Pleistocene Afro-Iberian dispersals. J.Human Evolution, 90:183–197. 
Giedd,J.N.;Blumenthal,J.,et al.,1999. Brain development during childhood and adolescence:a longitudinal
MRI study. Nature Neuroscience 2:861-863. 
Gogtay,N.J.;Giedd,J.N.,et al.,2004.  Dynamic mapping of human cortical development  during childhood
through early adulthood. PNAS 101(21):8174-8179. 
Gómez-Robles,A.;Smaers,J.B.,et  al.,2017.  Brain  enlargement  and  dental  reduction  were  not  linked  in
hominin evolution. PNAS 114(3):468-473. 
Goren-Inbar,N.;Alperson,N.,et al.,2004.  Evidence of hominin control of fire at  Gesher Benot Ya‘aqov,
Israel. Science 304(5671):725-727. 
Goren-Inbar,N.;Werker,E.,et al.,2002.  The Acheulian site of Gesher Benot Ya‘aqov, Israel, Volume 1:the
wood assemblage. Oxford:Oxbow,“Gesher Benot Ya‘aqov Monograph Series 1”. 
Gould,S.J.;Lewontin,R.C.,1979. The spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian paradigm:a critique of the
adaptationist program. Proceedings Royal Society of London ser.B 205(1161):581-598. 
Gowlett,J.A.J.;Harris,J.W.K.,et al.,1981. Early archaeological sites, hominid remains and traces of fire from
Chesowanja, Kenya. Nature 294(5837):125–129. 
Gowlett,J.A.J.;Wrangham,R.W.,2013.  Earliest  fire  in  Africa:towards  the  convergence  of  archaeological
evidence and the cooking hypothesis. Azania.Archaeological Research in Africa 48(1):5-30. 
Grasby,K.L,et al.(360 ENIGMA CONSORTIUM coauthors),2020. The genetic architecture of the human
cerebral cortex. Science 367(6484):eaay6690. 
Hamlin,J.K.;Wynn,K.,2011.  Young infants  prefer prosocial to antisocial  others.  Cognitive Development
26(1):30-9. 
Hamlin,J.K.;Wynn,K.,et al.,2007. Social evaluation by preverbal infants. Nature 450, 557-559. 
Hamlin,J.K.;Wynn,K.,et  al.,2010.  3-month-olds  show  a  negativity  bias  in  their  social  evaluations.
Developmental Science 13(6):923-9. 
Hartshorne,J.K.;Makovski,T.,2019.  The  effect  of  working  memory  maintenance  on  long-term  memory.
Memory and Cognition 47(4):749-763. 
Hecht,E.E.;Gutman,D.A.,et  al.,2015b.  Virtual  dissection  and  comparative  connectivity  of  the  superior
longitudinal fasciculus in chimpanzees and humans. NeuroImage 108:124–137. 
Hecht,E.E.;Gutman,D.A.,et  al.,2015a.  Acquisition  of Paleolithic  toolmaking  abilities involves  structural
remodeling to inferior frontoparietal regions. Brain Structure and Function 220(4):2315–2331. 
Hecht,E.E.;Murphy,L.E.,et  al.,2013.  Differences  in  neural  activation  for  object-directed  grasping  in
chimpanzees and humans. J.Neuroscience 33(35):14117–14134. 
17
Herrygers,C.,2002. A comparative analysis of wood residue on experimental stone tools and Early Stone
Age artifacts:a Koobi Fora case study. McNair Scholars Journal 6(1):65–75. 
Hodgson,D.,2009a.  Symmetry  and  humans:reply  to  Mithen’s  ‘Sexy  Handaxe  Theory’.  Antiquity
83(319):195-198. 
Hodgson,D.,2009b.  Evolution of the visual cortex and the emergence of symmetry in the Acheulean techno-
complex. Comptes Rendus Palevol 8:93-97. 
Hodgson,D.,2015.  The  symmetry  of  Acheulean  handaxes  and  cognitive  evolution.  J.Archaeological
Science:Reports 2:204-208. 
Hodgson,D.,2019. Stone tools and spatial cognition. In Squeezing minds from stones. Cognitive archaeology
and  the  evolution  of  the  human  mind.  Overmann,K.A.,  Coolidge,F.L.(eds.)  Pp.200-224.
Oxford:Oxford Univ.Press. 
Hohwy,J.,2016. The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 50(2):259-285. 
Hyder,F.;Rothman,D.L.,et al.,2013. Cortical energy demands of signaling and nonsignaling components in
brain are conserved across mammalian species and activity levels. PNAS 110(9):3549-3554. 
Jarzynski,C.,1997.  Nonequilibrium  equality  for  free  energy  differences.  Physical  Review  Letters
78(14):2690-2693. 
Jenesen,A.;Squire,L.R.,2012. Working memory, long-term memory, and medial temporal lobe function.
Learning and Memory 19(1):15-25. 
Keeley,L.H.,1980. Experimental  determination  of  stone  tool  uses:a  microwear  analysis.
Chicago:Univ.Chicago Press.
Keeley,L.H.;Toth,N.,1981.  Microwear  polishes  on  early  stone  tools  from  Koobi  Fora,  Kenya.  Nature
293(5832):464–465. 
Kilner,J.M.;Friston,K.J.,et al.,2007. Predictive coding:an account of the mirror neuron system.  Cognitive
Processing 8(3):159-166. 
Kohn,M.;Mithen,S.,1999. Handaxes:products of sexual selection? Antiquity 73(281):518-526 
Komiya,Y.;Habas,R.,2008. Wnt signal transduction pathways. Organogenesis 42(2):68-75. 
Kosik,K.S.;Nowakowski,T.,2018.  Evolution  of new miRNAs  and cerebro-cortical  development.  Annual
Review of Neuroscience 41:19-137. 
Krupenye,C.;Hare,B.,2018. Bonobos prefer individuals that hinder others  over those that help.  Current
Biology 28(2)280-286. 
Landauer,R.,1961. Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing process.  IBM Journal of Research
and Development 5(3):183-191. 
Langer,J.,1980a. The origins of logic, six to twelve months. New York:Academic Press. 
Langer,J.,1980b. Logic in infancy. Cognition 10(1-3):181-186.
Langer,J.,1986. The origins of logic, one to two years. New York:Academic Press.abc
Langer,J.,1996.  Heterochrony  and  the  evolution  of  primate  cognitive  development.  In  Reaching  into
thought:the  minds  of  the  great  apes.  Russon,A.E.;Bard,K.A.;  Parker,S.T.(eds.)  Pp.257-277.
Cambridge and New York:Cambridge Univ.Press. 
Langer,J.,1998. Phylogenetic and ontogenetic origins of cognition:Classification. In Piaget, evolution, and
development.  Langer,J.;Killen,M.(eds.)  Pp.33-54.  Mahwah,NJ:Lawrence  Erlbaum  Associates,“Jean
Piaget Symposia Series”.
Langer,J.,2000.  The heterochronic evolution of Primate cognitive development. In  Biology,  brains and
behaviour:the evolution of human development. Parker,S.T.;Langer,J.;McKinney,M.L.(eds.) Pp.215-
235.  Santa  Fe:School  for  Advanced  Research  Press,  “Advanced  Seminar  Series”;  Oxford:James
Currey. 
Langer,J.,2001a. The descent of cognitive development. Developmental Science 3(4):361-378. 
Langer,J.,2001b. The mosaic evolution of cognitive and linguistic ontogeny. In Language acquisition and
conceptual  development. Bowerman,M.;Levinson,S.C.(eds.)  Pp.19-43.  Cambridge:Cambridge
Univ.Press, “LCC3”. 
Langer,J.,2006. The heterochronic evolution of primate cognitive development. Biological Theory 1(1):41-
43.
18
Langer,J.;Rivera,S.,et  al.,2003.  Chapter  7  Early  cognitive  development:ontogeny  and  phylogeny.  In
Handbook of developmental psychology. Valsiner,J.;Connolly,K.J.(eds.) Pp.141-171. Thousand Oaks
CA, London and New Delhi:SAGE Publications.
Leakey,M.D.,1971.  Olduvai  Gorge.  Volume  3.  Excavations  in  Beds  I  and  II,  1960-1963.
Cambridge:Cambridge Univ.Press.
Lebenberg,J.;Mangin,J-F.,et al.,2019. Mapping the asynchrony of cortical maturation in the infant brain:a
MRI multi-parametric clustering approach. NeuroImage 185:641-653. 
Lein,E.S.;Belgard,T.G.,et  al.,2017.  Transcriptomic  perspectives  on  neocortical  structure,  development,
evolution, and disease. Annual Review of Neuroscience 40:629-652. 
Lepre,C.J.;Roche,H.,et al.,2011. An earlier origin for the Acheulian. Nature 477(7362):82-85. 
Leslie,A.M.,1998. Pretense and representations in infancy:the origins of “Theory of Mind”. Psychological
Review 94(4):412-426. 
Mandl,R.C.W.;Schack,H.G.,et  al.,2008.  Functional  diffusion  tensor  imaging:measuring  task-related
fractional anisotropy changes in the human brain along white matter tracts. PLoS ONE 3(11):e3631. 
Manrique,H.M.;Walker,M.J.,2017.  Early  evolution  of  human  memory:great  apes,  tool-making,  and
cognition. Cham:Springer-Nature,“Palgrave-Macmillan:Palgrave Pivot”. 
Mansouri,F.A.;Koechlin,É.,et al.,2017. Managing competing goals―a key role for the frontopolar cortex.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 18(11):645-657. 
Mars,R.B.;Passingham,R.E.,et al.,2017. 4.12 Evolutionary specializations of human association cortex. In
Evolution of nervous systems (2nd edition), Volume 4, Kaas,J.H.(gen.ed.), The evolution of the human
brain:apes and other ancestors. Preuss,T.M.(ed.) Pp.185-205. Amsterdam:Elsevier,“Academic Press”.
McCarthy,F.D.,1976. Australian Aboriginal stone implements:including bone, shell and tooth implements.
(Second edition revised). Sydney:Australian Museum Trust. 
McHenry, L.J.;de la Torre,I.,2018. Hominin raw material procurement in the Oldowan-Acheulean transition
at Olduvai Gorge. J.Human Evolution 120:3378-401. 
Miller,D.J.;Duka,T.,et  al.,2012.  Prolonged  myelination  in  human  neocortical  evolution.  PNAS
109(41):16480–16485. 
Millidge,B.,2019. Deep active inference as variational policy gradients. arXiv:1907.03876. 
Mitchell,J.C.,1995.  Studying  biface  utilisation  at  Boxgrove:roe  deer  butchery  with  replica  handaxes.
Lithics,Newsletter Lithic Studies Society 15:64-69.
Mitchell,J.C.,1997. Quantitative image analysis of lithic microwear on flint handaxes.  Microscopy and
Analysis (U.K.)61:15-17; European Microscopy and Analysis (September 1997)53:13-15; Microscopy
and Analysis (U.S.)26:15-17.
Mitchell,J.C.,1998.  A  use-wear  analysis  of  selected  British  Lower  Palaeolithic  handaxes  with  special
reference to the site of Boxgrove (West Sussex):a study incorporating optical microscopy, computer
aided image analysis and experimental archaeology. Oxford:Oxford University (unpublished D.Phil.
thesis)
Moncel,M-H.;Arzarello,M.,et al.,2018a,b,c.  a:The assemblages with bifacial tools in Eurasia (first part).
What is going on in the West? Data on western and southern Europe and the Levant. Comptes Rendus
Palevol 17(1-2):45-60; b:The assemblages with bifacial tools in Eurasia (second part). What is going
on in the East? Data from India, Asia and Southeast Asia.  Comptes Rendus Palevol 17(1-2):61-76;
c:Assemblages with bifacial tools in Eurasia (third part). Considerations on the bifacial phenomenon
throughout Eurasia. Comptes Rendus Palevol 17(1-2):77-97. 
Moore,M.W.,2003. Australian Aboriginal blade production methods on the Georgina River, Camooweal,
Queensland. Lithic Technology 28(1):35-63.
Moore,M.W.,2010. “Grammars of action” and stone flaking design space. In Stone tools and the evolution
of human cognition. Nowell,A.;Davidson,I.(eds.) Pp.13-43. Boulder:Univ.Press of Colorado.
Moore,M.W.,2016. Flake making the “cognitive Rubicon”:insights from stone-knapping experiments. In
Squeezing  minds  from  stones.  Cognitive  archaeology  and  the  evolution  of  the  human  mind.
Overmann,K.A.;Coolidge,F.L.(eds.) Pp.179-199. Oxford:Oxford Univ.Press. 
Mosquera,M.;Ollé,A.,et  al.,2016.  The Early  Acheulean  technology  of Barranc  de la Boella  (Catalonia,
Spain). Quaternary International 393:95-111. 
19
Nicoud,E.,2013.  Le  paradoxe  acheuléen.  Paris:Éditions  du  Comité  des  Travaux  Historiques  et
Scientifiques,“Documents préhistoriques t.2, Bibliothèque Écoles Françaises d’Athènes et de Rome
fasc.356e.”
Noble,W.;Davidson.I.,1996.  Human evolution, language and mind. A psychological and archaeological
inquiry. Cambridge:Cambridge Univ.Press. 
Nowell,A.;Chang,M.L.,2009. The case against sexual selection as an explanation of handaxe morphology.
PaleoAnthropology 2009:77-88.
Orban,G.A.;Rizzolatti,G.,2012.  An  area  specifically  devoted to  tool  use in human  left inferior  parietal
lobule. Behavioral and Brain Science 35(4):234.
Passingham,R.E.;Smaers,J.B.,2014.  Is  the  prefrontal  cortex  especially  enlarged  in  the  human  brain?
Allometric relations and remapping factors. Brain,Behavior and Evolution 84(2):156–166. 
Paus,T.;Zijdenbos,A.,  et al.,1999. Structural maturation of neural pathways in children and adolescents:in
vivo study. Science 283(5409):1108-1011. 
Peeters,R.;Simone,L.,  et al.,2009. The representation of tool use in humans and monkeys:common and
uniquely human features. J.Neuroscience 29(37):11523-11539. 
Perner,J.,1991. Understanding the representational mind. Cambridge,Mass:MIT Press,  “A Bradford Book”.
Petanjek,Z.;Judaš,M.,et al.,2011. Extraordinary neoteny of synaptic spines in the human prefrontal cortex.
PNAS 108(32):13281-13286. 
Petrides,M.;Pandya,D.N.,2009. Distinct parietal and temporal pathways to the homologues of Broca’s area
in the monkey. PLoSBiol, 7(8):e1000170. 
Pezzulo,G.;Rigoli,F.,et al.,2015. Active inference, homeostatic regulation and adaptive behavioural control.
Progress in Neurobiology 134:17-36. 
Ponce de León,M.S.;Bienvenu,T.,et al.,2021. The primitive brain of early  Homo.  Science 372(6538):165-
171.
Pope,S.M.;Taglialatela,J..,et al.,2018. Changes in frontoparietotemporal connectivity following Do-As-I-Do
imitation training in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). J.Cognitive Neuroscience 30(3):421-431.
Putt,S.S.;Wijeakumar,S.,et  al.,2017.  The  functional  brain  networks  that  underlie  Early  Stone  Age  tool
manufacture. Nature Human Behaviour 1:e102. 
Ragir,S.,2000. Diet and food preparation:rethinking early hominid behavior.  Evolutionary Anthropology
9:153-155. 
Rainey,A.C.,1991. Some Australian bifaces. Lithics,Newsletter Lithic Studies Society 12:33-6.
Rainey,A.C.,1997. An artist at work. Lithics,Newsletter Lithic Studies Society 17-18:15-8.
Ramayya,A.G.;Glasser,M.F.,et  al.,2010.  A  DTI  investigation  of  neural  substrates  supporting  tool  use.
Cerebral Cortex 20(3):507-516. 
Ramstead,M.J.D.;Badcock,.B.,et  al.,2017.  Answering  Schrödinger’s  question:a  free-energy  formulation.
Physics of Life Reviews 24:1-16. 
Ramstead,M.J.D.;Constant,A.,et al.,2018.  Variational ecology and the physics of sentient systems. Physics
of Life Reviews 31:188-205. 
Read,D.;Lane,D.,et  al.,2009.  The  innovation  innovation.  In  Complexity  perspectives  in  innovation  and
social change. Lane,D.;Pumain,D.;Van der Leeuw,S.E.;West,G.(eds.) Pp.45-84. Dordrecht:Springer
Science+Business Media,“Methodos Series 7”. 
Rizzolatti,G.;Craighero,L.,2004. The mirror-neuron system. Annual Review of Neuroscience 27:169-192. 
Roberts,R.E.;Anderson,E.J.,et al.,2010. Expert cognitive control and individual differences associated with
frontal and parietal white matter microstructure. J.Neuroscience 30(50):17063–17067. 
Roberts,R.E.;Anderson,E.J.,et  al.,2013a.  White  matter  microstructure  and  cognitive  function.   The
Neuroscientist 19(1):8–15. 
Roberts,R.E.;Bain,P.G.,et al.,2013b. Individual differences in expert motor coordination associated with
white matter microstructure in the cerebellum. Cerebral Cortex 23(10):2282–2292. 
Roche,H;Brugal.J.P.,et al., 2003.  Les sites archéologiques plio-pléistocènes de la formation de Nachukui,
Ouest-Turkana, Kenya:bilan synthétique 1997–2001. Comptes Rendus Palevol 2(8):663-673. 
Roe,D.A.,1981. The Lower and Middle Palaeolithic periods in Britain. London:Routledge and Kegan Paul.
20
Roe,D.A.,2002. An overview, with some thoughts on the study of bifaces.  In Multiple approaches to the
study  of  bifacial  technologies.  Soressi,M.,  Dibble,H-L.(eds.)  Pp.273-285.  Philadelphia:Univ.
Pennsylvania, Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology.  
Ruff,C.B.;Walker,A.,1993.  Body  size  and  body  shape.  In  The  Nariokotome Homo  erectus  skeleton.
Walker,A.;Leakey,R.(eds.) Pp.234-265. Berlin:Springer; Cambridge, Mass:Harvard University Press. 
Russon,A.E.,2004. Great ape cognitive systems. In The evolution of thought:evolutionary origins of great
ape  intelligence. Russon,A.E;Begun,D.R.(eds.)  Pp.76-100.  Cambridge  and  New  York:Cambridge
Univ.Press. 
Sakai,T.;Hirai,D.,et  al.,  2010.  Nature  precedings,  pre-publication  research  and  preliminary
findings:prolonged maturation of prefrontal white matter in chimpanzees. hdl:10101/npre.2010.4411.1
Sakai,T.;Mikami,A.,et  al.,2011.  Differential  prefrontal white  matter  development  in  chimpanzees  and
humans. Current Biology 21(16):1397–1402. 
Sakai,T.;Hirata,S.,et al.,2012.  Fetal brain  development  in chimpanzees versus  humans.  Current Biology
22(18):R791-R792. 
Sakai,T.;Matsui,M.,et al.,2013. Developmental patterns of chimpanzee cerebral tissues provide important
clues for understanding the remarkable enlargement of the human brain. Proceedings Royal Society
ser.B 280(1753):e20122398. 
Sano,K.;Beyene,Y.,et al.,2020. A 1.4-million-year-old bone handaxe from Konso, Ethiopia, shows advanced
tool technology in the early Acheulean. PNAS 117(31):18393-18400. 
Schmidhuber,J.,2006. Developmental robotics, optimal artificial curiosity, creativity, music, and the fine
arts. Connection Science 18(2):173-187. 
Scholz,J.;Klein,M.C.,et al.,2009. Training induces changes in white-matter architecture.  Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 12(11):1370–1371. 
Schwartenbeck,P.;Passecker,J.,et  al.,2019.  Computational  mechanisms  of  curiosity  and  goal-directed
exploration. Elife 8:e41703. 
Semendeferi,K.;Hanson,K.L.,2016.  Plastic  and  heterogeneous:postnatal  developmental  changes  in  the
human brain. In Costly and cute:helpless infants and human evolution. Trevathan,W.R.;Rosenberg,K.
(eds)  Pp.133-147.  Santa  Fe:School  for  Advanced  Research  Press,  “Advanced  Seminar  Series”;
Albuquerque:Univ.New Mexico Press. 
Semendeferi,K.;Teffer,K.,et al.,2011. Spatial organization of neurons in the frontal pole sets humans apart
from great apes. Cerebral Cortex 21(7):1485-1497. 
Shea,J.J.,2007. Lithic archaeology, or, what stone tools can (and can’t) tell us about early hominin diets. In
Evolution of the human diet:the known, the unknown and the unknowable. Ungar,P.(ed.) Pp.212-229.
Oxford:Oxford Univ.Press. 
Shea,J.J.,2013.  Lithic  modes  A–I:a  new  framework  for  describing  global-scale  variation  in  stone  tool
technology illustrated with evidence from the East Mediterranean Levant.  J.Archaeological Method
and Theory 20(1):151-186. 
Shea,J.J.,2017.  Stone  tools  in  human  evolution:behavioral  differences  among  technological  Primates.
Cambridge and New York:Cambridge Univ.Press. 
Sherwood,C.C.;Gómez-Robles,A.,2017.  Brain  plasticity  and  human  evolution.  Annual  Review  of
Anthropology 46:399-419. 
Sherwood,C.C.; Holloway,R.L.,et al.,2005. Is prefrontal white matter enlargement a human evolutionary
specialization? Nature Neuroscience 8(5):537-538. 
Shipton,C.;Clarkson,C.,et al.,2018. Were Acheulean bifaces deliberately made symmetrical? Archaeological
and experimental evidence. Cambridge Archaeological Journal 29(1):65-79. 
Smith,A.R.;Carmody,R.N.,et al.,2015. The significance of cooking for early hominin scavenging. J. Human
Evolution 84:62-70. 
Smith,B.H.,1993. The physiological age of KNM-WT 15000. In The Nariokotome Homo erectus skeleton.
Walker,A.;Leakey,R.(eds.) Pp.195-220. Berlin:Springer; Cambridge, Mass:Harvard Univ.Press.
Smith,R.;Schwartenbeck,P.,et al.,2019. An active inference approach to modeling structure learning:concept
learning as an example case. bioRxiv:633677.
Solodenko,N.;Zupancich,A.,et al.,2015. Fat residue and use-wear found on Acheulian biface and scraper associated
with butchered elephant remains at the site of Revadim, Israel. PLoS ONE 10(3):e0118572. 
21
Sowell,E.R.;Thompson,P.M.,et al.,1999. In vivo evidence for post-adolescent brain maturation in frontal
and striatal regions. Nature Neuroscience 2(10):859-861. 
Still,S.;Precup,D.,2012.  An  information-theoretic  approach  to  curiosity-driven  reinforcement  learning.
Theory in Biosciences 131(3):139-148. 
Stout,D.;Chaminade,T.,2007. The evolutionary neuroscience of tool making. Neuropsychologia 45(5):1091-
1100. 
Stout,D.;Chaminade,T.,2009.  Making  tools  and  making  sense:complex,  intentional  behaviour  in  human
evolution. Cambridge Archaeological Journal 19(1):85-96. 
Stout,D.;Passingham,R.,et  al.,2011.  Technology,  expertise  and  social  cognition  in  human  evolution.
European J. Neuroscience 33(7):1328–1338. 
Suzuki,J.;Gacquer,D.,et al.,2018. Human-specific NOTCH2NL genes expand cortical neurogenesis through
Delta/Notch regulation. Cell 173(6):1370-1384. 
Tennie,C.;Premo,L.S.,et al.,2017. Early stone tools and cultural transmission. Resetting the null hypothesis.
Current Anthropology 58(5):652-672. 
Urcid Serrano,J.,2017. El concepto de la rueda en Mesoamérica. Arqueología Mexicana 25(147):74-78. 
Vallverdú,J.;Saladié,P.,et al.,2014. Age and date for early arrival of the Acheulian in Europe (Barranc de la
Boella, la Canonja, Spain). PLoS ONE 9(7):e103634. 
Van den Heuvel,M.P.;Mandl,R.C.W.,et al.,2008. Microstructural organization of the cingulum tract and the
level of default mode functional connectivity.  J.Neuroscience 28(43):10844–10851. 
Van  Rooij,I.;Bongers,R.M.,et  al.,2002.  A  non-representational  approach  to  imagined  action.  Cognitive
Science 26(3):345–375.   
Vasil,J.;Badcock,P.B.,et  al.,2020.  A  world  unto  itself:communication  as  active  inference.  Frontiers  in
Psychology 11:e417 
Villavicencio Finalé,R.,2004. ¿Hachas de mano en Cuba? Santa Clara:Capiro. 
Walker,M.K.;Anesin,D.,et  al.,2016a.  A  view  from  a  cave:Cueva  Negra  del  Estrecho  del  Río  Quípar
(Caravaca  de  la  Cruz,  Murcia,  southeastern  Spain).  Reflections  on  fire,  technological  diversity,
environmental exploitation, and palaeoanthropological approaches. Human Evolution 31(1-2):1-67. 
Walker,M.J.;Anesin,D.,et al.,2016b.  Combustion at the late Early Pleistocene Palaeolithic site of Cueva
Negra del Estrecho del Río Quípar (Caravaca de la Cruz, Murcia, Spain).  Antiquity 90(351):571-589. 
Walker,M.J.;Haber Uriarte,M.,et al.,2020. Cueva Negra del Estrecho del Río Quípar:a dated late Early
Pleistocene Palaeolithic site in southeastern Spain. J.Paleolithic Archaeology 3(4):816-855. 
Walker,M.J.;Haber Uriarte,M.,et al., 2022- Cueva Negra del Estrecho del Río Quípar: Comings and goings
recorded  in  a  late  Early  (Lower)  Pleistocene  microstratigraphical  palimpsest.  L’Anthropologie
126(1):102995.
Walker,M.J.;López-Martínez,M.V.,et al.,2013. Cueva Negra del Estrecho del Río Quípar (Murcia, Spain) a
late  Early  Pleistocene  site  with  an  “Acheulo-Levalloiso-Mousteroid”  Palaeolithic  assemblage.
Quaternary International 294:135-159. 
Wilsch-Bräuninger,M.;Florio,M.,et al.,2016. Neocortex expansion in development and evolution—from cell
biology to single genes. Current Opinion Neurobiology 39:122-132. 
Wrangham,R.,2009. Catching fire. How cooking made us human. New York:Profile Books; London:Basic
Books. 
Wrangham,R.;Carmody,R.,2010.  Human  adaptation  to  the  control  of  fire.  Evolutionary  Anthropology
19(5):187-199. 
Wynn,T.,1989.  The  evolution  of  spatial  competence.  Urbana  and  Chicago:Univ.Illinois  Press,  “Illinois
Studies in Anthropology 17”. 
Wynn, T.,2002. Archaeology and cognitive evolution. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 25(3):389-438.
22
i