Volume 7 | Issue 3 | 1 of 7
Chem Pharm Res, 2025
Critique of the "Free Energy Principle" of Consciousness
1MX Biotech Ltd., Jerusalem, Israel.
2Institute of Chemistry, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel.
Gerard Marx1* and Chaim Gilon2
Chemical & Pharmaceutical Research
ISSN 2689-1050Research Article
Citation: Gerard Marx Chaim Gilon. Critique of the "Free Energy Principle" of Consciousness. Chem Pharm Res. 2025; 7(3): 1-7.
*Correspondence:
Gerard Marx, MX Biotech Ltd., Jerusalem, Israel.
Received: 02 Jun 2025; Accepted: 09 Jul 2025; Published: 28 Jul 2025
ABSTRACT
How does the viable brain transmute caloric energy into consciousness manifest as emotive memory? Apparently, 
the laws of physics and thermodynamics don't apply.
Here, we summarize and comment on a series of 4 articles published by Friston et al. which purports to rationalize 
the Free Energy concept applied to sentient consciousness. They suggest that perceptual processes are an emergent 
property of systems that conform to a free-energy principle and attempt a mathematical description of adaptive 
changes of biologic phase-boundaries.
We summarize and criticize each of the 4 articles and point out their deficiencies, notably the lack of physiologic 
relevance. We discuss the options available to the neural net to encode cognitive information and the possibility of 
epigenetic modifications on the process of memory. We conclude with a short discourse on the tripartite mechanism 
of neural memory, a biochemical description which conforms to the materials and processes available to neural 
cells.
Keywords
Mentality, Thermodynamics, Critique, Surprise.
Background
All living creatures experience “consciousness” as “awareness”. 
But not all can remember past stimuli. They can feel (sense) their 
current environment, but cannot project present experience to the 
future, cannot remember past feelings.
Responses of primitive cells, such as bacteria, to pleasant or 
unpleasant feelings, involve moving toward or away from a sensed 
stimulus, referred to as a “tropism”. Like a leaf turning in the sun, 
it has no psychic experience.
 The transduction of metabolic energy into mentality remains the 
core enigma of neuroscience. The confluence of psychic experience 
and underlying neuro-chemical processes cannot be ignored. One 
is a consequence of the other. But the enigma remains: How does 
the viable brain transmute caloric energy into consciousness 
manifest as emotive memory?
Classical thermodynamics throws little light on this subject though 
there have been attempts to drag the concepts of entropy, chaos 
and information theory into this puzzle [1-6]. 
A major problem confronting all these efforts is the lack of a 
notation that signifies emotive states. Absent such, one is at a loss 
to formulate a code for emotive state.
So too, the Information Theory lacks an evolutionary context with 
regard to the signaling and encoding of emotive states [7-12]. 
Music has a notation system that can encode and elicit emotion but 
it is not physiologic unless one can remember and carry a tune. By 
contrast, the binary (0 1) or trinary (- 0 +) formats of computers 
are incapable of encoding emotive states. Ditto all quantum based 
formulations; they may be entangled but are inherently "demotive."
As we are focused on memory, we inquired: When did the neural 
creatures develop the talent of “memory”? How does this talent 
emerge from the activity of neural circuits? In previous works, we 
summarized the evolution of bacterial signaling with molecular 
effectors leading to the chemical signaling, which evolved to 
Volume 7 | Issue 3 | 2 of 7
Chem Pharm Res, 2025
advanced neural circuits which employ the same molecular 
signaling molecules (cited below). 
Friston et al.,
Here, we examine on the works of Friston and collaborators 
which proffered a "free energy" rationale. We summarize and 
comment on a series of 4 articles published by Friston et al., [13-
16] which purports to rationalize Free Energy to clarify sentient 
consciousness. As background, we cite a number of works 
pertaining to the consideration of Free Energy and chaos to analyze 
various molecular processes [17,18].
Paper #1:
  Friston KJ. Stephan KE, 2007
  Free-energy and the brain
  Synthese 159: 417–458.
Summary
Discusses model of perceptual inference and learning.
The proposed scheme rests on "Empirical Bayes and hierarchical 
models of how sensory information is generated."
It suggests that perceptual processes are an emergent property of 
systems that conform to a free-energy principle. They attempt a 
mathematical description of adaptive changes of biologic phase-
boundaries to minimize surprise i.e. 
where 
  could be regarded as the adaptive value of a 
particular exchange, also known as the log-evidence. They link 
selection in theoretical biology to Bayesian model selection in 
machine learning
The free-energy of the system is presented as a scalar function of 
sensory and internal states.
The following headings are discussed: 
Theory= Thermodynamics and biologic systems.
The nature of biological systems
A free-energy bound- requiring adaptive systems to minimise 
surprise
The ensemble and generative densities
The free-energy principle
The mean-field approximation
Optimising variational modes
Perceptual inference: Optimising μ u
Perceptual context and attention: Optimising μ γ
Perceptual learning: Optimising μ θ
Variational action and free-energy
Model optimisation
They suggest that biological systems sample their environment 
to fulfil expectations generated by the model implicit in their 
structure (this implies memory). The arguments are couched in 
impenetrable mathematical formulae.
Describes hidden causes of environmental stimuli partitioned into 
three sets that change on a timescale of milliseconds, seconds and 
minutes, and factorise the ensemble density in terms of marginal 
densities:
Surprise the free- energy principle is supposed to explain adaptive 
behaviour without invoking notions of reinforcement. It is simply 
sampling the environment so that its sensory input conforms to its 
expectations (i.e. memory). It asserts that adaptive systems should 
minimize surprising exchanges with the environment. 
Critique
None of the discussion has a biologic flavor. It does not define 
the "sensory information" on which surprise is predicated. Thus, 
it does not mention the emotive qualities of "sensory information" 
or how this is made available without neural memory. Consider, 
a creature with no memory simply responds to external stimuli. 
Even bacteria aggregates have been shown to exhibit memory of 
past experience. "Surprise" implies divergence from a memory of 
previous experience. Without memory, there can be no "surprise" 
predicated on expectations based on previous experience. This is 
a circular argument.
A link is made to theoretical biology as a Bayesian model selection 
in machine learning, a probabilistic approach used in statistics 
and machine learning to compare and choose between different 
statistical models. But it implies little for neural activity eliciting 
subjective mentality.
The rest of the discussion is an obtuse stream of phrases i.e. 
"Formulating that bound in terms of Jensen’ s inequality requires 
that function to be a probability density  " which make little sense 
in terms of identifying the processes underlying neural mentality 
i.e. Jensen's inequality generalizes the statement that the secant 
line of a convex function lies above the graph of the function 
(Wikipedia). This does little to clarify neural processes whereby 
emotions and memory emerge.
The authors' stated goal is to present a perceptual inference and 
learning in neural systems.

Volume 7 | Issue 3 | 3 of 7
Chem Pharm Res, 2025
But in fact, the discussion holds little of neurobiologic interest, but 
forwards esoteric mathematical formulae which have little to do 
with physiology and do not reflect mental states.
Paper #2:
 Friston KJ. 2009
 The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the brain?
 Trends in Cognitive Sciences 13: 293-300.
Summary 
A free-energy formulation to find principles of brain function is 
based on conservation laws and neuronal energy. Theorises that 
any adaptive change in the brain will minimize free-energy, an 
information theory quantity that bounds the evidence for a model 
of data. It is greater than the negative log-evidence or ‘surprise’ 
in sensory data. It proposes that that self- organising biological 
agents resist a tendency to disorder and therefore minimize the 
entropy of their sensory states.
It provides a glossary of terms used to describe information as 
being "divergent", "surprised" or "dense". Box 1 describes the 
free-energy principle which is somehow a function of sensory 
input. It provides (Figure 1) a schematic detailing the mathematical 
quantities that define free-energy. 
Discusses " recognition dynamics " as parameters relating to 
"syntactic efficacy" and " synaptic gain". They overlook the non-
synaptic signaling modes available to many dendrites which do 
not make contact with other neurons, but simply peter out into the 
neural extracellular matrix (nECM) (Vizi). 
A mathematical transformation is presented input sensory i.e. 
 that changes the way the environment is sampled. 
The environment is described by equations of motion, which 
specify the dynamics of environmental causes. 
Posits that entropy corresponds to suppressing surprise over time. 
Subsequent consideration of Neuronal implementation  employs 
words such as" physiological", " anatomical" and "synaptic 
activity". However, the discussion is irrelevant to any physiologic 
neural activity which generates mental states. The authors 
themselves question their approach with a question mark (?) 
terminating their title.
Critique
The article is a mathematical flavored fantasy of concepts purported 
to be related to a free-energy principle. Attempts to convince that 
biological agents engage in some form of " Bayesian perception" 
to avoid surprises. For example, "surprise" necessarily relies on 
memory. Consider, a creature without memory is not surprised, 
but has to deal with each stimulus de novo, as it occurs, without 
expectations based on the memory of previous experience.
Their physiologic model is based exclusively on synaptic signaling 
and ignores non-synaptic modes. This seems to be a persistent 
model as a modern equivalent to such was recently repeated 
by Coupland et al. [17] which also ignored the nECM as being 
relevant to non-synaptic neural communication modes.
They list "Recognition dynamics" to compute the free- energy 
and derivatives which reduces to first-order differential equations 
of motion. However, complicated this is subsequently phrased, it 
makes no sense as a model of brain function; the brain doesn't 
move. 
The Figure I presents a schematic detailing neuronal architecture 
decorated with mathematical formulae for "forward and backward 
connections". This does nothing to clarify the subjective states 
characteristic of neural systems.
The Table 1 attempts to explain brain mentality in terms of 
anatomy, connectivity, synaptic physiology and electrophysiology 
to account for behavior. Here too, the unrealistic modeling of 
neural connectivity (i.e. ignoring the nECM and chemical signaling 
processes). The proposed (Table 2) probabilistic neuronal codes 
make no physiologic sense. In particular, the enigma of emotive 
memory remains mysterious. 
Paper #3:
Bradcock, Friston et al., (2019)
The hierarchically mechanistic mind: 
An evolutionary systems theory of the human brain, 
cognition, and behavior.
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 19:1319–
1351
Summary
The purpose of this review was to suggest a theory of the embodied, 
situated human brain, called the Hierarchically Mechanistic Mind 
(HMM). The brain is considered as a complex adaptive system 
that functions to minimize the entropy of our sensory and physical 
states via action-perception cycles comprising of four nested levels 
of biological causation (i.e., adaptation, phylogeny, ontogeny, and 
mechanism). They glibly leverage this theory to mathematically 
formulate neural dynamics.
They bring up a brain theory in neuroscience called the free-
energy principle. This proposes a schema (their Figure 1), an 
evolutionary systems theory of psychology, based on 4 levels of 
causation: adaptation, phylogeny, ontogeny, and mechanism. As 
gaphic aides, they present tables (Figures 1,2) which seem to be an 
assortment of words, that are purported to describe an evolutionary 
systems theory of psychology.
Critique
Though the word "evolutionary" appears in the title, there is little 
in this article that refers to biologic evolution. Though they tout 
"evolution" in the title, the substance of the article does not deal 
with the evolution of the signaling processes from bacteria onward 
Volume 7 | Issue 3 | 4 of 7
Chem Pharm Res, 2025
up the Darwinian tree of life. Only the human brain is considered 
with no mention of the universal signaling processes that govern 
the life and thought of all creatures, from bacteria upward. The 
words are there, but they don't make sense. The authors suggest 
that their "paradigms" allows researchers to integrate advances 
across different fields. But nothing is presented to substantiate such 
claims. The words in the table do not present a meaningful pattern. 
Rather, the words seem to be a random jumble of suggestive terms.
Ditto for their Figure 2, a table presented as a scheme for a 
hierarchically mechanistic mind.
Still missing is a neurobiologically plausible process.
Their Free-Energy Approach is questionable. The thermodynamic 
free energy is a measure of the amount of work a system can 
perform (see Wikipedia), but its application to the process of 
mentation is not at all clear. The use of phrases such as "the system 
will appear to be attracted to particular regimes of state or phase 
space" or " propensity to minimize surprise (resp. free-energy) 
is the consequence of natural selection: self-organizing systems 
capable of avoiding such phase-transitions" are not explanatory of 
a biologic mechanism, but exercises in linguistic fluidity. They do 
not address the core enigma of how caloric energy is transmuted 
to energize the brain's mental activities manifest as emotions and 
memory. It can be considered as a mysterious phase change, whose 
qualities we have not yet formulated or rendered mathematically. 
Throwing in the word "entropy" does little to connect the 
phenomenon of mentality to thermodynamic "entropy" (i.e. 
referring to work lost as heat) or the functioning of the brain. This 
is poetry, not science.
The term "Free Energy principle" refers to a hypothesis that the 
brain reduces "surprise" or "uncertainty" by predictions to guide 
behavior. The Figure 3 schematic of the depressed brain is not 
explanatory regarding brain functioning as a "mentation organ". 
Thus, we continue our quest for biochemical clarification of 
mentality.
Paper #4:
Friston K, Da Costa L, Sajid N., Heins C., Ueltzhöffer K., 
Pavliotis GA., 
Parr T. 2023.
The free energy principle made simpler but not too simple
Physics Reports 1024: 1–29
Summary 
One wants a physics of sentience. A concise description of the free 
energy principle (FEP), in terms of a Langevin equation ending 
with a Bayesian mechanics. The FEP rests on straightforward 
results from statistical physics aa described with stochastic 
differential equations, in which the rate of change of some states 
touches on the following mathematical treatments:
Bayesian mechanics. 
Lagrangian formulation
Fokker–Planck equation
Kolmogorov equation
Schrödinger wave equation
Markov boundary
Helmholtz decomposition
Hessian matrix
Jacobian coupling states
Taylor expansion
They provide a probabilistic description of a system in terms of 
a (NESS) density that admits conditional independencies among 
states. 
Suggest that readings of free energy link nicely to various 
normative (i.e., optimisation) theories of sentient behaviour. 
Their Figure 3. schematic with various mathematical equations 
illustrates Markov blankets and self-evidencing points of contact 
between minimizing variational free energy and other normative 
theories of optimal behaviour.
Their Figure 5. schematizes Bayesian mechanics and active 
inference. Sensory states furnish free energy gradients (often 
expressed as prediction errors), under some generative model. 
Neuronal dynamics are simulated as a flow on the resulting 
gradients to produce internal states that parameterise posterior 
beliefs about external states.
"Biological behaviour may be characterised by internal solenoidal 
flows that do not change variational free energy—or surprisal."
Their Figure 7 illustrates expected free energy and active inference 
and highlights various points of contact with other accounts of 
sentient, purposeful or intelligent behaviour.
They propose autonomous action of particles i.e. free energy 
contains terms that arise in various formulations of optimal 
behaviour.
Posterior beliefs are then used to evaluate free energy and 
subsequent action to
"simulate the sentient behaviour of precise particles that we have 
associated with biotic systems."
Critique 
The stated goal of this work is to provide a theoretical basis for 
considering a physics of sentience. That is a roundabout way of 
talking about consciousness. All sentient creatures exhibit features 
of consciousness manifest as awareness, emotive responses to 
their environment, recalled as memory.
The article employs linguistic subterfuges to avoid using the 
words like "mentality", "cognition" or "emotions", but refers to 
them indirectly as " Neuronal dynamics" and " normative theories 
of optimal behaviour".
It describes self-organisation as sentient behaviour that  can be 
interpreted as self-evidencing; namely, self-assembly, autopoiesis 
or active inference.
Volume 7 | Issue 3 | 5 of 7
Chem Pharm Res, 2025
What does this mean?
It suggests that readings of free energy link nicely to various 
normative theories of sentient behaviour. The article fugues into 
"math-speak" by providing various equations and referring to 
formulae named after mathematicians listed above. 
As far as we, the reviewers, are concerned, this 2023 attempt to 
rationalize mentality is "far off the mark". We note the following 
lapses.
1. No way of coding for emotions.
2. No process for encoding persistent memory.
3. No recognition of non-synaptic signaling.
4. No recognition of the nECM and its function in neural 
signaling.
5. No physiologic relevance.
Thus, this effort to yoke the Free Energy Principle to the service 
mentality does not convince.
Rather, it befuddles the reader with obscure mathematics that have 
no relevance to emotive memory. Again, more poetry than science.
 
Tripartite Mechanism [19-27]
To be original, one is encouraged to think "out of the box". But we 
are doing the opposite and thinking into a box i.e. a chemographic 
representation of the cuinfo within the nECM, represented as 
box rich in electrons that attract metal cations (i.e. address). The 
immobilized metal cations in turn bind NTs to form complexes 
that encode emotive memory (Figure 1).
Arguments from thermodynamics, such as free energy or 
mathematical formulations, lack physiologic relevance. Maxwell's 
cat notwithstanding, there is currently no unified theory of 
molecular and cellular dynamics that can give rise to mentality. 
Recall that the free energy of classical thermodynamics relates to 
the work (or heat) that can be extracted from a closed system at a 
given temperature.
where G energy available for non-pressure-volume work, H is 
enthalpy, T is absolute temperature and S is entropy. But this is 
far from the usage of Friston et al. The brain does not "work" 
and mentality cannot be described by just alluding to free energy 
clothed in constructs from statistical physics.
Consciousness, emotions and memory are examples of emergent 
properties of the brain that cannot be fully explained by the laws of 
physics or encoded by mathematical formulations.
Epigenetics
Epigenetics literally refers to processes that occur after DNA 
controlled structures have been formed (i.e. biosynthesis of neuron 
and nECM). What we want to know is how (epigenetic) experience 
is encoded for recall? As we are considering a biological process, 
we are driven into the realms of chemistry applied to biology. 
Some have attempted to ascribe memory to epigenetic process, 
such as acetylation of histones in the hippocampus [28-32]. This 
was interpreted as indicating that chromatin modifications dictated 
the recruitment of "sparse populations of neurons constituting an 
Figure 1: Chemographic representations of the reaction of a nECM at an electron rich site (“address”) binding site for a metal cation, to form a 
cognitive unit of information (cuinfo). The complexation of a neurotransmitter (NT) to the entrapped metal cation confers emotive context to the cuinfo. 
Subsequent crosslinking confers greater stability to the complex, reflected by the persistence of memory, particularly those with great emotive contex.

Volume 7 | Issue 3 | 6 of 7
Chem Pharm Res, 2025
engram". Epigenetic regulation could have significant indirect 
effects on the neural ECM through its influence on gene expression 
and cellular function.  While this may be true, it is too general to 
serve as a statement of a memory mechanism. Also, it is hard 
to imagine that a single derivatization process could encode the 
complex emotive states experienced and recalled by a neural 
circuit. What then is memory?
Encoding Memory: Tripartite mechanism
In spite of the many drugs that affect memory and mood, no chemist 
has had the effrontery to suggest that basic mental processes are 
chemical. Notwithstanding, we have proposed such a molecular 
mechanism, the tripartite mechanism. This idea would remain in 
the limbo of “hypothesis” were it not for the electrodes prepared 
by our colleagues (Shlomo Yitzchaik group at Hebrew University) 
[26-28]. They have shown experimentally that NTs coated on 
impedence electrodes can be used to detect traces of metals. 
Similarly, saccharide coating on electrodes behaved similarly, 
electrodynamically detecting metal cations. Such coated electrodes 
make more credible the idea that neural memory is based on a code 
comprising metal-centered complexes within the nECM. 
Of course, the neural code is exponentially more complex than the 
binary code of computers (n=2), with more than 10 metal cations, 
more than 80 NTs and a near infinity of polysaccharide isomers 
units comprising the nECM.
Codes (Info/ Cog-info)
binary n=2
neural  n= f(# metals) f(# NTs) f(# saccharide isomers) 
{>100}
There are many gaps in our knowlege of the general mechanisms 
of epigenetics which affects memory. The exact mechanism of 
memory is still not known [29-32]. As for the neural process for 
memory, we have identified the active components that generate 
memory (i.e. the static neural cells (neurons + astrocytes), the 
static nECM and the diffusible dopants (metal cations and NTs) 
(see tripartite mechanism). Describing the general process 
of epigenetics does not imply that one can detail the exact 
mechanism(s) by which it affects memory.
Unlike the Information Theory of the binary code, there is no 
theory whereby cognitive information can be encoded with >100 
effectors to represent emotive memory. Thus, the engram may be 
real and modulated by sparse sets of neural cells, but we have not 
yet grasped its essence. We continue our quest for enlightenment 
regarding the mechanism of emotive memory.
Conclusion
Memory and "thought" are different manifestations of the same 
process.
Consciousness is evanescent…it evaporates like bubbles in the 
sea of experience, of which only a residual physical trace remains, 
as memory, the "engram". Some have proposed the existence of 
"memory molecules" [18] but a credible, detailed case has not yet 
been forwarded.
References
1. Penrose R. Quantum physics and conscious thought. In. 
Quantum implications: Essays in honour of David Bohm 
(Eds. Hiley and Pearl). 1987.
2. Roberson ED, Sweatt JD. A biochemical blueprint for Long-
Term Memory Learning & Memory. 1999; 6: 381-388.
3. Collell G, Fauquet J. Brain activity and cognition: A connection 
from thermodynamics and information theory. Front. Psychol. 
2015; 6: 818. DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00818
4. Tuszynski JA. The Emerging Physics of Consciousness. 
Springer, Berlin, DE. 2006.
5. Rosenblum B, Kuttner F. Quantum Enigma: Physics Encounters 
Consciousness. Oxford University Press, NY . 2011.
6. Ampel BC, Muraven M, McNay EC. Mental Work Requires 
Physical Energy: Self-Control Is Neither Exception nor 
Exceptional Front. Psychol. 2018; 9: 1005. DOI: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2018.01005
7. Landauer R. The physical nature of information. Physics 
Letters. 1996; 217: 188-193.
8. Tononi. Consciousness as integrated information: A 
provisional manifesto. Biol Bull. 2008; 15: 216-242.
9. Howard N, Hussain A. The fundamental code unit (FCU) 
of the brain: Towards a new model for cognitive geometry. 
Cognitive Computation. 2018; 10: 426-436.
10. Hughes DT, Sperandio V . Inter-kingdom signalling: 
communication between bacteria and their hosts Nat. Rev. 
Microbiol. 2008; 6: 111-120.
11. Dahaene S. Consciousness and the Brain. Deciphering How 
the Brain Codes Our Thoughts. Viking Press, New York. 2014.
12. V on der Malsburg C. Concerning the Neuronal Code. J. 
Cognitive Science. 2018; 19: 511-550.
13. Friston KJ, Stephan KE. Free-energy and the brain Synthese. 
2007; 159(3): 417-458.
14. Friston KJ. The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the 
brain? Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 2009; 13: 293-300.
15. Bradcock PB, Friston KJ, Ramstead MJD, Ploeger A, Hohwy 
J. The hierarchically mechanistic mind: An evolutionary 
systems theory of the human brain, cognition, and behavior. 
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience. 2019; 19: 
1319-1351.
16. Friston K, Da Costa L, Sajid N, Heins C, Ueltzhöffer K, et 
al. The free energy principle made simpler but not too simple 
Physics Reports. 2023; 1024: 1-29.
17. Izquierdo I, Bevilaqua LRM, Rossato JI, Bonini JS., Medina 
JH, et al. Cammarota M. Different molecular cascades in 
different sites of the brain control memory consolidation. 
TRENDS in Neurosciences. 2006; 29: 496-505.
18. Dunning J, During MJ. Molecular mechanisms of learning 
and memory. Expert Reviews Molec. Med. 2003.
Volume 7 | Issue 3 | 7 of 7
Chem Pharm Res, 2025
© 2025 Gerard Marx, et al. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
19. Marx G, Gilon C. Tripartite mechanism of neural memory: 
Proof-of-concept with neuromimetic impedance electrodes. 
Biomedical Research and Clinical Review. 2020; 1(3): 21. 
DOI: 10.31579/2692-9406/021
20. Marx G, Gilon C. Encoding neural memory. Front Drug Chem 
Clin Res. 2020. DOI: 10.15761/FDCCR.1000149
21. Marx G, Gilon C. Interpreting neural morphology. Acta 
Scientific Neurology. 2020; 3: 1-4.
22. Marx G, Gilon C. Quantum considerations of neural memory. 
In: Quantum Boundaries of Life. Poznanski RR & Branda E. 
(Eds), Elsevier, Amsterdam. 2020; 82.
23. Marx G, Gilon C. The Molecular Basis of Neural Memory. 
Part 11. Chem-electric Write /Read Processes. J. Neurosurg. 
Imaging Techniques. 2020; 6: 283-301.
24. Marx G, Gilon C. The molecular basis of neural memory. 
Part 10. The sins and redemption of neurobiology. J Neurol 
Neurocrit Care. 2018; 1: 1-7.
25. Marx G, Gilon C. The molecular basis of neural memory. Part 
9: Defining the Engram Res Med Eng Sci. 2018; 7: 000651. 
DOI: 10.31031/RMES.2018.07.000651
26. Tadi KK, Alshanski I, Mervinetsky E, Marx G, Petrou P, et al. 
Oxytocin-monolayer-based impedimetric biosensor for zinc 
and copper ions. ACS Omega. 2017; 2: 8770-8778.
27. Alshanski I, Sukhran Y , Mervinetsky E, Unverzagt C, 
Yitzchaik S, et al. Electrochemical biosensing platform based 
on complex biantennary N-glycan for detecting enzymatic 
sialylation processes. Biosens Bioelectron. 2021; 172: 112762.
28. Marx G, Gilon C. Tripartite mechanism of neural memory: 
Proof-of-concept with neuromimetic impedance electrodes. 
Biomedical Research and Clinical Review. 2020; 1(3): 021. 
DOI: 10.31579/2692-9406/021
29. Krabbe S. Epigenetic control of memory formation. Science. 
2024; 385: 367-368.
30. Santoni G, Astori S, Leleu M, Glauser L, Zamora SA, et al. 
Chromatin plasticity predetermines neuronal eligibility for 
memory trace formation. Science. 2024; 385: 408-409.
31. Qureshi IA, Mehler MF. Understanding neurological disease 
mechanisms in the era of epigenetics. JAMA Neurol. 2013; 
70: 704-710.
32. Freudenthal RAM, Romano A, Baez MV . Editorial: Changes in 
molecular expression after memory acquisition and plasticity. 
Looking for the memory trace. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 2020; 
13: 50-53.