PRIVACY POLICY 
updated February 15, 2019 
 
The MIT Press is committed to supporting the privacy of our users.  This Privacy Statement explains 
how we handle and use the personal information we collect about users.  
What personal information we collect  
While specific information may vary for particular individuals, we may collect, use, store and transfer 
different kinds of personal information about you, which we have grouped together as follows: 
• Basic biographic/contact information which may include your name, home and/or business 
addresses, phone numbers, and email addresses as supplied to us by you; 
• Data about your search history (saved searches), if you have created a Profile; and 
• Analytical information that is, aggregated information related to web visitor activity and email 
marketing actions. 
We may also automatically collect information about your online use of the MIT Press Direct site such 
as: 
• The types of devices that you use to connect with us and related information such as IP address, 
browser type and version, operating system, mobile platform, unique device identifier, and other 
technical identifiers. 
• Usage data that is generated when you connect with us such as date and time stamp, referring 
and exit pages, and pages that you have visited. 
MIT Press collects this information through our servers by means of cookies, web beacons, and other 
tools. You can control technologies such as cookies through your browser settings. However, changing 
your browser settings may impact your experience with our site. 
We process your personal information collected through site to facilitate our online interactions with 
you. We only collect and process your personal information in furtherance of MIT Press’s legitimate 
interests and/or to fulfill any contractual obligations with you.  We do not sell your personal information 
to third parties. 
 
Storing your personal information 
MIT uses risk-assessed administrative, technical, and physical security measures to protect your personal 
information. There are reasonable security measures in place to help protect against the loss, misuse, 
and alteration of the information under our control. However, no method of transmission over the 
Internet or method of electronic storage is 100% secure. 
 
Giving and withdrawing your consent, and updating your personal information 
Where your consent is required for us to process your personal information, we will ask for your 
consent at the point at which you provide your data.  You have the right to withdraw that consent at 
any time. You can also update your personal information at any time. If you wish to do either, contact us 
at (800) 405-1619 or mitpressdirect@mit.edu 
 
 
 
Your rights 
You have the right to request that we provide you with information about the personal information we 
collect about you. If you would like to review, delete or update your information, you may contact us at 
mitpressdirect@mit.edu . We will permit you to correct, amend, or delete information that is 
demonstrated to be inaccurate.  
Rights for Individuals in the European Economic Area 
You have the right in certain circumstances to (1) access your personal information; (2) to correct or 
erase information; (3) restrict processing; and (4) object to communications, direct marketing, or 
profiling.  To the extent applicable, the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation provides further 
information about your rights.  You also have the right to lodge complaints with your national or 
regional data protection authority.  
If you are inclined to exercise these rights, we request an opportunity to discuss with you any concerns 
you may have. To protect the personal information we hold, we may also request further information to 
verify your identify when exercising these rights.  Upon a request to erase information, we will maintain 
a core set of personal data to ensure we do not contact you inadvertently in the future, as well as any 
information necessary for MIT archival purposes.  We may also need to retain some financial 
information for legal purposes, including US IRS compliance.  In the event of an actual or threatened 
legal claim, we may retain your information for purposes of establishing, defending against or exercising 
our rights with respect to such claim. 
By providing information directly to MIT, you consent to the transfer of your personal information 
outside of the European Economic Area to the United States.  You understand that the current laws and 
regulations of the United States may not provide the same level of protection as the data and privacy 
laws and regulations of the EEA.  
You are under no statutory or contractual obligation to provide any personal data to us. 
 
Additional Information 
We may change this Privacy Statement from time to time.  If we make any significant changes in the way 
we treat your personal information we will make this clear on our MIT sites or by contacting you 
directly. 
The controller for your personal information is MIT.  If you are in the EU and wish to assert any of your 
applicable GDPR rights, please contact dataprotection@mit.edu.  
 
MIT’s Privacy Policy 
The MIT Press is a division of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. MIT’s Privacy Statement is 
available at http://web.mit.edu/privacy/ 
 
 
 