fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 1
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 30 June 2022
doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2022.897247
Edited by:
Dirk Cysarz,
Witten/Herdecke University, Germany
Reviewed by:
Sara Invitto,
University of Salento, Italy
Darren J. Edwards,
Swansea University, United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
Jorge E. Esteves
osteojorge@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Emotion Regulation and Processing,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience
Received: 15 March 2022
Accepted: 24 May 2022
Published: 30 June 2022
Citation:
McParlin Z, Cerritelli F ,
Rossettini G, Friston KJ and
Esteves JE (2022) Therapeutic
Alliance as Active Inference: The Role
of Therapeutic Touch
and Biobehavioural Synchrony
in Musculoskeletal Care.
Front. Behav. Neurosci. 16:897247.
doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2022.897247
Therapeutic Alliance as Active
Inference: The Role of Therapeutic
Touch and Biobehavioural Synchrony
in Musculoskeletal Care
Zoe McParlin1, Francesco Cerritelli1, Giacomo Rossettini2, Karl J. Friston3 and
Jorge E. Esteves1,4,5*
1 Clinical-Based Human Research Department, Foundation COME Collaboration, Pescara, Italy,2 School of Physiotherapy,
University of Verona, Verona, Italy,3 Institute of Neurology, Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, London,
United Kingdom,4 Malta ICOM Educational, Gzira, Malta,5 University College of Osteopathy, London, United Kingdom
Touch is recognised as crucial for survival, fostering cooperative communication,
accelerating recovery, reducing hospital stays, and promoting overall wellness
and the therapeutic alliance. In this hypothesis and theory paper, we present
an entwined model that combines touch for alignment and active inference to
explain how the brain develops “priors” necessary for the health care provider to
engage with the patient effectively. We appeal to active inference to explain the
empirically integrative neurophysiological and behavioural mechanisms that underwrite
synchronous relationships through touch. Speciﬁcally, we offer a formal framework for
understanding – and explaining – the role of therapeutic touch and hands-on care
in developing a therapeutic alliance and synchrony between health care providers
and their patients in musculoskeletal care. We ﬁrst review the crucial importance of
therapeutic touch and its clinical role in facilitating the formation of a solid therapeutic
alliance and in regulating allostasis. We then consider how touch is used clinically –
to promote cooperative communication, demonstrate empathy, overcome uncertainty,
and infer the mental states of others – through the lens of active inference. We conclude
that touch plays a crucial role in achieving successful clinical outcomes and adapting
previous priors to create intertwined beliefs. The ensuing framework may help healthcare
providers in the ﬁeld of musculoskeletal care to use hands-on care to strengthen the
therapeutic alliance, minimise prediction errors (a.k.a., free energy), and thereby promote
recovery from physical and psychological impairments.
Keywords: therapeutic alliance, active inference, touch, manual therapy, physiotherapy, osteopathy,
musculoskeletal care, pain
INTRODUCTION
For over 50 years, the medical community has recognised the beneﬁcial therapeutic eﬀects
of touch on health and wellbeing (McGlone et al., 2017). Consequently, hands-on care is
recommended for a range of musculoskeletal (MSK) conditions, including low back pain (LBP),
neck pain, headaches, carpal tunnel syndrome and hip and knee osteoarthritis (Deyle et al., 2000;
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 1 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 2
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
Akalin et al., 2002; MacDonald et al., 2006; Rubinstein et al., 2011;
Gross et al., 2015; Cerritelli et al., 2017). A signiﬁcant body of
evidence demonstrates that hands-on techniques in MSK care
have a particularly important role on pain modulation (Deyle
et al., 2000; Bialosky et al., 2009; Vigotsky and Bruhns, 2015;
Cerritelli et al., 2017; Geri et al., 2019; Sánchez-Romero et al.,
2021). Therefore, the hand plays a crucial role in delivering
MSK care through the sense of touch. Touch in the clinical
context forms part of a range of examination and therapeutic
interventions such as manual therapy (Rondoni et al., 2017). It
is also central to enhancing communication, patient compliance,
cueing and assisting patients to reduce pain, and improving
clinical outcomes (Roger et al., 2002). On this point, Lederman
(2017) argues that manual therapy techniques should be viewed
as a vehicle to deliver touch eﬀects, which can have a positive
inﬂuence on the sense of ìself, ” wellbeing, and body image, as well
as a profound calming and soothing inﬂuence on the individual.
This article will focus on therapeutic touch as a synonym for
human touch-based interventions used in MSK care. Hands-on
care relies on three crucial dimensions of touch, i.e., analgesic,
somatoperceptual and aﬀective (Geri et al., 2019). Arguably, these
dimensions fall broadly into two categories ñ discriminatory
and aﬀective touch (McGlone et al., 2014, 2017). Most people
understand the sense of touch as a discriminative sense, enabling
us to detect, for example, a ﬂy landing on our face, or the
texture of the surface being manipulated ñ discriminatory or ìfast
touch” relies on large myelinated (A β) aﬀerents which project
primarily to the somatosensory cortex (McGlone et al., 2014).
Discriminatory touch has been traditionally associated with the
observed modulatory eﬀects of manual therapy and therapeutic
touch on the central and autonomic nervous system (i.e., Mancini
et al., 2014; Geri et al., 2019).
On the other hand, aﬀective touch is the ìslow” touch system
that is dependent on a system of unmyelinated low threshold
mechanosensitive c-ﬁbres called c-tactile (CT) aﬀerents, which
project mainly to emotion-related paralimbic cortical systems
(insular cortex), the posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS)
and the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC)/dorsoanterior cingulate
cortex (dACC) (McGlone et al., 2014). CT aﬀerents cannot
provide helpful discriminative information due to the slow
conduction velocity of C-ﬁbres (McGlone et al., 2014, 2017).
The CT aﬀerent system plays a crucial role in providing or
supporting emotional, hormonal, and behavioural responses to
skin-to-skin contact with conspeciﬁcs (McGlone et al., 2014).
Therefore, aﬀective touch is associated with tactile stimuli with a
hedonic and often emotional component, encompassing aspects
of reward and signiﬁcance in social communications (Morrison
et al., 2010; Morrison, 2016a).
The insular cortex integrates the sensory and emotional
systems creating an interoceptive modality. Interception is
deﬁned as the perception of internal physiological states within
an individual’s body and the sensations of an external stimulus
such as touch or pain (Craig, 2002; Panagiotopoulou et al.,
2017). CT and Aβ aﬀerents are required for the complete feeling
of pleasant touch on the hairy skin (McGlone et al., 2014).
Moreover, the insular cortex’s activation during therapeutic touch
aﬀects the modulation of interoceptive precision (attention) and
contributes to the pleasant feelings associated with therapeutic
touch. Crucially, the modulation of interoceptive precision
(attention) by the insular cortex also alters body awareness,
autonomy, and sense of self, updating interoceptive beliefs
associated with the use of therapeutic touch while also being
innervated by the transcutaneous auricular vagus nerve (Craig,
2008; Crucianelli et al., 2013, 2018; Ainley et al., 2016; Park et al.,
2017; Bradran et al., 2018; Paciorek and Skora, 2020).
The vagus nerve can also provide inhibitory inputs to the
heart, which are crucial for self-regulation, as proposed through
the neurovisceral integration model (NVIM) (Park and Thayer,
2014). The NVIM suggests that an individual’s ability to adapt to
its environment depends on the physiological ﬂexibility within
the diﬀerent hierarchical levels and attractor basins of the central
autonomic network (CAN), in which the vagus nerve and vagal
control are crucial to the feedback mechanism (Thayer and
Friedman, 2002; Condy et al., 2020).
The clinical beneﬁts of therapeutic touch in MSK care are
likely to depend on both discriminatory, ìfast” touch and
aﬀective, ìslow” touch (McGlone et al., 2017). Therapeutic touch
has shown to be eﬀective for pain relief, reducing heart rate and
systolic blood pressure in patients with persistent non-malignant
pain and even in those with other comorbidities such as breast
cancer (Billhult et al., 2009; Olufade et al., 2015; Pinheiro da
Silva et al., 2019). Moreover, therapeutic touch in the form
of massage initiates relaxation, sense of safety, reduces fear-
avoidance and physiological markers of stress, i.e., cortisol and
heart rate through deactivating the threat of noxious stimulus and
possibly initiating autonomic regulation, particularly in chronic
LBP , arthritis, fractures, and pain conditions (Hernandez-Reif
et al., 2004; Billhult et al., 2009; Maratos et al., 2017; Miciak et al.,
2019).
Touch with the intention to care for another, such as in a
clinical environment, provides better relief from physical and
emotional distress than self-care by decreasing the activation of
pain-related regions, particularly the dorsal Anterior Cingulate
Cortex (ACC) and the Anterior Insular Cortex (AIC) (Shamay-
Tsoory and Eisenberger, 2021). The insula is a crucial region in
pain processing, and developing evidence indicates that the insula
encodes the magnitude of an unexpected outcome ñ unsigned
prediction errors (Horing and Büchel, 2022). Prediction errors
occur in events where there is a mismatch between an expected
and actual event or sensory signal (Rossettini et al., 2022).
Prediction errors are crucial in updating a generative model and,
therefore, in driving learning (Parr et al., 2022). Recent evidence
indicates that a misrepresentation of learning relevant prediction
errors in the insula is likely an underlying factor in persistent pain
(Horing and Büchel, 2022).
Moreover, the insular cortex is also part of the Salience
and Default Networks that assist with regulating the nervous,
immune, and neuroendocrine systems, which play a crucial
role in regulating allostasis (Atzil et al., 2018). Allostasis is the
adaptive anticipatory process of, which delivers the right kind of
context for achieving homoeostatic balance; namely, to achieve
the primary goal of maintaining a stable bodily state through
a series of physiological (i.e., autonomic) or behavioural (i.e.,
sensorimotor) closed feedback loops (i.e., reﬂexes). Crucially, the
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 2 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 3
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
primary function of the nervous system is to manage allostasis,
i.e., predicting the physiological needs for survival (Barrett,
2020; Esteves et al., 2022). Importantly, in the context of MSK
care, allostatic load, and overload ñ the cumulative burden of
chronic stress and life events ñ has been linked to poorer health
outcomes, including pain, depression, anxiety and MSK disorders
(see Guidi et al., 2021, for a recent review). The role of the
insular cortex in allostatic regulation is also crucial in building
trust and attachment through a collaborative relationship to
secure joint attention, with synchronisation allowing empathy
and acknowledging it as being rewarding, and thus decreasing
pain (Barrett and Fleming, 2011; Tomasello et al., 2012; Shamay-
Tsoory and Eisenberger, 2021; McParlin et al., 2022). Moreover,
the insular cortex is also central to oxytocinergic modulation,
encouraging and modulating the development of bonding, trust,
and processing of therapeutic touch, which can also contribute
to building a robust TA (Morrison, 2016a; Fotopoulou et al.,
2022; McParlin et al., 2022). Therefore, it is crucial that clinicians
understand the role of allostatic load and its regulation on patient
care. Arguably, therapeutic touch can play a key role in allostatic
regulation and achieving embodied predictions regarding social
attachments, achieving balance amongst all bodily systems
needed for survival and physiological co-regulation with others,
through caregiving touch in speciﬁc social interactions (see
Fotopoulou et al., 2022, for a review).
The therapeutic alliance (TA) is referred to as the collaborative
relationship or working alliance between the patient and
Health Care provider (HCP) and is necessary for establishing
a positive rapport and trust, ensuring patient satisfaction,
and achieving positive clinical outcomes following treatment,
particularly in patients with persistent MSK pain (Taylor et al.,
2015; Kinney et al., 2018; Miciak et al., 2018; McCabe et al.,
2021b). This article will refer to an HCP as an orthopaedic
manual physical therapy practitioner specialising in managing
neuro-musculoskeletal conditions using manual techniques and
therapeutic exercises, including physiotherapists, osteopaths,
chiropractors, and massage therapists (International Federation
of Orthopaedic Manual Physical Therapists [IFOMPT], 2004).
The TA is centred around the tripartite elements of a working
alliance described by Bordin (1979), including the agreement on
goals, agreement on a task, and the development of attachment
bonds, which are the foundation for a successful TA (Rossettini
et al., 2020). An HCP who creates a successful person-centred TA
can gain the trust of anxious and sceptical patients. Moreover, in
patients, particularly those with chronic low back pain, a good
TA can result in positive clinical outcomes for both physical and
mental capacities, overall patient satisfaction, and quality of life
(Ferreira et al., 2013; Fuentes et al., 2014; Taccolini Manzoni
et al., 2018; Rossettini et al., 2020). To form a collaborative
agreement needed for a robust TA, one needs to adapt their
personal opinions to be in tune with other individuals. We argue
that this can be formulated as active inference.
Active Inference (AI) is a ìﬁrst principles” approach to
understanding sentient behaviouróperception, planning and
action in terms of probabilistic inferenceóframed as a single
imperative to minimise free energy (Esteves et al., 2022; Parr
et al., 2022). AI enables an organism or an agent to adjust to
its environment to ﬁt its expectations and therefore construct its
niche (Bruineberg et al., 2018; Constant et al., 2018; Esteves et al.,
2022). In particular, agents build shared expectations through
engagement with everyday social and material aﬀordances,
allowing adaptive niche construction by, for example, thinking
through other minds (Laland et al., 2001; Boyd et al., 2011;
Veissière et al., 2020; Esteves et al., 2022). Taken together, AI
reﬂects the natural inclination of all living organisms to regulate
themselves ñ within their environment ñ by optimising their
internal world model in a series of self-fulﬁlling action-perception
cycles. Subsequently, it will minimise ìsurprise” by becoming
in tune with others (Bruineberg et al., 2018; Constant et al.,
2018; Vasil et al., 2020). Surprise, in this context, can be read
as a prediction error or, mathematically, the implausibility (i.e.,
negative log-likelihood) of some sensory outcome, given a world
model or narrative that would predict that outcome.
The NVIM can also explain an individual’s ability to adjust to
their context-speciﬁc niche as it proposes the ﬂexibility to adapt
to an external environment is dependent on weighting attributed
to each prior as well as the hierarchical model proposed for
vagal control and corresponding attractor basins within the CAN
(Smith et al., 2017). Each layer of the neurovisceral integration
loop transfers prediction errors from lower to higher sensory
levels, which could involve the overall state-space of the CAN,
which is partly vagally mediated (Thayer et al., 2009; Park and
Thayer, 2014). Through AI, the hierarchical nature-space of the
CAN allows for the eﬀective minimisation and adjustment of
prediction errors through attention to determine which level and
output of the CAN is appropriate for regulating both visceral and
skeletal motor physiology (Thayer and Lane, 2000; Smith et al.,
2017).
Active inference has been applied to therapeutic practices
as a model to explain symptomatic presentations of predicted
sensory information compared to current sensory stimulus, with
persistent pain being a overestimate of prior beliefs compared
to current and often less noxious sensory stimulus, also called a
failure of inference (Henningsen et al., 2018; Pezzulo et al., 2019;
Bohlen et al., 2021). Inappropriate estimation of low precision
for maladaptive beliefs could be due to higher CAN levels for
the speciﬁc prior, inappropriately lower precision with higher
weighting at lower hierarchical levels (Hechler et al., 2016; Smith
et al., 2017; McParlin et al., 2022). Moreover, diﬃculty in updating
maladaptive embedded priors and prediction errors is also found
with sustained autonomic response reﬂected in the creation of
more set points across the hierarchical levels of the CAN, with
individuals getting ìstuck” in the maladaptive attractor basin.
Active inference has also been applied to TA, patient-centred
care and biobehavioural synchrony in combination with touch
as a sensory stimulus to intentionally share, update and generate
new prediction errors in an attempt to reduce symptoms, restore
allostasis, self-regulation and agency (Bohlen et al., 2021; Esteves
et al., 2022; McParlin et al., 2022). Cooperative communication
is the intentional interaction between individuals to align
their mental states (Tomasello, 2019). Therefore, gathering
evidence to endorse an individual’s beliefs by synchronising their
mental states with another’s mental states in a shared situation
strengthens the ability for cooperative communications and an
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 3 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 4
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
eﬀective TA (Vasil et al., 2020). Arguably, therapeutic touch
can be an eﬃcient way to achieve attunement and collaborative
interpersonal relationships and biobehavioural synchrony and
alignment with others (Csibra, 2010; McParlin et al., 2022).
We propose that therapeutic touch in MSK care can
help develop and enhance cooperative communications and
strengthen the TA between the patient and the HCP , while
restoring homoeostasis and allostatic balance to resolve the
patient’s clinical problem. A predictable and positive relationship
between the HCP and a positive TA is considered more
inﬂuential than individual attachment preferences, including
any pre-existing anxieties when developing a new relationship
with another individual (Taylor et al., 2015). In clinical
practice, collaborative interpersonal relationships also contribute
to patient control and self-eﬃcacy by encouraging active
participation and adherence to exercises (Babatunde et al., 2017;
Kinney et al., 2018). Therefore, touch could help develop a
successful collaborative and therapeutic relationship contributing
to the good clinical beneﬁts of a positive TA (Miciak et al., 2019).
The remaining sections unpack the clinical application of touch
in MSK care, through the lens of active inference.
PERSON-CENTRED APPROACH:
RECOGNISING PRIORS
A person-centred approach to treatment is crucial for achieving
shared attention and cooperative communication, producing
positive outcomes in managing MSK conditions (Shannon
and Hillsdon, 2007; Kim and Park, 2017; Hutting et al.,
2022). Person-centred care is structured around the individual’s
speciﬁc needs and preferences, enabling conﬁdence-building and
the development of a robust TA, particularly in rheumatoid
conditions and chronic LBP (Haugli et al., 2004; Lærum et al.,
2006; Reynolds, 2009; Barbari et al., 2020). Person-centred occurs
when, for example, an HCP adapts a standard rehabilitation
protocol to make it more time-eﬃcient or acknowledges that a
single mother or individual with ﬁnancial constraints may not
complete the protocol in its entirety (Miciak et al., 2019). On
this point, patients with LBP and other MSK conditions express
appreciation and a stronger bond with their HCP when personal
adjustments are made (Del Baño-Aledo et al., 2014; GMC, 2020).
A person-centred approach underpinned by a robust TA provides
opportunities for discussing personal beliefs and fears. Moreover,
it improves adherence to treatment advice and rehabilitation in
patients with LBP , shoulder, and hip osteoarthritis (Lequerica
et al., 2009; Hall et al., 2010; Cheung and Soundy, 2021).
Bayesian beliefs are the ñ sub-personal war propositional ñ
dispositions and narratives that guide a person’s choices and
behaviour, based on their prior experiences and cultural legacy.
Bayesian beliefs are important adaptive priors to consider in
the context of patient care: they are evolutionary, subpersonal,
socially and culturally inherited (Badcock et al., 2019a,b). These
priors will have been developed over time to create more adaptive
and veridical predictions of outcomes in the lived, prosocial
world (Ramstead et al., 2018; Badcock et al., 2019a). It has been
suggested that empirical assumptions of Bayesian beliefs with
personal priors and sensory input [ s = g(η,a) + ω], including
touch accounting for an individual’s internal states ( µ) and
aﬀecting how an individual chooses to interact with their external
world (Ramstead et al., 2018; Badcock et al., 2019a). The external
world can be empirically quantiﬁed through equations of motion
[η = f (η,a) + ω], specifying the hidden dynamics of the world
accounting for random ﬂuctuations ( ω) of internal and external
states synergistically attempting to minimise free energy. Free
energy is the probability of hidden environmental causes [q(η:µ)]
and sensory inputs determined by the individual’s internal states
(F = Energy-entropy). Free energy can be minimised by increasing
the accuracy of sensory data, i.e., picking more reliable data based
on priors (F = complexity–Accuracy) or synchronising with more
experienced individuals, i.e., HCP allowing the variation of free
energy to impose tighter bonds reducing surprise from sensory
or physiological states (F = divergence + surprise).
We use Bayesian belief to denote a speciﬁc viewpoint or
expectation encoded by neural representations in higher cortical
regions that send predictions to hierarchically lower levels
(Friston and Frith, 2015; Vasil et al., 2020). These descending
predictions can then be compared with expectations at lower
levels to form a prediction error. Subsequently, the prediction
error is then passed back to high levels to revise Bayesian
beliefs ñ and thereby instantiate a process of Bayesian belief
updating that enables the patient to, literally, make sense of
their world. These priors regulate and inﬂuence information
processing within treatment sessions and contextualise any
approach any treatment issues (Hasson et al., 2015). HCPs must
understand their patients’ perspectives, goals, and priors by
mentalising higher-order cognitive processes. This facilitates a
common ground ñ or shared narrative ñ and a beneﬁcial clinical
outcome (Frith and Frith, 2006; Miciak et al., 2019). Therefore,
the development of a robust TA is dependent on the HCP’s ability
to identify, accept and acknowledge an individual’s unique priors,
context, and expectations. Consequently, HCP can gain trust and
therefore develop a personalised patient-centred treatment.
Recognising priors is particularly crucial in chronic pain due
to its complexity and multifactorial nature when compared with
acute pain. In the context of chronic LBP , social factors are as
signiﬁcant as physical factors in the patients’ pain experience
(Hill and Fritz, 2011; Louw and Puentedura, 2013). To this
end, patients with chronic non-malignant pain and other MSK
disorders consider being listened to, believed and viewed more
than just their symptoms or condition to be crucial to their
quality of care (Bordin, 1979; Lærum et al., 2006; Clark, 2013;
Wilson et al., 2017; Søndenå et al., 2020). This genuine interest
in the person beyond their clinical condition can put patients at
ease, allowing them to relax and be more comfortable with their
HCP (Miciak et al., 2018). Arguably, in the context of MSK care,
an individual’s preferences and responses to therapeutic touch
are also modulated by the same factors that aﬀect a therapeutic
relationship, including cultural and social priors (Sorokowska
et al., 2021). Therefore, a person-centred approach with the
treatment speciﬁcally tailored to the individual is essential in all
aspects of a clinical encounter.
Prior beliefs regarding pain and a range of MSK
disorders are not always conducive to patient recovery
(Rossettini and Testa, 2018). Levels of maladaptive (i.e., false)
beliefs and accompanying attitudes are high among patients with
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 4 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 5
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
chronic LBP (Christe et al., 2021). These include catastrophising
and fear avoidance, leading to higher levels of pain, disability and
poorer clinical outcomes. One pernicious aspect of these ìfalse”
beliefs is that they preclude actively seeking evidence that would
revise them (e.g., ìI can’t move because it would hurt”). These
maladaptive beliefs are often linked to unaﬀectionate HCPs
(Wertli et al., 2014a,b; Cheung and Soundy, 2021). Therefore,
personalised, attentive care targetting and updating these beliefs
are signiﬁcant in aiding recovery (Main et al., 2010; Linton and
Shaw, 2011).
APPLICATION OF ACTIVE INFERENCE
TO TOUCH AND THERAPEUTIC
ALLIANCE
In active inference, our choices and behaviour determine the
sensory data we use to make inferences, including touch. This
includes overt action such as ìpalpation” of the visual world
through saccadic eye movements or touch, to covert action such
as the deployment of attention, or precision to newsworthy
sensory information (Seth and Friston, 2016; Parr and Friston,
2017; Parr et al., 2018; Sterzer et al., 2018; Smith et al., 2019;
Limanowski et al., 2020). In AI’s predictive processing (i.e.,
predictive coding) formulations, the newsworthy information
corresponds to prediction errors, namely, the diﬀerence between
our predictions based on our prior beliefs and what we actually
sensed. These prediction errors update beliefs when and only
when they are considered dependable or precise (Kok et al., 2012;
Brown et al., 2013; Veissière et al., 2019; Limanowski et al., 2020).
However, it is essential to note that the reliability or precision
given to prediction errors can be irrational and maladaptive,
particularly in persistent pain suﬀerers.
Physiologically, this corresponds to increasing the synaptic
gain of various neuronal populations encoding prediction
errors (Vossel et al., 2014; Auksztulewicz and Friston, 2015).
Psychologically, this can be thought of as sensory attenuation
or selective attention, depending upon whether the precision
is inferred to be high or low (Feldman and Friston, 2010;
Adams et al., 2013; Moran et al., 2013; Limanowski, 2017). In
short, ìprecision” describes the reliability or ìtrustworthiness”
aﬀorded prediction errors. The consequent precision weighting
of prediction errors may depend upon epistemic trust and a
mutual narrative (Fonagy and Allison, 2014). This also implicates
the building of trust essential to a robust TA.
In addition to increasing the precision via selective attention,
the attenuation of certain prediction errors (via reducing their
precision) is necessary to ignore certain sensations. Sensory
attenuation is crucial in this context because sensory attenuation
is necessary to act upon the world. In other words, to execute
a predicted or intended movement, it is essential to ignore
sensory evidence that the movement has not yet been initiated.
Anecdotally, sensory attenuation may explain why ìrubbing
one’s neck” attenuates nociceptive signals that would otherwise
be explained by the prior belief or experience ìI have a neck
pain.” This maladaptive overestimate in the weighting of sensory
information is commonly found in chronic pain patients whose
overly precise prior beliefs predict their pain symptoms before
the noxious sensory information actually occurs (Hechler et al.,
2016; Van den Bergh et al., 2017; Kube et al., 2020). Furthermore,
alternating augmentation and attenuation of sensory precision
may be crucial in dyadic interactions, in the sense that it
underwrites ìturn taking” in communication (i.e., Wilson and
Wilson, 2005; Ghazanfar and Takahashi, 2014; Friston and
Frith, 2015). In other words, listening and speaking when
establishing a shared narrative requires a reciprocal attenuation
and augmentation of the shared sensory modality, commonly
found in therapeutic touch and MSK care.
Therapeutic touch with a solid aﬀective component may be
a particularly potent interoceptive modality for this kind of
communication, allowing the updating of priors at two levels.
Firstly, it establishes a sensory modality of exchange, which
provides sensory evidence that ìyou are like me.” This is a crucial
inference that enables the use of the same (shared) narrative
to ﬁnesse predictions of ìself ” and ìother.” The notion of a
shared narrative or generative model of interpersonal exchange
may be an essential aspect of the TA, especially regarding the
agreement on goals and treatment plans. Secondly, the particular
eﬀect of therapeutic touch may draw attention (i.e., precision)
to the sensory levels of hierarchical inference, thereby reducing
the relative precision or commitment to higher-level prior beliefs.
A reduction or relaxation of the precision and reliance of prior
beliefs is generally thought to be a fundamental prerequisite
for belief updating in a therapeutic setting (please see Ainley
et al., 2012, 2016; Duquette, 2017, 2020; Carhart-Harris and
Friston, 2019) for treatments of precision and interception
in psychotherapy.
Moreover, many aspects of psychotherapy have played a role
in the research and practice of manual therapies, particularly in
the care of patients with chronic LBP and other MSK disorders
(McCabe et al., 2021a; Hutting et al., 2022). In short, synchronous
exchange between individuals enables more accurate inference of
the partner’s subsequent actions and coordinates joint attention
and implicit precision weighting. Through the hierarchically
organised model it helps to facilitate belief updating under
a shared narrative through equal collaboration and (mutual)
epistemic trust that may underwrite the TA, creating symmetrical
coupling and synchronisation (Moran et al., 2013; Fonagy
and Allison, 2014; Hasson and Frith, 2016). In other words,
it assists HCPs in navigating and implementing the most
eﬀective communication strategies while minimising prediction
errors and uncertainty necessary to establish an optimal
therapeutic alliance and maintain homoeostasis which can be
done through therapeutic touch and resulting in biobehavioural
synchrony with the other individual (Duquette, 2017, 2020;
Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2019).
BIOBEHAVIOURAL SYNCHRONY
INITIATED THROUGH TOUCH
Touch can often provide the sensory evidence to help conclude
that ìyou are like me” through stimulating biobehavioural
synchrony in which diﬀerent individuals harmonise their
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 5 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 6
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
biological and behavioural processes during social interaction
(Feldman, 2012, 2017; Koole and Tschacher, 2016; Tschacher
et al., 2017). Therapeutic touch during a massage in healthy
individuals aﬀects the modulation of psychological and
neuroendocrine function through the stimulation of mechanical
receptors, which share the same innervation as vagal aﬀerent
ﬁbres, which are subsequently involved in the regulation of the
autonomic nervous system, thus causing decreased heart rate,
blood pressure and stress (Diego and Field, 2009). The processes
involve coupling physiological and behavioural processes
across the four systems of matching non-verbal behaviour,
coupling heart rhythms, respiratory, autonomics, brain to
brain synchrony, motor movements, and coordinated oxytocin,
dopamine, and cortisol (Feldman, 2017; Goldstein et al., 2017).
Biobehavioural synchrony can be evident immediately with
therapeutic touch by increased heart rate variability, decreased
anxiety, anger and pain in patients with chronic tension-type
headaches (Toro-Velasco et al., 2009). Hands-on techniques
can also inﬂuence the autonomic nervous system and cause
bidirectional release of neurotransmitters such as oxytocin
between the HCP and the patient (Uvnäs-Moberg, 2004; Cerritelli
et al., 2020a). This supports the argument that therapeutic
touch can help in the embodied transfer of an individual’s
parasympathetic regulation to another (Van Puyvelde et al.,
2019). The exact mechanism behind biobehavioural synchrony
varies depending on the type of bond; for example, patient-
practitioner synchrony would be diﬀerent from a romantic
partnership. The threat level also plays a role with higher
synchronisation of their actions and posture even if they
are not aware of it in situations of stress or threat, i.e.,
a painful MSK injury (Goldstein et al., 2017). The release
of oxytocin is dependent on the level of attachment which
determines the coupling of oxytocin and dopamine before
being combined in the subcortical to cortical networks involved
in reward, embodiment and mentalisation (Feldman, 2017).
Consequently, when consolidating interpersonal relationships
and achieving biobehavioural synchrony in social situations,
synchronous activation of the temporoparietal regions and heart
rate is considered a key component to achieving brain to brain
alpha coupling (Shamay-Tsoory et al., 2019). The synchrony is
often visible within a therapeutic relationship in the clinician’s
temporoparietal, prefrontal, and AIC activation, indicating social
cognition and mirroring with the patients’ dyads (Ellingsen
et al., 2020). The right prefrontal cortex becomes activated when
one individual is perceived as the leader, inhibiting another
individual’s self-representation (Fairhurst et al., 2014a,b).
DEVELOPING AND UPDATING PRIORS
THROUGH TOUCH
Socio-aﬀective touch can adjust the relative importance and
response of noxious stimulus in the AIC and cingulate cortices
(Krahé et al., 2013; Von Mohr et al., 2018). Touch can create
bio-feedback loops that help develop and learn to develop new
or update less precise priors by altering the setpoint in crucial
survival demands. Touch can create bio-feedback loops that help
develop and learn to develop new or update less precise priors
by altering the setpoint in crucial survival demands (Rossettini
et al., 2022). This viewpoint was initially proposed by Sterling and
Eyer (1988) and has been expanding to include the integration of
active inference to interception, regulation of homoeostasis and
allostasis, all based on recent advances in anatomical knowledge,
empirical models, and computational neuroscience (Stephan
et al., 2016; Fotopoulou et al., 2022). When developing a prior,
brain regions such as the AIC, Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC),
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), and subgenual cortex (SGC) will
generate allostatic predictions to embody a generative model of
the current input (Pezzulo et al., 2015; Corcoran et al., 2020;
Tschantz et al., 2022). We would argue that one can include
therapeutic touch in predicting the bodies currently and future
state. These brain regions will receive prediction errors about
interception from the posterior and mid insula. Other allostatic
top-down predictions enable them to modulate the current
homoeostatic beliefs found in the subcortical regions fulﬁlled
by reﬂex arcs in areas such as the hypothalamus and brainstem
(Stephan et al., 2016; Fotopoulou et al., 2022).
The descending projections from the AIC, ACC, OFC, and
SGC could relay the individuals top-down predictions to the
posterior and mid insular cortex to compare them with bottom-
up sensory aﬀerents to form the prediction errors necessary for
precise allostatic responses to the current situation. A clinical
example of unpredicted sensory stimulation ñ incorporating
therapeutic touch ñ is through guided exercises or passive
movements. The HCP will help the patient complete a series of
movements they may previously ﬁnd painful or were too nervous
about doing independently. Moreover, it allows the patient to
observe and gain tactile sensory information, actively. They can
do the movement, even if the HCP is physically doing the
action for them, such as a passive joint examination. All areas
mentioned above connect to the granular layer IV of the primary
interoceptive insular cortex allowing the integrative modulation
of homoeostatic beliefs (Sterling and Eyer, 1988; Fotopoulou
et al., 2022). These assumptions are sustained and expanded
upon from the recognised anatomical and hierarchical structure
of laminar patterns in Macaque monkeys (Li et al., 2017).
Neuroimaging studies have discovered projections between the
AIC, ACC, OFC, and SGC regions during the activation of
CT ﬁbres suggesting further interconnectivity (McGlone et al.,
2012; López-Solà et al., 2019; Shamay-Tsoory and Eisenberger,
2021).
Ascending prediction errors target the frontoparietal network,
thereby revising descending self-eﬃcacy automatic sensory
predictions to help update future allostatic predictions. This
process creates a better generative model of the ìself ” that is
increasingly precise and aligned within the current situation,
potentially de-threatening the noxious stimuli (Fotopoulou and
Tsakiris, 2017; Owens et al., 2018). In essence, the HCP introduces
a ìsurprise” to the system through the tactile sensory stimulus,
which is part of the hands-on techniques. This ìsurprise”
enables a functional belief updating that revises prior beliefs
that underwrite the patients ìillness.” Subsequently, this enables
the patient to increase the weighting of interoceptive prediction
errors about the current state of the ìself ” ascending to
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 6 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 7
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
FIGURE 1 |The biofeedback loop of therapeutic touch. Green arrows: predictions errors; Red arrows: predictions. Touch biofeedback loop adapted from
Sterling and Eyer (1988) and Fotopoulou et al. (2022) to help modify and adjust the importance of priors through new allostatic predictions from therapeutic touch.
We suggest that the AIC, ACC, SGC, and OFC create allostatic therapeutic touch predictions that underwrite interceptive prediction errors in the posterior and mid
insula. These predictions modulate homoeostatic beliefs in the hypothalamus and brainstem. Descending projections from the AIC, ACC, OFC, and SGC replay
top-down predictions to the mid and posterior insula to protect the new bottom-up stimulus of therapeutic touch. The ensuing prediction errors are then sent to the
frontoparietal network that revises prior beliefs and future allostatic predictions, identifying more precise and newsworthy prediction errors for this speciﬁc situation
for the future.
higher hierarchical levels (Hechler et al., 2016). Moreover, this
process helps predict the right level of precision to be deployed
in certain situations. This process of predicting precision
appears to be mediated by cholinergic, dopamine and other
neuromodulators ñ to optimise attentional set (Atzil et al.,
2018; Cox and Witten, 2019; Crucianelli et al., 2019; Nguyen
et al., 2021). This contextualisation of predictive processing rests
on top-down predictions occurring before the consequences of
touching or being touched (Friston et al., 2015; Figure 1).
THE EFFECT OF TOUCH IN THE
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC
MUSCULOSKELETAL PAIN
There is substantial evidence showing that the expectation and
prediction of severe pain alone in chronic MSK pain can
increase the pain felt and cause symptoms before the trigger
occurs (Rossettini et al., 2018). This is observed in patients
with ﬁbromyalgia and arthritis who often predict the source
or trigger to their increase in symptoms, falsely interpreting a
non-noxious stimulus as painful, in order to fulﬁl their belief
of recurrent, persistent pain (Vlaeyen and Linton, 2000; Brown
et al., 2013; Henningsen et al., 2018). In these instances, it
can be argued that therapeutic touch can help re-establish their
misinterpreted bodily sensations or develop new explanations
for their symptoms (Xu et al., 2014; Barrett and Simmons,
2015). In the absence of such therapeutic interventions, pain
suﬀerers can have a persistent and self-fulﬁlling ìfailure of
inference” (Tracey, 2010; Di Lernia et al., 2016; Hechler et al.,
2016). Subsequently, persistent pain patients may be cognitively
immunised to updating or changing their priors, so that they
discount the interactions with the HCP and anticipate that the
clinical encounter will be irrelevant; thereby reaﬃrming their
maladaptive priors, even before they present for treatment. This
can lead to the HCP being regarded as an imprecise source of
sensory information, and their sensory input and stimulation are
dismissed (Fonagy and Allison, 2014).
The tactile and proprioceptive stimulation from handsoncare
conveys interoceptive and aﬀective information that adjusts the
processing of sensory information that undergirds symptoms
(McGlone et al., 2014; D’Alessandro et al., 2016; Quadt et al.,
2018; Bohlen et al., 2021) (see Figure 2 ). Cerritelli et al.
(2020b) endorse this view by ﬁnding that osteopathic treatment
increases the interoceptive accuracy of patients with chronic
LBP ñ with accompanying decreases in the blood oxygenation
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 7 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 8
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
FIGURE 2 |A mode to describe the allostatic regulation by a Health Care Provider (HCP). Blue arrows: The predicted expectations and priors transferring
information from the primary interoceptive cortex to posterior insula. Red arrows: New sensory information from the posterior insula to the ventral insular.
Exteroceptive: We propose that the patient has predicted expectations for the clinical appointment and predictions about the HCP’s stimuli. We offer putative
multisensory mechanisms, i.e., auditory, touch and visual – for allostatic regulation from the HCP . They help display support, empathy, reassurance, and improved
clinical function; all are originating from the anterior insula. The anterior insula integrates this multisensory input for allostatic regulation from the cerebellum,
ventromedial, limbic, temporoparietal, subcortical, posterior insular, occipital frontal, temporal cortices, anterior cingulate cortex, hypothalamus, and brainstem.
Interoceptive: The patient will predict or expect clinical expectations of interoception because of treatment including reduced pain and inﬂammation which we
propose originate from new tactile and proprioception (i.e., haptic) stimulation from the HCP .
level dependant (BOLD) levels in the bilateral insula, ACC, left
striatum and right middle frontal gyrus; brain regions implicated
in interception. This suggests that the brain becomes sensitised to
touch as a precise and newsworthy sensory modality (Scalabrini
et al., 2019). Additionally, this modiﬁcation in body perception,
awareness of pain levels, and location through touch is speciﬁc
to patients ñ with conditions like LBP ñ who cannot visualise the
source of symptoms and may therefore imagine the symptomatic
area being more extensive than it is (Nishigami et al., 2015;
Puentedura and Flynn, 2016).
Therapeutic touch ñ supported appropriate and non-nocebic
language ñ can create new interoceptive biofeedback loops to
promote reassurance, communication, and joint attention over
the injury: for example, by commenting, ìThis muscle feels tense,
or the joint is stiﬀ. Do you agree?” or showing that pressing the
injury while painful is not making the injury worse (Rossettini
et al., 2018). By physically exploring the area, it will provide
insight and a link to the ìinternal situation” beneath (Harman
et al., 2011). Arguably, the body is the physical manifestation of
our hidden thoughts or world, and HCPs can uncover hidden
beliefs through physical examination (Thornquist, 2001). In
short, changing the patient’s prior beliefs that she is a patient
with ìchronic pain” into a belief that she is ìrecovering from
a chronic pain condition” enables the patient to ignore and
reinterpret interoceptive signals, emulating the attenuation of
sensory (interoceptive) precision (Hoskin et al., 2019; Gerrans,
2020; Seymour and Mancini, 2020). Nonetheless, it is more
diﬃcult to form new priors if entrenched through self-reference
(Siu and Humphreys, 2015). Despite the HCP’s best intentions,
it is possible that over-precise priors will cause a lack of
attention ñ and therefore eﬀectiveness ñ to hands-on care and
interventions of the HCP.
Crucially, not only should the HCP consider the patient’s
priors, but they must be aware of their own priors that
may inﬂuence and modulate interpersonal behaviour (Horton
et al., 2021). If the HCP is aligned with their patients,
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 8 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 9
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
FIGURE 3 |Putative model homoeostatic regulation in musculoskeletal (MSK) care during a clinical encounter. Blue box, clinical presentation and practitioner’s
actions; Green box, interoceptive metacognitions; Red dotted box, changes in brain activity; Black dotted box, changes to interoception and mental states. The
patient will present with disrupted homoeostasis because of their clinical condition. During a clinical encounter, the HCP will take a case history, examine their
patient, and discuss their condition and care plan. The HCP will reassure, educate, understand, acknowledge, and empathise with their patient. We propose that
hands-on care which is underpinned by a robust therapeutic alliance and communication can putatively restore homoeostasis through increasing biobehavioural
synchrony and active inference – thus updating the patient’s generative model.
some disclosure of the HCP’s past can frequently deepen the
connection and help the patient feel that they are just like them
(Meltzoﬀ, 2007; Miciak et al., 2019). While not all HCPs are
comfortable with this, revealing some of their inner personal
experiences can help increase the TA, trust, and bond between
patient and HCP , thereby increasing the common ground and
synchrony. In patients with MSK disorders, if the HCP is more
open, approachable and expresses themselves more freely and
personally, it can help patients to freely express their feelings,
increasing trust, which can extend to taking more of a leap of faith
with their physical symptoms and injuries (Miciak et al., 2018).
JOINT ACTION-PERCEPTION CYCLES
WITHIN TREATMENT
The TA principles revolve around an agreement between patient
and HCP on the treatment plan and goals of the patient, which
is particularly important for managing many MSK conditions,
including LBP. With a closer bond, the patient may perceive
others to be more similar and isomorphic with themselves, than
an inanimate replica (Scalabrini et al., 2019). This increase in
synchrony may also contribute to teamwork and interpersonal
collaboration in manual therapy, which is developed through
collaboratively agreeing on a set goal (Miciak et al., 2019; Brun-
Cottan et al., 2020) (See Figure 3 for the application to MSK
clinical encounters). AI and cooperative communication both
suggest that the alignment of mental states with another helps
to minimise supplies and resolve uncertainty (Constant et al.,
2019; Tomasello, 2019). Similarly, the Social Baseline Theory
suggests that humans are built to be social and work with
familiar individuals in uncertain situations or when approaching
problems (Coan and Maresh, 2014; Beckes and Sbarra, 2022).
Individuals generate and modify their own feedback loops to
achieve the end goal of aligning their mental states with others
(Friston and Frith, 2015). Universally, this involves action and
perception loops that reliably connect the two distinct policies
until they become entwined and produce a shared narrative
(Friston and Frith, 2015). Social collaboration to achieve and
maintain allostatic needs helps decrease the risk of death and
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 9 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 10
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
FIGURE 4 |Proposed feedback loop during an explanation of the problem and plan of care. Blue box, HCP inner mental states and actions; Green box, Patient
internal mental states and actions. The HCP conducts an initial examination, often using verbal and non-verbal communication – including touch to reach a summary
of their evaluation and plan of care. As the practitioner communicates the outline of their assessment, they will start to mentalise their patient’s reactions and hidden
throughs. The patient may begin developing hidden thoughts regarding their diagnosis before verbalising them. Based on their patient’s responses, the HCP may
modify their previous explanation to achieve a more robust and collaborative description considering the patient’s reactions.
injury due to the shared goal, trust, and familiarity between
the groups’ individuals (Vasil et al., 2020). Touch is often
considered a standard modality to achieve this through socio-
aﬀective regulation involving cognitive, metacognitive process
and embodiment (Roberts and Bucksey, 2007; Aureli and
Presaghi, 2010; Coan and Maresh, 2014; Fotopoulou et al.,
2022). Examples of the socio-aﬀective regulation include positive
changes in immunity, inﬂammation, and neuroendocrine
function by decreasing stress, allostatic load and subsequently
eﬀort to maintain homoeostasis in critically ill or multifactorial
conditions such as chronic pain that have all been achieved
through touch (Papathanassoglou and Mpouzika, 2012; Coan and
Maresh, 2014; Morrison, 2016a; Kerr et al., 2019). The clinical
appointment is one example of a coupled action-perception cycle
and social collaboration; both in the agreement of the diagnosis
and within the hands-on therapeutic intervention. That patient
will present with pain or abnormal physiology, resulting in an
allostatic overload and seeking help from the HCP to re-establish
her allostatic balance (McEwen and Wingﬁeld, 2003; Beckes and
Coan, 2011; Miciak et al., 2019; Guidi et al., 2021; Vasil et al.,
2020) (see Figure 4).
With explanation of the diagnosis ñ and with the use of
therapeutic touch ñ the HCP can establish mutual synchrony by
continuously inferring the patient’s reaction, pain and symptoms
and adjusting their explanation or touch to align with the
patient’s sensory states. For example, if the HCP infers the
tactile pressure is excessive compared to the patient’s pain or
physiological response, they will adjust their predictions and
decrease the pressure and its subsequent eﬀects and vice versa if
not strong enough. Additionally, it has been shown that diﬀerent
massage strengths, light vs. moderate, have slightly diﬀerent
eﬀects, with moderate massage increasing parasympathetic and
light increasing the sympathetic nervous system (Lindgren et al.,
2010). The HCP will continue to constantly adjust their touch
until they are satisﬁed with the change in tactile feedback from
the technique, i.e., increased movement in the joint space of
exchange and restoring the patient’s homoeostasis. Restoring
homoeostasis and hopefully decreasing the symptoms can be
considered a reduction in the prediction error (a.k.a., free energy)
to regulate allostasis (Peters et al., 2017; Atzil et al., 2018;
Koban et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2021). This particular coupled
action-perception cycle is regarded as the touch feedback loop
(Shamay-Tsoory and Eisenberger, 2021).
THE ROLE OF TOUCH IN DEVELOPING A
CONNECTION
At the centre of the TA is the harmonious relationship between
the patient and the HCP in which the patient can trust,
communicate, and have a mutual understanding of their goals
and purpose, which patients with MSK disorders see as crucial to
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 10 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 11
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
their treatment (Pinto et al., 2012; O’Keeﬀe et al., 2016; Miciak
et al., 2019). Moreover, creating a collaborative relationship
where the HCP and patient are seen as equals enables successful
treatment outcomes, allowing HCPs to establish a meaningful
connection (Miciak et al., 2018).
Therapeutic touch and hands-on techniques in MSK care help
build an interpersonal connection by using the body as a pivot
point (Miciak et al., 2018). An HCP’s role is to encourage the
patient to reconnect to their body often through therapeutic
touch to empathise how the body reacts and feels in response
to the tactile stimulus from the HCP , essential to rehabilitation
(Miciak et al., 2018; Geri et al., 2019). In patients with chronic
LBP , the increased knowledge and awareness of their body will
reaﬃrm the connection with the HCP as they feel their HCP
understands their symptoms (Harman et al., 2011; Krueger, 2015,
p. 263). This phenomenon encourages them to take ownership
of their treatment plan (Miciak et al., 2018). Even the most
rudimentary form of touch, such as, for example, a half-second
of physical hand contact from a librarian, can increase positive
perceptions of the library; similar acts have also helped establish
the foundation for trust, compliance, cooperative and prosocial
communication (Fisher et al., 1976; Morrison et al., 2010).
Touch is the most intuitive mode of expressing and
detecting another’s emotional and mental states and sensory
and communicative intentions, providing the context and clarity
to ambiguous interactions (Hertenstein et al., 2006; McParlin
et al., 2022). The diﬀerent modes and manipulations of touch
enable individuals to accurately infer at least six diﬀerent
emotions, including love, fear, and anger, with 48ñ83% accuracy
(Herteinstein et al., 2006). As individuals become more precise at
inferring another’s emotional and mental states, they also become
better at establishing crucial elements of the TA such as common
ground, trust and synchrony. Additionally, accurately inferring
another’s hidden thoughts can simulate reward pathways as the
individual minimises prediction errors, thereby increasing the
enjoyment of the task (Beckes and Coan, 2011; Pan et al., 2017;
Goldstein et al., 2018).
Health Care providers are in a unique position: it is often
considered central and expected to clinically examine and
therefore touch a wide area of the body, including the head
and neck, generally reserved for more intimate or signiﬁcant
relationships (Geri et al., 2019). Additionally, it helps in the
accuracy of HCP to infer the other individual’s emotions, detected
through touch (Hertenstein et al., 2009; Geri et al., 2019).
Suvilehto et al. (2015) showed a correlation in the areas
individuals will allow others to touch and the strength of the
relationship. Therefore, HCPs who can touch more sensitive
areas within their ethical boundaries are aﬀorded a higher
baseline level of trust and a greater opportunity to develop social
bonds to build a stronger alliance and the overall analgesic
eﬀect. Therapeutic touch, when examining and validating their
clinical condition, can frequently alleviate the patient’s anxiety
and increase emotional support, empathy, mentalisation and be
rewarding for all individuals (Gentsch et al., 2015). Additionally,
it helps in emotional and communication regulation, as
reﬂected in activating the right AIC, inferior parietal lobe
and prefrontal cortex (Etkin et al., 2015; Goldstein et al., 2018;
Redcay and Schilbach, 2019). It is the activation of the inferior
parietal lobe that has been suggested to contribute to a signiﬁcant
role in the ability to infer another’s intentions and thoughts
through observations, which may allow us to modulate and
reduce the threat of noxious stimulus creating an analgesic
eﬀect (Kilner et al., 2007; Krahé et al., 2013; Von Mohr
et al., 2018). Clinically, this has been shown in patients with
acute postoperative pain, who reported decreased pain and
anxiety after receiving massage therapy daily during their 5-
day postoperative period (Mitchinson et al., 2007). Reduced
anxiety associated with the dysfunction may aid in updating the
autonomic and bottom-up interoceptive prediction errors that
impair metacognitive motor homoeostatic and allostatic systems,
which dictate dysfunction. This adds to the growing body of
evidence that a more eﬀective, stronger TA can improve clinical
outcomes and patient satisfaction in treating MSK pain patients
with manual therapy (Hush et al., 2011).
Touch and Oxytocin
One of the most signiﬁcant measures of bonding is the
neurotransmitter oxytocin. It has been labelled as the social
hormone as it enables the processing of social and non-social
cues (Graustrella and MacLeod, 2012). Oxytocin also helps
achieve biobehavioural synchrony and allostatic regulation and
is released in therapeutic touch during hands-on techniques
like massage (Uvnäs-Moberg, 2004). It has been argued that
the somatosensory stimulations from touch-based therapies
encourage anti-stress eﬀects via the stimulating somatosensory
pathways, subsequently activating the oxytocin system in the
hypothalamus (Takahashi et al., 2021). Moreover, cervical
spinal manipulations often used by HCPs in MSK care to
treat acute non-speciﬁc mechanical neck pain have been
shown to immediately aﬀect neuromodulation, including
oxytocin, potentially by modifying the neuropeptide expression
(Lohman et al., 2019).
Moreover, multimodal sensory stimulation, including tactile
touch, not only aid in the increase of cortical oxytocin levels but
also helps with reduced social interaction, potentially increasing
trust, and empathy essential for a successful TA (Green and
Hollander, 2010; Y amasue et al., 2012; Zheng et al., 2014).
Repeated stimulation of the CT aﬀerents in the skin during
aﬀective touch increases the frequency and duration of the release
of oxytocin receptors with tighter cross-links to dopamine and
opioids; as well as regulating and increasing synchronisation
within the autonomic nervous system (Löken et al., 2009;
Ackerley et al., 2014; Pawling et al., 2017). Furthermore, a
decrease in cortisol is observed when patients can recognise the
repetition of similar techniques, exercises, appointment structure,
and therapeutic touch with a familiar HCP (Uvnas-Moberg
et al., 2015). Collectively, the evidence demonstrates that the
repeated release of endogenous peptides, oxytocin, and opioids
has therapeutic beneﬁts, including analgesia, autonomic system
regulation, and synchrony. Therefore, it can be argued that
hands-on techniques still play a crucial role in MSK care.
Crucianelli et al. (2019) proposed that predictions of aﬀective
touch, could also be modulated by neuropeptides like oxytocin
to optimise interoceptive attention. Therefore, oxytocin is likely
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 11 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 12
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
to play a central role in interoception by modulating the
precision of sensory stimuli in social contexts. The oxytocin-
interoceptive nexus includes the multisensory eﬀects of touch ñ
somatosensory, thermoregulation and cardiorespiratory ñ on
homoeostatic control (Quintana and Guastella, 2020; Kirsch
et al., 2021). Oxytocin neuromodulation has been proposed as an
aetiological factor in the failure to develop coherent models of
ìself ” and ì[m]other” (Quattrocki and Friston, 2014). Moreover,
it has been suggested that the role of oxytocin is best characterised
through allostasis; as it can help facilitate the dynamic adjustment
and consolidation of homoeostatic setpoints, and is crucial to
many of life’s essential survival needs (Quintana and Guastella,
2020). Therefore, the eﬀective activation of the oxytocin system
could help achieve positive physical and psychological clinical
results through its ability to help patients adapt and encourage
successful recovery (Takayanagi and Onaka, 2021). Additionally,
oxytocin can help with analgesia due to its connection with
decreased activity in the AIC in response to noxious stimuli,
regulation of noxious threats, and increased activity in the
prefrontal lobe (Kreuder et al., 2019). These ﬁndings are reﬂected
in the use of therapeutic touch in MSK care, including in
pregnant women with back and leg pain who experienced a
reduction of pain and cortisol levels (Field, 2010; Mueller and
Grunwald, 2021).
BEYOND THE HEALTH CARE
PROVIDER-PATIENT DYAD: THE ROLE
OF HIERARCHY IN TRIADIC
SYNCHRONY IN THE CLINICAL
ENCOUNTER
To develop a robust and successful TA, HCPs need to work
as a team to develop a collaborative relationship. In many
circumstances, clinical interactions in MSK care are often triadic,
with interactions occurring between the HCP , next of kin and the
patient, i.e., an elderly relative or patient needing a translator.
The active inference model of precision and weighting can
be applied to clinical triadic situations through shared clinical
goals, coordinated hands-on techniques, and therapeutic touch
commonly used in MSK care. There is an increase in the coupling
between the mirror neuron and mentalising systems in the brain
during triadic social interactions, including the temporoparietal
junction and prefrontal context, which are also inﬂuenced by
therapeutic touch, including osteopathic manipulative treatment
(Trapp et al., 2014; Tamburella et al., 2019). Crucially, the
temporoparietal and medial temporal lobes are also intrinsic
to the manipulation, validation, and reinforcement of adapting
prior memories to speciﬁc contexts (Hasson et al., 2015).
The coordinated, complementary, triadic interactions increase
the activation and coupling of mirror neurons and the inferior
parietal lobe, which are engaged when two people make
physical contact or participate in co-operative communication
(Trapp et al., 2014; Miller et al., 2019). The three individuals
will eventually synchronise their actions as they become
more familiar with each other’s responses, increasing their
communication intent. Therefore, triadic interactions activate
both the mirror neuron and mentalisation systems, rather than
the single activation of the mentalisation system observed in
more direct interactions (Schilbach, 2010). The overlapping
mapping of neural structures such as the pregenual anterior
cingulate cortex, amygdala, and AIC, and the mentalisation
systems are also activated similarly via tactile communication
and hands-on care.
Touch is crucial to mentalisation, and the probabilistic
inference frequently encountered through multisensory
interoception, which is developed through the accumulation
of multisensory autonomic and motor predictions of the
body’s physiological states and coupling with the outside world
(Fotopoulou and Tsakiris, 2017; Fotopoulou et al., 2022). The
mirror neuron system suggests the utilisation of joint coding
for one’s actions and perceptions with the understanding and
ability to infer another individual’s actions, which is essential
to co-operative communications (Koban et al., 2019). It is
common for triadic situations to incorporate touch as a method
of communication, combining the beneﬁts of triadic interactions
and touch into one scenario and increasing the overall synchrony.
This can be applied to a clinical setting, when the HCP frequently
determines the communication hierarchy delegating their
expertise and advice to the next of kin, assisting with the
patient’s regulation (O’Shea et al., 2019). While more verbal
communications may be targetted at the next of kin than the
patient, the patient receives signiﬁcantly more stimulation from
sensory information and repetition of movements throughout
the treatment, utilising more direct tactile communication
than the accompanying individual (Harman et al., 2011). We
argue that understanding the mechanisms underpinning triadic
communication and synchrony is crucial to providing eﬀective
person-centred MSK care, particularly in the care of the elderly,
where the use of a translator is needed, and in contexts with a
solid family-centred culture.
TOUCH AS A METHOD TO EXPLORE
AND GAIN EXPERTISE
According to patients, an essential quality of an HCP in
MSK care is their expertise in the ﬁeld (Peersman et al.,
2013). Most patients believe their HCP has excellent clinical
skills and is trustworthy, possibly due to their more precise
prediction errors and priors on MSK disorders and associated
symptoms such as pain, combined with their ability to
help to resolve their symptoms (Cooper et al., 2008; Peiris
et al., 2012; Del Baño-Aledo et al., 2014; Vasil et al.,
2020). Despite a collaborative relationship, society’s hierarchical
social strata reﬂect that as the HCP has superior knowledge,
expertise, qualiﬁcations, and access to resources, they will
always be seen higher in the hierarchical order of the
relationship between HCP and patient (O’Shea et al., 2019).
Thus, while strategies such as the person-centred approach
allow for greater integration of patients’ voices in healthcare,
HCPs will fundamentally make top-down decisions regarding
their patients’ care.
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 12 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 13
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
Patients are frequently perceived to have an ìinterrogative
motivation” in which they have a more receptive and motivated
mindset to learn and create opportunities to adapt their current
prior beliefs to some extent due to asymmetry entrainment
(Harris and Corriveau, 2011; Harris et al., 2017). Patients
with MSK-related pain typically receive cognitive reassurance
through increased knowledge of their condition from their
HCP ñ arguably, it helps develop more precise priors, decreases
maladaptive beliefs, and improves patient conﬁdence and
condition management (Miciak et al., 2018; Cheung and Soundy,
2021). Touch and proprioception, i.e., haptics, is used to explore
and gain information about the world around us. The haptic
system enables us to discriminate and recognise objects through
palpation (McLinden and McCall, 2002). Palpation is commonly
used in MSK care. Despite its variable validity and reliability (see
Nolet et al., 2021, for a recent review), patients believe that their
HCPs can manually detect their clinical problem’s origin, thus
explaining why they frequently expect an HCP to examine the
area of dysfunction, particularly in subacute LBP.
THE ROLE OF TOUCH IN OVERCOMING
UNCERTAINTY BY CREATING A SAFE
CLINICAL ENVIRONMENT
Attachment theory suggests that an attachment ﬁgure can
provide another individual with a strong sense of security
Bowlby (1988). Through the lens of attachment theory, a
therapist can take on this role and act as a ìsecure base” by
instilling a sense of security in the clinical setting and thus
strengthening the TA (Sauer et al., 2010). A safe environment and
attachment can be created with the help of therapeutic touch and
eﬀective communication by acknowledging the clinical problem,
receiving reassurance, the expectation of allostatic regulation
and symptom modiﬁcation, and encouraging the patient to
engage in rehabilitation exercises, which they may not have
felt conﬁdent to do (Bright et al., 2015; Taylor et al., 2015).
Moreover, it is considered crucial and expected by patients with
MSK disorders for a successful TA, rapport, installing patient
conﬁdence, motivation, ownership while showing empathy and
reducing anxiety (Murray and Corney, 1991; Hill and Fritz, 2011;
O’Keeﬀe et al., 2016; Cederbom et al., 2020; Cheung and Soundy,
2021). Therapeutic touch is also considered ìcomfort contact, ” as
it can contribute to patients feeling more comfortable with their
HCP , especially in the case of LBP (GMC, 2020). Consequently, it
can help to decrease stress through reassurance and achieving a
secure attachment, a more vital relationship and a sense of safety
that helps to regulate and accurately predict the physiological
eﬀects of stress and general health (Harlow and Zimmermann,
1959; Coan et al., 2006; Morrison, 2016b; López-Solà et al., 2019;
Mühlenpfordt et al., 2020; Norholt, 2020). Compared to verbal
reassurance, caring touch reduces stress signiﬁcantly, reiterating
its superiority in providing social support (Ditzen et al., 2007).
Individuals who experience persistent pain are more likely to
suﬀer from anxiety, depression and fear-avoidance, thus a long-
term obstacle to recovery that should be addressed (Linton and
Shaw, 2011). Thus, increasing social support and a sense of safety
can decrease the likelihood of the brain detecting and modulating
potential threats, such as nociceptive signals, by increasing
ventral medial prefrontal lobe activation, modulating pain and
increasing the individual’s quality of life (Shamay-Tsoory and
Eisenberger, 2021; Krahé et al., 2013). The evidence demonstrates
that touch-based therapeutic interventions contribute to patients’
increased quality of life for many MSK conditions, including
ﬁbromyalgia, MSK, chronic pain, and headaches (Yuan et al.,
2015; Crawford et al., 2016). Therefore, touch-based therapies
are being recommended in the care of elderly patients with
chronic MSK conditions, as increasing quality of life is often
considered the main goal in symptomatic management, crucial
to this demographic (Kopf, 2021). This speaks to the eﬀect of
touch of A β but also A α, and CT aﬀerents on the modulation
of nociceptive signals at a subcortical level in conjunction with
a high-level cortical response that can disrupt pain signalling,
resulting in spinal gating that prevents signals from reaching
the brain (Melzack, 1996; Mancini et al., 2015). Moreover, touch
can moderate another individual’s level of pain, synchrony, and
level of analgesia (Goldstein et al., 2017). The reduction in
pain levels from hands-on care, particularly massage therapy,
can be seen in a range of chronic pain conditions, including
migraine headaches, ﬁbromyalgia, LBP in diﬀerent contexts,
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, and chronic paediatric conditions
(Field et al., 2007; Suresh et al., 2008).
THE ROLE OF TOUCH AND EMPATHY
WITHIN THE CLINICAL ENCOUNTER
Health Care provider and patients consider empathy as one of
the fundamental elements required for establishing a TA, and
signiﬁcantly, it demonstrates positive eﬀects on patient clinical
outcomes and reducing distress by shared feelings and higher-
order concerns with another, in the hope, they will help regulate
them (Decety and Fotopoulou, 2015; O’Keeﬀe et al., 2016).
Empathy is crucial in acknowledging the diﬃculties and sacriﬁces
that the patient may face on the road to recovery by accepting
and being willing to change or alter their prior and personal
preferences to achieve full recovery (Bordin, 1979). Additionally,
it contributes to the connection and synchrony between HCP
and their patients by establishing a shared narrative, experience,
emotional transfer, reinforcing the belief that everyone is the
same. Moreover, it encourages the patient to relate to their
current environment and discriminate their representations
between self and others (Frijda and Mesquita, 1994).
When two people share similar emotions, they accurately
infer the other’s actions, motivations, pain and suﬀering,
thus reinforcing their relationship and priors by reducing the
psychosocial barriers. Additionally, it helps patients with LBP
and other MSK disorders to perceive their HCP as caring
and empathic (Harman et al., 2011; Geri et al., 2019). In
combination with repetitive dynamic hands-on techniques, the
patient and HCP will often synchronise during spoken recall of
a situation both had experienced ñ or when holding hands while
experiencing noxious stimuli. This synchronisation is achieved
through the activation of the Default Mode Network, high-level
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 13 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 14
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
ventral temporal regions, intraparietal sulcus, pain-neuromatrix,
anterior mid-cingulate cortex, AIC, inferior parietal lobe and IFG
in both individuals, thus creating a prosocial eﬀect (Preston, 2007;
Romero et al., 2010; Goldstein et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2017;
Korisky et al., 2020). Arguably, we are able to understand and
share others’ emotions by partially processing them within our
own emotional systems (Jackson et al., 2005; Vogt, 2005; Kilner
et al., 2007; Friston, 2010; Lamm and Majdandži´c, 2015).
Empathy is often associated with physiological responses in
both the HCP and the patient, such as increased sympathetic
nervous system activation, including skin conductance in
chronic pain patients (Block, 1981). Moreover, more empathic
individuals show more extradural synchrony and coupling, thus
leveraging empathy ñ and learning the preferred coping strategies
(Goldstein et al., 2017; Ellingsen et al., 2020; Reddan et al., 2020;
Kozakevich Arbel et al., 2021; Shamay-Tsoory and Eisenberger,
2021). Indeed, it has been suggested that the degree of empathy
demonstrated during touch correlates with the level of analgesia
experienced by the partner through the toucher’s tactile stimulus
(Goldstein et al., 2016; Korisky et al., 2020). All reaﬃrm the
integral role that empathy plays in the TA and the patient
management in MSK care.
THE ROLE OF REPETITION WITHIN A
CLINICAL ENCOUNTER IN AIDING
SYNCHRONY
Clinical encounters are multifaceted and often have a repetitive
structure, repeated each session to incorporate new external
factors, changing symptom patterns and reactions or adjustments
to the treatment (Pricop, 2016). Manual therapists generally have
longer and more frequent appointments and patient continuity
of care than a general medical practitioner (Miciak et al.,
2018). In combination with repeated physical movements and
hands-on care, these factors will inﬂuence the development
of the TA. Moreover, they could contribute to the individual
being more accurate, sensitive, and motivated to align with
the HCP’s hidden mental states and recognise their unique
therapeutic touch resulting in them potentially enhancing
saliency, precision, synchrony, and conﬁrming their priors more
quickly (Tronick, 1989; Vasil et al., 2020). Additionally, it will
increase the representation of social and cultural coherence
and the likelihood of repeating the experience (Feldman,
2015; Begus et al., 2016). Finally, it bolsters the concept of
repeated therapeutic touch, helping to promote self-awareness
and synchrony ñ this could help explain why patients with
high TA relationships adhere more closely to their physical
rehabilitation programmes for many conditions, including
neurological patients (Schönberger et al., 2006).
Repeated physical movements can putatively reinforce the
patient’s pre-existing biological rhythms (Lester et al., 1985). It
has been suggested that physiological synchrony, including HRV ,
is contingent on attention, similar processing of natural stimuli,
and similar brain activity during memory processing (Pérez et al.,
2021). As a result, the HCP and their patients’ physiological
synchrony may be aided by the memory and expectations of
previous hands-on care. Furthermore, it is imperative to MSK
patients to have continuity of care and have ìtheir HCP” who
understands their body, activity levels and treatment preferences
(Miciak et al., 2018).
The repetition of hands-on techniques during treatment
increases sensitivity to pre-existing priors and allostatic
regulation as a means of achieving homoeostasis. This is
most notably seen bilaterally in the autonomic nervous
system, precisely the cardiac and sympathetic tone. To this
end, Tamburella et al. (2019) demonstrated that osteopathic
manipulative therapy increased PCC perfusion signiﬁcantly
for 3 days, followed by an immediate decrease in resting
cerebral perfusion within a cluster containing the Posterior
Cingulate Cortex and Superior Parietal Lobe. The observed
changes in cerebral perfusion suggest that touch may play
a role in the observed improvements in sympathetic tone
following sympathovagal modulation. Additionally, it has
been hypothesised that behavioural synchrony and intimacy
are associated with the evolution of the polyvagal system and
its capacity to adapt to changes in our external environment
(Porges, 2003, 2007). Several studies have demonstrated that the
decreased heart rate and increased oxygen saturation following
treatment could be sustained for 5ñ65 min after touch-based
therapies (Lindgren et al., 2010; Manzotti et al., 2019). Touch
has been shown to regulate physiological function and promote
the development of precise embodied social behaviour and
attachments, which can be inﬂuenced by the HCP’s treatment
and personal predispositions (Hardin et al., 2020). The repetitive
touch used in treatment can increase alpha EEG asymmetry,
predominantly found in the left frontal hemisphere, and
associated with emotional processing and cognitive maturation.
Moreover, consciously processing audio-visual stimuli is
associated with the degree and development of heart rate
synchrony (Pérez et al., 2021). Therefore, we would argue that
hands-on care supported by eﬀective verbal and non-verbal
communication strategies create an adequate multisensory
environment to promote biobehavioural synchrony.
CONCLUSION
In this article, we have proposed a model to explain the crucial
role of touch and hands-on care in developing a robust TA,
regulating allostasis and subsequently restoring homoeostasis
in the ﬁeld of MSK care. This model is based on AI and
furnishes an integrative account of neurophysiological and
biopsychosocial processes within a clinical encounter in MSK
care. This formulation emphasises the foundational role of
synchrony and cooperative communication between HCPs and
their patients, hoping to engender successful clinical outcomes.
While it is recognised that touch and skin contact is vital for
survival ñ and has therapeutic beneﬁts for patients ñ we consider
a similar beneﬁt for all individuals. This model reveals how
touch and hands-on care can be used to revise an individual’s
prior beliefs to create a person-centred care approach to promote
allostasis and restore homoeostasis after an injury or to manage
persistent pain and other functional medical symptoms. We
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 14 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 15
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
have considered multiple feedback loops that oﬀer potential
mechanisms that can be leveraged during a treatment session.
In short, the framework on oﬀer enables HCPs to use touch
and hands-on care techniques to strengthen the TA, minimise
prediction errors (a.k.a., free energy), and thereby promote
recovery from physical and psychological impairments.
Musculoskeletal care utilises therapeutic touch and
communication to expose an individual to sensory stimuli and
surprise, develop new associations and reactions to ìoverwrite”
maladaptive priors and revise existing generative models (Stewart
and Watt, 2008; Boettcher et al., 2016; Paulus et al., 2019;
Smith et al., 2021). While this article focuses on touch-based
interventions for treating and managing individuals suﬀering
from MSK disorders, there are crossovers between mental
health and MSK disorders ñ MSK related pain is associated
with mood disorders (Bekhuis et al., 2015; Bohlen et al.,
2021). Notwithstanding this association between chronic pain
and mood disorders, MSK practitioners must acknowledge
their limits of professional competence in mental health (Ianì,
2019; Bohlen et al., 2021). Psychotherapy also uses the body
to elicit aspects related to embodied memory. Therefore, the
complex, layered perceptions of memories and magnitude of
uncertainty in understanding how bodily experience contributes
to mental health must be respected (Ianì, 2019; Paoletti and Ben
Soussan, 2019). HCPs must critically recognise the central and
irreplaceable role of psychotherapy in treating and managing
somatic and somatoform symptoms (Chemero, 2009; Gentsch
and Kuehn, 2022).
Future research could consider the bidirectional
neurobiological synchrony implied by the exchange of touch
between HCP and patients in MSK care. This research line
would help establish and consolidate the role of touch and
hands-on care when characterising the complex and dynamic
interactions during a clinical encounter. Moreover, an increased
understanding of how touch and hands-on techniques could
be implemented and manipulated to develop a successful TA
could help dissolve the barriers encountered with patients who
struggle to update their priors, particularly in multifactorial
chronic MSK disorders.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in this study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author/s.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
ZM wrote the ﬁrst draft of the manuscript. All authors
contributed to the conception of the study and manuscript
revision, and approved and accountable for the submitted
manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Andrea Bacceli for his help in realising the ﬁgures,
and members from the Active Inference Research Group for their
productive feedback on the framework, namely, Boris Gaspar,
Danny Giraud, Lucas Bohlen, Robert Shaw, and Tristan Delion.
REFERENCES
Ackerley, R., Backlund Wasling, H., Liljencrantz, J., Olausson, H., Johnson,
R. D., and Wessberg, J. (2014). Human C-Tactile Aﬀerents Are Tuned to the
Temperature of a Skin-Stroking Caress. J. Neurosci. 34, 2879ñ2883. doi: 10.
1523/JNEUROSCI.2847-13.2014
Adams, R. A., Stephan, K. E., Brown, H. R., Frith, C. D., and Friston, K. J. (2013).
The Computational Anatomy of Psychosis. Front. Psychiatr. 4:47. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyt.2013.00047
Ainley, V., Apps, M. A. J., Fotopoulou, A., and Tsakiris, M. (2016). ‘Bodily
precision’: a predictive coding account of individual diﬀerences in interoceptive
accuracy. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.371:20160003. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.
0003
Ainley, V., Tajadura-Jiménez, A., Fotopoulou, A., and Tsakiris, M. (2012).
Looking into myself: Changes in interoceptive sensitivity during mirror self-
observation. Psychophysiology 49, 1672ñ1676. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2012.0
1468.x
Akalin, E., El, Ö, Peker, O., Senocak, Ö, Tamci, S., Gübahar, S., et al. (2002).
Treatment of Carpal Tunnel Syndrome with Nerve and Tendon Gliding
Exercises Carpal Tunnel. Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 81.108ñ13
Atzil, S., Gao, W., Fradkin, I., and Barrett, L. F. (2018). Growing a social brain.Nat.
Hum. Behav. 2, 624ñ636. doi: 10.1038/s41562-018-0384-6
Auksztulewicz, R., and Friston, K. (2015). Attentional Enhancement of Auditory
Mismatch Responses: a DCM/MEG Study. Cereb. Cort. 25, 4273ñ4283. doi:
10.1093/cercor/bhu323
Aureli, T., and Presaghi, F. (2010). Developmental trajectories for motherñinfant
coregulation in thethe second year of life. Infancy 15, 557ñ585. doi: 10.1111/j.
1532-7078.2010.00034.x
Babatunde, F., MacDermid, J., and MacIntyre, N. (2017). Characteristics of
therapeutic alliance in musculoskeletal physiotherapy and occupational therapy
practice: A scoping review of the literature. BMC Health Services Res. 17:375.
doi: 10.1186/s12913-017-2311-3
Badcock, P. B., Friston, K. J., and Ramstead, M. J. D. (2019a). The hierarchically
mechanistic mind: A free-energy formulation of the human psyche. Phys. Life
Rev. 31, 104ñ121. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2018.10.002
Badcock, P. B., Friston, K. J., Ramstead, M. J. D., Ploeger, A., and Hohwy, J.
(2019b). The hierarchically mechanistic mind: an evolutionary systems theory
of the human brain, cognition, and behavior. Cogn. Aﬀect. Behav. Neurosci. 19,
1319ñ1351. doi: 10.3758/s13415-019-00721-3
Barbari, V., Storari, L., Ciuro, A., and Testa, M. (2020). Eﬀectiveness of
communicative and educative strategies in chronic low back pain patients: A
systematic review. Patient Educ. Counsel.103, 908ñ929. doi: 10.1016/j.pec.2019.
11.031
Barrett, J., and Fleming, A. S. (2011). Annual research review: all mothers are not
created equal: neural and psychobiological perspectives on mothering and the
importance of individual diﬀerences. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 52, 368ñ397.
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7610.2010.02306
Barrett, L. F. (2020). Seven and a Half Lessons About the Brain .Boston: Houghton
Miﬄin Harcourt Publishing.
Barrett, L. F., and Simmons, W. K. (2015). Interoceptive predictions
in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 16, 419ñ429. doi: 10.1038/nrn
3950
Beckes, L., and Coan, J. A. (2011). Social Baseline Theory: The Role
of Social Proximity in Emotion and Economy of Action. Soc.
Personal. Psychol. Compass 5, 976ñ988. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-9004.2011.
00400.x
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 15 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 16
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
Beckes, L., and Sbarra, D. A. (2022). Social baseline theory: State of the science and
new directions. Curr. Opin. Psychol. 43, 36ñ41. doi: 10.1016/j.copsyc.2021.06.
004
Begus, K., Gliga, T., and Southgate, V. (2016). Infants’ preferences for native
speakers are associated with an expectation of information. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 113, 12397ñ12402. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1603261113
Bekhuis, E., Boschloo, L., Rosmalen, J. G., and Schoevers, R. A. (2015).
Diﬀerential associations of speciﬁc depressive and anxiety disorders with
somatic symptoms. J. Psychosom. Res. 78, 116ñ122. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.
2014.11.007
Bialosky, J. E., Bishop, M. D., Price, D. D., Robinson, M. E., and George, S. Z.
(2009). The mechanisms of manual therapy in the treatment of musculoskeletal
pain: A comprehensive model. Manual Ther. 14, 531ñ538. doi: 10.1016/j.math.
2008.09.001
Billhult, A., Lindholm, C., Gunnarsson, R., and Stener-Victorin, E. (2009). The
eﬀect of massage on immune function and stress in women with breast cancer
- A randomized controlled trial. Auto. Neurosci. 150, 111ñ115. doi: 10.1016/j.
autneu.2009.03.010
Block, A. R. (1981). An Investigation of the Response of the Spouse to Chronic Pain
Behavior. .Psychosom. Med. 43, 415ñ22
Boettcher, H., Brake, C. A., and Barlow, D. H. (2016). Origins and outlook of
interoceptive exposure. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatr. 53, 41ñ51. doi: 10.1016/j.
jbtep.2015.10.009
Bohlen, L., Shaw, R., Cerritelli, F., and Esteves, J. E. (2021). Osteopathy and Mental
Health: An Embodied, Predictive, and Interoceptive Framework.Front. Psychol.
12:767005. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.767005
Bordin, E. S. (1979). The generalizability of the psychoanalytic concept of the
working alliance1. Psychotherapy. Theor. Res. Pract. 16, 252ñ260.
Bowlby, J. (1988). a Secure Base.New York, NY:Basic Books.
Boyd, R., Richerson, P. J., and Henrich, J. (2011). The cultural niche: Why social
learning is essential for human adaptation. Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108,
10918ñ10925. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1100290108
Bradran, B. W., Dowdle, L. T., Mithoefer, O. J., LaBate, N. Y., Coarsworth, J.,
Brown, J. C., et al. (2018). Neurophysiologic eﬀects of transcutaneous auricular
vagus nerve stimulation (taVNS) via electrical stimulation of the tragus: A
concurrent taVNS/fMRI study and review. Brain Stimul. 11, 492ñ500. doi:
10.1016/j.brs.2017.12.009
Bright, F. A. S., Kayes, N. M., Worrall, L., and McPherson, K. M. (2015). A
conceptual review of engagement in healthcare and rehabilitation. Disabil.
Rehabil. 37, 643ñ654. doi: 10.3109/09638288.2014.933899
Brown, H., Adams, R. A., Parees, I., Edwards, M., and Friston, K. (2013). Active
inference, sensory attenuation and illusions. Cogn. Process. 14, 411ñ427. doi:
10.1007/s10339-013-0571-3
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., and Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not
a scientist: the free-energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective.
Synthese 195, 2417ñ2444. doi: 10.1007/s11229-016-1239-1
Brun-Cottan, N., McMillian, D., and Hastings, J. (2020). Defending the art
of physical therapy: Expanding inquiry and crafting culture in support of
therapeutic alliance. Physiother. Theor. Pract. 36, 669ñ678. doi: 10.1080/
09593985.2018.1492656
Carhart-Harris, R. L., and Friston, K. J. (2019). REBUS and the Anarchic Brain:
Toward a Uniﬁed Model of the Brain Action of Psychedelics. Pharmacol. Rev.
71, 316ñ344. doi: 10.1124/pr.118.017160
Cederbom, S., Nortvedt, L., and Lillekroken, D. (2020). The perceptions of older
adults living with chronic musculoskeletal pain about participating in an
intervention based on a behavioral medicine approach to physical therapy.
Physiother. Theor. Pract. 36, 1118ñ1129. doi: 10.1080/09593985.2019.15
72846
Cerritelli, F., Cardone, D., Pirino, A., Merla, A., and Scoppa, F. (2020a). Does
Osteopathic Manipulative Treatment Induce Autonomic Changes in Healthy
Participants? A Thermal Imaging Study. Front. Neurosci. 14:887. doi: 10.3389/
fnins.2020.00887
Cerritelli, F., Chiacchiaretta, P., Gambi, F., Perrucci, M. G., Barassi, G., Visciano,
C., et al. (2020b). Eﬀect of manual approaches with osteopathic modality on
brain correlates of interoception: an fMRI study.Sci. Rep. 10:3214. doi: 10.1038/
s41598-020-60253-6
Cerritelli, F., Lacorte, E., Ruﬃni, N., and Vanacore, N. (2017). Osteopathy for
primary headache patients: Asystematic review. J. Pain Res. 10, 601ñ611. doi:
10.2147/JPR.S130501
Chemero, A. (2009). Radical Embodied Cognitive Science . Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Chen, J., Leong, Y. C., Honey, C. J., Yong, C. H., Norman, K. A., and Hasson,
U. (2017). Shared memories reveal shared structure in neural activity across
individuals. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 115ñ125. doi: 10.1038/nn.4450
Cheung, L., and Soundy, A. (2021). The impact of reassurance on musculoskeletal
(MSK) pain: A qualitative review. Behav. Sci. 11:150. doi: 10.3390/bs11110150
Christe, G., Pizzolato, V., Meyer, M., Nzamba, J., and Pichonnaz, C. (2021).
Unhelpful beliefs and attitudes about low back pain in the general population:
A cross-sectional survey. Muscul. Sci. Pract. 52:102342. doi: 10.1016/j.msksp.
2021.102342
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the
future of cognitive science. Behav. Brain Sci. 36, 181ñ204. doi: 10.1017/
S0140525X12000477
Coan, J. A., and Maresh, E. L. (2014). ìSocial baseline theory and the social
regulation of emotion, ” inthe Handbook of Emotion Regulation , 2nd Edn, ed.
J. J. Gross (New York, NY: The Guilford Press), 221ñ236.
Coan, J. A., Schaefer, H. S., and Davidson, R. J. (2006). Lending a Hand. Psychol.
Sci. 17, 1032ñ1039. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01832.x
Condy, E., Friedman, B., and Gandjbakhche, A. (2020). Probing Neurovisceral
Integration via Functional Near-Infrared Spectroscopy and Heart Rate
Variability. Front. Neurosci. 14:575589. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.575589
Constant, A., Ramstead, M., Veissière, S., and Friston, K. (2019). Regimes of
Expectations: An Active Inference Model of Social Conformity and Human
Decision Making. Front. psychol. 10:679. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00679
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., Campbell, J. O., and Friston,
K. J. (2018). A variational approach to niche construction. J. R. Soc. Interface
15:20170685. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0685
Cooper, K., Smith, B. H., and Hancock, E. (2008). Patient-centredness in
physiotherapy from the perspective of the chronic low back pain patient.
Physiotherapy 94, 244ñ252.
Corcoran, A., Pezzulo, G., and Hohwy, J. (2020). From allostatic agents to
counterfactual cognisers: active inference, biological regulation, and the origins
of cognition. Biol. Philos. 35:32.
Cox, J., and Witten, I. B. (2019). Striatal circuits for reward learning and decision-
making. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 20, 482ñ494. doi: 10.1038/s41583-019-0189-2
Craig, A. D. (2002). How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiological
condition of the body. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 655ñ666.
Craig, A. D. (2008). ìInteroception and emotion, ” in Handbook of Emotions , 3rd
Edn, eds M. Lewis, J. M. Haviland-Jones, and L. F. Barrett (New York, NY:
Guilford Publications), 272ñ288.
Crawford, C., Boyd, C., Paat, C. F., Price, A., Xenakis, L., Y ang, E., et al. (2016). The
Impact of Massage Therapy on Function in Pain PopulationsóA Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials: Part I, Patients
Experiencing Pain in the General Population. Pain Med. 17, 1353ñ1375. doi:
10.1093/pm/pnw099
Crucianelli, L., Krahé, C., Jenkinson, P. M., and Fotopoulou, A. K. (2018).
Interoceptive ingredients of body ownership: Aﬀective touch and cardiac
awareness in the rubber hand illusion. Cortex 104, 180ñ192. doi: 10.1016/j.
cortex.2017.04.018
Crucianelli, L., Metcalf, N. K., Fotopoulou, A. K., and Jenkinson, P. M. (2013).
Bodily pleasure matters: velocity of touch modulates body ownership during
the rubber hand illusion. Front. Psychol. 4:703. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00703
Crucianelli, L., Serpell, L., Paloyelis, Y., Ricciardi, L., Robinson, P., Jenkinson, P.,
et al. (2019). The eﬀect of intranasal oxytocin on the perception of aﬀective
touch and multisensory integration in anorexia nervosa: protocol for a double-
blind placebo-controlled crossover study. BMJ Open 9:e024913. doi: 10.1136/
bmjopen-2018-024913
Csibra, G. (2010). Recognizing Communicative Intentions in Infancy. Mind Lang.
25, 141ñ168 doi: 10.1542/peds.2012-1552
D’Alessandro, G., Cerritelli, F., and Cortelli, P. (2016). Sensitization and
Interoception as Key Neurological Concepts in Osteopathy and Other Manual
Medicines. Front. Neurosci. 10:100. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00100
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 16 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 17
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
Decety, J., and Fotopoulou, A. (2015). Why empathy has a beneﬁcial impact on
others in medicine: unifying theories. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 8:457. doi: 10.
3389/fnbeh.2014.00457
Del Baño-Aledo, M. E., Medina-Mirapeix, F., Escolar-Reina, P., Montilla-Herrador,
J., and Collins, S. M. (2014). Relevant patient perceptions and experiences
for evaluating quality of interaction with physiotherapists during outpatient
rehabilitation: a qualitative study. Physiotherapy 100, 73ñ79. doi: 10.1016/j.
physio.2013.05.001
Deyle, G. D., Henderson, N. E., Matekel, R. L., Ryder, M. G., Garber, M. B.,
and Allison, S. C. (2000). Annals of internal medicine eﬀectiveness of manual
physical therapy and exercise in osteoarthritis of the knee a randomized,
controlled trial. Ann. Intern. Med. 132, 173ñ81. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-132-
3-200002010-00002
Di Lernia, D., Serino, S., and Riva, G. (2016). Pain in the body. Altered
interoception in chronic pain conditions: A systematic review. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 71, 328ñ341. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.09.015
Diego, M. A., and Field, T. (2009). Moderate Pressure Massage Elicits a
Parasympathetic Nervous System Response. Int. J. Neurosci. 119, 630ñ638. doi:
10.1080/00207450802329605
Ditzen, B., Neumann, I. D., Bodenmann, G., von Dawans, B., Turner, R. A., Ehlert,
U., et al. (2007). Eﬀects of diﬀerent kinds of couple interaction on cortisol and
heart rate responses to stress in women.Psychoneuroendocrinology 32, 565ñ574.
doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2007.03.011
Duquette, P. (2017). Increasing Our Insular World View: Interoception and
Psychopathology for Psychotherapists. Front. Neurosci. 11:135. doi: 10.3389/
fnins.2017.00135
Duquette, P. (2020). More Than Words Can Say: A Multi-Disciplinary
Consideration of the Psychotherapeutic Evaluation and Treatment of
Alexithymia. Front. Psychiatr. 11:433. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00433
Eisenberger, N. I., Master, S. L., Inagaki, T. K., Taylor, S. E., Shirinyan, D.,
Lieberman, M. D., et al. (2011). Attachment ﬁgures activate a safety signal-
related neural region and reduce pain experience. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
108, 11721ñ11726. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1108239108
Ellingsen, D.-M., Isenburg, K., Jung, C., Lee, J., Gerber, J., Mawla, I., et al. (2020).
Dynamic brain-to-brain concordance and behavioral mirroring as a mechanism
of the patient-clinician interaction. Sci. Adv. 6:eabc1304 doi: 10.1126/sciadv.
abc1304
Esteves, J. E., Cerritelli, F., Kim, J., and Friston, K. J. (2022). Osteopathic Care as
(En)active Inference: A Theoretical Framework for Developing an Integrative
Hypothesis in Osteopathy. Front. Psychol. 13:812926. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.
812926
Etkin, A., Büchel, C., and Gross, J. J. (2015). The neural bases of emotion regulation.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 16, 693ñ700. doi: 10.1038/nrn4044
Fairhurst, M. T., Janata, P., and Keller, P. E. (2014a). Leading the follower: An
fMRI investigation of dynamic cooperativity and leader-follower strategies in
synchronization with an adaptive virtual partner. NeuroImage 84, 688ñ697.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.09.027
Fairhurst, M. T., Löken, L., and Grossmann, T. (2014b). Physiological
and Behavioral Responses Reveal 9-Month-Old Infants’. Sensitivity to
Pleasant Touch. Psychol. Sci. 25, 1124ñ1131. doi: 10.1177/095679761452
7114
Feldman, H., and Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, Uncertainty, and Free-Energy.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 4:215. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215
Feldman, R. (2012). Oxytocin and social aﬃliation in humans. Hormones Behav.
61, 380ñ391. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.01.008
Feldman, R. (2015). The adaptive human parental brain: Implications for children’s
social development. Trends Neurosci. 38, 387ñ399. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2015.04.
004
Feldman, R. (2017). The Neurobiology of Human Attachments. Trends Cogn. Sci.
21, 80ñ99. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2016.11.007
Ferreira, P. H., Ferreira, M. L., Maher, C. G., Refshauge, K. M., Latimer, J., and
Adams, R. D. (2013). The therapeutic alliance between clinicians and patients
predicts outcome in chronic low back pain. Phys. Ther. 93, 470ñ478. doi: 10.
2522/ptj.20120137
Field, T. (2010). Touch for socioemotional and physical well-being: A review. Dev.
Rev. 30, 367ñ383. doi: 10.1016/j.dr.2011.01.001
Field, T., Diego, M., and Hernandez-Reif, M. (2007). Massage therapy research.
Dev. Rev. 27, 75ñ89. doi: 10.1016/j.dr.2005.12.002
Fisher, J. D., Rytting, M., and Heslin, R. (1976). Hands Touching Hands: Aﬀective
and Evaluative Eﬀects of an Interpersonal Touch. Sociometry 39:416. doi: 10.
2307/3033506
Fonagy, P., and Allison, E. (2014). The role of mentalizing and epistemic trust in
the therapeutic relationship. Psychotherapy 51, 372ñ380. doi: 10.1037/a0036505
Fotopoulou, A., and Tsakiris, M. (2017). Mentalizing homeostasis: The social
origins of interoceptive inference. Neuropsychoanalysis 19, 3ñ28. doi: 10.1080/
15294145.2017.1294031
Fotopoulou, A., von Mohr, M., and Krahé, C. (2022). Aﬀective regulation through
touch: homeostatic and allostatic mechanisms. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 43,
80ñ87. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2021.08.008
Frijda, N. H., and Mesquita, B. (1994). ìThe social roles and functions of emotions, ”
in Emotion and Culture:empirical Studies of Mutual Inﬂuence , eds S. Kitayama
and H. R. Markus (Washington, DC: American Psychological Association),
51ñ87.
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127ñ138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., and Pezzulo, G.
(2015). Active inference and epistemic value. Cogn. Neurosci. 6, 187ñ214. doi:
10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053
Friston, K. J., and Frith, C. D. (2015). Active inference, communication and
hermeneutics. Cortex 68, 129ñ143. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2015.03.025
Frith, C. D., and Frith, U. (2006). The Neural Basis of Mentalizing. Neuron 50,
531ñ534. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.05.001
Fuentes, J., Armijo-Olivo, S., Funabashi, M., Miciak, M., Dick, B., Warren, S., et al.
(2014). enhanced therapeutic alliance modulates pain intensity and muscle pain
sensitivity in patients with chronic low back pain: an experimental controlled
study background. Phys. Ther. 94, 477ñ89 doi: 10.2522/ptj.20130118
Gentsch, A., and Kuehn, E. (2022). Clinical Manifestations of Body Memories:
The Impact of Past Bodily Experiences on Mental Health. Brain Sci. 12:594.
doi: 10.3390/brainsci12050594
Gentsch, A., Panagiotopoulou, E., and Fotopoulou, A. (2015). Active Interpersonal
Touch Gives Rise to the Social Softness Illusion. Curr. Biol. 25, 2392ñ2397.
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.07.049
Geri, T., Viceconti, A., Minacci, M., Testa, M., and Rossettini, G. (2019). Manual
therapy: Exploiting the role of human touch. Muscul. Sci. Pract. 44:102044.
doi: 10.1016/j.msksp.2019.07.008
Gerrans, P. (2020). Pain Asymbolia as Depersonalization for Pain Experience. An
Interoceptive Active Inference Account.Front. Psychol.11:523710. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2020.523710
Ghazanfar, A. A., and Takahashi, D. Y. (2014). The evolution of speech: vision,
rhythm, cooperation. Trends Cogn. Sci. 18, 543ñ553. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2014.06.
004
GMC (2020). Good Medical Practice.England: GMC
Goldstein, P., Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Yellinek, S., and Weissman-Fogel, I. (2016).
Empathy Predicts an Experimental Pain Reduction During Touch. J. Pain 17,
1049ñ1057. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2016.06.007
Goldstein, P., Weissman-Fogel, I., Dumas, G., and Shamay-Tsoory, S. G. (2018).
Brain-to-brain coupling during handholding is associated with pain reduction.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115, E2528ñE2537. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1703643115
Goldstein, P., Weissman-Fogel, I., and Shamay-Tsoory, S. G. (2017). The role of
touch in regulating inter-partner physiological coupling during empathy for
pain. Sci. Rep. 7:3252. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-03627-7
Graustrella, A. J., and MacLeod, C. (2012). A critical review of the inﬂuence
of oxytocin nasal spray on social cognition in humans: Evidence and future
directions. Hormones Behav. 61, 410ñ418. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.01.002
Green, J. J., and Hollander, E. (2010). Autism and oxytocin: New developments
in translational approaches to therapeutics. Neurotherapeutics 7, 250ñ257. doi:
10.1016/j.nurt.2010.05.006
Gross, A., Langevin, P., Burnie, S. J., Bédard-Brochu, M. S., Empey, B., Dugas, E.,
et al. (2015). Manipulation and mobilisation for neck pain contrasted against
an inactive control or another active treatment.Cochrane Database System. Rev.
23:CD004249. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD004249.pub4
Guidi, J., Lucente, M., Sonino, N., and Fava, G. A. (2021). Allostatic Load and
Its Impact on Health: A Systematic Review. Psychother. Psycho. 90, 11ñ27.
doi: 10.1159/000510696
Hall, A. M., Ferreira, P. H., Maher, C. G., Latimer, J., and Ferreira, M. L. (2010).
The Inﬂuence of the Therapist-Patient Relationship on Treatment Outcome
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 17 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 18
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
in Physical Rehabilitation: A Systematic Review. Phys. Ther. 90, 1099ñ1110.
doi: 10.2522/ptj.20090245
Hardin, J. S., Jones, N. A., Mize, K. D., and Platt, M. (2020). Parent-Training with
Kangaroo Care Impacts Infant Neurophysiological Development & Mother-
Infant Neuroendocrine Activity. Infant Behav. Dev. 58:101416. doi: 10.1016/j.
infbeh.2019.101416
Harlow, H. F., and Zimmermann, R. R. (1959). Aﬀectional Response in the Infant
Monkey Orphaned baby monkeys develop a strong and persist& attachment to
inanimate surrogate mother. 130, 421ñ32 doi: 10.1126/science.130.3373.421
Harman, K., Bassett, R., Fenety, A., and Hoens, A. M. (2011). Client
Education: Communicative Interaction between Physiotherapists and Clients
with Subacute Low Back Pain in Private Practice. Physiotherapy Canada 63,
212ñ223. doi: 10.3138/ptc.2009-52P
Harris, P. L., Bartz, D. T., and Rowe, M. L. (2017). Young children communicate
their ignorance and ask questions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114, 7884ñ7891. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1620745114
Harris, P. L., and Corriveau, K. H. (2011). Young children’s selective trust in
informants. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B366, 1179ñ1187. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2010.0321
Hasson, U., Chen, J., and Honey, C. J. (2015). Hierarchical process memory:
memory as an integral component of information processing. Trends Cogn.Sci.
19, 304ñ313. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2015.04.006
Hasson, U., and Frith, C. D. (2016). Mirroring and beyond: coupled dynamics as a
generalized framework for modelling social interactions. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
B 371:20150366. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2015.0366
Haugli, L., Strand, E., and Finset, A. (2004). How do patients with rheumatic
disease experience their relationship with their doctors? Patient Educ. Couns.
52, 169ñ174. doi: 10.1016/S0738-3991(03)00023-5
Hechler, T., Endres, D., and Thorwart, A. (2016). Why harmless sensations
might hurt in individuals with chronic pain: About heightened prediction and
perception of pain in the mind. Front. Psychol. 7:1638. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.
01638
Henningsen, P., Gündel, H., Kop, W. J., Löwe, B., Martin, A., Rief, W.,
et al. (2018). Persistent Physical Symptoms as Perceptual Dysregulation: A
Neuropsychobehavioral Model and Its Clinical Implications. Psycho. Med.cine
80, 422ñ431. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000588
Hernandez-Reif, M., Ironson, G., Field, T., Hurley, J., Katz, G., Diego, M., et al.
(2004). Breast cancer patients have improved immune and neuroendocrine
functions following massage therapy. J. Psycho. Res. 57, 45ñ52. doi: 10.1016/
S0022-3999(03)00500-2
Hertenstein, M. J., Holmes, R., McCullough, M., and Keltner, D. (2009). The
communication of emotion via touch. Emotion 9, 566ñ573. doi: 10.1037/
a0016108
Hertenstein, M. J., Keltner, D., App, B., Bulleit, B. A., and Jaskolka, A. R. (2006).
Touch communicates distinct emotions. Emotion 6, 528ñ533. doi: 10.1037/
1528-3542.6.3.528
Hill, J. C., and Fritz, J. M. (2011). Psychosocial Inﬂuences on Low Back Pain.
Disability, and Response to Treatment. Phys. Ther. 91, 712ñ721. doi: 10.2522/
ptj.20100280
Horing, B., and Büchel, C. (2022). The human insula processes both modality-
independent and pain-selective learning signals. PLoS Biol. 20:e3001540. doi:
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001540
Horton, S., Barnston, D., Barnston, J., Bell, C., Bell, J., Coath, C., et al. (2021). In
it for the long haul: a reﬂective account of collaborative involvement in aphasia
research and education. Aphasiology 35, 1ñ36. doi: 10.1080/02687038.2021.19
07296
Hoskin, R., Berzuini, C., Acosta-Kane, D., El-Deredy, W., Guo, H., and
Talmi, D. (2019). Sensitivity to pain expectations: A Bayesian model of
individual diﬀerences. Cognition 182, 127ñ139. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2018.
08.022
Hush, J. M., Cameron, K., and Mackey, M. (2011). Patient Satisfaction with
Musculoskeletal Physical Therapy Care: A Systematic Review. Phys. Ther. 91,
25ñ36. doi: 10.2522/ptj.20100061
Hutting, N., Caneiro, J. P., Ong’wen, O. M., Miciak, M., and Roberts, L. (2022).
Patient-centered care in musculoskeletal practice: Key elements to support
clinicians to focus on the person. Muscul. Sci. Pract. 57:102434. doi: 10.1016/
j.msksp.2021.102434
Ianì, F. (2019). Embodied memories: Reviewing the role of the body in memory
processes. Psychon Bull. Rev. 26, 1747ñ1766. doi: 10.3758/s13423-019-01674-x
International Federation of Orthopaedic Manual Physical Therapists
[IFOMPT] (2004). OMPT Deﬁnition . Available online at:
https://www.ifompt.org/About+IFOMPT/OMPT+Deﬁnition.html
Jackson, P. L., Meltzoﬀ, A. N., and Decety, J. (2005). How do we perceive the pain of
others? A window into the neural processes involved in empathy. NeuroImage
24, 771ñ779. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.09.006
Kerr, F., Wiechula, R., Feo, R., Schultz, T., and Kitson, A. (2019). Neurophysiology
of human touch and eye gaze in therapeutic relationships and healing: a scoping
review. JBI Database System. Rev. Implement. Rep. 17, 209ñ247. doi: 10.11124/
JBISRIR-2017-003549
Kilner, J. M., Friston, K. J., and Frith, C. D. (2007). Predictive coding: An account
of the mirror neuron system. Cogn. Process. 8, 159ñ166. doi: 10.1007/s10339-
007-0170-2
Kim, S. K., and Park, M. (2017). Eﬀectiveness of person-centered care on people
with dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin. Interv. Aging 12,
381ñ397. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S117637
Kinney, M., Seider, J., Beaty, A. F., Coughlin, K., Dyal, M., and Clewley, D.
(2018). The impact of therapeutic alliance in physical therapy for chronic
musculoskeletal pain: a systematic review of the literature. Physiother. Theory
Pract. 34, 886ñ898. doi: 10.1080/09593985.2018.1516015
Kirsch, L. P., Mathys, Talelli, P., Friston, K., Moro, V., and Fotopoulou, A.
(2021). Updating beliefs beyond the here-and-now: the counter-factual self
in anosognosia for hemiplegia. Brain Commun. 3:fcab098. doi: 10.1093/
braincomms/fcab098
Koban, L., Ramamoorthy, A., and Konvalinka, I. (2019). Why do we fall into
sync with others? Interpersonal synchronization and the brain’s optimization
principle. Soc. Neurosci. 14, 1ñ9. doi: 10.1080/17470919.2017.1400463
Kok, P., Jehee, J. F. M., and de Lange, F. P. (2012). Less Is More: Expectation
Sharpens Representations in the Primary Visual Cortex. Neuron 75, 265ñ270.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.04.034
Koole, S. L., and Tschacher, W. (2016). Synchrony in Psychotherapy: A Review
and an Integrative Framework for the Therapeutic Alliance. Front. Psychol.
7:862ñ862. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00862
Kopf, D. (2021). Massage and touch-based therapy: Clinical evidence, neurobiology
and applications in older patients with psychiatric symptoms. Zeitschrift
Gerontologie Geriatrie 54, 753ñ758. doi: 10.1007/s00391-021-01995-4
Korisky, A., Eisenberger, N. I., Nevat, M., Weissman-Fogel, I., and Shamay-Tsoory,
S. G. (2020). A dual-brain approach for understanding the neuralmechanisms
that underlie the comforting eﬀects of social touch. Cortex 127, 333ñ346. doi:
10.1016/j.cortex.2020.01.028
Kozakevich Arbel, E., Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., and Hertz, U. (2021). Adaptive
Empathy: Empathic Response Selection as a Dynamic, Feedback-Based
Learning Process. Front. Psychiatr. 12,706474. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.706474
Krahé, C., Springer, A., Weinman, J. A., and Fotopoulou, A. (2013). The Social
Modulation of Pain: Others as Predictive Signals of Salience ñ a Systematic
Review. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7:386. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00386
Kreuder, A., Wassermann, L., Wollseifer, M., Ditzen, B., Eckstein, M., Stoﬀel-
Wagner, B., et al. (2019). Oxytocin enhances the pain-relieving eﬀects of social
support in romantic couples.Hum. Brain Mapp.40, 242ñ251. doi: 10.1002/hbm.
24368
Krueger, J. (2015). ìThe aﬀective ‘we’: Self-regulation and shared emotions, ” in
the Phenomenology of Sociality: discover the ‘We’, eds T. Szanto and D. Moran
(Milton Park :Routledge), 263277.
Kube, T., Schwarting, R., Rozenkrantz, L., Glombiewski, J. A., and Rief, W. (2020).
Distorted Cognitive Processes in Major Depression: A Predictive Processing
Perspective. Biol. Psychiatr. 87, 388ñ398. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2019.07.017
Laland, K. N., Odling-Smee, J., and Feldmanà, M. W. (2001). Cultural niche
construction and human evolution. J. Evol. Biol. 14, 22ñ33
Lamm, C., and Majdandži´c, J. (2015). The role of shared neural activations, mirror
neurons, and morality in empathy - A critical comment. Neurosci. Res. 90,
15ñ24. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2014.10.008
Lederman, E. (2017). A process approach in osteopathy: beyond the structural
model. Int. J. Osteopathic Med. 23, 22ñ35. doi: 10.1016/j.ijosm.2016.03.004
Lequerica, A. H., Donnell, C. S., and Tate, D. G. (2009). Patient engagement in
rehabilitation therapy: physical and occupational therapist impressions.Disabil.
Rehabil. 31, 753ñ760. doi: 10.1080/09638280802309095
Lester, B. M., Hoﬀman, J., and Berry Brazelton, T. (1985). The Rhythmic Structure
of Mother-Infant Interaction in Term and Preterm Infants. Source 56, 15ñ27
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 18 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 19
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
Li, B., Razi, A., and Friston, K. J. (2017). Editorial: Mapping Psychopathology
with fMRI and Eﬀective Connectivity Analysis. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 11:151.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00151
Limanowski, J. (2017). ì(Dis-)Attending to the Body - Action and Self-
Experience in the Active Inference Framework ”In Philosophy and Predictive
Processing T. Metzinger & W. Wiese. (Frankfurt: MIND Group.)doi: 10.15502/
9783958573192
Limanowski, J., Litvak, V., and Friston, K. (2020). Cortical beta oscillations reﬂect
the contextual gating of visual action feedback. NeuroImage 222:117267. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117267
Lindgren, L., Rundgren, S., Winsö, O., Lehtipalo, S., Wiklund, U., Karlsson, M.,
et al. (2010). Physiological responses to touch massage in healthy volunteers.
Auto. Neurosci. 158, 105ñ110. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2010.06.011
Linton, S. J., and Shaw, W. S. (2011). Impact of psychological factors in the
experience of pain. Phys. Ther. 91, 700ñ711. doi: 10.2522/ptj.20100330
Lohman, E. B., Pacheco, G. R., Gharibvand, L., Daher, N., Devore, K., Bains, G.,
et al. (2019). The immediate eﬀects of cervical spine manipulation on pain
and biochemical markers in females with acute non-speciﬁc mechanical neck
pain: a randomized clinical trial. J. Manual Manip. Ther. 27, 186ñ196. doi:
10.1080/10669817.2018.1553696
Löken, L. S., Wessberg, J., Morrison, I., McGlone, F., and Olausson, H. (2009).
Coding of pleasant touch by unmyelinated aﬀerents in humans. Nat. Neurosci.
12, 547ñ548. doi: 10.1038/nn.2312
López-Solà, M., Geuter, S., Koban, L., Coan, J. A., and Wager, T. D. (2019). Brain
mechanisms of social touch-induced analgesia in females.Pain 160, 2072ñ2085.
doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001599
Louw, A., and Puentedura, E. J. (2013). Therapeutic Neuroscience Education , 1st
Edn. Minneapolis, MN: International Spine and Pain Institute, Louw and
Puentedura.
Lærum, E., Indahl, A., and Sture Skouen, J. (2006). What Is ìThe Good Back-
Consultation”? A Combined Qualitative and Quantitative Study of Chronic
Low Back Pain Patients’ Interaction with and Perceptions of Consultations
with Specialists. J. Rehabil. Med. 38, 255ñ262. doi: 10.1080/165019706006
13461
MacDonald, C. W., Whitman, J. M., Cleland, J. A., Smith, M., and Hoeksma, H. L.
(2006). Clinical outcomes following manual physical therapy and exercise for
hip osteoarthritis: A case series. J. Orthopaedic. Sports Phys. Ther. 36, 588ñ599.
doi: 10.2519/jospt.2006.2233
Main, C. J., Buchbinder, R., Porcheret, M., and Foster, N. (2010). Addressing patient
beliefs and expectations in the consultation.Best Pract. Res. Clin. Rheumatol.24,
219ñ225. doi: 10.1016/j.berh.2009.12.013
Mancini, F., Beaumont, A. L., Hu, L., Haggard, P., and Iannetti, G. D. D. (2015).
Touch inhibits subcortical and cortical nociceptive responses. Pain 156, 1936ñ
1944. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000253
Mancini, F., Nash, T., Iannetti, G. D., and Haggard, P. (2014). Pain relief by touch:
A quantitative approach. Pain 155, 635ñ642. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2013.12.024
Manzotti, A., Cerritelli, F., Esteves, J. E., Lista, G., Lombardi, E., la Rocca, S., et al.
(2019). Dynamic touch reduces physiological arousal in preterm infants: A role
for c-tactile aﬀerents? Dev. Cogn. Neurosci. 39:100703. doi: 10.1016/j.dcn.2019.
100703
Maratos, F. A., Duarte, J., Barnes, C., McEwan, K., Sheﬃeld, D., and Gilbert, P.
(2017). The physiological and emotional eﬀects of touch: Assessing a hand-
massage intervention with high self-critics. Psychiatr. Res. 250, 221ñ227. doi:
10.1016/j.psychres.2017.01.066
McCabe, E., Miciak, M., Roduta Roberts, M., Sun, H. L., Kleiner, M. J., Holt, C.
J., et al. (2021b). Development of the physiotherapy therapeutic relationship
measure. Eur. J. Physiother. 1ñ10. doi: 10.1080/21679169.2020.1868572
McCabe, E., Miciak, M., Roduta Roberts, M., Sun, H., and Gross, D. P. (2021a).
Measuring therapeutic relationship in physiotherapy: conceptual foundations.
Physiother. Theor. Pract. 10, 1ñ13. doi: 10.1080/09593985.2021.1987604
McEwen, B. S., and Wingﬁeld, J. C. (2003). The concept of allostasis in biology and
biomedicine. Hormones Behav. 43, 2ñ15. doi: 10.1016/s0018-506x(02)00024-7
McGlone, F., Cerritelli, F., Walker, S., and Esteves, J. (2017). The role of gentle
touch in perinatal osteopathic manual therapy.Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.72, 1ñ9.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.11.009
McGlone, F., Olausson, H., Boyle, J. A., Jones-Gotman, M., Dancer, C., Guest, S.,
et al. (2012). Touching and feeling: diﬀerences in pleasant touch processing
between glabrous and hairy skin in humans. Eur. J. Neurosci. 35, 1782ñ1788.
doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2012.08092.x
McGlone, F., Wessberg, J., and Olausson, H. (2014). Discriminative and Aﬀective
Touch: Sensing and Feeling. Neuron 82, 737ñ755. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.
05.001
McLinden, M., and McCall, S. (2002). Learning Through Touch: supporting
Children with Visual Impairment and Additional Diﬃculties. Rochester, NY:letts
publishing.
McParlin, Z., Cerritelli, F., Friston, K. J., and Esteves, J. E. (2022). Therapeutic
Alliance as Active Inference: The Role of Therapeutic Touch and Synchrony.
Front. Psychol. 13:783694. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.783694
Meltzoﬀ, A. N. (2007). ‘Like me’: a foundation for social cognition. Dev. Sci. 10,
126ñ134. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00574.x
Melzack, R. (1996). Gate control theory: On the evolution of pain concepts. Pain
Forum 5, 128ñ138. doi: 10.1016/S1082-3174(96)80050-X
Miciak, M., Mayan, M., Brown, C., Joyce, A. S., and Gross, D. P. (2018).
The necessary conditions of engagement for the therapeutic relationship in
physiotherapy: an interpretive description study. Arch. Physiother. 8:3. doi:
10.1186/s40945-018-0044-1
Miciak, M., Mayan, M., Brown, C., Joyce, A. S., and Gross, D. P. (2019). A
framework for establishing connections in physiotherapy practice. Physiother.
Theor. Pract. 35, 40ñ56. doi: 10.1080/09593985.2018.1434707
Miller, J. G., Vrti ˇcka, P., Cui, X., Shrestha, S., Hosseini, S. M. H., Baker, J. M.,
et al. (2019). Inter-brain synchrony in mother-child dyads during cooperation:
An fNIRS hyperscanning study. Neuropsychologia 124, 117ñ124. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuropsychologia.2018.12.021
Mitchinson, A. R., Kim, H. M., Rosenberg, J. M., Geisser, M., Kirsh, M., Cikrit,
D., et al. (2007). Acute postoperative pain management using massage as an
adjuvant therapy: a randomized trial. Arch. Surgery 142, 1158ñ1167. discussion
1167. doi: 10.1001/archsurg.142.12.1158
Von Mohr, M., Krahe, C., Beck, B., and Fotopoulou, A. (2018). The social buﬀering
of pain by aﬀective touch: A laser-evoked potential study in romantic couples.
Soc. Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 13, 1121ñ1130. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsy085
Moran, R. J., Campo, P., Symmonds, M., Stephan, K. E., Dolan, R. J., and Friston,
K. J. (2013). Free Energy, Precision and Learning: The Role of Cholinergic
Neuromodulation. J. Neurosci. 33, 8227ñ8236. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4255-
12.2013
Morrison, I. (2016a). ALE meta-analysis reveals dissociable networks for aﬀective
and discriminative aspects of touch. Hum. Brain Mapp. 37, 1308ñ1320. doi:
10.1002/hbm.23103
Morrison, I. (2016b). Keep Calm and Cuddle on: Social Touch as a Stress Buﬀer.
Adap. Hum. Behav. Physiol. 2, 344ñ362. doi: 10.1007/s40750-016-0052-x
Morrison, I., Löken, L. S., and Olausson, H. (2010). The skin as a
social organ. Exper. Brain Res. 204, 305ñ314. doi: 10.1007/s00221-009-
2007-y
Mueller, S. M., and Grunwald, M. (2021). Eﬀects, Side Eﬀects and
Contraindications of Relaxation Massage during Pregnancy: A Systematic
Review of Randomized Controlled Trials. J. Clin. Med. 10:3485.
Mühlenpfordt, I., Stritter, W., Bertram, M., Ben-Arye, E., and Seifert, G. (2020).
The power of touch: external applications from whole medical systems in the
care of cancer patients (literature review). Supp. Care Cancer 28, 461ñ471.
doi: 10.1007/s00520-019-05172-7
Murray, J., and Corney, R. (1991). Locus of control in health: The eﬀects of
psychological well-being and contact with the doctor. Int. J. Soc. Psychiatry 35,
361ñ369. doi: 10.1177/002076408903500409
Nguyen, T., Abney, D. H., Salamander, D., Bertenthal, B. I., and Hoehl, S. (2021).
Proximity and touch are associated with neural but not physiological synchrony
in naturalistic mother-infant interactions. NeuroImage 244:118599. doi: 10.
1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118599
Nishigami, T., Mibu, A., Osumi, M., Son, K., Y amamoto, S., Kajiwara, S., et al.
(2015). Are tactile acuity and clinical symptoms related to diﬀerences in
perceived body image in patients with chronic nonspeciﬁc lower back pain?
Manual Ther. 20, 63ñ67. doi: 10.1016/j.math.2014.06.010
Nolet, P. S., Yu, H., Côté, P., Meyer, A.-L., Kristman, V. L., Sutton, D., et al. (2021).
Reliability and validity of manual palpation for the assessment of patients with
low back pain: a systematic and critical review. Chiropract. Manual Therapies
29:33. doi: 10.1186/s12998-021-00384-3
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 19 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 20
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
Norholt, H. (2020). Revisiting the roots of attachment: A review of the biological
and psychological eﬀects of maternal skin-to-skin contact and carrying of full-
term infants. Infant Behav. Dev. 60:101441. doi: 10.1016/j.infbeh.2020.101441
O’Keeﬀe, M., Cullinane, P., Hurley, J., Leahy, I., Bunzli, S., O’Sullivan, P. B.,
et al. (2016). What Inﬂuences Patient-Therapist Interactions in Musculoskeletal
Physical Therapy? Qualitative Systematic Review and Meta-Synthesis. Phys.
Ther. 96, 609ñ622. doi: 10.2522/ptj.20150240
Olufade, T., Gallicchio, L., MacDonald, R., and Helzlsouer, K. J. (2015).
Musculoskeletal pain and health-related quality of life among breast cancer
patients treated with aromatase inhibitors. Supp. Care Cancer 23, 447ñ455.
doi: 10.1007/s00520-014-2364-3
O’Shea, A., Boaz, A. L., and Chambers, M. (2019). A Hierarchy of Power: The Place
of Patient and Public Involvement in Healthcare Service Development. Front.
Sociol. 4:38. doi: 10.3389/fsoc.2019.00038
Owens, A. P., Allen, M., Ondobaka, S., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Interoceptive
inference: From computational neuroscience to clinic. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.
90, 174ñ183. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.04.017
Paciorek, A., and Skora, L. (2020). Vagus Nerve Stimulation as a Gateway to
Interoception. Front. Psychol.. 11:1659. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01659
Pan, Y., Cheng, X., Zhang, Z., Li, X., and Hu, Y. (2017). Cooperation in lovers:
An fNIRS-based hyperscanning study. Hum. Brain Mapp. 38, 831ñ841. doi:
10.1002/hbm.23421
Panagiotopoulou, E., Filippetti, M. L., Tsakiris, M., and Fotopoulou, A.
(2017). Aﬀective Touch Enhances Self-Face Recognition During Multisensory
Integration. Sci. Rep. 7:12883. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-13345-9
Paoletti, P., and Ben Soussan, T. D. (2019). The Sphere Model of Consciousness:
From Geometrical to Neuro-Psycho-Educational Perspectives.Log. Univers. 13,
395ñ415. doi: 10.1007/s11787-019-00226-0
Papathanassoglou, E. D., and Mpouzika, M. D. A. (2012). Interpersonal touch.Biol.
Res. Nursing 14, 431ñ443.
Park, G., and Thayer, J. F. (2014). From the heart to the mind: cardiac vagal
tone modulates top-down and bottom-up visual perception and attention to
emotional stimuli. Front. Psychol. 5:278. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00278
Park, H.-D., Bernasconi, F., Salomon, R., Tallon-Baudry, C., Spinelli, L., Seeck, M.,
et al. (2017). Neural sources and underlying mechanisms of neural responses
to heartbeats and their role in bodily self-consciousness: an intracranial EEG
Study. Cereb. Cortex 28, 2351ñ2364. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhx136
Parr, T., Benrimoh, D. A., Vincent, P., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Precision and
false perceptual inference. Front. Integ. Neurosci. 12:39. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2018.
00039
Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2017). Uncertainty, epistemics and active inference.J.R.
Soc. Interface 14:20170376. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0376
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., and Friston, K. J. (2022). Active Inference: the Free Energy
Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior.Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Paulus, M. P., Feinstein, J. S., and Khalsa, S. S. (2019). An Active Inference
Approach to Interoceptive Psychopathology. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 07,
97ñ122. doi: 10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-050718-095617
Pawling, R., Cannon, P. R., McGlone, F. P., and Walker, S. C. (2017). C-
tactile aﬀerent stimulating touch carries a positive aﬀective value. PLoS One
12:e0173457. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0173457
Peersman, W., Rooms, T., Bracke, N., Van Waelvelde, H., De Maeseneer, J., and
Cambier, D. (2013). Patients’ priorities regarding outpatient physiotherapy care:
a qualitative and quantitative study. Manual Ther. 18, 155ñ164. doi: 10.1016/j.
math.2012.09.007
Peiris, C. L., Taylor, N. F., and Shields, N. (2012). Patients value patient-therapist
interactions more than the amount or content of therapy during inpatient
rehabilitation: a qualitative study. J. Physiother. 58, 261ñ268. doi: 10.1016/
S1836-9553(12)70128-5
Pérez, P., Madsen, J., Banellis, L., Türker, B., Raimondo, F., Perlbarg, V.,
et al. (2021). Conscious processing of narrative stimuli synchronizes heart
rate between individuals. Cell Rep. 36:109692. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.
109692
Peters, A., McEwen, B. S., and Friston, K. (2017). Uncertainty and stress: Why
it causes diseases and how it is mastered by the brain. Prog. Neurobiol. 156,
164ñ188. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2017.05.004
Pezzulo, G., Maisto, D., Barca, L., and Van den Bergh, O. (2019). Symptom
Perception From a Predictive Processing Perspective.Clin. Psychol. Eur.1, 1ñ14.
doi: 10.32872/cpe.v1i4.35952
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., and Friston, K. (2015). Active Inference, homeostatic
regulation and adaptive behavioural control. Prog. Neurobiol. 134, 17ñ35. doi:
10.1016/j.pneurobio.2015.09.001
Pinheiro da Silva, F., Moreira, G. M., Zomkowski, K., Amaral, de Noronha, M.,
and Flores Sperandio, F. (2019). Manual Therapy as Treatment for Chronic
Musculoskeletal Pain in Female Breast Cancer Survivors: A Systematic Review
and Meta-Analysis. J. Manipul. Physiol. Therapeutics42, 503ñ513. doi: 10.1016/
j.jmpt.2018.12.007
Pinto, R. Z., Ferreira, M. L., Oliveira, V. C., Franco, M. R., Adams, R., Maher,
C. G., et al. (2012). Patient-centred communication is associated with positive
therapeutic alliance: a systematic review. J. Physiother. 58, 77ñ87. doi: 10.1016/
S1836-9553(12)70087-5
Porges, S. W. (2003). The Polyvagal Theory: Phylogenetic contributions to social
behavior. Physiol. Behav. 79, 503ñ513. doi: 10.1016/S0031-9384(03)00156-2
Porges, S. W. (2007). The Polyvagal Perspective. Biol. Psychol. 74, 116ñ143.
Preston, S. D. (2007). ìA perception-action model for empathy, ” in Empathy in
Mental Illness, eds T. Farrow and P. Woodruﬀ (Cambridge, ENG: Cambridge
University Press), 428ñ447.
Pricop, C. L. (2016). Repetition and diﬀerence in doctorñpatient interaction. Bull.
Integr. Psychiatry 3, 63ñ71.
Puentedura, E. J., and Flynn, T. (2016). Combining manual therapy with pain
neuroscience education in the treatment of chronic low back pain: A narrative
review of the literature. Physiother. Theor. Pract. 32, 408ñ414. doi: 10.1080/
09593985.2016.1194663
Quadt, L., Critchley, H. D., and Garﬁnkel, S. N. (2018). The neurobiology of
interoception in health and disease. Ann. NY. Acad. Sci. 1428, 112ñ128. doi:
10.1111/nyas.13915
Quattrocki, E., and Friston, K. (2014). Autism, oxytocin and interoception.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 47, 410ñ430. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.09.012
Quintana, D. S., and Guastella, A. J. (2020). An Allostatic Theory of Oxytocin.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 24, 515ñ528. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2020.03.008
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering
Schrödinger’s question: A free-energy formulation. Phys. Life Rev. 24, 1ñ16.
doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Redcay, E., and Schilbach, L. (2019). Using second-person neuroscience to
elucidate the mechanisms of social interaction. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 20, 495ñ505.
doi: 10.1038/s41583-019-0179-4
Reddan, M. C., Young, H., Falkner, J., López-Solà, M., and Wager, T. D. (2020).
Touch and social support inﬂuence interpersonal synchrony and pain. Soc.
Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 15, 1064ñ1075. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsaa048
Reynolds, A. (2009). Patient-centered Care. Radiol. Technol. 81, 133ñ147.
Roberts, L., and Bucksey, S. J. (2007). Communicating with patients: what happens
in practice? Phys. Ther. 87, 586ñ594. doi: 10.2522/ptj.20060077
Roger, J., Darfour, D., Dham, A., Hickman, O., Shaubach, L., and Shepard, K.
(2002). Physiotherapists’ use of touch in inpatient settings.Physiother. Res. Int.
7, 170ñ186. doi: 10.1002/pri.253
Romero, T., Castellanos, M. A., and de Waal, F. B. M. (2010). Consolation as
possible expression of sympathetic concern among chimpanzees. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 12110ñ12115. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1006991107
Rondoni, A., Rossettini, G., Ristori, D., Gallo, F., Strobe, M., Giaretta, F., et al.
(2017). Intrarater and Inter-rater Reliability of Active Cervical Range of
Motion in Patients With Nonspeciﬁc Neck Pain Measured With Technological
and Common Use Devices: A Systematic Review With Meta-regression.
J. Manip.Phys. Ther. 40, 597ñ608. doi: 10.1016/j.jmpt.2017.07.002
Rossettini, G., Carlino, E., and Testa, M. (2018). Clinical relevance of contextual
factors as triggers of placebo and nocebo eﬀects in musculoskeletal pain. BMC
Muscul. Disord. 19:27. doi: 10.1186/s12891-018-1943-8
Rossettini, G., Colombi, A., Carlino, E., Manoni, M., Mirandola, M., Polli, A.,
et al. (2022). Unraveling Negative Expectations and Nocebo-Related Eﬀects
in Musculoskeletal Pain. Front. Psychol . 13:789377. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.
789377
Rossettini, G., Latini, T. M., Palese, A., Jack, S. M., Ristori, D., Gonzatto, S.,
et al. (2020). Determinants of patient satisfaction in outpatient musculoskeletal
physiotherapy: a systematic, qualitative meta-summary, and meta-synthesis.
Disabil. Rehabil. 42, 460ñ472. doi: 10.1080/09638288.2018.1501102
Rossettini, G., and Testa, M. (2018). Manual therapy RCTs: should we control
placebo in placebo control? Eur. J. Phys. Rehabil. Med. 54, 500ñ501. doi: 10.
23736/S1973-9087.17.05024-9
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 20 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 21
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
Rubinstein, S. M., van Middelkoop, M., Assendelft, W. J. J., de Boer, M. R.,
and van Tulder, M. W. (2011). Spinal manipulative therapy for chronic
low back pain. Drug Ther. Bull. 49:41. doi: 10.1002/14651858.cd008112.
pub2
Sánchez-Romero, E., González-Zamorano, Y., Arribas-Romano, A., Martínez-
Pozas, O., Fernández Espinar, E., Pedersini, P., et al. (2021). Eﬃcacy of Manual
Therapy on Facilitatory Nociception and Endogenous Pain Modulation in
Older Adults with Knee Osteoarthritis: A Case Series. Appl. Sci. 11:1895. doi:
10.3390/app11041895
Sauer, E. M., Anderson, M. Z., Gormley, B., Richmond, C. J., and Preacco, L.
(2010). Client attachment orientations, working alliances, and responses to
therapy: A psychology training clinic study. Psychother. Res. 20, 702ñ711. doi:
10.1080/10503307.2010.518635
Scalabrini, A., Ebisch, S. J. H., Huang, Z., di Plinio, S., Perrucci, M. G., Romani,
G. L., et al. (2019). Spontaneous Brain Activity Predicts Task-Evoked Activity
during Animate Versus Inanimate Touch. Cereb. Cort. 29, 4628ñ4645. doi:
10.1093/cercor/bhy340
Schilbach, L. (2010). A second-person approach to other minds.Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
11, 449ñ449. doi: 10.1038/nrn2805-c1
Schönberger, M., Humle, F., Zeeman, P., and Teasdale, T. W. (2006). Working
alliance and patient compliance in brain injury rehabilitation and their relation
to psychosocial outcome. Neuropsychol. Rehabil. 16, 298ñ314. doi: 10.1080/
09602010500176476
Seth, A. K., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the
emotional brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 371:20160007. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.
0007
Seymour, B., and Mancini, F. (2020). Hierarchical models of pain: Inference,
information-seeking, and adaptive control. NeuroImage 222:117212. doi: 10.
1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117212
Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., and Eisenberger, N. I. (2021). Getting in touch: A neural
model of comforting touch.Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.130, 263ñ273. doi: 10.1016/
j.neubiorev.2021.08.030
Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Saporta, N., Marton-Alper, I. Z., and Gvirts, H. Z. (2019).
Herding Brains: A Core Neural Mechanism for Social Alignment. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 23, 174ñ186. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2019.01.002
Shannon, R., and Hillsdon, M. (2007). Motivational interviewing in
musculoskeletal care. Muscul. Care 5, 206ñ215. doi: 10.1002/msc.119
Smith, R., Badcock, P., and Friston, K. J. (2021). Recent advances in the application
of predictive coding and active inference models within clinical neuroscience.
Psychiatr. Clin. Neurosci. 75, 3ñ13. doi: 10.1111/pcn.13138
Smith, R., Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2019). Simulating Emotions: An Active
Inference Model of Emotional State Inference and Emotion Concept Learning.
Front. Psychol. 10:2844. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02844
Smith, R., Thayer, J. F., Khalsa, S. S., and Lane, R. D. (2017). The hierarchical
basis of neurovisceral integration. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 75, 274ñ296. doi:
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.02.003
Søndenå, P., Dalusio-King, G., and Hebron, C. (2020). Conceptualisation of the
therapeutic alliance in physiotherapy: is it adequate? Musculoskeletal Sci. Pract.
46:102131. doi: 10.1016/j.msksp.2020.102131
Sorokowska, A., Saluja, S., Sorokowski, P., Fr ˛ ackowiak, T., Karwowski, M., and
Aavik, T. (2021). Aﬀective Interpersonal Touch in Close Relationships: A Cross-
Cultural Perspective. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 47, 1705ñ1721. doi: 10.1177/
0146167220988373
Stephan, K. E., Manjaly, Z. M., Mathys, C. D., Weber, L. A. E., Paliwal,
S., Gard, T., et al. (2016). Allostatic Self-eﬃcacy: A Metacognitive Theory
of Dyshomeostasis-Induced Fatigue and Depression. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
10:550. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00550
Sterling, P., and Eyer, J. (1988). ìAllostasis: A new paradigm to explain arousal
pathology, ” inHandbook of Life Stress, Cognition and Health, eds S. Fisher and
J. Reason (Hoboken, NJ:John Wiley & Sons), 629ñ649.
Sterzer, P., Adams, R. A., Fletcher, P., Frith, C., Lawrie, S. M., and Muckli, L. (2018).
The Predictive Coding Account of Psychosis. Biol. Psychiatr. 84, 634ñ643. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2018.05.015
Stewart, S. H., and Watt, M. C. (2008). Introduction to the special issue on
interoceptive exposure in the treatment of anxiety and related disorders: novel
applications and mechanisms of action. J. Cogn. Psychother. 22, 291ñ230. doi:
10.1891/0889-8391.22.4.291
Siu, J., and Humphreys, G. W. (2015). The Integrative Self: How Self-Reference
Integrates Perception and Memory.Trends Cogn. Sci.19, 719ñ728. doi: 10.1016/
j.tics.2015.08.015
Suresh, S., Wang, S., Porfyris, S., Kamasinski-Sol, R., and Steinhorn, D. M. (2008).
Massage therapy in outpatient pediatric chronic pain patients: do they facilitate
signiﬁcant reductions in levels of distress, pain, tension, discomfort, and mood
alterations? Pediatric Anesthesia 18, 884ñ887. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9592.2008.
02638.x
Suvilehto, J. T., Glerean, E., Dunbar, R. I. M., Hari, R., and Nummenmaa, L.
(2015). Topography of social touching depends on emotional bonds between
humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112, 13811ñ13816. doi: 10.1073/pnas.151923
1112
Taccolini Manzoni, A. C., Bastos, de Oliveira, N. T., Nunes Cabral, C. M., and
Aquaroni Ricci, N. (2018). The role of the therapeutic alliance on pain relief
in musculoskeletal rehabilitation: A systematic review. Physiother. Theor. Pract.
34, 901ñ915. doi: 10.1080/09593985.2018.1431343
Takahashi, K., Oishi, C., Hamada, Y., Nishiyama, K., and Sonoo, M. (2021). The
inﬂuence of right-left error in the placement of the Cc electrode in tibial nerve
somatosensory evoked potentials (SEPs). Clin. Neurophysiol. Pract. 6, 215ñ218.
doi: 10.1016/j.cnp.2021.06.002
Takayanagi, Y., and Onaka, T. (2021). Roles of Oxytocin in Stress Responses,
Allostasis and Resilience. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23:150. doi: 10.3390/ijms23010150
Tamburella, F., Piras, F., Piras, F., Spanò, B., Tramontano, M., and Gili, T.
(2019). Cerebral perfusion changes after osteopathic manipulative treatment:
A randomized manual placebo-controlled trial. Front. Physiol. 10:403. doi: 10.
3389/fphys.2019.00403
Taylor, P. J., Rietzschel, J., Danquah, A., and Berry, K. (2015). The role of
attachment style, attachment to therapist, and working alliance in response to
psychological therapy. Psychol. Psychother.88, 240ñ253. doi: 10.1111/papt.12045
Thayer, J. F., and Friedman, B. H. (2002). Stop that! Inhibition, sensitization, and
their neurovisceral concomitants. Scand. J. Psychol. 43, 123ñ130. doi: 10.1111/
1467-9450.00277
Thayer, J. F., Hansen, A. L., Saus-Rose, E., and Johnsen, B. H. (2009). Heart
rate variability, prefrontal neural function, and cognitive performance: the
neurovisceral integration perspective on self-regulation, adaptation, and health.
Ann. Behav. Med. 37, 141ñ153. doi: 10.1007/s12160-009-9101-z
Thayer, J. F., and Lane, R. D. (2000). A model of neurovisceral integration in
emotion regulation and dysregulation. J. Aﬀect. Dis. 61, 201ñ216. doi: 10.1016/
s0165-0327(00)00338-4
Thornquist, E. (2001). Diagnostics in Physiotherapy Á Processes, Patterns and
Perspectives. Part I. Adv. Physiother. 3, 140ñ150. doi: 10.1080/1403819013171
73678
Tomasello, M. (2019). Becoming Human . Cambridge, MA:Harvard University
Press, doi: 10.4159/9780674988651
Tomasello, M., Melis, A. P., Tennie, C., Wyman, E., and Herrmann, E. (2012).
Two key steps in the evolution of human cooperation: the interdependence
hypothesis. Curr. Anthropol. 53, 673ñ692. doi: 10.1086/668207
Toro-Velasco, C., Arroyo-Morales, M., Fernández-de-las-Peñas, C., Cleland, J. A.,
and Barrero-Hernández, F. J. (2009). Short-Term Eﬀects of Manual Therapy on
Heart Rate Variability, Mood State, and Pressure Pain Sensitivity in Patients
With Chronic Tension-Type Headache: A Pilot Study. J. Manip. Physiol.
Therapeutics 32, 527ñ535. doi: 10.1016/j.jmpt.2009.08.011
Tracey, I. (2010). Getting the pain you expect: mechanisms of placebo, nocebo and
reappraisal eﬀects in humans. Nat. Med. 16, 1277ñ1283. doi: 10.1038/nm.2229
Trapp, K., Spengler, S., Wüstenberg, T., Wiers, C. E., Busch, N. A., and Bermpohl,
F. (2014). Imagining triadic interactions simultaneously activates mirror and
mentalizing systems. NeuroImage 98, 314ñ323. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.
05.003
Tronick, E. Z. (1989). Emotions and emotional communication in infants. Am.
Psychol. 144:112ñ9 doi: 10.1037//0003-066x.44.2.112
Tschacher, W., Giersch, A., and Friston, K. (2017). Embodiment and
Schizophrenia: A Review of Implications and Applications. Schizophr.
Bull. 43, 745ñ753. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbw220
Tschantz, A., Barca, L., Maisto, D., Buckley, C. L., Seth, A. K., and Pezzulo,
G. (2022). Simulating homeostatic, allostatic and goal-directed forms of
interoceptive control using active inference. Biol. Psychol. 169 108266. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsycho.2022.108266
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 21 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247
fnbeh-16-897247 June 25, 2022 Time: 15:52 # 22
McParlin et al. Active Inference in Musculoskeletal Care
Uvnäs-Moberg, K. (2004). ìMassage, relaxation and well-being: a possible role
for oxytocin as an integrative principle?, ” in ouch and Massage in Early
Child Development, ed. T. Field (Calverton, NY: Johnson & Johnson Pediatric
Institute).
Uvnas-Moberg, K., Handlin, L., and Petersson, M. (2015). Self-soothing behaviors
with particular reference to oxytocin release induced by non-noxious sensory
stimulation. Front. Psychol. 5:1529. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01529
Van den Bergh, O., Witthöft, M., Petersen, S., and Brown, R. J. (2017). Symptoms
and the body: Taking the inferential leap. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 74, 185ñ203.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.01.015
Van Puyvelde, M., Collette, L., Gorissen, A.-S., Pattyn, N., and McGlone, F. (2019).
Infants Autonomic Cardio- Respiratory Responses to Nurturing Stroking
Touch Delivered by the Mother or the Father. Front. Physiol. 10:1117. doi:
10.3389/fphys.2019.01117
Vasil, J., Badcock, P. B., Constant, A., Friston, K., and Ramstead, M. J. D. (2020). A
World Unto Itself: Human Communication as Active Inference.Front. Psychol.
11:417. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00417
Veissière, S. P. L., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., and Kirmayer,
L. J. (2019). Thinking Through Other Minds: A Variational Approach to
Cognition and Culture. Behav. Brain Sci. 43:e90. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X1900
1213
Veissière, S. P. L., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., and Kirmayer,
L. J. (2020). Thinking through other minds: a variational approach to cognition
and culture. Behav. Brain Sci. 43, e90. 1213 doi: 10.1017/S0140525X1900
Vigotsky, A., and Bruhns, R. (2015). The Role of Descending Modulation in
Manual Therapy and Its Analgesic Implications: A Narrative Review. Pain Res.
Treat. 2015:292805. doi: 10.1155/2015/292805
Vlaeyen, J. W. S., and Linton, S. J. (2000). Fear-avoidance and its consequences
in chronic musculoskeletal pain: a state of the art. Pain 85, 317ñ332. doi:
10.1016/S0304-3959(99)00242-0
Vogt, B. A. (2005). Pain and emotion interactions in subregions of the cingulate
gyrus. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 533ñ544. doi: 10.1038/nrn1704
Vossel, S., Bauer, M., Mathys, C., Adams, R. A., Dolan, R. J., Stephan, K. E.,
et al. (2014). Cholinergic Stimulation Enhances Bayesian Belief Updating in the
Deployment of Spatial Attention. J. Neurosci. 34, 15735ñ15742. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.0091-14.2014
Wertli, M. M., Eugster, R., Held, U., Steurer, J., Kofmehl, R., and Weiser, S. (2014a).
Catastrophizingóa prognostic factor for outcome in patients with low back
pain: a systematic review. Spine J. 14, 2639ñ2657. doi: 10.1016/j.spinee.2014.03.
003
Wertli, M. M., Rasmussen-Barr, E., Held, U., Weiser, S., Bachmann, L. M., and
Brunner, F. (2014b). Fear-avoidance beliefsóa moderator of treatment eﬃcacy
in patients with low back pain: a systematic review. Spine J. 14, 2658ñ2678.
doi: 10.1016/j.spinee.2014.02.033
Wilson, M., and Wilson, T. P. (2005). An oscillator model of the timing of
turn-taking. Psychonomic Bull. Rev. 12, 957ñ968. doi: 10.3758/BF03206432
Wilson, S., Chaloner, N., Osborn, M., and Gauntlett-Gilbert, J. (2017).
Psychologically informed physiotherapy for chronic pain: patient experiences
of treatment and therapeutic process. Physiotherapy 103, 98ñ105. doi: 10.1016/
j.physio.2015.11.005
Xu, P., Huang, R., Wang, J., van Dam, N. T., Xie, T., Dong, Z., et al. (2014). Diﬀerent
topological organization of human brain functional networks with eyes open
versus eyes closed. NeuroImage 90, 246ñ255. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.
12.060
Y amasue, H., Yee, J. R., Hurlemann, R., Rilling, J. K., Chen, F. S., Meyer-
Lindenberg, A., et al. (2012). Integrative Approaches Utilizing Oxytocin to
Enhance Prosocial Behavior: From Animal and Human Social Behavior to
Autistic Social Dysfunction. J. Neurosci. 32, 14109añ14117a. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.3327-12.2012
Yuan, S. L. K., Matsutani, L. A., and Marques, A. P. (2015). Eﬀectiveness
of diﬀerent styles of massage therapy in ﬁbromyalgia: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Manual Ther. 20, 257ñ264. doi: 10.1016/j.math.2014.
09.003
Zheng, J.-J., Li, S.-J., Zhang, X.-D., Miao, W.-Y., Zhang, D., Y ao, H., et al. (2014).
Oxytocin mediates early experienceñdependent cross-modal plasticity in the
sensory cortices. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 391ñ399. doi: 10.1038/nn.3634
Conﬂict of Interest: GR leads education programmes on placebo, nocebo eﬀects
and contextual factors in healthcare to under- and postgraduate students along
with private CPD courses.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note:All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 McParlin, Cerritelli, Rossettini, Friston and Esteves. This is an
open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
with these terms.
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 22 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 897247