fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 1
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 17 February 2022
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.783694
Edited by:
Michela Di Trani,
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
Reviewed by:
Annalisa Tanzilli,
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
Matteo Candidi,
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
*Correspondence:
Jorge E. Esteves
osteojorge@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Health Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 26 September 2021
Accepted: 19 January 2022
Published: 17 February 2022
Citation:
McParlin Z, Cerritelli F , Friston KJ
and Esteves JE (2022) Therapeutic
Alliance as Active Inference: The Role
of Therapeutic Touch and Synchrony.
Front. Psychol. 13:783694.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.783694
Therapeutic Alliance as Active
Inference: The Role of Therapeutic
Touch and Synchrony
Zoe McParlin1, Francesco Cerritelli1, Karl J. Friston2 and Jorge E. Esteves1,3,4*
1 Foundation COME Collaboration, Clinical-Based Human Research Department, Pescara, Italy,2 Wellcome Centre
for Human Neuroimaging, Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom,3 Malta ICOM Educational Ltd., Gzira, Malta,
4 Research Department, University College of Osteopathy, London, United Kingdom
Recognizing and aligning individuals’ unique adaptive beliefs or “priors” through
cooperative communication is critical to establishing a therapeutic relationship and
alliance. Using active inference, we present an empirical integrative account of the
biobehavioral mechanisms that underwrite therapeutic relationships. A signiﬁcant mode
of establishing cooperative alliances—and potential synchrony relationships—is through
ostensive cues generated by repetitive coupling during dynamic touch. Established
models speak to the unique role of affectionate touch in developing communication,
interpersonal interactions, and a wide variety of therapeutic beneﬁts for patients of
all ages; both neurophysiologically and behaviorally. The purpose of this article is to
argue for the importance of therapeutic touch in establishing a therapeutic alliance
and, ultimately, synchrony between practitioner and patient. We brieﬂy overview the
importance and role of therapeutic alliance in prosocial and clinical interactions. We then
discuss how cooperative communication and mental state alignment—in intentional
communication—are accomplished using active inference. We argue that alignment
through active inference facilitates synchrony and communication. The ensuing account
is extended to include the role of (C-) tactile afferents in realizing the beneﬁcial effect
of therapeutic synchrony. We conclude by proposing a method for synchronizing the
effects of touch using the concept of active inference.
Keywords: therapeutic alliance, active inference, affective touch, synchrony, predictive processing, allostasis,
free-energy principle, perinatal care
INTRODUCTION
The therapeutic alliance (TA) is a collaborative working relationship between a clinician and
patient iand is a critical component of person-centerd care because it contributes to positive
clinical outcomes across multiple healthcare disciplines (Miciak et al., 2019; Ryu et al., 2021).
Recognizing, gaining trust and aligning an individual’s unique beliefs or “priors” through
cooperative communication is crucial in patient management and establishing a beneﬁcial TA
(Kinney et al., 2018). A successful TA has been shown to improve overall patient satisfaction,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 2
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
quality of life as well as both increase both physical and
mental treatment outcomes (Ferreira et al., 2013; Fuentes
et al., 2014; Manzoni et al., 2018). The TA alliance is often
modeled from the working alliance described by Bordin (1979),
which includes the collaborative agreement on goals, tasks, and
the development of successful relationships and cooperative
communication. In order to achieve cooperative communication
individuals will often attempt to selectively gather evidence
to align and synchronize their mental states with another
individual’s narrative (Vasil et al., 2020). A successful TA, mutual
agreement and therefore alignment on clinical goals has been
suggested as to why patients report an increased self eﬃcacy,
participation and adherence to exercises prescribed (Babatunde
et al., 2017; Kinney et al., 2018).
Active inference (AI) is an empirical integrative model that
has been proposed to explain the dynamics and biobehavioral
mechanisms of cooperative communication (Vasil et al., 2020).
An eﬀective method for establishing this cooperative allianceó
and potential synchrony relationshipóis through ostensive cues
generated by repetitive coupling during physical touch (Csibra,
2010). Aﬀectionate (aﬃliative) touch is unique in its ability
to foster communication, interaction, and various therapeutic
beneﬁts, for example in the context of perinatal care, it
contributes to an infant’s development, both neurophysiologically
and behaviorally (Carozza and Leong, 2021).
Synchrony is deﬁned as the interpersonal coordination of
behavioral and neurophysiological rhythms that can aid in
sensory processing, learning, emotion and arousal regulation,
self-regulation, and the establishment of a communicative
relationship (Harrist and Waugh, 2002; Beebe et al., 2018;
Wass et al., 2020; Carozza and Leong, 2021). Therefore
considering the TA principles of agreement on goals, tasks
and developing strong relationships a degree of biobehavioral
synchrony will often occur within a clinical setting. Additionally,
it is human nature to want to share psychological and
emotional states with others; e.g., through the structured
patterns of communication between mother and infant (Reddy,
2008). These interactions synchronize and individual’s behavior,
hidden states (of mind), and biological rhythms, resulting in
an intertwined unit akin to a sophisticated waltz (Feldman,
2007; Tschacher and Haken, 2007; Koole and Tschacher, 2016;
Kupper et al., 2016; Tschacher et al., 2017). Furthermore,
biobehavioral synchrony can be achieved in order to fulﬁll
the role of caregiving when responding to a stimulus for
help, i.e., an infant, by activating numerous subcortical regions
including the hypothalamus, amygdala, and the dopaminergic
reward circuit (Uvnäs-Moberg et al., 2015; Feldman, 2016;
Hardin et al., 2020; Carozza and Leong, 2021). The emotional
distress exhibited by the infant’s stimulus consequently triggers
an empathic response from the caregiver by relating to
the infant’s distress, and this can putatively contribute to
activations in the anterior insular cortex and mentalizing network
(Rizzolatti and Craighero, 2004; Fan et al., 2011). Arguably,
motivationally rewarding dyadic exchanges between the infant
and their caregivers may result in concurrent activations in
the ventral segmental area, nucleus accumbens, insular cortex,
amygdala, and hypothalamus and increases in neurochemicals
such oxytocin (Li and Fleming, 2003; Ebner et al., 2005;
Atzil et al., 2011; Feldman, 2015). A common mode to
respond to the stimulus of the infant is often through touch,
further increasing the biobehavioral synchrony and therapeutic
eﬀectiveness (Kartner et al., 2010; Finset and Ørnes, 2017).
Crucially, the limbic system implicated in reward processing
regulates key survival and motivation functions, promoting a
social life (Sokolowski and Corbin, 2012).
Active inference provides an insight into why human
beings choose to synchronize and create working alliances
with others in order to minimize the free energy within a
bayesian structure through coupling between sentient systems
(Friston et al., 2015). AI is a formal account of the precise
interactions between one’s internal structure, function, and the
external environment. Synchronization occurs because each
individual seeks conﬁrmation of their self-fulﬁlling, genetic,
cultural, or social conception of the world, to ensure it
is the most probable outcome with the fewest biophysical
surprises, increasing eﬃciency of cooperative communication
and subsequently informational and energetic cost (Pezzulo
et al., 2018; Ramstead et al., 2018; Vasil et al., 2020). One way
to accomplish this eﬀectively is to intentionally synchronize
with others through the collection or generation of sensory
evidence to reliably conﬁrm and align beliefs, based on the
premise that everyone is identical, reducing the potential
for surprise and minimizing free energy (Bruineberg et al.,
2018; Ramstead et al., 2018; Badcock et al., 2019). In other
words, the simplest way to minimize surprise is to selectively
engage with people who respond in the same, predictable
fashion. As a result, forecasting the most likely narratives
that underwrite interpersonal exchange eludes surprises and
minimizes prediction errors or mismatches between predicted
and actual sensations. This imperative can be seen at many
levels: from homeostasis (Koban et al., 2019) to action
observation (Kilner et al., 2007; Edwards et al., 2012; Seth
and Friston, 2016). Additionally, the individual will be more
attuned to the environment, allowing for the learning and
consolidation of prior beliefs and subsequent repetition of
surprise-minimizing behavior (Friston and Frith, 2015a; Isomura
et al., 2019). Arguably, alignment through active inference
facilitates synchrony and communication and contributes to
changes in a patient’s generative model.
Technically, active inference refers to the inversion of Bayesian
(i.e., generative) models of the sensed world, where these
models include the consequences of action. Model inversion
can then be read as perceptual inference; namely, inferring the
(unobservable) causes of (observable) sensations. Because these
causes include action, active inference entails policy selection
and planning as inference (Attias, 2003; Botvinick and Toussaint,
2012; Mirza et al., 2016; Friston et al., 2017). Mathematically,
perceptual inference corresponds to a minimization of variational
free energy, while actions are chosen that minimize the expected
free energy following an action. In this setting, free energy can
be read as scoring the implausibility of (sensory) outcomes,
usually described in terms of surprise or prediction errors (Clark,
2013; Hohwy, 2013). Note, that surprise is not a propositional
surprise, it is just a mathematical way of describing how
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 3
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
unlikely outcome is, given a model that generates or predicts the
most likely outcome.
We will use “surprise” in this technical sense in what follows.
The expected free energy corresponds to the surprise expected
following an action, which can be read as uncertainty. In
short, surprise scores how unpredicted a particular outcome
is, while uncertainty scores how unpredictable some outcomes
will be in the future. Formally speaking, expected free energy
is usually decomposed into risk and ambiguity, where risk
scores the departure from prior preferences or outcomes that
can be regarded as rewarding. This means selecting actions
that minimize expected free energy have both pragmatic (goal
or reward-seeking) and epistemic (information-seeking) aspects.
We will consider both these kinds of aﬀordances in dyadic
interactions, with a special focus on touch and interoception.
Physical touch is a common and fundamental method
for establishing salience and social relationships, resulting in
biobehavioral synchrony (Craig, 2002; Aureli and Presaghi, 2010;
Fotopoulou and Tsakiris, 2017). Touch is regarded as a sensory
tactile stimulation of multiple myelinated and unmyelinated
mechanoreceptors. Low threshold, heavily myelinated AB
aﬀerent mechanoreceptors respond to rapid sensory stimulation
and discriminate between the physical sensations of touch
(Manzotti et al., 2019). In contrast, unmyelinated C-tactile (CT)
aﬀerent ﬁbers detect slow, stable, gentle touch and are sensitive to
skin temperature, sending signals to the limbic system. Aﬀective
touch via tactile stimulation can be viewed as an example of a
particular embodied social behavior that maintains homeostasis
and inﬂuences the perception ofóor inference aboutóthe mental
states of self and other (Ciaunica et al., 2021). Moreover, it has
been speculated that touch may cause a rapid reduction in the
activity in the pre-frontal cortex before instantiating a sustained
period of pre-emptive homeostatic regulation (Shamay-Tsoory
and Eisenberger, 2021). It has also been suggested that the use of
social touch decreases the level of eﬀort needed to overcome stress
(Coan and Maresh, 2014). When considering the hypothesis that
social touch is a distinct mode of touch, it has been suggested that
the CT ﬁbers may selectively sample slow sensory ﬂuctuations
that are socially salient (i.e., that are generated by the aﬃliative
touch of another person). And determine whether the stimulus
is perceived pleasant as it is processed in the interoceptive
hierarchy, including the insula (Björnsdotter et al., 2010).
In this paper, we propose a framework for the role of touch
in relation to building synchrony to underwrite a therapeutic
allianceóin a range of clinical situationsóthrough the lens of AI.
We start with an overview of the essential characteristics of how
we establish cooperative communication to achieve biobehavioral
synchrony via touch. We then discuss how, once established,
synchrony is continually developed and how the brain works to
overcome the uncertainty (i.e., expected surprise) inherent in the
lived world. Subsequently, we will discuss the neurophysiological
aspects of synchrony, and apply the concepts to the formation
of both dyadic and triadic relations (Trapp et al., 2014). We
discuss overcoming uncertainty in the clinical situation before
delving into the role of empathy and the use of repetition
within the appointment structure. We conclude by discussing the
adaptations and synchronization of ideas, emphasizing diagnosis
and the process by which patients and practitioners can develop
a shared treatment plan.
The Importance of Positive Connection
and How to Foster it
Throughout human evolution, the brain has evolved to acquire
and maintain suﬃcient resources to enable the body to
perform the essential (existential) functions of growth, healing,
and reproduction required for survival, achieving allostasis in
the process (Sterling and Eyer, 1988; Ramsay and Woods,
2014; Barrett et al., 2016; Seth and Friston, 2016). Most of
our interactions are motivated by our mutual expectation of
cooperative communication and synchrony with a common
mode being social touch (Suvilehto et al., 2015). Allostasis is
a process by which the brain predictively regulates the body
metabolic and energy needs using an internal model of that
body in the (Barrett, 2017). It has been proposed that the
computational architecture of the brain involved in allostatic
active inference processes depend on the default mode network,
salience network and the frontoparietal network (Kober et al.,
2008; Binder and Desai, 2011; Van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2013;
Barrett, 2017). This is demonstrated in infants through cultural
learning when they attempt to infer future events or uncertainties
based on what trusted others have learned or believed (Harris and
Corriveau, 2011; Harris et al., 2017). Cooperative communication
helps us become more attuned to our environment, creating
priors to predict future events and build a stronger therapeutic
alliance. Additionally, achieving allostasis requires a delicate
balance of various physiological mediators, including autonomic,
inﬂammatory, metabolic, cortisol, and neuromodulators, to
induce transient adaptations (McEwen and Wingﬁeld, 2003;
D’Alessandro et al., 2016). Moreover, the brain will prioritize and
motivate stimuli in a hierarchical manner in order to explain,
infer and later attempt to control their self fulﬁlling predictions as
a result improving communication and biobehavioral synchrony
(Sterling, 2014).
This process of allostasis regulation was demonstrated during
collaborative human foraging in a stag hunt situation; it was
evident that larger groups working cooperatively could achieve
greater hunting rewards such as catching a stag than an
individual hare could (Tomasello et al., 2012). To secure the
stag, they employ “joint attention, ” in which two or more
individuals work cooperatively on the same problem to achieve
a positive (unsurprising) outcome. As a result, they increase their
communication eﬀorts and align their mental states, to attempt
to oﬀset the risk of trusting others (Tomasello, 1995; Skyrms,
2001). This alignment is evident in increased interpersonal
brain synchronization when interacting with individuals you
have a higher social bond to, including a successful working
alliance, reﬂecting in the synchrony within the inferior Parietal
lobe (Kinreich et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018). By hunting
the stag, the group achieves increased allostatic regulationó
through social and cultural synchronyóas well as the nutritional
beneﬁts necessary for survival, motivating them to repeat the
collaborative communication method in the future (Yoshida
et al., 2008; Devaine et al., 2014; Duguid et al., 2014;
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 4
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
Feldman, 2015; Begus et al., 2016). The limbic system, which
connects external cues involved in social and emotional
processing to cultural behaviors essential for ensuring survival
and motivation may also inﬂuence the precision of new sensory
stimuli when establishing allostatic regulation (Sokolowski and
Corbin, 2012; Barrett, 2017). It is critical to infer the “hidden”
thoughts of others to engage in cooperative communication and
thus synchrony. These inferences (c.f., theory of mind) enable
individuals to work together to resolve uncertainty and achieve
familiar outcomes. Touch can be viewed as a form of tactile
communication and an ostensive cue indicating their partner’s
perceptions, thoughts, and feelings about the current context
and whether they have shifted with subtle changes the quality of
touch accurately inferring diﬀerent emotions (Hertenstein et al.,
2006a,b). Thus, to synchronize and overcome this uncertainty, we
frequently rely on and employ speciﬁc perceptual and ostensive
cues such as gaze, touch, and facial expressions to infer a
partner’s intentions and dispositions and, hopefully, better align
with them. This connection is frequently strengthened through
touch, as seen when romantic couples hold hands, thereby
increasing the phenomenon of neural synchrony (Goldstein
et al., 2018). The limbic system’s association with touch explains
why touch is crucial in developing relationships, alliances and
synchrony between individuals. Additionally, we must cultivate
self-other discrimination, attribution of agency and interpersonal
inference through face-to-face interactions, gaze, ostensive cues,
and hand/gesture holding.
The Importance of Physical Touch in the
Development of Interpersonal
Connections
Touch can be viewed as key in various situations for the
interpersonal inference necessary for establishing interpersonal
connections and, potentially, synchrony (Hertenstein et al.,
2006a; Fonagy and Allison, 2014). Touch can increase trust,
compliance, and generosity; while simultaneously reducing
anxiety and threatening negative emotions (Morrison et al.,
2010). Additionally, it can be used and manipulated to
assist in accurately applying context to infer diﬀerent hidden
thoughts, communicative intentions and at least 6 diﬀerent
emotions of others including love, fear and anger, with
between 48 and 83% accuracy (Hertenstein et al., 2006b). The
more precise one becomes at inferring others’ thoughts and
actions, the more adept one establishes common ground, trust,
synchrony, and a beneﬁcial therapeutic alliance. Additionally,
interpersonal synchrony between parent and infant is well
documented through non-verbal behaviors such as touch,
gaze, and voice, particularly in mothers (Feldman, 2016;
Fotopoulou and Tsakiris, 2017). Reciprocal somatosensory
responses within the orbitofrontal cortex and temporal lobe, but
also involving the cingulate cortex, caudate nucleus, preoptic
region, lateral hypothalamus, and ventral tegmental area (Rolls,
1999; Kringelbach and Rolls, 2004), as well as electrodermal
activity coupling between the ventromedial prefrontal and
medial orbitofrontal cortex, may putatively provide the neural
correlates for social value within co-operative communications
(Kringelbach and Rolls, 2004; Behrens et al., 2008; Ruﬀ and
Fehr, 2014; Murray et al., 2015). This is observed in individuals
that have the intention to care for others, while also having an
established intimate bond, not just between mother and infant.
However, with more intimate or signiﬁcant relationships, the
inter-brain synchrony and brain to brain coupling induced by
interpersonal touch is enhanced with diﬀerent activation patterns
in the somatosensory, Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC) and
occipital frontal cortices (McCabe et al., 2008; Gazzola et al.,
2012; Goldstein et al., 2018). This is corroborated by observed
coupling in partners’ right temporoparietal regions during touch,
implying a link between touch, attention orientation, self-other
discrimination, and perception (Goldstein, 2017). Additionally,
romantic couples exhibit the most signiﬁcant degree of heart rate
and respiration synchrony when one of the partners is in pain.
This is possibly due to the other individual needing additional
emotional support, most notably through empathy.
Additionally, the sight of a familiar face stimulates an
immediate release of oxytocin; however, when the interaction is
followed by physical touch, a second wave of prolonged oxytocin
is released, cortisol is decreased, and closeness is increased (Uvnäs
Moberg et al., 2020). The more “in sync” the interaction and the
stronger the bond, the more oxytocin is released (Feldman, 2006).
The reaction to a familiar face is due to increased salience due
to “aﬀective meaning” based on prior experiences, which causes
the individual to recreate the experience, even if they are not
fully experiencing it (Roy et al., 2012). As a result, it triggers the
release of oxytocin with less signiﬁcant sensory stimuli such as
sight or smell, rather than requiring a more signiﬁcant sensory
stimulus such as physical touch (Uvnäs Moberg et al., 2020). As
a result, touch can also enhance bonding, oxytocin release, heart
rate, frontal alpha EEG synchrony, and activation of the temporo-
parietal regions all building synchrony and a therapeutic alliance.
See Quattrocki and Friston (2014) for a discussion of oxytocin in
the setting of active inference, attachment and synchronization.
This rapid physiological response caused by synchrony is
also seen in the innate, sub-second reaction to proximal touch,
which mothers give to their six-week-old infants in the form
of body contact, touch, or physical stimulation. Proximal
touch was found to be the preferred mode of communication,
eclipsing audio and visual communication (Kartner et al.,
2010). Additionally, 65 percent of face-to-face play involves
physical contact, which helps alleviate stress through social
buﬀering (Stack and Muir, 1990; Kikusui et al., 2006). After
one year, an infant who is quickly picked up when crying
has been shown to learn to self-soothe and thus cry less
(Benoit, 2004). The intuitive, less than one second contingent
responsiveness from a mother to attend to her infant, is
thought to originate from the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis, which heightens their awareness of their infant (Kartner
et al., 2010; Barrett and Fleming, 2011), conﬁrming once again
that touch is an instinctive ostensive cue in the development of
communication and synchrony.
In uteroInitiation of Synchrony
The earliest manifestations of synchrony occur during the brain
and nervous system development of a fetus in utero. Throughout
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 5
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
pregnancy, a direct active bidirectional ﬂow of environmental
and interoceptive sensory signals is transmitted to the fetus
via the mother’s heart rate, movement, touch, stress, and social
cues, which is passed on to the fetus as the mother attempts
to maintain allostasis for their mutual health (Ciaunica et al.,
2021). A disruption in the allostasis of the stress mediators or
their excessive use can result in sensitization overload, resulting
in physiological symptoms such as chronic pain (McEwen
et al., 2015). Bilateral cardiac synchrony is evident as early
as prenatal development; when maternal stress, vagal tone,
and heart rate variability inter-beat rate increase, an increased
mean fetal heart rate within one second of the mothers, also
increases (Feldman et al., 2011). When the mean maternal
heart rate decreases at night, the fetal heart rate decreases to
reﬂect a bilateral somatosensory response and coupling of the
electrodermal activity (Ivanov et al., 2009; Feldman et al., 2011).
In active (interoceptive) inference, heart rate is a key realization
autonomic reﬂexes that rest upon inferring the right kind of
sympatheticóor parasympatheticócontext (Seth and Friston,
2016). The interaction between mother and infant allows the
infant to align the biological rhythm with that of others. Infants,
it is hypothesized, will initially respond to the “similar to me”
theory to learn what it is like to be a member of the species,
inﬂuenced by their bond with their mother: thereby creating a
blueprint template for future social experiences, correlating with
a hierarchical predictive processing model (Atzil et al., 2014;
Shimon-Raz et al., 2021).
Throughout pregnancy, the mother exerts control over her
interactions with the external world, suggesting it lays the
groundwork for the infant’s homeostatic mechanism and future
priors particularly in regard to food preferences and ﬂavors
(Mennella et al., 2001). Continuous bilateral interaction primes
the infant’s homeostatic regulation, acclimates it to direct social
proximity, and equips it with the tools necessary to adapt and
respond to the temporal dimension of social stimulus before they
are born (Akers et al., 2008; Feldman, 2017). This experience
of co-regulation lays the groundwork for the infant’s ability to
engage in social interactions such as intimacy, empathy, and
inferring hidden thoughts. By governing and establishing the
initial priors for numerous internal models, the fetus conserves
energy while developing by avoiding the active maintenance
of homeostasis, while ensuring allostasis. However, it has been
demonstrated that a fetus can exert inﬂuence over allostatic
control and kick the uterine wall when in pain or dissatisfaction,
eliciting a response from the mother. It teaches the fetus through
repetition that the mother will react in a certain way to the kick to
control and satisfy its physiological predictions and preferences
within the dyad (Ciaunica et al., 2021).
Post-natal Development of Synchrony
Through Touch
Infants continue to rely on their caregivers for survival following
birth, which correlates with the infant constructing their
conceptual model of the world around them based on the
temporal dimensions of the social dyads established by their
caregiver through contingency detection (Tarabulsy et al., 1996).
Infants instinctively maintain synchrony and thus regulation with
the mother after birth, as they participate in co-homeostatic
and allostatic regulation during co-embodiment (Ciaunica et al.,
2021). Infants who are highly attuned to their mothers frequently
allow them to learn in detail from their early interactions
and their mothers’ unique biological rhythms and priors how
to socialize, empathize, and infer the emotions of others
(Feldman, 2007). This bidirectional interaction results in forming
a “homeostatic fetus and an allostatic mother” (Ciaunica et al.,
2021). Synchrony between mother and new-born infant is
frequently established with the mother’s sensitive behavior to
maximize the infant’s ability to detect diﬀerences in their
environment, other people’s behavior, and their own behavior
(Tarabulsy et al., 1996). Additionally, it is possible to argue that
the infant developed and survived birth trauma due to their
mother’s care, further enhancing the salience and weighting of
her priors relative to other stimuli.
Often, the ﬁrst communication and connection with one’s
mother occurs immediately after birth through skin-to-skin
contact. This skin-to-skin contact is recommended because
touch has been shown to help reset neural oscillations and
align them with their parents’ oscillation patterns in their
neocortex particularly the pregenual ACC, all while reducing
overall stress (Takahashi et al., 2011; Wass et al., 2020).
Additionally, comforting touch is believed to provide more
physical and mental relief from stress than self-care and would
contribute to recovering from the distress of birth (Shamay-
Tsoory and Eisenberger, 2021). When combined with other forms
of ostensive cues, aﬀerent stimulation from the skin-to-skin
contact may contribute to biobehavioral synchrony (Carozza and
Leong, 2021). Additionally, the mother’s touch and physical body
can be viewed as a proactive external regulatory mechanism that
shapes the infant’s neurobiological, sensory, emotional, physical,
and social systems in response to contextual cues (Hrdy, 1999).
Increased lateralization, particularly in the left frontal
hemisphere, results in increased maternal warmth, physiological
regulation, and the development of speciﬁc coordinated social
behaviors and bonding (Feldman et al., 2006; Hardin et al.,
2020). The co-homeostasis established in utero is maintained
postnatally through touch, including breastfeeding and skin to
skin contact, which increases sensory oxytocin release in both
mother and infant. Additionally, a caregiver’s touch frequently
induces a state of calm alertness, which frequently signals to the
infant that the caregiver is attempting to communicate (Harrison
et al., 2000; Carozza and Leong, 2021). When new-born infants
coordinate their limb movements to the rhythm of the adult’s
speech, this intention to communicate is reciprocated (Condon
and Sander, 1974). A strong bond between parent and child
will amplify the parasympathetic response to aﬀectionate touch
(Aguirre et al., 2019).
Touch and Exploration aid in Establishing
a Reference for Homeostasis
We frequently rely on touch to investigate, conﬁrm, and
discriminate stimuli in complex or unfamiliar environments
rather than initiate communication. This is done to amass more
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 6
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
precise sensory evidence and establish reference values and priors
for various homeostatic mechanisms to enable regulation in
the future. These baseline references are frequently established
during childhood. Creating a prior of this sort enables users to
prioritize speciﬁc data to improve prediction, increase synchrony,
and reaﬃrm their priors through homeostasis. This can be
observed as early as 8–10 weeks gestation, when a fetus begins
to use their ﬁngers to touch their lips and face, coinciding with
the development of sensory nerves to that area, to explore the
boundary between newly innervated and non-innervated areas of
the womb (Piontelli, 2010). This (epistemic) exploration enables
the fetus to become acquainted with and attuned to the statistical
regularities of the environment to reliably deduce and optimize
future actions to minimize expected surprise (i.e., uncertainty)
and thereby maintain homeostasis (Friston et al., 2015). When
we use touch to explore the external environment, it assists us in
developing and establishing a baseline from which we can then
develop our beliefs (and evaluate surprise or prediction errors
in terms of deviations from baselines or prior beliefs). It is not
surprising that touch has been suggested to be the ﬁrst sense to
develop in utero (Gottlieb, 1971).
Through exploration, the inherent need and desire for
communication and diﬀerentiation between self and others can
also be seen by prioritizing relevant sensory information for
communication. All of these examples demonstrate the critical
role of touch in comprehending and establishing a foundation
for communication and a general understanding of oneself
in relation to regulating homeostasis to their current external
environment. By allowing for a shared experience with another
and diﬀerentiating between self and others, self-awareness can
be considered a precondition for developing synchrony. Even
at 14 weeks gestation, twins can direct movements toward
their co-twin in an attempt to communicate and co-regulate
basic homeostatic needs in a self-organized manner through
perception as action (Noë, 2004; Castiello et al., 2010).
The Importance of Touch in Activating
the Reward Pathways in Synchronous
Interpersonal Relationships
Humans are distinct from many other species that reproduce,
because human social interactions are not solely for practical
development (feeding or protection) but to establish a social
relationship to complete the self-fulﬁlling prophecy that
everyone is alikeósometimes discussed in terms of social niche
construction (Creanza and Feldman, 2014; Constant et al., 2019;
Veissiere et al., 2019). Every 2–4 min, caregivers will instinctively
copy and imitate up to 20% of the facial expressions of young
infants, and infants will also physically copy their parents
creating a degree of synchrony (Ray and Heyes, 2011; Slaughter,
2021). At six months of age, it is suggested that infants follow
their partner’s gaze based on the promise, reward, and prediction
that future stimulus of interest or social attention will occur
in that direction, further suggesting the embedded desire to
synchronize (Szufnarowska et al., 2014; Siposova et al., 2018). If
the other party is interested and attuned, the individual is viewed
as a valuable source of sensory information (that will resolve
uncertainty), which helps the individual develop a sense of social
understanding and connection to others; this is seen why infants
are only satisﬁed when their partner matches their emotions
(Liszkowski et al., 2004). Moreover, the new social connection
and feeling understood reinforced by touch is seen as rewarding
as it initiates the repetitive release of the endogenous peptides
oxytocin and dopamine, as evidenced by research on skin to skin
contact (Feldman, 2012; Seehausen et al., 2012).
The reward system is partly regulated by frontostriatal
circuits, which respond to and connect reward, passion, and
intention. The sophisticated higher-order cognitive processes
needed to create human attachments comprises of frontostriatal
connections in the reward system exerting top-down control over
the qualities of trust, empathy, and commitment necessary to
assign reward to developing and maintaining relationships (Pauli
et al., 2016; Feldman, 2017). In romantic couples there is an
increase in availability of u-opioid receptors in the reward centers
because of touch (Nummenmaa et al., 2016). While ostensive
cues such as touch are necessary for initiating communication,
they would be deemed irrelevant in establishing a connection and
alliance without the attention and intent embodied in the cue. In
active inference, rewards are cast as prior preferences such that
not securing a reward is surprising and therefore something to
be avoided. On this view, uncertainty is inherently aversive in
the sense it suggests a lack of precise beliefs about what to do
and whether the outcome will be preferred. Indeed, empirical
evidence suggests that dopamine reﬂects the degree of conﬁdence
in plans that lead to rewarding outcomesóor not (Friston et al.,
2014; Schwartenbeck et al., 2015).
Babies are content with their communication partner only
when their partner shares their intentions (Grewen et al., 2005).
Otherwise, they become dissatisﬁed and cry when they do not
receive an emotional response that matches theirs (Liszkowski
et al., 2004; Carpenter and Call, 2013). This reﬂects AI in that
the brain ﬁlters sensory information selectively to ensure that
it corresponds to the individual’s priors, avoiding sensory input
that does not match to try to avoid and correct prediction
errors from unexpected cues (Pezzulo et al., 2015). Additionally,
with repeated unsuccessful communications, the source could be
deemed imprecise in collecting sensory evidence to support their
speciﬁc existing prior, as well as predicting future encounters
would be highly costly in regards to free energy causing the
infant to be motivated to seek alternative sources minimizing
unexpected cues (Fonagy and Allison, 2014; Friston and Frith,
2015a; Vasil et al., 2020).
With proximity to caregivers, the infant is motivated to
regulate allostatic control, promoting growth and physiological,
neuropsychological, and behavioral development (McGlone et al.,
2017). The sudden dissatisfaction and decision to ignore them
can be interpreted as a rapid error correction mechanism
designed to halt unexpected stimulus and avoid repeating
this failed interaction and ensuing uncertainty. By minimizing
prediction errors and biophysical surprises, the individual
creates a self-fulﬁlling prophecy consisting of action-perception
cycles which maximizes the evidence for their own personal
inner or generative model of the world they live in Vasil
et al. (2020)ósomething that is sometimes referred to as
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 7
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
self evidencing (Hohwy, 2016). This increased brain–brain
synchrony and decreased (expected) surprise will stimulate the
reward pathways in the limbic system, responsible for the design,
and regulation of critical survival and motivational processes,
thereby promoting a more enjoyable (i.e., predictable) social life
(Sokolowski and Corbin, 2012).
The Role of Touch in Overcoming
Uncertainty, Increase Saliency and
Inferring Hidden Thought
To synchronize and overcome uncertainty, we frequently rely on
and employ speciﬁc perceptual and ostensive cues such as gaze,
touch, and facial expressions to elicit an individual’s attention
to communicate with them and establish new interpersonal
connections (Vasil et al., 2020). A gentle caregiving stroking
motion activates the CT ﬁbers which is believed to contribute
to the modulation of an individual’s silhouette and more
speciﬁcally the face, thus helping self-other diﬀerentiation,
whilst also increasing subjective self recognition and motivation
for cooperative communication (Panagiotopoulou et al., 2017;
Della Longa et al., 2019). This is believed to be responsible
for 4-month-old infants recognizing faces even when they
are not looking directly at the face. This capability was
previously absent compared to other forms of touch (Della
Longa et al., 2019). Additionally, young children can infer that
their partner attempts to communicate with them when they
receive ostensive looks. This observation implies that gentle
touch facilitates the initiation, mediation, and consolidation
of social processing and alleviates anxiety (Brauer et al.,
2016). Another example is mothers touching their infants
for 65% of their ﬁrst year of life, eﬀectively bombarding
them with sensory evidence. This will aid in regulating
allostasis via interoceptive AI by invoking speciﬁc hierarchical
precision weighted predictions and prediction errors to achieve
homeostasis (Stack and Muir, 1990; Mateus et al., 2021).
Observing touch or experiencing precise tactile behaviors assists
individuals in accurately identifying another’s emotional state
including anger, love, sympathy, fear and gratitude with up to
83% accuracy, thus increasing the beneﬁt of touch including
analgesia (Hertenstein, 2002; Hertenstein et al., 2006b; Goldstein
et al., 2016). Moreover, reduced pain has been recorded when
one feels they have been understood by another, a phenomenon
arguably modulated by activity within the reward system and
the cingulate cortex (Eisenberger, 2012; Oishi et al., 2013;
Jensen et al., 2014). At three months, infants begin to respond
to their mothers’ aﬀectionate touch, gradually developing the
ability to conduct intentional aﬀectionate touch themselves
(Feldman and Eidelman, 2004).
Additionally, touch improves accuracy in inferring other
hidden states, lowering the prediction error required to maintain
homeostasis and predict behaviors, frequently resulting in
synchrony and increased (joint) attention. Constant stimulation
eﬀectively bombards them with sensory evidence, assisting in
regulating allostasis and fostering a strong bond. Infants rely
on caregivers to assist them in achieving homeostasis through
interoceptive AI, which involves evoking and creating speciﬁc
hierarchical precision weighted predictions and prediction
errors (Stack and Muir, 1990; Mateus et al., 2021). In this
setting, precision scores the predictability of predictions and
prediction errors, with increased precision weighting of belief
updating under a shared narrative encourages (mutual) epistemic
trust that may contribute to the development of the TA
(Fonagy and Allison, 2014).
When we experience something for the ﬁrst time it is
often natural for us to explore the environment physically,
as evolutionarily touch is the ﬁrst sense to develop and
therefore the primary contact point to the external world
(Ciaunica, 2017; Ciaunica and Crucianelli, 2019). Moreover,
it has been suggested that touch is considered fundamental
in mediating and developing perceptual experiences in both
interceptive and exteroceptive natures, to our self-embodiment
and ownership within the external world we live in, in order
for us to develop priors of the world around us (Gallace
and Spence, 2010; Ratcliﬀe, 2013; Ciaunica and Crucianelli,
2019). We frequently initiate, mediate, and solidify social
processing through physical touch, thereby alleviating social
anxiety. This is especially true when confronted with more
complex or unfamiliar policies; we instinctively seek additional
sensory information to alleviate uncertainty, frequently touching
objects to conﬁrm their authenticity. Additionally, by acquiring
additional information, we increase the likelihood of the
preferred stimuli occurring and our sensitivity to it. This
is demonstrated when newborns instinctively reach out to
seek their mother’s breast (breast crawling), thereby increasing
opportunities for social communication and the development
of social priors while reducing uncertainty and minimizing
expected surprise. Subsequently, the infant will beneﬁt from the
critical action of acquiring necessary nutrients and maintaining
homeostasis (Uvnäs-Moberg et al., 2015).
The Role of Touch in Overcoming Uncertainty
Through Creating Safety
A secure attachment to an individual is thought to develop due to
prolonged skin-to-skin contact between mother and child; one
good example is breastfeeding. Additionally, the fundamental
need to feed to manage an infant’s homeostatic needs emphasizes
the relationship’s importance. One could argue that the sense of
security stems from the knowledge that the infants’ homeostatic
requirements will be met (Bystrova et al., 2007). Touch is
frequently used to regulate and alleviate stress by activating the
neural networks associated with stress and lowering cortisol levels
and increasing hippocampus cell development (Miles et al., 2006;
Coan et al., 2013). When combined with periods of touch, a
positive relationship frequently reduces both the heart rate and
level of anxiety of the individual.
The Role of Touch in Empathy
While there is debate over the exact deﬁnition of empathy, it
has been described as understanding others states by activating
the individuals own personal, neural, or mental representations
of the same state and communicating it to them (Fan et al.,
2011; De Waal and Preston, 2017; Schaefer et al., 2021).
A recent theory explaining the shared representations of
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 8
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
perception and the subsequent motor action behavior proposes
a perception-action model of empathy, which builds on the
suggested involvement of a person and goal-speciﬁc bottom-
up overlap between motor and aﬀective representations of self
and other. Arguably, this may contribute to understanding
others through empathy and embodiment (Preston, 2007;
De Waal and Preston, 2017; Rizzolatti and Caruana, 2017;
Schaefer et al., 2021).
Moreover, it can also be expanded to explain the distributed
representations developed through the observers’ previous
memories, priors and connotations for the target and situation
creating variations to the degree individuals empathize with
others (Preston, 2007; Preston and Hofelich, 2012; De Waal
and Preston, 2017). Additionally, touch and tactile acuity have
been recently found to directly contribute to the feelings of
sympathy for others and activate the somatosensory cortices most
likely via the insula, thus suggesting a contribution to accurately
deﬁning our own emotions and mental states aswell as others
(Schaefer et al., 2021). Moreover, empathy proposes that the
person care about the other individual and wants to help which is
often reinforced and exempliﬁed with physical touch. Individuals
with empathic tendencies have been suggested to contribute to
good therapeutic alliances and beneﬁcial treatment outcomes
(Goldstein et al., 2016, 2018).
Empathy can be considered the motivation behind the
prosocial response of comforting touch (Romero et al., 2010).
Empathy as an emotion is a way of relating to the environment
and sharing feelings and higher-order concerns with another
to regulate them (Frijda and Mesquita, 1994). Empathy has
even been shown to predict the amount of analgesia one can
experience from touch when the sensory aspects of the pain
matrix are activated (Goldstein et al., 2016). Indeed, the activation
of similar neural networks during observation, particularly in
the pain-neomatrix and related motivational regions of the
anterior mid-cingulate cortex and anterior insula, when directly
experiencing the situation to observing a similar situation
suggests we are able to understand and share others’ emotions
by partially processing them within our own emotional systems
(Jackson et al., 2005; Vogt, 2005; Kilner et al., 2007; Friston et al.,
2011; Lamm et al., 2015).
The same neural activation in the inferior parietal lobe and
IFG was found in both the target and empathizer on hand-
holding during the perception of noxious stimulus suggesting
that the IPL facilitates the shared experience to both parties
(De Waal and Preston, 2017; Korisky et al., 2020). Moreover,
the involvement of the IPL has also been suggested as play an
important role in the mechanism to infer another’s intentions
and thoughts based on one’s observations, which may allow us
to reevaluate the adverse stimulus to create an analgesic eﬀect
(Kilner et al., 2007; von Mohr et al., 2018). Furthermore, the more
empathetic an individual is to another the higher the degree of
brain-to-brain synchrony (Reddan et al., 2020). This is reﬂected
in the higher the clinicians’ precision at inferring a patient’s
pain level, the more positive analgesic eﬀect the patient receives
from the treatment possible due to the synchrony involved in
adaptive empathic touch (Ellingsen et al., 2020; Shamay-Tsoory
and Eisenberger, 2021).
Through social coordination, the increased physical
multimodal sensory nature of touch on a common threat
result in increased bonding and activation of the ACC.
Increased ACC activation has strong links to the amygdala
and increases motivation and reward pathways in the ventral
striatum reinforcing why gentle touch is commonly selected to
express empathy (Barrett and Fleming, 2011). Thus, empathy
in conjunction with touch can aid in forming synchrony and
coupling, as demonstrated by the alpha-mu band, which is also
involved in pain perception and empathy, particularly in the
frontocentral regions (Morelli et al., 2014). Moreover, comforting
touch including hand holding can decrease the activity in the
pain regions such as the dorsal ACC and anterior insula resulting
in an analgesic eﬀect (López-Solà et al., 2019; Shamay-Tsoory and
Eisenberger, 2021). Hand holding also increases the association
between the pain network, somatosensory cortices, and the
default mode network (López-Solà et al., 2019). Empathy has also
been linked to an individual’s degree of parent-infant synchrony
earlier in life (Feldman and Friston, 2010).
Repetition as a Tool to Overcome Uncertainty
Physical repetition can further enhance saliency, precision, and
synchrony. The Nso culture, based in rural Bamenda grass
ﬁelds in Cameroon, primarily communicates with their infants
through proximal parenting, emphasizing empathic body contact
and synchronized rhythmic rocking (Kartner et al., 2010). This
physical parenting method promotes self-awareness, compliance,
and the development of priors, resulting in a more symbiotic
relationship (Keller et al., 2004, 2005). As the bond becomes more
familiar and predictable, the corticostriatal connectivity within
the striatum shifts from ventral to the dorsal striatum (Tops and
Boksem, 2012). Increased awareness of a preceding or stimulating
event is frequently regarded as necessary for synchrony and
shared experience. Increased attention to the stimulus facilitates
future activation of the prior.
Manzotti et al. (2019) demonstrated that dynamic stroking
bilaterally activates the CT ﬁbers and posterior insular cortex
in mothers and infants, assisting individuals in developing the
ability to regulate, synchronize, and anticipate/prefer speciﬁc
sensory stimuli. The repetition aids in enhancing saliency,
precision, synchrony, and coupling in the appropriate temporal
lobe. Individuals develop an expectation and preference for
speciﬁc communicative cues or movements due to repeated
exposure, resulting in embedded automatic priors, learned
prediction errors, and future policies (Romberg and Saﬀran,
2010; Friston and Frith, 2015b). Additionally, the coupled
action-perception cycle increases more precise policy mappings,
frequently originating from social behaviors and initiating a
downward modulation via automatic policies. By developing
these automatic policies via behavioral and neural synchrony,
the brain can become more eﬃcient at maintaining homeostasis
(i.e., avoiding surprises) while avoiding (computationally and
metabolically) costly changes to beliefs. The brain assumes it
has chosen the correct policy to regulate allostasis (Constant
et al., 2018; Koban et al., 2019). Conﬁrming their priors more
rapidly results in a more prominent response to achieving
homeostasis, as evidenced by changes in heart rate and anxiety
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 9
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
(Smith et al., 2014). Touch can be used as an ostensive cue
through repeated imitation of facial expressions by a mother,
which results in the infant making the expression over 500% more
often. As a result, it is reasonable to expect a similar response in
other situations that involve repeated aﬀection touch.
Adaption of Priors to Achieve Synchrony
Individuals develop similaróbut not identicalópolicies
due to learning and continually updating their actions via
communicative coupling with the mental states of others. This
phenomenon is demonstrated by Bannard et al. (2009), who
found that when two 3-year-old infants communicate, the
utterances and grammar imputed between the two individuals
are reﬂected at a rate of 59 and 63%, respectively. Everyone’s
neuronal dynamics are chaotically coupled by inferring the
others’ hidden mental states, resulting in a bidirectional ﬂow
of sensory information synchronizing with their prior beliefs.
This process gradually increases the expectation, attention, and
evidence accumulation that underwrite belief updating in the
brainóand the implicit revision of prior beliefs and conceptual
or generative world models (Vasil et al., 2020). The canonical
loop of coupled action-perception cycles is the process by
which dyads generate and modify cycles until they achieve the
end goal of aligning their mental states and communicative
exchanges (Friston and Frith, 2015a). It is a deliberate process
of creating action and perception loops that reliably connect
the two members of the dyad until they become entwined
via a shared interpretation of their exchanges; i.e., a shared
narrative or simply, “singing from the same hymn sheet.” This
can be explained by AI as a simple consequence of trying
to make the world more predictable; namely, less surprising
(Friston et al., 2015).
Adaptation to Experts Based on
Hierarchical Structure
Infants frequently communicate hierarchically, relying on
and basing social interactions on the sensory information
provided by older individuals deemed reliable sources of
sensory information with fewer, more precise prediction errors
and more experienced priors. Due to their inexperience and
lack of prior knowledge, infants rely heavily on sensory
information such as touch to form and solidify their developing
beliefs through an “interrogative motivation” based on the
premise that everyone is the same (Karmali et al., 2018).
Infants constantly create situations where they can request
additional information, for example, by pointing to resolve
their uncertainty and gather additional information to solidify
potential beliefs, thereby activating their subcortical reward
centers (Lucca and Wilbourn, 2018).
Asymmetric entrainment is the process of adapting existing
priors to someone else’s more precise and reliable priors
around a particular niche to synchronize (Brownell, 2011). They
then reduce their concerns, free energy, and uncertainty while
increasing sensory information to conﬁrm or adapt their pre-
existing priors to more likely precise priors, frequently those
of their caregivers and mentors (Friston and Frith, 2015b).
By adapting their current prior beliefs to align with those of
an experienced adult, they can raise the precision weighting,
reliance, expectation, and information ﬂow associated with their
prediction errors to the same level as their partner, resulting in
symmetrical coupling and synchronization (Moran et al., 2013;
Hasson and Frith, 2016). Adults’ increased precision-weighting
will result in symmetric coupling, causing a shift in their priors
and low conﬁdence in their top-down beliefs, as well as aiding in
the dismissal of alternative prior explanations, conﬁrming their
self-fulﬁlling prophecy (Powers et al., 2016). As a result of this
new sensory input, their previous prior policies will be enhanced
and selected with greater precision or conﬁdence in the future
(Kemp et al., 2007).
With age, the infant develops a more precise inner
interoceptive model of the world, which is enhanced when
combined with touch. Physical touch is critical for an infant’s self-
regulation development or homeostasis possibly due to increased
ability for emotional regulation through the increased activation
in the prefrontal cortex (Shamay-Tsoory and Eisenberger, 2021).
As a result of the interoceptive prediction errors generated by
the pre-frontal cortex, priors will be updated in a multimodal
homeostatic manner, satisfying multiple skeletal motor reﬂex arcs
(Smith et al., 2014).
This is demonstrated by cardiac function and heart rate
synchrony, which activate the somatosensory cortex and insula,
reﬂecting interoceptive inference about bodily states. The
somatosensory system is involved in cognitive maturation and
is within the mirror neuron system, which is required for
individual synchrony and social coordination. This underwrites
interoceptive and aﬀective inference under a hierarchical
generative model that has to generate predictions of bodily
sensations (Seth, 2013; Gu and FitzGerald, 2014; Smith et al.,
2014; Pezzulo et al., 2015; Fotopoulou and Tsakiris, 2017;
Allen et al., 2019). Heart rate variability is an example of
allostatic regulation. When an infant reaches 9 months of
age and can comprehend intersubjectivity, a shift occurs from
infant-led mother follow synchrony to an increasingly brief
mutual moment to moment approach with both responding
to the other (Feldman, 2007). While they may temporarily
increase their HRV to reduce predictive error, they will
quickly revert to their developed baseline reference (Suga
et al., 2019). The ﬂuctuations in physiological synchrony from
moment to moment are unsurprising, as it is an active process
primarily activated via touch. The levels ﬂuctuate in response
to external stimuli such as priors, mood, and stimulation,
with research indicating that social understanding occurs via
communication intent. Multiple internal mechanisms facilitate
this process, with the brain discarding sensory input that
does not correlate with its internal model to forecast the
current state. Additionally, it reﬂects the homeostasis and
changes in the reliability of sensory information and the
inﬂuence on prediction errors, attend weighting associated
with the context and existing priors (Feldman and Friston,
2010). This is seen in the brain-to-brain synchrony between
teachers and students, which was higher when increased
joint attention through face-to-face interactions, gaze, ostensive
cues, physical gestures or activities, as they become more
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 10
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
FIGURE 1 |An overview of the effects of touch and therapeutic alliance on the different networks of the brain.
in tune with their surroundings compared to a traditional
lecture environment.
MECHANISMS INCREASING SALIENCY
WITHIN SYNCHRONY
Repetitive stimulation of the CT aﬀerents in touch increases
the number of oxytocin receptors and results in the release of
endogenous peptides with tighter crosslinks such as dopamine,
oxytocin, and opioids; all while regulating and synchronizing
the autonomic system (Löken et al., 2009; Ackerley et al., 2014;
Pawling et al., 2017). The more compact crosslinks aid in the
memory of the relationship and context-speciﬁc patterns that
stimulate a prior. Moreover, multimodal sensory stimulation
including tactile may aid in the increase of cortical oxytocin
levels through its involvement in the experience-dependent
development of social cortices in addressing conditions with
reduced social interaction, potentially increasing trust, empathy
and face memory (Green and Hollander, 2010; Y amasue et al.,
2012; Zheng et al., 2014). The oxytocinergic projections from the
paraventricular nucleus regulate regions of the brain involved
in social responsiveness, social recognition, increased bonding,
pain and stress reduction (Kumsta and Heinrichs, 2013; Uvnäs-
Moberg et al., 2015; Carozza and Leong, 2021). Moreover,
increased oxytocin levels are associated with a reduction in neural
activation in the anterior insular and increased activation in
the prefrontal cortex further contributing to the reduction in
unpleasantness (Kreuder et al., 2019). Additionally, the oxytocin
pulses released during skin-to-skin contact or breastfeeding are
longer lasting than those released during labor, which is a more
intense but brief extreme event. As a result, it demonstrates
that the brain prioritized the previously desired connection
and regulation of allostasis following an intense emotional
connection. It is also reﬂected in the frequent and cherished long-
term relationships that develop between close friends, lovers, and
family members due to shared experiences, habits, and trust (see
Figure 1 for an illustration of the neurobiology underpinning
our model). Moreover, the role of a practitioner to help regulate
the patient’s allostasis, increasing connection and trust that
have been suggested to be signiﬁcant components of increasing
and developing brain-to-brain synchrony, also overlap with the
components of a beneﬁcial TA.
The restructuring of neural pathways involved in choice and
behavior is aﬀected by the interaction of oxytocin and dopamine
in the striatum, which provides the substructure for bonding,
especially when motivation and intention are present (Kim et al.,
2014; Feldman, 2017). This can be translated over time to provide
a habituated drive toward elevated oxytocinergic levels, aﬀecting
how infants communicate with others. This is demonstrated
in depressed mothers, who produce less oxytocin, milk, and
face-to-face interactions with their children. Additionally, there
is a greater risk of the child developing social insecurities
later in life. This is demonstrated by the termination of the
alpha response in the posterior superior temporal sulcus, which
results in the cessation of top-down processing necessary for
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 11
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
FIGURE 2 |Therapeutic alliance as active inference. (A) Opportunity to build a synchronous relationship and understanding of the injury. (B) Opportunity to show
empathy to reduce anxiety and fears. (C) Working together to create a therapeutic alliance for recovery.(D) Regulating disrupted allostasis. (E) Joint attention to
regulate allostasis and support recovery. (F) Injury and pain—“what have I done?” (G) Fears of what the injury will become. (H) Anxiety over the injury. (I) The hope of
collaborative communication to understand and create a treatment and management plan. (J) Previous priors surrounding the injury including injury beliefs, social
expectations, family and injury history.
empathic resonance, and by decreased glucocorticoid receptor
density and neurogenesis in the hippocampus, which correlates
with decreased empathy (Jones et al., 1997; Heim et al., 2004;
Stuebe et al., 2013; Pratt et al., 2017). However, through
massage type stroking an increased glucocorticoid receptors
and reduced methylation in the hippocampus that regulates
insulin like growth hormone is found (Baldini et al., 2013;
Murgatroyd et al., 2015).
We can speculate through AI that the context in which an
infant develops their ﬁrst priors will inﬂuence their subsequent
actions and high-level actions later in life as they acquire the
deontic value of policies (Ainsworth et al., 1978; Ramstead
et al., 2016). This is in addition to the pulsating nature
of oxytocin release during attachment, which appears to be
established during infancy. All subsequent attachments will
be organized into dyad-speciﬁc temporal rhythms based on
their prior attachment experiences during their youth to
permanently embed them (Feldman, 2017; Shimon-Raz et al.,
2021). This can be seen in prairie voles, where the density of
oxytocin receptors predicts the amount of time spent huddling
with their partner and grieving over their mate later in life
(Bosch et al., 2016). Additionally, it suggests that elevated
oxytocinergic levels in childhood will inﬂuence communication
mechanisms and preferences later in life, reiterating the critical
role of aﬀectionate touch, particularly on infants, in developing
cooperative communication and synchrony.
CONCLUSION
We have proposed a framework in this article to explain
the critical role of touch in developing therapeutic alliances
and synchrony in general ( Figure 2 ). Touch appears to be
critical in initiating, developing, and enhancing the salience
of synchronous relationships. This framework is based on
active inference and encompasses an integrative hierarchical
framework that promotes synchrony and the therapeutic
alliance to engender allostasis. While it has long been
recognized that touch and skin contact have therapeutic
beneﬁts for patients and individuals, much less research
has been conducted on the bidirectional role of touch. This
generic model explains how touch can be used to infer
and predict others’ states of mind, which are crucial for
developing dyadic and triadic relationships in general and
in a clinical setting. However, it is important to note that
there is a particular emphasis on perinatal and pediatric
care, due to its focus on the role of touch and developing
synchrony. Additionally, by inferring individuals more
precisely, we can help create more adaptive feedback loops
that minimize surprise, increase understanding, and reduce
physical and psychological stress, all of which are crucial
for daily survival. The ensuing model considers how touch
can strengthen and tighten neurobiological and social bonds
to achieve a synchronous relationship and a more eﬀective
therapeutic alliance.
Future research will contribute to solidifying the potentially
broad bidirectional neurobiological coupling implied by the
role of touch between two individuals. Additionally, it may
assist in validating each of the predictive steps involved in the
dynamic interaction between practitioner and patient, thereby
advancing the therapeutic alliance critical to treatment success.
Additionally, establishing the role of touch paves the way
for explaining the complex and dynamic interactions that
occur in touch-based therapies. Additionally, it will aid in the
development of an understanding of the barriers encountered
during interactions with patients who are cognitively incapable
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 12
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
of updating their priors and the factors that may or may not be
inﬂuenced by comforting touch.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
ZM wrote the ﬁrst draft of the manuscript. All authors
contributed to the conception and revision of the manuscript and
approved and are accountable for the submitted manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Andrea Bacceli for his help in realizing
the ﬁgures, and members from the Active Inference
Research Group for their productive feedback on the
framework; namely, Boris Gaspar, Danny Giraud, David
Hohenschurz-Schmidt, Hilary Abbey, Lucas Bohlen,
Robert Shaw, Sanja Maretic, Sergi Casals-Gutiérrez,
and Tristan Delion.
REFERENCES
Ackerley, R., Backlund Wasling, H., Liljencrantz, J., Olausson, H., Johnson, R. D.,
and Wessberg, J. (2014). Human C-tactile aﬀerents are tuned to the temperature
of a skin-stroking caress. J. Neurosci. 34, 2879–2883. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
2847-13.2014
Aguirre, M., Couderc, A., Epinat-Duclos, J., and Mascaro, O. (2019). Infants
discriminate the source of social touch at stroking speeds eliciting maximal
ﬁring rates in CT-ﬁbers. Dev. Cogn. Neurosci. 36:100639. doi: 10.1016/j.dcn.
2019.100639
Ainsworth, M. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., and Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of
Attachment: A Psychological Study of the Strange Situation . Oxford: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Akers, K. G., Y ang, Z., DelVecchio, D. P., Reeb, B. C., Romeo, R. D., McEwen, B. S.,
et al. (2008). Social competitiveness and plasticity of neuroendocrine function
in old age: inﬂuence of neonatal novelty exposure and maternal care reliability.
PLoS one 3:e2840. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.000284
Allen, M., Levy, A., Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2019). In the body’s eye: the
computational anatomy of interoceptive inference. BioRxiv [Preprint] doi: 10.
1101/603928
Attias, H. (2003). “Planning by probabilistic inference, ” in Proceedings 9th
International Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, Vol. 4, Key West,
FL, 9–16.
Atzil, S., Hendler, T., and Feldman, R. (2011). Specifying the neurobiological
basis of human attachment: brain, hormones,and behavior in synchronous and
intrusive mothers. Neuropsychopharmacology 36, 2603–2615. doi: 10.1038/npp.
2011.172
Atzil, S., Hendler, T., and Feldman, R. (2014). The brain basis of social synchrony.
Soc. Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 9, 1193–1202. doi: 10.1093/scan/nst105
Aureli, T., and Presaghi, F. (2010). Developmental trajectories for mother–infant
coregulation in the second year of life.Infancy 15, 557–585. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-
7078.2010.00034.x
Babatunde, F., MacDermid, J., and MacIntyre, N. (2017). Characteristics of
therapeutic alliance in musculoskeletal physiotherapy and occupational therapy
practice: a scoping review of the literature. BMC Health Serv. Res. 17:375.
doi: 10.1186/s12913-017-2311-3
Badcock, P. B., Friston, K. J., Ramstead, M. J. D., Ploeger, A., and Hohwy, J.
(2019). The hierarchically mechanistic mind: an evolutionary systems theory
of the human brain, cognition, and behavior. Cogn. Aﬀect. Behav. Neurosci. 19,
1319–1351. doi: 10.3758/s13415-019-00721-3
Baldini, S., Restani, L., Baroncelli, L., Coltelli, M., Franco, R., Cenni, M. C., et al.
(2013). Enriched early life experiences reduce adult anxiety-like behavior in
rats: a role for insulin-like growth factor 1. J. Neurosci. 33, 11715–11723. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3541-12.2013
Bannard, C., Lieven, E., and Tomasello, M. (2009). Modeling children’s early
grammatical knowledge. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 17284–17289. doi:
10.1073/pnas.090563810
Barrett, J., and Fleming, A. S. (2011). Annual research review: all mothers are not
created equal: neural and psychobiological perspectives on mothering and the
importance of individual diﬀerences. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 52, 368–397.
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7610.2010.02306
Barrett, L. F. (2017). The theory of constructed emotion: an active inference
account of interoception and categorization. Soc. Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 12,
1–23. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsw154
Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., and Hamilton, P. (2016). An active inference theory of
allostasis and interoception in depression. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 371:20160011.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0011
Beebe, B., Myers, M. M., Lee, S. H., Lange, A., Ewing, J., Rubinchik, N., et al. (2018).
Family nurture intervention for preterm infants facilitates positive mother-
infant face-to-face engagement at 4 months. Dev. Psychol. 54, 2016–2031. doi:
10.1037/dev0000557
Begus, K., Gliga, T., and Southgate, V. (2016). Infants’ preferences for native
speakers are associated with an expectation of information. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 113, 12397–12402. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1603261113
Behrens, T. E., Hunt, L. T., Woolrich, M. W., and Rushworth, M. F. (2008).
Associative learning of social value. Nature 456, 245–249.
Benoit, D. (2004). Infant-parent attachment: deﬁnition, types, antecedents,
measurement and outcome. Paediatr. Child Health 9, 541–545. doi: 10.1093/
pch/9.8.541
Binder, J. R., and Desai, R. H. (2011). The neurobiology of semantic memory.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 527–536. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2011.10.001
Björnsdotter, M., Morrison, I., and Olausson, H. (2010). Feeling good: on the
role of C ﬁber mediated touch in interoception. Exp. Brain Res. 207, 149–155.
doi: 10.1007/s00221-010-2408-y
Bordin, E. S. (1979). The generalizability of the psychoanalytic concept of the
working alliance. Psychother. Theory Res. Pract. 16, 252–260. doi: 10.1037/
h0085885
Bosch, O. J., Dabrowska, J., Modi, M. E., Johnson, Z. V., Keebaugh, A. C., Barrett,
C. E., et al. (2016). Oxytocin in the nucleus accumbens shell reverses CRFR2-
evoked passive stress-coping after partner loss in monogamous male prairie
voles. Psychoneuroendocrinology 64, 66–78. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2015.11.
011
Botvinick, M., and Toussaint, M. (2012). Planning as inference. Trends Cogn. Sci.
16, 485–488.
Brauer, J., Xiao, Y., Poulain, T., Friederici, A. D., and Schirmer, A. (2016).
Frequency of maternal touch predicts resting activity and connectivity of the
developing social brain. Cereb. Cortex 26, 3544–3552. doi: 10.1093/cercor/
bhw137
Brownell, C. A. (2011). Early developments in joint action. Rev. Philos. Psychol. 2,
193–211. doi: 10.1007/s13164-011-0056-1
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., and Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not
a scientist: the free-energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective.
Synthese 195, 2417–2444. doi: 10.1007/s11229-016-1239-1
Bystrova, K., Widström, A.-M., Matthiesen, A.-S., Ransjö-Arvidson, A.-B., Welles-
Nyström, B., Wassberg, C., et al. (2007). Skin-to-skin contact may reduce
negative consequences of “the stress of being born”: a study on temperature
in newborn infants, subjected to diﬀerent ward routines in St. Petersburg. Acta
Paediatr. 92, 320–326. doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2003.tb00553.x
Carozza, S., and Leong, V. (2021). The role of aﬀectionate caregiver touch in early
neurodevelopment and parent-infant interactional synchrony. Front. Neurosci.
14:613378. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.613378
Carpenter, M., and Call, J. (2013). “How joint is the joint attention of apes and
human infants?, ” in Agency and Joint Attention , eds J. Metcalfe and H. S.
Terrence (New York, NY: Oxford University Press), 49–61. doi: 10.1093/acprof:
oso/9780199988341.003.0003
Castiello, U., Becchio, C., Zoia, S., Nelini, C., Sartori, L., Blason, L., et al. (2010).
Wired to be social: the ontogeny of human interaction. PLoS one 5:e13199.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013199
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 13
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
Ciaunica, A. (2017). The ‘Meeting of Bodies’: empathy and basic forms of shared
experiences. Topi 32, 185–195.
Ciaunica, A., and Crucianelli, L. (2019). Minimal self-awareness from within-a
developmental perspective. J. Conscious. Stud. 26, 207–226.
Ciaunica, A., Constant, A., Preissl, H., and Fotopoulou, K. (2021). The ﬁrst prior:
from co-embodiment to co-homeostasis in early life. Conscious Cogn. 91,
103117. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2021.103117
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future
of cognitive science. Behav. Brain Sci. 36, 181–204.
Coan, J. A., and Maresh, E. L. (2014). “Social baseline theory and the social
regulation of emotion, ” in Handbook of Emotion Regulation , ed. J. J. Gross
(New York, NY: The Guilford Press), 221–236.
Coan, J. A., Beckes, L., and Allen, J. P. (2013). Childhood maternal support
and social capital moderate the regulatory impact of social relationships in
adulthood. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 88, 224–231. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2013.04.
006
Condon, W. S., and Sander, L. W. (1974). Neonate movementis synchronized with
adult speech: interactional participation and language acquisition. Science 183,
99–101. doi: 10.1126/science.183.4120.99
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissiere, S. P. L., and Friston, K. (2019). Regimes
of expectations: an active inference model of social conformity and human
decision making. Front. Psychol. 10:679. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00679
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissiere, S. P. L., Campbell, J. O., and Friston,
K. J. (2018). A variational approach to niche construction. J. R. Soc. Interface
15:20170685. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0685
Craig, A. D. (2002). How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiological
condition of the body. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 655–666.
Creanza, N., and Feldman, M. W. (2014). Complexity in models of cultural niche
construction with selection and homophily. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111,
10830–10837. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1400824111
Csibra, G. (2010). Recognizing communicative intentions in infancy. Mind Lang.
25, 141–168. doi: 10.1542/peds.2012-1552
D’Alessandro, G., Cerritelli, F., and Cortelli, P. (2016). Sensitization and
interoception as key neurological concepts in osteopathy and other manual
medicines. Front. Neurosci. 10:100. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00100
De Waal, F., and Preston, S. D. (2017). Mammalian empathy: behavioural
manifestations and neural basis. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 498–509. doi: 10.1038/
nrn.2017.72
Della Longa, L., Gliga, T., and Farroni, T. (2019). Tune to touch: aﬀective touch
enhances learning of face identity in 4-month-oldinfants. Dev. Cogn. Neurosci.
35, 42–46. doi: 10.1016/j.dcn.2017.11.002
Devaine, M., Hollard, G., and Daunizeau, J. (2014). Theory of mind: did evolution
fool us? PLoS One 9:e87619. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087619
Duguid, S., Wyman, E., Bullinger, A. F., Herfurth-Majstorovic, K., and Tomasello,
M. (2014). Coordination strategies of chimpanzees and human children in a
Stag Hunt game. Proc. Biol. Sci. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 281:20141973. doi:
10.1098/rspb.2014.197
Ebner, K., Bosch, O., Krömer, S., SIngewald, N., and Neumann, I. D. (2005). Release
of oxytocin in the rat central amygdala modulates stress-coping behavior and
the release of excitatory amino acids. Neuropsychopharmacology 30, 223–230.
doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300607
Edwards, M. J., Adams, R. A., Brown, H., Parees, I., and Friston, K. J. (2012).
A Bayesian account of ‘hysteria’. Brain 135, 3495–3512. doi: 10.1093/brain/
aws129
Eisenberger, N. I. (2012). The neural bases of social pain: evidence for shared
representations with physical pain. Psychosom. Med. 74, 126–135. doi: 10.1097/
PSY.0b013e3182464dd1
Ellingsen, D. M., Isenburg, K., Jung, C., Lee, J., Gerber, J., Mawla, I., et al. (2020).
Dynamic brain-to-brain concordance and behavioral mirroring as a mechanism
of the patient-clinician interaction. Sci. Adv. 6:eabc1304. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.
abc1304
Fan, Y., Duncan, N. W., de Greck, M., and Northoﬀ, G. (2011). Is there a
core neural network in empathy? An fMRI based quantitative meta-analysis.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 35, 903–911. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2010.10.009
Feldman, H., and Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 4:215. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215
Feldman, R. (2006). From biological rhythms to social rhythms: physiological
precursors of mother–infant synchrony. Dev. Psychol. 42, 175–188.
Feldman, R. (2007). On the origins of background emotions: from aﬀect synchrony
to symbolic expression. Emotion 7, 601–611. doi: 10.1037/1528-3542.7.3.601
Feldman, R. (2012). Oxytocin and social aﬃliation in humans. Horm. Behav. 61,
380–391. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.01.008
Feldman, R. (2015). The adaptive human parental brain: implications for children’s
social development. Trends Neurosci. 38, 387–399. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2015.04.
00
Feldman, R. (2016). The neurobiology of mammalian parenting and the biosocial
context of human caregiving.Horm. Behav.77, 3–17. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2015.
10.001
Feldman, R. (2017). The neurobiology of human attachments.Trends Cogn. Sci. 21,
80–99. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2016.11.007
Feldman, R., and Eidelman, A. I. (2004). Parent–infant synchrony and the social-
emotional development of triplets. Dev. Psychol. 40, 1133–1147. doi: 10.1037/
0012-1649.40.6.1133
Feldman, R., Magori-Cohen, R., Galili, G., Singer, M., and Louzoun, Y. (2011).
Mother and infant coordinate heart rhythms through episodes of interaction
synchrony. Infant Behav. Dev. 34, 569–577. doi: 10.1016/j.infbeh.2011.06.008
Feldman, R., Masalha, S., and Alony, D. (2006). Microregulatory patterns of family
interactions: cultural pathways to toddlers’ self-regulation.J. Family Psychol.20,
614–623. doi: 10.1037/0893-3200.20.4.614
Ferreira, P. H., Ferreira, M. L., Maher, C. G., Refshauge, K. M., Latimer, J., and
Adams, R. D. (2013). The therapeutic alliance between clinicians and patients
predicts outcome in chronic low back pain. Phys. Ther. 93, 470–478. doi: 10.
2522/ptj.20120137
Finset, K., and Ørnes, K. (2017). Empathy in the clinician–patient relationship: the
role of reciprocal adjustments and processes of synchrony. J. Patient Exp. 4,
64–68. doi: 10.1177/2374373517699271
Fonagy, P., and Allison, E. (2014). The role of mentalizing and epistemic trust in
the therapeutic relationship. Psychotherapy 51, 372–380. doi: 10.1037/a0036505
Fotopoulou, A., and Tsakiris, M. (2017). Mentalizing homeostasis: the social origins
of interoceptive inference. Neuropsychoanalysis 19, 3–28.
Frijda, N. H., and Mesquita, B. (1994). “The social roles and functions of emotions, ”
in Emotion and Culture: Empirical Studies of Mutual Inﬂuence, eds S. Kitayama
and H. R. Markus (Washington, D.C: American Psychological Association),
51–87. doi: 10.1037/10152-002.
Friston, K., and Frith, C. (2015a). A duet for one. Conscious. Cogn. 36, 390–405.
doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2014.12.003
Friston, K., and Frith, C. D. (2015b). Active inference, communication and
hermeneutics. Cortex 68, 129–143. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2015.03.025
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., and Pezzulo, G. (2017).
Active inference: a process theory. Neural Comput. 29, 1–49. doi: 10.1162/
NECO_a_00912
Friston, K., Mattout, J., and Kilner, J. (2011). Action understanding and active
inference. Biol. Cybern. 104, 137–160. doi: 10.1007/s00422-011-0424-z
Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., and Pezzulo, G.
(2015). Active inference and epistemic value. Cogn. Neurosci. 6, 187–214.
Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T., Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T., and
Dolan, R. J. (2014). The anatomy of choice: dopamine and decision-making.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 369:1655. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2013.0481
Fuentes, J., Armijo-Olivo, S., Funabashi, M., Miciak, M., Dick, B., Warren, S., et al.
(2014). Enhanced therapeutic alliance modulates pain intensity and muscle pain
sensitivity in patients with chronic low back pain: an experimental controlled
study. Phys. Ther. 94, 477–489. doi: 10.2522/ptj.20130118
Gallace, A., and Spence, C. (2010). The science of interpersonal touch: an overview.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 34, 246–259. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2008.10.004
Gazzola, V., Spezio, M. L., Etzel, J. A., Castelli, F., Adolphs, R., and Keysers,
C. (2012). Primary somatosensory cortex discriminates aﬀective signiﬁcance
in social touch. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109:9688. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1113211109
Goldstein, P. (2017). Interpersonal Coupling During Touch-Related Analgesia .
Haifa: University of Haifa.
Goldstein, P., Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Yellinek, S., and Weissman-Fogel, I. (2016).
Empathy predicts an experimental pain reduction during touch. J. Pain 17,
1049–1057. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2016.06.007
Goldstein, P., Weissman-Fogel, I., Dumas, G., and Shamay-Tsoory, S. G. (2018).
Brain-to-brain coupling during handholding is associated with pain reduction.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115, E2528–E2537. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1703643115
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 14
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
Gottlieb, G. (1971). “Ontogenesis of sensory function in birds and mammals, ” in
The Biopsychology of Development, eds E. Tobach, L. R. Aronson, and E. Shaw
(New York, NY: Academic Press), 67–128.
Green, J. J., and Hollander, E. (2010). Autism and oxytocin: new developments
in translational approaches to therapeutics. Neurotherapeutics 7, 250–257. doi:
10.1016/j.nurt.2010.05.006
Grewen, K. M., Girdler, S. S., Amico, J., and Light, K. C. (2005). Eﬀects of partner
support on resting oxytocin, cortisol, norepinephrine, and blood pressure
before and after warm partner contact. Psychosom. Med. 67, 531–538. doi:
10.1097/01.psy.0000170341.88395.47
Gu, X., and FitzGerald, T. H. (2014). Interoceptive inference: homeostasis and
decision-making. Trends Cogn. Sci. 18, 269–270. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2014.02.001
Hardin, J. S., Jones, N. A., Mize, K. D., and Platt, M. (2020). Parent-training
with kangaroo care impacts infant neurophysiological development & mother-
infant neuroendocrine activity. Infant Behav. Dev. 58:101416. doi: 10.1016/j.
infbeh.2019.101416
Harris, P. L., and Corriveau, K. H. (2011). Young children’s selective trust in
informants. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.366, 1179–1187. doi: 10.1098/
rstb.2010.0321
Harris, P. L., Bartz, D. T., and Rowe, M. L. (2017). Young children communicate
their ignorance and ask questions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, 7884–7891.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1620745114
Harrison, L., Williams, A. K., Berbaum, M. L., Stem, J. T., and Leeper, J. (2000).
Physiologic and behavioral eﬀects of gentle human touch on preterm infants.
Res. Nurs. Health 23, 435–446. doi: 10.1002/1098-240X(200012)23:6 \&lt;435::
AID-NUR3\&gt;3.0.CO;2-P
Harrist, A. W., and Waugh, R. M. (2002). Dyadic synchrony: its structure and
function in children’s development.Dev. Rev. 22, 555–592. doi: 10.1016/S0273-
2297(02)00500-2
Hasson, U., and Frith, C. D. (2016). Mirroring and beyond: coupled dynamics as a
generalized framework for modelling social interactions. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 371:20150366. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2015.0366
Heim, C., Plotsky, P., and Nemeroﬀ, C. (2004). Importance of studying
the contributions of early adverse experience to neurobiological ﬁndings
in depression. Neuropsychopharmacology 29, 641–648. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.
1300397
Hertenstein, M. J. (2002). Touch: its communicative functions in infancy. Hum.
Dev. 45, 70–94. doi: 10.1159/000048154
Hertenstein, M. J., Verkamp, J. K., Kerestes, A. M., and Holmes, R. M. (2006a).
The communicative functions of touch in humnans, nonhuman primates, and
rates: a review and synthesis of the empirical research. Genet. Soc. Gen. Psychol.
Monogr. 132, 5–94. doi: 10.3200/mono.132.1.5-94
Hertenstein, M. J., Keltner, D., App, B., Bulleit, B. A., and Jaskolka, A. R. (2006b).
Touch communicates distinct emotions. Emotion 6:528. doi: 10.1037/1528-
3542.6.3.528
Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 50, 259–285. doi: 10.1111/nous.
12062
Hrdy, S. B. (1999). Mother Nature: A History of Mothers, Infants, and Natural
Selection. New York, NY: Pantheon Books.
Isomura, T., Parr, T., and Friston, K. (2019). Bayesian ﬁltering with multiple
internal models: toward a theory of social intelligence. Neural Comput. 31,
2390–2431. doi: 10.1162/neco_a_01239
Ivanov, P. C., Ma, Q. D., and Bartsch, R. P. (2009). Maternal-fetal heartbeat phase
synchronization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 13641–13642. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.0906987106
Jackson, P. L., Meltzoﬀ, A. N., and Decety, J. (2005). How do we perceive the pain of
others? A window into the neural processes involved in empathy. Neuroimage
24, 771–779. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.09.00
Jensen, K., Vaish, A., and Schmidt, M. F. (2014). The emergence of human
prosociality: aligning with others through feelings, concerns, and norms. Front.
Psychol. 5:822. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00822
Jones, N. A., Field, T., Fox, N. A., Lundy, B., and Davalos, M. (1997). EEG activation
in 1-month-old infants of depressed mothers. Dev. Psychopathol. 9, 491–505.
doi: 10.1017/s0954579497001260
Karmali, F., Whitman, G. T., and Lewis, R. F. (2018). Bayesian optimal adaptation
explains age-related human sensorimotor changes. J. Neurophysiol. 119, 509–
520. doi: 10.1152/jn.00710.2017
Kartner, J., Keller, H., and Yovsi, R. (2010). Mother-infant interaction furing the
ﬁrst 3 months: the emergence of cultural-speciﬁc contingency patterns. Child
Dev. 81, 540–554. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2009.01414.x
Keller, H., Ka¨rtner, J., Borke, J., Yovsi, R., and Kleis, A. (2005). Parenting styles
and the development of the categorical self: a longitudinal study on mirror self
recognition in Cameroonian Nso and German families. Int. J. Behav. Dev. 29,
496–504.
Keller, H., Yovsi, R., Borke, J., Kartner, J., Jensen, H., and Papaligoura, Z. (2004).
Developmental consequences of early parenting experiences: Self-recognition
and self-regulation in three cultural communities. Child Dev. 75, 1745–1760.
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2004.00814.x
Kemp, C., Perfors, A., and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Learning over hypotheses with
hierarchical Bayesian models. Dev. Sci. 10, 307–321. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.
2007.00585.x
Kikusui, T., Winslow, J. T., and Mori, Y. (2006). Social buﬀering: relief from stress
and anxiety. Philos. Trans. R 361, 2215–2228. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2006.1941
Kilner, J. M., Friston, K. J., and Frith, C. D. (2007). Predictive coding: an account of
the mirror neuron system. Cogn. Process. 8, 159–166. doi: 10.1007/s10339-007-
0170-2
Kim, S., Fonagy, P., Koos, O., Dorsett, K., and Strathearn, L. (2014). Maternal
oxytocin response predicts mother-to-infant gaze. Brain Res. 1580, 133–142.
doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.10.050
Kinney, M., Seider, J., Beaty, A. F., Coughlin, K., Dyal, M., and Clewley, D.
(2018). The impact of therapeutic alliance in physical therapy for chronic
musculoskeletal pain: a systematic review of the literature. Physiother. Theory
Pract. 34, 1–13.
Kinreich, S., Djalovski, A., Kraus, L., Louzoun, Y., and Feldman, R. (2017). Brain-
to-brain synchrony during naturalistic social interactions. Sci. Rep. 7:17060.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-17339-5
Koban, L., Ramamoorthy, A., and Konvalinka, I. (2019). Why do we fall
into sync with others? Interpersonal synchronization and the brain’s
optimization principle. Soc. Neurosci. 14, 1–9. doi: 10.1080/17470919.2017.
1400463
Kober, H., Barrett, L. F., Joseph, J., Bliss-Moreau, E., Lindquist, K., and Wager, T. D.
(2008). Functional grouping and cortical-subcortical interactions in emotion: a
meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies.Neuroimage 42, 998–1031. doi: 10.1016/
j.neuroimage.2008.03.059
Koole, S. L., and Tschacher, W. (2016). Synchrony in psychotherapy: a review and
an integrative framework for the therapeutic alliance. Front. Psychol. 7:862.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00862
Korisky, A., Eisenberger, N. I., Nevat, M., Weissman-Fogel, I., and Shamay-Tsoory,
S. G. (2020). A dual-brain approach for understanding the neuralmechanisms
that underlie the comforting eﬀects of social touch. Cortex 127, 333–346. doi:
10.1016/j.cortex.2020.01.028
Kreuder, A. K., Wassermann, L., Wollseifer, M., Ditzen, B., Eckstein, M., Stoﬀel-
Wagner, B., et al. (2019). Oxytocin enhances the pain-relieving eﬀects of social
support in romantic couples.Hum. Brain Mapp.40, 242–251. doi: 10.1002/hbm.
24368
Kringelbach, M. L., and Rolls, E. T. (2004). The functional neuroanatomy
of the human orbitofrontal cortex: evidence from neuroimaging and
neuropsychology. Prog. Neurobiol. 72, 341–372. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2004.
03.006
Kumsta, R., and Heinrichs, M. (2013). Oxytocin, stress and social behavior:
neurogenetics of the human oxytocin system. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 23, 11–16.
doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2012.09.004
Kupper, Z., Ramseyer, F., Hoﬀmann, H., and Tschacher, W. (2016). Nonverbal
synchrony in social interactions of patients with schizophrenia indicates socio-
communicative deﬁcits. PLoS One 10:e0145882. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0145882
Lamm, C., Silani, G., and Singer, T. (2015). Distinct neural networks underlying
empathy for pleasant and unpleasant touch. Cortex 70, 79–89. doi: 10.1016/j.
cortex.2015.01.021
Li, M., and Fleming, A. S. (2003). The nucleus accumbens shell is critical for normal
expression of pup-retrieval in postpartum female rats. Behav. Brain Res. 145,
99–111. doi: 10.1016/s0166-4328(03)00135-9
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., Henning, A., Striano, T., and Tomasello, M. (2004).
Twelve-month-olds point to share attention and interest. Dev. Sci. 7, 297–307.
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00349.x
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 15
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
Löken, L. S., Wessberg, J., Morrison, I., McGlone, F. P., and Olausson, H. (2009).
Coding of pleasant touch by unmyelinated aﬀerents in humans. Nat. Neurosci.
12, 547–548. doi: 10.1038/nn.2312
López-Solà, M., Geuter, S., Koban, L., Coan, J. A., and Wager, T. D. (2019). Brain
mechanisms of social touch-induced analgesia in females.Pain 160, 2072–2085.
doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001599
Lucca, K., and Wilbourn, M. P. (2018). Communicating to learn: infants’ pointing
gestures result in optimal learning. Child Dev. 89, 941–960. doi: 10.1111/cdev.
12707
Manzoni, T. A. C., Bastos de Oliveira, N. T., Nunes Cabral, C. M., and Aquaroni
Ricci, N. (2018). The role of the therapeutic alliance on pain relief in
musculoskeletal rehabilitation: a systematic review. Physiother. Theory Pract.
34, 901–915. doi: 10.1080/09593985.2018.1431343
Manzotti, A., Cerritelli, F., Esteves, J. E., Lista, G., Lombardi, E., La Rocca, S., et al.
(2019). Dynamic touch reduces physiological arousal in preterm infants: a role
for c-tactile aﬀerents? Dev. Cogn. Neurosci. 39:100703. doi: 10.1016/j.dcn.2019.
100703
Mateus, V., Osório, A., Oliveira Miguel, H., Cruz, S., and Sampaio, A. (2021).
Maternal sensitivity and infant neural response to touch: an fNIRS study. Soc.
Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 16:nsab069. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsab069
McCabe, C., Rolls, E. T., Bilderbeck, A., and McGlone, F. (2008). Cognitive
inﬂuences on the aﬀective representation of touch and the sight of touch in the
human brain. Soc. Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 3, 97–108. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsn005
McEwen, B. S., and Wingﬁeld, J. C. (2003). The concept of allostasis in biology and
biomedicine. Horm. Behav. 43, 2–15. doi: 10.1016/s0018-506x(02)00024-7
McEwen, B. S., Bowles, N. P., Gray, J. D., Hill, M. N., Hunter, R. G., Karatsoreos,
I. N., et al. (2015). Mechanisms of stress in the brain. Nat. Neurosci. 18,
1353–1363. doi: 10.1038/nn.4086
McGlone, F., Cerritelli, F., Walker, S., and Esteves, J. (2017). The role of gentle
touch in perinatal osteopathic manual therapy.Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.72, 1–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.11.009
Mennella, J. A., Jagnow, C. P., and Beauchamp, G. K. (2001). Prenatal and postnatal
ﬂavor learning by human infants. Pediatrics 107:E88. doi: 10.1542/peds.107.6.
e88
Miciak, M., Mayan, M., Brown, C., Joyce, A. S., and Gross, D. P. (2019). A
framework for establishing connections in physiotherapy practice. Physiother.
Theory Pract. 35, 40–56. doi: 10.1080/09593985.2018.1434707
Miles, R., Cowan, F., Glover, V., Stevenson, J., and Modi, N. (2006). A controlled
trial of skin-to-skin contact in extremely preterm infants. Early Hum. Dev. 82,
447–455. doi: 10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2005.11.008
Mirza, M. B., Adams, R. A., Mathys, C. D., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Scene
construction, visual foraging, and active inference. Front. Comput. Neurosci.
10:56. doi: 10.3389/frai.2020.509354
Moran, R. J., Campo, P., Symmonds, M., Stephan, K. E., Dolan, R. J., and
Friston, K. J. (2013). Free energy, precision and learning: the role of cholinergic
neuromodulation. J. Neurosci. 33, 8227–8236. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4255-
12.2013
Morelli, S. A., Torre, J. B., and Eisenberger, N. I. (2014). The neural bases of feeling
understood and not understood. Soc. Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 9, 1890–1896.
doi: 10.1093/scan/nst191
Morrison, I., Loken, L. S., and Olausson, H. (2010). The skin as a social organ.Exp.
Brain Res. 204, 305–314.
Murgatroyd, C., Quinn, J. P., Sharp, H. M., Pickles, A., and Hill, J. (2015). Eﬀects of
prenatal and postnatal depression, and maternal stroking, at the glucocorticoid
receptor gene. Transl. Psychiatry 5:e560. doi: 10.1038/tp.2014.140
Murray, R. J., Debban ′e, M., Fox, P. T., Bzdok, D., and Eickhoﬀ, S. B. (2015).
Functional connectivity mapping of regions associated with self- and other-
processing. Hum. Brain Mapp. 36, 1304–1324. doi: 10.1002/HBM.22703
Noë, A. (2004). Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nummenmaa, L., Tuominen, L., Dunbar, R., Hirvonen, J., Manninen, S., Arponen,
E., et al. (2016). Social touch modulates endogenousµ-opioid system activity in
humans. NeuroImage 138, 242–247. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.05.063
Oishi, S., Schiller, J., and Gross, E. B. (2013). Felt understanding and
misunderstanding aﬀect the perception of pain, slant, and distance.Soc. Psychol.
Pers. Sci. 4, 259–266.
Panagiotopoulou, E., Filippetti, M. L., Tsakiris, M., and Fotopoulou, A. (2017).
Aﬀective touch enhances self-face recognition during multisensory integration.
Sci. Rep. 7:12883. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-13345-9
Pauli, W. M., O’Reilly, R. C., Y arkoni, T., and Wager, T. D. (2016). Regional
specialization within the human striatum for diverse psychological functions.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, 1907–1912. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1507610113
Pawling, R., Cannon, P. R., McGlone, F. P., and Walker, S. C. (2017). Ctactile
aﬀerent stimulating touch carries a positive aﬀective value. PLoS One
12:e0173457. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0173457
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., and Friston, K. (2015). Active Inference, homeostatic
regulation and adaptive behavioural control". Prog. Neurobiol. 134, 17–35. doi:
10.1016/j.pneurobio.2015.09.001
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Hierarchical active inference: a
theory of motivated control. Trends Cogn. Sci. 22, 294–306. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.
2018.01.009
Piontelli, A. (2010). Development of Normal Fetal Movements: The First 25 Weeks
of Gestation. Milan: Springer.
Powers, A. R., Kelley, M., and Corlett, P. R. (2016). Hallucinations as top-down
eﬀects on perception. Biol. Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging1, 393–400.
doi: 10.1016/j.bpsc.2016.04.003
Pratt, M., Goldstein, A., Levy, J., and Feldman, R. (2017). Maternal depression
across the ﬁrst years of life impacts the neural basis of empathy in
preadolescence. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 56, 20–29.e3. doi: 10.
1016/j.jaac.2016.10.012
Preston, S. D. (2007). “A perception-action model for empathy, ” in Empathy in
Mental Illness , eds T. Farrow & P. Woodruﬀ (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press), 428–447.
Preston, S. D., and Hofelich, A. J. (2012). Understanding empathy by modeling
rather than organizing its contents. Emot. Rev. 4, 24–33. doi: 10.1177/
1754073911421378
Quattrocki, E., and Friston, K. (2014). Autism, oxytocin and interoception.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 47, 410–430. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.09.012
Ramsay, D. S., and Woods, S. C. (2014). Clarifying the roles of homeostasis and
allostasis in physiological regulation. Psychol. Rev. 121, 225–247. doi: 10.1037/
a0035942
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering
Schrödinger’s question: a free-energy formulation. Phys. Life Rev. 24, 1–16.
doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., and Kirmayer, L. J. (2016). Cultural
aﬀordances: scaﬀolding local worlds through shared intentionality and regimes
of attention. Front. Psychol. 7:1090. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01090
Ratcliﬀe, M. (2013). “Touch and the sense of reality, ” inThe Hand: An Organ of the
Mind, ed. Z. Radman (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 131–157.
Ray, E., and Heyes, C. (2011). Imitation in infancy: the wealth of the stimulus.Dev.
Sci. 14, 92–105. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00961.x
Reddan, M. C., Young, H., Falkner, J., L ′opez-Sol‘a, M., and Wager, T. D. (2020).
Touch and social support inﬂuence interpersonal synchrony and pain. Soc.
Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 15, 1064–1075. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsaa048
Reddy, V. (2008). How Infants Know Minds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Rizzolatti, G., and Caruana, F. (2017). Some considerations on de Waal and Preston
review. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 769. doi: 10.1038/nrn.2017.139
Rizzolatti, G., and Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron system. Annu. Rev.
Neurosci. 27, 169–192.
Rolls, E. T. (1999). The Brain and Emotion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Romberg, A. R., and Saﬀran, J. R. (2010). Statistical leaning and
language acquisition. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Cogn. Sci. 1, 906–914.
doi: 10.1002/wcs.78
Romero, T., Castellanos, M. A., and De Waal, F. B. M. (2010). Consolation as
possible expression of sympathetic concern among chimpanzees. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 12110–12115. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1006991107
Roy, M., Shohamy, D., and Wager, T. D. (2012). Ventromedial prefrontal-
subcortical systems and the generation of aﬀective meaning. Trends Cogn. Sci.
16, 147–156. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2012.01.005
Ruﬀ, C. C., and Fehr, E. (2014). The neurobiology of rewards and values in social
decision making. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 15, 549–562. doi: 10.1038/nrn3776
Ryu, J., Banti, D., and Gu, X. (2021). Modelling therapeutic alliance in the age of
telepsychiatry. Trends Cogn. Sci. 25, 5–8. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2020.10.001
Schaefer, M., Joch, M., and Rother, N. (2021). Feeling touched: empathy is
associated with performance in a tactile acuity task. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
15:593425. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.593425
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694
fpsyg-13-783694 February 16, 2022 Time: 10:31 # 16
McParlin et al. Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference
Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T. H., Mathys, C., Dolan, C. R., and Friston,
K. (2015). The dopaminergic midbrain encodes the expected certainty about
desired outcomes. Cereb. Cortex 25, 3434–3445. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhu159
Seehausen, M., Kazzer, P., Bajbouj, M., and Prehn, K. (2012). Eﬀects of empathic
paraphrasing – _extrinsic emotion regulation in social conﬂict. Front. Psychol.
3:482. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00482
Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self.Trends
Cogn. Sci. 17, 565–573. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.007
Seth, A. K., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the
emotional brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 371:20160007. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2016.0007
Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., and Eisenberger, N. I. (2021). Getting in touch: a neural
model of comforting touch.Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.130, 263–273. doi: 10.1016/
j.neubiorev.2021.08.030
Shimon-Raz, O., Salomon, R., Bloch, M., Aisenberg Romano, G., Yeshurun, Y.,
Ulmer Y aniv, A., et al. (2021). Mother brain is wired for social moments. Elife
10:59436. doi: 10.7554/eLife.59436
Siposova, B., Tomasello, M., and Carpenter, M. (2018). Communicative eye contact
signals a commitment to cooperate for young children.Cognition 179, 192–201.
doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2018.06.010
Skyrms, B. (2001). The stag hunt. Proc. Address. Am. Philos. Assoc . 75, 31–41.
doi: 10.1017/cbo9781139165228.005
Slaughter, V. (2021). Do newborns have the ability to imitate?Trends Cogn. Sci. 25,
377–387. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2021.02.006
Smith, J. R., McGrath, J., Brotto, M., and Inder, T. (2014). A randomized-
controlled trial pilot study examining the neurodevelopmental eﬀects of a
5-week technique intervention on very preterm infants. Adv.Neonatal. Care 14,
187–200. doi: 10.1097/ANC.0000000000000093
Sokolowski, K., and Corbin, J. G. (2012). Wired for behaviors: from development
to function of innate limbic system circuitry. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 5:55. doi:
10.3389/fnmol.2012.00055
Stack, D. M., and Muir, D. W. (1990). Tactile stimulation as a component of social
interchange: new interpretations for the still-face eﬀect. Br. J. Dev. Psychol. 8,
131–145. doi: 10.1111/j.2044-835x.1990.tb00828.x
Sterling, P. (2014). Homeostasis vs allostasis:implications for brain function and
mental disorders. JAMA Psychiatry71, 1192–1193. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.
2014.1043
Sterling, P., and Eyer, J. (1988). “Allostasis: a new paradigm to explain arousal
pathology, ” inHandbook of Life Stress, Cognition and Health, eds S. Fisher and
J. Reason (New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons), 629–649.
Stuebe, A. M., Grewen, K., and Meltzer-Brody, S. (2013). Association between
maternal mood and oxytocin response to breastfeeding. J. Womens Heal. 22,
352–361. doi: 10.1089/jwh.2012.3768
Suga, A., Uraguchi, M., and Tange, A. (2019). Cardiac interaction between mother
and infant:enhancement of heart rate variability.Sci. Rep. 9:20019. doi: 10.1038/
s41598-019-56204-5
Suvilehto, J. T., Glerean, E., Dunbar, R. I., Hari, R., and Nummenmaa, L. (2015).
Topography of social touching depends on emotional bonds between humans.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 13811–13816. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1519231112
Szufnarowska, J., Rohlﬁng, K. J., Fawcett, C., and Gredebäck, G. (2014). Is ostension
any more than attention? Sci. Rep. 4:5304. doi: 10.1038/srep05304
Takahashi, Y., Tamakoshi, K., Matsushima, M., and Kawabe, T. (2011). Comparison
of salivary cortisol, heart rate, and oxygen saturation between early skin-to-skin
contact with diﬀerent initiation and duration times in healthy, full-term infants.
Early Hum. Dev. 87, 151–157. doi: 10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2010.11.012
Tarabulsy, G. M., Tessier, R., and Kappas, A. (1996). Contin- gency detection
and the contingent organization of be- havior in interactions: implications for
socioemotional development in infancy. Psychol. Bull. 120, 25–41. doi: 10.1037/
0033-2909.120.1.25
Tomasello, M. (1995). “Joint attention as social cognition, ” in Joint Attention: Its
Origins and Role in Development , eds C. Moore and P. J. Dunham (Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates), 103–130.
Tomasello, M., Melis, A. P., Tennie, C., Wyman, E., and Herrmann, E. (2012).
Two key steps in the evolution of human cooperation: the interdependence
hypothesis. Curr. Anthropol. 53, 673–692. doi: 10.1086/668207
Tops, M., and Boksem, M. A. (2012). What’s that?” “What went wrong?” Positive
and negative surprise and the rostral–ventral to caudal–dorsal functional
gradient in the brain. Front. Psychol. 3:21. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00021
Trapp, K., Spengler, S., Wüstenberg, T., Wiers, C. E., Busch, N. A., and Bermpohl,
F. (2014). Imagining triadic interactions simultaneously activates mirror and
mentalizing systems. NeuroImage 98, 314–323. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.
05.003
Tschacher, W., and Haken, H. (2007). Intentionality in non-equilibrium systems?
The functional aspects of self-organised pattern formation. New Ideas Psychol.
25, 1–15.
Tschacher, W., Giersch, A., and Friston, K. (2017). Embodiment and
Schizophrenia: a review of implications and applications. Schizophr. Bull.
43, 745–753. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbw220
Uvnäs Moberg, K., Ekström-Bergström, A., Buckley, S., Massarotti, C., Pajalic,
Z., Luegmair, K., et al. (2020). Maternal plasma levels of oxytocin during
breastfeedingóA systematic review. PLoS One 15:e0235806. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0235806
Uvnäs-Moberg, K., Handlin, L., and Petersson, M. (2015). Self-soothing behabiours
with particular reference to oxytocinrelease induced by non-noxious sensory
stimulation. Front. Psychol. 5:1529. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01529
Van den Heuvel, M. P., and Sporns, O. (2013). An anatomical substrate for
integration among functional networks in human cortex.J. Neurosci. 33, 14489–
14500. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2128-13.2013
Vasil, J., Badcock, P. B., Constant, A., Friston, K., and Ramstead, M. J. D. (2020).
A world unto itself: human communication as active inference. Front. Psychol.
11:417. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00417
Veissiere, S. P. L., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., and Kirmayer,
L. J. (2019). Thinking through other minds: a variational approach to
cognition and culture. Behav. Brain Sci. 43:e90. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X1900
1213
Vogt, B. A. (2005). Pain and emotion interactions in subregions of the cingulate
gyrus. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 533–544. doi: 10.1038/nrn1704
von Mohr, M., Krahé, C., Beck, B., and Fotopoulou, A. (2018). The social buﬀering
of pain by aﬀective touch: a laser-evoked potential study in romantic couples.
Soc. Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 13, 1121–1130. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsy085
Wass, S. V., Whitehorn, M., Marriott Haresign, I., Phillips, E., and Leong, V. (2020).
Interpersonal neural entrainment during early social interaction. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 24, 329–342. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2020.01.006
Y amasue, H., Yee, J. R., Hurlemann, R., Rilling, J. K., Chen, F. S., Meyer-
Lindenberg, A., et al. (2012). Integrative approaches utilizing oxytocin to
enhance prosocial behavior: from animal and human social behavior to autistic
social dysfunction. J. Neurosci. 32, 14109–14117. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
3327-12.2012
Yoshida, W., Dolan, R. J., and Friston, K. J. (2008). Game theory of mind. PLoS
Comput. Biol. 4:e1000254. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000254
Zhang, Y., Meng, T., Hou, Y., Pan, Y., and Hu, Y. (2018). Interpersonal
brain synchronization associated with working alliance during psychological
counseling. Psych. Res. Neuroimaging 282, 103–109. doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.
2018.09.007
Zheng, J. J., Li, S. J., Zhang, X. D., Miao, W. Y., Zhang, D., Y ao, H., et al. (2014).
Oxytocin mediates early experience-dependent cross-modal plasticity in the
sensory cortices. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 391–399. doi: 10.1038/nn.3634
Conﬂict of Interest: JE was employed by Malta ICOM Educational Ltd, Malta.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note:All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 McParlin, Cerritelli, Friston and Esteves. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
(CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided
the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No
use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 16 February 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 783694