 
 
 
THE CUTANEOUS BORDERS OF INTEROCEPTION: ACTIVE AND SOCIAL 
INFERENCE OF PAIN AND PLEASURE ON THE SKIN 
 
Mariana von Mohr1 & Aikaterini Fotopoulou1  
 
1Research Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, University College 
London, London, United Kingdom 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correspondences to:  
Aikaterini (Katerina) Fotopoulou, 
Research Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology,  
University College London, 
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK  
e-mail: a.fotopoulou@ucl.ac.uk  
 
 
 
 2 
Abstract 
Pain and pleasant touch have been recently classified as interoceptive modalities. This 
reclassification lies at the heart of long-standing debates questioning whether these modalities 
should be defined as sensations on their basis of neurophysiological specificity at the periphery 
or as homeostatic emotions on the basis of top-down convergence and modulation at the spinal 
and brain levels. Here, we outline the literature on the peripheral and central neurophysiology of 
pain and pleasant touch. We next recast this literature within a recent Bayesian predictive coding 
framework, namely active inference. This recasting puts forward a unifying model of bottom-up 
and top-down determinants of pain and pleasant touch and the role of social factors in 
modulating the salience of peripheral signals reaching the brain. 
Key words: pain, pleasant touch, nociceptors, C-Tactile afferents, active inference, allostasis, 
homeostasis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
1. Introduction 
Humans are capable of conscious feelings that concern the state of the body, such as pain, 
itch, muscular and visceral sensations, hunger, thirst, sexual desire and air need. The 
classification of such feelings and particularly their relation to the more classical sensory systems 
for vision, audition and touch, as well as to emotions such as anger and happiness has been a 
matter of ongoing debate.. Unlike sight, smell and hearing that have dedicated sensory organs, 
there are no dedicated bodily organs for position and movement sense, pain and many other 
modalities. Instead, developments in physics, anatomy, and physiology since the 19th century 
have given rise to a wide interest in mapping and classifying the senses with reference to criteria 
such as the nature of the stimulus, the nature, anatomy and location of receptors across body 
parts, the pathways to and the representation of the signal at the central nervous system (CNS), 
as well as the quality of the experience. This interest led to a number of classifications of the 
senses; for example, in exteroceptive (their receptive field “lies freely open to the numberless 
vicissitudes and agencies of the environment” Sherrington, 1910, p. 132), interoceptive (sensory 
receptors located within the body and primarily in the viscera) and proprioceptive sensations 
(receptors in muscles, tendons, and joints detecting position and movement of the body). Since 
this influential classification (see Ceunen, Vlaeyen, & Van Diest, 2016 for a review), 
exteroceptive and proprioceptive systems have received far more attention than interoceptive 
modalities. However, as this volume exemplifies, this has changed in the two last decades. On 
the one hand, theories and studies in affective neuroscience (e.g. Damasio, 2010) have brought to 
the foreground William James’s older idea that interoceptive sensations may lie at the heart of 
our emotions and self-awareness. On the other hand, progress in anatomy and physiology have 
urged certain researchers (e.g. Craig, 2002) to propose alternative classifications of the senses 
 4 
that include a more encompassing definition of interoception, as the sense of the physiological 
condition of the entire body, not just the viscera. 
Bud Craig’s proposal relies in synthesizing findings regarding the functional anatomy of 
a lamina I spinothalamocortical pathway that is portrayed as the long-missing afferent 
complement of the efferent autonomic nervous system, underling distinct, conscious, affective 
bodily feelings such as cool, warm, itch, first (pricking) pain, second (burning) pain, pleasant or 
sensual touch, muscle burn, joint ache, visceral fullness, flush, nausea, cramps, hunger, thirst, 
and visceral taste (Craig, 2002). Specifically, he proposes that the primate brain has evolved a 
direct sensory pathway to the thalamus that provides a modality-specific representation of 
various individual aspects of the physiological condition of the body (interoception re-defined; 
Craig 2002, 2003a). This pathway is thought to originate in lamina I of the spinal dorsal horn and 
in the nucleus of the solitary tract in the caudal medulla and to represent the afferent inputs from 
sympathetic (somatic) and parasympathetic nerves, respectively, and to terminate with a 
posterior-to-anterior somatotopic organization in a specific thalamic structure (the posterior and 
basal parts of the ventral medial nucleus, Craig 2002). He has further proposed that the 
functional role of this pathway is to represent the sensory aspects of homeostatic emotions (Craig 
2003a, 2008) and their accompanying motivations (represented in anterior cingulate cortex) that 
serve to maintain the body in a relative stability despite ongoing internal and external changes 
(e.g. variabilities in metabolic energy levels and the availability of food). This proposal brings 
the concept of interoception in a tight relation to the notion of homeostasis (Cannon, 1929, see 
also Chapter Y in present volume by Bentson, Giannaros &Tsakiris, and Chapter X by Corcoran 
& Jakob Hohwy), so that interoception is the sensory representation of the physiological 
condition of the whole body allowing homeostatic, and ultimately ‘allostatic’ control (i.e., self-
 5 
initiated temporary change in homeostatic imperatives to prepare for a predicted external 
change). In other words, interoceptive signals provide information regarding current homeostatic 
levels (e.g. reduced glucose levels in the blood), which are used as motivations to steer action 
(e.g. ingest food to restore glucose levels). This definition of interoception, which subsumes 
cutaneous pain, itch and pleasant touch, differs greatly from the classic association of these 
modalities with exteroception and particularly discriminatory touch. Moreover, in addition to this 
‘spinal pathway’, there are also other proposed interoceptive pathways (Critchley & Harrison, 
2013), and more broad proposals regarding the role of higher order processing in interoception 
(Ceunen et al., 2016).  
We will here focus on pleasant touch and cutaneous pain, which are two interoceptive 
(Craig, 2003a, 2003b) sub-modalities of touch that have contrasting affective qualities 
(pleasantness/unpleasantness) and social meanings (care/harm). Although the source of the skin 
stimulation lies outside the body and the resulting sensations can be used to gain information 
about how, where and by what one is touched, we also assume that these modalities are of 
fundamental homeostatic importance, signalling physiological safety (i.e. the pleasantness of 
touch signifies a homeostatically safe environment in is contact with the body) or threat (i.e. pain 
signifies the reverse) to the organism and leading to certain behavioural and physiological 
reactions of homeostatic and allostatic significance. In the present chapter, we first briefly 
outline the current literature on the peripheral and central neurophysiology of unpleasant, 
cutaneous pain and affective, pleasant touch. Subsequently, we make use of recent 
neurocomputational theories of perception and action, as applied to both exteroceptive and 
interoceptive modalities, to put forward a unifying model of how bottom-up and top-down 
signals can be integrated to give rise to these modalities. We speculate that the understanding of 
 6 
these modalities within the Bayesian predictive coding framework of ‘active inference’ (Friston, 
2010) offers a unique opportunity to unify various insights into a common framework that 
emphasizes particularly: 1) the deep interdependence between bottom-up and top-down 
mechanisms in any modality; 2) the deep interdependence of perception and action in any 
modality; 3) the special role of these modalities in homeostatic and allostatic control; 4) the 
particular relevance of social developmental factors in determining the salience of interoceptive 
modalities such as pain and pleasant touch.  
2. The Peripheral and Central Neurophysiology of Cutaneous Pain and Pleasant Touch 
Surrogate animal models and human studies have revealed that nociceptors are distinctive 
afferent units rather than the extremes of a single class of receptors with a continuum of features 
(reviewed by Marks, Raja, Campbell, & Meyer, 2006). While low-threshold, mechanoreceptive 
or thermoreceptive afferent neurons cannot discriminate reliably between noxious and non-
noxious (innocuous) stimulation, nociceptors can (Bessou, Burgess, Perl, & Taylor, 1971). These 
two classes of fibers also differ in their termination patterns in the spinal cord (Sugiura, Lee, & 
Perl, 1986), their membrane constituents (Caterina, Schumacher, Tominaga, & Rosen, 1997) 
andproperties, including their action potential shape (Ritter & Mendell, 1992). . Broadly, 
nociceptors can be divided into two types: A- (most in the Aδ- range) and C-fibers, which are 
mediated by myelinated fast (5-30 m/s) and unmyelinated slow (0.4-1.4m/s) conductive axons 
(Dubin & Patapoutian, 2010), corresponding to initial fast-onset pain (sharp pain sensation) and 
slow second pain (pervasive burning pain sensation), respectively. Nociceptors, particularly in 
musculoskeletal tissue, have been mostly thought to be electrically ‘silent’, transmitting all or 
none action potentials only when excited and thus give rise to pain (Marks et al., 2006). 
 7 
Different pathways on how the nociceptor is conveyed to the CNS have been suggested, 
including different spinal neural features and their functional role. First, it is thought that an 
afferent volley is produced upon activation of the nociceptor. The nociceptive volley travels 
along the periphery and enters the dorsal horn of the spinal cord (Brooks & Tracey, 2005) and 
mostly terminates in laminae I where they synapse with relay neurons and local interneurons 
important for signal modification (see Dubin & Patapoutian, 2010 for the specific role of laminae 
I, IV, V in relation to A- and C- fibres). Via spinal ascending pathways, the relay neurons project 
to the thalamus and brainstem, which in turn project to large distributed brain networks (Dubin & 
Patapoutian, 2010). However, a different type of multimodal spinal neurons located deeper in the 
dorsal horn, namely the wide dynamic (WDR) neurons, has also been implicated in nociceptive 
and pain-related mechanisms (Perl, 2007).  
More generally, peripheral neurophysiological specificity does not seem to lead to a 
direct relation between nociception and conscious pain perception. While the activation of 
nociceptors and nociceptive pathways can lead to pain (Marks et al., 2006), it is also known that 
nociceptors can be active in the absence of pain perception and pain can occur without known 
nociceptive activity. Indeed, there have been observations of a lack of reported pain by soldiers 
during battle, despite severe injuries, as well as experimental evidence suggesting that pain 
perception varies with psychological state and context (Head & Holmes, 1911; Gaughan & 
Gracely, 1989). In fact, since the proposal of the influential ‘gate control theory’ (inhibition of 
nociceptive excitatory signalling at the level of the spinal cord), and more recent insights 
regarding the heightened sensitivity of afferent signals at the same level, known as ‘central 
sensitization’, it is widely accepted that although much pain is a consequence of stimulation of 
 8 
peripheral nociceptors, the CNS plays a major role in the processing of noxious sensations 
(Melzack & Wall, 1967).   
 Furthermore, more potent neuroscientific methods in recent decades have provided 
corroborating evidence for the role of the brain in pain (Rainville et al., 1997; Ploghaus et al., 
1999; Ploner et al., 1999). For example, novel cortical stimulation studies have qualified 
Penfield’s inability to detect ‘pain cortical areas’; Mazzola, Isnard, Peyron, & Mauguiere, 2011). 
Moreover, functional neuroimaging studies indicate that noxious stimulation involves large 
distributed brain networks (Brooks & Tracey, 2005; Talbot et al., 1991). The so-called ‘pain 
matrix’ has been subdivided into a medial and lateral pain system, based on their respective 
projection sites from the thalamic structures to the cortex. The lateral pain system involves the 
S1 and secondary somatosensory cortex (S2) and is thought to play a role in the sensory-
discriminative aspect of pain (i.e., where is the stimulus and how intense it is), whereas the 
medial pain system, including areas such as the AAC, the insula and the amygdala, is thought to 
be involved in the affective-cognitive aspect of pain. However, the insular cortex may play a role 
in facilitating the integration of information between the lateral and medial pain systems (Brooks 
& Tracey, 2005) and some studies suggest that the functional role of these areas may not be pain-
specific but rather relating to the processing of all sensory salient-events (see Legrain, Iannetti, 
Plaghki, & Mouraux, 2011). Nevertheless, it is assumed that a top-down descending circuitry 
modulates ascending nociceptive information and consequently, influence pain perception. 
Hence, scientific and health organisations such as the International Association for the Study of 
Pain stress the difference between nociception and pain. However, debates regarding the bottom 
up versus the top-down contributions to pain and its corresponding definition remain. Similar 
debates surround the study of pleasant touch.. 
 9 
 Recent research suggests that slow conducting unmyelinated (non-nociceptive) afferent 
CT fibres mediate the affective, pleasant component of touch. These C fiber tactile afferents 
were first identified in a cat in 1939 by showing low spike heights using the skin-nerve 
preparation technique (Zotterman, 1939). More recently, low threshold mechanosensitive C 
fibres (C-LTMs; detected by cutaneous sensory neurons, i.e., C low threshold mechanoreceptors, 
C-LTMRs) have been found in the hairy skin of rodents and primates (Bessou et al., 1971). C-
LTMs are now acknowledged to also exist in human skin, termed as CT afferents (Vallbo et al., 
1999). CTs have different characteristics than myelinated fast conducting Aβ-fibres associated 
with discriminative touch, including their conduction axon velocity (0.6-1.3 m/s) and skin 
location (i.e., found in hairy but not glabrous skin).  
Microneurography studies have shown that CTs are highly sensitive mechanoreceptors 
responding to stimuli that are clearly innocuous and their firing rate seems to be distinct from 
myelinated afferents, reflecting an inverted U-shaped relationship between the stroking velocity 
and mean firing rate with the most vigorous responses being at 1-10 cm/s (Loken, Wessberg, 
Morrison, McGlone, & Olausson, 2009). Moreover, subjective responses of perceived 
pleasantness in response to stroking also showed an inverted U-shape relationship, with the 
highest pleasantness responses found at 1-10 cm/s stroking velocities (Loken, et al., 2009), 
indicating that CT afferents may carry a positive hedonic quality. Furthermore, CTs are also 
temperature sensitive (i.e., preferentially discharged ≈ 32°C, the typical skin temperature; 
Ackerley et al., 2014). However, one main difficulty in our understanding of selective CT 
stimulation is related to the fact that to date, we cannot stimulate CT fibres without stimulating 
Aβ-fibres in healthy subjects. Nevertheless, insights have been provided from patients with 
sensory neuropathy, as these patients are thought to lack Aβ afferents while their CTs afferents 
 10 
remain intact (Olausson et al., 2002, 2008). Research has shown that CT stimulation in these 
patients activates the insula (i.e., the preferential cortical target for CT afferents; see more 
below), but not somatosensory regions associated with the sensory discriminative processing of 
touch (Olausson et al., 2002). Moreover, these patients were able to detect, although poorly, slow 
brushing on the forearm (where CTs are abundant; Olausson et al., 2008). Given the sensory 
discriminative properties associated with Aβ-fibres and the lack thereof in these patients, it is 
possible to presume that CT afferents may follow a separate neurophysiological route than Aβ 
mediated discriminative touch (Olausson et al., 2008).  
Unfortunately, our knowledge on how CTs peripheral information reaches spinal, 
brainstem and cortical areas in humans remains scarce. Yet, meaningful insights regarding the 
spinal processing of CTs have been obtained from animal studies. Mice studies suggest that C-
LTMS enter the laminae II of the dorsal horn; with axons arborizing in lamina I, where they 
would synapse with secondary afferent neurons (reviewed by McGlone et al., 2014). Secondary 
afferent neurons then project to higher centres such as the insula via spinal pathways (Andrew, 
2010). Furthermore, as with pain, there could be different classes of spinal neurons responsive to 
gentle touch, including WDR neurons (Andrew, 2010). Finally, yet controversially, recent 
findings using mice genetic tools indicate the dorsal horn as the key initial focus for integration 
of Aβ and C-LTMRs (Abraira & Ginty, 2013). Together, these lines of work suggest that there 
may be different pathways through which CT peripheral information is conveyed to higher 
centres, although these pathways may likely vary across species.  
Similar to pain, neuroimaging research has shown that gentle stroking activates the 
posterior superior temporal sulcus, medial prefrontal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and 
ACC, which are typically implicated in the cognitive-affective aspects of pleasant touch (Gordon 
 11 
et al., 2011). Further, while investigating the cortical areas that represent pleasant touch, painful 
touch and neutral touch, studies have also found increased activity in the OFC in response to 
pleasant and painful touch, highlighting the role of the OFC on the affective aspects of the touch. 
In contrast, the somatosensory cortex was less activated by pleasant and painful touch, relative to 
neutral touch (Rolls et al., 2003; see also Gordon et al., 2011; Olausson et al., 2002). These 
studies suggest that CT-based touch may not be involved in the discriminative aspects of touch. 
Importantly, slow gentle touch on CT skin has also been shown to preferentially activate the 
insula (Olausson et al., 2002; Gordon et al., 2011), although the insula also plays a critical role in 
integrating sensory-discriminative and affective-cognitive aspects of the touch (McCabe et al., 
2008; Rolls, 2010).  
3. An Integration: The Predictive, Active and Social Components of Pain and Pleasant 
Touch 
The history of the study of pain, and more recently of pleasant touch can be said to be 
steeped in the debates between bottom-up, neurophysiological specificity at the periphery versus 
top-down convergence and gating at the spinal and brain levels. In this section, we make use of a 
Bayesian, predictive coding framework, namely the Free Energy Principle, also referred to as 
‘active inference’ (Friston, 2010) to put forward a unifying model of how bottom-up and top-
down signals can be integrated to give rise to affective, pleasant touch and unpleasant, cutaneous 
pain.  
3.1. Action-perception Loops and the Control of Physiological States  
Recent neurocomputational theories of perception and action assume that the brain is an 
organ that learns and self-improves a generative model of the organism and its environment 
based on sensory signals and action (Friston, 2010). A basic tenet of such accounts is that 
 12 
perception is an active process, whereby top-down mechanisms are activated to make predictions 
about the upcoming bottom-up sensory signals. Thus, perception is an inferential process, whose 
aim is to minimize prediction errors or the difference between top-down hypotheses about the 
most likely causes of sensations (termed ‘empirical prior beliefs’) and current sensations. 
Recurrent message passing among several levels of the sensorimotor hierarchy allows the 
suppression of (small, or irrelevant) prediction errors by priors, or the adjustment of (empirical) 
prior expectations by (large or highly salient) prediction errors. Furthermore, the relative 
influence of predictions versus prediction errors across several layers in this hierarchical 
organization is determined by the weighting (precision) of predictions versus prediction errors at 
each level. Precision can be regarded as a measure of signal-to-noise ratio or confidence, or 
mathematically, as the inverse variance, uncertainty or reliability of a signal (Feldman & Friston, 
2010; Friston et al., 2012). Uncertainty is thought of as encoded mainly by neuromodulations of 
synaptic gain (such as dopamine and acetylcholine) that encode the precision of random 
fluctuations about predicted states, i.e. the context in which sensory data is encountered 
(Quattrocki & Friston, 2014). For example, cholinergic or dopaminergic neuromodulatory 
mechanisms can optimise the attentional gain of populations encoding prediction errors, so that 
greater attention is allocated to certain salient events in the environment influencing the relative 
weighting or importance of prediction errors.  
Importantly, prediction errors can also be minimized through action. At the simplest 
control loop level, peripheral reflexes are engaged to suppress proprioceptive prediction errors 
(Feldman & Friston, 2010), generated by comparing primary afferents from receptors in muscles, 
tendons, and joints with proprioceptive predictions regarding body position that descend to alpha 
motor neurons in the spinal cord and cranial nerve nuclei. Thus, action is driven by such 
 13 
predictions rather than descending motor commands. Ultimately action is seen as a prediction-
driven tendency to re-sample the world to generate more sensory evidence for one’s predictions 
(active inference). Importantly, the organism could solve a discrepancy between prediction and 
error (e.g., unexpected noxious stimulation) by either changing its predictions (effectively 
convincing oneself that one is not in pain) or by generating protecting action (moving to avoid 
the noxious source of the prediction error). Both of these can be adaptive depending on the 
magnitude, as well as the context of the noxious stimulation and hence, their relation needs to be 
optimized by weighting in each case. This framework emphasizes the tight interconnection of 
perception and action as well as the fundamental integration of bottom-up and top-down factors 
in all perceptual and active inference.   
Recently several proposals have applied this framework to interoception (Paulus & Stein, 
2006; Barrett & Simmons, 2015; Gu et al., 2013; Pezzulo et al., 2015; Seth, 2013; Seth, Suzuki, 
& Critchley, 2011), and by extension to the concepts of ‘homeostatic’ and ‘allostatic’ control 
(see also Chapter X by Corcoran & Hohwy).  ‘Homeostasis’ (Cannon, 1929) refers to the 
maintenance of a relative stability in one’s physiological states despite ongoing internal and 
external changes. ‘Allostasis’ refer to the idea that physiological changes need to be anticipated 
by adaptive changes and choices across different spatial and temporal scales, e.g. adjusting one’s 
metabolic needs in certain environments where foraging is dangerous (Sterling & Eyer, 1988). In 
predictive coding frameworks, both homeostatic and allostatic control can be cast formally as 
active inference (e.g. Pezzulo et al., 2015; Stephan et al., 2016). Homeostatic control enslaves 
reflexes to produce corrective actions that fulfill beliefs about bodily states, and allostatic control 
entails changing homeostatic beliefs under guidance by higher predictive models about future 
perturbations of bodily states.  
 14 
Moreover, as in the case of exteroceptive perception and action, the balance between 
homeostatic and allostatic regulation rests upon the precision (i.e. weighting) placed in deeper 
expectations about the organism and its environment. For example, during conditions of bodily 
threat or psychological stress, such as pain sharp object approaching one’s face, noxious signals 
on one’s body may induce low-level proprioceptive predictions that mobilize withdrawal 
movements away from the source of the stimulation. However, high-precision, predictions at 
higher-level of the neurocognitive hierarchy may indicate that the source of the noxious 
stimulation is actually our dentist, then predictions of tooth pain can be fulfilled without 
engaging, low-level motor reflexes and instead engage allostatic changes in the form of updated 
beliefs about the ‘safety’ and tolerance (i.e. attenuated pain) of nociceptive signals in this 
context, in order to ensure future pain-free and healthy teeth.  
3.2. Active, Interoceptive Inference and Feelings on the Skin 
Despite the above proposals of interoceptive predictive coding, there is currently no 
direct evidence for the proposal that interoceptive predictions, prediction errors and their relation 
rest on a common neurocomputational framework (for a first step, see Kleckner et al., 2017). 
There are however ample circumstantial findings in the pain and pleasant touch literature that 
can be cast in this light and importantly, the framework can allow some specific predictions 
regarding the nature of pain and pleasant touch, and their modulation by cognitive and social 
factors, that we will focus on here.  
First, this framework suggests that peripheral signals, such as nociceptive and CT tactile 
channels, do not cause homeostatic perceptions or emotions (e.g. pain or the affectivity of touch), 
or vice versa. Instead, there is a circular and multi-layered causality, where on one end of the 
neural hierarchy, neuronally encoded predictions about bodily states, including in this case states 
 15 
of the skin, engage autonomic, somatic and motor reflexes in a top-down fashion. On the other 
end of the hierarchy, specialised skin organs and their spinal cord circuitry carry interoceptive 
signals in a bottom-up way that informs and updates predictions at the levels above. These 
aspects can be linked to the cognitive and sensory aspects of pain, respectively. Moreover, the 
affective component of pain or touch can be seen as an attribute of the weighting (precision, see 
above) of any representation that generates predictions and prediction errors about the 
physiological state of the skin (see also Ainley et al., 2016; Fotopoulou, 2013). In other terms, 
the subjective feelings of pain or pleasant touch can be linked to the neuromodulatory weighting 
of the corresponding sensory prediction errors in relation to more higher order predictions 
regarding these sensory states. Typically, the optimisation of precision is linked with the function 
of neuromodulators in the brain (see Section 3.1. Action-perception Loops and the Control of 
Physiological States) but similar processes of synaptic gain modulation have long been described 
in the spinal cord, particularly in the context of pain (see Section 2. The Peripheral and Central 
Neurophysiology of Cutaneous Pain and Pleasant Touch). We have previously proposed that in 
interoceptive modalities, optimizing the precision of internal body signals can be seen as 
optimising interoceptive sensitivity and related feelings in perceptual inference (see also Ainley 
et al., 2016; Fotopoulou, 2013). We propose here that  concepts such as ‘precision’ and its 
reverse, uncertainty, relate to the affective, conscious components of pain and pleasant touch. 
The intensity of painful or pleasurable aspects of touch can be thus understood as our sensitivity 
to such tactile, interoceptive signals in a given context (e.g. a measurement of our subjective pain 
threshold in the lab) and our corresponding behavioural tendency to approach the world to gather 
more information (uncertainty) or to avoid resampling (the certainty of pain and pleasant touch). 
 16 
This view can offer a new integration of previous theories of pain and hence potentially also 
pleasant touch, as we specify below.  
Specifically, classic theories may view cutaneous pain and the affectivity of touch as 
signals of danger or safety to the organism, respectively, starting in the periphery and reaching 
consciousness if a ‘threshold’ is surpassed at the spinal cord level, allowing the the brain to 
‘read’ them as pain or pleasure. For example, this threshold may be equated to the “gate control 
theory” (Melzack & Wall, 1967), or more modern “central sensitization” theories, where the gain 
of the spinal cord nociceptive synapse is amplified and hence ‘travels up’ the hierarchy to elicit 
conscious pain (Woolf & Salter, 2000). On the contrary, more ‘active’, alternative theories of 
pain suggest that acute pain is not a warning signal but rather is the failure of the ‘aversion’ 
machinery (nociceptor activity) designed to operate unconsciously in order to avoid harm and 
ultimately also conscious pain (Baliki & Apkarian, 2016). In such accounts, most nociceptive 
activity is designed to remain ‘subconscious’ and protect the organism from harm without 
necessarily eliciting conscious pain. Conscious pain instead only emerges when subconscious 
pain is converted to conscious pain in subcortical areas in the brain. In such accounts, it is 
conscious pain that has the capacity to modulate spinal nociceptive sensitivity and thus actively 
determine “gate control” and/or “central sensitization” spinal nociceptive processes, mediated 
through descending pathways (Vera-Portocarrero et al., 2006).  
From the point of view of active inference models, these are not competing but 
supplementary views. Allostatic control is an extension of homeostatic control and they both 
work to minimise prediction errors. Thus, these two perspectives can be integrated in the 
following way, illustrated here with specific reference to cutaneous pain and pleasant touch. For 
homeostatic control purposes, the organism entails (in an embodied manner) a set of inherited 
 17 
prior expectations of the state of the skin. Any stimulation of the skin that deviates from the 
range of such predicted states generates a prediction error. This prediction error is corrected in 
simple, unconscious loops, by reflexive motor or autonomic reactions that fulfil the initial beliefs 
about the state of the skin. If however these ‘homeostatic corrections’ fail (i.e. the prediction 
error persists), then the prediction error travels up the hierarchy to generate posterior beliefs 
(updated predictions) at the above hierarchical level. These updated beliefs act as priors towards 
future positive or negative events, thus attempting to anticipate and avoid danger, or anticipate 
and approach pleasure, before these occur (allostasis). Specifically, more complex, generative, 
predictive models of the organism’s needs are able to better predict stimuli at the levels below 
and at different time-scales and hence ‘suppress’ any future, anticipated prediction errors at the 
level below by guiding autonomic function and action more effectively and under the control of 
higher-order predictive models. Please note that these homeostatic and allostatic control 
operations are understood to be processes of unconscious inference for the most part, so 
conscious feelings of skin pain and pleasure are not necessary for such processes. This 
conclusion however raises the question of why should we have conscious feelings such as pain 
and pleasure, if we can predict and control our sensations unconsciously? We speculatively 
propose that it is important that the organism registers the core feelings that relate to the 
specificity of innate, homeostatic needs (in this case safe or dangerous contact on the skin), so 
that the cognitive resources available for scanning the world and the body for novelty and 
salience are always constrained by, and in competition with, the high precision of our innate 
expectations. In other terms, conscious pain and pleasant touch are there to ensure that we do not 
habitually update, or ignore our predictions about what is safe versus dangerous for the skin.   
 18 
Interestingly, although these two modalities, pain and unpleasant touch appear opposite 
in hedonic content and behaviour tendencies towards their particular sensory stimulus (i.e. 
avoidance versus approach), from the point of view of the certainty-uncertainty axis described 
here, they are of similar characteristics. The greater the pain, or the felt pleasure of touch, the 
more one’s attention and behavior is captured in the experience and the less one is likely to 
engage in active, exploration of new sensations. Instead, the organism’s resources are focused on 
controlling or, escaping pain, and enjoying or, prolonging the feelings of pleasant touch. This 
view goes against the intuitive, long-standing view of core affective consciousness, pain and 
pleasure, as monitoring hedonic quality. Instead, the core quality of affective consciousness is a 
kind of certainty-uncertainty, or disambiguation principle (Fotopoulou, 2013). Pain and pleasant 
touch therefore are a measure of how important is for a given organism, in a given context, to be 
‘certain’ about what was predicted versus what occurred.  
This view of the conscious feelings of pain and pleasant touch, tallies with long-standing 
insights regarding the dissociation between sensory and affective aspects of pain and more 
recently pleasant touch, as well as with the fact that the physiology of nociception has a well-
known specificity at the periphery which is not mirrored at the brain (see Section 2. The 
Peripheral and Central Neurophysiology of Cutaneous Pain and Pleasant Touch). The unique 
feeling qualities of painful or pleasant touch may be associated with the CNS’s capacity for 
synaptic gain modulation and large-scale integration of information arising from the body and 
the world in different timescales. This is consistent with the fact that no one area or network in 
the brain has been reliably associated with the conscious perception of pain (Baliki & Apkarian, 
2015). Instead, the various networks that have been associated with pain and its modulation, and 
with pleasant touch and its modulation, are not only common to these two modalities, but seem 
 19 
relevant to the processing of the salience of any sensory modality (Legrain et al., 2011). Indeed, 
several recent neuroimaging studies have included such areas and their observed functional 
connectivity in various hypothesized “salience networks” (Legrain et al., 2011; Medford & 
Critchley, 2010; Wiech et al., 2010). For instance, predictive signals from such a “salience 
network” process and integrate information about the significance of an impending noxious 
stimulus and determine whether or not such a stimulus will be consciously perceived as painful 
(Wiech et al., 2010).   
More generally, a plethora of neuroimaging studies have shown that cognitive, affective 
and social factors modulate our perception of cutaneous pain, with emerging evidence also 
making a case for these factors modulating the pleasantness of CT-optimal touch. For example, 
expectations may help an individual to adjust sensory, cognitive and motor systems in order to 
optimally process the noxious stimuli in terms of neural and behavioural responses (Wiech, 
Ploner, & Tracey, 2008; see also Villemure & Brushnell, 2002 for review). Most consistently 
with the present proposal, expectations in which there is a high level of certainty regarding the 
stimulus may activate descending control systems to attenuate pain, whereas in contrast, 
uncertainty may increase pain (Ploghaus et al., 2003).  
Although there is less evidence on the neural mechanisms underlying the cognitive and 
social factors that modulate pleasant CT-optimal touch, studies suggest that a person’s beliefs 
about the stimulus (McCabe et al., 2008) or the person (Ellingsen et al., 2015) providing pleasant 
touch influences the perceived pleasantness of the touch. We use the example of the social 
modulation of pain below to unpack and better illustrate these ideas. 
3.3. The Mentalisation of Nociception and CT Stimulation: Homeostatic and Allostatic 
Control by Proxy  
 20 
The long observed fact that conscious pain is modulated by social context has received 
experimental support in recent years (see Krahé et al., 2013 for review). In the last decade, 
similar observations have also been made regarding the modulation of pleasant touch by social 
context. In this section, we will apply the above insights from the active inference framework to 
propose some mechanisms by which this social modulation takes place. This application has the 
advantage that it can provide a mechanistic, unified account of the relation between bottom-up 
(e.g., neurophysiological) and top-down (e.g., psychosocial) influences on homeostasis and 
allostasis. Existing biopsychosocial models of pain offer similar insights but the current model 
has the advantage of offering direct links between these different bottom-up and top-down 
determinants of pain and pleasant touch, instead of treating them as merely additive variables.  
Specifically, we propose that the perception of the social environment of pain or pleasant 
touch can affect inferential processes about the perception of these modalities, as well as related 
active tendencies, by influencing the certainty or precision of an individual’s predictions about 
an impending stimulus vs. the certainty or precision of related prediction errors. As 
aforementioned, top-down predictions do not represent just the content of lower level 
representations but also predict their context, defined in mathematical terminology as the 
precision of a probability distribution (inverse variance or uncertainty). For example, the 
allocation of attention toward specific events can optimize their salience and ultimately influence 
the relative weighting or importance of prediction errors against predictions. This kind of top-
down prediction in sensory cortices is thought to be mediated by cholinergic neuromodulatory 
mechanisms that optimise the attentional gain of populations encoding prediction errors 
(Feldman & Friston, 2010), as well as by dopamine in fronto-striatal circuits (Fiorillo, Tobler, & 
Schultz, 2003) and by neuropeptides such as oxytocin in social contexts (Quatrokki & Friston, 
 21 
2014). In interoception, precision may relate to attention to signals from the body or 
interoceptive sensitivity (Ainley et al., 2016; Fotopoulou, 2013) and may be modulated by 
several contextual factors. Therefore, factors such as active social support or empathy may 
modulate pain or pleasant touch by changing the precision of top-down predictions about 
nociception or CT stimulation. In such social contexts, individuals have learned to anticipate 
social support and thus the optimization of the weight allocated to bottom-up signals versus top-
down predictions maybe different than in conditions of experiencing similar stimuli alone, or in 
hostile environments. For example, in previous studies we have shown that the administration of 
intranasal oxytocin versus placebo, or the provision of high versus low empathy, or social 
support may modulate the subjective, behavioural and neural responses to noxious stimulation 
(Hurter, Paloyelis, Williams, & Fotopoulou, 2014; Krahé et al., 2015; Paloyelis et al., 2016). 
More generally, based on a systematic review of the experimental pain literature (Krahé et al., 
2013), we have concluded that precision modulation by interpersonal interactions takes several 
forms, including two main categories: (a) social signals about the safety or threat and thus the 
salience of the impending stimulus itself, and (b) social signals about the threat or safety and thus 
the salience of the environment in which the stimulus occurs. In turn, the perception and 
interpretation of such interpersonal variables themselves may in turn depend on (a) their own 
salience, as well as (b) an individual’s prior beliefs about interpersonal relating and associated 
behaviours (see below for further details).  
This notion of social modulation as precision modulation is compatible with previous 
theories such as the social baseline theory, which proposes that the presence of other people 
helps individuals to conserve metabolically costly somatic and neural resources through the 
social regulation of emotion (Beckes & Coan, 2011; see also Decety & Fotopoulou, 2014). 
 22 
Integrating such notions within a predictive coding model has the advantage of placing them in a 
wider and neurobiologically plausible framework and hence integrating findings across many 
fields, as well as generating novel hypotheses, as we outline below. 
3.3.1. Developmental considerations: The social origins of interoceptive inference. 
The active inference framework we propose allows us to observe that the social modulation of 
pain and pleasant touch is not a simple ‘add-on’ in our understanding of such modalities. Rather, 
it appears that interpersonal interactions are necessary in shaping all interoceptive modalities 
from the onset. This claim is supported by several observations (presented in detail elsewhere, 
Fotopoulou & Tsakiris, 2017), the most important of which we outline below. Namely, in early 
infancy, when the human motor system is not yet developed, interoceptive function and 
homeostasis are wholly dependent on embodied interactions with other bodies. Action and 
perception do not mature at the same time. As human infants are born without a fully matured 
motor system, and hence they cannot regulate their own homeostasis unaided, the actions of their 
caregivers necessarily determine how they come to update their beliefs by active inference and 
ultimately how they experience all their sensations and particularly those requiring purposeful 
actions. For example, young infants cannot position, balance, feed, thermoregulate or protect 
themselves from accidentally cutting or burning their skin (beyond some reflexive avoidance 
movements). Thus, in the case of these interoceptive modalities, no available movement on the 
part of the infant alone can change certain key neurophysiological states relating to homeostasis 
and allostasis. As such, the young infant cannot use action to collect evidence about the causes 
of interoceptive experience to test its interoceptive predictions against the world.   
Instead, infants use autonomic and motor reflexes in response to unpredicted 
physiological states (e.g. crying when hypothalamic function detect that glucose level are not 
 23 
within the predicted viable range) to elicit caregivers’ actions that can change the infant’s 
physiological state (for example by feeding it) until the homeostatic needs are met (i.e. glucose 
levels are within the predicted range). Thus, updating interoceptive predictions in infants (close 
the action-perception loop) includes multisensory signals regarding the reaction of caregivers to 
infants’ initial autonomic and proprioceptive predictions; a process we have termed as the 
‘mentalization’ of physiological states elsewhere; Fotopoulou & Tsakiris, 2017). In other words, 
the origins of interoceptive active inference are always by necessity social, and thus core 
subjective feelings such as hunger and satiation, pain and relief, cold or warmth have actually 
social origins.  
3.3.2. Adult predictions about the role of others in pain and pleasant touch. The 
above conclusions about the social origins of interoceptive feelings such as pain and pleasant 
touch are also consistent with the literature on the relation between these modalities and social 
attachment (see also Panksepp, 1998). As we aforementioned, pain and pleasant touch may be 
modulated by social factors. In turn, the perception and interpretation of social variables 
themselves may depend on individual prior beliefs, or generative models about interpersonal 
relating and associated behaviours. One influential way of conceptualizing prior beliefs about 
relating to others is attachment theory. Attachment theory posits that from early in life, 
attachment partners can serve as a ‘secure base’ from which the infant explores the world 
(Bowlby, 1969). If a secure attachment bond is formed over repeated instances of responsive 
caregiving, the ‘secure base’ signals safety to the infant, while insecure bonds lead to more 
ambivalent or even threatening signals from others. These bonds lead to the formation of 
attachment styles, which remain relatively stable into adulthood.  
Individual differences in attachment style have been linked directly with the perception of 
 24 
pain and related reactions (e.g. Hurter et al., 2014; Meredith, Ownsworth & Strong, 2008; Sambo 
et al., 2010). Moreover, in the clinical pain literature, insecure attachment has been proposed as a 
vulnerability factor for developing chronic pain (Meredith et al., 2008), supporting its 
importance as a pain-relevant prior.  In a series of pain studies by our lab, we have shown that 
differences in attachment style influence the effects of interpersonal variables on subjective, 
behavioural, physiological and neural responses to pain. For example, social contextual factors 
and individual differences in attachment style determine the amount of subjective report, facial 
expressions, heart-rate, skin conductance and neural responses people show in response to 
experimental pain (Sambo et al., 2010; Hurter et al., 2014; Krahe et al., 2015; 2016).  
. Using laser-evoked potentials (LEPs) we further found that active, social support can 
reduce both subjective and neural pain-related outcomes (Krahe et al., 2016; von Mohr et al., 
upublished data). However, contrary to other neuroimaging studies on passive forms of social 
support between couples (e.g., Coan et al., 2006; Eisenberger et al., 2011), our neural effects 
indicate that the effects of active support by one’ romantic partner may begin at earlier stages of 
cortical nociceptive processing, as reflected by changes in the N1 local peak amplitude. The N1 
component is thought to reflect pre-perceptual sensory response (outside of conscious 
awareness), with activation in the operculoinsular and primary somatosensory cortex (Garcia-
Larrea et al., 2003; Valentini et al., 2012). Given that LEPs have been recently proposed to 
detect environmental threat to the body in response to sensory salient events (Legrain, Iannetti, 
Plaghki, & Mouraux, 2011), we speculate that affective touch by one’s romantic partner seems to 
reduce the sensory salience of impending noxious stimulation.  
Similar findings have been reported in relation to the perception of pleasantness and 
attachment style in response to CT-optimal touch (Krahé et al., unplublished data). Nevertheless, 
 25 
the field of pleasant touch is still at its infancy and further neuroscientific studies are needed in 
both humans and other animals before firm conclusions can be drawn about the social nature of 
this modality.   
4. Summary and Conclusions 
Cutaneous pain and pleasant touch have been recently classified by some researchers as 
interoceptive modalities, even if their stimulation site lies outside the body. This reclassification 
is basis a more encompassing definition of interoception itself, as the sense of the physiological 
condition of the entire body, not just the viscera. However, this reclassification lies at the heart of  
long-standing debates regarding the nature of such modalities and particularly the question of 
whether they should be defined as sensations on their basis of their bottom-up, 
neurophysiological specificity at the periphery or as homeostatic emotions on the basis of top-
down convergence and modulation at the spinal and brain levels. In the present chapter, we 
speculatively recast this current state of knowledge within a recent, Bayesian predictive coding 
framework of brain function, namely the active inference model., This framework suggests that 
peripheral signals, such as nociceptive and CT tactile channels, do not cause homeostatic 
perceptions or emotions (e.g. pain or pleasant touch), or vice versa. Instead, there is a circular 
and multi-layered causality, where on one end of the neural hierarchy, neuronally encoded 
predictions about bodily states, including in this case states of the skin, engage autonomic, 
somatic and motor reflexes in a top-down fashion. On the other end of the hierarchy, specialised 
skin organs and their spinal cord circuity carry interoceptive signals in a bottom-up way that 
informs and updates predictions at the levels above. These aspects can be linked to the cognitive 
and sensory aspects of pain, respectively. The affective component of pleasant or painful touch is 
a third component of this circular causality. Such affects are an attribute of the optimisation of 
 26 
the weighting (precision) of any representation that generates predictions and prediction errors 
about the physiological state of the skin (see also Ainley et al., 2016; Fotopoulou, 2013). This 
weighting is further not only determined by such specialised modalities and pathways but also 
necessarily contextualized by concurrent proprioceptive signals, as well as by concurrent 
exteroceptive cues about the body itself and about the physical, material and social environment 
currently and across different time-scales (for allostatic control purposes). The painful or 
pleasurable aspects of touch can be thus understood as our sensitivity to bottom-up signals in 
given interoceptive, exteroceptive, cognitive, social and time contexts and our corresponding 
behavioural and anticipatory tendencies.  
These assumptions have received some empirical support in adult studies from our lab, as 
well as many other labs, that show that ‘on-line’ social factors such as active social support or 
empathy, as well as ‘off-line’ predictions about the availability of social help (e.g. individual 
differences in attachment style), may modulate pain or pleasant touch by changing the precision 
of top-down predictions versus prediction errors from nociception or CT stimulation. Finally, 
such claims are supported by the developmental observation that in early infancy, when the 
human motor system is not yet developed, interoceptive function and homeostasis are dependent 
on embodied interactions with other bodies. It is the adult’s actions that will generate changes in 
interoceptive states and hence ultimately close the action-perception loop. Thus, the origins of 
interoceptive active inference are always, by necessity social, and core subjective feelings, such 
as hunger and satiation, pain and relief, cold or warmth, have actually social origins.  
 
 
 
 27 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by the European Research Council (ERC) Starting Grant ERC-
2012-STG GA313755 (to A.F.) and the National Council on Science and Technology 
(CONACyT- 538843) scholarship (to M.V.M.).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 28 
 
 
References 
 
Abraira, V. E., & Ginty, D. D. (2013). The sensory neurons of touch. Neuron, 79(4), 618-639. 
Ackerley, R., Wasling, H. B., Liljencrantz, J., Olausson, H., Johnson, R. D., & Wessberg, J. 
(2014). Human C-tactile afferents are tuned to the temperature of a skin-stroking 
caress. Journal of Neuroscience, 34(8), 2879-2883. 
Ainley, V., Apps, M. A., Fotopoulou, A., & Tsakiris, M. (2016). ‘Bodily precision’: a predictive 
coding account of individual differences in interoceptive accuracy. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 
B, 371(1708), 20160003. 
Andrew, D. (2010). Quantitative characterization of low‐threshold mechanoreceptor inputs to 
lamina I spinoparabrachial neurons in the rat. The Journal of physiology, 588(1), 117-
124. 
Atzil, S., & Barrett, L. F. (2017). Social regulation of allostasis: Commentary on “Mentalizing 
homeostasis: The social origins of interoceptive inference” by Fotopoulou and 
Tsakiris. Neuropsychoanalysis, 19(1), 29-33. 
Baliki, M. N., & Apkarian, A. V. (2015). Nociception, pain, negative moods, and behavior 
selection. Neuron, 87(3), 474-491. 
Barrett, L. F., & Simmons, W. K. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nature Reviews. 
Neuroscience, 16(7), 419. 
Beckes, L., & Coan, J. A. (2011). Social baseline theory: The role of social proximity in emotion 
and economy of action. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 5(12), 976-988. 
Bessou, P., Burgess, P. R., Perl, E. R., & Taylor, C. B. (1971). Dynamic properties of 
mechanoreceptors with unmyelinated (C) fibers. Journal of neurophysiology. 
 29 
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New York, NY: Basic Books. 
Brooks, J., & Tracey, I. (2005). From nociception to pain perception: imaging the spinal and 
supraspinal pathways. Journal of anatomy, 207(1), 19-33. 
Cannon, W. B. (1929). Bodily changes in pain, hunger, fear and rage (2nd ed.). New York: 
Appleton 
Caterina, M. J., Schumacher, M. A., Tominaga, M., & Rosen, T. A. (1997). The capsaicin 
receptor: a heat-activated ion channel in the pain pathway. Nature, 389(6653), 816. 
Ceunen, E., Vlaeyen, J. W., & Van Diest, I. (2016). On the origin of interoception. Frontiers in 
psychology, 7. 
Coan, J. A., Schaefer, H. S., & Davidson, R. J. (2006). Lending a hand: Social regulation of the 
neural response to threat. Psychological science, 17(12), 1032-1039. 
Craig, A. D. (2002). Opinion: How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiological 
condition of the body. Nature reviews. Neuroscience, 3(8), 655. 
Craig, A. D. (2003a). Interoception: the sense of the physiological condition of the body. Current 
opinion in neurobiology, 13(4), 500-505. 
Craig, A. D. (2003b). A new view of pain as a homeostatic emotion. Trends in 
neurosciences, 26(6), 303-307. 
Craig, A. D. (2008). Interoception and emotion: a neuroanatomical perspective. Handbook of 
emotions, 3(602), 272-88. 
Critchley, H. D., & Harrison, N. A. (2013). Visceral influences on brain and 
behavior. Neuron, 77(4), 624-638. 
Damasio, A. (2010). Self comes to mind: Constructing the conscious brain. Vintage. 
 30 
Decety, J., & Fotopoulou, A. (2014). Why empathy has a beneficial impact on others in 
medicine: unifying theories. Frontiers in behavioral neuroscience, 8. 
Dubin, A. E., & Patapoutian, A. (2010). Nociceptors: the sensors of the pain pathway. The 
Journal of clinical investigation, 120(11), 3760. 
Ellingsen, D. M., Leknes, S., Løseth, G., Wessberg, J., & Olausson, H. (2015). The neurobiology 
shaping affective touch: expectation, motivation, and meaning in the multisensory 
context. Frontiers in psychology, 6. 
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy. Frontiers in human 
neuroscience, 4. 
Fiorillo, C. D., Tobler, P. N., & Schultz, W. (2003). Discrete coding of reward probability and 
uncertainty by dopamine neurons. Science, 299(5614), 1898-1902. 
Fotopoulou, A. (2013). Beyond the reward principle: consciousness as precision 
seeking. Neuropsychoanalysis, 15(1), 33-38. 
Fotopoulou, A., & Tsakiris, M. (2017). Mentalizing homeostasis: The social origins of 
interoceptive inference. Neuropsychoanalysis, 19(1), 3-28. 
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory?. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 11(2), 127-138. 
Friston, K. J., Shiner, T., FitzGerald, T., Galea, J. M., Adams, R., Brown, H., ... & Bestmann, S. 
(2012). Dopamine, affordance and active inference. PLoS computational biology, 8(1), 
e1002327. 
Garcia-Larrea, L., Frot, M., & Valeriani, M. (2003). Brain generators of laser-evoked potentials: 
from dipoles to functional significance. Neurophysiologie clinique/Clinical 
neurophysiology, 33(6), 279-292. 
 31 
Gaughan, A. M., & Gracely, R. H. (1989). A somatization model of repressed negative emotion: 
defensiveness increases affective ratings of thermal pain sensations. Soc Behav Med 
[Abstr]. 
Gordon, I., Voos, A. C., Bennett, R. H., Bolling, D. Z., Pelphrey, K. A., & Kaiser, M. D. (2013). 
Brain mechanisms for processing affective touch. Human Brain Mapping, 34(4), 914-
922. 
Gu, X., Hof, P. R., Friston, K. J., & Fan, J. (2013). Anterior insular cortex and emotional 
awareness. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 521(15), 3371-3388. 
Head, H. & Holmes, G. (1911). Sensory disturbances from cerebral lesions. Brain, 34, 102–254.  
Hurter, S., Paloyelis, Y., Williams, A. C. D. C., & Fotopoulou, A. (2014). Partners' empathy 
increases pain ratings: effects of perceived empathy and attachment style on pain report 
and display. The Journal of Pain, 15(9), 934-944. 
Kleckner, I., Zhang, J., Touroutoglou, A., Chanes, L., Xia, C., Simmons, W. K., ... & Barrett, L. 
(2017). Evidence for a large-scale brain system supporting allostasis and interoception in 
humans. bioRxiv, 098970. 
Krahé, C., Drabek, M. M., Paloyelis, Y., & Fotopoulou, A. (2016). Affective touch and 
attachment style modulate pain: a laser-evoked potentials study. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 
B, 371(1708), 20160009. 
Krahé, C., Paloyelis, Y., Condon, H., Jenkinson, P. M., Williams, S. C., & Fotopoulou, A. 
(2015). Attachment style moderates partner presence effects on pain: a laser-evoked 
potentials study. Social cognitive and affective neuroscience, 10(8), 1030-1037. 
 32 
Krahé, C., Springer, A., Weinman, J. A., & Fotopoulou, A. (2013). The social modulation of 
pain: others as predictive signals of salience–a systematic review. Frontiers in human 
neuroscience, 7. 
Krahé, C., von Mohr, M., Gentsch, A., Vari, C., Fidler, L., Nolte, T., & Fotopoulou, A. 
(unplublished data). Attachment style modulates the perception of affective touch.  
Legrain, V., Iannetti, G. D., Plaghki, L., & Mouraux, A. (2011). The pain matrix reloaded: a 
salience detection system for the body. Progress in neurobiology, 93(1), 111-124. 
Löken, L. S., Wessberg, J., McGlone, F., & Olausson, H. (2009). Coding of pleasant touch by 
unmyelinated afferents in humans. Nature neuroscience, 12(5), 547-548. 
Marks, L.E., Ringkamp, M., Campbell, J.N., Raja, S.N. (2006). Peripheral mechanisms of 
cutaneous nociception. London: Elsevier, 3-34.  
Mazzola, L., Isnard, J., Peyron, R., & Mauguière, F. (2012). Stimulation of the human cortex and 
the experience of pain: Wilder Penfield's observations revisited. Brain, 631-640. 
McCabe, C., Rolls, E. T., Bilderbeck, A., & McGlone, F. (2008). Cognitive influences on the 
affective representation of touch and the sight of touch in the human brain. Social 
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 3(2), 97-108. 
McGlone, F., Wessberg, J., & Olausson, H. (2014). Discriminative and affective touch: sensing 
and feeling. Neuron, 82(4), 737-755. 
Medford, N., & Critchley, H. D. (2010). Conjoint activity of anterior insular and anterior 
cingulate cortex: awareness and response. Brain Structure and Function, 214(5-6), 535-
549. 
Meredith, P., Ownsworth, T., and Strong, J. (2008). A review of the evi- dence linking adult 
attachment the- ory and chronic pain: presenting a conceptual model. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 
 33 
28, 407–429. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2007. 07.009  
Mikulincer, M., Shaver, P. R., Sapir- Lavid, Y., and Avihou-Kanza, N. (2009). What’s inside the 
minds of securely and insecurely attached people? The secure-base script and its 
associations with attachment- style dimensions. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 97, 615–633. 
doi:10.1037/a0015649  
Olausson, H., Cole, J., Rylander, K., McGlone, F., Lamarre, Y., Wallin, B. G., ... & Vallbo, Å. 
(2008). Functional role of unmyelinated tactile afferents in human hairy skin: 
sympathetic response and perceptual localization. Experimental brain research, 184(1), 
135-140. 
Olausson, H., Lamarre, Y., Backlund, H., Morin, C., Wallin, B. G., Starck, G., ... & Bushnell, M. 
C. (2002). Unmyelinated tactile afferents signal touch and project to insular 
cortex. Nature neuroscience, 5(9), 900. 
Paloyelis, Y., Krahé, C., Maltezos, S., Williams, S. C., Howard, M. A., & Fotopoulou, A. (2016). 
The Analgesic Effect of Oxytocin in Humans: A Double‐Blind, Placebo‐Controlled 
Cross‐Over Study Using Laser‐Evoked Potentials. Journal of neuroendocrinology, 28(4). 
Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective neuroscience: The foundations of human and animal emotions. 
New York: Oxford University Press 
Paulus, M. P., & Stein, M. B. (2006). An insular view of anxiety. Biological psychiatry, 60(4), 
383-387. 
Perl, E. R. (2007). Ideas about pain, a historical view. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8(1), 71-80. 
 34 
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. (2015). Active Inference, homeostatic regulation and 
adaptive behavioural control. Progress in Neurobiology, 134, 17-35. 
Ploghaus, A., Becerra, L., Borras, C., & Borsook, D. (2003). Neural circuitry underlying pain 
modulation: expectation, hypnosis, placebo. Trends in cognitive sciences, 7(5), 197-200. 
Ploghaus, A., Tracey, I., Gati, J. S., Clare, S., Menon, R. S., Matthews, P. M., & Rawlins, J. N. 
P. (1999). Dissociating pain from its anticipation in the human brain. science, 284(5422), 
1979-1981. 
Ploner, M., Freund, H. J., & Schnitzler, A. (1999). Pain affect without pain sensation in a patient 
with a postcentral lesion. Pain, 81(1), 211-214. 
Quattrocki, E., & Friston, K. (2014). Autism, oxytocin and interoception. Neuroscience & 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 47, 410-430. 
Rainville, P., Duncan, G. H., Price, D. D., Carrier, B., & Bushnell, M. C. (1997). Pain affect 
encoded in human anterior cingulate but not somatosensory cortex. Science, 277(5328), 
968-971. 
Ritter, A. M., & Mendell, L. M. (1992). Somal membrane properties of physiologically 
identified sensory neurons in the rat: effects of nerve growth factor. Journal of 
neurophysiology, 68(6), 2033-2041. 
Rolls, E. T. (2010). The affective and cognitive processing of touch, oral texture, and 
temperature in the brain. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 34(2), 237-245. 
Rolls, E. T., O’Doherty, J., Kringelbach, M. L., Francis, S., Bowtell, R., & McGlone, F. (2003). 
Representations of pleasant and painful touch in the human orbitofrontal and cingulate 
cortices. Cerebral cortex, 13(3), 308-317. 
 35 
Sambo, C. F., Howard, M., Kopelman, M., Williams, S., & Fotopoulou, A. (2010). Knowing you 
care: effects of perceived empathy and attachment style on pain 
perception. PAIN®, 151(3), 687-693. 
Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends in cognitive 
sciences, 17(11), 565-573. 
Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K., & Critchley, H. D. (2011). An interoceptive predictive coding model of 
conscious presence. Frontiers in psychology, 2. 
Sherrington, C. (1910). The integrative action of the nervous system. CUP Archive. 
Stephan, K. E., Manjaly, Z. M., Mathys, C. D., Weber, L. A., Paliwal, S., Gard, T., ... & 
Petzschner, F. H. (2016). Allostatic self-efficacy: A metacognitive theory of 
dyshomeostasis-induced fatigue and depression. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 10. 
Sterling, P., & Eyer, J. (1988). Allostasis: a new paradigm to explain arousal pathology. In 
‘Handbook of Life Stress, Cognition and Health’.(Eds K. Fisher and J. Reason.) pp. 629–
649. 
Sugiura, Y., Lee, C. L., & Perl, E. R. (1986). Projections of identified, unmyelinated (C) afferent 
fibers innervating mammalian skin. Science, 234, 358-362. 
Talbot, J. D., Marrett, S., Evans, A. C., Meyer, E., Bushnell, M. C., & Duncan, G. H. (1991). 
Multiple representations of pain in human cerebral cortex. Science, 251(4999), 1355-
1359. 
Valentini, E., Hu, L., Chakrabarti, B., Hu, Y., Aglioti, S. M., & Iannetti, G. D. (2012). The 
primary somatosensory cortex largely contributes to the early part of the cortical response 
elicited by nociceptive stimuli. Neuroimage, 59(2), 1571-1581. 
 36 
Vallbo, Å. B., Olausson, H., & Wessberg, J. (1999). Unmyelinated afferents constitute a second 
system coding tactile stimuli of the human hairy skin. Journal of Neurophysiology, 81(6), 
2753-2763. 
Vera-Portocarrero, L. P., Zhang, E. T., Ossipov, M. H., Xie, J. Y., King, T., Lai, J., & Porreca, F. 
(2006). Descending facilitation from the rostral ventromedial medulla maintains nerve 
injury-induced central sensitization. Neuroscience, 140(4), 1311-1320. 
Villemure, C., & Bushnell, C. M. (2002). Cognitive modulation of pain: how do attention and 
emotion influence pain processing?. Pain, 95(3), 195-199. 
von Mohr, M., Krahé, C., Beck, B., & Fotopoulou, A. (unpublished data). Affective touch and 
attachment style modulates pain in romantic couples: A laser-evoked potentials study. 
Wall, P., & Melzack, R. (1999). Text book of pain. 
Wiech, K., Lin, C. S., Brodersen, K. H., Bingel, U., Ploner, M., & Tracey, I. (2010). Anterior 
insula integrates information about salience into perceptual decisions about pain. Journal 
of Neuroscience, 30(48), 16324-16331. 
Wiens, S. (2005). Interoception in emotional experience. Current opinion in neurology, 18(4), 
442-447. 
Woolf, C. J., & Salter, M. W. (2000). Neuronal plasticity: increasing the gain in 
pain. science, 288(5472), 1765-1768. 
Zotterman, Y. (1939). Touch, pain and tickling: an electro‐physiological investigation on 
cutaneous sensory nerves. The Journal of physiology, 95(1), 1-28. 
 