  
Resurrecting Gaia:  
Harnessing the Free Energy Principle to 
Preserve Life as We Know It 
 
Caspar Montgomery1, Inês Hipólito1,2* 
1Berlin School of Mind & Brain, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany 
2Department of Philosophy, Macquarie University, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia 
Corresponding Author 
ines.hipolito@hu-berlin.de  
 
Abstract 
This paper applies the Free Energy Principle (FEP) to propose that the lack of action in response to 
the global ecological crisis should be considered a maladaptive symptom of human activity that we 
refer to as biophilia deficiency syndrome. The paper is organised into four parts: the characterisation 
of the natural world under the Gaia Hypothesis, the employment of the FEP as a description of the 
behaviour of self-organising systems, the application of the FEP to Gaia to understand coupling 
dynamics between living systems and purportedly non-living planetary processes, and the offering of 
positive interventions for addressing the current state of ecological crisis under this framework. For 
the latter, we emphasise the importance of perturbing stuck states for healthy development, and the 
necessary appreciation of life existing as nested systems at multiple levels in a hierarchy. We propose 
the development of human biophilia virtue in accordance with the FEP as a practical intervention for 
treating biophilia deficiency syndrome and helping to safeguard the balance of planetary processes 
and the integrity of living systems that depend on them, offering some examples of what this might 
look like in practice. Overall, this paper provides novel insights into how to catalyse meaningful 
ecological change, proposing a deliberate and disruptive approach to addressing the dysfunctional 
relationship between humans and the rest of the natural world. 
Keywords: Free Energy Principle (FEP), Gaia Hypothesis (GH), active inference, biophilia, 
ecological crisis, nature connectedness 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
The relation of humanity to the rest of the natural world is essentially one of dependence. Our 
continued survival and flourishing are utterly contingent upon the state and functioning of our 
environment, which supplies us with eatable food, drinkable water, and breathable air. In the most 
practical sense possible, we are existentially bound to the rest of nature. Moreover, extensive 
empirical evidence demonstrates that connection to natural environments is a key ingredient of 
mental health. Specifically, spending time in natural settings has been shown to reduce stress, anxiety 
and depression, and enhance mood, cognitive function, mental health and well-being (Bratman et al., 
2021; White et al., 2019). The psychological construct ‘connection to the world’ correlates with 
therapeutic outcomes in treatment for depression (Watts et al., 2022), while Berto (2014) found that 
even exposure to images of natural scenes can improve mood and cognitive function. These results 
suggest that nature can be a powerful tool for promoting mental health and well-being.  
However, to frame the value of nature purely in such utilitarian terms would be to gravely miss the 
point. Recent research in cognitive science suggests that humans possess an innate cognitive 
disposition towards nature, known as “biophilia”. This concept, coined by biologist E.O. Wilson 
(1984), purportedly has deep roots in our evolutionary history as the natural psychological 
disposition of humans to seek out and connect with other living organisms and natural environments 
(Clowney, 2013; Olivos-Jara et al., 2020; Barbiero and Berto, 2021). This evolutionary adaptation is 
believed to be the biological basis for human values of nature and environmental virtue (Clowney, 
2013): the sense of connection and identity with, and fondness for (the continued existence of) all 
forms of life on Earth entails a sense of care towards the rest of the natural world and a willingness to 
protect it (Rowlandson 2015). The concept of biophilia is therefore not merely a psychological 
theory, but rather a fundamental aspect of human nature that has played a crucial role in our survival 
and adaptation throughout our evolutionary history. The flip-side to this bond is the increasing 
prevalence of eco-anxiety among young adults and children upon learning about climate change, and 
observing human inaction towards them (Pihkala, 2020; Baudon and Jachens, 2021; Gunasiri et al., 
2022). The question remains as to whether there can be an effective therapeutic strategy that 
addresses eco-anxiety without addressing the fundamental ecological crisis, or whether they are two 
crises which can only be tackled together.  
We therefore arrive at a philosophical dilemma. On the one hand, human beings are imbued with 
biophilia, the “innate emotional  affiliation … to  other  living organisms” (Wilson 1993, p. 31). This 
biopsychological disposition suggests that people would be inclined to strive to protect and preserve 
the environment, including mitigating and ideally overcoming the threats of ecological breakdown. 
On the other hand, the lack of action to address the ecological crisis appears contradictory to this 
biophilic inclination. As our population and global footprint continue to expand, humanity's 
catastrophic impact on the Earth has become increasingly apparent: it is by now beyond doubt that 
activities such as deforestation, pollution of the oceans, and greenhouse gas emissions are harming 
our planet.  
This paper seeks to address the contradiction between the biophilic inclination towards 
environmental protection and the lack of action taken to address the current ecological crisis. The 
paper proceeds in four parts. First, the natural world is characterised by the Gaia Hypothesis (GH). 
Second, the Free Energy Principle (FEP) is described, and then, third, employed to further develop 
and augment the GH. Fourth, it is argued that human failure to act on the ecological crisis does not 
invalidate the FEP. Rather, it is shown that this failure is indicative of an imbalance between active 
and sensory states, which reflects an unhealthy condition in the human species. If not addressed, this 
 
condition will lead to the dissipation of adaptation, the painful decline of our species, and ultimately 
the end of (human) ‘life as we know it’ (Friston, 2013). The paper concludes by proposing that 
organised action motivated by biophilia in line with the FEP is necessary to treat this unhealthy 
condition. 
 
1. The Gaia Hypothesis 
“We have to use the crude tool of metaphor to translate conscious ideas into unconscious 
understanding.” James Lovelock (2007, p. 178) 
The Gaia Hypothesis – named after the goddess who personified Earth in Ancient Greek mythology 
(Lovelock, 1972) – holds as its central tenet that the conditions required for life on our planet are 
maintained by and for the biosphere (Lovelock and Margulis, 1974). The ‘biosphere’ (synonymous 
with ‘Gaia’ hereafter) refers to the thin spherical layer of the planet at which life exists, starting 
where rock meets magma roughly 100 miles below the surface, and extending another 100 miles 
towards the thermosphere where air meets space (Lovelock, 2007, p. 19; see fig. 1). Consisting of 
rock, soil, water, air, and all of the approximately 5.5 x 1014 kg of organic matter in the known 
universe (Bar-On et al., 2018), Gaia is a geophysiological entity, since the totality of life and its non-
living environment are bound as a single interdependent system (Lovelock, 1989). The ‘abiotic’ parts 
are considered part of the total living organism, like the shell of a snail (Lovelock, 1972). 
 
 
Figure 1. Selected layers of Planet Earth. The biosphere, highlighted here in green, encompasses the Earth’s 
crust, the lands and oceans on its surface, and extends out towards the edge of the atmosphere. 
 

 
The GH is motivated by the fact that during the 3.8 billion years that life has persisted on Earth, 
conditions have remained remarkably constant and favourable across a huge range of parameters. 
Most obvious of these is temperature, which has remained within the tight parameters required for 
life to survive and thrive, despite an increase of the sun’s output by at least 30% since life began 
(Lovelock and Margulis, 1974). The same applies to the pH and salinity of the ocean, despite the 
incessant depositing of salts from the land into the ocean by rivers (Lovelock, 2007, p. 34), and to the 
chemical composition of the soil and atmosphere (Lovelock and Watson, 1982). For a quarter of the 
time the universe has existed, these and countless other variables have been vastly different from 
what they ‘should’ be, lying far from equilibrium at the levels that just happen to support life, even 
withstanding countless catastrophic volcanic eruptions, solar flares and asteroid strikes (Lovelock, 
1979, p. 33). “For this to have happened by chance,” originator James Lovelock says, “is as unlikely 
as to survive unscathed a drive blindfolded through rush-hour traffic.” (1979, p. 10). 
The Gaia Hypothesis instead takes this constancy to be a natural product of evolution. However, in a 
modification of canonical Darwinism, rather than the evolution of individual organisms to an inert 
environment, “what evolves is the whole Earth system with its living and nonliving parts existing as 
a tight coupled entity.” (Lovelock, 2007, p. 178). This can be understood through the ‘hologenome’ 
concept (Rosenberg and Zilber-Rosenberg, 2011): according to this framework, a holobiont – a living 
host plus all of the smaller organisms living in dependence to it – is the unit of selection, such that 
changes in environmental parameters can lead to long-term adaptive changes to the holobiont via 
iterative changes to the constituent living systems. This is corroborated by Pricean formalisations, 
which demonstrate that natural selection can be extended to accommodate evolution (of Gaia) 
without reproduction (Bourrat, 2023). Thus, in a neo-Lamarckian turn within a Darwinian 
framework, the combined genetic wealth of information of the whole system (the hologenome) 
acquires characteristics that are conducive to its continued existence and in turn affect changes on 
the environment.  
 
The biosphere thereby constitutes a complex system which “appears to have the … goal of regulating 
the climate and the chemistry at a comfortable state of life.” (p. 19). This fact was recognised by the 
scientific community in the 2001 Amsterdam Declaration, where it was acknowledged that the Earth 
is indeed a self-regulating system (Moore et al., 2001): just as an animal employs homeostatic 
feedback cycles to maintain viable conditions for its survival, the biosphere is kept within the limits 
needed for its own continued existence by thermodynamic imperatives (Karnani and Annila, 2009). 
This self-regulation tends not towards set points but adapts in a flexible manner to support the 
particular current life forms given the current environmental conditions (Lovelock, 2007, p. 19).1 
Some literature on simulations can elucidate this further. ‘Daisyworld’ was originally a caricature of 
Gaia wherein the only life forms – black and white daisies – absorb and reflect light, respectively 
(Watson and Lovelock, 1983). Temperature-driven competition between the two creates a balance in 
populations and therefore albedo effects, such that a planetary temperature favouring daisy growth is 
maintained, even as the output of the nearby ‘sun’ varies in the simulation (ibid.). Considered as a 
complex adaptive system, Daisyworld thereby exhibits “emergent self–regulation as a consequence 
of feedback coupling between life and its environment” (Lenton and van Oijen, 2002).  
 
1 For instance, oxygen, which was extremely poisonous to the organisms of the time, was virtually absent from the 
atmosphere for more than a billion years of life, until the explosion of aerobic life coincided with a dramatic increase of 
oxygen levels as it was produced by cyanobacteria (Schirrmeister et al., 2013; Lyons et al., 2014). 
 
More recent models have corroborated and extended these findings. Using standard methodology 
from quantitative genetics, it has been shown that the self-regulating dynamics are explainable purely 
in terms of the low-level evolutionary dynamics of competition between the daisies: no higher level 
principle (such as teleology) need be invoked (Wood and Coe, 2007; Makarieva, 2022; Bourrat, 
2023), at least at certain timescales (Weaver and Dyke, 2012). The implications have also been 
corroborated by models of different properties of organic systems: for instance, the metabolically 
abstract microorganism system (METAMIC) model simulates nutrient recycling (rather than 
temperature regulation) given appropriate thermodynamic constraints, and largely recapitulates the 
relevant behaviour of Daisyworld (Downing, 2002; 2003). Further, models based on based on 
Chemical Organization Theory (COT) and the Zero Deficiency Theorem (ZDT) demonstrate the 
autopoietic properties of the biosphere, and suggest how these might relate to other intrinsic features 
of living systems, such as autonomy and anticipation (Rubin et al., 2021). Finally, Daisyworld has 
been used in spatial systems dynamics simulations which demonstrate the importance of spatio-
temporal interactions in such systems, thereby bridging the gap between purely abstract models and 
the three-dimensional coupling involving the biosphere (Neuwirth et al., 2015). 
At a broader level, the perspective that the GH brings is appealing for many reasons. Conceptualised 
as a single complex system, Gaia changes in a way that is adaptive and non-linear (Lovelock, 1979); 
it displays dynamical, emergent, and sudden tipping behaviour: when bifurcation points are reached, 
new attractor states form, and higher order is established (Lovelock, 1979; 1989; Gleick, 1987; 
Capra, 1997; Lenton et al., 2020b);2 importantly for our purposes, it is self-organising (Lenton and 
van Oijen, 2002), and strong emphasis is given to the extreme interdependence between the 
processes of the system (Capra, 1997).  Due to this combination of properties, the GH has both 
informed and been informed by a wide range of fields including ecology, climate science, 
cybernetics, complex systems theory, chaos mathematics, and the philosophy of mind. 
Furthermore, there is an intuitive – and, indeed, poetic – attraction to Gaian thinking, as it allows us 
to transcend conventional levels of analysis, bridge philosophy and science, and prompt novel 
discussions on planetary-scale issues (Ruse, 2013). We generally find it intuitively easy to 
distinguish life from non-life, but only at the (somewhat arbitrary) level of resolution that the range 
of our senses allows: we would not recognise an E. coli  bacterium without a microscope (Lovelock, 
2007, p. 174). Similarly, although we struggle to see it that way (Lenton et al., 2020a), the natural 
way for aliens observing the Earth from space would plausibly be not to see a writhing mass of 
individual organisms on a dead planet, but rather a rock that has come to life (Oliver, 2020, p. 11). As 
a mode of thought, this visualisation of Gaia, while not necessary to comprehend it, provides a 
powerful tool for scientific understanding (de Regt, 2014). Thus, like the ‘overview effect’ 
experienced by astronauts viewing our planet from orbit (White, 2014), the GH offers a glimpse of a 
fundamentally different way of thinking that in fact dominated most of human history, whereby the 
world was considered a single living organism – a ‘Thou’ rather than an ‘It’ (Frankfort et al., 1960). 
This may amount to a revival of some important elements of animism in its most basic form: a sensed 
appreciation of the vitality of the more-than-human aspects of Earth (Abram, 1997). 
However, the GH has been subject to a wide range of criticisms (see e.g. Ruse, 2013; Rubin and 
Crucifix, 2022). Of the two most vociferous objections, however, the first worries unnecessarily that 
the use of language in the formulation of the idea entails commitments concerning the divine, 
sentient, or otherwise supernatural status of Gaia. Despite being largely compatible with strong 
 
2 These tipping points are partly what make climate change such a difficult challenge, especially since we won’t 
necessarily know when they have been passed (Lenton et al., 2020b). 
 
claims such as those made in panpsychism, and somewhat ontologically slippery as an edge case of 
metaphysical categories, Lovelock (2007, p. 20) stresses that his illustrative goddess metaphor is just 
that. 
Secondly, it has variously been argued that the GH is either false or unfalsifiable (Kirchner, 1989). 
Both cannot be correct, and, while it clearly contains and presupposes certain empirical claims 
(concerning the age of the solar system, the composition of the atmosphere, and so on), the actual 
idea of the biosphere as a self-regulating system is not a ‘hypothesis’ at all but a perspective, a way 
of describing the fact of life’s existence on Earth (though I will stick to its conventional name to 
avoid confusion). As per Catherine Elgin’s assertions (2019), truth is defined within this framework, 
rather than applied to it, and the mode of thinking that the GH engenders ‘refracts’ with other modes, 
rather than competing with them. This is the “explanatory pluralism” that Kleinhans et al. (2010) 
refer to in their conclusion from an analysis of the philosophy of earth science. 
Like Newtonian physics or psychoanalysis, the GH is therefore much more a framework or a method 
of investigation than it is a falsifiable empirical claim, and it is therefore to be judged by its 
usefulness, not its purported correctness, where usefulness is determined by factors such as 
parsimony, coherence and consistency, plus its power to explain phenomena, produce new facts, and 
so on, in a given context and a given time-frame (De Regt and Dieks, 2005). Thus we effectively 
adopt a broadly pragmatic epistemological view of scientific understanding with regards to GH, 
similar to that endorsed by Henk de Regt (2009) and others. By analogy, when meeting someone on 
the street, we conventionally treat the object of the encounter as a single fellow living being, rather 
than a composite menagerie of over 40 trillion discrete microorganisms in a state of cohabitation 
(Sender et al., 2016). This ‘Human Hypothesis’ is not more or less correct than a ‘Microorganism 
Hypothesis’, it is simply a different (and usually more useful) scale at which to engage with the 
phenomena. In principle, then, the GH can at worst be called unpragmatic, but not false. 
 
2. The Free Energy Principle for Self-Organising Interacting Systems 
In this section, we aim to present the fundamental framework of the Free Energy Principle (FEP) and 
active inference. Subsequently, we intend to apply this framework to the planetary-scale processes 
which comprise Gaia. By doing so, we can apply the FEP to analyse the interdependent dynamics 
between living systems and (non-living) planetary processes. Specifically, this framework allows us 
to gain insights into future states of Gaia, formulate predictions, and devise potential interventions to 
alleviate future dysfunction. 
The second law of thermodynamics, which governs the behaviour of energy and entropy in a system, 
stipulates that all open systems  – which means almost all systems in the natural world – tend to 
dissipate, i.e. tend towards chaos or increased entropy. For example, a cup of hot coffee will always 
cool down to room temperature, but it will never spontaneously heat back up to its original 
temperature. The principles of thermodynamics in physics stipulate that the behaviour of open 
systems is critically influenced by the interaction with the environment. The flow of these 
interactions cannot be replicated in the opposite direction due to the irreversible nature of time (Von 
Bertalanffy, 1950; Ptaszyński and Esposito, 2019; Pokrovskii, 2020; Rovelli, 2023). 
However, there are displays of ‘negentropy’ (Schrödinger, 1944), pockets of the universe where 
order and bodily integrity are maintained in the face of the surge towards chaos. These pockets are 
self-organising systems, or “things” (Hipólito, 2019), including – but not limited to – living 
 
organisms. These things resist entropy by interacting with the world such that their integrity is 
maintained, i.e. the process of homeostasis. They use energy to keep themselves within the restricted 
set of possible states that allows for their continued existence. Hence the workings of feedback cycles 
– drinking when one is thirsty, retreating from a hot fire, etc. – represent work that can only be done 
by the energy that is ‘bound’ within the system and therefore useful, whilst the remainder is called 
‘free’ energy (Friston and Stephan, 2007). Simply by existing, then – by virtue of seemingly defying 
the second law of thermodynamics by acting to minimise entropy – all such self-organising systems 
necessarily act so that their free energy is minimised. This is the Free Energy Principle. 
Moreover, a system’s free energy bears upon various other related concepts in addition to entropy, 
including the number of possible states the system can manifest, the predictability of its behaviour, 
and the level of ‘surprise’ associated with new data (Table 1).3 Furthermore, at least in Karl Friston’s 
formulation,4 free energy is equal to information, i.e. the number of new binary facts about the state 
of the world gleaned by a system from a given data sample (Solms, 2021). This means that, adhering 
to the FEP, every thing should act so as to minimise the amount of information about the world it 
needs to process, which amounts to minimising its free energy, chaos or entropy and thus 
maintaining its physical integrity. 
Free Energy Low High 
Bound (i.e. useful) energy High Low 
Entropy Low High 
Number of possible states of the system Low High 
Predictability High Low 
Surprise Low High 
Average information (i.e. uncertainty) of a series of measurements Low High 
Mutual information between internal and external states High Low 
Table 1. The relationship between Friston’s Free Energy and related quantities. 
 
3 Though a technical term, this formal meaning of ‘surprise’ is close enough to its use in common parlance. 
4 As opposed to Helmholtz’s and Gibbs’ free energy, which refer to related thermodynamic and chemical quantities, 
respectively. 
 
 
Organisms minimise free energy by action. Active inference is a corollary of the FEP that allows us 
to model and understand a complex system’s behaviour. In its formulation, living systems: 
will appear to engage in active Bayesian inference. In other words, they will appear to 
model — and act on — their world to preserve their functional and structural integrity, 
leading to homoeostasis and a simple form of autopoiesis. (Friston, 2013, p. 1, emphasis 
added). 
‘Active inference’ is a modelling technique that, because it employs a scale-free formalism known as 
Markov blankets, allows us to understand and make predictions about the coupling dynamics taking 
place between interacting systems. A living system is equated with “internal states”, while the system 
it interacts with is “external states”. Because, mathematically, internal and external states are 
conditionally independent, they do not directly influence one another. The direct influence occurs via 
yet another set of states: active and sensory states. A balanced reciprocal influence between active 
and sensory states is fundamental for a system (internal states) to maintain a healthy interaction with 
— and thereby adaptation to — its environment (external states). 
These interdependencies and dynamics are understood by employing a Markov blanket. A Markov 
blanket is a statistical tool that can be applied to any system that self-organises. More precisely it 
furnishes probabilistically defined tools to set a system’s boundaries through conditional dependence 
or independence relationships. Because they are scale-free, they can be applied to any level of 
analysis of the natural world. The concept of Markov blanket involves defining a set of variables, 
denoted as b, that surround the internal states while labelling all other external variables as η.  
The internal and active states are a function of a system's internal and blanket states. Similarly, 
external and sensory states are a function of external and blanket states. This sparse dynamical 
coupling means that the state of a system at a moment in time results from the interactive dynamics 
between internal, sensory and active states; meanwhile, the state of the environment at a moment in 
time is a result of the dynamics between external, sensory and active states. It follows from this that 
internal and external states reciprocally (indirectly) influence each other. 
There are therefore two ways for a thing to minimise its free energy, and thereby maintain its own 
integrity and continued existence: the first is to change the model (or belief) that it instantiates so as 
to more closely resemble the world, by perpetually generating, testing and updating it based on 
incoming prediction error information. The second is to change the world by acting upon it to bring it 
in line with predictions, under the generative model. These processes form a feedback loop, from 
within the system to without and vice versa (as seen in fig. 2). 
 
 
Figure 2. The partitioning of a system into states. The result is composed of internal (purple) and external 
or hidden (orange) states, separated by a Markov blanket consisting of sensory (green) and active (blue) states. 
The schematic highlights directed influences with dotted connectors. Autonomous states are those not 
influenced by external states, while sensory and autonomous states constitute an entity, namely, blanket and 
internal states. A system of scientific interest (e.g. a cell, an organ, an organism, a community, an ecosystem) 
is composed of sensory, active, and internal states, as described in more detail by Hipólito (2019). 
 
This loop involves the system being described as if using inference to both update its model of the 
environment and act upon it, as illustrated by fig. 3 in the case of a human. The loop can be described 
in terms of the following steps (where we can regard free energy as the total amount of prediction 
error): 
1. The generation of a prediction of its sensory input based on its internal model. This prediction 
is compared to the actual sensory input to generate a prediction error. 
2. The updating of its internal model to reduce the prediction error. This involves adjusting the 
probabilities assigned to various possible causes of the sensory input. 
3. Based on an updated internal model, the system is then supposed to generate an action that it 
“believes” will lead to a predicted outcome in the environment. 
4. The system’s action upon the environment is seen as generating new sensory input. 
5. The loop then repeats, as a system generating a new prediction of sensory input based on the 
updated internal model, and so on. 

 
 
 
Figure 3. An organism-environment interaction. Active inference and the Free Energy Principle describe a 
closed causal loop of action and perception within a system, such as a human. This loop involves the system 
using inference to both update its model of the environment and act upon it. 
 
The system is then understood by scientifically interpreting and predicting its behaviour as a system's 
internal model is constantly updated in response to new sensory input to improve the accuracy of 
predictions. This loop therefore minimises the system’s uncertainty about the causes of its sensory 
input, since it is driven by (or amounts to) the minimisation of free energy. 
 
3. Applying the Free Energy Principle to the Gaia Hypothesis 
In this section, we utilise the Free Energy Principle (FEP) to elucidate the coupling dynamics 
between biological systems and geophysical planetary processes, which make up the biosphere. In 
this picture, organisms and ecosystems are self-organising systems which are each part of a larger 
multiscaled system. The FEP framework facilitates greater understanding of current states and 
enables us to make predictions about future states. Additionally, it helps to identify and develop 
interventions to rectify any maladaptive responses, namely actions which are antithetical to 
maintaining the integrity of a system: human behaviour that leads to an imbalance within the Markov 
blanket states is therefore to be considered maladaptive or pathological. 
As a self-organising system, Gaia meets the requirements to be formalised as part of an active 
inference system. It exists in non-equilibrium steady states (NESS), viz. its processes and states must 
persist over time within a range of states that are far from equilibrium (i.e. resisting entropy); and it is 

 
distinguishable from its larger scale cosmic environment, defined by conditional independence 
between its internal and external states (which influence each other only vicariously through blanket 
states).  
The issue of distinguishability – that is, the ability to differentiate the biosphere from the earth's core 
on one side and the larger-scale solar system, galaxy, and universe on the other – presents a 
challenge. Experts from diverse fields, from climate and complexity scientists to Buddhist 
philosophers, have stressed that the biosphere is an integral part of the larger cosmic environment, 
demonstrating fundamental continuity with and interdependent upon it (McMichael, 1993; Egri et al., 
1999; Danvers, 2016; Kaçar et al., 2021; Boulton, 2022; Stahel, 2022). However, while the 
ontological continuity of the Earth and the rest of the universe should be emphasised, it is 
nevertheless possible to employ epistemic (statistical) tools to help us understand the interactions 
between multiscaled systems, in the same way that we can usefully distinguish between cells and 
organisms or countries and continents without supposing that they are truly separable. 
We can therefore use Markov blankets to elucidate the interdependencies and dynamics between the 
nested systems, since, as outlined above, a Markov blanket is scale-free, making it suitable for 
application across various scales in the natural world, depending on the object of scientific interest. 
For example, we can employ Markov blankets in a multi-scale system to further understand and 
predict the interactions between human behaviour, Gaia, and the Cosmos. 
To envision what this might look like, we can draw from Rubin et al. (2020) who assigned Markov 
blankets specifically to the Earth’s climate system. The authors begin by defining metabolic rates of 
the biosphere as internal states and the changes in ‘space weather’ (mostly driven by solar radiation) 
as external states. Further, they define active states as the changes in greenhouse effects and the 
reflection of sunlight, and sensory states as ocean-driven changes in global temperatures. Internal and 
external states are conditionally independent, thereby indirectly influencing each other via the 
ocean’s very slow reaction to thermal fluctuation. Through this formalism, “the Earth’s climate 
system [can] be interpreted as an anticipatory system that minimises variational free energy” (Rubin 
et al., 2020). 
As stressed previously, because Markov blankets are a scale-free formalism, we can broaden our 
object of scientific interest to cover the entire biosphere. If the geophysiological processes of the 
biosphere are considered internal states, then external states would refer to the external environment, 
which includes everything outside of the system, such as the outer atmosphere, and other planets and 
celestial bodies, as well as the molten core of the planet lying below the Earth’s crust. Sensory states 
are the influences the external environmental states have on the planet Earth such as the impact on 
the Earth’s rotation, orbit, and ocean tides by gravitational effects of the sun, moon, and other 
planets. Earthquakes and volcanoes caused by the influence of by convection currents within the 
mantle on plate tectonics; climate and weather are influenced by solar radiation and space weather 
events; cosmic events like meteor impacts can trigger evolutionary changes and cause mass 
extinctions; the composition of the Earth’s atmosphere is similarly influenced by cosmic events. 
Active states are simply the capacity of the earth to assimilate external influence and adjust to it (i.e. 
change its properties) in ways that will feed back to the external states. For example, the Earth's 
gravitational force causes slight perturbations in the orbits of other objects in the solar system, and its 
magnetic field interacts with the solar wind, affecting phenomena such as the aurora borealis. The 
Earth also emits radiation that can be detected by other objects in the solar system, even from billions 
of kilometres away (fig. 4). 
 
 
Figure 4. The Markov blankets of Gaia. When we consider the geophysical processes of the biosphere as 
internal states, the external states refer to everything outside the organism, including the atmosphere, other 
planets, and celestial bodies. Sensory states include gravitational effects of other celestial bodies, climate and 
weather, the evolution of life, the composition of the atmosphere. Active states are the Earth’s gravitational 
effects, magnetic field, radiation etc. 
 
The active states of a system embody its primary mechanism for self-regulation, representing its 
efforts to remain within the bounds required for ongoing existence, based on predictions about the 
present and future states of the system. For instance, the current levels of greenhouse and albedo 
effects, soil pH, and the number of living organisms reflect the predictive attempts of the Gaian 
system to adapt to the anticipated effects of solar events, volcanic eruptions, ocean salinity changes, 
and other environmental factors in the future. It is in this context that the role of life itself assumes 
paramount importance in the self-regulation of the biosphere. 
In information theory, the dynamics described above can be explained by considering the active 
states as realising the prior predictions of the generative model, while the sensory states provide 
information resulting from the external world, which is used to update the inferred state of the 
biosphere into posterior beliefs. The system responds to prediction errors, to accommodate this new 
information, while at the same time acting on the external states to resolve the prediction error, to the 
extent possible. Note that only certain kinds of prediction errors can be actively resolved. In 
neurobiology, the prediction errors resolved by movement are the predictions of signals from the 
muscles, known as proprioception. If prediction errors cannot be resolved via action, then they will 
be resolved by changing predictions. This can be cast as Bayesian belief updating and an elemental 
kind of perception. Updating the priors to accommodate this new information causes a change in the 
macro properties responsible for enabling such fluctuations, thereby updating the model itself such 
that the mutual information between the internal and external states is maximised, and free energy is 
minimised. Describing Gaia as a complex system of interacting, self-organising processes that exist 

 
in non-equilibrium steady states, actively adapting to changing environmental conditions, affords 
new syntheses between different conceptual approaches. For instance, combining the greenhouse 
effect and the role of life in the biosphere provides a unique opportunity to incorporate energy and 
information as two aspects of the same underlying physical process (Hermann-Pilath, 2011), namely 
the minimisation of free energy. 
Finally, a purported weakness of the FEP actually speaks in favour of its application to the GH.5 Raja 
et al. (2021) rightly point out that Markov blankets do not automatically capture every relevant 
property of biological systems: relational properties such as affordances – what the environment 
“offers the animal [sic], what it provides or furnishes, either for good or ill” (Gibson, 1979, p. 127) – 
fall into this bracket. However, the claim that they are precluded by the FEP is not true, at least with 
respect to the biosphere: on the contrary, affordances correspond well to Gaia as one rung in a ladder 
of nested Markov blankets – with the system in question at every level ranging up from, say, cells 
and organs, through animals and ecosystems, to our solar system (Dennison, 2020) and the whole 
cosmos. In this framework, it is entirely coherent to say that our solar system is one that affords a 
living planet, or that the geosphere affords a biosphere, when we consider that lower levels or layers 
in such hierarchies operate at much faster rates of change than higher levels (Wu 2013). The 
affordances available in an environment are not determined solely by the physical properties of the 
environment, but also by the organism's goals, abilities, and previous experiences. In the case of the 
sun and its affordances for life on the planet, we can apply this theory to understand how the physical 
properties of the sun, as well as the goals and abilities of organisms on Earth, shape the affordances 
that the sun provides. 
The same principles of dynamics, interdependence and scale apply to the symbiotic evolution and 
exchange of genetic information throughout the history of life (Paracer & Ahmadjian, 2000; Watson, 
2002; Gontier, 2016), and, increasingly, to the tight coupling between humans and technology and 
the possible emergence of autonomous symbiotic AI systems (Wang et al., 2021). Hierarchy theory is 
therefore not only compatible with the FEP as applied to the Gaia Hypothesis, it is a highly tractable 
vehicle for understanding it, in terms of the complexity in ecosystems (Allen and Starr, 2017), the 
evolution of the planetary genome across billions of years (Margulis and Sagan, 1995) and changes 
to the (‘non-living’) aspects of ecological landscapes (King, 1997) at different scales of time and 
space. Overall, there is good evidence that phenomena in earth science are emergent, but should be 
considered irreducible to the laws of physics (Kleinhans et al, 2010): we therefore aim to marry 
‘bottom-up’ principles intrinsic to the FEP from fundamental physics to the higher-level phenomena 
captured by the GH. As emphasised above, we are not arguing not that this approach to 
understanding life on Earth is the best one, merely that it can be beneficial.  
 
4. Human Behaviour as an Aspect of Gaia 
We can now employ Markov blankets to further understand and predict the actions of humans within 
the biosphere. Specifically, we want to understand the extent to which human behaviour is 
 
5 Note that applications of the FEP to systems such as animals introduces the notion of planning (as inference) in a 
psychological sense and the consideration of epistemic and pragmatic affordances. However, here, we are applying the 
FEP to the systems that do not necessarily plan, such as the weather, market economy, evolution, et cetera). 
 
antithetical to the healthy behaviour of the larger system, why this is the case according to the FEP, 
and what might be done to improve the situation.  
Larger systems provide the smaller nested systems they contain with existential challenges as well as 
affordances: the sun provides energy for photosynthesis and regulation of the climate, but also 
threatens humans with bad harvests and skin cancer. These challenges demand adaptation in a 
dynamic fashion. The mechanism for this – as per the FEP – is to assimilate information (in the form 
of prediction error) of an upcoming threat from the world, and act accordingly on the world such that 
the system’s integrity will be maintained and free energy minimised. Thus, according to the FEP, 
living beings have a natural tendency to act upon their environment to prevent the dissipation of their 
integrity. Therefore, if the principle holds true, the knowledge that (for example) climate change 
caused by continued greenhouse gas emissions will have catastrophic consequences for continued 
human existence should prompt drastic action from the human species to rectify it, in the form of 
behaviour that reflects biophilia. The lack of such action can be seen as an imbalance within 
(Markov) blanket states, therefore indicating a profoundly unhealthy condition in the human species, 
whereby it is unable to maintain its integrity by adapting to changing environmental conditions. It is 
the combination of knowing that disrupting the balance in such a way is self-harming, and yet acting 
as if this were not the case that constitutes a pathological state. 
According to the FEP, a system’s interaction with the environment consists of using inference to both 
update the model of the environment and act upon it to make the environment fit the model.6 
Therefore, learning (as we have done) that the global status quo represents a serious threat to human 
civilisation, one would expect to see behaviour change accordingly. This would amount to gathering 
more evidence and then acting upon it to minimise free energy and, by extension, preventing the rise 
of entropy, chaos, and the ultimate dissipation of life. 
Instead, the human species either rejects the information available so as to remove the imperative for 
action or, possessing the information available, still refrains from taking action, or worse, continues 
the same harmful behaviour and perpetuates the same systems (such as capitalism) that enable it. If 
the FEP holds, then the observed contradictory behaviour is a maladaptive state, arising as an 
imbalance within the Markov blanket states (fig. 5). 
Using the lens of the FEP to model the dynamics of the relationship between humans and the 
environment, it is possible to see the current lack of sustainability and pro-environmental behaviour 
as a pathology of the human species that must receive treatment. We label this condition biophilia 
deficiency syndrome. To unpack the notion of biophilia deficiency syndrome — and lend it a 
construct validity — it is useful to consider other applications of the FEP to pathology. In general, 
these applications rest upon instances of false inference, of the sort found in psychiatry and 
neurology. For example, inferring things are not there when they are, describes certain dissociative 
and hysterical (e.g., neglect) syndromes. Conversely, inferring things are there when they are not, 
describes phenomena like hallucinations and delusions. 
 
6 Or, fails to attenuate sensory evidence that nothing is — or can — be done about the situation. 
 
 
Figure 5. Imbalance in the Markov blanket. The figure shows influences occurring within the Markov 
blanket, which is marked by a dotted box and includes internal, active, and sensory states. This imbalance 
results in an insulation or echo-chamber effect in internal states that are impermeable to information from 
external states that demand action. 
 
These pathologies are commonplace in computational psychiatry and generally reduce to a failure to 
assign the right weight or precision to prediction errors. Perhaps the most prescient example of this is 
Parkinson's disease, characterised by a failure to initiate movement or action that manifests as 
bradykinesia. From the perspective of the FEP, this is simply explained by a failure to attenuate 
evidence from sensors providing evidence that the one is not moving. Put simply, a failure to realise 
prior predictions can be due to a failure to ignore evidence that predictions are not coming true. This 
seems to be an apt description of our communal and cultural response to the ecological crisis. In 
other words, biophilia deficiency syndrome can be seen as a collective or cultural Parkinsonism that 
inherits from our inability to attenuate the evidence that we are not acting in a remedial or restorative 
fashion. 
 
From the perspective of the FEP, this is a pernicious pathology because doing nothing is a Bayes 
optimal response in the face of a pathological attention to various sources of evidence. In 
computational psychiatry, one then is led to therapeutic interventions that rest either on restoring 
neurochemical deficits in the brain or engaging in therapy that allows people to become skilled in 
deploying their attention — and exploring other models of active engagement with the world. In 
short, enabling patients to escape from particular patterns of active inference in which they are stuck. 
By leveraging the concepts of the free-energy principle (FEP) and active inference, a compelling 
analogous perspective on how humans relate to the ecological crisis emerges. The FEP and active 
inference formalisms shed light on climate change and the wider ecological crisis as a predicament 

 
that is both human-generated and often disregarded due to a lack of action. According to the FEP, 
living systems possess a biologically encoded inclination to interact with their environment in order 
to survive and adapt. 
However, the current state of affairs diverges from this natural inclination. Despite climate change 
being a pressing issue, proactive measures to reverse its effects are not given the priority they 
deserve. This discrepancy between the expected and observed actions can be understood in the 
framework of the FEP as an illness. It implies that systems, including human societies, may form 
erroneous inferences that prevent them from effectively addressing the problem at hand. 
Given this characterization, it is imperative that we recognise the current ecological imbalance as a 
‘stuck state’ that requires active disturbance to bring about systemic change (for detail see Hipólito, 
2023). What we are calling for amounts to a kind of ‘homeostatic awakening’ (Wong & Bartlett, 
2022): a deliberately-induced, disruptive shift in trajectory reflecting a prioritisation of planetary 
homeostasis over infinite growth. To achieve this, we must focus on addressing the reciprocal 
unbalanced influences between sensory and active states at multiple levels of nested systems, rather 
than solely at the level of the individual: the best efforts of individuals to change their own behaviour 
will be in vain so long as the lack of appreciation of dynamics at higher nested levels persists. On the 
other hand, if we can come to truly understand our relationship to Gaia at a depth that becomes part 
of cultural common sense,7 then we will no longer be able to deny our current knowledge, and more 
appropriate behaviour will follow as a natural reflection of our (FEP-driven) values. Meaningfully 
addressing the ecological crisis is therefore synonymous with restoring the felt connection between 
humans and the rest of life on Earth, such that we collectively come to truly embody the fact that we 
are a part of, not apart from, the natural world (Seth, 2022). This will entail the transformation of the 
very concepts of ‘self’ and ‘nature’ to reflect a part-to-whole relation, rather than a subject-object 
dichotomy, in much the same way that integrating the understanding that the Earth revolves around 
the sun required a shift in what those words actually mean (Kuhn, 1962).8 
It should be clear that individual responses will not suffice for problems that are essentially collective 
and relational. Thus, beyond enforcing institutional climate commitments at the national and 
international levels, future work should focus on identifying strategies for action and intervention at 
community, societal and whole-species levels to stimulate both the integration of ecological 
knowledge and the practice of biophilia virtue. In this way, both sides of the Markov blanket are 
addressed simultaneously in an effort to remedy the insulation of internal states (i.e. to address the 
loss of connection between humans and the Earth; fig. 5). Providing a full manifesto for doing so is 
far beyond the scope of this paper; however, some intuitive examples of measures that can point 
 
7 It is arguably only in WEIRD (Western, educated, industrialised, rich, democratic) cultures that this is not already the 
case: “Many indigenous belief systems share a view of people and nature as part of an extended ecological family … 
These different groups … separated by geography, culture and time, have described this phenomenon. The Māori 
worldview (te ao Māori) acknowledges the interconnectedness of all living and non-living things. The Raramuri 
worldview includes ‘Iwigara’: the total interconnectedness of all life, physical and spiritual. From the point of view of 
these belief systems, feeling separate from nature would signify a state of disconnectedness and constitute a significant 
rupture in wellbeing.” (Watts et al., 2022, emphasis added). 
8 “Part of what [geocentrists] meant by ‘earth’ was fixed position. Their earth, at least, could not be moved. 
Correspondingly, Copernicus’ innovation was not simply to move the earth. Rather, it was a whole new way of regarding 
the problem of physics and astronomy, one that necessarily changed the meaning of both ‘earth’ and ‘motion.’” (Kuhn, 
1962, pp. 149-50). 
 
towards directions of implementation and be taken at the institutional level to catalyse biophilia 
virtue as conceptualised under the FEP may include the following: 
(1) Education: Ecopedagogy is a holistic approach to education that emphasises the interdependence 
of social, economic, and ecological systems. One of the main goals of ecopedagogy is to integrate 
environmental sustainability and social justice into educational practices and to encourage learners to 
take an active role in addressing environmental and social issues. By promoting experiential and 
place-based learning, ecopedagogy encourages learners to connect with their local environment and 
community, fostering a deeper understanding of ecological systems and their interrelationships (as 
opposed to the abstract intellectual knowledge many of us currently harbour). For example, learning 
about the fundamental role of fungi in the web of life through mycology can foster an appreciation of 
Gaia’s interconnected nature and prompt a shift away from the anthropocentric insistence on thinking 
of organisms as individuals (Sheldrake, 2020), as well as providing practical skills in food-growing 
and restorative practices (Stamets, 2005). 
Ecopedagogy also emphasises critical thinking skills and encourages learners to engage in social and 
environmental activism, by promoting, firstly, a true reciprocity between nature and humans 
(Varanasi, 2020) that recognises that the fate of the latter is dependent on the state of the former, and 
secondly, non-linear thinking, so that the Earth and its inhabitants can be encountered as the highly 
complex adaptive systems they are (Varela et al., 1991; Margulis and Sagan, 1995; Capra, 1997; 
Duncan, 2018; Fried and Robinaugh, 2020; Hayes and Andrews, 2020). Thus individuals and 
collectives can become more aware of the impact of human activities on the natural world at multiple 
levels of analysis, and develop a corresponding sense of responsibility towards the environment 
(Norat et al., 2016; Zysltra et al., 2014; Misiaszek, 2020; Hung, 2021). A shift in the value pyramid 
of the educational priorities towards sustainable behaviour not only acts as a perturbation to the 
biophilia deficiency syndrome but also addresses the raising eco-anxiety symptoms reported by 
young generations (Pihkala, 2020; Baudon and Jachens, 2021; Gunasiri et al., 2022). 
(2) Urban design: Green spaces, such as parks, green roofs, or community gardens, provide 
opportunities for individuals to connect with nature, even in urban areas. These spaces offer a range 
of benefits, from relaxation and recreation to habitat for wildlife. Community gardens, in particular, 
can promote community engagement and healthy eating, while also fostering a deeper connection to 
nature through shared stewardship (Roe and McCay, 2021). 
(3) Technological and Artificial Intelligence design: Technological design can be used to promote 
sustainability and reconnect humans with nature. This can be achieved through environmental 
monitoring to understand the impact of human activities on ecosystems (Bodini, 2012), nature-based 
gaming to promote education about biodiversity and conservation (Schneider and Schaal, 2018), and 
sustainable design of buildings and green  infrastructure to create and maintain natural environments 
in urban areas (Restall and Conrad, 2015; Leavell et al., 2019; McKewan et al., 2020). 
(4) Mindful nature practices: mindfulness practices like yoga or meditation can help individuals 
develop a greater sense of embodiment and connection with their physical selves, which can translate 
into a felt appreciation of the “interwoven nature” of the natural world (Danvers, 2016). By 
cultivating mindfulness practices, individuals can become more attuned to the natural world and 
develop a greater sense of respect and responsibility towards the environment (Barbaro and Pickett, 
2016; Amel et al., 2009). Conscious and responsible use of psychedelic plant medicines like 
ayahuasca and psilocybin can also be fruitful options. Psychedelic use predicts nature connectedness 
(Nour et al., 2017; Kettner et al., 2019), and solidarity with other species (Pöllänen et al., 2022), 
 
translating into pro-environmental behaviour (Forstmann and Sagioglou, 2017), as well as both 
concern for and objective knowledge about climate change (Sagioglou and Forstmann, 2022), while a 
recent survey on “psychedelically induced biophilia” found a tendency to elicit a “passionate and 
protective” connection with nature (Irvine et al., 2023). Engagement with these practices would also 
encourage interaction with cultures from which they originate, affording opportunities for learning 
from and cooperation with indigenous peoples who currently steward lands with 80% of the world’s 
biodiversity (Watene and Yap, 2015), and increasingly carry the flame for cultural diversity and lost 
ecological wisdom (Toledo, 2013; Rowlandson, 2015; Etchart, 2017; George et al., 2019). 
This list is neither fully developed nor exhaustive, but offered as an exemplar of how the principles 
provided in this paper can be applied. Despite efforts made by individuals, organisations, and 
governments to reduce carbon emissions and mitigate the impact of climate change and the wider 
ecological crisis, progress has been hindered by the multifaceted and global nature of this problem. 
To catalyse meaningful change, a deliberate, disruptive and holistic approach is necessary to address 
the symptomatic ways in which humans induce (self-)harm upon Gaia. 
 
Conclusion 
This paper employs the Free Energy Principle to argue that the lack of action taken in response to 
threats to planetary life, such as those posed by the ongoing ecological crisis, should be treated as a 
maladaptive disruption to Gaia’s Markov blankets, referred to as biophilia deficiency syndrome. 
Adopting a pragmatic, pluralist epistemological approach to understanding planetary life processes, 
the paper proceeded in four parts. Firstly, it characterised life under the Gaia Hypothesis, wherein the 
biosphere constitutes a single self-organising system of living and non-living planetary processes, 
arguing that this is a plausible and useful way of looking at life on Earth. It then described the Free 
Energy Principle as a means of understanding self-organising (living) systems, before employing the 
FEP to elucidate the coupling dynamics within the biosphere with a view to developing beneficial 
interventions. Finally, the paper demonstrated the possibility for positive alternatives afforded by this 
framework to remedy the ongoing crisis of ecological breakdown, emphasising the importance of 
perturbing stuck states at multiple levels of nested hierarchies to promote biophilia virtue and, by 
extension, the healthy development of human behaviour as part of Gaia. Ultimately, this paper 
considers the Gaia Hypothesis through the lens of the Free Energy Principle to reveal insights into 
how we can restore the balance of planetary processes and safeguard the integrity of living systems 
that depend on them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
Abram, D. (1997). The spell of the sensuous. Pantheon. 
Allen, T, & Starr, T. (2017). Hierarchy. University of Chicago Press. 
Amel, E., Manning, C., & Scott, B., (2009). Mindfulness and sustainable behavior: Pondering 
attention and awareness as means for increasing green behavior. Ecopsychology, 1(1), 14-25. 
Barbaro, N., & Pickett, S. (2016). Mindfully green: Examining the effect of connectedness to nature 
on the relationship between mindfulness and engagement in pro-environmental behavior. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 93, 137-142. 
Barbiero, G., & Berto, R. (2021). Biophilia as Evolutionary Adaptation: An Onto- and Phylogenetic 
Framework for Biophilic Design. Frontiers in Psychology, 12. 700709. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2021.700709. 
Bar-On, Phillips, R., & Milo, R. (2018). The biomass distribution on Earth. Proceedings of the 
National Science, 115(25), 6506-6511. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1711842115  
Baudon, P., & Jachens, L. (2021). A Scoping Review of Interventions for the Treatment of Eco-
Anxiety. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 18(18), 9636. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph18189636. 
Berto, R. (2014). The role of nature in coping with psycho-physiological stress: A literature review 
on restorativeness. Behavioral Sciencs, 4(4), 394-409. 
Bodini, A. (2012). Building a systemic environmental monitoring and indicators for sustainability: 
What has the ecological network approach to offer? Ecological Indicators, 1, 140-148. 
Boulton, J. (2022). Process complexity. Complexity, Governance & Networks, 7(1), 5-14. 
Bourrat, P. (2023) A Pricean Formalization of Gaia. Philosophy of Science, 1-34. Philosophy of 
Science 
Bratman, G., Olvera-Alvarez, H., & Gross, J. (2021). The affective benefits of nature exposure. 
Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 15(8), e12630. doi: 10.1111/spc3.12630. 
Capra, F. (1997). The web of life. HarperCollins. 
Clowney, D. (2013). Biophilia as an environmental virture. Journal of Agricultural and 
Environmental Ethics, 26, 999-1014. 
Danvers, J. (2016). Interwoven nature. Whitewick Press. 
Dennison, P. (2020). Covid-19, the climate change crisis and breakdown of the global Markov 
blanket, April 1, 2020. Accessed online [18.09.22]: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/340342510_Covid-
19_the_Climate_Change_Crisis_and_Breakdown_of_the_Global_Markov_Blanket 
De Regt, H. (2009). The epistemic value of understanding. Philosophy of Science, 76(5), 585-597. 
 
De Regt, H. (2014). Visualization as a tool for understanding. Perspectives on Science, 22(3), 377-
396. 
De Regt, H., & Dieks, D. (2005). A contextual approach to scientific understanding. Synthese, 144, 
137-170. 
Downing, K. (2002). The simulated emergence of distributed environmental control in evolving 
microcosms. Artificial Life, 6, 123-153. 
Downing, K. (2003). Gaia in the machine: The artificial life approach, in Stephen Schneider (ed.), 
Scientists debate Gaia. MIT Press. 
Duncan, R. (2018) Nature in mind. Abingdon. 
Egri, C. P., Pinfield, L. T., Clegg, S. R., Hardy, C., & Nord, W. (1999). Organizations and the 
biosphere: Ecologies and environments. Managing organizations: Current issues, 209-233. 
Elgin, C. (2019). Nominalism, realism and objectivity. Synthese, 196(2), 519-534. 
Etchart, L. (2017). The role of indigenous peoples in combating climate change. Palgrave Commun, 
3, 17085. doi: 10.1057/palcomms.2017.85 
Forstmann, M., & Sagioglou, C. (2017). Lifetime experience with (classic) psychedelics predicts pro-
environmental behavior through an increase in nature relatedness. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 
31(8), 975-988. 
Frankfort, H., Frankfort, H., Wilson, J., & Jacobsen, T. (1960). Before philosophy. Penguin. 
Fried, E., & Robinaugh, D. (2020). Systems all the way down: Embracing complexity in mental 
health research. BMC Med, 18, 205, doi: 10.1186/s12916-020-01668-w. 
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86), 20130475. 
Friston, K., & Stephan, K. (2007). Free-energy and the brain. Synthese, 159, 417-458. 
George, J., Michaels, T., Sevelius, J., & Williams, M. (2019). The psychedelic renaissance and the 
limitations of a White-dominant medical framework: A call for indigenous and ethnic minority 
inclusion. Journal of Psychedelic Studies, 4(1), 4-15. 
Gibson, J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Houghton Mifflin. 
Gleick, J. (1987). Chaos. Viking Books. 
Gontier, N. (2016). Symbiosis, history of, in Richard Kliman (ed.), Encyclopedia of Evolutionary 
Biology, vol. 4. Academic Press. 
Gunasiri, H., Wang, Y., Watkins, E., Capetola, T., Henderson-Wilson, C., & Patrick, R. (2022). 
Hope, Coping and Eco-Anxiety: Young People’s Mental Health in a Climate-Impacted 
Australia. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 19(9), 5528. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph19095528. 
 
Hayes, A., & Andrews, L. (2020). A complex systems approach to the study of change in 
psychotherapy. BMC Medicine, 18(1), 1-13. 
Hermann-Pilath, C. (2011). Revisiting the Gaia Hypothesis: Maximum entropy, Kauffman’s ‘fourth 
law’ and physiosemeiosis, February 16, 2011. Accessed online [18.09.22]: 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1102.3338. 
Hipólito, I. (2019). A simple theory of every ‘thing’. Physics of life reviews, 31, 79-85. 
Hipolito, I. (2023). Psychotic Markov Blankets: Striking a Free Energy Balance for Complex 
Adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12175. 
Hung, R. (2021). Ecopedagogy and education. In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Education. doi: 
10.1093/acrefore/9780190264093.013.1502. 
Irvine, A., Luke, D., Harrild, F., Gandy, S., & Watts, R. (2023). Transpersonal ecodelia: Surveying 
psychedelically induced biophilia. Psychoactives, 2(2). 174-193. 
Kaçar, B., Anbar, A., Garcia, A., Seefeldt, L., Adam, Z., Konhauser, K., ... & Swanner, E. (2021). 
Between a rock and a living place: Natural selection of elements and the search for life in the 
universe. Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, 53(4), 210. 
Karnani, M., & Annila, A. (2009). Gaia again. Biosystems, 95(1), 82-87. 
Kettner, H., Gandy, S., Haijen, E., & Carhart-Harris, R. (2019). From egoism to ecoism: 
Psychedelics increase nature relatedness in a state-mediated and context-dependent manner. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 16(24), 5147. 
King, A. (1997). Hierarchy theory: A guide to system structure for wildlife biologists, in: John 
Bissonette (eds.), Wildlife and landscape ecology. Springer. 
Kirchner, J. (1989). The Gaia hypothesis: Can it be tested? Reviews of Geophysics, 27(2), 223-235. 
doi: 10.1029/RG027i002p00223 
Kleinhans, M., Buskes, C., & de Regt, H. (2010). Philosophy of earth science, in Fritz Allhoff 
Philosophies of the sciences: A guide, (pp. 213-236). Wiley-Blackwell. 
Kuhn, T. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions. University of Chicago Press. 
Leavell, M., Leiferman, J., Gascon, M., Braddick, F., Gonzalez, J., & Litt, J. (2019). Nature-based 
social prescribing in urban settings to improve social connectedness and mental well-being: A 
review. Current Environmental Health Reports, 6, 297-308. 
Lenton, T., Dutreuil, S., & Latour, B. (2020a). Life on Earth is hard to spot. The Anthropocene 
Review, 7(3), 248-272. 
Lenton, T., Rockström, J., Gaffney O, …, & Schnellnhuber, H. (2020b). Climate tipping points — 
too risky to bet against. Nature, 575, 592–595. 
Lenton, T., & van Oijen, M. (2002). Gaia as a complex adaptive system. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society B, 357(1421), doi:10.1098/rstb.2001.1014. 
 
Lovelock, J. (1972). Gaia as seen through the atmosphere. Atmospheric Environment, 6(8), 579-580. 
Lovelock, J.  (1979). Gaia. Oxford University Press. 
Lovelock, J.  (1989). Geophysiology, the science of Gaia. Reviews of Geophysics, 27(2), 223-235. 
Lovelock, J.  (2007). The revenge of Gaia. Penguin. 
Lovelock, J., & Margulis, L. (1974). Atmospheric homeostasis by and for the biosphere: The Gaia 
hypothesis. Tellus, 26(1-2), 2-10. 
Lovelock, J., & Watson, A. (1982). The regulation of carbon dioxide and climate: Gaia or 
geochemistry. Planetary and Space Science, 30(8), 795-802. 
Lyons, T., Reinhard, C., & Planavsky, N. (2014). The rise of oxygen in Earth’s early ocean and 
atmosphere. Nature, 506, 307-315. 
Makarieva, A. M. (2022). Natural Ecosystems and Earth’s Habitability: Attempting a Cross-
Disciplinary Synthesis. Strategies for Sustainability of the Earth System, 143-169. 
Margulis, L., & Sagan, D. (1995). What is life? University of California Press. 
McKewan, K., Ferguson, F., Richardson, M., & Cameron, R. (2020). The good things in urban 
nature: A thematic framework for optimising urban planning for nature connectedness. Landscape 
and Urban Planning, 194, 103687. 
McMichael, A. (1993). Planetary overload: Global environmental change and the health of the 
human species. Cambridge University Press. 
Misiaszek, G. (2020). Ecopedagogy: Teaching critical literacies of ‘development’,‘sustainability’, 
and ‘sustainable development’. Teaching in Higher Education, 25(5), 615-632. 
Moore, B., Underdal, A., Lemke, P., & Loreau, M. (2001, July 13). “The Amsterdam Declaration on 
Earth System Science”. Challenges of a changing Earth: Global Change Open Science Conference 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Accessed online [18.09.22]: 
http://www.igbp.net/about/history/2001amsterdamdeclarationonearthsystemscience.4.1b8ae20512db
692f2a680001312.html 
Neuwerth, C., Peck, A., & Simonović, S. (2015). Modeling structural change in spatial systems 
dynamics: A Daisyworld example. Environmental Modelling & Software, 65, 35-40. 
Norat, M. D. L. Á. V., Herrería, A. F., & Rodríguez, F. M. M. (2016). Ecopedagogy: a movement 
between critical dialogue and complexity: proposal for a categories system. Journal of Education for 
Sustainable Development, 10(1), 178-195. 
Nour, M., Evans, L., & Carhart-Harris, R. (2017). Psychedelics, Personality and Political 
Perspectives. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 49(3), 182-191. 
Oliver, T. (2020). The self delusion. Orion. 
 
Olivos-Jara, P., Segura-Fernández, R., Rubio-Pérez, C., & Felipe-García, B. (2020). Biophilia and 
Biophobia as Emotional Attribution to Nature in Children of 5 Years Old. Frontiers in Psychology, 
11, 511. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00511. 
Paracer, S., & Ahmadjian, V. (2000). Symbiosis. Oxford University Press. 
Pihkala, P. (2020). Anxiety and the Ecological Crisis: An Analysis of Eco-Anxiety and Climate 
Anxiety. Sustainability, 12(19), 7836. doi: 10.3390/su12197836. 
Pokrovskii, V. N. (2020). Thermodynamics of Complex Systems: Principles and Applications. IOP 
Publishing. 
Pöllänen, E., Osika, W., Stenfors, C., & Simonsson, O. (2022). Classic psychedelics and human–
animal relations. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 19(13), 8114. 
Ptaszyński, K., & Esposito, M. (2019). Entropy production in open systems: The predominant role of 
intraenvironment correlations. Physical Review Letters, 123(20), 200603. 
Raja, V., Valluri, D., Baggs, E., Chemero, A., & Anderson, M. (2021). The Markov blanket trick: On 
the scope of the free energy principle and active inference. Physics of Life Reviews, 39, 49-72. 
Restall, B., & Conrad, E. (2015). A literature review of connectedness to nature and its potential for 
environmental management. Journal of Environmental Management, 159, 264-278. 
Roe, J., & McCay, L. (2021). Restorative cities. Bloomsbury Publishing. 
Rosenberg, E., & Zilber-Rosenberg, I. (2011). Symbiosis and development: The hologenome 
concept. Birth Defects Research, 93(1), 56-66. 
Rovelli, C. (2023). Anaximander. Allen Lane. 
Rowlandson, W. (2015). Ayahuasca, ecology and indigeneity, in David King et al. (eds.), 
Neurotransmissions. Strange Attractor Press. 
Rubin, S., & Crucifix, M. (2022). Taking the Gaia hypothesis at face value. Ecological Complexity, 
49, 100981. 
Rubin, S., Parr, T., La Costa, L., & Friston, K. (2020). Future climates: Markov blankets and active 
inference in the biosphere. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 17(172), 
doi:0.1098/rsif.2020.0503. 
Rubin, S., Veloz, T., & Maldonado, P. (2021). Beyond planetary-scale feedback self-regulation: Gaia 
as an autopoietic system. Biosystems, 199, 104314. 
Ruse, M. (2013). The Gaia hypothesis. University of Chicago Press. 
Sagioglou, C., & Forstmann, M. (2022). Psychedelic use predicts objective knowledge about climate 
change via increases in nature relatedness. Drug Science, Policy and Law, 8, 1-9. 
 
Schirrmeister, B., de Vos, J., Antonelli, A., & Bagheri, H. (2013). Evolution of multicellularity 
coincided with increased diversification of cyanobacteria and the Great Oxidation Event. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(5), 1791-1796. 
Schneider, J., & Schaal, S. (2018). Location-based smartphone games in the context of 
environmental education and education for sustainable development: Fostering connectedness to 
nature with Geogames. Environmental Education Research, 24(11), 1597-1610. 
Schrödinger, E. (1944). What is life? Cambridge University Press. 
Sender, R., Fuchs, S., & Milo, R. (2016). Revised estimates for the number of human and bacteria 
cells in the body. PLOS Biology, 14, doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002533. 
Seth, A. (2022). Being you. Faber & Faber. 
Sheldrake, M. (2020). Entangled life. Random House. 
Solms, M. (2021). The Free Energy Principle. In The hidden spring: A journey to the source of 
consciousness (pp. 148-177). Profile Books. 
Stahel, A. W. (2022). The Ways of Gaia. In Regenerative Oikonomics: A New Perspective on the 
Economic Process (pp. 125-146). Cham: Springer International Publishing. 
Stamets, P. (2005). Mycelium running. Ten Speed Press 
Toledo, V. (2013). Indigenous peoples and biodiversity. Encyclopedia of biodiversity, Second 
edition, Simon Levin (ed.). Academic Press. 
Varanasi, U. (2020). Focusing attention on reciprocity between nature and humans can be the key to 
reinvigorating planetary health. Ecopsychology, 12(3), 188-194. 
Varela, F., Rosch, E., & Thompson, E. (1991). The embodied mind. MIT Press. 
Von Bertalanffy, L. (1950). The theory of open systems in physics and biology. Science, 111(2872), 
23-29. 
Wang, Y., Karray, F., Kwong, S., Plataniotis, K., Leung, H., … & Patel, S. (2021). On the 
philosophical, cognitive and mathematical foundations of symbiotic autonomous systems. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 37920200362. doi: 10.1098/rsta.2020.0362 
Watene, K., & Yap, M. (2015). Culture and sustainable development: indigenous contributions. 
Journal of Global Ethics, 11(1), 51-55. 
Watson, A., & Lovelock, J. (1983). Biological homeostasis of the global environment: the parable of 
Daisyworld. Tellus, 35B(4), 286-289. 
Watson, R. (2002). Compositional evolution. Brandeis University ProQuest Dissertations Publishing. 
Watts, R., Kettner, H., Geerts, D., Gandy, S., Kartner, L. … & Roseman, L. (2022). The Watts 
Connectedness Scale: a new scale for measuring a sense of connectedness to self, others, and world. 
Psychopharmacology, 239, 3461-3483. 
 
Weaver, I., & Dyke, J. (2012). The importance of timescales for the emergence of environmental 
self-regulation. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 313, 172-180. 
White, F. (2014). The overview effect. American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics. 
White, M., Alcock, I., Grellier, J., Wheeler, B., Hartig, T., … & Fleming, L. (2019). Spending at 
least 120 minutes a week in nature is associated with good health and wellbeing. Scientific Reports 9, 
7730. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-44097-3. 
Wilson, E. (1984). Biophilia. Harvard University Press. 
Wilson, E. (1993). Biophilia and the conservation ethic, in: Stephen Kellert and Edward Wilson  
(eds.), The biophilia hypothesis. Shearwater Books. 
Wong, M., & Bartlett, S. (2022). Asymptotic burnout and homeostatic awakening: A possible 
solution to the Fermi paradox? Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 19(190). doi: 
10.1098/rsif.2022.0029 
Wood, A, & Coe. J. (2007). A fitness based analysis of Daisyworld. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 
249(2), 190-197. 
Wu, J. (2013). Hierarchy theory: An overview, in: Ricardo Rozzi et al. (eds.), Linking ecology and 
ethics for a changing world. Ecology and Ethics, vol 1. Springer. 
Zysltra, M., Knight, A., Esler, K., & Le Grange, L. (2014). Connectedness as a core conservation 
concern: An interdisciplinary review of theory and a call for practice. Springer Science Reviews, 2, 
119-143. 