Proprioceptive integration in motor control
Erik Skjoldan Mortensen∗ and Mark Schram Christensen
Department of Psychology, University of Copenhagen
Øster Farimagsgade 2A, Copenhagen, Denmark
Abstract
Muscle vibration alters both perceived limb position
and velocity by increasing type Ia afferent firing rates,
although these afferents mainly encode velocity. Pre-
dictive frameworks of sensori-motor control, such as Ac-
tive Inference and Optimal Feedback Control, suggest
that velocity signals should inform position estimates.
Such a function would predict that errors in perceived
limb position and velocity should be correlated, but this
prediction remains empirically underexplored. We hy-
pothesized that an online evaluation of the integral of
sensed velocity influences the perceived arm position
during active movements. Such a mechanism would ex-
plain how vibratory stimulation of velocity-sensitive Ia
afferents leads to the classic pattern of biased movement
endpoint accuracy. Using a virtual reality-based reach-
ing task, we investigated how vibration-biased proprio-
ceptive feedback influences voluntary movement con-
trol. Our results suggest that muscle vibration bi-
ases perceived movement velocity, with downstream ef-
fects on perceived limb position and reflexive correc-
tions of movement speed. We found that (i) antagonist
vibration during active movement caused participants
to both overestimate their movement speed while also
slowing down, (ii) movement speed and endpoint errors
were correlated, with muscle vibration affecting both,
and (iii) adjustments in movement speed to muscle vi-
bration are sufficiently fast to be reflexive. Together,
these findings support the hypothesis that propriocep-
tive velocity signals are integrated to augment infer-
ence of position, consistent with predictive frameworks
of sensorimotor control.
∗Corresponding author: esm@psy.ku.dk
1 Key points
• During movement without visual feedback, the
central nervous system (CNS) has access to both
position- and velocity-based proprioceptive signals,
which are used to estimate limb state.
• Muscle vibration biases the perception of limb po-
sition, as seen in the classically observed pattern of
biased endpoint errors, through the stimulation of
primary (type Ia) muscle spindles, a velocity sen-
sor.
• We investigated how proprioceptive velocity sig-
nals affect position estimation during movement
by applying muscle vibration while measuring per-
ceived movement speed, actual movement speed,
and endpoint errors.
• We show that errors in perceived limb position and
velocity are correlated during active movements,
consistent with predictive frameworks of sensori-
motor control.
• These findings support the idea that the CNS
maintains a self-consistent estimate of limb state
across both position and velocity domains.
2 Introduction
To reach out and grasp an object, we must infer our own
body position and movement kinematics. If we plan for
our hand to arrive at a specific end position with a
particular velocity (e.g., zero), the action required to
achieve this must account for the hand’s position and
velocity as it is moving towards the target. Central to
this task is the continuous stream of sensory informa-
tion processed by the central nervous system (CNS),
with vision and proprioception being the most relevant
for a reaching task. While vision is not necessary (i.e.,
1
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
we can reach a target without looking at it, or even
with our eyes closed), the sense of proprioception con-
tinuously supplies the CNS with information regarding
the arm’s movement parameters.
This proprioceptive information is incorporated into
motor control at several different hierarchies in the
CNS, with corresponding types of possible movement
corrections. These have a range of latencies, from
the shortest mono-synaptic stretch-reflexes(in the arm)
with latencies ranging 20-45 ms, to medium (45-75 ms)
and long latency (75-100 ms) reflexes, with later re-
sponses being driven by deliberate conscious control, in-
corporating relevant information for accomplishing the
task (Shadmehr et al., 2010). While the mono-synaptic
stretch reflex is relatively small in amplitude and pri-
marily evoked directly by the receptor-bearing muscle,
the latter two are substantially larger in amplitude, and
show progressively more evidence of being coordinated
by an internal model of limb dynamics and interact with
visual feedback (Yamamoto & Ohtsuki, 1989; Nakazawa
et al., 1997; Kurtzer et al., 2008; Kurtzer, 2015; Keyser
et al., 2019). Two of the primary peripheral sensory
organs responsible for these reflexes are the type Ia
and type II afferent muscle spindles (Proske & Gan-
devia, 2012). They carry rich information regarding
limb movement, allowing decoding of imposed move-
ment patterns (Roll et al., 2004; Albert et al., 2006).
The type Ia afferent primarily signals the rate of change
in muscle length, i.e., a velocity signal (Roll et al., 2004;
Albert et al., 2006), whereas the type II afferent primar-
ily signals muscle length directly, i.e., a positional signal
(Roll & Vedel, 1982). In practice, there is likely signif-
icant functional overlap between these afferent types,
and their encoding of movement further depends on
the activity of the parent muscle, and any external load
(e.g., gravity) against which they are working (Dim-
itriou & Edin, 2008; Macefield & Knellwolf, 2018).
While both of these muscle spindle afferents are sen-
sitive to lengthening of the receptor-bearing muscle, the
type Ia in particular also responds well to muscle/ten-
don vibration (Proske & Gandevia, 2012), prompting
a large body of experimental research investigating the
contents and inference of these proprioceptive signals.
At a behavioural level, it has been demonstrated that
the vibration of a muscle can bias both perceived limb
position as well as limb velocity (Eklund, 1972; Good-
win et al., 1972; Roll & Vedel, 1982; Gilhodes et al.,
1986; Inglis & Frank, 1990). One of the primary tech-
niques for investigating this phenomenon involves vi-
brating the muscles of a stationary limb and tasking
the research participants with mirroring the perceived
movement with the contralateral limb. Although re-
searchers have explained their findings in terms of ei-
ther biased perception of limb position or velocity, it
proves challenging to design experiments that allow for
distinctive reports of perceived limb velocity, without
also inherently reporting changes in limb position, and
vice versa. In all cases, the induced bias, whether in dy-
namic joint movement or a change in a statically sensed
position, is perceived to be in the direction that would
have resulted from stretching out the vibrated muscle,
with the amplitude of the induced bias being positively
correlated to vibration amplitude (Roll & Vedel, 1982;
Calvin-Figui` ere et al., 1999). Even complex illusions
of limb movement have been demonstrated by ”playing
back” microneurographically recorded Ia afferent firing
patterns through vibration, allowing subjects to recog-
nise specific movement patterns (Albert et al., 2006).
This suggests that joint and limb movement are in-
ferred from the combined signalling of afferents from
all the muscles involved in controlling said joint, with
the general mechanism often described in terms of vec-
tor coding (Proske & Gandevia, 2012).
Similar effects are observed during active movements,
when vibration is applied to the antagonist (passively
lengthening) muscle. Here, antagonist vibration causes
a bias towards undershooting presented visual targets,
when moving without visual feedback of the hand (Ca-
paday & Cooke, 1981). Moreover, when vibration is
applied to a larger portion of the movement, the target
is undershot to a larger degree, indicating a cumulative
effect (Cody et al., 1990). Conversely, vibration applied
to the agonist (actively contracting) muscle during ac-
tive movement causes little to no effects (Capaday &
Cooke, 1981, 1983; Cody et al., 1990; Inglis & Frank,
1990; Macefield & Knellwolf, 2018).
These behavioural findings align with microneuro-
graphic studies of type Ia afferent activity. At rest,
type Ia afferents exhibit minimal firing rates, with fir-
ing rate increasing proportionally to the velocity of mus-
cle lengthening (Matthews, 1963; Roll & Vedel, 1982;
Roll et al., 1989). During muscle shortening in the con-
tracting muscle, the firing rate decreases below base-
line (Roll & Vedel, 1982; Macefield & Knellwolf, 2018).
The already low baseline activity creates a natural limit
on both the amount and precision of information that
can be conveyed through further rate reduction. Con-
sequently, with its wider dynamic range of firing rates,
2
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
the lengthening muscle has been assumed to function as
the primary source of joint position/velocity informa-
tion during active movement, explaining the previously
observed limited effects from vibration of the agonist
muscle (Capaday & Cooke, 1981).
Electromyographic (EMG) recordings during active
movements have shown changes in muscle activity with
onset latencies of 40-60 ms (Capaday & Cooke, 1983;
Cody et al., 1990). This suggests that a medium-short
feedback loop is involved in controlling the relevant
muscles in response to Ia afferent feedback. However,
no similar latency analysis has been conducted to de-
termine the time course of actual movement speed cor-
rection.
In summary, previous research has established that
type Ia afferents primarily encode muscle velocity, while
type II afferents are more directly associated with mus-
cle length. However, the behavioral responses to mus-
cle vibration suggest that both perceived limb velocity
and position are affected, indicating that proprioceptive
state estimation is an integrated process. Specifically,
velocity signals from type Ia afferents may inform per-
ceived limb position, contributing to a self-consistent
internal estimate of limb state. This kind of cross-
domain sensory inference is consistent with both Active
Inference and Optimal Feedback Control frameworks.
In Active Inference, the CNS is assumed to maintain
a generative model of the body, predicting the causal
structure of sensory inputs over time, with velocity and
positional signals originating from a common underly-
ing latent state (Friston et al., 2010). In Optimal Feed-
back Control, a Kalman filter is often used as a model of
sensory integration for state estimation, wherein veloc-
ity estimates can inform predictions of positional states
(Wolpert et al., 1995; Todorov & Jordan, 2002). De-
spite these theoretical predictions, the extent to which
proprioceptive velocity signals shape position estima-
tion remains empirically unexplored.
In this paper, we investigate how sensed limb posi-
tion and limb velocity are integrated into a cohesive
perception of limb state and movement. Our study is
structured around three interrelated research questions:
1. How are changes in perceived and actual movement
speed related?
2. How does muscle vibration affect endpoint errors,
movement speed, and movement time?
3. What is the latency of movement correction in re-
sponse to muscle vibration?
Addressing these questions will enhance our under-
standing of how positional and velocity signals are in-
tegrated for limb state estimation during active move-
ments. To explore these, we designed three VR-based
tasks, which are used in conjunction with muscle vibra-
tion.
3 Methods
The experiment was conducted at the Department of
Psychology, University of Copenhagen, and approved
by the local ethics board at the department (no. IP-EC-
030723-01). Seventeen healthy participants (3 men, 14
women, all right-handed) were included, with a mean
age of 23.4 y (range 20-31 y). All participants provided
written and informed consent before participating in
the experiment and were compensated monetarily for
their time.
3.1 General experimental procedures
A total of 3 tasks were performed in a single session last-
ing approximately 2 hours, sharing the common setup
seen in Figure 1. Subjects were seated and had their
right arm placed on a rotating armrest, and were outfit-
ted with a VR headset and vibration motors (described
in detail in the sections below). With the arm resting
on the rotating armrest and holding the attached right
VR controller, participants could freely move their arm
in the extension and flexion directions with minimal
friction. Trials in all experiments would be initiated
by moving the controller to an indicated start position
close to the chest, with the right elbow flexed. Here,
subjects would press a thumb key on the controller to
indicate their readiness to start, which would change
the color of the target from red to yellow. After a ran-
domized delay of 500-1000 ms, the target would turn
green, which served as the ’go’ signal. Up to this time,
a virtual representation of the rotating armrest was vis-
ible in the VR environment and was mapped to the ac-
tual armrest location. Before each of the three tasks,
10 practice trials were performed.
3.1.1 Task 1
During Task 1, subjects were presented with a target
per trial, positioned along a 40-80° arc from their start-
ing position. The virtual arm remained visible through-
out the movement, but its movement speed was ran-
domized to one of five conditions:
3
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Hand line types: True hand, not seen in VR Hand as seen in VR
Vibration motors: Antagonist motor Agonist motor
Task goal: Indicate target location Judge visual speed gain (slower/faster)
Task 2
0°
40°
0°
80°
Targets presented 40-80° from start
Vibration conditions:
 • Antagonist vibration entire movement
 • Agonist vibration entire movement
 • Double vibration entire movement
 • No vibration
Visual feedback of virtual arm:
 • 12% slower
 • 6% slower
 • True speed
 • 6% faster
 • 12% faster
Task 3 Targets presented 80° from start
Vibration conditions:
 • Antagonist vibration entire movement
 • Antagonist vibration 0° to 20°
 • Antagonist vibration 20° to 80°
• No vibration
Visual feedback of virtual arm:
 • Invisible after trial initiation
20°
80°
Task 1
0°
Targets presented 40-80° from start
Vibration conditions:
 • Antagonist vibration entire movement
 • Agonist vibration entire movement
 • Double vibration entire movement
 • No vibration
Visual feedback of virtual arm:
 • Invisible after trial initiation
40°
80°
General setup
Figure 1: The top panel shows the physical setup on the left and the VR representation that subjects see on
the right, here incl. an example target (green sphere). The remaining three panels summarize the experimental
setup.
4
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
• 12% slower, 6% slower, True speed, 6% faster, or
12% faster
The position of the virtual arm would match that of the
real arm at the start of each trial, with a cumulative
spatial discrepancy developing over the course of the
movement for each of the four manipulated conditions.
The virtual arm was hidden during the return move-
ment between each trial. Participants simply needed to
move the virtual arm past the target location to end
each trial, and were instructed to pay attention to their
movement speed. They were informed that the virtual
arm was manipulated always to be slightly slower or
faster than the actual speed of their arm (they were
not informed of the ”True speed” control condition),
and they were instructed to judge whether the move-
ment speed of the virtual arm was ”Faster” or ”Slower”
than their actual arm after each trial. The above setup
was combined with the following four vibration condi-
tions, which started upon arm movement and lasted
until the target was reached:
• Agonist vibration, Antagonist vibration, Double
vibration, or No vibration
Each visual speed gain and vibration condition was re-
peated 18 times for a total of 360 trials per participant,
split across two runs to allow for a break in between, in
a pseudo-randomized order, with a uniform distribution
of target distances. The goal of this task was to inves-
tigate changes in both actual and perceived movement
speed in response to muscle vibration. To the extent
that muscle vibration affects the perceived movement
speed, this should be reflected in changes in the distri-
bution of reports of the relative speed of the virtual arm.
By also including actual visual speed manipulation, we
can further estimate the perceived movement speed off-
set caused by the vibration motors by comparing it to
the shifted distribution of subjective reports.
3.1.2 Task 2
During Task 2, targets were presented 40-80 ° from the
starting position. Participants were instructed to indi-
cate the location of the target by moving their arm and
pressing a thumb button. Upon the ”go” signal (target
turning green), the virtual arm became invisible, leav-
ing only the tabletop and the target visible in the VR
environment. Upon movement onset, one of four vibra-
tion conditions was started and lasted until the target
location was indicated:
• Agonist vibration, Antagonist vibration, Double
vibration, or No vibration
The order of vibration conditions was pseudo-
randomised, ensuring 24 repetitions of each condition
for a total of 96 trials, with a uniform spread of dis-
tances to the target. This task was repeated in the
flexion direction, starting with the right arm at close to
full extension and moving towards the chest for 96 more
trials. Our goal with this task was to investigate the ef-
fects of muscle vibration on movement speed, time, and
endpoint errors.
3.1.3 Task 3
During this task, subjects were again instructed to in-
dicate the target position as precisely as possible, which
was here always presented 80 ° from the start location.
At trial start, the virtual armrest would again turn
invisible. To investigate online changes in movement
speed in response to turning the antagonist vibration
motor on or off during movement, four conditions were
used. These are in two sets of intervention-control pairs:
• Vibration 0-20° compared to Vibration 0-80 °
• Vibration 20-80° compared to No vibration
48 trials of each condition were completed in a pseudo-
randomized order, totaling 192 trials per subject.
3.2 Rotating armrest
An armrest allowing rotation around a vertical axis was
constructed to support the participant’s arm during the
experiment. The armrest was positioned so that it
had an axis of rotation under the participant’s right
elbow joint, with the height adjusted to just below
the shoulder, thereby minimizing movements of other
joints. A smooth tabletop combined with felt sliders
on the underside of the armrest allowed for very low-
friction movement. The right-hand VR controller was
mounted on the armrest, with its exact positioning indi-
vidualized according to forearm length. The controller
provided the necessary button input for the experiment,
as well as real-time tracking of the rotating armrest. See
figure 1A for visualization.
3.3 VR setup
The experiment was programmed in the Unity engine
(v21.3.24f1, Unity Technologies, San Francisco, USA),
utilizing the Unity Experiment Framework (Brookes et
5
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
al., 2020) to control the trial and block structure of the
experiment. We used a Meta Quest 3 VR headset (Meta
Platforms Technologies Ireland Limited, Dublin, Ire-
land) connected to the experiment PC via USB Quest
Link, allowing the Unity executable to run on the ex-
periment PC and be displayed in the Quest headset.
The headset was set up to run at a refresh rate of 90
Hz. The left controller was mounted at the corner of the
tabletop, allowing the table to be tracked and displayed
in VR, providing participants with a stable visual ref-
erence of the working environment.
3.4 Vibration motors
Two small vibration motors (Vp216 VIBRO transducer,
Acouve Laboratory Inc., Tokyo, Japan) were mounted
on the right arm, with inelastic micropore tape. One
was mounted over the distal triceps tendon, just prox-
imal to the elbow, while the other was mounted cen-
trally on the belly of the biceps muscle. This mounting
of the biceps motor over the muscle belly rather than
the tendon was chosen to minimize changes in mount-
ing pressure due to elbow flexion/extension. Previous
research has indicated no difference in the required vi-
bration amplitude to elicit an illusory movement be-
tween the distal biceps tendon and the biceps muscle
belly (Ferrari et al., 2019).
The vibration motors were controlled by an 80
Hz sine wave audio signal produced by the experi-
ment PC’s sound card, with the signal amplified by a
stereo PAM8610 amplifier (Diodes Incorporated, Plano,
Texas) using a 12 V 1.5 A power supply. A delay from
triggering vibration in the experiment software to ac-
tual vibration start was determined (118.8 ms (SD =
4.6)) using an Arduino Uno R3 (Arduino S.r.l., Monza,
Italy) analogue-to-digital listener, and was accounted
for in the timing-sensitive analysis of Task 3.
3.5 Data processing and statistical
modeling
Data analysis was conducted inR (v4.3.3, R Core Team,
2024) with data wrangling and plotting completed using
the tidyverse package (v2.0.0, Wickham et al., 2019).
Model fitting was performed using the brms package
(v2.20.4, B¨ urkner, 2017), anR interface for the proba-
bilistic programming language Stan (v2.32.6, Stan De-
velopment Team, 2024), and the PyMC library (v5.10.2,
Abril-Pla et al., 2023), in Python. All models employed
weakly informative priors with effect parameters cen-
tered at zero, providing mild regularization while allow-
ing the data to dominate the posterior estimates. Hi-
erarchical models with partial pooling were used to ac-
count for the nested structure of research participants.
Inference was performed using the No-U-Turn Sampler,
a variant of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. All models
were run with four independent chains of 4000 itera-
tions each, including 1000 warm-up iterations, yielding
12,000 post-warm-up samples. Convergence diagnostics
indicated no divergent transitions, all bR values were be-
low 1.005, and caterpillar plots were visually inspected
for convergence and mixing.
Posterior distributions for relevant parameters are
summarized using the Maximum a Posteriori (MAP)
estimate and associated 95% Credible Intervals (CI).
An effect was interpreted as supported when the 95%
CI did not include zero. All fitted traces, including
complete sets of posterior distributions, are made avail-
able in the code repository (see the Data Availability
section).
3.5.1 Task 1
In Task 1, we investigate the effect of muscle vibration
on the perceived and actual movement speed. Both
models for these two analyses were implemented in brms
as hierarchical (multilevel) models with the random ef-
fects defined at the participant level. The formula syn-
tax presented follows the structure used for brms, which
adheres to the same scheme as that employed in the
lme4 R package and is widely adopted in mixed-effects
modeling.
To investigate whether the vibration motors influence
perceived movement speed, we model the distribution
of ratings of ”Faster” and ”Slower” responses. This
was done with a Bernoulli model with a probit link,
implemented in brms as shown in model 1.
This model assumes that the answer distribution for
each condition can be approximated by a latent, z-
normalized Gaussian distribution, with a static thresh-
old defining whether ”Faster” or ”Slower” is selected,
with this outcome here represented by rating. The
control, no-vibration condition with an unperturbed
speed of visual feedback, is used here as the reference
category, with µ set to 0 and σ set to 1. The parame-
ter estimates of the predictors and the threshold are
then modeled relative to this. Agonist (ago
v) and
antagonist ( anta v) vibration are included as predic-
tors, which can move µ left or right, to the extent that
different rating distributions are observed when muscle
6
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
vibration is applied. Visual gain (vg) is included as a
linear predictor, likewise pushing µ of the latent distri-
bution left or right, dependent on the changes in rating
distribution. id is a unique identifier per participant,
indicating that the model is fitted as a multilevel model
with shrinkage, which reflects the participant structure
of the data.
rating ∼ 1 + vg + ago
v + anta v+
(1 + vg + ago v + anta v | id)
family = bernoulli(link = "probit") (1)
Additionally, we model the effects on the actual mean
movement speed of each trial, as shown in model 2.
Here, mms (in °/s) represents the mean movement speed
of each trial. Here we additionally include the target
distance (td) as a predictor, as this variable is highly
predictive of movement speed.
mms ∼ 1 + vg + ago
v + anta v + td+
(1 + vg + ago v + anta v + td | id)
family = gaussian() (2)
360 trials were completed per participant, except for
one, for whom the last 194 trials could not be com-
pleted due to technical issues. This leaves a total of
5926 included trials.
3.5.2 Task 2
To investigate how the sensorimotor system integrates
the afferent proprioceptive feedback, we model endpoint
errors (epe, in °), mean movement speed (mms, in °/s),
and movement time (mt, in s) during Task 2 as out-
comes in a hierarchical multivariate model. This was
implemented in brms, as shown in model 3.
Prior to model fitting, the data were centered by the
mean in the no-vibration condition within each partic-
ipant, for each outcome. Beyond aiding model conver-
gence, this enables us to estimate how each vibration
condition affects the three outcome variables, relative to
the case when no vibration is present; we are here in-
terested in how, e.g., endpoint error accuracy changes
in response to muscle vibration, while accounting for
any individual baseline inaccuracy. As such, the pa-
rameter estimates of the vibration conditions describe
the change in mean from the control no-vibration con-
dition. Apart from the vibration conditions (ago
v and
anta v), we also include the distance to the target (td),
to account for baseline differences in endpoint errors,
movement speed, and movement time that depend on
the distance to the target. Additionally, the movement
direction (md) and its interactions with vibration and
target distance variables are included to differentiate
between effects observed for flexion and extension move-
ments. This accounts for the fact that, for example, the
biceps muscle functions as the antagonist muscle dur-
ing extension but as the agonist muscle during flexion.
An interaction term between the two muscle vibrations
is also included here to investigate the extent to which
the combination of both vibration motors has different
effects than the sum of the effects of each type of muscle
vibration alone.
epe, mms, mt ∼ 1 + ago
v · anta v + ·md + td · md+
(1 + ago v · anta v · md + td · md | id)
sigma ∼ 1 + ago v · anta v · md+
(1 + ago v · anta v · md | id)
+ set rescor(TRUE)
family = gaussian() (3)
A total of 192 trials were included for each partici-
pant, resulting in 3264 trials.
3.5.3 Integrative analysis of Tasks 1 & 2
A further analysis of Tasks 1 and 2 was completed, using
only the baseline control trials from each task, i.e., a
subset of the data also used for the analyses described
in the above two sections. Specifically, trials with no
visual speed gain and no vibration were included from
Task 1, while trials with no vibration were included
from Task 2.
Model 4 shows the brms syntax used to fit the follow-
up analysis on the subset trials from Task 1. This
model shares the same Bernoulli (probit-link) struc-
ture as the first model described for Task 1; however,
here we examine whether movement speed predicts the
tendency to overestimate or underestimate perceived
movement speed. rating refers to whether the vir-
tual arm was rated as ”Faster” or ”Slower”. To ac-
count for between-subject differences in both the mean
and variability of movement speed, the predictor was
z-normalized within each participant prior to model fit-
ting (denoted as mms
zn).
7
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
rating ∼ 1 + mms zn + td+
(1 + mms zn + td)
family = bernoulli(link = "probit") (4)
Model 5 shows syntax used for the Task 2 subset
trials. Here we investigate the extent to which move-
ment speed is predictive of endpoint errors. Here, both
the endpoint errors and mean movement speed are like-
wise z-normalized (epe
zn and mms zn) to account for
between-subject differences as above.
epe zn ∼ 1 + mms zn · md + td · md+
(1 + mms zn · md + td · md | id)
family = gaussian() (5)
td refers to the target distance and is included in both
models to capture any effect of varied target distances
on the respective outcomes. md refers to movement di-
rection and is included in the second model to differenti-
ate between flexion and extension direction movement.
3.5.4 Task 3
To investigate the latency from the antagonist vibration
motor turning on and off, respectively, until a compen-
satory change in movement speed could be observed,
we implemented a changepoint model (e.g., see (Carlin
et al., 1992)) in PyMC. To effectively run the model,
some preprocessing of the tracking data was required.
First, the time t was adjusted to be set to 0 at the
time of starting/stopping the vibration motor, which
was triggered at 20° into the movement. Data from 100
ms before to 120 ms after vibration start/stop was in-
cluded in the model fitting. Angular movement speed
was estimated at the trial level from the tracking data
using the first derivative of a cubic smoothing spline
applied to the angular position-versus-time trace, using
R ’s smooth.spline() function with the smoothing pa-
rameter (spar) set to 0.4. The movement speed was
extracted at 10 ms intervals, which was then used in
the changepoint model as follows.
The mean movement speed (within participant) in
each control condition was then subtracted from the
trial-level movement speed data in the corresponding
intervention condition (”No vibration” from ”Vibration
20-80°” and ”Vibration 0-80 °” from ”Antagonist vibra-
tion 0-20 °”).
After this step, the data represent the timeline of
delta movement speed in each intervention condition
trial, with respect to the mean movement speed at
each time point in the corresponding control condition
for that participant. The delta mean movement speed
should be close to 0 until vibration start/stop begins
to affect the movement speed in the intervention condi-
tion. The changepoint model is set up to estimate this
time point. For simplicity, only the model likelihood,
along with the priors of the changepoint, is shown here
in formula 6.
dmsi is the delta movement speed at time ti. The
model uses this to sample the most likely time of change
in movement speed (group mean =
τ, participant to
participant SD = τσ) given the model formulation be-
low. To allow for sampling of a continuous changepoint,
we use a sigmoid function to blend smoothly between
the pre- and post-changepoint linear functions. A uni-
form prior for the group mean changepoint was used,
between 0 ms (vibration start/stop) and +120 ms (the
end of the included data). The same model, includ-
ing identical priors, was run twice, once each for the
two sets of intervention-control pairs of conditions. The
complete model definition with all priors may be found
in the appendix (model A1), where it is also described
in detail. To see a visualization of the fitting process,
see figure A3 in the appendix.
dmsi ∼ N(µi, σj)
µi = µ
pre τi · Si + µ post τi · (1 − Si)
Si = 1
1 + e
ti−τj
0.001
µ pre τi = α pre τj + β pre τj · ti
µ post τi = α post τj + β post τj · ti
τj = τ + τσ · ϵ τj for j ∈ {1, . . . , nid}
ϵ τj ∼ N(0, 1) for j ∈ {1, . . . , nid}
τ ∼ U(0, tmax)
τσ ∼ HN(0.025)
(6)
48 trials of each of the four conditions per 17 subjects
(816 per condition) were completed during data collec-
tion. However, a small number of trials were excluded
due to transient tracking issues. A total of 16 trials
were discarded across the four conditions. Data from
-100 ms before to 120 ms after vibration start/stop was
included, at 5 ms intervals for 45 observations per trial.
To test whether the above-mentioned spline method
was a reasonable approach for estimating movement
8
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
speed for this use case, a simple finite-difference ap-
proach to estimating angular movement speed was also
tested with the same changepoint model. Here, the
movement speed was estimated as follows, before being
linearly interpolated to align samples temporally:
msi = anglei+1 − anglei−1
ti+1 − ti − 1
Both methods produced group mean latency esti-
mates within 2 ms of each other for both model fits (vi-
bration on and off), while the spline method filtered out
some of the noise apparent at the trial level in the finite-
differences approach. Both sets of estimated movement
speed data and model traces are available at the code
and data repository mentioned in the Data Availability
section.
4 Results
4.1 Task 1
In Task 1, we investigated the effects of muscle vibration
on both the perceived movement speed and the actual
movement speed. Here we found clear effects of varying
the visual speed gain applied to the virtual arm, which
participants had to judge the relative speed of. Varying
the visual speed gain from −12% to +12%, Figure 2A
shows the expected shift in the probability of report-
ing the virtual arm as ”Faster”; when the visual speed
gain is increased, the probability of reporting it as such
increases. This effect was estimated with a coefficient
of 0.41 (95% CI [0.31, 0.52]) for a visual gain of +6%.
Having thus validated that participants can successfully
compare their own arm movement speed to that of the
virtual arm, we can interpret the effects of applying
muscle vibration during this task. Here, we found a
decrease in the probability of reporting the virtual arm
as ”Faster” when antagonist vibration is applied, with
a coefficient of -0.29 (95% CI [-0.47, -0.1]). This may
then be interpreted as antagonist muscle vibration caus-
ing participants to overestimate their movement speed.
For further visualization of the underlying rating data,
see Figure A2A in the appendix.
In addition to biasing the perceived movement speed,
antagonist vibration also affects the actual movement
speed; as participants believe they are moving faster,
they decrease their actual mean movement speed by
1.94 °/s (95% CI [0.55, 3.44]).
For agonist vibration, the results are mixed. While
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
88% 94% 100% 106% 112%
Visual speed gain
Probability of rating virtual arm as 'Faster'
(A) Perceived speed by visual speed and vibration
-0.6 -0.3 0.0 0.3 0.6
z-normalised latent decision var.
(B) Effects on perceived relative movement speed
-4 -2 0 2 4
Mean speed (°/s)
(C) Effects on actual movement speed
Agonist vibration
Antagonist vibration
No vibration
Visual speed gain (+6%)
Figure 2: Panel A shows the modeled probability of
rating visual feedback as appearing ”Faster”, for the
control ”No vibration” condition (gray), as well as with
agonist vibration (teal) and antagonist vibration (or-
ange). Panel B shows the modeled z-normalized latent
distribution differences between the agonist and antag-
onist vibration conditions relative to the ”No vibration”
condition. As a point of reference, the modeled effect of
increased speed of +6% visual speed gain is also shown.
Panel C shows how the same three conditions affect
mean movement speed compared to the ”No vibration,
normal visual speed” control condition. Dots and point
intervals represent maximum a posteriori (MAP) and
95% credible intervals (CI).
9
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Extension
Flexion
−4 −2 0 2 4
Change in Endpoint error (°)
(A) Vibration effects on endpoint errors
Extension
Flexion
−4 −2 0 2 4
Change in Mean speed (°/s)
(B) Vibration effects on mean speed
Extension
Flexion
−0.10 −0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10
Change in Movement time (s)
(C) Vibration effects on movement time
Extension
Flexion
−0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
Change in Endpoint error SD (°)
(D) Vibration effects on endpoint error SD
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
Res. corr. of endpoint errors & mean speed
(E) Residual correlation
Vibration
Antagonist vibration
Agonist vibration
Double vibration
Interaction
Residual correlation
Endpoint error & Mean speed
Figure 3: Panels A, B, and C show the modeled effects of agonist and antagonist vibration along with their
interaction and the overall effect of double vibration of the agonist and antagonist muscle. Effects are shown
for flexion and extension movements relative to the control ”No vibration” condition, on Endpoint errors (A),
Mean movement speed (B), and Movement time (C), respectively. Negative values indicate undershooting the
target, decreased mean movement speed, and decreased movement time, relative to the ”No vibration” condition.
Effects are shown conditional on the mean target distance of 60 ° (range 40-80 °). Panel D shows the effects on
the change in standard deviation of Endpoint errors relative to the ”No vibration” condition. Panel D shows the
modeled residual correlation of Endpoint errors and Mean movement speed. Dots and point intervals represent
MAP and 95% CI.
the actual movement speed increased by 1.41 °/s (95%
CI [0.13, 2.88]), the 95% credible interval describing
the change in probability of reporting the perceived
movement speed overlapped 0, indicating insufficient
evidence to claim such an effect with confidence. Visual
speed gain was found not to affect the actual movement
speed.
4.2 Task 2
In Task 2, we investigated how muscle vibration affects
movement time, movement speed, and endpoint errors
(Figure 5). While we focus on the changes in perfor-
mance caused by muscle vibration in the following sec-
tion, a summary of the baseline performance in the ”No
vibration” trials is provided in Table A1 for reference
in the appendix.
We found that antagonist vibration caused a consis-
tent bias towards undershooting the target, both in the
flexion (-2.76° (95% CI [-3.8, -1.64])) and extension di-
rections (-1.32° (95% CI [-2.07, -0.48])). Agonist vi-
bration, in contrast, caused participants to overshoot
the target in the flexion direction (1.45° (95% CI [0.51,
2.39])), but not in the extension direction. Further-
more, we found no indication of increased standard de-
viation of endpoint errors, suggesting that neither ag-
onist, antagonist, nor both of them together have any
effects on movement precision, but only on accuracy in
this task (Figure 3D). The effects of muscle vibration
on movement speed presented a very similar pattern of
relative effect sizes to those observed for endpoint er-
rors. Antagonist vibration caused a decrease in move-
ment speed (extension direction: -1.18 °/s (95% CI [-
2.02, -0.44]), flexion direction: -3.13 °/s (95% CI [-4.09,
10
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
-2.05])), while agonist vibration resulted in a consistent
increase in movement speed (extension direction: 1.25
°/s (95% CI [0.5, 2.05]), flexion direction: 2.71 °/s (95%
CI [1.84, 3.54])). To further highlight how endpoint er-
ror and mean movement speed covariied, see Figure A1
in the appendix.
In general, we found small but consistent effects of
muscle vibration on movement time, but in the op-
posite direction compared to what one might expect,
considering the observed effects on endpoint errors. In
a simplified manner, a change towards undershooting
the target due to antagonist vibration may have been
caused by either a decrease in movement time at a sim-
ilar movement speed or a reduction in movement speed
at a similar movement time. In contrast to this, we
found that antagonist vibration during flexion move-
ment caused a bias towards increased movement time of
52.48 ms (95% CI [6.34, 99.79]), while agonist vibration
caused decreases in movement time of -73.9 ms (95%
CI [-108.62, -40.57]) for flexion movements and -37.48
ms (95% CI [-65.65, -8.14]) for extension movements.
These changes in movement time effectively work in the
opposite direction as the changes in movement speed,
in terms of achieving a given endpoint error.
For none of the three outcomes did we find any vibra-
tion interaction effects (Figure 3A, B & C), indicating
that the impact of concurrent vibration of both the ag-
onist and antagonist motor can be well explained by the
sum of their individual effects.
Additionally, we found a residual correlation of 0.20
(95% CI [0.17, 0.24], Figure 3D) between movement
speed and endpoint errors, indicating that movement
speed is predictive of endpoint errors after accounting
for the modeled effects of the vibration motors on both
parameters.
4.3 Integrative analysis of Tasks 1 and
2
One way to jointly interpret the above findings from
Tasks 1 and 2 is to assume that the CNS estimates limb
position during movement by integrating sensed move-
ment speed over time. In this framework, the perceived
position is, in part, shaped by the ongoing evaluation
of velocity signals.
To further evaluate this framework, we tested two
predictions based on the following assumptions: (i)
movement speed is continually adjusted based on sensed
speed, and (ii) perceived speed contributes to perceived
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
−3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3
Mean speed (z−normalised)
Probability of rating virtual arm as 'Faster'
(A) Task 1 baseline trials
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
−3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3
Mean speed (z−normalised)
End point error (z−normalised)
(B) Task 2 baseline trials
Movement direction Flexion Extension
Figure 4: Panel A shows the MAP and 95% CI pre-
dicted probability of rating virtual arm as ’Faster’ in
the subset of trials from Task 1 with ’No vibration &
no visual speed gain’, dependent on z-normalized mean
movement speed. Panel B shows z-normalized (within-
subject and direction) mean speed and endpoint errors
from the subset of trials with ’No vibration’ from Task
2. Dots show individual trials, with overlaid posterior
conditional effects linear regression lines showing the
MAP and 95% CI.
11
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
position. If true, these relationships should also be ev-
ident in non-perturbed trials. Specifically:
1. Movement speed should predict the probability of
over- or underestimating one’s movement speed.
For example, participants who slow down may be
compensating for an overestimation of their actual
speed.
2. Movement speed should also predict endpoint er-
rors. Overestimating speed would lead to both
compensatory slowdown and overestimation of cov-
ered distance.
The results of these analyses are reported in Fig-
ure 4. Here, Figure 4A shows the predicted effect of
z-normalized mean movement speed on the reported
perception of movement speed, such that slower move-
ments are associated with overestimation of movement
speed, and vice versa, with a coefficient of 0.37 (95%
CI [0.14, 0.61]). This refers to a change in mu of the
modeled latent z-normalized decision variable of 0.37
per standard deviation of z-normalized mean movement
speed. We have further provided a visualization of the
distribution of mean movement speed across the two
ratings in Figure A2B.
Figure 4B likewise shows the hypothesized positive
predictive effect of z-normalized mean movement speed
on endpoint errors, with practically identical slopes of
0.27 (95% CI [0.08, 0.46]) for extension movements and
0.27 (95% CI [0.09, 0.47]) for flexion movements.
4.4 Task 3
In Task 3, we adjusted the experimental setup in order
to get a more detailed estimate of how the sensori-motor
system incorporates information from the Ia afferents
in real-time during movement, by turning on or off the
antagonist vibration motor 20 ° into an 80° extension
movement.
Figure 5 shows the same two control conditions in
both panels A and B, with no vibration in the dashed
grey line and antagonist vibration over the entire move-
ment in the fully drawn grey line. Figure 5A shows
how turning on the antagonist vibration motor causes
subjects to begin decreasing their movement speed at
an estimated group mean latency of 48.2 ms (95% CI
[42.9, 53.5], with a subject-to-subject standard devia-
tion of 1.0 ms (95% CI [0.2, 9.9]). Similarly, turning off
the antagonist vibration motor causes subjects to begin
increasing their movement speed with a latency of 58.0
ms (95% CI [48.7, 67.7]), and with a subject-to-subject
standard deviation of 11.3 ms (95% CI [3.3, 22.8]). In
both cases, the change in movement speed is greater
than the difference in movement speed between the two
control conditions, where antagonist vibration was on
or off for the entire movement.
5 Discussion
In this paper, we set out to investigate how sensed limb
position and velocity are integrated into a cohesive per-
ception of limb state and movement. While the indi-
vidual effects of muscle vibration on endpoint errors,
changes in movement speed, and the reportable percep-
tion of limb state have all been described in the existing
literature, we sought here to provide a comprehensive
understanding of how these factors interact with one
another.
Our investigation was based on the hypothesis that
proprioceptive positional and velocity signals interact
in a reciprocally reinforcing manner. Specifically, we
explored the possibility that velocity signals contribute
to the perceived position of the arm during reaching
movements.
In the following subsections, we will discuss the find-
ings from each of the three tasks in turn, addressing the
three research questions outlined in the introduction.
5.1 Muscle vibration biases both per-
ceived and actual movement speed
In Task 1, the results show that antagonist muscle vi-
bration causes participants to overestimate their move-
ment speed while simultaneously decreasing their actual
movement speed. This suggests that vibration-induced
activity of the type Ia afferents biases the perceived
movement speed, causing a reactive change in actual
movement speed to compensate.
By tasking participants with rating whether the vir-
tual arm had moved faster or slower than their actual
arm on each trial, we essentially ask them to compare
two measures of movement speed, which, under nor-
mal conditions, would be combined and integrated in
the final perception of limb state. Although this does
not necessarily align with the typical sensory integra-
tion process, it nonetheless offers insight into how pro-
prioceptive feedback influences the perceived movement
speed of self-paced movements.
By further considering our analysis of the subset of
12
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
70
75
80
-0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
Time (s)
Movement speed (°/s)
(A) Effect of turning on antagonist vibration
70
75
80
-0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
Time (s)
(B) Effect of turning off antagonist vibration
Vibration offVibration on
Antagonist vibration on
Control condition, antagonist vibration off whole movement 
Est. latency of speed change (95% CI)
Antagonist vibration off
Control condition, antagonist vibration on whole movement
Figure 5: Panels A and B each show how movement speed is affected immediately after turning on (A) and off (B)
the antagonist vibration motor 20 into an 80 extension movement. Overlaid is the MAP and 95% CI estimated
group mean latency from vibration start/stop until movement speed is affected in purple. Grey lines are used
to indicate the two control conditions, with the motor on or off throughout the movement. Orange lines show
the intervention conditions, where the motor turns on (A) and off (B) 20 ° into the movement, time-locked to 0.
Dotted line segments indicate when the motor is off, while solid lines indicate when the motor is on. Each line
represents the mean movement speed of 816 trials (48 per subject). See model 6 for details of latency estimation.
trials with no vibration and normal visual feedback, we
observe that movement speed is generally predictive of
the reported perception of movement speed. Specifi-
cally, trials performed with higher movement speeds are
associated with underestimating the movement speed
of the arm, and vice versa. This baseline association
might in principle arise from (at least) two categories
of errors in the CNS: (i) spontaneous errors in effer-
ent motor drive (Jones et al., 2002), or (ii) spontaneous
errors in afferent feedback (Faisal et al., 2008). In a
predictive framework of state estimation, both efferent
drive and afferent feedback are utilized (Van Beers et
al., 2002). From this point of view, either, e.g., greater-
than-intended force production or greater-than-actual
velocity feedback would give rise to the observed rela-
tionship between the perceived and actual movement
speed. Given that it is well understood that muscle vi-
bration actively biases the muscle velocity sensors (Roll
& Vedel, 1982; Gilhodes et al., 1986; Roll et al., 2004),
and that muscle vibration does affect both perceived
and actual movement speed in a similar manner as seen
here, it seems likely that the observed baseline associ-
ation is at least in part driven by spontaneous errors
in the perceived movement speed on a trial to trial ba-
sis, causing reactive changes in movement speed. To-
gether, these observations support the assumption that
movement speed is adjusted in response to perceived
movement speed.
The velocity profile of reaching movements is typi-
cally bell-shaped and smooth, a feature that has been
well-accounted for by models based on signal-dependent
noise and Optimal Feedback Control (Harris & Wolpert,
1998; Todorov & Jordan, 1998), as well as through
models that minimize variational free energy (Friston
et al., 2010). From either of these perspectives, any er-
ror in the perception of movement speed, whether aris-
ing spontaneously or through muscle vibration, would
be expected to trigger the observed compensatory mo-
tor adjustments. These may align ongoing movement
with either a planned trajectory or with predictions pro-
duced by a generative model, depending on the control
framework.
13
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
5.2 Perceived movement speed biases
position estimation
In Task 2, the results mirror those seen in Task 1 in
terms of the effects of muscle vibration on movement
speed. Building upon the argumentation in the pre-
vious section, these effects may similarly be assumed
to be in response to an induced bias in the percep-
tion of movement speed. Furthermore, these changes in
movement speed are accompanied by congruent changes
in endpoint error, indicating biases in the perceived
arm position. This is seen in that antagonist vibra-
tion causes both decreased movement speed and a bias
towards undershooting the target. Thus, consider-
ing Tasks 1 and 2 together, our results indicate that
vibration-induced biases in the perception of movement
velocity are associated with congruent biases in the per-
ception of limb position. This observation supports the
hypothesis that estimation of limb position and veloc-
ity is an integrated process, as predicted by both Active
Inference (Friston et al., 2010) and Optimal Feedback
Control (Wolpert et al., 1995) frameworks.
Both the residual correlation found between move-
ment speed and endpoint errors in the primary anal-
ysis of Task 2, as well as the subanalysis including
only the no-vibration trials, further demonstrate that
errors in perceived arm position (observed through end-
point errors) are generally correlated with errors in per-
ceived movement speed (as observed through variation
in movement speed).
While we do see some minor changes in movement
time in response to muscle vibration, these are con-
sistently in the opposite direction as what might have
explained the changes in endpoint errors; e.g., under-
shooting the target might, in a simplified fashion, have
been associated either with moving slower for an un-
changed movement time, or moving for a shorter time
at a similar speed. Instead, we tend to see increased
movement time in response to antagonist vibration, ef-
fectively increasing the required change in movement
speed to achieve the same shift in endpoint error.
Finally, we did not find evidence indicating that mus-
cle vibration causes a decrease in endpoint error preci-
sion. This observation is somewhat contrary to previ-
ous findings, which have indicated that muscle vibration
may decrease the precision or weight placed on propri-
oceptive signals. This has been observed in tasks where
antagonist-pair double vibration has been used to in-
crease the strength of visual illusion (Chancel et al.,
2016; Chancel & Ehrsson, 2023). Additionally, it has
been observed that muscle vibration leads to a decrease
in the precision of force production (Bock et al., 2007),
which would also seem to predict decreased precision of
endpoint errors. As such, it is surprising that we ob-
serve no effects on precision, but only on accuracy, in
the current task.
5.3 Online control of movement speed
In Task 3, results show how movement speed is affected
immediately following turning on or off the antagonist
vibration motor. The expected decrease in movement
speed in response to antagonist vibration had an onset
latency of approximately 50 ms. This finding is in line
with previous EMG-based research, which has identi-
fied changes in muscle activity at latencies of 40-60 ms
(Capaday & Cooke, 1983; Cody et al., 1990). Our ob-
servations further expand on this work, demonstrating
that the previously observed latency of EMG response
matches well with actual changes in movement speed,
which quickly exceeds the difference between the control
conditions with no vibration and antagonist vibration
for the entire movement.
This confirms that the initial movement speed correc-
tion is a reflexive response to increased type Ia firing,
operating well below the time required for conscious
and deliberate motor control. As already mentioned,
this reflexive reaction to biased proprioceptive input is
well explained by both Active Inference and Optimal
Feedback Control. In the context of Active Inference,
such adjustments would reflect actions aimed at mini-
mizing proprioceptive prediction error, effectively align-
ing actual sensory feedback with predicted sensory con-
sequences of movement (Friston et al., 2010). From a
signal-dependent noise perspective, corrections may be
seen as restoring or replanning a trajectory that best
minimizes endpoint variance (Harris & Wolpert, 1998).
We generally observed a similar, although slightly
longer delay (approximately 59 ms) to turning off the
antagonist vibration until movement speed was in-
creased in response. This may be due to a limitation
in our implementation of vibration motor control; while
the vibration motor was always in a consistent state at
vibration start (non-vibrating), the state of the motor
was variable when vibration stop was triggered, such
that it might either be accelerating towards or away
from the antagonist muscle when power was cut. Given
that the length of a single oscillatory cycle exceeds the
14
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
detected difference (12.5 ms for our 80 Hz vibration sig-
nal), the actual physiological delay is likely very similar.
5.4 Limitations & concluding remarks
In this study, we approached the investigation of mus-
cle vibration through the lens of movement tracking,
with arm movement restricted to the elbow joint only.
This approach has the advantage of simplifying the as-
sumptions regarding the effects of muscle vibration on
perceived joint angles and velocities. With both the
biceps and triceps brachii crossing both the elbow and
shoulder joint, any bias introduced in the firing rate of
muscle afferents here would presumably influence both
the perceived elbow and shoulder state. This signif-
icantly increases the complexity of forming hypothe-
ses regarding the expected movement corrections in re-
sponse to muscle vibration for whole-arm movement.
While the current approach with restricted movement
sidesteps this issue to some extent, it has drawbacks
in terms of generalizing our observations to more nat-
ural whole-arm/body movement. A limitation here is
that 1-dimensional movement, as is the case here, limits
endpoint errors to lie along this dimension exclusively.
Additional freedom of movement dimensions may be
necessary to fully describe whether muscle vibration in-
creases variation in endpoint errors, even if this effect
is not apparent with the current setup.
Further, our discussion was framed based on the ef-
fects of antagonist muscle vibration, while we tested
the impact of both agonist and antagonist vibration.
Generally, for agonist vibration, we saw effects in the
opposite direction, although smaller and less consistent.
This generally matches well with previous research (Ca-
paday & Cooke, 1981, 1983; Cody et al., 1990; Inglis
& Frank, 1990; Macefield & Knellwolf, 2018), although
our results do expand on the earlier findings, as we did
observe consistent effects on the actual movement speed
in both Tasks 1 and 2. In Task 2, we found no indication
of any interaction effect between the vibration motors,
indicating that the combined effect of both vibration
motors on both perception of arm position and velocity
is well approximated by the sum of each vibration motor
alone. This suggests that state estimation during active
movement is based on feedback from both the agonist
and antagonist muscles, as previously demonstrated in
passive conditions (Gilhodes et al., 1986).
In summary, our results suggest that the perception
of limb position and velocity is an integrated process,
with sensed limb velocity likely contributing to the per-
ceived limb position through an integral-like compu-
tation of the velocity signal. A mechanism for such
velocity-to-position estimation arises naturally within
the frameworks of both Active Inference and Optimal
Feedback Control (Wolpert et al., 1995; Friston et al.,
2010). To the extent that velocity signals contribute to
position estimation via an integration-like process, it is
equally plausible that position signals could influence
velocity estimation through a differentiation-like mech-
anism, although this was not investigated here. Such
reciprocal interactions in state estimation would serve
to maintain a stable and self-consistent representation
of limb state across both position and velocity domains,
with the unavoidable downside that any sensory error
in one domain would have downstream effects on the
other domain as well, as demonstrated through the ap-
plication of muscle vibration. While movement speed
corrections are too fast to be deliberately driven, the
underlying perceived bias in movement speed is never-
theless available for verbal report.
To reach out and grasp an object, we must infer our
own body position and movement kinematics. This
study provides further support for predictive models
of motor control, demonstrating that limb state esti-
mation is an integrated process spanning both position
and velocity domains.
6 Additional Information
6.1 Data availability
The source data and analysis code will be made publicly
available at time of peer-review publication.
6.2 Grants
This project was supported by a DATA+ grant from
UCPH. MSC was supported by DFF-FKK (0132-
00141B) and the Carlsberg Foundation (CF22-0941).
6.3 Disclosures
The authors report no conflicts of interest.
6.4 Author contributions
The experiment was conducted at the Cognition, Inten-
tion and Action research group, Section for Cognition
15
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
and Neuropsychology, Department of Psychology, Uni-
versity of Copenhagen, Øster Farimagsgade 2A, Copen-
hagen.
ESM and MSC conceptualized and designed the re-
search project. ESM acquired and analyzed the data
and drafted the manuscript, and ESM and MSC re-
vised and edited the manuscript. ESM and MSC con-
firm that they have read and approved the final version
of the manuscript.
7 Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Mantas Cibulskis,
Difeng Yu, and Joanna Emilia Bergstr¨ om for their valu-
able discussions and insights on the topic of sensory
inference.
7.1 Keywords
sensorimotor control, sensory integration, muscle ten-
don vibration, Ia afferent, position estimation, velocity
estimation
References
Matthews, P. B. (1963). The response of de-efferented
muscle spindle receptors to stretching at dif-
ferent velocities. The Journal of Physiology,
168(3), 660. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1113 /
JPHYSIOL.1963.SP007214
Eklund, G. (1972). Position sense and state of contrac-
tion; the effects of vibration. Journal of Neu-
rology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 35(5), 606–
611. https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.35.5.606
Goodwin, G. M., McCloskey, D. I., & Matthews,
P. B. C. (1972). Proprioceptive Illusions
Induced by Muscle Vibration: Contribution
by Muscle Spindles to Perception? Science,
175(4028), 1382–1384. https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1126/science.175.4028.1382
Capaday, C., & Cooke, J. D. (1981). The Effects of
Muscle Vibration on the Attainment of In-
tended Final Position During Voluntary Hu-
man Arm Movements*. Experimental Brain
Research, 42(42), 228–230. https://doi.org/
10.1007/BF00236912
Roll, J. P., & Vedel, J. P. (1982). Kinaesthetic Role
of Muscle Afferents in Man, Studied by Ten-
don Vibration and Microneurography. Experi-
mental Brain Research,47(2), 177–190. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/BF00239377
Capaday, C., & Cooke, J. D. (1983). Vibration-induced
changes in movement-related EMG activity in
humans. Experimental Brain Research, 52(1),
139–146. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00237158
Gilhodes, J., Roll, J., & Tardy-Gervet, M. (1986). Per-
ceptual and motor effects of agonist-antagonist
muscle vibration in man. Experimental Brain
Research, 61(2), 395–402. https://doi.org/10.
1007/BF00239528
Roll, J. P., Vedel, J. P., & Ribot, E. (1989). Alteration
of proprioceptive messages induced by tendon
vibration in man: a microneurographic study.
Experimental Brain Research,76(76), 213–222.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00253639
Yamamoto, C., & Ohtsuki, T. (1989). Modulation of
stretch reflex by anticipation of the stimu-
lus through visual information. Experimental
Brain Research,77(1), 12–22. https://doi.org/
10.1007/BF00250562
Cody, F. W., Schwartz, M. P., & Smit, G. P. (1990).
Proprioceptive guidance of human voluntary
wrist movements studied using muscle vibra-
tion. The Journal of Physiology,427(1), 455–
470. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1990.
sp018181
Inglis, J. T., & Frank, J. S. (1990). The effect of ag-
onist/antagonist muscle vibration on human
position sense. Experimental Brain Research,
81(3), 573–580. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 /
BF02423506
Carlin, B. P., Gelfand, A. E., & Smith, A. F. M. (1992).
Hierarchical Bayesian Analysis of Changepoint
Problems. Journal of the Royal Statistical Soci-
ety: Series C (Applied Statistics), 41(2), 389–
405. https://doi.org/10.2307/2347570
Wolpert, D. M., Ghahramani, Z., & Jordan, M. I.
(1995). An internal model for sensorimotor
integration. Science, 269(5232), 1880–1882.
https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.7569931,
Nakazawa, K., Yamamoto, S.-i., & Yano, H. (1997).
Short- and long-latency reflex responses dur-
ing different motor tasks in elbow flexor mus-
cles. Experimental Brain Research, (116), 20–
28. https://doi.org/10.1007/pl00005740
16
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Harris, C. M., & Wolpert, D. M. (1998). Signal-
dependent noise determines motor planning.
Nature, 394(6695), 780–784. https://doi.org/
10.1038/29528;KWRD=SCIENCE
Todorov, E., & Jordan, M. I. (1998). Smoothness max-
imization along a predefined path accurately
predicts the speed profiles of complex arm
movements. Journal of Neurophysiology,80(2),
696–714. https://doi.org/10.1152/JN.1998.80.
2.696,
Calvin-Figui` ere, S., Romaigu` ere, P., Gilhodes, J. C.,
& Roll, J. P. (1999). Antagonist motor re-
sponses correlate with kinesthetic illusions in-
duced by tendon vibration. Experimental Brain
Research, 124(3), 342–350. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s002210050631
Jones, K. E., Hamilton, A. F. C., & Wolpert, D. M.
(2002). Sources of signal-dependent noise dur-
ing isometric force production. Journal of Neu-
rophysiology, 88(3), 1533–1544. https : / / doi .
org / 10 . 1152 / JN . 2002 . 88 . 3 . 1533 / ASSET /
IMAGES/LARGE/9K0922581106.JPEG
Todorov, E., & Jordan, M. I. (2002). Optimal feed-
back control as a theory of motor coordina-
tion. Nature Neuroscience, 5(11), 1226–1235.
https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / NN963 ; KWRD =
BIOMEDICINE
Van Beers, R. J., Baraduc, P., & Wolpert, D. M. (2002).
Role of uncertainty in sensorimotor control.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B: Biological Sciences, 357(1424), 1137–1145.
https://doi.org/10.1098/RSTB.2002.1101
Roll, J. P., Albert, F., Ribot-Ciscar, E., & Bergen-
heim, M. (2004). ”Proprioceptive signature” of
cursive writing in humans: A multi-population
coding. Experimental Brain Research,157(3),
359–368. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-004-
1853-x
Albert, F., Bergenheim, M., Ribot-Ciscar, E., & Roll,
J. P. (2006). The Ia afferent feedback of a given
movement evokes the illusion of the same move-
ment when returned to the subject via mus-
cle tendon vibration. Experimental Brain Re-
search, 172(2), 163–174. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00221-005-0325-2
Bock, O., Pipereit, K., & Mierau, A. (2007). A method
to reversibly degrade proprioceptive feedback
in research on human motor control.Journal of
Neuroscience Methods,160(2), 246–250. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2006.09.010
Dimitriou, M., & Edin, B. B. (2008). Discharges
in human muscle spindle afferents during a
key-pressing task. The Journal of Physiology,
586(22), 5455–5470. https://doi.org/10.1113/
JPHYSIOL.2008.160036
Faisal, A. A., Selen, L. P., & Wolpert, D. M. (2008).
Noise in the nervous system. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 9(4), 292–303. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nrn2258
Kurtzer, I. L., Pruszynski, J. A., & Scott, S. H. (2008).
Long-Latency Reflexes of the Human Arm Re-
flect an Internal Model of Limb Dynamics.Cur-
rent Biology,18(6), 449–453. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cub.2008.02.053
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., Kilner, J., & Kiebel, S. J.
(2010). Action and behavior: A free-energy for-
mulation. Biological Cybernetics,102(3), 227–
260. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00422 - 010 -
0364-z
Shadmehr, R., Smith, M. A., & Krakauer, J. W. (2010).
Error correction, sensory prediction, and adap-
tation in motor control. Annual Review of Neu-
roscience, 33(Volume 33, 2010), 89–108. https:
//doi.org/10.1146/annurev- neuro- 060909-
153135
Proske, U., & Gandevia, S. C. (2012). The Pro-
prioceptive Senses: Their Roles in Signaling
Body Shape, Body Position and Movement,
and Muscle Force. Physiol Rev, 92, 1651–1697.
https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00048.2011
Kurtzer, I. L. (2015). Long-latency reflexes account for
limb biomechanics through several supraspinal
pathways. Frontiers in Integrative Neuro-
science, 8(JAN), 1–19. https : / / doi . org / 10 .
3389/fnint.2014.00099
Chancel, M., Blanchard, C., Guerraz, M., Montagnini,
A., & Kavounoudias, A. (2016). Optimal visuo-
tactile integration for velocity discrimination of
self-hand movements. Journal of Neurophysiol-
ogy, 116(3), 1522–1535. https://doi.org/10.
1152/jn.00883.2015
B¨ urkner, P. C. (2017). brms: An R package for Bayesian
multilevel models using Stan.Journal of Statis-
tical Software, 80. https://doi.org/10.18637/
jss.v080.i01
Macefield, V. G., & Knellwolf, T. P. (2018). Functional
properties of human muscle spindles. Journal
17
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
of Neurophysiology, 120(2), 452–467. https://
doi.org/10.1152/jn.00071.2018
Ferrari, F., Clemente, F., & Cipriani, C. (2019). The
preload force affects the perception threshold of
muscle vibration-induced movement illusions.
Experimental Brain Research,237(1), 111–120.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-018-5402-4
Keyser, J., Ramakers, R. E., Medendorp, W. P., &
Selen, L. P. (2019). Task-dependent responses
to muscle vibration during reaching. European
Journal of Neuroscience, 49(11), 1477–1490.
https://doi.org/10.1111/ejn.14292
Wickham, H., Averick, M., Bryan, J., Chang, W., Mc-
Gowan, L., Fran¸ cois, R., Grolemund, G., Hayes,
A., Henry, L., Hester, J., Kuhn, M., Pedersen,
T., Miller, E., Bache, S., M¨ uller, K., Ooms, J.,
Robinson, D., Seidel, D., Spinu, V., . . . Yutani,
H. (2019). Welcome to the Tidyverse. Journal
of Open Source Software,4(43), 1686. https:
//doi.org/10.21105/joss.01686
Brookes, J., Warburton, M., Alghadier, M., Mon-
Williams, M., & Mushtaq, F. (2020). Study-
ing human behavior with virtual reality: The
Unity Experiment Framework. Behavior Re-
search Methods, 52(2), 455–463. https://doi.
org/10.3758/s13428-019-01242-0
Abril-Pla, O., Andreani, V., Carroll, C., Dong, L., Fon-
nesbeck, C. J., Kochurov, M., Kumar, R., Lao,
J., Luhmann, C. C., Martin, O. A., Osthege,
M., Vieira, R., Wiecki, T., & Zinkov, R. (2023).
PyMC: a modern, and comprehensive prob-
abilistic programming framework in Python.
PeerJ Computer Science, 9, e1516. https : / /
doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.1516
Chancel, M., & Ehrsson, H. H. (2023). Proprioceptive
uncertainty promotes the rubber hand illusion.
Cortex, 165, 70–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cortex.2023.04.005
R Core Team. (2024). R: A Language and Environment
for Statistical Computing. https : / / www . R -
project.org/
Stan Development Team. (2024). Stan Modeling Lan-
guage Users Guide and Reference Manual.
https://mc-stan.org
18
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
8 Appendix
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
88% 94% 100% 106% 112%
Visual feedback speed gain
Percent reported as 'Faster'
(A) Percent trials rated as 'Faster'
−2
−1
0
1
2
Faster Slower
Virtual arm rated as
Mean speed (z−normalised)
(B) Movement speed
Antagonist vibration Double vibration No vibration Agonist vibration
Figure A1: Panel A shows the mean and 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals of subject means of trials reported
as ’Faster’ from Task 1, complement of Figure 2A. Panel B shows z-normalized (within-subject) mean movement
speed by subject rating of ’Faster’ and ’Slower’ from Task 1 trials with no visual speed gain (normal speed) and
no vibration, complement of figure 4B.
Outcome Movement direction Mean of subject means Mean of subject SDs
Endpoint error (°) Extension -3.28 (5.07) 3.65 (1.05)
Endpoint error (°) Flexion -1.12 (3.49) 3.69 (0.96)
Mean movement speed (°/s) Extension 40.92 (9.83) 7.73 (2.57)
Mean movement speed (°/s) Flexion 38.55 (7.6) 6.59 (1.74)
Movement time (s) Extension 1.46 (0.34) 0.29 (0.09)
Movement time (s) Flexion 1.61 (0.3) 0.29 (0.1)
Table A1: Summary of mean (SD) endpoint errors, mean movement speed, and movement time in Task 2 for the
baseline trials with no muscle vibration, along with between-subject variability.
19
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
−4.5 −3.0 −1.5 0.0 1.5 3.0 4.5
−4.5
−3.0
−1.5
0.0
1.5
3.0
4.5
6.0
Mean speed (z−normalised)
Endpoint errors (z−normalised)
Antagonist vibration Double vibration
No vibration Agonist vibration
Movement speed and endpoint errors
Figure A2: Shows mean movement speed and endpoint errors from Task 2. All values are z-normalized within-
subject by the values of the control no-vibration condition, to account for subject-to-subject variation in both
movement speed as well as endpoint error precision and accuracy. Small dots represent individual trials, while
large dots show the mean of each vibration condition. Complement of Figure 3.
20
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
0.1
 0.0 0.1 0.2
65
70
75
80Movement speed (°/sec)
(A1) Antagonist vibration on at time = 0
0.1
 0.0 0.1 0.2
65
70
75
80
(B1) Antagonist vibration off at time = 0
0.1
 0.0 0.1 0.2
10
5
0
5
10
Delta movement speed (°/sec)
Prior samples(A2)
0.1
 0.0 0.1 0.2
10
5
0
5
10
Prior samples(B2)
0.1
 0.0 0.1 0.2
Time (s)
4
2
0
2
4
Delta movement speed (°/sec)
Posterior samples(A3)
0.1
 0.0 0.1 0.2
Time (s)
4
2
0
2
4
Posterior samples(B3)
0
0
100
200
300
0
0
100
200
300
Mean of "Baseline" condition
Mean of "Intervention" condition
Vibration on/off (20° into movement)
Sample of _pre_ + _pre_ * time
Sample of _post_ + _post_ * time
Distribution of 
Figure A3: Visualizes the fitting process of model A1. Panels A1 and B1 show the mean movement speed of the
two sets of intervention and control conditions, with control conditions in grey and intervention conditions in
orange. Panels A2 and B2 display the same two lines, with the mean of the control condition subtracted from its
corresponding intervention condition trials at each time point t. As a result, the orange line now represents the
delta mean movement speed between the two conditions. A subset of prior draws of the pre- and post-
τ linear
function parameters (blue and green), as well as the prior distribution of τ (purple), are also shown. Panels A3
and B3 show a subset of posterior draws of the two linear function parameters and the posterior distribution of
τ. Note that while only the mean delta movement speed is shown (orange), the model is fitted to the underlying
trial-level data in a hierarchical fashion to account for subject-to-subject variation.
21
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Model A1 describes the complete changepoint model,
which was implemented in PyMC. See Figure A3 for a
visualization of the fitting process.
The changepoint model approximates the delta mean
movement as two linear functions, one before the effect
of starting/stopping the vibration motor takes effect,
with a slope of near 0, and one after, where the slope will
indicate the estimated relative change in velocity over
time, i.e., acceleration. These assumptions allow us to
sample the most likely changepoints ( τ) during model
fitting. The same model, using identical priors, is fit
twice, once for detecting the latency of turning on the
vibration motor until velocity is changed, and once for
turning off. dmsi is the movement speed difference at
time ti (in deg/s). Specifically, it is calculated by sub-
tracting the mean speed of the control condition from
each observation in the intervention condition (within-
participant) at time ti. A sigmoid function (S i) with a
very rapid transition between asymptotic values is used
to blend between the two linear functions. The esti-
mated inflection point τ thus models the latency. Zero-
centered priors are used for the slopes both pre and post
τ, and a uniform prior was used for the value of τ be-
tween 0 (vibration start/stop) and the max time stamp
of the included data (120 ms after vibration start/stop).
The model definition is subdivided into the likeli-
hood function, as well as priors, which here describe
the subject-level parameters (random effects, marked
as j), and the hyperpriors, which represent the priors
of the group-level parameters (fixed effects). The distri-
bution of subject-level parameters is modeled as Gaus-
sian distributions centered on the group means (marked
with overlines), e.g., subject changepoints are assumed
to be normally distributed. We use an uncentered pa-
rameterization of the model here to aid convergence.
This relates to parameters marked as ϵ; including these
ϵ terms significantly improves sampling efficiency and
convergence.
dmsi are at ti modeled as a Gaussian distribution
with µi and σj. µi is a blend between the two linear
functions, µ
pre τi, µ post τi, blended using the value
of a sigmoid function ( Si) at ti. Of note, α post τj
is defined deterministically depending on the sampled
values of α
pre τj , β pre τj , β post τj and τj, such that
the two linear functions intersect att = τj. This ensures
continuity between µ pre τi and µ post τi within each
set of sampled values. For simplicity, the distribution of
observed dmsi is assumed to be constant across values
of ti, within-subject (denoted by σj).
22
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Likelihood
dmsi ∼ N(µi, σj)
µi = µ pre τi · Si + µ post τi · (1 − Si)
Si = 1
1 + e
ti−τj
0.001
µ pre τi = α pre τj + β pre τj · ti
µ post τi = α post τj + β post τj · ti
Priors
α pre τj = α pre τ + α pre τσ · ϵ α pre τj for j ∈ {1, . . . , nid}
ϵ α pre τj ∼ N(0, 1) for j ∈ {1, . . . , nid}
β pre τj = β pre τ + β pre τσ · ϵ β pre τj for j ∈ {1, . . . , nid}
ϵ β pre τj ∼ N(0, 1) for j ∈ {1, . . . , nid}
β post τj = β post τ + β post τσ · ϵ β post τj for j ∈ {1, . . . , nid}
ϵ β post τj ∼ N(0, 1) for j ∈ {1, . . . , nid}
α post τj = α pre τj + (β pre τj − β post τj · τj) for j ∈ {1, . . . , nid}
τj = τ + τσ · ϵ τj for j ∈ {1, . . . , nid}
ϵ τj ∼ N(0, 1) for j ∈ {1, . . . , nid}
σj = 1
1 + eσ logj
for j ∈ {1, . . . , nid}
σ logj = σ log + σ logσ · ϵ σ logj for j ∈ {1, . . . , nid}
ϵ σ logj = N(0, 1) for j ∈ {1, . . . , nid}
Hyperpriors
α pre τ ∼ N(0, 2.5)
α pre τσ ∼ HN(5)
β pre τ ∼ N(0, 5)
β pre τσ ∼ HN(5)
β post τ ∼ N(0, 50)
β post τσ ∼ HN(25)
τ ∼ U(0, tmax)
τσ ∼ HN(0.025)
σ log ∼ N(0, 10)
σ logσ ∼ HN(10)
(A1)
23
.CC-BY 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted July 23, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.18.665517doi: bioRxiv preprint 