HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 19 September 2019
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00319
Edited by:
Roberto Esposito,
A.O. Ospedali Riuniti Marche Nord,
Italy
Reviewed by:
Heinz Boeker,
University of Zurich, Switzerland
Karl Friston,
University College London,
United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
Georg Northoff
georg.northoff@theroyal.ca
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Cognitive Neuroscience,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience
Received: 03 July 2019
Accepted: 29 August 2019
Published: 19 September 2019
Citation:
Northoff G (2019) Lessons From
Astronomy and Biology for the
Mind—Copernican Revolution in
Neuroscience.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 13:319.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00319
Lessons From Astronomy and
Biology for the Mind—Copernican
Revolution in Neuroscience
Georg Northoff *
Cellular and Molecular Medicine Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa Institute of Mental Health Research, Ottawa, ON,
Canada
Neuroscience made major progress in unravelling the neural basis of mental features like
self, consciousness, affect, etc. However, we nevertheless lack what recently has been
described as “missing ingredient” or “common currency” in the relationship between
neuronal and mental activity. Rather than putting forward yet another theory of the neural
basis of mental features, I here suggest a change in our methodological strategy how
to approach the brain, that is, our view or vantage point of the brain. Learning from
astronomy (Copernicus) and biology (Darwin), I suggest that we may want to change
our currently pre-Copernican vantage point from within brain to a post-Copernican
vantage point from beyond brain. Such post-Copernican vantage point from beyond
brain allows us taking into view that what happens beyond the brain itself, e.g., the
world, and how that shapes the brain and its neural activity, e.g., world-brain relation.
We then lend empirical support to the world-brain relation by converging it with Karl
Friston’s free energy principle that, as we see it, provides a neuro-ecological and
therefore post-Copernican view of the brain. That, in turn, allows us taking into view
that mental features are shaped by both world and brain and are therefore truly neuro-
ecological rather than merely neuronal. This raises the question for the link, e.g., the
“missing ingredient” or “common currency” of world brain relation and mental features.
Recent empirical evidence suggests that temporo-spatial dynamics may provide such
link as it characterizes both the world-brain relation’s free energy and mental features,
e.g., their spatiotemporality as described in philosophy. Taken together, I here advocate
a change in our methodological strategy on how to approach the brain, that is, a
shift from a pre-Copernican vantage point from within brain to a post-Copernican
vantage point from beyond brain. The latter allows us taking into view that what
happens beyond the brain in the world and how that shapes the brain in such a way
that it can yield mental features. This amounts to nothing less than a Copernican
turn or revolution in neuroscience akin to the ones in astronomy (Copernicus) and
biology (Darwin).
Keywords: physics, biology, neuroscience, common currency, copernican turn
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 1 September 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 319
Northoff Copernican Turn in Neuroscience
INTRODUCTION
Mental Features—How Can We Reconcile
World and Brain?
The mind and its various mental features present us with a
puzzle. On the one hand, mental features like self, consciousness,
and affect (and others) can be characterized by an experience
or perception of specific events or objects and even the
own self as part of the wider world beyond ourselves, e.g.,
body and brain. Taken in such sense, mental features exhibit
a strong ecological component. On the other hand, recent
research in neuroscience clearly demonstrates a neural basis
of the various mental features in the brain. One would
consequently assume that mental features are neuronal rather
than ecological.
How can we reconcile both mental, e.g., ecological and
neuronal views of mental features in our empirical research
in neuroscience (while refraining from any ontological
metaphysical assumptions; see below)? One way to do so is to
reduce mental features to the neuronal mechanisms of the brain.
This is reflected in various excellent neuroscientific theories
of mental features like consciousness and self. Among others,
these include the Integrated Information Theory (IIT; Tononi
et al., 2016), the Global Neuronal Workspace Theory (GNWT;
Dehaene et al., 2014, 2017), and the Temporo-spatial Theory of
consciousness (TTC; Northoff, 2013, 2014a,b, 2016a,b,c,d, 2018;
Northoff and Huang, 2017).
The same also holds for other mental features like self
where neuronal accounts of cognitive (Churchland, 2002),
dynamic pattern (Gallagher, 2005), affective (Panksepp,
1998a,b), attentional (Sui and Humphreys, 2015), embodied
(Gallagher, 2005; Thompson, 2007; Hu et al., 2016), and
temporo-spatial (Northoff, 2016a,b,c,d, 2017) theories of self
have been suggested. Finally, affect has also been the focus
where, rather than reducing it, neuronal and mental features
are conceived as two sides of one and the same activity (which,
metaphysically, presupposes dual-aspect monism)—this has
recently been suggested by Mark Solms who conceives affect
as most basic and primary manifestation of consciousness
and mental features (Solms, 2017, 2018, 2019; see also
Damasio, 2018).
Yet another methodological strategy on how to reconcile
ecological and neuronal views of mental features is to change
our approach to the brain. Specifically, one may want to take
into view that what happens beyond the brain itself, e.g., in
world and body, and how that shapes the brain itself in such
way that it can yield mental features. Such neuro-ecological
(rather than purely neuronal) view of the brain, in turn, may
allow us to account for both ecological and neuronal aspects of
mental features. Even more important, we can then take into view
that what has been recently described as ‘‘missing ingredient’’
(Lamme, 2018) or ‘‘common currency’’ (Northoff, 2019) of
neuronal and mental features. The main goal in the present
article consists in sketching such alternative methodological
strategy in our approach to the brain and how it yields
mental features.
Main and Speciﬁc Aims—Copernican
Revolution in Neuroscience
My main aim is to demonstrate that neuroscience can learn
from both astronomy and biology in their Copernican turns.
Copernicus changed our view of earth (see below) which allowed
him to take into view a novel and different relation of universe
and earth. Analogously so in the case of Darwin. He changed
our view of human species which enabled him to take into
view our relation to evolution (see below for details on both
Copernicus and Darwin). I now suggest the same kind of
Copernican turn or revolution with regard to the brain. We may
want to change our currently pre-Copernican view of the brain
and replace it by a post-Copernican view. That, as I suggest,
will enable us to take a novel post-Copernican view how the
brain is related to the world, e.g., world-brain relation (see
below for details; Northoff, 2016a,b,c,d, 2018). Importantly, this,
in turn, makes possible to reconcile ecological and neuronal
view of mental features as truly neuro-ecological rather than as
merely neuronal.
My suggestion amounts to nothing less than the claim
for a Copernican revolution in neuroscience (analogous to
the ones in astronomy and biology). Note that I conceive
such Copernican revolution in merely empirical terms of
neuroscience. Hence, I only focus on the methodological
strategy, e.g., our view or vantage point (see below) with
regard to the brain in purely empirical terms, that is,
how we can approach and understand the brain’s neuronal
features as we observe and investigate them in neuroscience.
In contrast, I refrain from more philosophical claims of
an epistemological (as, for instance, Kant suggests; Kant,
1781/1998), metaphysical, or ontological (Whitehead, 1929/1978;
Sherburne, 1983; Northoff, 2016a,b,c,d). Copernican revolution
(see also Northoff, 2018, for discussing the Copernican
revolution in more detail in the context of the mind-body
problem or world-brain problem).
Refraining from such wider senses of the Copernican
revolution beyond the merely empirical territory of
neuroscience entails that I here do not address any kind of
philosophical problems like the ‘‘explanatory gap’’ (Levine,
1983), ‘‘hard problem’’ (Chalmers, 1996), or mind-body
problem (see also Northoff, 2018 for the dissolution of
the mind-body problem and its replacement by the world-
brain problem). Accordingly, my understanding of the
Copernican revolution in this article is purely empirical
and limited to neuroscience (rather than psychology as
Sigmund Freud has also been attributed a Copernican
revolution with respect to the relation of consciousness and
unconsciousness; see Weinert, 2013) which, as I see it, is
akin to the revolutions in both astronomy (Copernicus) and
biology (Darwin).
The first specific aim consists in briefly describing the
basic features of the Copernican revolutions in both astronomy
(Copernicus) and biology (Darwin). That will provide the basis
for the second specific aim, that is, the comparison of pre- and
post-Copernican views of the brain. The third specific aim is
to sketch a post-Copernican view of the brain by suggesting a
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 2 September 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 319
Northoff Copernican Turn in Neuroscience
neuro-ecological view of the brain in terms of Karl Friston’s
free energy principle (Friston and Stephan, 2007; Friston, 2010;
Bruineberg et al., 2018a,b). That sets the basis for the fourth
specific aim that consists in outlining (albeit tentatively) a
post-Copernican view of mental features as neuro-ecological and
temporo-spatial.
PART I: PRE- VS. POST-COPERNICAN
VANTAGE POINTS IN ASTRONOMY AND
BIOLOGY
Vantage Point—Egocentric vs. Allocentric
What is a vantage point? I here consider the concept of vantage
point in its original definition as a ‘‘position or stand point from
which something is viewed or considered’’ (Oxford Dictionary).
Taken in this sense, the concept of vantage point comes close to
those of point of view or viewpoint. The chosen vantage point
may provide a specific view or viewpoint that includes a wide
range of phenomena while excluding others.
Let us take the example of viewing a city. One walks around
within a city. That allow us to see the details of, for instance,
the mosaic on the door of the big gothic cathedral. In contrast,
we remain unable to take into view the cathedral as such and
how it is integrated and thus fits into its respective context,
i.e., the city as whole. Specifically, the relationship between city
as whole and the cathedral as part of it remains opaque to us.
The cathedral looks very special to us in such viewpoint since it
is not related at all to the rest of the city and its spatiotemporal
coordinates—our view thus highlights the specialness of the
cathedral and its dichotomy with the city. Such vantage point
from within city takes the city itself including the cathedral as
center thus entailing what can be described as ‘‘vantage point
from within city (and cathedral).’’ Such viewpoint corresponds
well to the egocentric ‘‘vantage points from within earth and
humans’’ in astronomy and biology prior to Copernicus and
Darwin (see below).
That changes, once one moves to the mountain nearby from
which one can view the city as a whole including the big
cathedral. Now, we can take into view how the big cathedral is
part of the overall spatiotemporal coordinates of the city that is,
how well it integrates and aligns to its respective context and the
city as a whole. The spatiotemporal scope and range of our view
is thus extended beyond the cathedral—this is possible by taking
a what we describe as ‘‘vantage point from beyond city (and
cathedral).’’ As we will see below, that corresponds well to the
allocentric vantage points Copernicus and Darwin introduced,
the ‘‘vantage points from beyond earth and humans.’’
Pre- vs. Post-Copernican Vantage Points
in Astronomy—Earth and Universe
Before Copernicus, the universe did include earth and other
planets. However, the earth was not just another planet besides
the others within the universe as a whole. Instead, earth was
conceived special when compared to the other planets and the
rest of the universe. Specifically, the earth was supposed to
hold together the universe when being attributed the role of the
center around which all other planets move in the periphery.
FIGURE 1 | (A) Pre-Copernican—Geo-centric view with Vantage point from
within earth.(B) Post-Copernican—Helio-centric view with Vantage point
from beyond earth.
There was thus a clear center-periphery dichotomy between
earth and non-earth—the earth was deemed special entailing
a geocentric and consequently egocentric view of the universe,
a ‘‘vantage point from within earth’’ (see also Northoff, 2018;
see Figure 1A).
The specialness of earth was further supported by its
non-moving character. Being conceived as center that holds the
whole universe together, the earth itself was not supposed to
change as any such change would lead to the breakdown of
the universe. The earth was thus conceived in an a-temporal
way—the earth was assumed to be eternally present without any
change in space and time. Together, the earth was characterized
by specialness, e.g., its role as center, and its dichotomy to the
universe, e.g., a-spatiotemporal vs. spatiotemporal.
The view of the universe changed with Copernicus which was
empirically confirmed by his successors Kepler, Bruno, Gallilei,
and Newton (Weinert, 2013; Northoff, 2018). Copernicus
introduced a different view of earth within the universe. He
attributed the observed movements to earth itself. Rather than
sun and all other planets revolving around earth as center of
the universe, he suggested the opposite namely that the earth
revolves around the sun as center of universe. This led to the
replacement of the geocentric and egocentric view of the universe
by a heliocentric and allocentric view of the relationship of earth
and universe.
In the case of a heliocentric framework, the earth loses its
specialness in terms of its position, its role, and its temporal
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 3 September 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 319
Northoff Copernican Turn in Neuroscience
features. The earth is no longer the center of the universe around
which all other planets revolve. Instead, the earth is replaced
by the sun—the special position of earth is thus lost. Moreover,
it is no longer the earth that holds together the universe but
the sun—the central role of earth for the universe is also lost.
Finally, the a-spatiotemporal nature of earth as not being subject
to change is replaced by attributing movements to earth as it
revolves around the sun—the earth is thus characterized by the
same spatiotemporal features as the rest of the universe albeit in
different degrees, e.g., in a smaller scale. Together, the specialness
and dichotomy of earth in the pre-Copernican view are replaced
by non-specialness of earth and intrinsic relationship of earth
and universe.
How was it possible for Copernicus to take into view the
non-specialness of earth and its intrinsic relationship with the
universe? He abandoned the traditional vantage point from
within earth and replaced it by one that allowed him to take
into view that what happens beyond the earth itself within the
universe and how that shapes the earth itself, e.g., its movements
within the universe. Like the tourist walking to the nearby hill
to view city and cathedral, Copernicus shifted the vantage point
from within earth to what I describe as ‘‘vantage point from
beyond earth’’ (seeFigure 1B).
Pre- vs. Post-Copernican Vantage Points in
Biology—Human and Non-human Species
How about biology? Darwin is often credited with bringing
about a Copernican turn which lead to a scientific (and
metaphysical) revolution in biology (Ruse, 2009; Weinert, 2013).
Before Darwin, humans were considered special when compared
to non-human species. Humans were regarded the center of the
world with capacities vastly superior to the ones of non-human
species. This led to the assumption of a special role of humans
as only they were attributed soul and mind which enabled them
to be in special contact with God as creator of the world.
Since God does not change and is therefore a-spatiotemporal,
humans and, more specifically, their soul or mind must also be
a-spatiotemporal (as otherwise they could not be in contact with
God) this entailed dichotomy of mind and world.
Both specialness of humans and their dichotomy to the rest
of the world can be taken into view only when presupposing
a ‘‘vantage point from within humans.’’ That all changed with
Darwin though. He presented empirical evidence that humans
are part of the same evolution as non-human species. The
specialness of humans was thus lost and replaced by their
non-specialness.
Even more important, Darwin showed that both humans and
non-humans are subject to the same principles in the world, e.g.,
natural selection, throughout space and time in their evolution.
This allowed Darwin to take into view the intrinsic relationship
of humans and non-humans including their commonly shared
spatiotemporal features. Accordingly, Darwin thus able to take
into view that happens beyond human species in the world
including non-human species and how that shapes and relates
to the humans themselves.
Look beyond humans themselves which presupposes a
‘‘vantage point from beyond human.’’
PART II: PRE- VS. POST-COPERNICAN
VANTAGE POINT IN NEUROSCIENCE
Vantage Point From Within Mind—From
Philosophy to Psychology and Cognitive
Science
The famous 17th century philosopher Descartes is considered the
main source of the dualism of mind and body. The body as part
of the wider world can be observed in time and space, that is,
at discrete points in time and space, and operates in a purely
mechanical way like a machine. That, in contrast, is not the case
in consciousness and other mental features like self. The mental
features are neither spatiotemporal, e.g., they a-spatiotemporal
as traditionally conceived in philosophy. Nor are mental features
mechanical like body and world. We, therefore, cannot attribute
mental features to the body as part of the world but to the mind.
Together, the mind is special as it alone can mediate
mental features like consciousness, affect/emotional feelings, and
self—this reflects the specialness of mind. At the same time,
the mind can be characterized by its dichotomy to body/world
with seemingly no relationship between both. For that reason,
Descartes conceived mind and body/world as separate existences
and realities—this led him to the famous mind-body dualism
which, at the same time, implies dualism of mind and world
(McDowell, 1994; Northoff, 2018).
How is it possible to conceive the possibility of mind-body
dualism including specialness of mind and its dichotomy to
body and world? This presupposes a vantage point that takes
the mind itself as its center or ‘‘primary location’’ in the same
way pre-Copernican astronomists and biologists took earth and
humans as their viewpoints. The assumption of the specialness
of mind and its dichotomy to body/world thus presupposes a
‘‘vantage point from within mind’’ (Northoff, 2018). Taking the
mind as reference for mental features, such vantage point from
within mind leads to a mento-centric and ego-centric view of
mental features as being special and dichotomous to body and
world (seeFigure 2A).
One may now want to argue that such mind-body dualism
is just a merely philosophical problem. Current research
in psychology and cognitive science goes beyond that by
showing how the mind operates, displays different functions
like consciousness, cognition, self, and affect/emotion, and uses
certain computational principles and mechanisms. That does
not change the basic methodological presupposition though,
that is, the egocentric vantage point from within mind. True
psychology and cognitive science shift from the metaphysical
domain of philosophy to the empirical domain. That by itself
does not change the methodological strategy how to approach
the mind though.
Even an empirical approach to the mind can still take the
mind itself as center and conceive the latter as special. That is,
for instance, the case when one attributes specific psychological
processes or computational mechanisms to mental features
which stand in dichotomous relation to those of non-mental
features in body and world. The mento- and thus egocentric
character of the methodological approach to the mind is thus
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 4 September 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 319
Northoff Copernican Turn in Neuroscience
FIGURE 2 | (A) Vantage point from within mind: mento-centric and pre-Copernican stance.(B) Vantage point from with brain: neuro-centric and ego-centric view
with brain as center of the world.(C) World-brain relation vs. brain-world relation.(D) Vantage point from beyond brain: allo-centric view of the
brain—post-Copernican.
more or less preserved in psychology and cognitive science—they
thus presuppose a vantage point from within the mind.
Vantage Point From Within
Brain—Neuroscience
One may now be tempted to say that we know better these days.
The assumption of mind has been disputed in both philosophy
and even more so in neuroscience in our time. There is no mind
anymore, mental features like consciousness and self are based
on the brain and are thus physical or better neuronal rather
than primarily mental, e.g., non-physical. Mind-body dualism is
thus replaced by monism with either materialism/physicalism,
panpsychism (Tononi and Koch, 2015), or dual-aspect monism
(Solms, 2017, 2018, 2019).
The recognition of the neural basis of mental features has led
to a search for their neuronal mechanisms. In the debate about,
for instance, consciousness, this has led to the search for the
neural correlates of consciousness (the NCC; Chalmers, 2001;
Crick and Koch, 2003; Koch, 2004; Aru et al., 2012; de Graaf et al.,
2012; Northoff, 2013, 2014a,b; Solms, 2018, 2019). The NCC
has been defined as the minimum neuronal mechanisms jointly
sufficient for any one specific conscious percept (Crick and Koch,
1990; Koch, 2004). Recent progress in consciousness research
further introduces two refined interpretations of the NCC as:
(1) the content-specific NCC, which determines a particular
phenomenal distinction with an experience; and (2) the full
NCC, which supports conscious experiences in their entirety,
irrespective of the contents (Koch et al., 2016).
The NCC assumes special neuronal features within the
brain itself. These special yet not fully clear neuronal features
(see below) are supposed to underlie consciousness; this
distinguishes them from other neuronal features that only
mediate unconsciousness. The NCC thus signify a special
neuronal role for consciousness and entail a neuronal
dichotomy of consciousness vs. unconsciousness. Specialness
and dichotomy are thus now ‘‘located’’ within the brain
itself, that is, in terms of two sets of neuronal features
and mechanisms.
Without going into detail, these specific neuronal mechanism
include, to name just a few of the various suggested ones,
information integration (Tononi et al., 2016), recurrent
processing (Lamme, 2018), access to global workspace (Dehaene
et al., 2017), embodiment (Tallon-Baudry et al., 2018), higher-
order cognition (Lau and Rosenthal, 2011), predictive error
minimization (Hohwy, 2013), temporo-spatial dynamics
(Northoff and Huang, 2017; Northoff, 2019), or subcortical
mechanisms and affect/emotion as emphasized by Panksepp
(1998a,b), Damasio (2018) and Solms (2018, 2019).
How can we take into view the specialness of the neuronal
mechanisms of mental features and their dichotomy to those
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 5 September 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 319
Northoff Copernican Turn in Neuroscience
of non-mental features? That is possible only by taking a
view from within the brain itself and, more specifically, from
within the neuronal mechanisms supposedly underlying mental
features. One thus presupposes a ‘‘vantage point from within
brain’’ in neuroscience. The mento-centric view of psychology
is thus replaced by a neuro-centric view of mental features
in neuroscience. However, despite the difference between
mento- and neuro-centric views of mental features, both
psychology/cognitive science and neuroscience still presuppose a
rather egocentric vantage point, e.g., that is, from within either
mind or brain which entails what, further down, I describe as
brain-world relation. This marks both approaches to mental
features as pre-Copernican (seeFigure 2B).
Some approaches may want to argue that they are not neuro-
centric as they, instead of the brain, presuppose information
(Tononi et al., 2016), cognition (Lau and Rosenthal, 2011), or
the body (Noe, 2004; Thompson, 2007; Blanke et al., 2015;
Tallon-Baudry et al., 2018) as primary basis of mental features
like consciousness. True indeed, these approaches are no longer
neuro-centric. That does not relieve them of their ego-centric
character though. The ego-centric approach is now transferred
from the brain to body, cognition, or information—they are
thus body-centric, information-centric, and cognition-centric
and therefore be characterized by ‘‘vantage points from within
information, cognition or body.’’ As in the neuro-centric
approaches, both specialness of mental features and their
dichotomy to non-mental features are still preserved in these
approaches (which shall not be elaborated in detail here) this
marks them as pre-Copernican.
Vantage Point From Beyond Brain
I—Brain-World Relation vs. World-Brain
Relation
One may now want to raise the question for a post-Copernican
approach to the brain, a vantage point from beyond brain,
and how that will look like. Like earth and human species, the
brain and mental features would then no longer be conceived as
special nor as dichotomous to the world. I here briefly want to
formulate the criteria of such vantage point from beyond brain
which then will be explicated in a more concrete way in the
subsequent parts.
A vantage point from beyond brain must allow us taking
into view that what lies beyond the boundaries of the brain
itself and, even more important, how that shapes the brain.
More specifically, we need to consider how the world and its
external dynamic shape and impact the brain as featured by
its own internal dynamic (see below for the exact meaning of
dynamic). Accordingly, we need to take into the relationship
between world and brain, that is, how the world shapes the
brain—this is what I recently described as ‘‘world-brain relation’’
(Northoff, 2016a,b,c,d, 2018; seeFigure 2C).
The world-brain relation needs to be distinguished from
the reverse relationship, that is, how the brain shapes
and cognizes the world—this is described as ‘‘brain-
world relation’’ (Northoff, 2016a,b,c,d, 2018; see also
Figure 2B ). The distinction between world-brain relation and
brain-world relation is important in both aspects, empirically
and methodologically.
Empirically, the brain-world relation entails that the brain
imposes itself upon and shapes the world—this is the case in
especially cognition and action. This is different in the case of
the world-brain relation where the world primarily shapes the
brain rather than the latter shaping and imposing itself upon the
former. That is empirically supported by data showing how, for
instance, early life events in the world shape the brain’s temporo-
spatial dynamic, e.g., its degree of entropy in ventromedial
prefrontal cortex (Duncan et al., 2015), and internally-guided
decision making (e.g., N200 in EEG; Nakao et al., 2013) later
in adulthood.
Yet another empirical example of how the world shapes
the brain is the phenomenon of entrainment where the neural
activity of the brain actively adapts to the events in the
environment like the rhythm of music or tone sequences (Lakatos
et al., 2013; van Atteveldt et al., 2015). We all know such
alignment of our brain to the world only too well as when we,
for instance, unconsciously, tap our feet in the rhythm of the
background music.
Together, these examples show that the brain’s neural
activity is strongly shaped by the world by either the latter
imposing itself upon the former, e.g., as in the life events, or,
alternatively, by the brain actively adapting to the world, e.g., as
in entrainment. Common to both examples is that the world’s
external dynamics shapes the brain’s internal dynamics—we,
therefore, speak of ‘‘world-brain relation’’ as distinguished from
brain-world relation where the brain’s internal dynamics shapes
and imposes itself upon the world’s external dynamics. Note that
the distinction of world-brain relation vs. brain-world relation
is not an absolute and mutually exclusive. Instead, world-brain
relation and brain-world relation stand in a dynamic balance
with each other—their conceptual distinction is thus relative
(rather than absolute).
Finally, one may be surprised why we almost completely
neglect the body here. Recent data show that the brain and its
internal dynamic align to the body’s dynamics in more or less
the same way as it aligns to the world’s external dynamics. For
instance, various studies by the group around Tallon-Baudry
et al. (2018) demonstrated that the brain’s internal dynamics
aligns its phase onsets to the onsets of the heartbeat—one
can thus speak of ‘‘body-brain relation’’ (Northoff, 2018). The
brain thus recruits the same mechanisms for its alignment,
e.g., relation to the body as it employs when synchronizing
with its external environment, e.g., the world. Therefore,
we assume that the body-brain relation can be subsumed
(conceptually) under the more extended world-brain relation
(given also that the body is part of the world; Northoff, 2018
for details).
Vantage Point From Beyond Brain
II—Post-Copernican Vantage Point in
Neuroscience
The distinction of world-brain relation and brain-world relation
carries major methodological implications. Featuring how the
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 6 September 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 319
Northoff Copernican Turn in Neuroscience
brain shapes and imposes itself upon the world, the brain-
world relation conceives the brain as center and the world as
periphery. This presupposes a vantage point from within brain.
One consequently comes to the assumption of the specialness of
the brain (as distinguished from non-brains) and its dichotomy
to the world—this resembles the pre-Copernican vantage points
in astronomy and biology. Since mental features are supposed
to be caused by or identical with the brain (see Solms, 2019 for
the difference between causal theories and dual-aspect monistic
accounts of mental features), the specialness of the brain and its
dichotomy to the world do then also apply to mental features like
consciousness, self, and affect (and other mental features).
This is different in the case of the world-brain relation. Unlike
the brain-world relation, the world-brain relation is based on
that what happens beyond the boundaries of the brain, e.g., the
world’s external dynamics, and how it shapes the brain’s internal
dynamics. That can be taking into view only when presupposing
a post-Copernican vantage point from beyond brain—the brain
is then no longer special (when compared to non-brains) nor
dichotomous to the world (seeFigure 2D).
Presupposing such vantage point from beyond brain, we can
then take into view how mental features extend beyond the brain
as they may be traced to and based on the world and how it
shapes the brain, e.g., world-brain relation. Consciousness, self,
affect and other mental features may consequently no longer
be conceived as exclusively neuronal but neuro-ecological (see
below for details). Most important, this implies that mental
features are no longer special nor in dichotomous relation to
the world. Presupposing a vantage point from beyond brain, we
will now, in the next part, sketch (albeit very preliminary) such
post-Copernican view of both brain, e.g., in terms of world-brain
relation and free energy (third part), and mental features (fourth
part; for more details, see Northoff, 2016a,b,c,d, 2018).
We here pursue a two-step procedure to explicate such
post-Copernican approach. First, we explicate and detail what
is meant by world-brain relation in more biological detail by
characterizing it by the free-energy principle of Friston (2010).
This amounts to a post-Copernican view of the brain (third part).
Second, being characterized by free energy, we are then able to
link world-brain relation in a necessary way to mental features;
such necessary connection is provided by dynamic and more
specifically temporo-spatial features as ‘‘common currency’’ of
world, brain, and mental features (Northoff, 2018, 2019). This
entails a post-Copernican view of mental features.
PART III: POST-COPERNICAN VIEW OF
THE BRAIN—FREE ENERGY
Free Energy I—Neuro-Ecological and
Biological View
The organism and its brain are not isolated from the world
but deeply embedded within and dependent upon the world,
e.g., its respective environmental context (which is the meaning
in which understand the concept of ‘‘world’’ in the following).
There is interaction between the world’s external dynamics and
the brain’s internal dynamics. Both can interact in a bilateral or
mutual way in that the brain’s internal dynamics can conform
to the world’s external dynamics (‘‘perception’’ as Friston
says), e.g., world-brain relation, or, conversely, the world’s
external dynamics can conform to the brain’s internal dynamics
(‘‘action’’ as Friston says), e.g., brain-world relation (Friston and
Stephan, 2007; Friston, 2010; Bruineberg and Rietveld, 2014;
Bruineberg et al., 2018a,b).
How is such bilateral interaction between
world/environmental context and brain mediated? That is
the moment where Friston’s free energy principle comes
in. Roughly, free energy provides the commonly shared
reference of both world/environmental context and brain
according to which they adjust and relate to each other. The
interaction of organism/brain and world/environmental context
is characterized by the attempt to minimize the amount of
free energy that is discrepant between both systems (Friston
and Stephan, 2007; Bruineberg and Rietveld, 2014). Friston
thus speaks of ‘‘free energy minimization’’ as basic principle
of the organism’s life that specifically characterizes the brain
(Friston and Stephan, 2007).
We need to be careful though. The concept of ‘‘free energy
minimization’’ can be understood in different ways. One most
commonly held assumption is that free energy minimization
is a guiding principle within the brain itself; the different
layers of neuronal activity and its hierarchy do then aim
to minimize their amount of free energy against each other.
Here, free energy minimization is taken to be closely linked
to (if not almost identical with) predictive coding as central
computational mechanism of the brain’s neuronal activity
(Hohwy, 2013; for an excellent discussion, see Bruineberg et al.,
2018a). This amounts to a neuronal view of free energy which,
conceptually, merges well with what I described as brain-
world relation.
Such neuronal view of free energy stands in contrast
to the here sketched more biological view. The biological
view conceives free energy as basic principle and common
reference for the interaction of world/environmental context and
organism/brain. Free energy here is no longer restricted to the
brain itself and confined within its boundaries. In contrast, free
energy is supposed to operate at and beyond the boundaries of
the brain by guiding its interaction with and attunement to the
world/environmental context. That allows to view free energy as
the central principle and reference for regulating the homeostasis
of the organism/brain with the world/environmental context. I
here follow such biological and neuro-ecological view of free
energy (see Bruineberg and Rietveld, 2014; Bruineberg et al.,
2018a,b as it aligns well with what I describe as world-brain
relation (see above).
Free Energy II—Generative Model and
Variational Density
How can the organism and its brain access and modulate
free energy relative to their respective environmental context?
Friston assumes that the organism/brain’s internal dynamics
can be characterized by two features, that is, generative model
and variational density. In a nutshell, the generative model
describes the probability of co-occurrence between the brain’s
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 7 September 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 319
Northoff Copernican Turn in Neuroscience
internal states and the environmental context’s external state.
Importantly, the generative model does not amount to a neuronal
representation of the world within the brain itself. Instead, the
generative model refers to the long-term stochastic regularities
in the relationship between world/environmental context and
organism/brain (see Bruineberg et al., 2018a who emphasize
this point).
Since the generative model does not provide a neuronal
representation of the world, it can not be thought of as a model
of the world that the organism and its brain create within
themselves. Instead, the organism and its brain are by themselves
a model of the world and, more specifically, ‘‘being a model of
their econiche’’ (Bruineberg and Rietveld, 2014). The concept of
generative model describes the organism’s eco-niche within the
world by free energy—this entails a neuro-ecological rather than
purely neuronal view of generative model. Based on such neuro-
ecological understanding of generative model, free energy can be
thought as basic biological principle that provides the coupling
or attunement between the organism/brain’s internal dynamics
and the world/environments’ external dynamics.
How can the organism and its brain actively modulate their
free energy as to conform to their respective environmental
context by minimizing free energy? Friston takes variational
density as proxy for probability distribution within the organism
itself including its body (like temperature) and brain [e.g., its
‘‘perception/action,’’ as Friston says, which is interpreted in
terms of ‘‘readiness states’’ by Bruineberg and Rietveld, 2014
as it does not really imply actual (or real) but only possible
(not yet realized) perception/action]. Variational density is
encoded in the organism/brain’s internal dynamics (see below
for details of this point) whose probability distribution can
be changed to minimize free energy in its relationship to the
world/environmental context.
Variational density, reflecting the brain’s internal dynamics,
is, for instance, changed by anticipation. If the organism can,
through its brain, anticipate the state of the world/environmental
context, the free energy between world/environmental context
and organism/brain is minimized and thus low. In that case, there
is strong coupling and high attunement of world and brain—that
is, for instance, the case when dancing to the rhythm of the music.
If, in contrast, anticipation remains impossible, free energy is
rather high. That is manifest in low coupling with less attunement
of world and brain—in that case, one cannot get into the rhythm
of the music.
Free Energy III—Vantage Point From
Beyond Brain
Free energy featured by generative model and variational
density can be understood as the basic biological principle that
guides the relationship of world/environmental context and
organism/brain, e.g., world-brain relation as I coined it above.
Specifically, free energy can be understood as the biological
mechanism that establishes relationship between world and
brain. Taken in such a way, free energy must be understood as
intrinsically neuro-ecological and biological rather than as purely
neuronal and neuroscientific.
Such neuro-ecological view of the brain as part of the world
with their relation established by free energy is only possible
by presupposing a vantage point that allows to take into view
that what happens beyond the boundaries of the brain. The here
suggested neuro-ecological and biological view of free energy (see
Bruineberg et al., 2018a,b) thus presupposes a post-Copernican
vantage point from beyond brain. Like in the cases of earth
and human species in astronomy and biology (see above), such
post-Copernican vantage point from beyond brain radically
changes our view of the brain in neuroscience.
The brain as an organ that aims to minimize free energy
is no longer special when compared to other organs,
i.e., non-brains, which, being biological adhere to the same
principle. Nor does the brain stand in a dichotomous
relationship to the world anymore as it is intimately
coupled to the latter through free energy minimization.
This specifies and presupposes what I described as world-brain
relation. If, in contrast, one shifts towards a neuronal and
neuroscientific concept of free energy, one’s view remains
restricted to the brain itself without taking into view that
what happens beyond the brain, that is, how it is related
and coupled to the world. This entails a pre-Copernican
vantage point from within brain where the brain remains
special and stands in a dichotomous relation to the
world thus presupposing brain-world relation (rather than
world-brain relation).
PART IV: POST-COPERNICAN VIEW OF
MENTAL FEATURES—TEMPORO-SPATIAL
DYNAMIC AS “MISSING INGREDIENT”
AND “COMMON CURRENCY”
Mental Features I—Biological and
Neuro-Ecological
I characterized the world-brain relation by free energy that
allows for relating and coupling world and brain. This raises
the question of how such world-brain relation, as based on free
energy, stands in relation to mental features like consciousness,
self, and affect. Applied in this sense, free energy provides
a biological and neuro-ecological characterization of mental
features (seeFigure 3A).
Such biological characterization in terms of free energy has
indeed been suggested by various authors for different mental
features. Without going into details of the various approaches,
I here just mention some (which neglects various others).
One model of consciousness that takes the computational
mechanisms of free energy as a starting point is the ‘‘projective
consciousness model’’ (Rudrauf et al., 2017). Yet others have
applied the free energy principles to dreams (Hobson et al.,
2014). Moreover, free energy has even been assumed to provide
an answer to the hard problem of consciousness (Solms, 2019),
that is, why is there consciousness rather than non-consciousness
(Chalmers, 1996).
Yet another mental feature where free energy has been
intensively applied is the self. Bodily approaches to the
self, e.g., somatic self, extensively rely on free energy
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 8 September 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 319
Northoff Copernican Turn in Neuroscience
FIGURE 3 | (A) Neuro-biological characterization of mental features by free energy between world and brain.(B) Neuro-ecological characterization of mental
features by internal-external relation.(C) Temporo-spatial dynamic as “common currency” of world-brain relation, free energy, and mental features.
(Seth and Tsakiris, 2018). More generally, the self as such,
e.g., as distinguished from non-self, has been associated with
free energy by Friston himself (Friston, 2018). Yet other recent
approaches to the self like the dynamic pattern theory of self
(Gallagher and Daly, 2018) and the subjective self (‘‘I’’ vs. ‘‘me’’)
strongly rely on free energy.
Finally, affect and emotion have also been related to free
energy. One major proponent of such approach is Solms (2017,
2018, 2019). He associates the subcortical regions of the brain,
as relying on Panksepp (1998a,b) and Damasio (2018), with
affect and especially its subjective first-experiential features as
paradigmatic and most basic manifestation of consciousness.
Affective and its subjective feature are, in turn, assumed to be
closely linked to free energy minimization with the environment
(Solms, 2017, 2018, 2019). Hence, Solms links free energy to
affect and consciousness in a unique way. Yet another proponent
is Seth who develops an embodied theory of the free energy-based
concept of active inference and how that relates to emotions (Seth
and Friston, 2016).
Taken together, free energy is conceived central
for mental features including consciousness, self, and
affect (and others not mentioned here). If free energy
characterizing the relation between world/environmental
context and organism/brain is indeed central for mental
features, one would expect the latter to be neither
purely external, e.g., ecological, nor purely internal, e.g.,
neuronal, either. Instead, one would then assume mental
features to be intrinsically neuro-ecological rather than
merely neuronal.
Mental Features II—Internal-External
Relation
Free energy regulating the relation of world/environmental
context and organism/brain relates the former’s external
dynamics and the latter’s external dynamics. If mental features
do indeed depend upon free energy, one would expect
them to signify different forms of internal-external relations
(thus reflecting their neuro-ecological rather than neuronal
characterization). This raises the question of how we can
characterize the relationship between internal and external
dynamics on both biological and mental levels.
On the biological level, the internal dynamics of the
organism/brain is coupled to the external dynamics of the
world/environmental context. Both share mutual information
which is manifested in what Friston (2010) describes as
‘‘generalized synchrony’’ (as distinguished from representation).
Generalized synchrony refers to the ‘‘coupled dynamics’’ between
two systems who synchronize their different time scales with each
other like the Huygens clocks where two clocks synchronize their
time scales with each other over time—such synchronization can
then be conceived as manifestation of free energy minimization
(Bruineberg et al., 2018a).
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 9 September 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 319
Northoff Copernican Turn in Neuroscience
The same kind of synchronization now happens, analogously,
in the relationship between world/environmental context and
organism/brain when they couple with each other. For instance,
when we tap our foot in the rhythm of the music, our brain
and its internal dynamic entrain to the external dynamic of
the latter. Neuronal investigation show, for instance, the brain
synchronizes its phase onsets with those of continuous external
stimuli (Lakatos et al., 2013) which seems to be disrupted in
schizophrenia (Lakatos et al., 2013). One can thus see how,
on the biological level, free energy allows for establishing
synchronization between external and internal dynamics of
world/environmental context and organism/brain.
We now assume that such synchronization between internal
and external dynamics is also central for establishing relation
between internal and external contents in mental features,
i.e., internal-external relation. For instance, Honey et al. (2017)
recently showed how perception, memory, and others can be
characterized by different forms of internal-external relations.
Yet another example is consciousness. Inner time consciousness,
for instance, can be characterized by the relation between the
subject’s own ‘‘inner time speed’’ and how it perceives ‘‘outer
time speed’’ (Fuchs, 2013). Usually, inner and outer time speed
are somewhat in synchrony in our consciousness with both
mutually adjusting and coupling to each other (Fuchs, 2013; see
Figure 3B).
However, they can also differ and thus be non-adjusted.
That is, for instance, the case in psychiatric conditions like
depression and mania. In the case of depression, inner time
speed in consciousness is too slow while the subjects perceive
outer time speed, e.g., the time speed in the world, as too
fast (Northoff, 2018). While the reverse happens in mania
where subjects’ inner time speed is fast (as manifested in
fast action and psychomotor agitation) while they perceive
outer time speed, relative to their abnormally fast inner time,
as too slow—they thus become impatient (Northoff, 2018).
Accordingly, as exemplified by our example of inner and outer
time speed, consciousness can be characterized by specific
relation of internal and external dynamic in our subjective
experience, i.e., internal-external relation.
The same holds for other mental features like self and
affect. The self is based on relating external stimuli and
objects in the environment to the internal dynamics—this
has been described as self-related processing (Northoff et al.,
2007; Northoff, 2011, 2016a,b,c,d). For instance, even our
own name is nothing but a collection of syllables which
need to be put together by our brain to shape what we
call our own name—that is possible only by processing
the syllables more strongly related to the own brain and
its internal dynamics than those of another person’s name.
Accordingly, what we describe as self-related (like our own
name) reflects a certain constellation between the brain’s internal
dynamics, e.g., its spontaneous activity and the environment’s
external dynamics, e.g., the syllables. If that specific internal-
external relation is disrupted, as in schizophrenia, we may
lose our sense of self (Northoff and Duncan, 2016). The
self can thus be featured as relational and neuro-ecological
(Northoff, 2016a,b,c,d).
Yet another example of internal-external relation shaping the
self is transcultural differences. It has been well established that
the self is constructed in a more inter-dependent, e.g., social
way, in far eastern cultures (Markus and Kitayama, 1991; Han
and Northoff, 2008). In contrast, the self is constructed in a
more independent, e.g., isolated way in western culture. Most
interestingly, such difference between inter- and in-dependent
self is accompanied by neuronal differences (Han and Northoff,
2008; Han et al., 2013). Hence, the self in different cultures is
neither purely internal nor exclusively external but is constituted
by different degrees or balances of internal-external relation.
Temporo-Spatial Dynamic I—World-Brain
Relation and Free Energy
One may now raise the question of why and how the coupling
of world and brain, the world-brain relation, can give rise
to mental features. This question focuses especially on the
subjective experience and its phenomenal features like qualia,
intentionality, transparency, unity, et cetera (for details Northoff,
2014a,b), that characterize all mental features like consciousness,
self, and affect. In order for the world-brain relation and its
free energy to yield mental features, both must share something
that first and foremost makes possible the transformation of the
former into the latter. This is the search for what we recently
described as ‘‘common currency’’ (Northoff, 2019).
A ‘‘common currency’’ allows for exchange and mutual
adaptation. Consider for instance the US dollar that provides
the ‘‘common currency’’ between the different currencies in the
global economy. By referring their own currency to the US-
dollar, different countries can exchange and trade goods. Goods
can thus be transformed from one country to another country.
We now assume that such ‘‘common currency’’ is also central
in transforming the neuro-ecological activity of world-brain
relation, e.g., free energy, into mental features like consciousness,
self, and affect (for details, see Northoff, 2019).
What is the ‘‘common currency’’ of world-brain relation
and its characterization by free energy on the one hand
mental features on the other? To address this question,
we first have to briefly address the notion of time and
space and, secondly, how they characterize both world-
brain relation and free energy. Note that the conceptions
of time and space are here not understood in the way we
perceive or cognize time and space in terms of discrete
points in time and space (see for instance, Buzsáki and
Llinás, 2017; Drayton and Furman, 2018). Instead, we
rather refer to time and space in a dynamic sense as in
dynamical system theories where time and space are rather
described in terms of attractors and trajectories (Cocchi
et al., 2017) this amount to what we refer to as ‘‘temporo-
spatial dynamic’’ (see also Northoff and Huang, 2017;
Northoff, 2019).
Let us be more concrete. The brain constructs such
dynamics in terms of different frequencies with oscillations
and fluctuations (Buiszaki, 2006) that show a specific temporal
structure with long range temporal correlations (LRTC) and
scale-free activity (Linkenkaer-Hansen et al., 2001; He et al.,
2010). As they connect different points in time by operating
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 10 September 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 319
Northoff Copernican Turn in Neuroscience
across different temporal scales, LRTC can be conceived as an
example of temporal relation. Specifically, LRTCs and scale-free
activity reflect the relationship between different frequencies and
thus model different points in time relative to each other (see
Northoff, 2019 as well as Northoff and Huang, 2017 for more
details on the brain’s temporo-spatial dynamic).
Importantly, the brain’s construction is closely aligned to the
way how it couples and relates to its respective environmental
context, that is, in terms of free energy. This is reflected in
the fact that the assumption of space and time takes also
center stage in formulations in the free energy principle. That
follows because the variational free energy is defined in terms
of a generative model (see above) and the generative model
includes information about the relation of world and brain,
e.g., their degree of stochastic matching or convergence (Friston
et al., 2006). This leads to the notion ofdeep temporal models
that possess a necessarytemporal thickness or depth (Seth and
Friston, 2016). Together, albeit only hinted upon, both free
energy and brain can be characterized by an elaborate temporo-
spatial dynamic.
Temporo-Spatial Dynamics II “Missing
Ingredient” and “Common Currency” of
Neuronal and Mental Features
Mental features can also be characterized by time and
space, that is, what phenomenological accounts describe
as ‘‘spatiotemporality.’’ Consciousness, for instance, can be
characterized by a ‘‘stream’’ and the inclusion of presentation,
prospection, and retrospection (James, 1890a,b; Husserl, 1921)
this has been subsumed under the umbrella of ‘‘inner time
consciousness’’ (Husserl, 1921; Fuchs, 2013; Northoff, 2014a,b).
The same holds analogously for space (Ferri et al., 2015);
for that reason, philosophers characterize consciousness by
‘‘spatiotemporality’’ (James, 1890a,b; Husserl, 1921; Zahavi,
2005; Fuchs, 2013).
Recent modeling further supports such view by showing that
the ‘‘spatiotemporality’’ of mental features can be understood in
dynamical terms, that is by temporo-spatial dynamics in terms
of virtual trajectories in what has been described as ‘‘phenomenal
space’’ (Prentner, 2019). Such dynamic temporo-spatial view of
mental features like consciousness and self (for the latter, see
Wolff et al., 2019) thus replaces the non-temporal view of mental
features in traditional philosophy and the more recent static
temporal approach to mental features in terms of perception
and cognition.
We are now ready to address the quest for the ‘‘common
currency.’’ Albeit tentatively and laid out in more detail
elsewhere (Northoff, 2014a,b, 2018; Northoff and Huang, 2017;
Northoff, 2019), we assume that temporo-spatial dynamical
features provide the link between neuro-ecological and
mental levels—the former’s temporo-spatial dynamic is thus
supposed to be manifest in the latter’s ‘‘spatiotemporality.’’
We, therefore, suppose that temporo-spatial dynamic may
be a good candidate to provide the ‘‘missing ingredient’’
(Lamme, 2018) and ‘‘common currency’’ (Northoff, 2019)
of world-brain relation, free energy, and mental features
(see Figure 3C).
How can we lend more concrete empirical support to
the assumption of temporo-spatial dynamics providing the
‘‘common currency’’ of neuronal and mental features? This
has recently been put into more specific terms when, for
instance, assuming that the scale-free activity of the brain’s
spontaneous activity transforms into more or less analogous
scale-freeness with the integration of different time scales on the
psychological level of consciousness, e.g., its arousal or level/state
(Tagliazucchi et al., 2013, 2016; Northoff, 2017; Cavanna et al.,
2018). Analogously, recent studies demonstrated that the self is
also mediated by temporo-spatial features of the spontaneous
activity like scale-free activity, autocorrelation window and cross-
frequency coupling which may be in analogous way manifest on
the psychological level (Huang et al., 2016; Wolff et al., 2019).
The different affects as described by Panksepp (1998a,b) and
Solms (2017, 2018, 2019) may then also be described by
different forms of spatial and temporal coordinates in their
subjective experience.
Yet another instance where temporo-spatial features
transform from the neuronal to the mental level are
psychiatric disorders like autism (Damiani et al., 2019) and
bipolar disorder (Martino et al., 2016, 2018) where recently
‘‘Spatiotemporal Psychopathology’’ (Northoff, 2016a,b,c,d, 2017,
2018; Fingelkurts and Fingelkurts, 2019) has been proposed.
This is supported by data on consciousness, self, and bipolar
disorder (for details, see Northoff, 2019).
For instance, the above mentioned inner and outer time
speed changes in the consciousness of depressed and manic
patients are related to corresponding time speed changes in
the neuronal activity in those networks mediating inner and
outer time experience/perception (Northoff, 2018). Together,
these examples support the view that temporo-spatial dynamics
provides the ‘‘common currency’’ of neuronal and mental
features in both healthy and pathological states.
Temporo-Spatial Dynamics
III—Post-Copernican Approach to Mental
Features
Why do we require a novel methodological strategy for
postulating temporo-spatial dynamics as ‘‘common currency’’ of
neuronal and mental features? I assume that this is only possible
by presupposing a post-Copernican approach with a vantage
point from beyond brain. Let me sketch that briefly.
The concept of ‘‘common currency’’ provides the necessary
(rather than contingent) connection of neuronal and mental
features that so far remained elusive to us. We simply do not
know how neuronal and mental features are intrinsically linked
to each other—we miss something, the ‘‘missing ingredient’’
(Lamme, 2018). I suggest in this article that the lack of
insight into the necessary connection and thus the ‘‘missing
ingredient’’ is due, at least in part, to our pre-Copernican
methodological strategy.
Specifically, our currently pre-Copernican ego-centric
vantage point from within brain (or within body, information,
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 11 September 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 319
Northoff Copernican Turn in Neuroscience
or cognition; see above) prevents us from taking into view
that what happens beyond the brain in world (and body) and
how that shapes the brain’s neuronal activity in such that
it is intrinsically and thus necessarily connected to mental
features. We consequently assume mental features to be special
as related to specific neuronal mechanisms (like the NCC) as
distinguished from those underlying others, e.g., non-mental
features. This renders impossible to take into view the necessary
connection of neuronal and mental features. Moreover, that puts
mental features in a dichotomous relation to the world and its
non-mental features.
That changes once one shifts the pre-Copernican vantage
point from within brain to a post-Copernican vantage point from
beyond brain. The vantage point from beyond brain allows taking
into view that what happens beyond the boundaries of the brain
in the world, e.g., world-brain relation as featured by free energy,
and how that, e.g., its temporo-spatial dynamics, shapes and
yields mental features with their own spatiotemporality. Being a
viable candidate to provide the ‘‘common currency,’’ temporo-
spatial dynamics establishes intrinsic and thus necessary
connection of neuronal and mental features.
Most importantly, mental features are then no longer
conceived as special (when compared to non-mental features)
but rather non-special. Moreover, being temporo-spatial, mental
features no longer stand in dichotomous relationship to the
world but in a ‘‘temporo-spatial continuum’’ this specifies and
explicates what, in more general terms, has been described
as ‘‘embeddedness/enactivism’’ or ‘‘deep continuity of mind
and life’’ (Thompson, 2007; Clark, 2013). Most important,
such view of mental features resembles very much our current
post-Copernican views of both earth and human species
including their continuous relationship to universe and evolution
that were established by Copernicus and Darwin.
CONCLUSION
I here propose a novel methodological strategy on how to
approach brain and mental features. Relying on Copernicus
and Darwin, I advocate changing our currently rather
pre-Copernican vantage from within brain to a post-Copernican
vantage point from beyond brain. This allows us taking
into view that what happens beyond the boundaries of
our brain, e.g., in world and body as described in the
concept of world-brain relation, and how that shapes the
brain in such way that it can yield mental features. Relying
on Friston, I characterize such world-brain relation in a
biological way by the free-energy principle. That renders
the brain as intrinsically neuro-ecological rather than
merely neuronal.
Such post-Copernican vantage point from beyond brain
allows us taking into view that both free energy of world-brain
relation and the brain itself are characterized by temporo-
spatial dynamics. Based on empirical evidence, such temporo-
spatial dynamic is also manifest in mental features, e.g., their
spatiotemporality. I therefore conclude that a post-Copernican
approach to the brain, e.g., a vantage point from beyond
brain, allows us taking into view temporo-spatial dynamics as a
viable candidate of the so far elusive ‘‘missing ingredient’’ and
‘‘common currency’’ of neuronal (or better neuro-ecological) and
mental features (Northoff, 2019).
I conclude that neuroscience may benefit from a shift in
its vantage point from within brain to beyond brain in its
methodological approach to mental features. That amounts
to nothing less than a Copernican turn or revolution in
neuroscience akin to the ones in both astronomy and biology.
Like in the latter disciplines, such methodological shift can, as
I propose, provide a novel framework for neuroscience that
will turn its search for the neural basis of mental features
into a true and major success story at the beginning of
the 21st century.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
GN being the sole author, contributed all parts of the
article himself.
FUNDING
This project/research has received funding from the European
Q7
Union’s Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research and
Innovation under the Specific Grant Agreement No. 785907
(Human Brain Project SGA2). GN is grateful for funding
provided by UMRF (University Medical Research Funds),
uOBMRI (University of Ottawa Brain and Mind Research
Institute), CIHR (Canadian Institute of Health Research), and
PSI (Physician Service Incorporated Foundation).
REFERENCES
Aru, J., Bachmann, T., Singer, W., and Melloni, L. (2012). Distilling the
neural correlates of consciousness. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 36, 737–746.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.12.003
Blanke, O., Slater, M., and Serino, A. (2015). Behavioral, neural, and computational
principles of bodily self-consciousness.Neuron 88, 145–166. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuron.2015.09.029
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., and Rietveld, E. (2018a). The anticipating brain is not
a scientist: the free-energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective.
Synthese 195, 2417–2444. doi: 10.1007/s11229-016-1239-1
Bruineberg, J., Rietveld, E., Parr, T., van Maanen, L., and Friston, K. J.
(2018b). Free-energy minimization in joint agent-environment systems: a niche
construction perspective.J. Theor. Biol.455, 161–178. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2018.
07.002
Bruineberg, J., and Rietveld, E. (2014). Self-organization, free energy
minimization, and optimal grip on a field of affordances. Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 8:599. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00599
Buiszaki, G. (2006).Rhythms in the Brain.Oxford, New York: Oxford University
Press.
Buzsáki, G., and Llinás, R. (2017). Space and time in the brain.Science 358,
482–485. doi: 10.1126/science.aan8869
Cavanna, F., Vilas, M. G., Palmucci, M., and Tagliazucchi, E. (2018). Dynamic
functional connectivity and brain metastability during altered states of
consciousness. Neuroimage 180, 383–395. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.
09.065
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 12 September 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 319
Northoff Copernican Turn in Neuroscience
Chalmers, D. (1996).The Conscious Mind.Oxford, New York: Oxford University
Press.
Chalmers, D. (Eds). (2001).The Neural Correlates of Consciousness.Oxford, New
York: Oxford University Press.
Churchland, P. S. (2002). Brain-Wise. An Introduction to Neurophilosophy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future
of cognitive science.Behav. Brain Sci.36, 181–204. doi: 10.1017/s0140525x12
000477
Cocchi, L., Gollo, L. L., Zalesky, A., and Breakspear, M. (2017). Criticality in the
brain: a synthesis of neurobiology, models and cognition.Prog. Neurobiol.158,
132–152. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2017.07.002
Crick, F., and Koch, C. (1990). Some reflections on visual awareness. Cold
Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 55, 953–962. doi: 10.1101/sqb.1990.055.
01.089
Crick, F., and Koch, C. (2003). A framework for consciousness.Nat. Neurosci.6,
119–126. doi: 10.1038/nn0203-119
Damiani, S., Scalabrini, A., Gomez-Pilar, J., Brondino, N., and Northoff, G. (2019).
Increased scale-free dynamics in salience network in adult high-functioning
autism. Neuroimage Clin.21:101634. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2018.101634
Damasio, A. (2018).The Strange Order of Things: Life, Feeling, and the Making of
Cultures. (New York: Deckle Edge).
Dehaene, S., Charles, L., King, J. R., and Marti, S. (2014). Toward a computational
theory of conscious processing.Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.25, 76–84. doi: 10.1016/j.
conb.2013.12.005
Dehaene, S., Lau, H., and Kouider, S. (2017). What is consciousness and could
machines have it?Science 358, 486–492. doi: 10.1126/science.aan8871
de Graaf, T. A., Hsieh, P. J., and Sack, A. T. (2012). The ‘correlates’ in
neural correlates of consciousness. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 36, 191–197.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.05.012
Drayton, L., and Furman, M. (2018). Thy mind, thy brain and time.Trends
Neurosci. 41, 641–643. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2018.09.001
Duncan, N. W., Hayes, D. J., Wiebking, C., Tiret, B., Pietruska, K., Chen, D. Q.,
et al. (2015). Negative childhood experiences alter a prefrontal-insular-motor
cortical network in healthy adults: a preliminary multimodal rsfMRI-fMRI-
MRS-dMRI study. Hum. Brain Mapp. 36, 4622–4637. doi: 10.1002/hbm.
22941
Ferri, F., Costantini, M., Huang, Z., Perrucci, M. G., Ferretti, A., Romani, G. L.,
et al. (2015). Intertrial variability in the premotor cortex accounts for
individual differences in peripersonal space. J. Neurosci. 35, 16328–16339.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1696-15.2015
Fingelkurts, A. A., and Fingelkurts, A. A. (2019). Brain space and time in mental
disorders: paradigm shift in biological psychiatry.Int. J. Psychiatry Med.54,
53–63. doi: 10.1177/0091217418791438
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory?Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. (2018). Am I self-conscious? (or does self-organization entail self-
consciousness?). Front. Psychol.9:579. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00579
Friston, K., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle for the brain.
J. Physiol. Paris100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001
Friston, K. J., and Stephan, K. E. (2007). Free-energy and the brain.Synthese 159,
417–458. doi: 10.1007/s11229-007-9237-y
Fuchs, T. (2013). Temporality and psychopathology.Phenomenol. Cogn. Sci.12,
75–104. doi: 10.1007/s11097-010-9189-4
Gallagher, S. (2005).How the Body Shapes the Mind.Oxford, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gallagher, S., and Daly, A. (2018). Dynamical relations in the self-pattern.Front.
Psychol. 9:664. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00664
Han, S., Northoff, G., Vogeley, K., Wexler, B. E., Kitayama, S., and Varnum, M. E.
(2013). A cultural neuroscience approach to the biosocial nature of the human
brain. Annu. Rev. Psychol.64, 335–359. doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych-071112-
054629
Han, S., and Northoff, G. (2008). Culture-sensitive neural substrates of human
cognition: a transcultural neuroimaging approach. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9,
646–654. doi: 10.1038/nrn2456
He, B. J., Zempel, J. M., Snyder, A. Z., and Raichle, M. E. (2010). The temporal
structures and functional significance of scale-free brain activity.Neuron 66,
353–369. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.04.020
Hobson, J. A., Hong, C. C., and Friston, K. J. (2014). Virtual reality and
consciousness inference in dreaming.Front. Psychol.5:1133. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2014.01133
Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Honey, C. J., Newman, E. L., and Schapiro, A. C. (2017). Switching between
internal and external modes: a multiscale learning principle.Netw. Neurosci.
1, 339–356. doi: 10.1162/netn_a_00024
Hu, C., Di, X., Eickhoff, S. B., Zhang, M., Peng, K., Guo, H., et al. (2016). Distinct
and common aspects of physical and psychological self-representation in the
brain: a meta-analysis of self-bias in facial and self-referential judgements.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.61, 197–207. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.12.003
Huang, Z., Zhang, J., Wu, J., Qin, P., Wu, X., Wang, Z., et al. (2016). Decoupled
temporal variability and signal synchronization of spontaneous brain activity in
loss of consciousness: An fMRI study in anesthesia.Neuroimage 124, 693–703.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.08.062
Husserl, E. (1921).Inner Time Consciousness.Amsterdam: Nijhaus Publisher.
James, W. (1890a).The Principles of Psychology: Vol. 1.London: MacMillan.
James, W. (1890b).The Principles of Psychology: Vol. 2.London: MacMillan.
Kant, I. (1781/1998).Critique of Pure Reason(trans. and eds by P. Guyer & A.W.
Wood). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Koch, C. (2004). The Quest for Consciousness. Oxford, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Koch, C., Massimini, M., Boly, M., and Tononi, G. (2016). Neural correlates
of consciousness: progress and problems.Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17, 307–321.
doi: 10.1038/nrn.2016.22
Lakatos, P., Schroeder, C. E., Leitman, D. I., and Javitt, D. C. (2013). Predictive
suppression of cortical excitability and its deficit in schizophrenia.J. Neurosci.
33, 11692–11702. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0010-13.2013
Lamme, V. A. F. (2018). Challenges for theories of consciousness: seeing or
knowing, the missing ingredient and how to deal with panpsychism.Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.373:20170344. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2017.0344
Lau, H., and Rosenthal, D. (2011). Empirical support for higher-order theories of
conscious awareness. Trends Cogn. Sci.15, 365–373. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2011.
05.009
Levine, J. (1983). Materialism and qualia: The explanatory gap. Pacific
Philosophical Quarterly64, 354–361. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0114.1983.tb00207.x
Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., Nikouline, V. V., Palva, J. M., and Ilmoniemi, R. J.
(2001). Long-range temporal correlations and scaling behavior in human
brain oscillations.J. Neurosci.21, 1370–1377. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21-04-
01370.2001
Markus, H. R., and Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: implications
for cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychol. Rev. 98, 224–253.
doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.98.2.224
Martino, M., Magioncalda, P., Huang, Z., Conio, B., Piaggio, N., Duncan, N. W.,
et al. (2016). Contrasting variability patterns in the default mode and
sensorimotor networks balance in bipolar depression and mania.Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U S A113, 4824–4829. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1517558113
Martino, M., Magioncalda, P., Yu, H., Li, X., Wang, Q., Meng, Y., et al.
(2018). Abnormal resting-state connectivity in a substantia nigra-related
striato-thalamo-cortical network in a large sample of first-episode drug-naïve
patients with schizophrenia.Schizophr. Bull.44, 419–431. doi: 10.1093/schbul/
sbx067
McDowell, J. (1994).Mind and World.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Nakao, T., Bai, Y., Nashiwa, H., and Northoff, G. (2013). Resting-state EEG power
predicts conflict-related brain activity in internally guided but not in externally
guided decision-making. Neuroimage 66, 9–21. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2012.10.034
Noe, A. (2004).Action in Perception.Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Northoff, G. (2011). Self and brain: what is self-related processing?Trends Cogn.
Sci. 15, 186–187; author reply 187–188. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2011.03.001
Northoff, G. (2013). What the brain’s intrinsic activity can tell us about
consciousness? A tri-dimensional view.Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.37, 726–738.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.12.004
Northoff, G. (2014a). Unlocking the Brain. Volume I: Coding.New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Northoff, G. (2014b). Unlocking the Brain. Volume II: Consciousness. Oxford:
Oxford University.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 13 September 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 319
Northoff Copernican Turn in Neuroscience
Northoff, G. (2016a).Neurophilosophy and the Healthy Mind. Learning from the
Unwell Brain.New York, NY: Norton Publisher.
Northoff, G. (2016b). Neuroscience and Whitehead: Neuro-Ecological Model of
Brain. New York, NY: Axiomathes.
Northoff, G. (2016c). Spatiotemporal psychopathology I: no rest for the brain’s
resting state activity in depression? Spatiotemporal psychopathology of
depressive symptoms.J. Affect. Disord.190, 854–866. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2015.
05.007
Northoff, G. (2016d). Spatiotemporal Psychopathology II: how does a
psychopathology of the brain’s resting state look like? Spatiotemporal
approach and the history of psychopathology.J. Affect. Disord.190, 867–879.
doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2015.05.008
Northoff, G. (2017). ‘‘Paradox of slow frequencies’’—Are slow frequencies in
upper cortical layers a neural predisposition of the level/state of consciousness
(NPC)? Conscious. Cogn.54, 20–35. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2017.03.006
Northoff, G. (2018). The brain’s spontaneous activity and its psychopathological
symptoms—‘‘Spatiotemporal binding and integration’’. Prog.
Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 80, 81–90. doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.
2017.03.019
Northoff, G. (2019). The anxious brain and its heart—temporal brain-heart
de-synchronization in anxiety disorders.J. Affect. Disord.
Northoff, G., and Duncan, N. W. (2016). How do abnormalities in the brain’s
spontaneous activity translate into symptoms in schizophrenia? From an
overview of resting state activity findings to a proposed spatiotemporal
psychopathology. Prog. Neurobiol. 145–146, 26–45. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.
2016.08.003
Northoff, G., Bermpohl, F., Schoeneich, F., and Boeker, H. (2007). How
does our brain constitute defense mechanisms? First-person neuroscience
and psychoanalysis. Psychother. Psychosom. 76, 141–153. doi: 10.1159/0000
99841
Northoff, G., and Huang, Z. (2017). How do the brain’s time and space
mediate consciousness and its different dimensions? Temporo-spatial theory
of consciousness (TTC).Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.80, 630–645.
Panksepp, J. (1998a). Affective Neuroscience. Oxford, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Panksepp, J. (1998b). The preiconscious substrates of consciousness: affective
states and the evolutionary origins of the SELF. J. Conscious. Stud. 5,
566–582.
Prentner, R. (2019). Consciousness and topologically structured phenomenal
spaces. Conscious. Cogn. 70, 25–38. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2019.
02.002
Rudrauf, D., Bennequin, D., Granic, I., Landini, G., Friston, K., and Williford, K.
(2017). A mathematical model of embodied consciousness.J. Theor. Biol.428,
106–131. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2017.05.032
Ruse, M. (2009). The Darwinian revolution: rethinking its meaning and
significance. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A106, 10040–10047. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
0901011106
Seth, A. K., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the
emotional brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 371:20160007.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0007
Seth, A. K., and Tsakiris, M. (2018). Being a beast machine: the somatic basis of
selfhood. Trends Cogn. Sci.22, 969–981. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2018.08.008
Sherburne, D. W. (1983). Whitehead, categories, and the completion of the
copernican revolution.Monist 66, 367–386. doi: 10.5840/monist198366319
Solms, M. (2017). What is ‘‘the unconscious,’’ and where is it located in the
brain? A neuropsychoanalytic perspective.Ann. N Y Acad. Sci.1406, 90–97.
doi: 10.1111/nyas.13437
Solms, M. L. (2018). The neurobiological underpinnings of psychoanalytic
theory and therapy.Front. Behav. Neurosci.12:294. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2018.
00294
Solms, M. (2019). The hard problem of consciousness and the free energy
principle. Front. Psychol.9:2714. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02714
Sui, J., and Humphreys, G. W. (2015). The integrative self: how self-reference
integrates perception and memory. Trends Cogn. Sci. 19, 719–728.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2015.08.015
Tagliazucchi, E., von Wegner, F., Morzelewski, A., Brodbeck, V., Jahnke, K., and
Laufs, H. (2013). Breakdown of long-range temporal dependence in default
mode and attention networks during deep sleep.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A
110, 15419–15424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1312848110
Tagliazucchi, E., Crossley, N., Bullmore, E. T., and Laufs, H. (2016). Deep sleep
divides the cortex into opposite modes of anatomical-functional coupling.
Brain Struct. Funct.221, 4221–4234. doi: 10.1007/s00429-015-1162-0
Tallon-Baudry, C., Campana, F., Park, H.-D., and Babo-Rebelo, M. (2018).
The neural monitoring of visceral inputs, rather than attention, accounts
for first-person perspective in conscious vision. Cortex 102, 139–149.
doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2017.05.019
Thompson, E. (2007).Mind in Life.Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tononi, G., and Koch, C. (2015). Consciousness: here, there and everywhere?.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.370:20140167. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2014.
0167
Tononi, G., Boly, M., Massimini, M., and Koch, C. (2016). Integrated information
theory: from consciousness to its physical substrate.Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17,
450–461. doi: 10.1038/nrn.2016.44
van Atteveldt, N., Musacchia, G., Zion-Golumbic, E., Sehatpour, P., Javitt, D. C.,
and Schroeder, C. (2015). Complementary fMRI and EEG evidence for more
efficient neural processing of rhythmic vs. unpredictably timed sounds.Front.
Psychol. 6:1663. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01663
Weinert, F. (2013). The March of Time. Heidelberg, New York, NY: Springer
Publisher.
Whitehead, A. N. (1929/1978).Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology. D. R.
Griffin and D. W. Sherburne (Eds).New York, NY: The Free Press.
Wolff, A., Di Giovanni, D. A., Gómez-Pilar, J., Nakao, T., Huang, Z., Longtin, A.,
et al. (2019). The temporal signature of self: temporal measures of resting-
state EEG predict self-consciousness. Hum. Brain Mapp. 40, 789–803.
doi: 10.1002/hbm.24412
Zahavi, D. (2005).Subjectivity and Selfhood.Camrbidge, MA: MIT Press.
Conﬂict of Interest Statement : The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Northoff. This is an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No
use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with
these terms.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 14 September 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 319