47
THE NEW PRINCIPLE OF TRANSFORMATION
HEAT INTO ELECTRICITY
G.V.Skornyakov
A.F. Ioffe Physics and Technology Institute RAS, St. Petersburg, Russia
Email: skorn@ioffe.ru
ABSTRACT
The general scheme of heat-to-electric power conversion in closed thermally inhomogeneous
heterogeneous flow with constantly renewable local imbalance is considered. Conversion
system comprises high-speed motor-generator rigidly coupled with propulsor. Propulsor has
the form of rotating vessel containing liquid phase of working substance. Nozzles are installed
on it to discharge liquid into closed volume filled with gas. The jet of working substance
leaving the propulsor under the action of high pressure due to centrifugal forces is directed in
the opposite direction of rotation of the generator, but its phase composition and other
thermodynamic parameters are not determined. The transition of the working substance from
the propulsor to the closed volume goes beyond equilibrium thermodynamics. Motion energy
of each element of working substance mass leaving the propulsor is supplied to electric power
generation.
Keywords: Energy, Entropy, Laws of thermodynamics.
SCIREAJournal of Energy
http://www.scirea.org/journal/Energy
July 28, 2021
Volume 6, Issue 3, June 2021
48
INTRODUCTION
The role of phase transitions in changing the state of the Earth's atmosphere cannot be
overestimated. Condensation of water vapors in clouds rarely occurs under equilibrium
conditions. In winter, they pass the liquid phase and condense directly into the snow. But in
summer, along with rain, there is hail. Naturally, the question arises of the use of phase
transitions in systems for converting heat to other types of energy.
The task of thermodynamics from the very beginning was not so much to find ways to
convert heat into work, but to explain the mechanism of action of long-existing thermal
machines and improve their characteristics. It put an indelible imprint on it.
The presence of a heater and a cooler is a characteristic feature of such processes. It is the
difference in their temperatures that is considered as the "driving force" of the transformation.
Chemical or nuclear reactions are commonly used as an energy source, resulting in
unavoidable environmental problems.
The working substance of heat converters to operation is most often gases, the
thermodynamic characteristics of which vary widely. At the same time, liquid-solid phase
transitions are associated with significant energy changes at an almost unchanged temperature.
When mercury, amalgam, xenon or other liquefied gases are used as a working substance, the
heating can be carried out by a stream of water. The use of this circumstance for the purpose
of energy conversion opens up an unlimited source of energy under earth conditions.
THERMODYNAMICS OF FLOWS
The basic concepts of thermodynamics are formulated for fixed equilibrium systems and
quasi-static processes. Strictly speaking, the power conversion in such systems is zero. But
the time for establishing thermodynamic equilibrium in a small element of the volume of
matter decreases as its dimensions decrease. This gives reason to consider the steady-state
closed flow of working substance between the heater and cooler, widely used to convert heat
into work, locally equilibrium. When moving in the flow, each element of the mass of the
working substance cyclically changes its characteristics.
It is believed that the laws of thermodynamics in a known way limit the ability to convert
heat into work [1 - 7]. But these laws themselves are valid only in cases of fully integrable
Pfaff equations, which determine the course of thermodynamic processes. A characteristic
49
feature of the process of complete heat conversion into operation is the use of heterogeneous
thermally inhomogeneous systems [8]. This would seem to exclude the very possibility of
using closed flows in it. But such a conclusion would be too hasty. The fact is that the
process of converting heat to other types of energy may include a deliberately irreversible
step leading to cooling of the working substance.
LOCAL IMBALANCE AND ITS ROLE DURING
ENERGY CONVERSION
The basis of the new principle of heat conversion to electricity is the use of a high-speed
motor-generator rigidly connected to a propulsor that affects the parameters of the working
substance. Rotor, current generator and propulsor are mounted on common shaft and rotate
synchronously. Propulsor has the form of axisymmetric vessel expanding upwards, and from
below on axis passing into narrow tube immersed in liquid phase of working substance.
Nozzles are arranged nearby propulsor cover to discharge fluid jets pressed against propulsor
inner surface by centrifugal forces in direction opposite to generator rotation direction. (Fig.)
Let us consider the general features of steady state flow of working substance in the system.
The pressure of the liquid on the inner surface of the propulsor is determined by its density
and rotation speed of the generator. This pressure sets the flow rate of liquid from the nozzle.
The speed of the nozzle is proportional to the speed of rotation of the system, and the speed of
outflow is proportional to its square. In the case of sufficiently high rotation speeds of the
system, they coincide. At optimal speed of rotation working substance leaves propulsor at
zero speed in fixed coordinate system. Behind the nozzle during the rotation of the propulsor
there remains an almost stationary "plume" of working substance. When the released element
of the working substance stops, the energy of the liquid movement goes to generate current.
Without this, it is impossible to exit the propulsor and stop the mass element.
As a result of each one turn at the optimal frequency, the system state returns to the initial one.
This opens up the possibility to establish the connection of liquid flow parameters with
electric power generation. Although the energy of each mass element during the passage of
the propulsor increases as its speed increases, due to the practical incompressibility of the
liquid, its temperature remains unchanged like the constant temperature of water in the ocean
depending on the depth of immersion. The main energy of the liquid, determined by the high
speed of its movement at the outlet of the propulsor, goes to generate current.
50
Whether, as a result of establishing local thermodynamic equilibrium, the working substance
that left the propulsor will be "rain," "hail" or "snow" does not matter. Prior to exiting the
propulsor, the high internal pressure in each fluid mass element is balanced by the same high
external pressure. The entry of the element of working substance into the surrounding system
of a closed volume filled with gas at a significantly lower pressure leads it out of local
thermodynamic equilibrium and leads to radical changes in the structure. During the time of
establishing the local thermodynamic equilibrium, the element of mass of the working
substance released from the propulsor does not have any thermodynamic characteristics other
than energy and momentum. As a result of establishing local thermodynamic equilibrium, the
element is scattered in pieces with zero pulses of fragments. In steady state, ingress into the
surrounding gas will lead to their falling to the surface of the liquid.
As a result of establishing local thermodynamic equilibrium, the local entropy of the mass
element that has left the propulsor reaches a maximum, and the local temperature of the
fragments will be obviously lower than the temperature of the working substance entering the
propulsor, since part of its energy is spent on power generation. At the liquid surface
temperature not much higher than the melting temperature, the gas temperature and the
working substance entering the propulsor are practically the same. Fragments on the way to
the liquid surface are cooled gas. The cooling intensity is proportional to the mass of the
liquid passed in one revolution and the heat of its phase transition. Possible cooling below the
phase transition temperature can be neglected due to a sharp decrease in heat capacity
proportional to the temperature cube. The same value determines the production of electricity
in one revolution.
The mismatch of the rotation speed with the optimal at high speeds will lead to the
unpredictable development of the process and heating of the gas with fast fragments of a
thermodynamically uncertain nature. To achieve stable operation of the system, the possibility
of controlling the current in the rotor can be used.
PUTTING THE SYSTEM INTO CONVERSION MODE
In the initial state, the system is stationary at a temperature below the freezing temperature of
the liquid. The propulsor tube is above the surface of frozen mercury. To start the system and
continue to function, it must be heated and melted. At the same time (unlike water) its density
will decrease, and the surface level will grow slightly. Increasing the current in the rotor
51
increases the rotation speed. Under the action of centrifugal forces, gas through the nozzles
leaves the volume of the propulsor. Lowering the system causes the propulsor tube to immerse
in mercury and fill it with liquid.
As the volume of the propulsor is filled with liquid, it becomes the second source of energy,
which provides, along with the current in the rotor, the rotation of the system. Increasing the
rotation speed increasingly increases the role of the propulsor in the process and makes it
possible to reduce the growth of current in the rotor. When the optimum frequency is reached,
the current growth in the rotor stops. The power of the generator at this moment is equal to the
power of the propulsor and is determined by the amount of mercury passing through the
propulsor per unit time and the specific heat of the phase transition. At the same time, the
current power in the rotor fully compensates for the inevitable losses on friction and ohmic
heating of the windings. All heat energy absorbed by the system, minus the energy spent on
friction and ohmic heating of the rotor and generator windings, is converted into electricity.
Stabilized current energy is not included in the energy balance of the converter, and a small
part of the current energy produced by the generator can be used to provide it.
In the case of mercury, with a propulsor size of the order of centimeters, a nozzle outlet
diameter of about a tenth of a millimeter and a rotation speed of about several tens of
thousands of revolutions per minute, usually used in gyroscopes and centrifuges, the power
developed by one nozzle reaches a value of about one kilowatt.
In steady state, the rotation speed is stable, the layer of mercury at the bottom is heated from
below by a stream of water and cooled from above by gas and falling fragments. The
temperature of mercury entering the propulsor is close to its melting point. Thermal contact of
gas and mercury ensures the proximity of their temperatures.
CONCLUSION
Heat is converted into electricity in a narrow temperature range in the low temperature region
due to phase transition energy. The rapid transition of the accelerated compressed liquid to the
low gas pressure region and its shutdown lead to "self-cooling" of the working substance.
Permanent violation of the local thermodynamic equilibrium when compressed liquid enters
the gas-filled volume causes a sharp drop in the local temperature of the working substance.
The "driving force" of the process is the high pressure created in the liquid by centrifugal
forces. The energy source in the process is a small cooling of the water flow. When cooling
52
the flow of water used by humanity by two-three degrees, the electricity produced is an order
of magnitude higher than the existing level of energy consumption.
SIGNATURE TO FIGURE
1 - current generator, 2 - motor,
3 - propulsor, 4 - heater.
53
REFERENCES
[1] Leontovich M. A., Introduction to Thermodynamics. Statistical Physics (In Russian), M.,
Nauka, 1983. 416 pp.
[2] Landau L. D. and Lifshits E. M., Statistical Physics (In Russian), Moscow, Nauka, 1964,
568 pp.
[3] Truesdell C., The Tragicomical History of Thermo- dynamics 1822—1854, N.—Y.;
Spring.Verlag, 1982, 339 pp.
[4] Fermi E., Thermodynamics, London & Glasgow, Blackie & Son Ltd., 1938, 160 pp.
[5] Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, Ed. by P.Schlipp,// Evanston, Ill. 1949..
[6] Afanas’eva-Ehrenfest T.A.// Zhurn. Prikl. Phys. (In Russian), 1928, vol. 5, parts 3--4, pp.
3–30.
[7] Skornyakov G.V.//Tech. Phys.,1996, 41,(1),pp.1—11.
[8] Skornyakov G.V.//International Journal of Energy and Power Engineering, 2019; 8(1):pp
1—3.