In-active inference: contemplative practice
as an (auto-)epistemic process
Giuseppe Pagnoni
September 6, 2024
Introduction
Over the past two decades, there has been a significant increase in the adoption of meditation
or “mindfulness” practices among the general public. This trend has been partly driven by the
scientific community’s renewed interest in exploring the effects and underlying mechanisms of
these practices. As a result, “contemplative studies” has emerged as a legitimate research area,
attracting substantial funding from both public and private entities.
Indeed, Francisco Varela’s pioneering “neurophenomenology” manifesto (Varela et al., 1991;
Varela, 1996) explicitly advocated for a generative, mutually enriching dialogue between the
scientific study of the mind and the experiential knowledge accumulated by contemplative tra-
ditions. This vision has inspired many researchers currently active in this field.
The present paper aims to introduce readers to a recent theoretical framework known as “active
inference” which has quickly gained prominence in neuroscience. I will argue that this perspec-
tive and methodological approach can significantly advance our understanding of the mind and
the processes activated by meditative practices. Additionally, it may enrich traditional notions
of meditation and the mind with new interpretations that are less tied to the original cultural and
historical milieau in which they developed.
A short primer on active inference
The term “active inference” refers to a theoretical framework (hereafter, AIF) originally pro-
posed by Karl Friston to describe the processes of perception and action in living beings (for a
thorough treatment, seeParr et al., 2022). More recently, AIF has been shown to represent a
powerful paradigm to understand not only higher functions in sentient creatures — such as at-
tention, planning, decision making, and self-consciousness — but also the dynamics of complex,
self-organizing entities in general (Badcock et al., 2022), from cells (Kiebel & Friston, 2011) to
plants (Calvo et al., 2020; Calvo & Friston, 2017) to societies (Friedman et al., 2021; Ramstead
et al., 2016) to ecosystems (Rubin et al., 2020).
Active inference rests on the so-called “Free Energy Principle” (FEP), which simply states that
an organism that maintains (self-organizes) a recognizable identity through time must necessarily
1
behave so as to minimize on average the probability of incurring into surprising states — sur-
prising, that is, with respect to its own phenotypical profile. And, naturally, the very fact that an
organism can be identified as something other than its environment implies a separation between
the two. This separation can be formalized as a relationship of conditional statistical indepen-
dence between the internal states of the organism and its external states, known as a “Markov
blanket”: the internal states are independent of the external statesgiven the sensory states of the
blanket, and the external states are independent of the internal statesgiven the active states of
the blanket. Put more simply, all that the organism can know about the world must be inferred
from its sensations, and all that the world can know about the organism must be gathered from
the organism’s actions. Thus, the sensory and active states of the organism form a (statistical)
membrane that constitutes the sole avenue of communication between the (internal states of the)
organism and the outside world. Notably, although the Markov blanket is a statistical construct,
in certain cases it can map quite closely onto a physical interface — for example, the plasma
membrane that bounds a living cell and mediates the transfer of energy, matter, and information
between the inside and the outside of the cell.
While this may seem very abstract, it does carry profound epistemological consequences.
First, it means that everything we try to know (and control, but more on this later) about our
world, must beprobabilistically inferredbased on our sensory data and our pre-existing notions.
It then becomes natural to develop an understanding of cognitive and behavioral processes in
terms of a Bayesian mechanics of beliefs — an apt description of active inference — which al-
lows us to treat the unfolding of perception, cognition, and behavior of a sentient agent using the
same formalism we would use to describe the motion of a random dynamical physical system.
Second, the interaction of an agent with its environment through its Markov blanket organizes
the internal states of the former so that they can be viewedas if embodying a (continuously up-
dated) representation of the latter: an internalgenerative model of the world. “Generative” here
specifies that this is a model — i.e., a set of “beliefs” — of how external causes in the world
generate sensory data.
According to this perspective, the free-energy principle that we introduced as a physics-based
description of self-organizing systems, can also be cast in terms of predictive processing, whereby
the agent appears to behave as if constantly attempting to predict its sensorium. A key point here,
though, is that the minimization of the discrepancy between the agent’s predictions and the actual
sensory data is brought about not only by revising expectations so that a better fit with the sen-
sory data is attained (the process ofperceptual inference), but also by eliciting actions that aim
to collect the very data that the organism expects — this is the “active” bit in active inference,
which effectively closes the sensorimotor loop, a defining feature of every animal (i.e.,animate)
beings.
It is also important to note how the organism itself (its structure and dynamics) implements or
is, rather thanhas, a model of its environmental niche; in other words, there is no separate central
controller here using the generative model for its own goals, like a computer CPU would use its
memory banks. In this sense, the apparenttautological nature of the FEP (i.e., a description
of things that maintain their identity as things that don’t become something else) lends itself to
a Bayesian teleological interpretation, where the generative model is in the business of “self-
evidencing”, i.e., of continuously collecting sensory evidence for its constituting set of beliefs.
Now, before proceeding further, two clarifications are in order. First, when we talk about
2
“beliefs” in active inference we do not necessarily mean personal or conscious psychological
beliefs. More simply, although perhaps less intuitively, the term refers in general to probability
distributions — about the state of the world, about how a given external cause can elicit a certain
sensation, about our own actions, etc. — encoded in the generative model. In other words, the
agent carries within itself a set of flexible estimates about the relative likelihood of different
things to occur in its world, how likely these things are to give rise to various sensations, what
courses of actions it is likely to undertake at any given moment and context, which effects in
the external world these actions are likely to produce, etc. Furthermore, these “beliefs” span a
wide range of spatio-temporal scales and structural implementations: for instance, an anteater
arguably holds some kind of cognitive belief about where anthills are more likely to be found in
its environment, but its tube-like mouth can also be seen as an “embodied belief” about the likely
shape of the artifact in its ecological niche where its favorite food lies. Second, when we stated
that self-organizing systems can be described as surprise-minimizing agents, we did not mention
the fact that surprise is, but for the most trivial cases, computationally intractable. However,
agentive systems — who only have access to sensory data and their internal beliefs —can in fact
compute a quantity that depends only on those variables and approximates (by excess) surprise.
This quantity, called “variational free energy” (VFE), allows an agent to vicariously minimize
surprise by behaving just so that its upper bound, VFE, is made as small as possible.
VFE minimization is therefore, in active inference, the mechanism that underwritesboth per-
ception and action: perception minimizes VFE by selecting the beliefs about the state of the
world (from those encoded in the generative model) that best align with the current sensory data
in the current context; action minimizes VFE by selecting the actions that will bring about those
sensory data that best align with our current expectations. For instance, when we meet some-
one we know, a swift competition takes place in our brain among all the alternative hypotheses
about who that person might be, based on minimizing the mismatch between the expected visual
sensation we would receive if a given hypothesis was true and the actual visual sensation; the
winning hypothesis determines our perception, i.e., the phenomenological event of recognizing
our friend. On the other hand, imagine trying to spot a friend in a crowd: what we do in this
case is hold steady in our mind the expectation of receiving the visual sensation corresponding
to our friend’s face, and then move around and turn our head and gaze (i.e., reorient our sensory
surfaces) until we receive a visual sensation that minimizes the discrepancy with our expectation.
Phylogenetically more evolved organisms like us, however, have the peculiar faculty of not
being strictly bound to the present contingencies for what concerns their inferential processes. We
can — and do it all the time — cast our expectations quite far into the future, planning our courses
of actions accordingly. Similarly, we can look back at the past in search of the causal factors of
the present state of affairs. This capacity speaks to thetemporal depthof the generative model
enabled by its hierarchical architecture, whereby lower levels (the ones operationally closer to
the sensory surfaces) code for statistical regularities of fine (spatio-)temporal grain, while higher
levels code for statistical regularities of progressively coarser (spatio-)temporal grain and of a
more abstract nature.
Decision-making and planning, then, cannot be solely based on the current inferred state of
the world and sensory data, but must depend on theexpected sensations, were we to undertake
a specific course of action. What ranks the available potential courses of actions (policies) for
their selection is thus a quantity calledexpected free energy, which can be usefully decomposed
3
(among other ways) into:
• the pragmatic value of a policy: how likely it is that the policy will bring about my (phe-
notypically and cognitively) preferred sensations;
• the epistemic value of a policy: how likely it is that the policy will bring about new infor-
mation that will reduce the uncertainty in my generative model.
Note that the important role of the epistemic value in policy selection speaks to the peculiar
curiosity that seems to be a crucial feature of the behavior and mental life of sentient beings.
One last, all important, piece of the mosaic needs to be introduced here, namely the notion of
precision. Since “beliefs” are really just probability distributions over hidden states or policies,
their variance represents our uncertainty about them. Thus, precision — i.e., the reciprocal of the
variance — encodes the confidence with which such beliefs are held. Furthermore, the discrep-
ancy between predicted and actually received sensory signals (i.e., theprediction error), which
underlies the process of belief updating in the service of improving our model of the world, is
weighted or modulated by the estimated newsworthiness or reliability of such prediction error
signals — once again, expressed by their precision. As we will see, the capacity of flexibly ad-
justing precision across the hierarchy of the generative model, to amplify or attenuate different
prediction error streams, extends our agential faculties to mental action, and corresponds to the
cognitive process of attentional deployment and regulation, perhaps the single most important
element of meditative practice.
The practice of zazen
While most contemplative practices share a number of common features1 — and thus much of
the reasoning henceforth can be applied more generally — I will focus here onzazen (Jap. 坐禅,
“seated meditation”) as practiced within the Japanese Zen Sōtō school. The key components of
this meditative style are: (1) a particular care in arranging and maintaining the seated posture,
(2) an attentional stance with a decidedly somatic flavor, and (3) the relinquishment of value
judgments about experiential content.
A stable sitting posture is indeed a requisite of many meditative techniques. It facilitates a
sustained immobility with minimum effort (when the posture is well-balanced), and this in turn
minimizes the variability of externally generated sensations. Inzazen, however, the detailed
traditional instructions about how to assume and maintain a proper body-mind arrangement in
meditation points to a frank ritualization of posture2, which becomes an embodied, symbolic
representation of the suspension of daily behavioral and cognitive patterns: the soles of the feet
turned upwards in the lotus position (suspension of the walking motion towards, or away from,
what our personal preferences dictate), the hands folded in thehokkajoin mudra (suspension
of the gestures of reaching for or pushing away), the eyes half-open without looking around
(suspension of the foraging for visual information), and a mental attitude of not-seeking anything
1Mainly, a stable sitting posture in a quiet environment with a minimization of external sensory signals.
2See Rev. Issho Fujita’s article “My footnotes on Zazen 1. Zazen is not Shuzen (1)” in the November 2011 issue of
the Zen Sōto School newsletter “Dharma Eye” (https://www.sotozen.com/eng/dharma/pdf/28e.pdf).
4
in particular (suspension of our habitual patterns of pursuit and avoidance, also in the cognitive,
motivational, and emotional domains).
Furthermore, the phenomenal presence aimed at by thezazen posture is not of the absorptive
kind, as is the case of some yogic practices that facilitate a progressive withdraw of the mind
from sensory impressions. On the contrary, the posture is supposed to be somewhat active in
its relaxed immobility. In this perspective, paying attention to the body (e.g., to the sensations
generated by breathing or to the alignment of the seated position) — a common element across
a variety of meditative practices — inzazen becomes rather paying attentionthrough the body.
An AIF perspective
The active inference framework offers a novel and intriguing approach to the scientific study of
zazen and other contemplative practices. As discussed in the Introduction, our behavior can be
usefully viewed as the outcome of an inferential process guided by expected free energy, whereby
we select courses of action based on their foreseen likelihood to reap us our preferred sensations
(the pragmatic value of a policy)and to gather new information that will decrease our uncertainty
about the world (the epistemic value of a policy).
In this perspective, then, engaging in seated meditation corresponds to assigning high precision
to a superordinate policy prescribing posture regulation (and the associated stillness) and mental
equanimity. In turn, adhering to this policy for the duration of the meditative session, constrains
the dynamics of other inferential processes in the following way. First and foremost, as men-
tioned in the previous section, the policies that underwrite habitual patterns of behavior related
to pursuing things we desire and avoiding things we dislike are suspended by virtue of the immo-
bility of the posture. In the context of heightened somatic attention, preventing such ingrained
courses of action that have acquired a high pragmatic value through our personal history allows
meditators to gather information about: (1) the sequel of body-mind changes that precedes the
onset of an action and constitute the “urge” motivating most automatic behaviors; (2) how this
emotionally-laden compulsion increases intensity, reaches its peak, and then begins to subside,
when we avoid yielding to it via our habitual urge-reducing behaviors. As an example, think
about how an anxiogenic thought occurring to a habitual smoker is typically followed, mostly in
an unaware fashion, by a somatic urge to reach for a cigarette. According to the AIF, this urge is
an expression of a rapid increase of free energy, which then motivates the selection of a course of
action that is expected — based on the beliefs encoded in the generative model — to bring free
energy down again (i.e., reducing the urge by lighting up a cigarette). If this scenario takes place
during a meditative session, however, the initial surge in free energy is not normalized, quickly
and unconsciously, by the habitual compulsive action. Instead, the probability of the meditator
becoming aware of it increases as she remains attentive and still in the seated posture, while at
the same time, the established urge-reducing policy is prevented for being reinforced once more,
thus beginning to lose some of its compulsive quality. In other words, the meditative policy not
only has a significant (auto-)epistemic value — whereby the generative model learns about its
own internal dynamics — but also subtracts precision from inveterate behavioral patterns, thus
opening up the game for a wider range of agentive possibilities.
It is intriguing to consider the role of spontaneous mental activity or mind-wandering during
5
meditation in such a framework. This cognitive process, which takes place naturally when we
are not engaged in a demanding task and has been linked to the activity of a specific brain cir-
cuit — the so-called “default mode network” (DMN) — is often perceived as a disturbance to a
“correct” meditative session by beginner meditators, who then try (mostly unsuccessfully) to get
rid of it. In the perspective outlined here, however, meditation could rather be seen as askilled
optimization of the role of spontaneous mental activity, which then turns from an impediment to
the very substrate and fuel for the auto-epistemic work of the generative model. It is important
to emphasize that the “knowledge” accrued during meditative practice is not necessarily explicit
but, unfolding as it does in the context of a heightened somatic presence, is often of an intuitive
nature, making the meditator more attuned to the complex mind-body dynamics underwriting
both impulsive behavior and gut feelings. Paradoxically, but only at a cursory look, this “knowl-
edge” also involves getting in touch with, and accept, the intrinsic limitations of our epistemic
powers3.
In this regard, it is worthwhile to discuss briefly the specific conative qualities ofzazen. The
alternative term often used for it,shikantaza (Jap. 只管打坐, “simply sitting”), suggests that
the somatic presence implied by attendingthrough the body is a skillful means to disengage
the mind (i.e., subtract precision) from ruminations and sticky mental processes,including an
excessive, effortful preoccupation with pursuing the goal of being attentive during meditation
— which would in fact hinder the natural unfolding of mental processes, and thus thwart the
auto-epistemic dynamics. Similarly, and quite paradoxically, the very same “grasping” attitude
of “wanting to know” — in this case, the drive to self-knowledge — should also be suspended
during zazen, to enable the process of auto-epistemy to take place unimpeded, as implied by the
notion ofmushotoku (Jap. 無所得, “not seeking anything”).
Finally, the AIF provides an interesting outlook on the increased cultural acceptance of the “be-
ing in the present” dictum associated with the recent spreading of lay meditative practices, and
that has almost acquired the status of truism in contemporary Western (or Western-ized) societies.
A dispassionate observation of the current circumstances is certainly both useful and necessary,
but the surreptitious seeping of this notion into the vernacular, unexamined belief that only the
present is really important can have momentous consequences. First, it aligns quite cheerfully
with a growing tendency towards immediate gratification (“Live in the moment!”), an attitude
both created and fueled by rampant consumer culture, advertisement, and social media. Tech-
nically, this corresponds to an increasing reward delay-discounting bias, where non-immediate
rewards are steeply depreciated (Frederick et al., 2002; Kalenscher & Pennartz, 2008) and, con-
sequently, behaviors whose benefits are expected to be reaped only in the distant future are less
likely to be selected (see, e.g., climate change for one dramatic example above all). Second, it
devalues our capacity for long-term planning and self-projection out of the here-now (Buckner
& Carroll, 2007), which holds a tremendous adaptive power and underwrites most of our cre-
ative deeds, freeing us from being fettered to the present. Interestingly, in the AIF, the scope of
our consciousness is hypothesized to depend critically on thetemporal depthof our generative
3At the entrance of the Delphic Temple of Apollo in ancient Greece was the famed inscription “Know thyself”
(Greek, Γνῶθι σαυτόν). Interestingly, it was originally meant to warn people to cross the sacred threshold care-
fully, mindful of the limitations of mortal comprehension in their queries to the Delphic oracle. More to the point,
the oracle was said to have stated “Socrates is the wisest person in Athens”, which Socrates interpreted as referring
to his lucid awareness of his own ignorance about many things.
6
model, which speaks to our faculty of casting temporally-extended arcs of prediction (about the
consequences of present actions) and postdiction (for inferring the past causes of the present state
of affairs). In fact, biological creatures much simpler than us (e.g., an amoeba) are thought to em-
body generative models that are temporally shallow, as their limited set of agentive possibilities
does not require them to predict outcomes beyond the tiny sliver of their “eternal present”. Con-
versely, that its capacity for long-term predictive processing is of the essence for the uniqueness
of the human mind has been recognized since ancient times. In the Greek myth, for example,
men were created from clay by the Titan Prometheus, whose love for humanity went as far as
driving him to steal fire from the Olympian gods to give it to humans, thus initiating knowledge,
technology, and civilization among them. According to Hesiod, the name of the Titan — who
was characterized by a distinctive intelligence, which he also bestowed on his creation — comes
from προμανϑάνω, “being able to foresee”.
Challenges and future steps
Active inference appears to be a compelling conceptual framework for studying the cognitive
and somatic processes involved in meditative practices. While this has already been argued by
a few authors (Farb et al., 2015; Laukkonen & Slagter, 2021; Lutz et al., 2019; Pagnoni, 2019;
Pagnoni & Guareschi, 2017), the critical test — and the most challenging next step — will be
the application of the theory to specific experimental paradigmsand computational models (for
a first attempt in this direction, seeSandved-Smith et al., 2021).
Also, a few theoretical aspects will need to be better clarified. For example, how the atten-
tional mechanism of increased precision deployed to somatic signals during meditation differs
from the case of many psychiatric and neurological conditions, which have been proposed to de-
rive from abnormally-high precision estimates for sensory data, to the detriment of higher-level
representations necessary for an appropriate contextual framing of behavior and perception (Fris-
ton, 2023; Smith et al., 2020). Or how the specific modulation of inferential processes induced
by meditative sitting is supposed to transfer to daily life behavior when off the cushion.
Despite these important challenges, I feel that the principled and unifying approach provided
by the AIF — something that has been lacking in contemplative research — represents a unique
opportunity for the advancement of our knowledge about this most human activity that is medi-
tative practice.
References
Badcock, P. B., Ramstead, M. J. D., Sheikhbahaee, Z., & Constant, A. (2022). Applying the free
energy principle to complex adaptive systems.Entropy (Basel, Switzerland), 24. https:
//doi.org/10.3390/e24050689 (Epublish)
Buckner, R. L., & Carroll, D. C. (2007). Self-projection and the brain.Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 11, 49–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.11.004 (Ppublish)
Calvo, P., & Friston, K. (2017). Predicting green: really radical (plant) predictive processing.
Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 14(131), 20170096. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rsif.2017.0096
7
Calvo, P., Gagliano, M., Souza, G. M., & Trewavas, A. (2020). Plants are intelligent, here’s how.
Ann Bot, 125(1), 11–28. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcz155
Farb, N., Daubenmier, J., Price, C. J., Gard, T., Kerr, C., Dunn, B. D., Klein, A. C., Paulus, M.
P., & Mehling, W. E. (2015). Interoception, contemplative practice, and health.Frontiers in
Psychology, 6, 763.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00763
Frederick, S., Loewenstein, G., & O’donoghue, T. (2002). Time discounting and time preference:
A critical review.Journal of Economic Literature, 40(2), 351–401. https://doi.org/10.
1257/jel.40.2.351
Friedman, D. A., Tschantz, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K., & Constant, A. (2021). Ac-
tive inferants: An active inference framework for ant colony behavior.Frontiers in Be-
havioral Neuroscience, 15, 647732. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2021.647732
(Epublish)
Friston, K. (2023). Computational psychiatry: from synapses to sentience.Molecular Psychia-
try, 28(1), 256–268. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-022-01743-z
Kalenscher, T., & Pennartz, C. M. (2008). Is a bird in the hand worth two in the future? the
neuroeconomics of intertemporal decision-making.Progress in Neurobiology, 84(3), 284–
315. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2007.11.004
Kiebel, S. J., & Friston, K. J. (2011). Free energy and dendritic self-organization.Frontiers in
Systems Neuroscience, 5, 80. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2011.00080 (Epub-
lish)
Laukkonen, R. E., & Slagter, H. A. (2021). From many to (n)one: Meditation and the plasticity
of the predictive mind. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 128, 199–217. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.06.021
Lutz, A., Mattout, J., & Pagnoni, G. (2019). The epistemic and pragmatic value of non-action: a
predictive coding perspective on meditation.Current Opinion in Psychology, 28, 166–171.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.12.019
Pagnoni, G. (2019). Chapter 13 - the contemplative exercise through the lenses of predictive
processing: A promising approach. In N. Srinivasan (Editor),Meditation (V ol. 244, pp.
299–322). Elsevier.https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.pbr.2018.10.022
Pagnoni, G., & Guareschi, F. T. (2017). Remembrance of things to come: a conversation between
zen and neuroscience on the predictive nature of the mind.Mindfulness, 8(1), 27–37. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s12671-015-0438-z
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., & Friston, K. J. (2022).Active inference: The free energy principle in mind,
brain, and behavior. The MIT Press. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/12441.
001.0001
Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2016). Cultural affordances: Scaf-
folding local worlds through shared intentionality and regimes of attention.Frontiers in
Psychology, 7, 1090.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01090 (Epublish)
Rubin, S., Parr, T., Costa, L. D., & Friston, K. (2020). Future climates: Markov blankets and
active inference in the biosphere.Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 17(172), 20200503.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2020.0503
Sandved-Smith, L., Hesp, C., Mattout, J., Friston, K., Lutz, A., & Ramstead, M. J. D. (2021).
Towards a computational phenomenology of mental action: modelling meta-awareness and
8
attentional control with deep parametric active inference.Neuroscience of Consciousness,
2021, niab018.https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niab018 (Epublish)
Smith, R., Badcock, P., & Friston, K. J. (2020). Recent advances in the application of predictive
coding and active inference models within clinical neuroscience.Psychiatry and Clinical
Neurosciences. Aheadofprint. https://doi.org/10.1111/pcn.13138
Varela, F. J. (1996). Neurophenomenology: a methodological remedy for the hard problem.
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 3(4), 330–349.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991).The embodied mind: cognitive science and
human experience(p. xx, 308). MIT Press.
9