Predicting Fixation Tendencies of the H3N2 Influenza Virus by
Free Energy Calculation
Keyao Pan† and Michael W. Deem*,†,‡
†Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005
‡Department of Physics & Astronomy, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005
Abstract
Influenza virus evolves to escape from immune system antibodies that bind to it. We used free
energy calculations with Einstein crystals as reference states to calculate the difference of antibody
binding free energy (ΔΔG) induced by amino acid substitution at each position in epitope B of the
H3N2 influenza hemagglutinin, the key target for antibody. A substitution with positive ΔΔG
value decreases the antibody binding constant. On average an uncharged to charged amino acid
substitution generates the highest ΔΔG values. Also on average, substitutions between small
amino acids generate ΔΔG values near to zero. The 21 sites in epitope B have varying expected
free energy differences for a random substitution. Historical amino acid substitutions in epitope B
for the A/Aichi/2/1968 strain of influenza A show that most fixed and temporarily circulating
substitutions generate positive ΔΔG values. We propose that the observed pattern of H3N2 virus
evolution is affected by the free energy landscape, the mapping from the free energy landscape to
virus fitness landscape, and random genetic drift of the virus. Monte Carlo simulations of virus
evolution are presented to support this view.
1 Introduction
Influenza A virus causes annual global epidemics resulting in 5–15% of the population
being infected, 3–5 million severe cases, and 250,000–500,000 fatalities.1 The subtype of
influenza A is determined by two surface glycoproteins—hemagglutinin (H) and
neuraminidase (N). The H3N2 virus has been one of the dominant circulating subtypes since
its emergence in 1968. The antibodies IgG and IgA are the major components of the
immune system that control influenza infection, binding to the influenza hemagglutinin.2
There are five epitopes at the antibody binding sites on the top of H3 hemagglutinin, namely
epitopes A–E. The epitope bound most prolifically by antibody is defined as the dominant
epitope, and it is central to the process of virus neutralization by antibody and virus escape
substitution.3 The cellular immune system, on the other hand, plays a relatively less
recognized role in handling the invasive influenza virus.2 The cellular system along with the
innate immune system exerts a somewhat more homogeneous immune reaction against
genetically distinct influenza strains.2,4
Vaccination is currently the primary method to prevent and control an influenza epidemic in
the human population.1 Influenza vaccination raises the level of antibody specific for
hemagglutinin and significantly enhances the binding affinity between antibody and
hemagglutinin. Vaccine effectiveness depends on the antigenic distance between the
hemagglutinin of the administered vaccine strain and that of the dominant circulating strain
in the same season.3,5 Memory immune response from virus in previous seasons as well as
*To whom correspondence should be addressed, mwdeem@rice.edu, Fax: 713-348-5811.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
Published in final edited form as:
J Chem Theory Comput. 2011 May 10; 7(5): 1259±1272. doi:10.1021/ct100540p.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
vaccination in the current and previous seasons impose selective pressure on the current
circulating virus to force it to evolve away from the virus strains recognized by memory
antibodies that selectively bind to hemagglutinin.
As a result of the immune pressure and the escape evolution of the influenza virus, which is
largely substitution in the dominant epitope of hemagglutinin, the influenza vaccine must be
redesigned and administered each year, and the vaccine effectiveness has been suboptimal in
some flu seasons.3,6 The escape evolution in the dominant epitope is at a higher rate than
that in the amino acid sites outside the dominant epitope.7 Sites in the dominant epitope also
show higher Shannon entropy of the 20 amino acids than do those outside the dominant
epitope.8 High substitution rate and Shannon entropy in the dominant epitope of
hemagglutinin suggest that the dominant epitope is under the strongest positive selection by
human antibodies. The immune pressure against each genotype of the dominant epitope can
be at least partially quantified by the binding constant between antibody and hemagglutinin.
The H3N2 virus and human immune system in this work are simplified to be a system
consisting of the H3 hemagglutinin and the corresponding human antibody. Exposure by
infection or vaccination produces an affinity-matured antibody with the binding constant to
the corresponding hemagglutinin equal to 106–107 M−1, while the binding constant of an
antibody uncorrelated to the hemagglutinin is below 102 M−1.2 Escape substitutions may
decrease the binding constant by changing the antibody binding free energy ΔG. Some
substitutions decrease the antibody binding constant more than others and have higher
probabilities to be fixed, because decrease in the antibody binding constant is favorable to
the virus. Here we define the difference of antibody binding free energy as ΔΔG =ΔG42 −
ΔG31 in which ΔG31 and ΔG42 are antibody-wildtype hemagglutinin binding free energy
and antibody-evolved hemagglutinin binding free energy, respectively, as shown in Figure
1. The fixation tendency of each substitution is a function of the difference of the antibody
binding free energy9 of the escape substitution.
Epitope A or B of the H3N2 virus was dominant in most influenza seasons.3 Epitope B of
the H3N2 virus was the dominant epitope presenting more substitutions than any other
epitope in the recent years. Epitope B was also dominant in 1968 when H3N2 virus
emerged. Thus during these periods of time, the substitutions in epitope B directly affect the
antibody binding constant and reflect the direction of the virus escape substitution. To attain
a global view of the effects of substitutions in epitope B, it is necessary to compute a matrix
containing the differences of antibody binding free energy caused by each possible single
substitution in epitope B. There are 21 amino acid sites in epitope B, and each residue in the
wild type strain may substitute to any of the 19 different types to amino acid residues, hence
we need to calculate a 19 × 21 matrix with 399 elements. Such a matrix is a free energy
landscape quantifying the immune selection over each evolved influenza strain. In this free
energy landscape, the virus tends to evolve to a position with low binding affinity of
antibody to evade antibodies and reduce the immune pressure. Calculation of this landscape
will enable us to study the mechanism of immune escape from a quantitative viewpoint,
providing a criterion to describe and foresee the evolution of influenza virus.
This paper is organized as follows: In Materials and Methods section, we describe the
protocol for the free energy calculation and the system of hemagglutinin and antibody. In
Results section, we present and analyze the calculated free energy landscape. The
substitutions observed in history are also compared with the results of the calculation. In the
Discussion section, a general picture of H3N2 virus evolution under the selection pressure of
the immune system is discussed and simulation results are discussed. Finally, our work is
summarized in the Conclusion section.
Pan and Deem Page 2
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
2 Materials and Methods
2.1 Scheme of the Free Energy Calculation
The expression of the binding constant K depends on the antibody binding free energy ΔG,
K = exp(−ΔG/RT). The Boltzmann constant R = 1.987 × 10−3 kcal/mol/K. The temperature
is fixed to the normal human body temperature T = 310 K. Shown in Figure 1, one
substitution in hemag-glutinin changes the antibody binding free energy from ΔG31 to ΔG42.
The first and second subscripts define the end state and the starting state of the binding
process, respectively. The ratio of the antibody binding constant after and before substitution
is written as
(1)
where K1 and K0 are the antibody binding constant to substituted and wildtype
hemagglutinin, respectively.
The difference of the antibody binding free energy ΔΔG =ΔG42 − ΔG31 =ΔG43 − ΔG21 is
calculated by applying the Hess’ Law to the thermodynamic cycle defined by State 1–4 in
Figure 1. The processes corresponding to ΔG43 and ΔG21 are unphysical but more
convenient to simulate. We calculated AG21 and AG43 for each amino acid substitution in
the unbound hemagglutinin and hemagglutinin bound by antibody, respectively On the
surface of the virus particle, hemagglutinin exists in the form of a trimer in which three
monomers are encoded by the same virus gene. Thus we simultaneously substituted the
amino acids in three hemagglutinin monomers in the trimer. The antibody has a Y-shaped
structure with two heavy chains and two light chains. In the resolved structure (PDB code:
1KEN), the hemagglutinin trimer is bound by two Fab fragments. Thus, we incorporated the
Fab dimer into the system for MD simulation.
Using the software CHARMM,10 we calculated each of AG21 and AG43 using
thermodynamic integration.11 We used molecular dynamics (MD) simulation to obtain the
ensemble averages of the integrand from which each of ΔG21 and ΔG43 is calculated. The
potential energy for the MD algorithm to sample the conformation space of the system is
(2)
in which r is the coordinates of all the atoms, λ is the variable of integration, Ureac is the
potential energy of the system corresponding to wildtype hemagglutinin, and Uprod is the
potential energy of the system corresponding to substituted hemagglutinin. The value of
ΔG21 or ΔG43 is
(3)
The integrand 〈Uprod (r) − Ureac (r)〉λ is the ensemble average with fixed λ of potential
energy difference between the system after and before substitution. The interval of
integration λ ∈ (0,1) was equally divided into four subintervals in each of which a 16-point
Gauss-Legendre quadrature was applied to numerically integrate the ensemble averages. The
ensemble averages with 64 distinct λ ∈ (0,1) were calculated by MD simulation with the
potential energy defined in Eq. (2).
Pan and Deem Page 3
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
2.2 Einstein Crystal
We introduce the Einstein crystals to calculate the free energy of the reference state in the
dual topology at both endpoints of the thermodynamic integration. To illustrate the function
of the Einstein crystals, we analyze the free energy of the dual topology without Einstein
crystals when λ = 0 as an example. We denoted by n1, n2, and n0 numbers of the reactant
atoms, product atoms, and all the remaining atoms in the system, respectively. We denoted
by r, rproduct, and x the coordinates of the reactant atoms, product atoms, and all the
remaining atoms in the system. The momenta of reactant atoms, product atoms, and the
remaining atoms are denoted by pr,i, pp,i, and px,i. The masses are similarly denoted by mr,i,
mp,i, and mx,i. The Hamiltonian of the system with λ = 0 is
(4)
The partition function is
(5)
When λ = 0, this partition function is the product of Qreal, the partition function of the real
system without product atoms, and Qproduct, the partition function of the product atoms
when λ = 0.
The free energy is given by −1/β times the logarithm of the above partition function. The
free energy is
(6)
As shown in the above equation, the effect on the translational entropy from the product
atoms is proportional to the logarithm of system size V. It diverges in the thermodynamic
limit. This divergence exists, no matter what λ scaling is performed. Note that we do not use
the Einstein crystals to handle the translational entropy a ligand loses or gains when binding
a flexible biomolecular receptor, which is taken into account by the thermodynamic cycle in
Figure 1. The translational entropy, proportional to logV in Eq. (6), is that of the dummy
product atoms, not that of the bound or unbound complex.
The value of G depends on the identity of the product atoms. Thus, the contribution to the
thermodynamic integration is different at the two endpoints, i.e. −kT log Qreactant ≠ −kT log
Qproduct, in which Qreactant is the partition function of the reactant atoms when λ = 1. Note
also that the expression of the partition function contains the factor Qproduct for the product
atoms. Relating the conventional expression for thermodynamic integration, Eq. (3), to ΔΔG
of Eq. (1) requires one to account for this term. This term arises from the use of a dual
topology in CHARMM, and this term is typically ignored. While the contribution from the
Pan and Deem Page 4
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
decoupled atoms is not constant, it can be exactly calculated if the restricted partition
function over the decoupled atoms can be calculated. This calculation is what the Einstein
crystal performs, using an Einstein crystal for the reference state rather the ideal gas in Eq.
(4).
In four 16-window thermodynamic integrations, the smallest variable of integration is λ =
1.32 × 10−3. Since λ is close to zero, product atoms in the system have potential energy near
zero and behave as ideal gas atoms, with translational entropy proportional to the logarithm
of system size, see Eq. (6). Exact calculation of the translational entropy terms of product
atoms at λ = 0 by explicit dynamics seems difficult, because the translational entropy of the
product atoms grows as the logarithm of the system size. These relatively free product atoms
destabilize the system. This entropy divergence is a fundamental feature of the statistical
mechanics, not a numerical artifact. Unrestrained product atoms induce large fluctuation of
the Hamiltonian in the MD algorithm. These fluctuations increase the standard error of the
quantity Uprod (r)−Ureac (r), which is defined in Eq. (3) and is computed from the trajectory
of the MD simulation. These fluctuations often cause the numerical integration algorithm in
the MD simulation to be unstable.12 In this case, the energy of the simulated system
increases rapidly. This phenomenon causes CHARMM to terminate abnormally. The
translational entropy introduced by the free atoms at λ = 0 and 1 affects the result. Reactant
atoms cause the same problem near λ = 1.
We noticed that the non-linear scaling, i.e. using a high power of λ such as the fourth power
of λ, in Eq. (2)13,14 did not work. The high power of the smallest λ is extremely close to zero
and the product atoms are almost free, which cause the MD simulation to terminate
abnormally at several windows with small λ. Additionally, the issue of translational entropy
of reactant and product atoms needs to be addressed. Even when the MD algorithm with the
non-linear scaling of λ13,14 terminates and appears to have generated a converged simulation
trajectory, this does not necessarily imply that the translational entropy of reactant or
product atoms has been properly controlled. In fact, the λ scaling approach may hide the
entropy divergence at λ = 0 or λ = 1 by letting the algorithm terminate due to numerical
roundoff error, rather than building statistical mechanical reference states for each of λ = 0
and λ = 1 to account for or control the effect of translational entropy.
An alternative to λ scaling introduces the soft-core potential as a way to turn off the
potential.15,16 The soft-core approach, like the lambda-scaling approach, does not address
the translation entropy of the atoms at λ = 0 or λ = 1. Previous studies with non-constrained
atoms at both end-points have been performed.17–23 Besides the classical molecular
dynamics with a non-ideal-gas reference state introduced into the dual topology, quantum
molecular dynamics via metadynamics has been used to analyze a deamidation process.24
Other applications of quantum molecular dynamics based free energy calculation include
chorismate conversion to prephenate,25 isomerization of glycine,26 and histone lysine
methylation.27 As illustrated in Eq. (6), the translational entropy of the uncoupled atoms
causes error in the final free energy results if it is not accounted for.
One way to calculate the free energy change exactly is to use a non-ideal-gas reference state.
This is quite natural, since the protein is not composed of ideal gas atoms. Deng and Roux
introduced restraint potentials to confine the translational and rotational motion of a bound
ligand to accelerate convergence of the simulation.28 We use this idea to exactly include the
contribution from the restrained states and built two Einstein crystals as the reference states
for reactant and product atoms, respectively. Our calculation allows a theoretically exact
determination of the free energy due to amino acid substitution.
Pan and Deem Page 5
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
To handle these two difficulties at both endpoints of the integration in a theoretically exact
way, we use two Einstein crystals as the reference states for reactant and product atoms,
respectively. The Einstein crystal has been used as a reference state for free energy
calculations. Frenkel and Ladd computed free energy of solids by building a path connecting
the real solid and the reference Einstein crystal.29 Noya et al. showed that a restrained
Einstein crystal is a suitable reference in the free energy calculation of biomolecules.30 The
Einstein crystal, a solid state model, is consistent with the nature of antibody binding
process in liquid phase. First, although the importance of biomolecular flexibility in protein-
protein binding process is well-accepted, and is fully and exactly included in our calculation,
we simply need to localize the product atoms when λ = 0 and the reactant atoms when λ = 1.
Moreover, we need to calculate the contribution to the free energy of these localized atoms.
The choice of Einstein crystals as the reference states removes the singularity in
thermodynamic integration in Eq. (3). As an example, an Einstein crystal was used as the
reference state for the free energy calculation of hard-sphere fluid in order to remove the
singularity in Eq. (3) at the end point λ = 0.31 In this example, the reference Einstein crystal
was achieved by harmonically coupling the particles to their equilibrium positions and
removing all interactions between particles.32
We here use Einstein crystals as the reference states to calculate the binding free energy
change due to amino acid substitution. The Einstein crystal is a model for localized atoms.
The free energy of the Einstein crystal can be exactly calculated. One Einstein crystal
contains distinguishable and non-interacting atoms under harmonic constraints around
reference positions fixed in space. In the Einstein crystal, the atom i with coordinates ri has
potential energy
(7)
in which ri and ri0 are the actual and reference position of the atom, respectively, and Ki is
the force constant of the harmonic constraint. We denote by mi the mass of atom i. The
canonical partition function of an Einstein crystal is
(8)
The spatial fluctuation of atom i in the Einstein crystal is
(9)
In our system, we let the potential energy for MD simulation defined by Eq. (2) become
(10)
Therefore reactant and product atoms are localized at both λ = 0 and λ = 1. The reference
positions of atoms in Einstein crystals are the equilibrium positions of corresponding
Pan and Deem Page 6
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
reactant and product atoms. To minimize the numerical error during the thermodynamic
integration calculation, we minimized the fluctuation of the integrand of thermodynamic
integration 〈∂U (r, λ) /∂λ〉λ = 〈Uein,reac (r) − Ureac (r)〉λ+ 〈Uprod (r) − Uein, prod (r) 〉λ.
Minimization of the terms on the right hand size is approximately achieved by letting the
average spatial fluctuation of each atom in Einstein crystals equal to that of the
corresponding reactant or product atom, i.e.
(11)
(12)
For each atom in the Einstein crystal, the force constant of harmonic constraint, 
  or
, was calculated from the monitored fluctuations of the corresponding reactant or
product atom with Eq. (11) or Eq. (12). In the scheme in Figure 1, the states with Einstein
crystals are states 1b, 2b, 3b, and 4b.
2.3 Modified Hydrogen Atoms
The frequency of atom vibration depends on its mass. Hydrogen atoms generally have the
highest vibration frequencies in the system. Such high frequencies require short time step in
MD simulation and increase computational load. To limit vibration frequencies and allow a
longer time step, one can apply the SHAKE algorithm to fix the length of any bond
involving hydrogen atoms.33 The SHAKE algorithm decreases the degrees of freedom in the
system by introducing additional constraints between atoms. Instead, we artificially changed
the mass of hydrogen atoms from 1.008 to 16.000 amu in order to preserve degree of
freedom in the system following the suggestion by Bennett.34 A larger mass of hydrogen
atoms allows a longer time step in the MD algorithm. Pomes and McCammon showed that
changing the hydrogen mass to 10 amu allow using a 0.01 ps time step to simulate a system
which consists of 215 TIP3P water molecules, smaller than our system.35 Feenstra et al.
change the mass of hydrogen atoms to 4 amu to increase the simulation stability of a system
which contains protein and water molecules and resembles our system.36 We set the time
step as 0.001 ps, a value widely used in simulations with physical masses for all atoms, to
gain higher stability in the simulation of our large system with a hemagglutinin trimer, a Fab
dimer, and water molecules. As with the Einstein crystals, we exactly calculated and
subtracted off the contribution of the change to the hydrogen mass to ΔΔG. Note that the
modification of hydrogen mass is independent to the reference states in the simulation,
which is selected to be Einstein crystals in this project. In fact, most of the hydrogen atoms
in the system are neither reactant nor product atoms. In Figure 1, the states with Einstein
crystals and modified hydrogen atoms are states 1a, 2a, 3a, 4a, 1b, 2b, 3b, and 4b.
2.4 Expressions of Free Energies
Introducing two Einstein crystals and heavier hydrogen atoms changes the potential energy
in the system, as well as the canonical partition functions. After modification of hydrogen
atoms, the mass of atoms changed from mr,i to 
 , from mp,i to 
 , or from mx,i to 
 .
Canonical partition functions of the states in Figure 1 are:
Pan and Deem Page 7
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
in which the states are denoted by the subscripts. Contribution of the potential energy part of
the Hamiltonian to the partition function is
(19)
(20)
From the partition functions, free energies defined in Figure 1 are calculated:
(21)
Pan and Deem Page 8
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
The free energy between state 3 and 4 is
(26)
in which QE1 and QE2 are the partition functions of the Einstein crystals for product atoms
and reactant atoms, respectively. The free energy ΔG43b was calculated by thermodynamic
integration while ΔG43 was used to calculate the free energy difference of one substitution.
Note that the correction term between ΔG43b and ΔG43 is independent of the masses of
atoms. Canonical partition functions as well as free energies of the state 1, 1a, 1b, 2, 2a, and
2b are calculated in a similar way.
2.5 Implementation of Free Energy Calculation Algorithm
The above discussion is the theoretical basis for the implementation of our free energy
calculation algorithm. The free energy calculation protocol consists of four steps. First, we
built the dual topology with reactant and product atoms in the amino acid substitution site in
separated antibody and hemagglutinin or antibody-hemagglutinin complex. We then
solvated the protein system and modified the mass of hydrogen atoms. Second, two Einstein
crystals were introduced as the reference states for the reactant and product atoms,
respectively Third, the MD simulation was run at 64 windows. The thermodynamic
integration algorithm obtained the free energy values ΔG21 for separated antibody and
hemagglutinin or ΔG43 for antibody-hemagglutinin complex, as in Figure 1. This step gave
the ΔΔG value. Fourth, we calculated the error bar of the ΔΔG value obtained in the last
step. The technical details of these four steps are illustrated in the text below. Also described
are the verification of the free energy calculation protocol, the software and hardware
information, and the CPU hours consumed by the protocol.
Pan and Deem Page 9
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The hemagglutinin trimer of H3N2 virus strain A/Aichi/2/1968 with bound dimer antibody
HC63 (PDB code: 1KEN) was used in our calculation. For each amino acid substitution, we
built the dual topology with side chains of both amino acids prior to the simulation. Reactant
and product atoms were defined as the side chains in the original and substituting amino
acid, respectively. All the covalent and non-bonded interactions between reactant and
product atoms were removed. The protein was in an explicit water box with periodic
boundary condition. The mass of hydrogen atoms was changed from 1.008 to 16.000 amu.
All the simulations were performed by CHARMM c33b2 with CHARMM22 force field.10
We first fixed the positions of hemagglutinin trimer except reactant atoms and minimized
the system with 200 steps of steepest descent (SD) algorithm and 5000 steps of adopted
basis Newton-Raphson (ABNR) algorithm. We ran a 5 ps MD simulation of the system, the
trajectory of which gave the spatial fluctuation 〈(δri)2〉 of each reactant atom. Then we fixed
reactant atoms, released product atoms, and ran a 5 ps MD simulation to obtain the spatial
fluctuation of each product atom. Final positions of both reactant and product were adopted
as the reference positions of the corresponding Einstein crystal. The force constant Ki of
each atom in Einstein crystals was obtained from 〈(δri)2〉 by Eq. (11) and Eq. (12). With
modified hydrogen atoms and two Einstein crystals as the reference states of reactant and
product atoms, state 1b, 2b, 3b, and 4b in Figure 1 were generated for thermodynamic
integration.
In thermodynamic integration, MD simulations were run at 64 windows with distinct λ. In
each window, pressure of the system was first calibrated with a 10 ps MD simulation in an
isothermal-isobaric (NPT) ensemble. The duration of 10 ps is appropriate because it is long
enough to equilibrate the pressure and short enough to prevent the protein from drifting
away from the original location. We fixed coordinates of the residues and water molecules
except for those within 15 Å from the three alpha carbons. Then we removed amino acid
residues and water molecules other than those within 27.5 Å from the three alpha carbons of
substituted residues in the hemagglutinin trimer to reduce the system size, because the fixed
atoms are not included in the topology of movable atoms and the cutoff of the non-bonded
forces is 12 Å. The Ewald sum was used to calculate charge interactions. Note that this
substantial reduction of the system relies on the assumption that the free energy change due
to the amino acid substitution is mostly affected by atoms near the binding site after the
system reaches equilibrium. This assumption is based on two facts: the conformations of
hemagglutinin and antibody are stable once the system reaches equilibrium, and all the
removed or fixed atoms have invariant interactions with the substituting amino acid
residues. The stable protein conformation means amino acid residues far away from the
substituting residue do not move during the amino acid substitution process. In the
CHARMM22 force field used in this project, the cutoff of non-bonded force is 12 Å and less
than the 15 Å threshold for system reduction. The system reduction does not directly affect
the force on the substituted residue because of absence of the long-range non-bonded force
between the substituted residue and atoms removed from the system. This system reduction
method was also applied to compute binding free energy of subtilisin,37 of tripsin,21 and of
Src SH2 domain.22 Robust results were obtained in all of these applications. Generally, this
system reduction strategy can produce reliable result if the reduced system contains the
residues and molecules critical to the binding process.21 We note that the system reduction
method could be a limitation of the free energy calculation model. The fixing of amino acid
residues and water molecules described in section 2.5 substantially reduced the CPU time
needed, but is an approximation to the real system containing the whole proteins. This
limitation reflects the tradeoff between model accuracy and required computational
resource. In the canonical ensemble, the new system was equilibrated for 200 ps and
simulated for another 900 psas the data production phase. The integrand of thermodynamic
integration is the ensemble average of the sampled trajectory 〈∂U (r, λ) /∂λ〉λ = 〈Uein, reac (r)
Pan and Deem Page 10
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
− Ureac (r) − Uein,prod (r) + Uprod (r)〉λ. The free energy ΔG21 and ΔG43 between the real
states was calculated by adding a correction term of the Einstein crystals in Eq. (26). Finally,
the difference of antibody binding free energy is ΔΔG = ΔG43 − ΔG21.
Error bars of ΔΔG are also given. The convergence behavior of the simulation was analyzed
using the block average method developed by Flyvbjerg and Petersen.38 As mentioned
above, the MD simulation for either the unbound hemagglutinin or the hemagglutinin-
antibody complex contains 64 windows with distinct λ. The 900 ps data production phase
contains 9 × 105 simulation steps. The values A = Uprod (r) − Ureac (r), as in equation Eq.
(3), computed in consecutive simulation steps were grouped into bins, and consecutive bins
were merged progressively. The quantity σ2 (A) / (n − 1), in which σ2 (A) is the variance of
the average of each bin A1,A2, …, An and n is the number of bins, increases with the bin size
and reaches a plateau when the bin size is 1 × 104 steps. We fixed the bin size to 1 × 104
steps and estimate the variance of ensemble average 〈A〉 as σ2 (A) / (n − 1), following
Flyvbjerg and Petersen’s method.38
This protocol, without the Einstein crystal contribution, was verified by recalculating
published free energy differences of amino acid substitution T131I.9 Without the Einstein
crystal contribution, our protocol gave the ΔΔG = 5.69 ± 0.07 kcal/mol, compared to the
ΔΔG = 5.20 ± 0.94 kcal/mol in the published work.9 Theoretically exact results presented
here include the Einstein crystal contribution. We note that the theoretically exact ΔΔG for
T131I, including the Einstein crystal contribution, is 3.71 ± 0.07 kcal/mol.
The simulation was performed using CHARMM22 force field at three clusters: tg-
steele.purdue.teragrid.org (Intel Xeon E5410, 2.33 GHz), sugar.rice.edu (Intel Xeon E5440,
2.83 GHz), and biou.rice.edu (IBM POWER7, 3.55 GHz), as well as at the condor pool tg-
condor.rcac.purdue.edu at Purdue University. Simulation of each substitution took
approximately 7.5 thousand CPU hours on average, and so this work consumed about three
million CPU hours.
3 Results
3.1 Free Energy Landscape
For each of the 21 amino acid sites in epitope B, we substituted from alanine to each one of
the 19 other amino acids, in which we used the neutral histidine (CHARMM code: Hse) as
the model of histidine. The free energy difference and standard error of each substitution
were calculated by the MD simulation (see Materials and Methods). The wildtype amino
acid in each site of epitope B was extracted from the hemagglutinin sequence of the H3N2
strain A/Aichi/2/1968. The free energy difference and standard error of the substitution from
the wildtype amino acid in each site were then calculated from the values for the change
from the wildtype amino acid to alanine and from alanine to the new amino acid. The values
are listed in Table 1.
As described in Eq. (26), each ΔΔG value listed in Table 1 contains the contribution of two
Einstein crystals. The contribution of Einstein crystals to the final ΔΔG values was
calculated for each of the 399 amino acid substitutions in epitope B. The average fraction of
the contribution of Einstein crystals in the calculated ΔΔG values is 44%. The contribution
of Einstein crystals is far greater than that of the statistical error of our free energy
calculation in Table 1, which is 4.5% on average. Thus, the Einstein crystal contribution is
both theoretically exact and practically important. In 371 of the 399 substitutions, the
absolute values of the contribution of Einstein crystals is greater than 1.96 standard errors of
the final ΔΔG values. That is, the contribution of Einstein crystals is significant with p <
0.05 in 93.0% of all the amino acid substitutions. Consequently, it is essential to incorporate
Pan and Deem Page 11
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Einstein crystals in the free energy calculation to eliminate the error caused by the methods
that neglect the unknown effect of the translational entropy of the free atoms in
thermodynamic integration. The contribution of the translational entropy of ideal gas-like
atoms (λ = 0 or λ = 1) needs to be either calculated or removed by a theoretically exact
method to perform an exact free energy calculation.
The obtained ΔΔG values allow us to analyze the character of each of the 20 amino acids.
We first averaged over all the 21 amino acid sites in epitope B the ΔΔG value caused by the
single substitutions from alanine to the other amino acids. The averaged ΔΔG values are
listed in Table 2. The largest ΔΔG are caused by the negatively charged amino acids (Glu,
Asp) and the positively charged amino acids (Arg, Lys), indicating that introduction of
charged amino acids in the dominant epitope decreases the binding affinity between
antibody and hemagglutinin. Note that amino acid substitutions that change the charge of
hemagglutinin significantly affect the calculated free energy values.39–41 The issue of how
to best calculate free energy differences when charge changes has been debated over the
years. In the present paper, we are using the standard Ewald approach with explicit solvent.
We note that the evolutionary history of H3 hemagglutinin since 1968 shows an increasing
trend of the number of charged amino acids in epitope B,42 which agrees with the results
that introduction of charged amino facilitates virus evasion from antibody, as illustrated in
Table 2. The result that introduction of charged amino acid on average increases ΔΔG is not
an artifact, is supported by data from the influenza evolution, and is expected on the basis
that charge is hydrophilic. In addition to the charge, the rank of free energy differences also
largely correlated to the size of amino acid. By the definition used by RasMol,43 the 16
uncharged amino acids are tagged as hydrophobic (Ala, Gly, Ile, Leu, Met, Phe, Pro, Trp,
Tyr, Val), large (Gln, Hse, Ile, Leu, Met, Phe, Trp, Tyr), medium (Asn, Cys, Pro, Thr, Val),
and small (Ala, Gly, Ser), as shown in Table 2. The ranks of small amino acids are lower
than those of medium amino acids (p = 0.036, Wilcoxon rank-sum test) and those of large
amino acids (p = 0.085, Wilcoxon rank-sum test). In contrast, the hydrophobicity of the
uncharged amino acids is largely uncorrelated to their ranks by ΔΔG. As a result, charged
amino acids in the dominant epitope are essential to the immune evasion while the virus
escape substitution among small amino acids have minimal effect.
Epitope B comprises 21 amino acid sites in the top of the hemagglutinin trimer. Taking the
probability for one substituting amino acid to exist at each site to be proportional to the
relative frequency of this amino acid in H3 hemagglutinin, the weighted average free energy
difference in each of the 21 sites was calculated. The relative frequencies of 20 amino acids
were obtained from 6896 H3 hemagglutinin sequences deposited between 1968 and 2009 in
the NCBI database44 and listed in Table 2. Also using the ΔΔG values in Table 1, we
calculated and tabulated in Table 3 for each site i the value of 〈ΔΔG〉i, which is the average
ΔΔG weighted by the probability for each different amino acid to be introduced, where
probability is proportional to the relative frequencies of 20 amino acids counted from the H3
sequences in NCBI database from 1968 to 2009.
As shown in Table 3, there is obvious variation among the expected free energy differences
〈ΔΔG〉i caused by single substitutions at amino acid site i of epitope B. This variation is
partly due to the wildtype amino acids in the sites. For instance, the wildtype amino acid in
site 190 is Glu that has the highest rank in Table 2. As shown in Table 3, any amino acid
substitution in site 190 tends to have a negative ΔΔG. Another cause of variation in 〈ΔΔG〉i
is that distinct sites affect differently the antibody binding process. Epitope B of the
wildtype A/Aichi/2/1968 hemagglutinin sequence contains five sites with threonine: 128,
155, 160, 187, and 192. The mathematical expectancies 〈ΔΔG〉i in these five sites are
−7.746, 4.471, 4.956, 1.182, and −1.737 kcal/mol, respectively. Therefore, each site in
epitope B has a specific effect on the virus escape substitution. A random substitution in
Pan and Deem Page 12
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
epitope B affects the antibody binding free energy differently depending on the site and the
substituting amino acids.
The variation of 〈ΔΔG〉i is also reflected by the tertiary structure of the epitope B bound by
the antibody By looking into the structure of epitope B shown in Figure 2. Epitope B resides
in two protruding loops from amino acid site 128 to 129, and from site 155 to 165,
respectively, and in a α-helix from site 186 to 198. Site 128 has a negative average free
energy difference 〈ΔΔG〉128 = −7.746 ± 0.098 kcal/mol. All the other sites in these two
loops show a positive 〈ΔΔG〉i value of a random substitution, with the minimum 〈ΔΔG〉157
= 3.944 ± 0.090 kcal/mol in site 157. The α-helix is located between hemagglutinin and
antibody. In the α-helix, the sites facing towards the antibody usually present large positive
〈ΔΔG〉i values such as site 193 and 196, while the sites facing towards the hemagglutinin
show lower 〈ΔΔG〉i such as site 189, 192, and 197. Thus in the one dimensional sequence
from site 186 to 198, the 〈ΔΔG〉i values oscillate with peaks and valleys corresponding to
the sites in the α-helix facing alternatingly to the antibody and hemagglutinin. Consequently,
the variation of the expected free energy changes in distinct sites depends on the structure of
the hemagglutinin-antibody complex.
3.2 Historical Substitutions in Epitope B
The simulation results are supported in two aspects by amino acid sequence data of H3
hemagglutinin collected since 1968. These historical sequences are downloaded from the
NCBI Influenza Virus Resource45 and aligned. First, Pan et al. analyzed the number of
charged amino acid in epitope B of H3 hemagglutinin in each year since 1968, and found an
increasing trend of charged amino acids.42 This finding supports the results that amino acid
substitution introducing charged residues on average facilitates virus escape from antibody,
as illustrated in Table 2. Second, amino acid substitutions in epitope B between 1968 and
1975 also verified the free energy calculation, as shown below.
With the knowledge of the free energy landscape of the single substitutions, we are able to
recognize favorable single substitutions in epitope B. Substitutions with large positive ΔΔG
values enable the virus to evade the immune pressure and increase the virus fitness.
Favorable substitutions grow in the virus population. Selection for substitutions with large
ΔΔG is part of the evolutionary strategy of the virus. The results of free energy calculation
can also explain the substituted virus strains collected in history.
We analyzed the hemagglutinin sequence information of H3N2 strains evolving from the A/
Aichi/2/1968 strains. H3 hemagglutinin circulating from 1968 to 1971 was mainly in the
HK68 antigenic cluster while those circulating from 1972 to 1975 were mainly in the EN72
antigenic cluster.46 Table 4 shows that in the dominant epitope B, there were 17
substitutions occurred in 12 sites collected between 1968 to 1975,47 which contributed to the
immune evasion and corresponding virus evolution from the HK68 cluster to the EN72
cluster. Also listed in Table 4 are the free energy differences of these historical substitutions.
The 17 substituting amino acids have significantly higher ranks compared to the
corresponding wildtype amino acids (p = 0.0044, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). This
significant difference is expected because 15 of 17 substituting amino acids have ranks
between 1 and 10, while 10 of 12 wildtype amino acids in the substituted site have ranks
between 11 and 20. In all the 21 sites in epitope B, 15 of 21 wildtype amino acids have ranks
between 11 and 20. Additionally, the ΔΔG values of these 17 substitutions listed in Table 4
are greater than the expected free energy differences 〈ΔΔG〉i in Table 3 of random
substitutions in the 12 substituted sites (p = 0.013, Wilcoxon signed-rank test).
We also looked into the historical escape substitutions in epitope B evading the immune
pressure of the vaccine strains. For each influenza season, the amino acids in the
Pan and Deem Page 13
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
administered vaccine strain were defined as the wildtype ones and those in the dominant
circulating strain as the substituting amino acids. In each of the 19 seasons in which H3N2
virus was the dominant subtype from 1971 to 2004, the substitutions in epitope B were
located3 and their ΔΔG values were obtained from Table 1. As shown in Table 5, escape
substitutions in epitope B as of 1973 mostly had positive ΔΔG and generated substituting
amino acids with increased rank (p = 0.047, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). Such tendency to
introduce amino acids with higher ranks was not observed after 1973: the ranks of wildtype
and substituting amino acids after 1973 present little significant difference (p = 0.28,
Wilcoxon signed-rank test). The hemagglutinin of A/Aichi/2/1968 used in the free energy
calculating is in the HK68 antigenic cluster. Perhaps after the virus evolved into the next
EN72 cluster, change in the virus antigenic character stimulates the immune system to
produce new types of antibody other than the HC63 antibody used in the calculation. A
different binding antibody changes the free energy landscape of the substitutions in epitope
B. Thus the application of the present free energy landscape should be limited within the
HK68 and EN72 clusters. Free energy differences of substitutions in the EN72 cluster would
need to be calculated using the updated antibody crystal structure.
4 Discussion
4.1 Fitness of the Virus Strains
The free energy landscape shown in Table 1 gives the change of the antibody binding
affinity, K1/K0 = exp(−ΔΔG/RT), induced by each possible substitution in epitope B of the
wildtype hemagglutinin. The majority of the substitutions lead to positive ΔΔG, and yield a
reduced binding affinity K1 that is smaller than the binding affinity of the original mature
antibody K0. Decreased antibody binding constant grants the virus a higher chance of
evading the immune pressure and infecting host cells. We propose that virus fitness is
positively correlated to the free energy difference ΔΔG. The other factor affecting virus
fitness is the capability of the hemagglutinin to maintain the normal biochemical functions,
such as virus entry. Most sites in epitope B changed amino acid identities during 1968 to
2005 as the H3N2 virus kept circulating.47 We therefore postulate that the substitutions in
epitope B do not greatly interfere with the biochemical function of hemagglutinin, and virus
fitness is dominantly determined by the free energy difference resulted from substitutions in
epitope B.
The binding constant between hemagglutinin and antibody after the first round of maturation
is about 106 M−1, and the binding constant of an uncorrelated antibody is below 102 M−1.2
On average, four substitutions in epitope B change the substituted hemagglutinin sufficiently
so that the immune response of the original antibody binding to epitope B is abrogated.3
Since this is a reduction of the binding constant from roughly 106 M−1 to 102 M−1, one
amino acid substitution that contributes to immune escape causes on average a 10-fold
decrease in antibody binding constant, or equivalently ΔΔGcrit = 1.42 kcal/mol at 310 K.
Assuming the effect of immune evasion can be broken into the sum of individual amino acid
substitutions in the dominant epitope,3 we define the virus fitness w as the sum of the
contribution in each site of epitope B
(27)
We denote by 
  the free energy difference to substitute amino acid α to amino acid γ at
site i. We investigated two versions of the virus fitness landscape. The first is to define δwi
as a linear function of the free energy difference of the substitution
Pan and Deem Page 14
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
(28)
The second is to define δwi as a step function
(29)
in which H is the Heaviside step function. Illustrated in the simulation below, either
definition of fitness is sufficient to explain the observed immune evasion of the H3N2 virus.
4.2 Selection in the Epitope
Evolution of the H3N2 virus is driven jointly by neutral evolution and selection.48 Neutral
evolution may be ongoing in sites outside the epitopes. The high substitution rate in epitope
B suggests that selection is the major factor shaping the pattern of evolution in that
epitope.47 Shown in Table 4 and Table 5 are the historical substitutions. The significantly
increased ranks of free energy differences suggests the existence of selection by the immune
pressure for substitutions that have increased the free energy difference ΔΔG and decreased
the antibody binding constant. The immune selection is directional: certain types of amino
acids such as charged ones were initially more likely to be added into the epitope B42
because they maximally decreased the antibody binding constant as indicated in Table 2.
The heterogeneity of the expected free energy difference of a random substitution in Table 3
shows that each site in epitope B has a specific weight with regard to immune escape.
Table 4 also illustrates that the immune selection did not necessarily pick the amino acid
with the highest rank of ΔΔG as the substituting amino acid. Amino acids with moderate
rank were introduced into epitope B even for the fixed substitution T155Y. Therefore the
historical evolution did not simply substitute amino acids by maximizing the free energy
differences in Table 1. This phenomenon is possibly due to two causes. First, the virus
fitness may be insensitive to the ΔΔG values, e.g. A1 in Eq. (28) may be small, or amino
acid substitutions with large ΔΔG values may contribute equivalently to the fitness, as in Eq.
(29). Second, only a small fraction of virus in one host is shed by the host and infects the
next host, so the population size of propagated virus from one host is smaller by several
orders of magnitude than the total virus population size in the same host. Additionally, a
seasonal bottleneck exists in the influenza virus circulation.49 Both random mutation and
small population sizes lead to dramatic randomness in the evolution. Consequently, the
evolution of H3 hemagglutinin is not solely determined by maximizing the free energy
differences in Table 1 and minimizing the antibody binding constant, even if the virus is
under immune selection. Instead, randomness plays a key role in the H3N2 virus evolution.
4.3 A Picture of the H3N2 Virus Evolution
Selection depends on the fitness of each virus genotype that is quantified as a non-
decreasing function of the free energy difference ΔΔG. Moderate selection in epitope B
requires that fitness improvement is limited when ΔΔG is large. One possibility is that the
ratio A1/A0 in Eq. (28) is small. Another is that the fitness takes the form of Eq. (29) in
which all substitutions with ΔΔG > ΔΔGcrit have equal fitness.
The virus evolution is also affected by the genetic drift. Genetic drift is a term which
captures the random component of evolution due to the large size of the phase space of
possible substitutions relative to the single set of substitutions that lead to the highest viral
Pan and Deem Page 15
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
fitness. The effect of genetic drift is quantitatively reflected in the fixation process of a new
strain, as shown in the simulation below A narrow bottleneck of virus propagation allows
only a small fraction of the progeny to survive, imposing a notable probability that a
favorable substitution is lost in the next generation. The effect of genetic drift is to increase
the randomness in the virus evolution so that observed substitutions are based on chance in
addition to the fitness of these substitutions.
To model the H3N2 evolution discussed above, we ran two Monte Carlo simulations of the
influenza evolution model. A population of N sequences of epitope B with 21 sites were
created and initialized as the wildtype A/Aichi/2/1968 sequence. Here N = 103 to account
for a narrow genetic bottleneck of hemagglutinin and for tractability of the simulation. We
iterated the simulation program for 5,000 generations or about five years to recreate a
pattern of evolution similar to that in history and shown in Table 4. The random substitution
rate of H3 hemagglutinin is roughly 4.5 × 10−6 amino acid substitution/site/generation.50
We let the number of substitutions follow a Poisson distribution with mean λ = 21 × 4.5 ×
10−6 N = 9.5 × 10−5N and randomly assigned the substitution sites. The substituting amino
acid at each substitution site was randomly picked from the remaining 19 amino acids
proportional to the historical frequencies observed in hemagglutinin. The fitness w in the
first simulation was calculated for each sequence using Eq.(28) with A0 = 100 and A1 = 3
and that in the second simulation was calculated for each sequence using Eq. (29) with A0 =
100, A2 = 9, and ΔΔGcrit = 1.42 kcal/mol. Note that by choosing A1 = 3 for the first
simulation, a random substitution causes the expected fitness to change from 100 to 104.9,
and by choosing A2 = 9 for the second simulation, a random substitution changes the
expected fitness from 100 to 105.0. The size of the progeny of each sequences equals the
fitness w of the sequence if w > 0, and equals 0 if w ≤ 0. The next generation of sequences
was initialized by randomly sampling N sequences from the progeny sequences.
The results of both simulations showed remarkable similarity to the observed substitutions
in Table 4 with the bottleneck N equal to 103. See Figure 3 and Figure 4. Amino acid
substitutions generated in the simulation are usually distinct with those in Table 4 observed
in history. The ΔΔG values of each substitution emerging in the simulation are nevertheless
similar to those of the historical substitutions listed in Table 4. As was observed in history in
Table 4, most of the substituted strains in the simulations with relative frequency greater
than 1% have positive ΔΔG values with the ranks of the substituting amino acids ranging
from 1 to 10. The fixation of a newly emerged substitution takes about 1,000 generations or
one year on average. Fixed substitutions mostly introduce amino acids with positive ΔΔG
values in Table 1 and higher ranks in Table 2, and several of these fixed substitutions in
simulation, such as E190D and N188D, have the highest ΔΔG values in the current site.
However, fixed substitutions in the simulation are not always the substitutions with the
highest ΔΔG values in Table 1. These observations suggest that the Monte Carlo simulation
considering the effect of substitution, selection, and genetic drift is able to reproduce the
pattern of evolution observed in history. This simulation also shows that besides the free
energy difference of each substitution, the mapping from the free energy landscape to the
fitness landscape as well as the random genetic drift are dominant factors of the evolution in
virus epitopes.
Shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4 for both simulations are the trajectories of relative
frequencies of substituting amino acids. The trajectories are similar to historical
observations of human H3N2 virus data.47 For influenza, 1000 generations roughly equal
one year. The two substitutions T155Y and N188D were fixed in epitope B in 1968–1973.
As indicated by Figure 3 and Figure 4, substitution T155Y emerged between generation
3000 and 4000, or equivalently between 1971 and 1972 from the emergence of the H3N2
virus in 1968.47 Substitution T155Y was fixed between generation 4000 and 5000.
Pan and Deem Page 16
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Similarly, substitution N188D emerged between generation 2000 and 3000 and was fixed
between generation 4000 and 5000. The first simulation in which virus fitness is calculated
using Eq. (28) generated two fixed substitution, G129A that emerged at generation 4000 and
was fixed by generation 5000, and E190D that emerged at generation 3600 and was fixed by
generation 3900. The second simulation using Eq. (29) generated one fixed substitutions,
V196D emerging at generation 2900 and fixed by generation 5000, and one substitution that
nearly fixed, N188D emerging at generation 4100 and acquiring the relative frequency 0.84
at generation 5000. The trajectories in both simulations resemble those of substitutions
T155Y and N188D observed in history. From these results, the two Monte Carlo simulations
appear to capture the main factors of immune selection and genetic drift in evolution of the
H3N2 virus.
4.4 Multiple Substitutions
In this work, we calculated the free energy difference for each possible substitution in
epitope B. The free energy calculation for multiple substitutions is intractable using the
current technology due to the combinatorially increasing calculation load for multiple
substitutions. The issue of multiple substitutions is here addressed by assuming that the
effect of immune evasion is well represented by the sum of the contribution in each
substituted site in epitope B. Data indicate the independence of the immune evasion effect of
the sites in epitope B.3 We may, thus, assume that the free energy difference of the multiple
substitution is the sum of the individual ΔΔG values available in Table 1 plus a minor
correction term.
4.5 Prediction of Future Virus Evolution
The result of this work quantifies the reduction of the binding constant of antibody to virus
for substitutions in epitope B with larger ΔΔG values and higher ranks of substituting amino
acids. A newly emerging virus strain with larger antibody binding free energy difference has
a greater probability to become the dominant strain in the next flu season. Note that due to
random fluctuations in the large phase space of possible substitutions, actual trajectories
deviate from the trajectory determined by choosing sites and substituting amino acids with
greatest free energy differences. With a three dimensional structure of hemagglutinin of the
current circulating virus and binding antibody, one is able to calculate the free energy
landscape for all the possible single substitutions in the dominant epitope and estimate the a
priori escape probabilities in the next season. The dominant circulating influenza strain
usually possesses amino acid substitutions from the vaccine strain against which memory
antibodies are generated. Usually these substitutions disrupt the antibody binding process by
decreasing the binding constant, as shown in Table 5. Thus one can predict vaccine
effectiveness by evaluating the antibody binding constant against the dominant circulating
strain, which is acquired by calculating free energy difference of the amino acid
substitutions between the vaccine strain and the dominant circulating strain.3 More accurate
predictions of evolutionary pattern of virus as well as epidemiological data such as vaccine
effectiveness may be obtained by optimally mapping the free energy landscape to the fitness
landscape and taking into account random factors such as genetic drift in the evolution
process.
5 Conclusion
We introduced the Einstein crystal as a technology to improve the results of free energy
calculation. By calculating the free energy difference of each amino acid substitution, we
obtained the free energy landscape for substitutions in epitope B of hemagglutinin. There is
notable variation between the values of free energy differences of different substitutions at
different sites, because the identities of original and substituting amino acids, as well as the
Pan and Deem Page 17
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
locations of amino acid substitutions, affect to differing degrees the antibody binding
process. In this free energy landscape, we suggest that virus tends to evolve to higher ΔΔG
values to escape binding of antibody. Counterbalancing this selection is random drift.
Historical amino acid substitutions in epitope B and Monte Carlo simulations of the virus
evolution using the free energy based virus fitness, in which random genetic drift of the
virus adds statistical noise into the virus evolution process, showed that selected
substitutions are biased to those with positive ΔΔG values.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation through TeraGrid resources provided by
Purdue and Indiana University under grant number TG-MCA05S015. We specifically acknowledge the assistance
of Phillip Cheeseman. Part of the calculation is performed at computing resources at Research Computing Support
Group, Rice University. Keyao Pan’s research was supported by a training fellowship from the Keck Center
Nanobiology Training Program of the Gulf Coast Consortia (NIH Grant No. R90 DK071504). This project was also
partially supported by DARPA grant HR 00110910055.
References
1. World Health Organization Media Centre Influenza Fact Sheet 211.
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs211/en/index.html
2. Janeway, C.; Travers, P.; Walport, M.; Shlomchik, M. Immunobiology: The immune system in
health and disease. 6th ed.. New York: Garland Science; 2005. p. 430
3. Gupta V, Earl DJ, Deem MW. Vaccine. 2006; 24:3881–3888. [PubMed: 16460844]
4. Lee LYH, Ha DLA, Simmons C, de Jong MD, Chau NVV, Schumacher R, Peng YC, McMichael
AJ, Farrar JJ, Smith GL, Townsend ARM, Askonas BA, Rowland-Jones S, Dong T. J Clin Invest.
2008; 118:3478–3490. [PubMed: 18802496]
5. Pan K, Subieta KC, Deem MW. Protein Eng., Des. Sel. 2011; 24:291–299. [PubMed: 21123189]
6. Pan K, Deem MW. Vaccine. 2009; 27:5033–5034. [PubMed: 19524615]
7. Ferguson NM, Galvani AP, Bush RM. Nature. 2003; 422:428–433. [PubMed: 12660783]
8. Deem MW, Pan K. Protein Eng., Des. Sel. 2009; 22:543–546. [PubMed: 19578121]
9. Zhou RH, Das P, Royyuru AK. J Phys Chem B. 2008; 112:15813–15820. [PubMed: 19367871]
10. Brooks BR, Bruccoleri RE, Olafson BD, States DJ, Swaminathan S, Karplus M. J Comput Chem.
1983; 4:187–217.
11. Frenkel, D.; Smit, B. Understanding molecular simulation: from algorithms to applications. 2nd
ed.. San Diego: Academic Press; 2002. p. 168
12. Beveridge DL, DiCapua FM. Annu Rev Biophys Biophys Chem. 1989; 18:431–492. [PubMed:
2660832]
13. Mezei M, Beveridge DL. Ann NY Acad Sci. 1986; 482:1–23. [PubMed: 3471099]
14. Cross AJ. Ann NY Acad Sci. 1986; 482:89–90.
15. Beutler TC, Mark AE, Vanschaik RC, Gerber PR, Vangunsteren WF. Chem Phys Lett. 1994;
222:529–539.
16. Zacharias M, Straatsma TP, Mccammon JA. J Chem Phys. 1994; 100:9025–9031.
17. Boresch S, Karplus M. J Phys Chem A. 1999; 103:103–118.
18. Boresch S, Karplus M. J Phys Chem A. 1999; 103:119–136.
19. Roux B. Biophys J. 1996; 71:3177–3185. [PubMed: 8968588]
20. Nina M, Beglov D, Roux B. J Phys Chem B. 1997; 101:5239–5248.
21. Essex JW, Severance DL, TiradoRives J, Jorgensen WL. J Phys Chem B. 1997; 101:9663–9669.
22. Price DJ, Jorgensen WL. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2001; 15:681–695. [PubMed: 11718474]
23. Zacharias M, Straatsma TP, Mccammon JA, Quiocho FA. Biochemistry. 1993; 32:7428–7434.
[PubMed: 8338840]
24. Kaliman I, Nemukhin A, Varfolomeev S. J Chem Theory Comput. 2010; 6:184–189.
Pan and Deem Page 18
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
25. Crespo A, Marti MA, Estrin DA, Roitberg AE. J Am Chem Soc. 2005; 127:6940–6941. [PubMed:
15884923]
26. Takahashi H, Kawashima Y, Nitta T, Matubayasi N. J Chem Phys. 2005; 123:124504. [PubMed:
16392495]
27. Wang SL, Hu P, Zhang YK. J Phys Chem B. 2007; 111:3758–3764. [PubMed: 17388541]
28. Deng YQ, Roux B. J Chem Theory Comput. 2006; 2:1255–1273.
29. Frenkel D, Ladd AJC. J Chem Phys. 1984; 81:3188–3193.
30. Noya EG, Conde MM, Vega C. J Chem Phys. 2008; 129:104704. [PubMed: 19044935]
31. Frenkel, D.; Smit, B. Understanding molecular simulation: from algorithms to applications. 2nd
ed.. San Diego: Academic Press; 2002. p. 248
32. Meijer EJ, Frenkel D, Lesar RA, Ladd AJC. J Chem Phys. 1990; 92:7570–7575.
33. Ryckaert JP, Ciccotti G, Berendsen HJC. J Comput Phys. 1977; 23:327–341.
34. Bennett CH. J Comput Phys. 1975; 19:267–279.
35. Pomes R, Mccammon JA. Chem Phys Lett. 1990; 166:425–428.
36. Feenstra KA, Hess B, Berendsen HJC. J Comput Chem. 1999; 20:786–798.
37. Rao SN, Singh UC, Bash PA, Kollman PA. Nature. 1987; 328:551–554. [PubMed: 3302725]
38. Flyvbjerg H, Petersen HG. J Chem Phys. 1989; 91:461–466.
39. Morgan BR, Massi F. J Chem Theory Comput. 2010; 6:1884–1893.
40. Hünenberger PH, McCammon JA. J Chem Phys. 1999; 110:1856–1872.
41. Figueirido F, Delbuono GS, Levy RM. J Chem Phys. 1995; 103:6133–6142.
42. Pan K, Long J, Sun H, Tobin GJ, Nara PL, Deem MW. J Mol Evol. 2011; 72:90–103. [PubMed:
21086120]
43. Sayle RA, Milnerwhite EJ. Trends Biochem Sci. 1995; 20:374–376. [PubMed: 7482707]
44. Pan K, Deem MW. An Entropy Method to Quantify Selection and Diversity in the Hemagglutinin
of H3N2 Influenza. Submitted.
45. NCBI Influenza Virus Resource. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/FLU/FLU.html
46. Smith DJ, Lapedes AS, de Jong JC, Bestebroer TM, Rimmelzwaan GF, Oster-haus ADME,
Fouchier RAM. Science. 2004; 305:371–376. [PubMed: 15218094]
47. Shih AC, Hsiao TC, Ho MS, Li WH. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2007; 104:6283–6288. [PubMed:
17395716]
48. Koelle K, Cobey S, Grenfell B, Pascual M. Science. 2006; 314:1898–1903. [PubMed: 17185596]
49. Rambaut A, Pybus OG, Nelson MI, Viboud C, Taubenberger JK, Holmes EC. Nature. 2008; 453
615–U2.
50. Nobusawa E, Sato K. J. Virol. 2006; 80:3675–3678. [PubMed: 16537638] , In the amino acid
level, the average mutation rate of influenza A virus is converted to 4.5 × 10−6 amino acid
substitution/site/generation.
Pan and Deem Page 19
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1.
The scheme of the free energy calculation. The free energy difference of one substitution is
calculated by ΔΔG = ΔG43 − ΔG21. State n, n = 1–4, is the real system. State na has the
same configuration of atoms as state n except that all the hydrogen atoms have mass 16.000
amu. Compared to state na, state nb contains one additional Einstein crystal of product
atoms (n = 1,3) or reactant atoms (n = 2,4). The mass of hydrogen atoms in state nb is also
16.000 amu. Free energy ΔG21b and ΔG43b are obtained by thermodynamic integration.
Pan and Deem Page 20
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 2.
The tertiary structure of the interface between the HA1 domain of H3 hemagglutinin
monomer A/Aichi/2/1968 (bottom) and the antibody HC63 (top) (PDB code: 1KEN). Water
molecules are not shown. Epitope B of the HA1 domain is located in two loops and one α-
helix with the color scale modulated according to the expected free energy difference
〈ΔΔG〉i of each site i in epitope B. The color scale ranges from red for the most negative
〈ΔΔG〉i values to blue for the most positive 〈ΔΔG〉i values. The sites i in epitope B with
〈ΔΔG〉i near zero are colored white. The region outside epitope B is colored gray. The red
site 128 is far from the antibody binding region and the red site 190 possessed the original
amino acid Glu, which is a charged amino acid. It may explain why these two sites show
negative 〈ΔΔG〉i with large absolute values.
Pan and Deem Page 21
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 3.
Two fixed substitutions G129A and E190D generated by Monte Carlo simulation of epitope
B using Eq. (28). Also plotted are two historical fixed substitutions in epitope B: T155Y
fixed between 1971 and 1973, and N188D fixed between 1970 and 1973. The frequency
data of historical substitutions are from Shih et al.47 The origin of time axis is 1968. One
thousand generation of the H3N2 virus is approximately one year. Figure 3(a) Substitution
G129A causing the free energy difference ΔΔG = 3.33 ± 0.29 kcal/mol is fixed by the
simulation. The rank of the free energy difference of G129A is 12 in 19 possible
substitutions in site 129. Figure 3(b) Substitution E190D with ΔΔG = 18.75 ± 0.32 kcal/mol.
The rank is 1 in 19 possible substitutions in site 190.
Pan and Deem Page 22
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 4.
Two fixed substitutions N188D and V196D generated by Monte Carlo simulation of epitope
B using Eq. (29). Two historical fixed substitutions T155Y and N188D are also plotted, and
data are from Shih et al.47 Figure 4(a) Substitution N188D causing the free energy
difference ΔΔG = 19.77 ± 0.37 kcal/mol is fixed by the simulation. The rank of the free
energy difference of N188D is 1 in 19 possible substitutions in site 188. Figure 4(a)
Substitution V196D with ΔΔG = 9.25 ± 0.34 kcal/mol. The rank is 5 in 19 possible
substitutions in site 196. The proportions of substituting amino acids are represented by
different line types.
Pan and Deem Page 23
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Pan and Deem Page 24
Table 1
Summary of the calculated free energy differences ΔΔG in each amino acid site in epitope B from the wildtype amino acid to all 20 amino acids. The
standard errors are also listed. The free energy difference and its standard error of the substitution from the wildtype amino acid to itself are both zero.
The units of free energy differences and their standard errors are kcal/mol.
Positions 128 129 155 156 157 158 159
Ala −13.12±0.27 3.33±0.29 2.78±0.20 1.19±0.33 2.48±0.21 4.27±0.31 5.18±0.21
Arg 22.57±0.46 2.31±0.45 16.98±0.37 0.08±0.50 −4.19±0.44 −1.61±0.48 7.07±0.42
Asn −4.80±0.36 5.83±0.42 −7.83±0.30 10.72±0.40 5.64±0.34 3.41±0.42 10.97±0.35
Asp 4.52±0.38 19.12±0.42 16.28±0.32 11.06±0.42 9.95±0.37 18.37±0.40 15.34±0.36
Cys −11.83±0.34 12.64±0.37 −2.37±0.30 5.32±0.38 −2.72±0.29 −7.88±0.40 7.92±0.32
Gln −12.37±0.40 7.34±0.42 −4.29±0.36 13.14±0.41 −0.45±0.36 11.47±0.43 6.54±0.40
Glu 11.15±0.38 10.50±0.42 17.77±0.34 26.54±0.43 4.68±0.36 8.58±0.48 5.19±0.39
Gly −9.93±0.39 0.00±0.00 17.00±0.34 0.11±0.44 0.21±0.36 0.00±0.00 −4.19±0.41
Hse 4.43±0.42 0.15±0.43 2.47±0.36 −6.89±0.43 12.18±0.38 5.54±0.46 1.06±0.39
Ile −16.03±0.41 0.54±0.40 1.55±0.33 8.33±0.42 11.22±0.37 8.09±0.43 18.96±0.39
Leu −23.58±0.41 −4.27±0.43 −8.92±0.33 2.64±0.45 −6.26±0.39 1.61±0.45 4.08±0.38
Lys 3.57±0.45 11.18±0.46 14.58±0.37 0.00±0.00 6.24±0.40 −1.60±0.48 5.39±0.46
Met −13.38±0.39 −2.59±0.39 1.23±0.35 10.11±0.43 16.15±0.36 14.49±0.44 −6.38±0.37
Phe −10.21±0.45 6.12±0.43 9.39±0.35 0.30±0.45 10.28±0.40 5.17±0.48 12.33±0.42
Pro −9.36±0.36 −2.43±0.42 −1.86±0.31 2.32±0.43 5.69±0.30 17.09±0.40 6.08±0.36
Ser −14.55±0.34 3.36±0.37 −1.09±0.29 −1.45±0.38 0.00±0.00 2.76±0.39 0.00±0.00
Thr 0.00±0.00 7.35±0.36 0.00±0.00 −1.08±0.41 6.34±0.32 8.36±0.41 15.32±0.32
Trp 9.82±0.47 4.81±0.47 19.84±0.43 23.26±0.48 16.14±0.45 3.52±0.62 −1.35±0.45
Tyr −14.83±0.43 2.72±0.42 7.25±0.36 −2.18±0.46 −8.37±0.44 18.42±0.51 5.95±0.43
Val −19.13±0.37 3.56±0.38 8.57±0.31 −3.01±0.39 7.63±0.32 3.77±0.42 6.45±0.32
Positions 160 163 165 186 187 188 189
Ala 4.16±0.22 −0.24±0.22 4.15±0.24 −3.19±0.19 −4.03±0.23 3.45±0.25 −9.01±0.28
Arg 9.70±0.44 5.97±0.39 14.58±0.41 21.01±0.38 8.12±0.42 −0.06±0.45 −0.39±0.48
Asn 2.07±0.34 −2.32±0.32 0.00±0.00 4.67±0.30 −10.07±0.34 0.00±0.00 −3.18±0.37
Asp 13.50±0.32 12.64±0.32 25.01±0.31 24.54±0.28 7.78±0.35 19.77±0.37 6.77±0.35
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Pan and Deem Page 25
Positions 128 129 155 156 157 158 159
Cys 15.82±0.31 1.84±0.30 1.93±0.29 −2.30±0.25 −11.09±0.32 4.07±0.34 6.23±0.33
Gln 3.04±0.39 −8.29±0.35 4.27±0.36 5.16±0.33 −2.87±0.37 12.36±0.39 0.00±0.00
Glu 15.48±0.36 2.17±0.35 15.74±0.34 33.29±0.31 14.41±0.35 10.10±0.37 12.16±0.39
Gly 1.22±0.39 −5.83±0.38 9.11±0.37 0.13±0.27 −0.60±0.30 −5.06±0.32 −5.69±0.32
Hse 0.52±0.38 6.31±0.33 7.44±0.33 18.15±0.30 3.69±0.39 −1.95±0.40 −8.53±0.40
Ile 1.51±0.34 10.62±0.36 3.85±0.33 −1.85±0.30 −2.51±0.33 −4.77±0.37 3.65±0.37
Leu −1.39±0.40 3.85±0.35 −9.20±0.37 1.07±0.30 −0.40±0.38 −1.30±0.37 −6.91±0.39
Lys 5.91±0.44 10.37±0.38 1.93±0.41 −1.15±0.39 24.91±0.41 8.42±0.44 9.48±0.64
Met 10.78±0.38 7.22±0.35 1.63±0.36 13.06±0.33 −5.11±0.36 6.97±0.38 6.86±0.40
Phe 7.90±0.41 −0.86±0.36 13.87±0.38 6.94±0.33 −7.23±0.39 2.05±0.39 4.37±0.43
Pro 4.51±0.32 12.50±0.34 18.96±0.33 11.82±0.29 10.69±0.32 −10.24±0.35 −8.98±0.36
Ser 7.13±0.29 9.07±0.30 −0.92±0.28 0.00±0.00 −4.88±0.31 8.09±0.33 −5.09±0.34
Thr 0.00±0.00 9.18±0.30 10.35±0.31 −14.79±0.27 0.00±0.00 3.53±0.38 9.30±0.35
Trp 0.86±0.44 12.34±0.35 19.02±0.43 −7.69±0.38 −11.04±0.48 7.20±0.40 −9.19±0.45
Tyr −5.43±0.39 1.06±0.34 14.76±0.37 11.90±0.33 5.29±0.42 1.57±0.40 4.81±0.41
Val 7.99±0.34 0.00±0.00 9.79±0.32 2.97±0.29 3.08±0.33 3.73±0.34 −7.89±0.36
Positions 190 192 193 194 196 197 198
Ala −18.12±0.24 −0.86±0.23 −5.20±0.20 2.37±0.23 5.95±0.23 −2.40±0.29 0.00±0.00
Arg 4.97±0.41 23.07±0.44 32.33±0.41 −13.66±0.37 −25.38±0.44 −17.94±0.47 3.99±0.37
Asn −16.44±0.30 −2.56±0.32 8.24±0.30 −3.81±0.31 13.27±0.36 −6.58±0.38 0.05±0.28
Asp 18.75±0.32 2.92±0.32 15.29±0.29 26.72±0.35 9.25±0.34 5.58±0.39 5.17±0.24
Cys −20.36±0.32 −1.45±0.32 −9.79±0.26 1.91±0.30 1.30±0.31 6.70±0.36 5.91±0.22
Gln −17.37±0.37 −6.00±0.37 4.87±0.34 −0.83±0.32 7.68±0.36 0.00±0.00 1.41±0.31
Glu 0.00±0.00 1.18±0.35 45.40±0.34 38.35±0.33 3.60±0.36 11.34±0.41 2.37±0.30
Gly −17.09±0.29 −13.46±0.30 −13.89±0.27 −18.59±0.30 8.08±0.31 4.11±0.36 3.65±0.28
Hse −26.26±0.35 −0.96±0.38 −0.96±0.35 9.95±0.34 18.42±0.37 −2.62±0.40 −3.27±0.35
Ile −16.45±0.37 −5.57±0.37 −3.80±0.31 −6.91±0.32 0.77±0.34 1.23±0.41 0.01±0.32
Leu −17.27±0.36 −7.97±0.37 10.76±0.34 0.00±0.00 10.07±0.39 −0.03±0.40 −11.18±0.29
Lys −9.33±0.38 5.67±0.42 39.36±0.39 −16.67±0.38 0.49±0.40 −16.50±0.47 1.98±0.37
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Pan and Deem Page 26
Positions 128 129 155 156 157 158 159
Met −26.63±0.34 6.82±0.36 −2.91±0.32 7.75±0.35 4.08±0.37 −7.79±0.40 15.57±0.32
Phe −31.89±0.39 1.56±0.40 16.46±0.59 2.78±0.34 −1.99±0.37 1.05±0.44 8.73±0.34
Pro −17.85±0.33 −2.28±0.33 9.84±0.31 8.01±0.31 15.42±0.35 −5.34±0.40 0.70±0.29
Ser −14.75±0.31 −7.79±0.30 0.00±0.00 6.62±0.29 6.91±0.29 1.97±0.36 −2.40±0.22
Thr −4.17±0.32 0.00±0.00 −2.04±0.27 12.40±0.31 7.81±0.33 −7.91±0.36 6.79±0.24
Trp −22.93±0.39 2.31±0.44 17.92±0.42 −1.30±0.40 8.17±0.43 −7.73±0.44 −7.23±0.38
Tyr −13.82±0.38 7.63±0.42 16.16±0.38 9.73±0.36 2.92±0.40 6.10±0.44 −4.82±0.32
Val −9.12±0.31 −6.80±0.32 −6.92±0.30 2.59±0.29 0.00±0.00 4.16±0.39 −4.22±0.24
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Pan and Deem Page 27
Table 2
The rank of the average binding free energy difference of the single substitution from alanine to another amino acid over all the 21 amino acid sites in
epitope B of hemagglutinin trimer. The rank correlates with the charge and the size of amino acid, and it is relatively uncorrelated to the hydrophobicity.
Here we applied classifications of RasMol for the biochemical properties of the 20 amino acids.43 The relative frequencies of 20 amino acids were
counted from the H3 sequences in NCBI database from 1968 to 2009.
Rank Amino Acid ΔΔG (kcal/mol) Charged Hydrophobic Large Medium Small Relative frequency
1 Glu 14.612±0.061 × × 0.029
2 Asp 14.533±0.055 × × 0.051
3 Arg 6.018±0.078 × × 0.052
4 Lys 5.766±0.078 × × 0.057
5 Trp 4.458±0.081 × × 0.016
6 Tyr 3.984±0.071 × × 0.035
7 Thr 3.981±0.050 × 0.078
8 Pro 3.912±0.054 × × 0.060
9 Met 3.562±0.062 × × 0.009
10 Phe 3.522±0.073 × × 0.030
11 Hse 2.654±0.064 × 0.020
12 Gln 1.985±0.063 × 0.042
13 Ile 1.396±0.060 × × 0.070
14 Asn 1.150±0.054 × 0.085
15 Val 1.147±0.051 × × 0.055
16 Cys 0.888±0.046 × 0.028
17 Ser 0.469±0.044 × 0.096
(18) (Ala) (0.000±0.000) × × 0.046
19 Gly −1.612±0.055 × × 0.070
20 Leu −2.273±0.064 × × 0.071
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Pan and Deem Page 28
Table 3
The rank of the average free energy difference 〈ΔΔG〉i generated by a substitution in each amino acid site i of
epitope B.
Rank Site 〈ΔΔG〉i (kcal/mol)
1 193 8.074±0.081
2 159 7.792±0.094
3 165 7.741±0.086
4 158 6.128±0.108
5 196 5.444±0.088
6 160 4.956±0.090
7 186 4.754±0.076
8 163 4.722±0.085
9 129 4.690±0.103
10 155 4.471±0.081
11 156 4.029±0.106
12 157 3.944±0.090
13 188 2.945±0.092
14 194 1.886±0.080
15 187 1.182±0.087
16 198 0.531±0.072
17 189 −0.631±0.098
18 192 −1.737±0.087
19 197 −1.967±0.099
20 128 −7.746±0.098
21 190 −12.666±0.084
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Pan and Deem Page 29
Table 4
Substitutions occurred in epitope B of the hemagglutinin A/Aichi/2/1968 (H3N2) as of 1975. Also listed are
the time when the substitutions were observed, and the free energy differences with standard errors. In each
site of epitope B, all the 20 amino acid were sorted in the descending order by the free energy differences
introduced by a substitution from the wildtype amino acid to 20 amino acids. The ranks of the substituting
amino acid and the wildtype amino acid in each substituted site are listed in the column Rank (substituting)
and Rank (WT), respectively.
Substitution Year ΔΔG (kcal/mol) Rank (substituting) Rank (WT)
T128N 1971 −4.796±0.361 8 7
T128I 1975 −16.026±0.412 18 7
G129E 1970, 1972 10.500±0.415 4 17
T155Y 1972–1973, fixed in 1973 7.254±0.358 9 14
G158E 1971–1972 8.584± 0.479 6 17
S159N 1971, 1974–1975 10.969±0.352 5 17
S159C 1972 7.923±0.324 6 17
S159R 1972 7.065±0.424 7 17
T160A 1973 4.160±0.217 11 18
S186N 1975 4.673±0.298 10 14
N188D 1971–1973, fixed in 1973 19.767±0.367 1 14
Q189K 1975 9.484±0.640 2 10
E190V 1972 −9.115±0.310 5 3
E190D 1975 18.752±0.324 1 3
S193N 1972–1975 8.239±0.301 10 12
S193D 1975 15.285±0.294 7 12
A198T 1972 6.793±0.236 3 14
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Pan and Deem Page 30
Table 5
Substitutions occurred in epitope B of H3 hemagglutinin between the vaccine strain and the dominant
circulating strain in each season in which the H3N2 subtype was dominant. The free energy difference with
standard error of each substitution is obtained using the free energy landscape in Table 1. The ranks of free
energy differences sorted in the descending order are listed in column Rank (vaccine) and in column Rank
(circulating) for the amino acids in the vaccine strain and the dominant circulating strain, respectively.
Year Substitution ΔΔG (kcal/mol) Rank (vaccine) Rank (circulating)
1972 T155Y 7.254±0.358 14 9
1972 G158E 8.584± 0.479 17 6
1972 S159C 7.923±0.324 17 6
1972 E190V −9.115±0.310 3 5
1973 T160A 4.160±0.217 18 11
1973 N188D 19.767±0.367 14 1
1973 S193N 8.239±0.301 12 10
1975 S157L −6.256±0.394 15 19
1975 A160T −4.160±0.217 11 18
1975 Q189K 9.484±0.640 10 2
1975 N193D 7.046±0.317 10 7
1984 E156K −26.536±0.429 1 15
1984 V163A −0.243±0.217 15 16
1984 D190E −18.752±0.324 1 3
1984 I196V −0.768±0.343 16 18
1987 Y155H −4.782±0.414 9 11
1987 E188D 9.669±0.382 3 1
1987 K189R −9.872±0.697 2 11
1996 V190D 27.867±0.299 5 1
1996 L194I −6.914±0.324 13 17
1997 K156Q 13.140±0.413 15 3
1997 E158K −10.187±0.515 6 18
1997 V190D 27.867±0.299 5 1
1997 L194I −6.914±0.324 13 17
1997 V196A 5.947±0.229 18 11
2003 H155T −2.472±0.355 11 14
2003 Q156H −20.028±0.365 3 20
2003 S186G 0.132±0.275 14 13
J Chem Theory Comput. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 May 10.