Laying down a forking path:
Tensions between enaction and the free energy principle
Ezequiel A. Di Paoloa,b,c (ezequiel.dipaolo@ehu.es)
Evan Thompsond (evan.thompson@ubc.ca)
Randall D. Beere (rdbeer@indiana.edu)
Abstract
Several authors have made claims about the compatibility between the Free Energy Principle
(FEP) and theories of autopoiesis and enaction. Many see these theories as natural partners or
as making similar statements about the nature of biological and cognitive systems. We critically
examine these claims and identify a series of misreadings and misinterpretations of key enactive
concepts. In particular, we notice a tendency to disregard the operational definition of autopoiesis
and the distinction between a system’s structure and its organization. Other misreadings concern
the conflation of processes of self-distinction in operationally closed systems and Markov blankets.
Deeper theoretical tensions underlie some of these misinterpretations. FEP assumes systems
that reach a non-equilibrium steady state and are enveloped by a Markov blanket. We argue
that these assumptions contradict the historicity of sense-making that is explicit in the enactive
approach. Enactive concepts such as adaptivity and agency are defined in terms of the modulation
of parameters and constraints of the agent-environment coupling, which entail the possibility
of changes in variable and parameter sets, constraints, and in the dynamical laws affecting the
system. This allows enaction to address the path-dependent diversity of human bodies and minds.
We argue that these ideas are incompatible with the time invariance of non-equilibrium steady
states assumed by the FEP. In addition, the enactive perspective foregrounds the enabling and
constitutive roles played by the world in sense-making, agency, development. We argue that
this view of transactional and constitutive relations between organisms and environments is a
challenge to the FEP. Once we move beyond superficial similarities, identify misreadings, and
examine the theoretical commitments of the two approaches, we reach the conclusion that far
from being easily integrated, the FEP, as it stands formulated today, is in tension with the theories
of autopoiesis and enaction.
Keywords
Agency ∙ Autopoiesis ∙ Enaction ∙ Free energy principle ∙ Sense-making
aIkerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, Bizkaia, Spain
bIAS-ResearchCenterforLife,MindandSociety,UniversityoftheBasqueCountry,Donostia,Spain
cCentre for Computational Neuroscience and Robotics, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK
dDepartment of Philosophy, University of British Columbia, Canada
eCognitive Science Program, Indiana University, Bloomington, USA
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 2
1 Introduction
The Free Energy Principle (FEP,Friston et al., 2006; Friston, 2012) has spurred a
large body of literature in the sciences of mind. A growing subset of this litera-
ture concerns a series of claims about the compatibility between FEP and theories
in embodied cognitive science, in particular, the enactive approach (e.g.,Di Paolo
et al., 2017; Thompson, 2007; Varela et al., 1991). Several articles (to date over
two dozen) have appeared that make some connection between FEP, autopoiesis,
and enaction. We are interested in examining these claims. They are varied and
presented with justifications that range from pointing out general similarities to
attempting to demonstrate deeper, principled connections between the two ap-
proaches. These claims have been interpreted in different ways. Some welcome
the prospect of compatibility as positive to both the enactive and FEP positions,
leading potentially to a more powerful and unified theory of embodied cognition.
They speak of elaborations, interpretations, extensions, syntheses, etc. (e.g.,Bru-
ineberg et al., 2018). Others think FEP may serve to reconcile enaction with posi-
tions enactivists criticize, such as modern versions of representationalism (Clark,
2015; Constant et al., 2021; Wiese & Friston, 2021). Others adopt a different tone
that suggests that FEP has overcome the limitations of the enactive approach, or
subsumes or absorbs autopoietic and enactive theories (e.g.,Allen & Friston, 2018;
“FEP subsumes autopoiesis,”Korbak, 2021, p. 2747; “FEP provides an implementa-
tion of enactivism, and in a sense supersedes or absorbs classical (i.e., autopoietic)
formulations,”Ramstead et al., 2021, p. 59). Finally, in contrast to the latter, some
propose that enactive ideas can be used to fill in gaps and resolve problems in the
FEP framework (Kirchhoff & Froese, 2017; van Es & Kirchhoff, 2021).
Given this variety, it is difficult to examine this literature as a coherent whole.
Moreover, claims continue to evolve, so that sometimes important details absent
in one piece of work become relevant in another. Nevertheless, we think that
there are a few core shared claims that do not seem to change. In particular, there
is the claim that the extension of FEP from its original domain of application in
neuroscience to living systems in general serves as the basis of a broad theory
of biology and cognition, something that resonates with enactive discourse about
the continuity between life and mind (Thompson, 2007). A more specific com-
mon claim concerns the need to attend to the active role of the cognitive agent
in engaging the world by following vital norms. This claim underlines the close
connection between internal processes, processes in the environment, the agent’s
activity, and the agent’s viability. At first sight, enactivists would agree with these
claims. But are these parallels merely superficial? The literature we examine here
claims that the connection between the two perspectives runs deep. We disagree.
We will argue that the apparent compatibilities are based on quick readings, or
even misreadings, of enactive ideas and what they entail, while central aspects of
autopoiesis and enaction are left unacknowledged.
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 3
Clearing up misinterpretations may move the discussion forward, but will not
by itself resolve the deeper tensions between FEP and enaction as theories of cog-
nition. Many commentators focus on what they see as the main source of tension,
which has to do with the representational and cognitive-loaded bias that instantia-
tions of FEP and related ideas tend to adopt, particularly in the form of predictive
processing models (Hohwy, 2013). They argue that FEP admits wider interpreta-
tions of terms such as “model” and “inference,” and that these interpretations are
compatible with enaction’s rejection of internalism and computationalism. While
theseargumentshavemerit,wethinktheymissmuchmorebasictensionsbetween
the two theories. These tensions have to do with how the enactive approach con-
ceives of agents as precarious, self-constituted entities in ongoing historical devel-
opment and capable of incorporating different sources of normativity throughout
theirdevelopment,aworld-involvingprocessthatisco-definedwiththeirenviron-
ment across multiple spatiotemporal scales and together with other agents. The
enactive view, as we shall explain, is at odds with universalizing the ideas of non-
equilibrium steady states and Markov blankets that serve as key assumptions in
FEP. Underlying these worries are divergent fundamental conceptions of material-
ityandtemporality. Theseincompatibilitiesleadtoaseriesofforkingclaimsabout
embodied agents in general, claims that take on a sharper contrast in the case of
human beings due their diversity and historicity. Nonrepresentational interpreta-
tions of FEP do not rejoin these divergences.
Before we proceed, a few caveats. First, we do not intend to critically evaluate
FEP altogether (for this, see e.g.,Aguilera et al., 2021; Baltieri et al., 2020; Biehl
et al., 2021; Colombo & Wright, 2021; Litwin & Miłkowski, 2020; Raja et al., 2021;
van Es, 2021). We are exclusively concerned with examining claims about the
compatibility between FEP and enaction. Second, in specifying what we see as
points of theoretical tension between the approaches, we work on the basis of the
FEP as currently formulated. We make no claims that clarifications, extensions,
or elaborations of the FEP could not address some of the divergences between the
approaches.
Our argument will proceed roughly as follows: (1) There are certain principles
andphenomenathatFEPneedstobeabletoaccountforifitclaimstomakecontact
with enaction; (2) to date, FEP has not successfully accounted for these enactive
principles and phenomena, despite some claims to the contrary in the literature;
(3) there are reasons to think that it might be difficult for anything like the FEP
to provide such an account, although time will tell and we are certainly not claim-
ing any impossibility proof. Finally, we do not reject specific applications of FEP
ideas or techniques to make sense of empirical data (Walsh et al., 2020). Insofar as
they offer useful methods for analysis, FEP and predictive processing models can
provide helpful tools in specific cases. Our discussion concerns FEP as ageneral
approach to explaining life and mind. It is at this level that we find significant and
hard to reconcile differences with the enactive approach.
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 4
2 An enactive FEP?
EnactivereadingsofFEPandclaimsofcompatibilitywithideassuchasautopoiesis
are varied. Some attempt principled unifying arguments (Ramstead et al., 2021),
others provide readings of FEP from enactive and ecological perspectives (Bru-
ineberg et al., 2018), and others simply remark on apparent resonances and simi-
larities (Clark, 2015).
Despite this variety, the motivations for these diverse claims seem fairly
aligned. We can roughly describe them as a concern to establish embodied-
cognition interpretations of FEP that do not necessarily entail a traditionally
internalist or representationalist perspective (as predictive processing models
tendtodo, Hohwy, 2013), orthatatleastrecastnotionsofrepresentationinaction-
oriented terms (Clark, 2015). Some authors are also motivated by the potential
extensions of FEP, originally formulated within the confines of neuroscience, to a
wider range of biological phenomena—indeed, to the status of a general principle
of theoretical biology and psychology. Demonstrating compatibility with the
enactive approach, with its emphasis on the continuity between life and mind,
could be considered as a step towards this goal.
Because of these aligned motivations, it makes sense to look at this literature
as a whole. We group its claims into two broad sets. We are aware that we may
miss some nuances, but we do not think these will be central to our purposes. In
particular, we are concerned with the following two groups of ideas: (1) proposals
foralinkbetweenFEPandthetheoryofautopoiesis, and(2)discussionsofvarious
compatibilities between FEP and enactive ideas.
We present only selected examples in this section and offer a critical analysis
in the next two sections. We will not occupy ourselves with other discussions that
point to broad similarities between FEP and “enactive-like” ideas (e.g., situated
embodied activity, action-perception co-dependence) that are shared by various
other approaches (e.g.,Pezzulo et al., 2015).
It is important to keep in mind that autopoiesis and enaction are obviously re-
latedandthedivisionintotwogroupsismerelyoneofconvenience. Theunspoken
assumption is that the enactive approach has developed historically from readings
and elaborations of the ideas first presented in the classical theory of autopoiesis
(Maturana & Varela, 1980, 1987), and that to this day many central concepts in
enaction find their roots in this theory. However—and this may be a confounding
factor to keep in mind—the enactive approach is in many ways a branching devel-
opment of the theory of autopoiesis and is critical of important aspects of classical
autopoietic theory (e.g.,Di Paolo, 2018). Contemporary defenders of classical au-
topoietic theory, in turn, have criticized the enactive approach precisely for this
reason (e.g.,Villalobos & Ward, 2015).
Our first group concerns the goal championed by Karl Friston and others of
extendingthereachoftheFEPtobiology. ThisworkdiscussesFEP’srelationtothe
theoryofautopoiesisandconcernsenactiveideasonlyindirectly. Nevertheless,its
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 5
claims form a kind of backbone for work looking at enaction, the reasoning being
that enactive theory is an elaboration of the theory of autopoiesis, as we have just
said.
Friston (2013) provides an early claim concerning the relation between FEP
and autopoiesis (for more up-to-date versions of this claim, seeParr et al., 2019;
Ramsteadetal.,2021 ;Wiese&Friston,2021 ). Thispaperdescribestheapplicability
of FEP to biological systems (see alsoFriston, 2012) by explicitly referring to the
concept ofautopoiesis.
Briefly, autopoiesis is a property of the organization of living systems (Matu-
rana&Varela, 1980,1987). Maturana&Varela (1980)originallypostulateditasthe
defining property, necessary and sufficient for the living organization, but subse-
quent researchers have argued that autopoiesis is necessary but not sufficient for
the living organization (Bitbol & Luisi, 2004; Bourgine & Stewart, 2004; Di Paolo,
2005; see Thompson, 2007, for discussion). “Autopoiesis” means that living sys-
tems are organized as networks of biochemical processes such that two conditions
obtain: (1) (self-production) the operation of the processes in the network regener-
atesthesetofrelationsbetweenprocessesinthenetwork; and(2)(self-distinction)
the network emerges as a distinct topological unity in the domain of biochemical
interactions. Anautopoieticsystemisthereforemateriallyself-producingandself-
distinguishing. Duetothecircularity(recursiveself-production)towhichthisidea
refers, Maturana & Varela(1980, see also1987; Varela, 1979) described an autopoi-
etic system as manifesting “organizational closure” or “operational closure.” We
will come back to these ideas in the next section.
Friston (2013) considers an ergodic random dynamical system. According to
him, ergodicity in this context “means that the time average of any measurable
function of the system converges (almost surely) over a sufficient amount of time”
(ibid.,p.2)andthat“onecaninterprettheaverageamountoftimeastateisoccupied
as the probability of the system being in that state when observed at random”
(ibid.). Such a system will tend to evolve towards a regime where the probability
density of its states (the chance that a particular state will be visited) does not
change over time.
If the density of states is unchanging, that is, if the system reaches a non-
equilibrium steady state (NESS), one can derive a series of relations between in-
ternal and external variables. The distinction between these sets of variables is
defined by assuming the presence of a Markov blanket that statistically “insulates”
onesetfromdirectlyaffectingtheother. 1 Instead,effectspropagatethroughaction
andsensoryvariablesthatconstitutetheblanketandmediatebetweeninternaland
1Biehl et al. (2021) clarify that Markov blankets are presented as a combination of two indepen-
dent conditions. One concerns the vector field underlying the stochastic differential equation of
the system forcing any systematic influences between external and internal variables through the
sensory and active variables. The other is an actual Markov blanket condition on the stationary
distribution saying that according to this distribution the internal and external states are condi-
tionally independent given sensory and active states. For our purposes we take Markov blankets
to imply a combination of the two conditions.
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 6
external variables. According to Friston, these relations demonstrate the central
claim that “any ergodic random dynamical system that possesses a Markov blan-
ket will appear to actively maintain its structural and dynamical integrity” (Fris-
ton, 2013, p. 2, emphasis removed). Friston sees the maintenance of structural
and dynamical integrity as the key property of biological systems, from which he
conjectures that, to exist, organisms must be ergodic2 (or converge to a NESS, e.g.,
Costaetal., 2021; Parretal., 2019)andmustbeinpossessionofaMarkovblanket. 3
Friston refers to autopoiesis as an attribute of biological self-organization and
claimsthatitcanbederivedfromhisanalysis. Heseesthemaintenanceofasteady
state as a kind of structural integrity; and he sees such structural integrity as a
form of homeostasis sustained by the system appearing to act against the disper-
sion or entropy of its states (Friston, 2013, p. 5). The same argument is repeated
in more recent publications (e.g.,Parr et al., 2019; Wiese & Friston, 2021). The par-
allel is reaffirmed elsewhere by suggesting that Markov blankets play the role of
the autopoietic system’s boundary-subserving processes of self-distinction.Allen
& Friston(2018) further claim that “One can formulate this in another way; the
organism’s internal states constitute probabilistic beliefs about what actions are
the most likely to provide evidence for the organism’s existence (survival)” (ibid.
p. 2474), and they state that “This notion is at the heart of autopoietic views of life
and mind, insofar as it induces a deeply circular causality between internal and
external states, to provide a normative principle by which to understand all action
and perception” (ibid. p. 2474).
2The phrase “biological systems are ergodic” found in (Friston, 2013, p. 5) could be interpreted
as involving both the organism and its environment. Similarly with the phrase: that “all living
systems revisit a bounded set of states repeatedly (i.e., they are locally ergodic)” (Ramstead et al.,
2018, p. 3) although from the context “living systems” seems equivalent to “organisms.” Friston
(2012, p. 2105), however, makes reference to systems “in a changing (and possibly non-ergodic)
environment” suggesting that the ergodicity claim is made about organisms.
3Friston’s argument bears a resemblance to an idea presented by W. R.Ashby(1962) if we interpret
hisuseoftheterm“equilibrium”tomeanasteady-stateflow. “Sotheanswertothequestion: How
can we generate intelligence synthetically? is as follows. Take a dynamic system whose laws are
unchanging and single-valued, and whose size is so large that after it has gone to an equilibrium
that involves only a small fraction of its total states, this small fraction is still large enough to
allow room for a good deal of change and behavior. Let it go on for a long enough time to get
to such an equilibrium. Then examine the equilibrium in detail. You will find that the states or
forms now in being are peculiarly able to survive against the changes induced by the laws. Split
the equilibrium in two, call one part ‘organism’ and the other part ‘environment’: you will find
thatthis‘organism’ispeculiarlyabletosurviveagainstthedisturbancesfromthis‘environment.’”
(ibid. p. 272). This resemblance may explain Friston’s insistence on using the language of “appear-
ances,” e.g., internal states appearing to minimize energy, appearing to engage in active inference,
and appearing to model the external world, to mention three instances appearing in the abstract
in Friston (2013). Ashby’s exercise, like Friston’s, is ambiguous between deflating the notion that
thereisarealdistinctionbetweenorganismandenvironment,wheninfacttheboundaryisdrawn
by the observer (or the choice of one of possibly many Markov blankets), and suggesting that to
speak of actual distinctions and of their appearances is ultimately the same thing, a view that
enactivists tend to reject (e.g.,Barandiaran et al., 2009; Di Paolo et al., 2017, p. 39).
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 7
The central claim of these arguments is that random dynamical systems with
one or several Markov blankets that converge to a NESS conserve themselves in
that stationary condition (or appear to do so depending on the perspective) by
minimizing free energy, and that these conditions are equivalent to the condition
of a system being autopoietic.
As we discuss later, Friston’s (2013) use of the concept of autopoiesis is rather
loose. He does not attempt to substantiate his claim by considering the definition
of autopoiesis; instead, he bases the claim on a broad analogy between the con-
servation of systemic properties in the random dynamical systems he proposes
and in autopoietic systems. Further elaborations of his argument move into more
specific enactive territory and lean more explicitly on ideas such asoperational clo-
sure, adaptivity, agency, andsense-making (Di Paolo, 2005, 2009; Thompson, 2007).
For instance,Kirchhoff et al.(2018) discuss the significance of the concept of the
Markov blanket. After pointing out that metabolic cell production is a process
enabled by the existence of cellular boundaries, the authors conclude that “living
systems can therefore be construed as a process of boundary conservation, where
the boundary of a system is its Markov blanket” (ibid. p. 6). The dependencies
induced by the Markov blanket act as a “kinetic barrier” that keeps the system “far
removed from thermodynamical equilibrium.” A Markov blanket does not fully
isolate the system: “external states may influence internal states even if the for-
mer are not constitutive parts of an operationally closed system” (ibid).Ramstead
et al.(2021) draw similar analogies between Markov blankets and the boundaries
of (unicellular) organisms. More specifically, they claim in agreement with Kirch-
hoff et al. that “it is fairly straightforward to establish that the Markov blanket
formalism provides a statistical formulation of operational closure” (Ramstead et
al., 2021, p. 55).
Oursecondgroupintheliteraturewearediscussingcorrespondstoarguments
in favour of a broad spectrum compatibility between FEP and enaction, not just
the concept of autopoiesis, though in all cases the claims tend to rely on the work
in the first group. For instance,Bruineberg et al. (2018) accept that FEP is ap-
plicable to biological systems, but they reject its association with Helmholtzian
approaches, in which perception is mediated by unconscious inferences about the
causes of sensation. A typical version of such approaches is the postulation of pre-
dictive processing models implemented in the brain. Bruineberg and colleagues
argue that FEP is more general and one need not be committed to a Helmholtzian
perspective (though even when conceiving of strictly biological integrity in terms
of the FEP, Friston already talks about active inference or the semblance of it).
The authors articulate an ecological-enactive interpretation of FEP, avoiding the
Helmholtzian sharp separation between organism and environment, and placing
the locus of active inference in the whole situated organism and not just its brain.
They offer charitable interpretations, such as construing the internal dynamics of
active inference as states of action-readiness or expounding Friston’s claim that
an organism embodies an optimal model of its ecological niche (Friston, 2011) in
terms of the organism possessing adequate skills that allow it to reach conditions
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 8
of grip.4 These interpretations are indeed more palatable to enactivists and ecolog-
ical psychologists than the Helmholtzian picture.
Applying a similar ecological-enactive interpretation of FEP to questions con-
cerning the self and the feeling of mineness,Kiverstein (2020) offers a more de-
tailed comparison with enactive technical concepts. LikeRamstead et al. (2021),
he describes the concept of autonomy in terms of precarious operational closure
and suggests that this concept can be cashed out in FEP terms. According “to
the free energy principle, the autonomy of living systems is a consequence of the
inferential processes of free energy minimisation” (Kiverstein, 2020, p. 565), and
“the free energy principle tells us how living systems might sustain their own op-
erational closure under precarious conditions in their dynamic coupling with the
environment” (ibid. p. 566).
Kiverstein also makes reference to key aspects of the enactive concepts of
agency and sense-making:
Any system that has autonomy will also qualify as an agent that
has its own individual point of view upon the world (Di Paolo et al.,
2017). Relative to this point of view the environment has affective
significance in terms of how it bears on the organism’s self-produced
identity. Organisms enact values, purposes and norms which are
of their own making in the sense that they originate in processes
of self-individuation (i.e. free energy minimisation) to which the
organism owes its existence. […] Perception and action are thus
laden with affect […]. (Kiverstein, 2020, p. 566)
Except for the parenthetical reminder that he accepts the equating of self-
individuation and free energy minimization, Kiverstein in these passages does not
seem to be arguing for a parallel between enaction and FEP as much as for what
an enactive interpretation of sense-making could add to FEP.
Kiverstein also suggests that a more embodied and situated understanding of
active inference should be in terms of readiness for action, and he uses recent
developments in enactive theory to expand on what this idea means.
As the organisation of the autonomous system becomes less bound to
its immediate metabolic needs, so the possible meaningful relations
the organism can stand in to the environment becomes less tightly
bound to the here and now. The organism becomes sensitive to ten-
dencies and trajectories that constitute the dynamical configurations
of the organism–environment system, and their consequences for its
precariousexistence[…]Thenervoussystemcanthenbethoughtofas
generating and sustaining stable and recurrent patterns of sensorimo-
tor engagement with the environment. These patterns of engagement
4RecentinterpretationsofFriston’sclaimde-emphasizetheideathattheorganismimplementsoris
itself a model of its environment, and argue instead that these models correspond to descriptions
available to the observer (see, e.g.,Baltieri et al., 2020; van Es, 2021).
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 9
with the environment exhibit just the same properties of operational
closure and precariousness as we find in the more basic processes of
homeostasis. The argument [here] is that patterns of sensorimotor en-
gagement owe their operational closure to processes of free energy
minimisation. (Kiverstein, 2020, p. 566)
In contrast to Kiverstein’s attempt at a careful inter-theoretical comparison, other
commentators offer their own particular reading of enactive ideas from an FEP
standpoint. For example, Clark (2015) defends an embodied and action-oriented
construal of predictive processing, which he uses to interpret Varela et al.’s (1991)
notionof“enactingaworld.” Despitetherebeingseveralelaborationsofthisnotion
in the enactive literature (Stewart et al., 2010; Thompson, 2007; Varela, 1991a, and
others), Clark idiosyncratically suggests that one way to interpret phrases like
“bringing forth a world” is through processes such as active data sampling used to
sustain and update a cognitive agent’s predictive models in an action-dependent
manner.
Kirchhoff (2018) follows the thrust of the argument byFriston (2013), adding
a few glosses: “FEP adds more to life than AT [autopoietic theory] […] for the
FEP, living systems minimize surprise on the basis of embodying a probabilistic
model of themselves and their environment. This is a step beyond the appeal to
mere AT in explaining the process of self-maintenance” (Kirchhoff, 2018, p. 2526).
Followingenactiveargumentsabouttheinsufficiencyofbareautopoiesisforsense-
making, Kirchhoff states that the FEP “incorporatesadaptivity—viz., the future-
oriented aspect of cognition—from the very beginning.” This point justifies the
perspective that, more than just being compatible with autopoiesis, FEP is also
compatible with the enactive approach. Adaptivity (Di Paolo, 2005) is taken as a
complexification of autopoiesis. “This shoehorns nicely with the FEP. Given that
the FEP can be shown to apply to systems that are, at least arguably, not cognitive,
it follows that mentality arises when organisms minimize free energy to a certain
degree—viz., in the context of active inference” (ibid. p. 2535).
Kirchhoff continues, however, by raising the potential worry that FEP might
not fully account for the enactive notion of sense-making and the existential-
phenomenological sense of life-mind continuity: “nothing in the FEP is able
to account for the constitution of a meaningful perspective” (Kirchhoff, 2018,
p. 2535). After describing the idea of sense-making as the most general aspect
of mindedness and acknowledging that for enactivists this idea is central to an
explanation of life-mind continuity, Kirchhoff asks whether this concept can fully
be captured by the minimization of free energy. This is one of the few instances
in the literature we are examining where a potential incompatibility (rather than
a mere difference) between FEP and enaction is explicitly signaled: “if the FEP
gives up on sense-making, then how can it explain what is central to life and
mind?” (ibid. p. 2536). Kirchhoff observes that FEP does not negate the idea
of sense-making (so the relation between them is not so much compatibility as
non-incompatibility), and that this idea has itself been criticized by so-called
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 10
radical enactivists (Hutto & Myin, 2013) for possibly entailing that basic cognition
has meaningful content (content subject to correctness conditions), contrary to
the nonrepresentationalist aims of the enactive approach (but see Thompson,
2018, for a critical response to radical enactivism). In a strange reversal of roles,
Kirchhoffarguesthatifthereweresuchanimplicationleadingfromsense-making
to content, then the concept of sense-making, and hence the enactive approach,
would be in tension with the nonrepresentational, leaner version of FEP he
defends. Here an enactive explanation of meaning moves from something that
FEP as a theory of the mind lacks to something it should not have because it
seemingly invites representations back.
Elsewhere we see similar worries about FEP’s potential lack of cognitive speci-
ficity, as inKirchhoff & Froese(2017), who suggest that enactive theory can con-
strain overly broad interpretations of FEP. As we mentioned, Friston’s (2013) argu-
ment applies to any random dynamical system in a NESS with a Markov blanket,
and so the conclusions should be valid for a wide range of systems, including sys-
tems traditionally considered non-living or non-cognitive. Kirchhoff and Froese
argue that Friston should therefore be committed to a view that sees mind every-
where, as part of any system that minimizes free-energy, including non-biological
ones (or, given some kind of life-mind continuity, to a view that finds both life
and mind nearly everywhere). Given the existence of systems, such as a candle
flame, or in Bruineberg et al.’s (2018) example, two synchronized pendulum clocks,
whose stable features are more parsimoniously explained through dissipative self-
organization or dynamical couplings than by supposing that internal variables are
performing active inferences, Kirchhoff and Froese are right to worry about a thin-
ning out of the explanatory power of the FEP. They suggest that life and mind
should be seen as strongly continuous, and that this continuity places cognitive
specificity demands that FEP does not meet. To remedy this problem, they sug-
gest that enactive versions of life-mind continuity, defined in terms of autonomy,
adaptivity, and sense-making, should be used to constrain an otherwise too liberal
FEP.
In this quick exposition we have seen a sample of how FEP, autopoiesis, and
enaction have been discussed almost exclusively in terms of important compati-
bilities. These compatibilities are of different kinds, ranging from broad analogies
between free energy minimization, Markov blankets, and aspects of autopoiesis
to more elaborate readings using enactive concepts such as autonomy, adaptivity,
and sense-making. These compatibilities serve to indicate the possibility of a more
detailedinter-theoreticalrelationortosupplementwhatsomeauthorsseeasprob-
lematic aspects of FEP as a candidate universal approach to life and mind. We find
very few instances where serious incompatibilities are mentioned, making things
look as if, except for some details and clarifications, there is a broad consensus
about the match between the approaches.
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 11
Before we discuss why we strongly disagree with this picture and we examine
deeper problems that have not been raised by any of these authors, we will men-
tion a few misreadings that we consider important to clarify for this and future
discussions.
3 Misreadings of autopoiesis and enaction
The enactive approach owes much to the classical theory of autopoiesis but it is
notidenticalwithit. Enactioninheritsseveralconceptsfromthistheory,andmore
importantly, a sensitivity to the need to provide operational definitions of its key
ideas. As well as serving as a constraint on theory development, such definitions
should also facilitate inter-theoretical debates. Concepts such as autopoiesis, au-
tonomy, operational closure, sense-making, and agency are defined in operational
terms in the enactive literature to avoid vague interpretations. It is surprising that
very few attempts to link FEP, autopoiesis, and enaction have taken advantage
of these operational definitions and that technical terminology is sometimes used
loosely or interpreted narrowly. This sloppiness results in a series of misreadings
that,aswearguelater,cansignaldeeperincompatibilitiesbetweentheapproaches.
Here we indicate some of these misreadings.
3.1 Autopoiesis
Let us start by re-stating the classical definition of autopoiesis (afterMaturana &
Varela, 1980, pp. 78–79):
An autopoietic system is organized (defined as a unity) as a network
ofprocessesofproduction(transformationanddestruction)ofcompo-
nents which:
(i)throughtheirinteractionsandtransformationscontinuouslyregen-
erate and realize the network of processes and relations that produces
them; and
(ii) constitute the system as a concrete unity in the space in which the
processes exist by specifying the topological domain of its realization
as a network.
We call the first and second requirements “self-production” and “self-distinction,”
respectively. It is possible to show that both requirements are dialectically related
to each other by using the concept ofadaptivity (Di Paolo, 2018), which is impor-
tant in recent enactive literature (Di Paolo & Thompson, 2014; Thompson, 2007).
We return to this concept later.
Friston (2013, p. 5 ) refers to autopoiesis as an attribute of biological self-
organization and homeostasis in which “active states will appear to maintain
the structural and functional integrity of biological states.” Others make similar
remarks, such as “the internal and blanket states that constitute a subsystem are
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 12
autopoietic, because their (nonequilibrium steady-state or ergodic) probability
density is maintained by the flow of the subsystem’s internal and active states.”
(Palacios et al., 2020, p. 5 ). Autopoiesis is here understood as sufficiently
characterized by self-organization and integrity, entailing persistence over time.
However, autopoiesis is notdefined as self-organization, integrity, or persis-
tence over time. The definition describes the organization of a system that jointly
fulfils the requirements of self-production and self-distinction. A system may self-
organize and not be autopoietic. It may persist over time and not be autopoietic.
And it may spontaneously achieve integrity and still not be autopoietic. The dy-
namic processes and conditions that form a crystal in a supersaturated liquid solu-
tionresultinintegrity,self-organization,andpersistenceovertimebuttheydonot
constitute an autopoietic system (it does not continuously regenerate and realize
the network of processes and relations that produces the crystal; it simply under-
goes a one-off individuationeventuntil it reachesa steady state). Autopoiesismay
in many cases entail integrity, self-organization, and persistence over time. When
present, these properties are realized in specific ways in autopoietic systems, i.e.,
by fulfilling the requirements of self-production and self-distinction. But the pres-
enceofthesepropertiesinagivensystem,asweseeinthecrystalcounter-example,
does not, in any combination, entail autopoiesis. The literature linking FEP and
autopoiesis often takes these attributes as sufficient and in doing so disregards
important aspects of the definition.
To clarify these aspects, classical autopoietic theory introduces a distinction
between the structure and the organization of a system (Maturana & Varela, 1980).
The structure is the system’s actual realization, the concrete components that con-
stitute a system and the actual and concrete relations between them. The system’s
organization is the abstract set of relations that define the system as belonging to
a class. Autopoiesis is the description of a class of systems, i.e., a description of the
organization that defines this class. Concrete autopoietic systems may be instan-
tiated in a wide variety of structures, and a given structure may belong to more
than one class of organization (Fido is a dog, a mammal, a living organism). Struc-
tures also change over time, even if the organization remains invariant (Fido was a
puppy, is an adult hound, will be a lazy senior). The distinction between structure
and organization, as well as other technical concepts, such asstructural coupling
and operational closure, are further clarified by Beer (2015; Beer, 2020) using a toy
model that reveals other subtleties about these ideas, such as the relevance of their
spatiality and time-extendedness.
To come back to the relation between autopoiesis and integrity, self-
organization, and persistence over time, it should now be clear that we need to be
carefulaboutwhetherwearetalkingaboutstructureororganization. Forinstance,
the autopoietic organization of a living organism persists over time as long as it
lives, but its structure most often does not. Statements about the structure of a
system do not obviously translate into statements about its organization, and vice
versa.
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 13
Settingasidethismisreadingoftheideaofautopoiesiswemaystillaskwhether
the formal proposal made by Friston and colleagues can be expected to lead to sys-
temsthatspecificallymeettherequirementsofself-productionandself-distinction.
We address this question in more detail in Section 4, but here we discuss why Fris-
ton and colleagues might think that this is the case.
Autopoiesis entails the conservation of biological organization and an adap-
tive relation to the environment, a relation that allows the autopoietic system to
remain viable. Conservation of organization has sometimes been illustrated in the
classical autopoietic literature as a special form of homeostasis, lending some cre-
dence to Friston’s interpretation of biological systems as resisting a tendency to
disorder (e.g.,Friston, 2011, p. 92). For instance, “an autopoietic machine is an
homeostatic (or rather a relations-static) system which has its own organization
(definingnetworkofrelations)asthefundamentalvariablewhichitmaintainscon-
stant” (Maturana & Varela, 1980, p. 79). The qualification (“relation-static”) should
be read as a warning that we are not talking here of homeostasis in the traditional
dynamical sense. Indeed, the idea of an autopoieticorganization as a regulated
variable is problematic and not generally accepted. At the organizational—as op-
posed to the structural—level there is no gradient to the condition of being or not
being autopoietic that could be thus regulated (Di Paolo, 2005).
The sense of homeostasis to which Friston and colleagues refer correspond to
structural properties not organizational ones. While several references to “struc-
tural integrity” and to “self-organization” can be found inFriston (2013) and other
work, none of them corresponds to the structure/organization distinction elabo-
rated in autopoietic theory. The structural integrity of systems with a Markov
blanket as they converge to a NESS bears some resemblance to the idea of a sys-
tem that actively conserves its organization. But it is not the same idea.
A contrast with the definition of autopoiesis can verify this claim. Several dis-
crepancies become apparent. There is no obvious organization-level equivalent in
Friston’s systems to the network of processes that through transformationsrealize
the conditions of its own production. In fact, the assumptions (of an invariant den-
sity of states and the presence of a Markov blanket) are such that no regeneration
is needed after the NESS is reached; the “organization” of the system simply en-
dures. It is unclear in what sense the components of the systems, e.g., its Markov
blanket, are materiallyproduced by other processes in the system, instead of just
being there by assumption (see alsoRaja et al., 2021for a similar point). Friston
himself may be thinking of this problem when he recognizes that more than en-
tropy minimization is needed to distinguish a biological system from a petrified
stone (Friston, 2013, p. 11).
In summary, autopoiesis has been loosely interpreted and indeed often mis-
read to different degrees by Friston and colleagues. Attending to the operational
definition of autopoiesis and the distinction between structure and organization,
it is possible to show that the characterization of autopoiesis presented by Friston
and colleagues (structural integrity, persistence, self-organization) does not entail
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 14
autopoieticorganization; suchpropertiescanbefoundinnon-autopoieticsystems.
Nor do autopoietic systems necessarily realize such properties in their structure.
Lack of attention to the structure/organization distinction can lead to readings of
autopoiesis where both are conflated.
3.2 Boundaries
The concept of operational closure under precarious conditions (explicated inDi
Paolo & Thompson, 2014) underpins the enactive idea ofautonomy (derived from
Varela, 1979), another technical term that extends the concept of autopoiesis to
more general domains:
[An] autonomous system is defined as a system composed of several
processes that actively generate and sustain an identity under precari-
ouscircumstances. Inthiscontext,togenerateanidentityistopossess
the property of operational closure. This is the property that among
the conditions affecting the operation of any constituent process in
the system there will always be one or more processes that also be-
long to the system. And, in addition, every process in the system is
a condition for at least one other constituent process, thus forming a
network. (Di Paolo, 2009, p. 15)
Inotherwords,theprocessesthatconstituteanoperationallyclosednetworkrelate
to each other such that they form a set of mutually enabling relations. They do
so under precarious conditions, meaning that in the absence of these mutually
enabling relations, the same processes would tend to run down. No component is,
in other words, strictly self-standing in the absence of the whole network.
Operational closure does not mean that processes external to the network can-
not influence those that belong to it, or that processes in the network cannot influ-
ence processes external to it. Nor does it mean that these influences cannot have
an enabling character, i.e., by being causally necessary for internal processes to
continue to exist. In other words, an operationally closed system is open not only
to informational external influences but also to all kinds of material and forma-
tive relations, including, in the case of living systems, the transport of heat, mass,
biomatter, genetic material, microorganisms, and so on. Internal processes can
literally depend on such enabling exchanges to continue to operate.
Ramstead et al.(2021) andKirchhoff (2018) make reference to operational clo-
sure. These authors see in this concept an enactive analogue of a Markov blan-
ket. For Ramstead et al. (2021, p. 555), as we have indicated earlier, “it is fairly
straightforward to establish that the Markov blanket formalism provides a statisti-
cal formulation of operational closure.” ForKirchhoff (2018), FEP accommodates,
through the idea of Markov blankets, the requirement of operational closure and
goes beyond it. Confusingly, Kirchhoff, followingFriston (2013), also states that
it “can be shown that Markov blankets operate in much the same way as a cell
boundary” (Kirchhoff, 2018, p. 2527; see alsoAllen & Friston, 2018, p. 2473; Kirch-
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 15
hoff et al., 2018, p. 6). We also read that a “cell therefore has a Markov blanket—its
plasmalemma [cell membrane]” (Ramstead et al., 2021, p. 551). More complex
organisms are described as bounded by an ensemble of nested Markov blankets
(Kirchhoff et al., 2018). In addition, Markov blankets are said to act as the epis-
temological and ontological boundaries of cognitive, not just biological, systems
(Ramstead et al., 2021, p. 551). Similarly, Kirchhoff & Kiverstein(2021) propose
using the formalism of Markov blankets to delineate flexible boundaries for the
mind.
Such statements are speculative and perplexing. They again confuse the or-
ganization and the structure of living and cognitive systems. We see no straight-
forward relation between operational closure (an organizational statement about
howanetworkofprocessesactivelyproducesanddistinguishesitself)andMarkov
blankets (a statement about statistical conditional independence between sets of
variables). Very few commentators seem to have remarked on this discrepancy
(e.g.,Bruineberg & Hesp, 2018, p. 38; see alsoBruineberg et al., 2021). As we have
said, an operationally closed system is open to all kinds of interactions and ex-
changes with the environment, as long as its organization is not destroyed. These
exchangesaretypicallyregulatedbythesystem, butnotalways(thinkofexposure
to ionizing radiation or the effects of gravity), and not always successfully (think
of a viral infection). Potential breakdowns caused by unregulated exchanges are
not necessarily fatal, meaning the condition of operational closure can still be sus-
tained. Because operationally closed systems may be realized in such complex
unmediated relations between internal and external variables, it seems unreason-
able to assume that operational closure is therefore equivalent to the statistical
conditions imposed by Markov blankets.
Moreover, because operational closure is an organizational concept, its rela-
tion to biological or cognitivestructural “boundaries” is not obvious nor are there
obvious relations between the boundaries of biological and cognitive systems, as
discussed inDi Paolo(2009). If we know how the organization of an operationally
closed system is structurally instantiated, we could in principle point to processes
that belong to it and processes that do not. But this epistemic operation is not
replaceable by the act of pointing to a physical structure, such as a cell mem-
brane. Maintaining the condition of self-distinction can lead to processes that
regulate complex, structural and spatial boundaries, as in the case of cell mem-
branes, but also to other processes, such as the prokaryotic CRISPR-Cas immune
system that defends unicellular organisms from viruses (Rath et al., 2015). Im-
portantly, these self-distinction processes, including membranes, are not in any
organizational sense at the boundary of the operationally closed system; rather,
they arepart of it, they arein it.
In sum, the status of the relations between different concepts, such as the sys-
temic distinction enabled by operational closure, the structural processes that sub-
serveself-distinction,thepresenceofactualspatialboundaries,andtheconditional
statisticalindependencebetweeninternalandexternalvariables(Markovblankets)
is anything but “fairly straightforward” (Ramstead et al., 2021, p. 555).
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 16
4 Points of tension between the two approaches
Attempts to establish some sort of connection between FEP and enaction continue
to appear as wewrite these lines. Some claims change in tone and detail, but so far
we have not seen many cases in which the misreadings we have indicated are not
present in some form or other. In this section, we raise points of deeper tension
between the two perspectives. As stated in the Introduction, our argument is that
there are certain principles and phenomena that FEP needs to account for if it
claims to make contact with or encompass enaction, and that, to date, FEP has not
successfully accounted for these enactive principles and phenomena. There are
reasons to think that it might be difficult for future developments of anything like
FEP to account for these enactive principles and phenomena, although we are not
claiming any impossibility proof.
Let us clarify some terminology. The comparison between different theoret-
ical approaches can be contentious precisely because it is difficult to agree on a
common ground about what aspects should be contrasted. These aspects can in-
clude explicit and implicit assumptions, ontologies, types of causality, semantics,
categorizations,standards,methodologies,formalizations,models,interpretations,
explanatory goals, intended scope, and applications. The criteria for declaring two
theories to be incompatible vary and can be contentious if we are not clear about
exactly what we are comparing. To facilitate the reading of this section we will
usetheterm tension todescribeanapparentcontradictionbetweentheories. Aten-
sionmight turnout to beachallenge, i.e., a contradictionthat might beresolved by
further work and conceptual coordination not involving a change to fundamental
assumptions (e.g., corrections, extensions, clarifications, or making explicit some-
thing that was only implicit up to this point). We will qualify tensions asincom-
patibilities when, within the scope of our analysis, statements describing assump-
tions, categories, formalizations, and/or interpretations in each theory cannot be
held jointly together. Claims of incompatibility in this section can be contested by
pointing to limitations of the analysis or by offering reformulations, possibly turn-
ing them into challenges. However, the point is that such reformulations would
require major theoretical accommodation, such as abandoning basic assumptions.
Because of this, to show an incompatibility is not the same as presenting an im-
possibilityproof,sincethelatterrequiressharedterminologyandframeworksthat
may not be currently in place, as in the case here.
A stronger difference between theories is that ofincommensurability (Kuhn,
1962). This refers to the difficulty of comparing the holistic nature of scientific the-
ories (involving in addition to assumptions, formalizations, interpretations, stan-
dards,etc.,alsotechnological,institutional,economic,andculturalaspects). Wedo
not attempt to claim incommensurability between FEP and autopoiesis/enaction,
but we do note that it is sometimes possible to appreciate a divergence in the
style and orientation of discourses between these approaches. These lead to a diffi-
cultyin“neutrally”comparingassumptions,semantics,andformalaspectsbecause
these hold different value to different researchers, a difficulty we acknowledge in
our case.
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 17
Our task is not helped by the ongoing revisions and refinements to the FEP. To
be as fair as possible, we will attend to the more recently published versions and
variants of these claims.
4.1 Non-equilibrium steady states versus history
The work presented inFriston(2013) is central to practically all the proposals com-
paring FEP and enaction. It continues to be cited approvingly to this day. It has
been argued that the formal argument presented in this work has technical prob-
lems (Biehl et al., 2021; see also Friston et al., 2021), and that when applied to
concrete systems “the assumptions of the FEP do not hold for a very broad class
of systems, namely linear, weakly coupled systems, except for the limited case of
fully symmetric agent-environment interaction” (Aguilera et al., 2021, p. 18). We
will not focus on these problems. Our goal is to examine claims of compatibility
with the enactive approach. To do this, it turns out that it is sufficient to examine
the central assumptions of the FEP because we already find tensions between the
two theories at this starting point. Here we question whether the convergence
to non-equilibrium stationary states, or NESS, which has been and remains cen-
tral to the FEP argument, is compatible with the theoretical claims of the enactive
approach.
The assumption we are concerned with is that the random dynamical system
in question will converge to an invariant set of states: “Because the system is
ergodic (and weakly mixing) it will, after a sufficient amount of time, converge
to an invariant set of states called apullback or random global attractor” (Friston,
2019, p. 10). In other words, the system reaches a NESS with an invariant density
ofstates( Costaetal.,2021 ;Friston,2019;Palaciosetal.,2020 ;Parretal.,2019 ). This
enables an important step in the formal derivation of FEP mathematical relations.
The invariant NESS density describes the probability of visiting particular states
even if the variables continue to change. As a consequence, the flow of the system
canbeexpressedasatime-independentoperationonthisinvariantprobability;see
e.g., equation 2.3 inFriston (2013), equations 3.2 inParr et al.(2019), equations 1.8
in Friston (2019), equations 2 inPalacios et al.(2020). The time invariance of these
expressions is key: setting “the rate of change of the density to zero” is “useful in
formalizingthenotionthatasystemmaintainsitsformovertime”( Parretal.,2019,
p. 6). And the already quoted: “the internal and blanket states that constitute a
subsystem are autopoietic, because their (nonequilibrium steady-state or ergodic)
probabilitydensityismaintainedbytheflowofthesubsystem’sinternalandactive
state” (Palacios et al., 2020, p. 5). The arrival at an unchanging set of relations
describingthesysteminaNESSservesastheconceptuallinkbetweenFEPandthe
properties its proponents associate with autopoiesis (self-organization, integrity,
persistence, as we saw in Section 3).
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 18
Convergence to a NESS is an important point of contrast between FEP and en-
activetheory,onewhichfewresearchershaveremarkedupon. Likeorganizational
approaches in biology (e.g.,Longo & Montévil, 2014), enaction emphasizes the his-
torical nature of life and mind (even more than the classical theory of autopoiesis
does, seeDi Paolo, 2018; Thompson, 2007; andVarela, 2011)5. Key technical enac-
tive ideas, such as the concepts of adaptivity and sense-making, operate through
mutually defined transformations of agent and environment that contradict the
NESS condition. These ideas theorize precisely what happens in transitions be-
tween different relatively metastable situations (which might in some cases be ap-
proximately stationary in themselves) or in enduring situations where metastable
conditions are not reached for significant periods. Varela uses the word “enaction”
to refer precisely to such processes that happen “between one behavioral moment
and the next” (Varela, 1991a, p. 106); andDi Paolo et al.(2017) describe such con-
creteactsofsense-makingastheopentransitionbetweendifferentmicroworldsof
activity. In that sense, history is built into the very definition of the termenaction.
Enactiveideasdescribetransitionsbetweendifferentregimesthattypicallyrequire
different dynamical descriptions, leading to changes in dynamical flows. In other
words, these ideas concern what happens when a dynamical description suitable
for one situation becomes unsuitable for the next; i.e., when we are no longer in
a situation oftime translation symmetry.6 We can say that as a matter of defini-
tion, enaction focuses its theoretical apparatus on thehistory of mutual change
between agents and their environments and for this reason enactive ideas are in
tension with thetime-invariant distribution of states that obtains in the NESS con-
dition. We will argue next that this tension is in fact an incompatibility between
the two approaches.
5In 1994, Maturana and Varela wrote individual prefaces to a new edition ofDe Máquinas y Seres
Vivos, the first book on their joint work on autopoiesis. In his preface,Varela(2011) acknowledges
that an important criticism of this early work was that autopoiesis seemed to imply a form of
solipsism. Maturana and Varela had replaced the idea of mental representations with the idea
that the environment triggers perturbations to the ongoing and operationally closed processes of
the living system. This proposal included the notion of structural coupling, the idea that the liv-
ing system and environment act as mutual sources of perturbation, triggering changes of state in
each other. Varela notes that this notion seemed to many researchers to be a weaker alternative
to the input-output approach of the information-processing metaphor, “because it seems to leave
the phenomenon of interaction in a grey area of being a ‘mere’ perturbation” (ibid. 614). Struc-
tural coupling “does not properly take the account of the emerging regularities in the course of a
history of interactions […] Over these years I have developed an explicit alternative […] turning
the historical reciprocity into the clue of a co-definition between an autonomous system and its
environment. I propose to call this point of view in both biology and cognitive science,enaction”
(ibid.). History and organism-environment co-definition have been explicit concerns of the enac-
tive approach since its beginnings, and they constitute a change in emphasis and orientation with
respect to classical autopoietic theory.
6Time translation symmetry simply expresses that thelaws of changedescribing a system remain
unchangedifweapplyatimedisplacementfrom t tot +dt. Whentalkingaboutstationaryregimes,
distributions, densities, we use the term time-invariant, instead.
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 19
Let us first clarify what we mean by historicity in this context.7 Historical
processes and historical explanations abound in biology and the human sciences
(e.g, Arthur, 1994; Byrge et al., 2014; Fischer & Bidell, 2006; Gould, 2002; Oyama
et al., 2001; Thelen, 2005; Vygotsky, 2012; Waddington, 1957). We associate his-
torical processes with qualitative changes in the space of possibilities for a given
system. These changes go beyond changes in states. In dynamical systems terms,
historical changes can be described as changes in parameters, whole sets of vari-
ables, in the laws of change, constraints, and boundary conditions that result in
qualitative dynamical differences (e.g., a reshaping of the attractor landscape due
to new (de)couplings to other systems; the transformation of variable sets due to
changes in the body, the adaptation to novel external constraints that induce a
reduction in degrees of freedom in the system, and so on). We also expect his-
torical processes to be dissipative and often to inhabit extended critical regimes
(with scale-invariant distribution of changes, i.e., not only manifested at longer
timescales), and to be subject to changing nonholonomic constraints leading to
phase spaces under persistent change. Phenomena that may be observed in his-
torical processes can be hard to predict and include long-term memory, founder
effects, locked-in retention, catastrophic forgetting, path-dependence, and broken
symmetriesofdifferentkindsleadingtodiversityandvariability( Desjardins, 2011,
2015; Di Paolo, 2001; Longo, 2018; Longo & Montévil, 2014; Montévil, 2020).
In sum and for our current purposes, historicity fundamentally entails broken
time symmetries, i.e., changing laws, couplings, parameters, constraints, bound-
ary conditions and variable sets. Systems in a stationary condition, in contrast,
cannot accommodate this kind of historical change: they remain in their station-
ary condition unless something knocks them out of it and eventually forget their
history due to their time invariant properties.8 The unchanging density of states
7WefollowauthorssuchasLongo,Montévil,andothersanduse historicity todescribethehistorical
character of some systems and processes, as elaborated in this paragraph. In other contexts, the
term has a different meaning and refers mostly to the actuality or authenticity of historical events,
persons, facts, etc.
8In this context, it is worth clarifying that models of active inference based on the FEP can be ap-
plied to the tracking and representation of nested sequential structures (Friston et al., 2018, 2020).
These models can encode/generate relations in a hierarchy of nested sequences and in this way
capture patterns over several timescales assuming a correlation between scale and model level.
But the relation between these models and the question of historicity as defined above is, in our
opinion, tenuous. These models describe the statistical relation of discrete nested sequences in
order to generate a hierarchy of expectations to drive time-extended behavior, as in the case of
reading a text, which may be described as organized hierarchically as sequences of sequences
(letters, words, phrases, sentences, paragraphs, etc.). This does not entail that the system being
modelled constitutes a historical process or that the model itself instantiates a historical process
in the sense of changing spaces of possibilities and broken time-symmetries. We do not deny
that deep temporal or sequential generative models may be useful in approximating historical
changes, but they do so by tracking relations between nested sequences that are sufficiently close
to being stationary. If the sequences change historically, say, as an infant transitions from crawl-
ing to walking (Adolph & Hoch, 2019), a nested sequential model tracking the muscle activation
sequences of one kind of behavior does not by itself generate the new sequential relations needed
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 20
arrivedatinFEPsystemsisdefinitionallytimeinvariant. Thisisexplicitlystatedin
thetechnicalliterature. Forthisreason,therelationsbetweenvariablesetsderived
fromsuchaconditioncannotaccommodatethepossibilityofthebrokentimesym-
metries that define historicity. For example, the appearance of a novel constraint
induces novel correlations between variables and these new correlations provoke
changes in the flow, thus making the system abandon its stationary condition. In
other words,the conservation of time invariant conditions cannot be guaranteed if
time translation symmetry is broken.
ThetensionbetweenFEPandhistoricityhasalreadybeennotedby Colombo&
Wright(2021; see alsoColombo & Palacios, 2021). Is this a minor tension or doesit
signal an incompatibility between the two approaches? We have already claimed
that historicity can be said to be part of the very definition of the termenaction. In
the rest of this subsection, we will show how important historicity is for enactive
theorizing at all scales.
Historicity in life and mind can be found in many important cases that are
central areas not only of enactive research but also of biology and psychology
in general, such as the formation of sensorimotor habits (Di Paolo et al., 2017)
and the formation of shared repertoires for coordinated action (Di Paolo et al.,
2018). Historical processes are also manifested at shorter, behavioral and neural
timescales, as in cases of soft assembly and critical agent-environment integration
(e.g.,Andersonetal.,2012 ),orthelong-rangecoordinationofneuralpopulationsat
the moment of perceptualawareness (Varela et al., 2001). At multiple scales, living
agents are constantly undergoing regulation in relation to the set of constraints
that redefine their structural dynamics (phase spaces) moment to moment.
Evidence shows that in living and cognitive systems organizations can endure
even if structures change. Without attempting to review the many cases in biolog-
ical, neural, and cognitive systems where processes of historical transformation
are at play, we can mention some examples. In biological processes: embryogene-
sis, life-cycle patterns, epigenetic variability, symbiosis, and metamorphosis.9 At
behavioral levels: fluid, critical agent-environment integration across scales in the
development of perceptual learning, skill acquisition, expert tool use, and habit
formation (Anderson et al., 2012). At the neurocognitive level: developmental
plasticity, possibly many-many mappings between neural networks and cognitive
functions (Pessoa, 2014), and more generally whatAnderson (2014) calls “neural
reuse,” the continued acquisition of new uses for neural circuits in evolution and
development without those circuits losing their original uses.
for the newer kind. At most, it can track them and reconstruct them a posteriori once the new
situation is sufficiently stable.
9ItisoddtofindveryfewreferencesintheFEPliteraturetothesecasesandthepotentialchallenges
they offer to the premises of the approach. One exception isClark (2017), who realizes that cases
such as metamorphic insects can be puzzling from a FEP perspective. The solution, he suggests,
is to look at whole life cycles as the free energy minimizing strategy of complex organisms. This
idea, however, challenges the assumption of convergence to a NESS, as Clark himself notes in a
footnote (16).
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 21
Enaction attempts to accommodate many of these phenomena, so it is con-
cerned with historical processes. Is historicity itself to be found at the core of its
theoretical apparatus? The possibility of historicity is introduced unequivocally
and explicitly in enactive theory through the concept ofadaptivity (Di Paolo, 2005,
p. 444). Adaptivity is the system’s capacity to regulate its states and relation to
the environment in ways that result in the avoidance of trajectories that move
towards loss of viability. This definition of adaptivity entails that adaptive inter-
ventions necessarily modulate the dynamical landscape, for instance, by changing
parametric relations to the environment, (un)coupling to other systems, or alter-
ing constraints or boundary conditions. These changes must necessarily result in
an altered phase space of the adaptive system. Bydefinition, this is the only way
in which it is possible to change the tendencies of dynamical trajectories bound
to break through the viability boundary in a state-dependent system. To elaborate
our critical point, adaptivity, as defined and used in the enactive approach, implies
brokentimesymmetriesandso, aswehaveexplained, isincompatiblewithassum-
ing that a system remains in a NESS. Time invariant properties of the flow cannot
be maintained if parameters, constraints, and even the system’s variable sets are
modified in the course of an adaptive event. Thus, two ideas that are key for each
approach (adaptivity and NESS, respectively) contradict each other.
Adaptivity makes explicit the aspects oftime direction and time granularity
of agency (Di Paolo, 2005). An adaptive act is in itselfnot a conservation, but a
modulatory deviation from an existing tendency that would lead to eventual loss
of viability if left unchecked. An adaptive act takes time, has a particular time-
course with different phases, and must occur within appropriate time constraints
(given by requirements of speed, deadlines, by the relevant embodied and social
norms, and so on). In important ways, things are just not the same before and
after an adaptive intervention. History is made possible by these properties, espe-
cially as organisms become more complex, and adaptive acts relate to one another
in networks of mutual influence and triggering, affecting, moment to moment,
the relational constraints that shape the dynamics of the agent. The historicity of
biological systems (Longo & Montévil, 2014) is precisely the ongoing broken sym-
metries in dynamical constraints, parameters, and even variable sets throughout
a lifetime of changing mutual dependencies between organism and environment
(including other organisms).
Historicityisnotjustpresentinenactivetechnicalconceptsbutalsoelaborated
in enactive research, particularly to theorize minimal agency, mastery of sensori-
motor contingencies in action and perception, and the development of sensorimo-
tor repertoires as the theoretical basis for the concept of sensorimotor agency and
linguistic bodies (Di Paolo et al., 2017, 2018). One of the definitional requirements
for agency proposed by enaction is that ofinteractional asymmetry. In dynami-
cal systems terms, this requirement is meant to capture that not only are agent
and environment coupled systems, but also that processes in the agent can trig-
ger modulations (changes in parameters and constraints) of this coupling. Again,
such modulations of parameters and constraints cannot guarantee that dynamical
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 22
flows will remain in a NESS. They typically will not, and these changes are what
allow the system to avert the potential loss of viability were it to remain in such
a regime. As in the case of widespread extended critical transitions in biological
systems (e.g., Longo & Montévil, 2014), the regulation performed in the acts of
an agent can give rise to path-dependent changes on the constraints affecting the
dynamical flows of the agent as a whole, essentially altering the configuration of
thephasespaceoforganismandenvironment, andevenrenderingnotionssuchas
attractive sets and NESS inadequate. The enactive concept of agency reaffirms for
cognitive systems what Longo and Montévil predicate about biological systems:
“Biological processes are more ‘history based’ than physical [non-biological] pro-
cesses. Usual physical processes preserve invariants, whereas extended critical
transitions [characteristic of biology] are a permanent reconstruction of organiza-
tion and symmetries, i.e., of invariants” (ibid, p. 175).10
As far as human beings are concerned, evidence strongly suggests that pro-
cesses of historical change cannot be disregarded. Ergodic and stationary condi-
tions in psychology and neuroscience may sometimes make methodological sense
in laboratory situations. But such conditions are not always made explicit and
these assumptions can lead to systematic problems in interpreting the generality
of empirical results or making group-to-individual inferences (Fisher et al., 2018).
Indeed, severalresearchersinterpretthecurrentcrisisofreplicationinpsychology
precisely as a crisis provoked by assuming ergodicity by default, a practice that be-
10It is important not to misread this quotation as stating that historical processes can occur only in
biological systems. Broken symmetries occur in all kinds of physical systems, but usually in the
form of single critical transitions. Longo and Montévil argue that biological systems are charac-
terised by continuous extended critical transitions, and this is what makes them historical: “In
our approach to biological processes as ‘extended critical transitions,’ ‘extended’ means thatevery
point of the evolution/development space is near a critical point. More technically, at the math-
ematical limit, the critical points form a dense subset of the multidimensional space of viability
for the biological process. Thus, criticality is extended to the space of all pertinent parameters
and observables (or phase space), within the limits of viability […] In terms of symmetries, such
a situation implies that biological objects (cells, multicellular organisms, species) are in acontin-
ual transition between different symmetry groups; that is, they are in transition between different
phases, according to the language of condensed matter. These phases swiftly shift between dif-
ferent critical points and between differentphysical determinationsthrough symmetry changes”
(Longo & Montévil, 2014, p. 173). An example of extended criticality are the broken symmetries
induced by the millions of mitosis events a multicellular organism undergoes every day where
the resulting distributions of proteins, etc. are not identical and can lead to different integrated
cellular dynamics which play a role in the development of different cell types and tissue differ-
entiation. Dense sets of critical transitions make it difficult to explain biological systems via
minimization or maximization principles: “As a further consequence of our approach, phyloge-
netic or ontogenetic trajectories cannot be defined by the geodesic principle. Indeed, they are
not theoretically determined by invariants and their associated symmetries. Trajectories are con-
tinually changing in a relatively minor but extended way. Moreover, we expect the rate of these
changes themselves not to be regular with respect to physical time, so that some temporal region
can be ‘calm’ while others correspond [to a] sudden burst of changes” (ibid.). The existence of
“critical surfaces” in relation to conservation of integration/viability can be shown in relatively
simple models of information integration under environmental diversity (Aguilera & Di Paolo,
2019).
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 23
lies the lack of an underlying theory that would grant validity to the assumption
for each given caseRose et al.(2013).
For instance, consider the formation of habits. We could say that there can
be no habit without history, or that history is constitutive of the concept of habit.
Enactive literature is very clear about this point: “To say that the habitual body
acts as guarantee for the body at this moment is to say that one’s lived body is a
developmental being thick with its own history and sedimented ways of feeling,
perceiving,acting,andimagining. Thesesedimentedpatternsarenotlimitedtothe
space enclosed by the body’s membrane; they span and interweave the lived body
anditsenvironment,therebyformingaunitarycircuitoflived-body-environment”
(Thompson, 2007, p. 33).
Importantly, history and contingency lead to diversity, which a theory of hu-
man bodies and minds cannot afford to leave without a proper theoretical ground-
ing. The beginnings of such a theory are offered in (Di Paolo et al., 2018). Cultural
and interpersonal variability in human beings are not statistical noise, but rather
necessary consequences of what it means to undergo human becoming. Some
events may enter the developmental, cognitive, and emotional history of a person
as accidents, but if their effects endure or get amplified, this occurs by triggering
a swerve in dynamical paths and reshaping dynamical landscapes. Fluctuations
can become locked-in and change the course of subsequent history. None of this
entails a loss of the system’s integration, but it may entail transformations that
redefine skills, sensitivities, meanings, and norms. Widespread biological and psy-
chological phenomena of the kind FEP proponents intend to cover with their the-
ory, (e.g.,Veissière et al., 2019) are inherently historical.
The enactive approach provides accounts of perception and perceptual learn-
ingintermsofmasteryofsensorimotorcontingencieslinkingmultiplescalesfrom
neuraltodevelopmentalprocesses. Mastery,oracquisitionofaknow-how,isoper-
ationalizedusingadynamicaltheoryofequilibrationthatdoesnotrequiresystems
tobeinaNESStowork( DiPaoloetal.,2017 ). Infact,oneofthephasesofequilibra-
tion, accommodation, demands plastic changes in the agent and the environment
such that the corresponding phase spaces are modified as a consequence, other-
wise equilibration could not occur. Phenomena such as developmental spurts in
skill level (Fischer & Bidell, 2006) are large scale manifestations of such changes
in dynamical configurations (novel constraints, emergent parameters, changing
variable sets). The variability entailed in changing dynamical configurations has
been postulated as the origin of motor creativity (Orth et al., 2017), the very idea
of which is rendered problematic without an account of historical change. All
of these processes can be accommodated by the enactive theory of sensorimotor
learning, which can also account for the existence of multiple developmental path-
ways, path-dependence, and the intrinsic variability found in all kinds of human
skills (Adolph & Hoch, 2019; Kostrubiec et al., 2012; Thelen, 2005; Thelen et al.,
1996).
A central claim of the enactive approach is that sense-making is the activity
of an autonomous agent that contrasts with heteronomous information process-
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 24
ing. To illustrate the sort of neural processes that underpin sense-making,Varela
(1991a)and Thompson(2007)makerepeatedreferencestotheworkofWalterFree-
man, who explicitly acknowledges history-dependence in the most basic neurosci-
entific scenario of stimulus processing: “The emerging [neural] pattern […] is a
state transition that is induced by a stimulus, followed by a construction of a pat-
ternthatisshapedbythesynapticmodificationamongcorticalneuronsfromprior
learning. […] Owing to dependence on history, the patterns created in each cortex
areuniquetoeachsubject”( Freeman,1999,pp. 149–150 ). Suchhistorydependence
of neural processes has been recognized as posing a methodological challenge of
non-ergodicity for neuroscience (e.g.,Medaglia et al., 2011).
Historicity is manifested over very different timescales, not just the longer
timescales associated with development. In discussing the fine temporal structure
of cognitive action, Varela proposes that coherent patterns of fast neural oscil-
lations emerge at moments of concretion (significance) in action and perception
(Varela, 1991a). This idea is empirically supported by studies of long-range neural
(de)synchronization at moments of perceptual awareness (recognition) and action
initiation, evidencing emergent processes that rapidly constrain and free dynam-
ical flows contingently on the actions of the perceiver and her situation (Varela
et al., 2001). This perspective on brain function puts the emphasis on neural pro-
cesses radically altering their dynamics in fluid and adaptive ways so as to meet
the demands of a concrete sociomaterial situation (e.g.,Anderson, 2014; Fuchs,
2017; Pessoa, 2014). Such rapid moments of high dimensional dynamic expansion
followed by lower dimensional coordination is one of the meanings given to the
term enaction itself, as we have said. Accordingly, “the hinge that articulates en-
action consists of fast non-cognitive dynamics wherein a number of alternative
microworlds are activated. These hinges are the source of both common sense and
creativity in cognition” (Varela, 1991a, p. 109). The latter remark indicates that
these fast neural processes are not just history-dependent (“common sense”) but
also history-making (“creativity”).
The idea of inhabiting and transitioning between microworlds has been fur-
ther developed byDi Paolo et al.(2017), where the authors discuss the possibility
of extended periods of high-dimensional exploration of sensorimotor possibilities
when the transition between activities does not occur or for whatever reason is
arrested. Examples include periods of hesitation or confusion as to the relevant ac-
tivityoneisengagedin,eitherbylackofdetermination(notknowingexactlywhat
comes next out of several options) or overdetermination (current activity contin-
ues pre-reflectively while we are reflectively aware that it is no longer the relevant
activity). Extended exploratory periodsthat donot settle intometastable modesof
activity also include situations in which the required adaptations to some radical
sensorimotordisruptionhavenotyetbeenachieved(changinghabits,experiments
involving sensorimotor alterations, major injury, trauma, etc.). The authors call
these moments of uncommitted dynamical engagement the zero-mode of activity.
Usinganetworkmetaphortodescribethefunctionalandstructuralrelationsfound
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 25
withinarepertoireofsensorimotorschemes,theauthorsremark“throughregional
developmentaldifferentiationandintegrationofschemes, integratedsubnetworks
can be formed that correspond well to notions such as activities, microworlds, and
sensorimotor genres. The structure of the sensorimotor network reflects thehis-
tory of the agent. In humans the possibilities are open-ended and path-dependent,
as we would expect, leading to a way of characterizing otherwise vague concepts
such as sensorimotor styles” (Di Paolo et al., 2017, pp. 177–178).
In sum, whether at biochemical, neural, behavioral, or developmental scales,
enactive ideas all share in common the expectation that biological and cognitive
systems are historical, changing in path-dependent ways, not only at some points
in time, but regularly, at different scales, and throughout their lifetime. For this
reason, historicity is definitionally built into its key concepts (enaction, adaptivity,
agency, sense-making). History is also a thread that drives current directions of
the enactive approach (e.g., see recent articulations of the notion of open-ended
human becoming inDe Jaegher, 2021; andDi Paolo, 2021).
Could this incompatibility between key ideas in each approach be turned into
a reconcilable tension, i.e. a challenge for FEP? A possible attempt might take the
formofanargumentthatrenders“historical”changesasonlyapparent(i.e., notre-
ally involving broken time symmetries) and explains them as transitions between
existing and pre-established “micro-regimes” within what is otherwise a system
in a NESS (when seen at appropriately long scales). This is similar to Clark’s
(2017) idea to regard whole life cycles as a free energy minimizing strategy. Thus
a transition between one microworld and another could be described as a switch
between metastable “micro-regimes” within the larger, lifetime NESS. This expla-
nation could accommodate some cases of switches between routine activities, but
if it were generally the case, it would imply that all of our activities are routine,
statistically speaking. The stationary condition must translate into a steady dis-
tribution of transits between “micro-regimes.” Engaging in novel activities (e.g.,
learning to drive) or abandoning old ones (because of loss of interest or other fac-
tors), however, cannot be explained in this way. The idea of a whole life cycle
characterised by a NESS does not seem applicable to the open-endedness of the
human case.
Another way a FEP account might accommodate historicity could be by not
assuming that the system overall must behave in a stationary manner, but that it
frequently inhabits different steady-state “micro-regimes” and sometimes is able
to transit from one to another without the whole set of steady states being prede-
terminedorfixedovertime. Thiswouldfreetheaccountfromtherequirementthat
transitions between “micro-regimes” must also follow a stationary distribution be-
cause stationarity is only required locally within a “micro-regime.” But such a
refinement still would not answer the question of what exactly happens during
such transitions, what triggers them, how frequent they are, how long they are
expected to last, what norms regulate the adaptive mechanisms at play in them
(since free energy minimization is not guaranteed during a transition), and so on.
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 26
Moreover, while this idea may bring the FEP closer to some aspects of history, it
would not be suitable for the extended criticality and dense transitions sets postu-
lated byLongo & Montévil(2014) as characteristic of biological systems, which in
some cases exhibit symmetry breaking of the kind that would not even guarantee
steady-state “micro-regimes.”
We repeat our point that given the current state of affairs, and the respective
importance of the NESS condition for FEP and of historicity for enaction, this ten-
sion counts as a theoretical incompatibility (in the sense that one cannot assert
both simultaneously). If new variants of FEP were developed replacing the need
for the system to converge to and remain in a NESS, the situation might change.
But the problem of accounting for the historicity of life and mind cannot be solved
by admitting that the need for a NESS condition is merely an idealization that can
sometimes be relaxed or is relative to a timeframe of relevant observation (e.g.,
Wiese & Friston, 2021, p. 7). To admit this is, again, to concede that the FEP does
not have the claimed status of a universal principle, since its domain of applicabil-
ity would remain limited to relatively simple cases. Such a move begs the question
of what happens to biological and cognitive systems at the moments the steady-
state assumption doesnot hold, moments that, as we have argued, are copiously
found at all scales of biological and psychological phenomena. A theoretical biol-
ogy and a theoretical psychology should be able to answer when this assumption
is sufficiently validfor its application to be usefuland what happens when it is not
met.
If important phenomena (e.g., ontogeny, acquired immunity, the time course
of illness or injury and recovery/compensation, skill acquisition, habits, devel-
opment towards emotional maturity, trauma, personality, language, abstract
thought, social interactions, expert use of tools, cultural history, evolution of tech-
nology, changes in modes of production, and innumerably other path-dependent
processes) fundamentally break the time invariance of NESS, it does not follow
that we should discard FEP ideas as useful research tools, provided we can specify
the conditions under which their use makes sense. But, as currently formulated,
FEP does not answer this question by itself. It would be as if we were expected
to deduce the shape of the Earth from a theory that assumes its surface must be
flat just because under some conditions this is a good approximation but without
specifying what these conditions are or what happens when they are not met.
The necessary specifications must come from a theoretically-loaded account that
tells us when to expect assumptions that lead to a NESS to hold and when not
to expect them. Elaborations to the existing formulation of the FEP may provide
some answers, but they may require seeking different, perhaps less restrictive
starting points. It goes without saying that the same theory cannot adopt an
assumption as fundamental and deduce when it does not hold as a corollary.
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 27
4.2 Mutual enablement and co-constitution of internal and
external domains
In Section 3, wenoted the recurrentand puzzling confusion between Markovblan-
kets and what autopoietic and enactive theories specify as operationally closure,
and in particular processes of organizational self-distinction. These processes of
self-distinctiondooccasionally—butnotexclusively—taketheformofprocessesof
structural boundary formation, regulation, and maintenance. They can also take
otherforms(e.g,immuneresponsesagainstinvadingpathogens,temperatureregu-
lation in warm-blooded animals, musculoskeletal systems of tension and compres-
sion maintaining bodily shape). In all instances they involve adaptive regulations
of exchanges between organisms and the environment. We can ask whether the
confusionbetweensuchprocessesandMarkovblanketsissymptomaticofanother
tension between the two approaches, a tension in how they conceive of relations
between organism and environment and relations between different organisms;
whether these relations are merely informational (i.e., contextual), or can also be
transactional (e.g., mutually enabling) or even constitutive of biological and cogni-
tive/affective processes. Enactivists assert a strong notion of world-involvement,
i.e., processes in the environment play more than informational roles in the consti-
tution and actualization of life and mind (Di Paolo et al., 2017; Thompson & Staple-
ton, 2009). To enact a world of significance is to engage in actual acts, which are
material events with spreading consequences that are both world-changing and
agent-changing. Environmental and biological/cognitive processes are mutually
enabled and mutually constituted. They interpenetrate at all scales and they co-
ordinate across scales. Can these claims be accommodated by the idea of Markov
blankets?11
Here we will re-examine the concept and processes of self-distinction and why
these processes should not be quickly equated with Markov blankets. We will ar-
gue that many important exchanges between organisms and the environment do
notfollowthestatisticalconstraintsofMarkovblanketsandcaninfactbeunmedi-
ated or unconditioned, only to be dealt with adaptively after the fact. After this,
we turn to what enactivists describe as world-involvement, i.e., the ways in which
relational processes involving both organism and environment play enabling and
constitutive roles in the activity of an agent as well as in its ongoing individuation.
These relational processes affect the operation of this activityand contribute to
establishing the norms of viability that this activity follows. In particular, they
help establish which encounters can or should be mediated by states of the organ-
11For recent critical discussions about Markov blankets, seeBruineberg et al. (2021) andRaja et
al. (2021). Bruineberg and colleagues argue that a simple statistical idea applied in Bayesian
networks and describing how variables may be shielded from variations in other variables has
been made to do some heavy conceptual lifting in the FEP framework, being used, as we discuss
in this paper, to play the role of boundaries and sensorimotor interfaces. Raja and colleagues,
similarly note this problem and the fact that the drawing of a Markov blanket is often ad hoc,
rather than following a consistent method.
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 28
ism. For this reason, world-involving relational dynamics operate at a level prior
to Markov blankets and cannot be established by them. In other words, these
two points indicate that Markov blankets insufficiently specify what enactivists
highlight about the relation between organism and environment. It is possible,
however, that the tensions we discuss in this subsection may take more the form
of a challenge than that of a strict incompatibility, as we shall see.
Historicityandtheco-constitutionoforganismandenvironmentareinternally
relatedintheenactiveapproach. Concernsabouttheconservationoforganization
are mostly linked to the self-production requirement of autopoiesis (the regen-
eration of the conditions that continuously give rise to the operationally closed
network of processes making up the organism). Concerns about barriers, bound-
aries, and in general about an organism’s relation to its environment are mostly
linked to the condition of self-distinction in the definition of autopoiesis. From
an enactive perspective, self-distinction and self-production are dialectically re-
lated (Di Paolo, 2018), that is, they are mutually dependent, though distinct, mo-
ments of autopoiesis (Thompson, 2007; Varela, 1991b). You cannot have one set
of processes and not the other as long as the organism lives, yet the processes are
not the same. All processes subserving self-distinction are themselves products of
self-production. In contrast, Markov blankets in FEP systems are there by assump-
tion.12
In other words, Markov Blankets are notproduced by the system the same way
that self-distinction processes and structures are. Hence there is nothing in the
Markov Blanket that necessarily links it to processes of organismic constitution.
This is a discrepancy also noted byRaja et al.(2021), who argue that the choice of
where a Markov blanket should be is ratherad hocand follows the convenience of
each case (see alsoBruineberg et al., 2021). This is not a problem in itself; it might
even be an advantage in some cases. But it points to a difference between FEP and
enaction.
12The assumption is considered self-evident: “Clearly, one needs to differentiate between the sys-
tem and its environment […] To do this, we have to introduce a third set of states that separates
internalfromexternalstates. ThisisknownasaMarkovblanket.” ( Ramsteadetal., 2018, pp. 3–4).
This explains the wide applicability of Markov Blankets in examples and models of FEP, some-
times taking the role of boundaries, other times of action and sensory states, and so on. AsRaja
et al. (2021) argue the choice of where a blanket is located seems to be relatively arbitrary and
made to fit the convenience of an FEP interpretation. In an attempt to provide a more principled
interpretation of Markov Blankets,Friston (2019) associates them with the structured (ordered)
flows in far-from-equilibrium dissipative structures (Nicolis & Prigogine, 1977). But he acknowl-
edges that this poses a problem for the FEP formalism, because such structures are in constant
material and energetic flux, which contradicts the assumption of a random dynamical attracting
set,andconfirmsthatthetwocentralassumptionsofFEPareindependent,unlikeself-production
and self-distinction for enaction. Friston considers this problem an unresolved challenge for FEP
and its generalization to so-called wandering sets (which would not suffice to address the cases
of historicity discussed in this section, as these include the possibility of changing sets of vari-
ables, suchasemergingnovelagent-environmentrelations). Thewholeformalism, asitcurrently
stands,restson“thesimplifyingassumptionthatoverasuitabletimescale,blanketstatesarewell
defined—as a subset of attracting states” (Friston, 2019, p. 50).
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 29
We may still ask whether Markov blankets, even if they are not produced by
the organism itself, could still provide a sufficiently informative description of the
organism-environment relation. In response to this question, we find that self-
distinction is not sufficiently specified by a statement about statistical dependen-
cies or sparsity of connections between variables, nor does it entail any such state-
ment. Let us see why.
We confront a semantic difficulty at this point. A Markov blanket helps define
the sets of internal and external variables in the FEP. What counts as internal and
externalvariablesintheenactiveapproachislessstraightforward. Itisinprinciple
possible to identify what processes belong or do not belong to the operationally
closednetworkoftheorganism(thoughinpracticetheremaybesomeambiguities;
consider for instance the layer of warm air that surrounds the skin or fur of warm-
blooded animals). But this distinction does not translate into a straightforward
topologicalrelationasmightbepostulatedbypointingtoboundaryprocessessuch
as membranes, cell walls, skin, etc. The network of operationally closed processes
can extend beyond these boundaries and environmental processes can transverse
them. There is a semantic difficulty in comparing apparently simple terms such as
“internal” and “external” in the two theories. From an enactive perspective and for
the purposes of this discussion, we propose to treat as internal those variables that
are topologically contained by an organism’s boundary surfaces in cases where
these are well-defined by boundary processes of self-distinction, and as external
those variables that lie outside boundary surfaces. The meaning approaches the
usage in the FEP literature but is not exactly the same, because this distinction
between internal and external does not exactly map to that between organism and
environment in the enactive view, nor does it presuppose any statistical relation
between internal and external variables.
Keeping this in mind, we repeat that self-distinction is not supported struc-
turally only by the formation of organismic boundaries. “Non-boundary” pro-
cesses of self-distinction include the immune system, CRISPR-Cas anti-virus de-
fense,sweating,shiveringandotherprocessesthatsustaintemperatureregulation,
processes of maintenance of shape, such as cytoskeletons, musculoskeletal tenseg-
rity,tissueformationandregulationoftheextracellularmatrix,andsoon. Inother
words, they include internal processes (in the sense just defined). Because these
“non-boundary”self-distinctionprocessesdonotlieatthetopologicalinterfacebe-
tweenorganismandenvironment, theydonotgenerallyentailanyparticularkind
of conditioned independence between internal and external variables; on the con-
trary, they are regulations of encounters between internal and external processes,
where internal effects can follow external factors quite directly. Even if they op-
erate internally, these processes of self-distinction adaptively regulate the relation
between agent and environment. However, because they operate internally, they
seem difficult to describe by Markov blankets.
Let us consider “boundary” processes of self-distinction, such as cell mem-
branes. We find a large number of processes that cross boundaries and barriers
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 30
in both directions without any statistical mediation. For example, osmosis and
other forms of diffusion, the ergodicity-breaking formation of protein nanoclus-
ters affecting ion-channels in neurons (Weron et al., 2017), horizontal transfer of
plasmids in bacteria (Soucy et al., 2015), the cumulative effects of diet and adapta-
tion to toxins or their expulsion (Landecker, 2011), direct energy transfer in pho-
tosynthesis, temperature equilibration and temperature-induced neural plasticity
in cold-blooded animals (e.g.,Beltrán et al., 2021), and “externalized” physiological
processessuchastheextractionofgaseousoxygenunderwaterbyinsectstrapping
air bubbles in their abdomen (e.g.,Turner, 2000). Not to mention more complex
processes such as cell division, sexual reproduction, host-parasite relations, gut
microbiota, and symbiosis in general. The list does not include external processes
that are hard or impossible to regulate, such as the effects of ionizing radiation,
gravity, or unavoidable physical impacts, but that nevertheless affect internal vari-
ables directly. External processes affect internal variables without mediation in all
of these cases.
Thisrangeofexchangesbetweeninternalandexternalprocessesdoesnotpose
a problem for enaction. Some of these exchanges are avoided or rejected, some are
mediated by the activity of the organism, others remain unmediated in the en-
counter and regulated only in their effects. The condition of operational closure
is not necessarily lost even in the latter case, provided the effects of an unmedi-
ated exchange can be adaptively assimilated (e.g., a fever response to bacterial
infection). These exchanges, however, do not require that internal and external
variables relate through a conditional statistical independence and in fact in many
of the cases mentioned, this will not be the case.
We suggest that processes of self-distinction, as conceived in the enactive ap-
proach, do not generally behave like Markov blankets do. Agency, in the enac-
tive view, involves not just the regulation of boundaries, but also thea posteriori
regulation of more direct, boundary-crossing influences of the world, by taking
advantage of these influences when useful (e.g.. nourishment) and compensating
for their negative effects when not (e.g., fever response). From an enactive per-
spective, Markov blanket conditions are too strong and too undiscriminating to
account for the complexity of the organism-environment relation, and this is a
point of tension.
Arelatedpointoftensionconcerns world involvement, atermenactivistssome-
times use to capture the relational aspects of the agent-environment coupling (Di
Paolo, 2014; Di Paolo et al., 2017). World involvement stresses the fact that the
environment is involved in what an agent is and what it does in more than con-
textual ways, that is, its involvement goes beyond being a source of information.
The world is also a material enabler of cognitive acts and may also play constitu-
tive roles in such acts, particularly in contributing to determine their normative
aspects (what counts as an act succeeding or failing, what makes an act preferable
to another).13
13The distinction between contextual, enabling, and constitutive factors was introduced byDe
Jaegher et al. (2010) to ask the question of whether the dynamic patterns that we observe in
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 31
The world enables and constitutes embodied agency over and above any infor-
mation it provides to the cognitive processes of the agent. This is not to say such
informationisirrelevant(providedwedescribeclearlywhatwemeanbythisterm,
and provided we can establish what counts as the frame of relevance in each case,
something that can change historically). It means that other, non-informational,
aspectsofmaterialprocessesarealsoenablingandconstitutivefactorsincognitive
acts and in sustaining the autonomy of the agent. This is what world involvement
means. Goingonadiet, trainingforanewskill, andsoon—theenvironmentalpro-
cessesinsuchactivitiesdonotmerelyinformourbodiesthroughsensory-screened
inputs about how they should change as a consequence, more often than not they
change our bodies directly. Drinking a glass of water quenches our thirst in a way
that is different from encountering a useful piece of information. A zero-G envi-
ronment does not inform the body of a cosmonaut that it should grow less dense,
it “makes it” do so.
In addition to these enabling and constitutive roles in the activity and ongo-
ing self-constitution of the agent, the relational processes of world involvement
also contribute to the establishment of the norms of an agent’s activity, as well
as its conditions of viability. For instance, by engaging in a novel manual skill,
we learn through confronting obstacles to accommodate new norms that emerge
from these material encounters, as in the different ways an expert potter prepares
different kinds of clay. We learn to establish a new frame of relevance as a histor-
ical transformation of our bodies and our relation to the environment. This frame
is necessary to determine what counts as meaningful information (e.g., cues we
used to be indifferent to, but now tell us whether this is good wood for sawing,
or well-prepared clay for shaping a pot, or the age of a wine from its bouquet).
Relevance, meaning, norms are irreducibly relational properties. Because they es-
tablish what counts as informational for the agent, these material and relational
transformations are prior to any informational account we can provide.
Both of these points—the enabling and constitutive roles environmental pro-
cesses play in sense-making and in agent constitution, and the role they play in
establishing norms for the activity of an agent—indicate tensions with the idea of
MarkovBlankets. Thesetensions,however,partlyrelyonhowwechoosetodefine
internal and external processes. For this reason, it might be possible to work on
interpretations of enaction and FEP that avoid these apparent contradictions, so
these tensions are at leastchallenges to the FEP; we do not claim they are incom-
patibilities.
social interactions can (sometimes) be said to be constitutive of social cognitive performance, i.e.,
whetherthereissocialintelligenceinthedynamicsoftheinteractionitselfandnotjustwithinthe
interactors. A contextual factor merely modulates a phenomenon under observation; it changes
it, but is not required for the phenomenon to exist or to be the kind of phenomenon that it is. An
enabling factor is one without which the phenomenon would not occur. A constitutive factor is
one without which the phenomenon would not be the kind of phenomenon that it is (see alsoDe
Jaegher et al., 2016).
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 32
These are not minor challenges, though. They can lead to divergences in how
each approach conceives action and perception. The enactive approach postulates
a theory of sensorimotor mastery (know-how) based on equilibrated relations be-
tween sensorimotor schemes (Di Paolo et al., 2017). These schemes are norma-
tively integrated flows of coordinated body and environmental processes in cou-
pling (e.g., the movement of water from a glass into the mouth, the activation of
swallowing muscles, its flow within the body, and so on). They combine internal
and external processes. Because traffic across a Markov Blanket is conceived as
mediated by sensory and effector states there is a tendency of conceiving of the
organism-environmentrelationininformationaltermsandthisisverifiedbyterms
such as evidence, surprise, inference, etc. This promotes (not necessarily compels)
internalist views of sensorimotor know-how that leave out precisely the transfor-
mativeeffectsoftheworldonourbodies. Aninformationalinterpretationassumes
that such effects have already occurred, such that the norms that determine what
counts as relevant information are already in place and the relevant distinctions
already established. But explaining how we can reach this stage is what enactive
theories of action and perception are about.
Foratheoryofperceptioninspiredbyfreeenergyminimization, suchasSeth’s
(2014), embodied factors such as sensorimotor contingencies play a role in the in-
formational economy of hierarchical predictive models, structuring data, selecting
sampling strategies, and generating error-based corrections. Such proposals re-
main all “in-the-head” and reduce the rich materiality of the worldly constituents
of perceptual experience to error signal generation (Di Paolo, 2014). For the enac-
tive approach, in contrast, it is from the material constraints introduced by world-
involvement in action and perception that the norms of such activities arise (what
to do? what counts as doing it right?). These emerging norms result from agent-
environment transactions and crucially frame what counts or does not count as
relevant information for the agent and not for the external observer; what is rele-
vant and what is not, what needs to be optimized and what may be safely ignored.
In this sense, the mastery of these norms, a transactional process not bound by the
brain,isconstitutiveofperceptualexperience( DiPaoloetal.,2017 ). Whateverone
may think of the merits of these theories, the fact remains that they are different
inimportantaspects(thisissometimesacknowledgedbythosewhowouldstilltry
to reconcile them; seeClavel Vázquez, 2020).
5 Conclusions
It is important that our motivation in this article should not be misconstrued as
a general statement against intellectual synthesis or against the cross-fertilization
of ideas. Enactivists generally welcome and celebrate such exchanges. Nor is our
discussion an exercise in gatekeeping. The enactive approach has undergone im-
portant changes over the last decades and will continue to evolve. In part, these
changeshaveresultedfromthemeeting(sometimestheconfrontation)ofenactive
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 33
ideas with other theories, disciplines, and practices. A case in point is the ongoing
discussion of the relations between enaction and ecological psychology (Chemero,
2009; Di Paolo et al., 2021).
Nevertheless, the process of inter-theoretical comparison cannot be bypassed
or replaced by rhetorical devices, such as stating that some similarities are “fairly
straightforward” or by cherry-picking what to keep and what to ignore about a
theoretical framework.
Attempts at discussing the compatibility or complementarity between differ-
ent theories are initially motivated by what look like interesting similarities and
resonances between them. This is fine. But the work of inter-theoretical compar-
ison cannot stay at the level of pointing out these similarities. It requires critical
examinationtodeterminewhethersimilaritiesareonlyapparentandwhetherthey
are not based on misinterpretations. This work demands a deeper and detailed en-
gagement with the assumptions behind the theories being compared, as well as
their contexts and goals. Despite its abundance, the literature defending compati-
bilities between the FEP and autopoietic and enactive theories has advanced very
little beyond bald statements of apparent similarities between these approaches.
Such statements remain at the beginning of the work that needs to be done.
In this article, we have shown that once we take the required steps of check-
ing for misinterpretations and comparing fundamental assumptions, the FEP, as
it stands formulated today, presents a series of tensions with the theories of au-
topoiesis and enaction. Not only do we find misreadings—such as confusing state-
ments about organization with statements about structures, or conflating notions
of self-distinction with material boundaries and the latter with Markov blankets—
but we also suggest that at the root of these misreadings may lie conflicting views
about the constitution of agency and self-individuation in biological and cognitive
systems.
Our conclusion is that, for these reasons, the FEP—at least in its present
form—and the enactive approach are not as compatible as has been suggested.
The inter-theoretical differences we have shown are not minor, and spread
respectively through each project as a whole. In some cases, we argued that
apparent contradictions can be shown to lead to incompatible statements and
claims. In other cases they at least indicate a challenge for proponents of FEP
interested in connecting to enactive theory to develop extensions, clarifications,
or make explicit how the tension can be resolved.
In particular, we have shown that enaction conceives of bodies and sense-
making as irreducibly historical (both in the sense of depending on the past and
in the sense of changing, or enacting, the present) and co-constituted by the so-
ciomaterial world in ways that go far beyond the processing of information. The
centrality of the historical transformation of agents and worlds for the enactive
approach is in plain view and a definitional matter in its technical concepts. It is
also a direct reading of its classical slogan:Laying down a path in walking(Thomp-
son, 2007; Varela et al., 1991). In contrast, the key assumptions of the FEP, such as
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 34
NESS, make it difficult for it to reach a similar conception of life and mind, as we
haveshown. Becauseofthis,weconsiderthistobeanincompatibilitybetweenthe
two approaches. Other tensions turn around how each theory conceives of the re-
lation between agent and environment. We have suggested that Markov blankets
donotseemtodescribethepossibleinteractionsthatcanbeaccommodatedbythe
enactive idea of operational closure, particularly those that take place “internally.”
However, this tension revolves around tricky semantic issues such as definitions
of seemingly obvious terms such as “internal” and “external.” If semantic interpre-
tations were modified, then this tension might turn out to be simply a challenge
and not an incompatibility, so for now, we take it as such.
There are other differences between the two approaches that we have not ex-
plored here. For example, there are aspects of the temporality of sense-making
and lived experience apart from historicity that can be said to be in tension with
notionssuchaspredictionsandactiveinference. Sense-makingbyitstechnicaldef-
inition is future-oriented activity, but this orientation can take a variety of forms,
fromgeneral states ofreadiness, trust, or alertand their opposites, to conditionsof
commitmenttoactionandfocusorstatesofopennessatthetransitionbetweenac-
tivities. Ofcourse,sometimessense-makingcanalsotaketheformofexpectations,
inferences, andpredictions. Butthevarietiesoffutureorientationdonotreduceto
the latter cases only. Establishing this point, however, would require careful con-
ceptual, phenomenological, and terminological analysis, which we cannot pursue
here.
Another difference we have not explored concerns the social dimension. Hu-
manbodiesandminds,apartfrombeingconstitutivelyhistoricalanddiverse,areir-
reducibly social. Any approach that hopes to provide explanations for human cog-
nition must acknowledge this fact and supply the right theoretical articulations to
workwithit. Enactivistshaveproposedtheconceptofparticipatorysense-making
(De Jaegher & Di Paolo, 2007) as the keystone for developing an enactive approach
to social, linguistic, and ethical agency (Di Paolo & De Jaegher, 2021). This idea, in
our view, is at odds with the notions of blanketed individual persistence of cogni-
tive individuals at the heart of the FEP. In participatory sense-making, actions and
intentions become socially constituted and transformative of individual agency;
they involve not only other participants but also the relational dynamics of the
interaction (De Jaegher et al., 2010). We suggest that it would be difficult to ac-
count for these mutually transformative processes if each interactor were subject
to the conditional statistical independence that is forced on them by Markov blan-
kets and the need to remain in a NESS during the participation process. Again, a
fullargument,whichspacepreventsusfromprovidinghere,wouldbenecessaryto
establish this point and decide whether it is only a challenge or an incompatibility.
We have not dwelled on the question of what motivates researchers to attempt
to make the FEP compatible with enaction and autopoiesis. One driving motiva-
tion seems to be the need to provide more embodied and less neurocentric inter-
pretations of free energy minimization and active inference. Although this is a
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 35
good motivation, we think that elaborating this interpretation is an uphill task, in
no small measure because of the neurocentric and computational origins of FEP
and predictive processing. A lot of intellectual effort in the literature that we have
discussed is spent, almost apologetically, in revisionist attempts at reinterpreting
computationally loaded ideas, such as model, inference, and prediction, in terms
of embodiment, dynamics, and agent-environment couplings. Having a theoreti-
cal approach at hand, such as enaction, that already starts from an embodied and
situated perspective could perhaps have given the impression that the uphill task
was achievable by establishing a few bridges between the theories. We have ar-
gued that things are not so easy. The styles of thinking are different and the ideas
difficult to harmonize. Whether there are other ways to make the FEP coherently
more embodied is not a question we have set ourselves to answer here.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Miguel Aguilera, Maxwell Ramstead, and the reviewers of this paper for
their comments and suggestions. We also thank Wanja Wiese for his editorial advice and
support during the review process.
References
Adolph, K. E., & Hoch, J. E. (2019). Motor development: Embodied, embedded, enculturated, and enabling.Annual Review
of Psychology, 70(1), 141–164.https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010418-102836
Aguilera, M., & Di Paolo, E. A. (2019). Integrated information in the thermodynamic limit.Neural Networks, 114, 136–146.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2019.03.001
Aguilera, M., Millidge, B., Tschantz, A., & Buckley, C. L. (2021). How particular is the physics of the free energy principle?
Physics of Life Reviews. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2021.11.001
Allen, M., & Friston, K. J. (2018). From cognitivism to autopoiesis: Towards a computational framework for the embodied
mind. Synthese, 195(6), 2459–2482.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1288-5
Anderson, M. L. (2014).After phrenology: Neural reuse and the interactive brain. MIT Press.
Anderson,M.L.,Richardson,M.J.,&Chemero,A.(2012). Erodingtheboundariesofcognition: ImplicationsofEmbodiment.
Topics in Cognitive Science, 4(4), 717–730.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-8765.2012.01211.x
Arthur, W. B. (1994).Increasing returns and path dependence in the economy. The University of Michigan Press.
Ashby, W. R. (1962). Principles of the self-organizing system. In H. V. Foerster & Jr. G. W. Zopf (Eds.),Principles of self-
organization: Transactions of the University of Illinois Symposium(pp. 255–278). London: Pergamon Press.
Baltieri, M., Buckley, C. L., & Bruineberg, J. (2020). Predictions in the eye of the beholder: An active inference account of
watt governors. In J. Bongard, J. L. L. Hebert-Dufrsne, R. Dasari, & L. Soros (Eds.),Proceedings of ALIFE 2020: The 2020
conference on artificial life(pp. 121–129). MIT Press.https://doi.org/10.1162/isal_a_00288
Barandiaran, X. E., Di Paolo, E. A., & Rohde, M. (2009). Defining agency: Individuality, normativity, asymmetry, and spatio-
temporality in action.Adaptive Behavior, 17(5), 367–386.https://doi.org/10.1177/1059712309343819
Beer, R. D. (2015). Characterizing autopoiesis in the game of life.Artificial Life, 21(1), 1–19.
https://doi.org/10.1162/artl_a_00143
Beer, R. D. (2020). Bittorio revisited: Structural coupling in the game of life.Adaptive Behavior, 28(4), 197–212.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059712319859907
Beltrán, I., Herculano-Houzel, S., Sinervo, B., & Whiting, M. J. (2021). Are ectotherm brains vulnerable to global warming?
Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 36(8), 691–699.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2021.04.009
Biehl, M., Pollock, F. A., & Kanai, R. (2021). A technical critique of some parts of the free energy principle.Entropy, 23(3),
293. https://doi.org/10.3390/e23030293
Bitbol, M., & Luisi, P. L. (2004). Autopoiesis with or without cognition: Defining life at its edge.Journal of The Royal Society
Interface, 1(1), 99–107.https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2004.0012
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 36
Bourgine, P., & Stewart, J. (2004). Autopoiesis and cognition.Artificial Life, 10(3), 327–345.https://doi.org/10.1162/106454
6041255557
Bruineberg, J., Dolega, K., Dewhurst, J., & Baltieri, M. (2021). The emperor's new Markov blankets.Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 1–63.https://doi.org/10.1017/s0140525x21002351
Bruineberg, J., & Hesp, C. (2018). Beyond blanket terms: Challenges for the explanatory value of variational (neuro-)
ethology. Physics of Life Reviews, 24, 37–39.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2017.11.015
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not a scientist: The free-energy principle from
an ecological-enactive perspective.Synthese, 195(6), 2417–2444.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1239-1
Byrge, L., Sporns, O., & Smith, L. B. (2014). Developmental process emerges from extended brain–body–behavior networks.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 18(8), 395–403.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2014.04.010
Chemero, A. (2009).Radical embodied cognitive science. MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2015). Radical predictive processing.The Southern Journal of Philosophy, 53, 3–27.
https://doi.org/10.1111/sjp.12120
Clark,A.(2017). HowtoknityourownMarkovblanket: Resistingthesecondlawwithmetamorphicminds. InT.Metzinger.
& W. Wiese (Eds.),Philosophy and predictive processing(pp. 1–19). Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group.https://doi.org/
10.15502/9783958573031
Clavel Vázquez, M. J. (2020). A match made in heaven: Predictive approaches to (an unorthodox) sensorimotor enactivism.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 19(4), 653–684.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-019-09647-0
Colombo, M., & Palacios, P. (2021). Non-equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle in biology.Biology &
Philosophy, 36(5). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-021-09818-x
Colombo, M., & Wright, C. (2021). First principles in the life sciences: The free-energy principle, organicism, and mecha-
nism. Synthese, 198(S14), 3463–3488.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-018-01932-w
Constant,A.,Clark,A.,&Friston,K.J.(2021). Representationwars: Enactinganarmisticethroughactiveinference. Frontiers
in Psychology, 11, 598733.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.598733
Costa, L. D., Friston, K., Heins, C., & Pavliotis, G. A. (2021). Bayesian mechanics for stationary processes.Proceedings of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 477(2256), 20210518.https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2
021.0518
De Jaegher, H. (2021). Loving and knowing: Reflections for an engaged epistemology.Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences, 20(5), 847–870.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-019-09634-5
De Jaegher, H., & Di Paolo, E. A. (2007). Participatory sense-making.Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 6(4), 485–
507. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-007-9076-9
De Jaegher, H., Di Paolo, E. A., & Adolphs, R. (2016). What does the interactive brain hypothesis mean for social neu-
roscience? A dialogue. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 371(1693), 20150379.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0379
De Jaegher, H., Di Paolo, E. A., & Gallagher, S. (2010). Can social interaction constitute social cognition?Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 14(10), 441–447.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2010.06.009
Desjardins, E. (2011). Historicity and experimental evolution.Biology & Philosophy, 26(3), 339–364. https://doi.org/10.100
7/s10539-011-9256-4
Desjardins, E. (2015). Historicity and ecological restoration.Biology & Philosophy, 30(1), 77–98.https://doi.org/10.1007/s1
0539-014-9467-6
Di Paolo, E. A. (2001). Artificial life and historical processes. In J. Kelemen & P. Sosík (Eds.),Advances in artificial life(pp.
649–658). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-44811-x_75
Di Paolo, E. A. (2005). Autopoiesis, adaptivity, teleology, agency.Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 4(4), 429–452.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-005-9002-y
Di Paolo, E. A. (2009). Extended life.Topoi, 28(1), 9–21.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-008-9042-3
Di Paolo, E. A. (2014). The worldly constituents of perceptual presence.Frontiers in Psychology, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2014.00450
Di Paolo, E. A. (2018). The enactive conception of life. In A. Newen, S. Gallagher, & L. de Bruin (Eds.),The Oxford handbook
of cognition: Embodied, embedded, enactive and extended(pp. 71–94). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Di Paolo, E. A. (2021). Enactive becoming.Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 20(5), 783–809.https://doi.org/10.100
7/s11097-019-09654-1
Di Paolo, E. A., Buhrmann, T., & Barandiaran, X. (2017).Sensorimotor life: An enactive proposal. Oxford University Press.
Di Paolo, E. A., Cuffari, E. C., & De Jaegher, H. (2018).Linguistic bodies: The continuity between life and language. MIT Press.
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 37
Di Paolo, E. A., & De Jaegher, H. (2021). Enactive ethics: Difference becoming participation.Topoi. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11245-021-09766-x
Di Paolo, E. A., Heras-Escribano, M., Chemero, A., & McGann, M. (Eds.). (2021).Enaction and ecological psychology: Con-
vergences and complementarities. Frontiers Media SA.https://doi.org/10.3389/978-2-88966-431-3
Di Paolo, E. A., & Thompson, E. (2014). The enactive approach. In L. Shapiro (Ed.),The Routledge handbook of embodied
cognition (pp. 68–78). London: Routledge.
Fischer, K. W., & Bidell, T. R. (2006). Dynamic development of action, thought, and emotion. In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner
(Eds.), Handbook of child psychology, vol. 1: Theoretical models of human development(pp. 313–399). New York: Wiley.
Fisher, A. J., Medaglia, J. D., & Jeronimus, B. F. (2018). Lack of group-to-individual generalizability is a threat to human
subjects research.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(27), E6106–E6115. https://doi.org/10.1073/pn
as.1711978115
Freeman, W. J. (1999). Consciousness, intentionality and causality.Journal of Consciousness Studies, 6(11–12), 143–172.
https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/imp/jcs/1999/00000006/f0020011/995
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it.Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 10(86), 20130475.https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2
013.0475
Friston, K. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems.Entropy, 14(11), 2100–2121.https://doi.org/10.3390/e141
12100
Friston, K. (2019).A free energy principle for a particular physics. https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.10184
Friston, K. J. (2011). Embodied inference: Or “I think therefore I am, if I am what I think.” In W. Tschacher & C. Bergomi
(Eds.), The implications of embodiment: Cognition and communication(pp. 89–125). Exeter: Imprint Academic.
Friston, K. J., Costa, L. D., & Parr, T. (2021). Some interesting observations on the free energy principle.Entropy, 23(8), 1076.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e23081076
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., Yufik, Y., Sajid, N., Price, C. J., & Holmes, E. (2020). Generative models, linguistic communication and
active inference.Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 118, 42–64.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.07.005
Friston, K. J., Rosch, R., Parr, T., Price, C., & Bowman, H. (2018). Deep temporal models and active inference.Neuroscience
& Biobehavioral Reviews, 90, 486–501.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.04.004
Friston, K., Kilner, J., & Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle for the brain.Journal of Physiology-Paris, 100(1-3),
70–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001
Fuchs, T. (2017).Ecology of the brain: The phenomenology and biology of the embodied mind. Oxford University Press.
Gould, S. J. (2002).The structure of evolutionary theory. Harvard University Press.
Hohwy, J. (2013).The predictive mind. Oxford University Press.
Hutto, D., & Myin, E. (2013).Radicalizing enactivism: Basic minds without content. MIT Press.
Kirchhoff, M. D. (2018). Autopoiesis, free energy, and the life–mind continuity thesis.Synthese, 195(6), 2519–2540.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1100-6
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Froese, T. (2017). Where there is life there is mind: In support of a strong life-mind continuity thesis.
Entropy, 19(4), 169.https://doi.org/10.3390/e19040169
Kirchhoff,M.D.,&Kiverstein,J.(2021). Howtodeterminetheboundariesofthemind: AMarkovblanketproposal. Synthese,
198(5), 4791–4810.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02370-y
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov blankets of life: Autonomy, active
inference and the free energy principle.Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 15(138), 20170792.https://doi.org/10.1
098/rsif.2017.0792
Kiverstein, J. (2020). Free energy and the self: An ecological–enactive interpretation.Topoi, 39(3), 559–574.https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11245-018-9561-5
Korbak, T. (2021). Computational enactivism under the free energy principle.Synthese, 198(3), 2743–2763.https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11229-019-02243-4
Kostrubiec, V., Zanone, P.-G., Fuchs, A., &Kelso, J.A.S.(2012). Beyondtheblankslate: Routestolearningnewcoordination
patterns depend on the intrinsic dynamics of the learner—experimental evidence and theoretical model.Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 6, 222.https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2012.00222
Kuhn, T. (1962).The structure of scientific revolutions. University of Chicago Press.
Landecker, H. (2011). Food as exposure: Nutritional epigenetics and the new metabolism.BioSocieties, 6(2), 167–194.
https://doi.org/10.1057/biosoc.2011.1
Litwin, P., & Miłkowski, M. (2020). Unification by fiat: Arrested development of predictive processing.Cognitive Science,
44(7), e12867.https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12867
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Ezequiel A. Di Paolo, Evan Thompson, and Randall D. Beer 38
Longo, G. (2018). How future depends on past and rare events in systems of life.Foundations of Science, 23(3), 443–474.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10699-017-9535-x
Longo, G., & Montévil, M. (2014).Perspectives on organisms: Biological time, symmetries and singularities. Springer.
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1980).Autopoiesis and cognition: The realization of the living. D. Reidel Publishing Company.
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1987).The tree of knowledge. Shambhala.
Medaglia, J. D., Ramanathan, D. M., Venkatesan, U. M., & Hillary, F. G. (2011). The challenge of non-ergodicity in network
neuroscience. Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 22(1–4), 148–153.
https://doi.org/10.3109/09638237.2011.639604
Molenaar, P. C. M. (2004). A manifesto on psychology as idiographic science: Bringing the person back into scientific
psychology, this time forever.Measurement: Interdisciplinary Research & Perspective, 2(4), 201–218.https://doi.org/10
.1207/s15366359mea0204_1
Molenaar, P. C. M., & Nesselroade, J. R. (2014). New trends in the inductive use of relational developmental systems theory:
Ergodicity, nonstationarity, and heterogeneity. In P. C. Molenaar, R. M. Lerner, & K. M. Newel (Eds.),Handbook of
developmental systems and methodology(pp. 442–462). New York: Wiley.
Montévil, M. (2020). Historicity at the heart of biology.Theory in Biosciences. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12064-020-00320-8
Nicolis, G., & Prigogine, I. (1977).Self-organization in nonequilibrium systems: From dissipative structures to order through
fluctuations. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Orth, D., Kamp, J. van der, Memmert, D., & Savelsbergh, G. J. P. (2017). Creative motor actions as emerging from movement
variability. Frontiers in Psychology, 8, 1903.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01903
Oyama, S., Griffiths, P. E., & Gray, R. D. (Eds.). (2001).Cycles of contingency: Developmental systems and evolution. MIT
Press.
Palacios, E. R., Razi, A., Parr, T., Kirchhoff, M., & Friston, K. (2020). On Markov blankets and hierarchical self-organisation.
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 486, 110089.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2019.110089
Parr, T., Costa, L. D., & Friston, K. (2019). Markov blankets, information geometry and stochastic thermodynamics.Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 378(2164), 20190159.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2019.0159
Pessoa, L. (2014). Understanding brain networks and brain organization.Physics of Life Reviews, 11(3), 400–435. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2014.03.005
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. (2015). Active inference, homeostatic regulation and adaptive behavioural control.
Progress in Neurobiology, 134, 17–35.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2015.09.001
Raja, V., Valluri, D., Baggs, E., Chemero, A., & Anderson, M. L. (2021). The Markov blanket trick: On the scope of the free
energy principle and active inference.Physics of Life Reviews, 39, 49–72.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2021.09.001
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering Schrödinger's question: A free-energy formulation.
Physics of Life Reviews, 24, 1–16.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Ramstead, M. J. D., Kirchhoff, M. D., Constant, A., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Multiscale integration: Beyond internalism and
externalism. Synthese, 198(S1), 41–70.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02115-x
Rath, D., Amlinger, L., Rath, A., & Lundgren, M. (2015). The CRISPR-cas immune system: Biology, mechanisms and appli-
cations. Biochimie, 117, 119–128.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2015.03.025
Rose, L. T., Rouhani, P., & Fischer, K. W. (2013). The science of the individual.Mind, Brain, and Education, 7(3), 152–158.
https://doi.org/10.1111/mbe.12021
Seth, A. K. (2014). A predictive processing theory of sensorimotor contingencies: Explaining the puzzle of perceptual
presence and its absence in synesthesia.Cognitive Neuroscience, 5(2), 97–118.https://doi.org/10.1080/17588928.2013.
877880
Soucy, S. M., Huang, J., & Gogarten, J. P. (2015). Horizontal gene transfer: Building the web of life.Nature Reviews Genetics,
16(8), 472–482.https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg3962
Speelman, C. P., & McGann, M. (2016). Editorial: Challenges to mean-based analysis in psychology: The contrast between
individual people and general science.Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 1234.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01234
Stewart, J., Gapenne, O., & Di Paolo, E. A. (Eds.). (2010).Enaction: A new paradigm for cognitive science. MIT Press.
Thelen, E. (2005). Dynamic systems theory and the complexity of change.Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 15(2), 255–283.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10481881509348831
Thelen, E., Corbetta, D., & Spencer, J. P. (1996). Development of reaching during the first year: Role of movement speed.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 22(5), 1059–1076.https://doi.org/10.1037/00
96-1523.22.5.1059
Thompson, E. (2007).Mind in life: Biology, phenomenology and the sciences of mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
Laying down a forking path 39
Thompson, E. (2018). Review of Daniel D. Hutto and Erik Myin, Evolving enactivism: Basic minds meet content.Notre
Dame Philosophical Reviews. https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/evolving-enactivism-basic-minds-meet-content/
Thompson, E., & Stapleton, M. (2009). Making sense of sense-making: Reflections on enactive and extended mind theories.
Topoi, 28(1), 23–30.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-008-9043-2
Turner, J. S. (2000).The extended organism: The physiology of animal-built structures. Harvard University Press.
van Es, T. (2021). Living models or life modelled? On the use of models in the free energy principle.Adaptive Behavior,
29(3), 315–329.https://doi.org/10.1177/1059712320918678
van Es, T., & Kirchhoff, M. D. (2021). Between pebbles and organisms: Weaving autonomy into the Markov blanket.Syn-
these, 199(3-4), 6623–6644.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-021-03084-w
Varela, F. J. (2011). Preface to the second edition of “De máquinas y seres vivos - Autopoiesis: La organización de lo vivo”
by francisco varela.Systems Research and Behavioral Science, 28(6), 601–617.https://doi.org/10.1002/sres.1122
Varela, F. J. (1979).Principles of biological autonomy. North Holland.
Varela, F. J. (1991a). Making it concrete: Before, during and after breakdowns.Revue Internationale de Psychopathologie,
4(6), 601–617.https://associationpsychanalytiquedefrance.org/publications/revues/n4-1991/
Varela, F. J. (1991b). Organism: A meshwork of selfless selves. In A. I. Tauber (Ed.),Organism and the origins of self. Boston
studies in the philosophy of science vol. 129(pp. 79–107). Dordrecht: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-
3406-4_5
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991).The embodied mind: Cognitive science and human experience. MIT Press.
Varela, F., Lachaux, J.-P., Rodriguez, E., & Martinerie, J. (2001). The brainweb: Phase synchronization and large-scale
integration. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2(4), 229–239.https://doi.org/10.1038/35067550
Veissière, S. P. L., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2019). Thinking through other minds: A
variational approach to cognition and culture.Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 43, E90. https://doi.org/10.1017/s01405
25x19001213
Villalobos, M., & Ward, D. (2015). Living systems: Autonomy, autopoiesis and enaction.Philosophy & Technology, 28(2),
225–239. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-014-0154-y
Vygotsky, L. (2012).Thought and language. Revised and expanded edition. MIT Press.
Waddington, C. H. (1957).The strategy of the genes: A discussion of some aspects of theoretical biology. George Allen; Unwin.
Walsh,K.S.,McGovern,D.P.,Clark,A.,&O’Connell,R.G.(2020). Evaluatingtheneurophysiologicalevidenceforpredictive
processing as a model of perception.Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1464(1), 242–268.https://doi.org/10
.1111/nyas.14321
Weron, A., Burnecki, K., Akin, E. J., Solé, L., Balcerek, M., Tamkun, M. M., & Krapf, D. (2017). Ergodicity breaking on
the neuronal surface emerges from random switching between diffusive states.Scientific Reports, 7(1), 5404. https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-05911-y
Wiese,W.,&Friston,K.J.(2021). Examiningthecontinuitybetweenlifeandmind: Isthereacontinuitybetweenautopoietic
intentionality and representationality?Philosophies, 6(1), 18.https://doi.org/10.3390/philosophies6010018
Open Access
ThisarticleisdistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0Interna-
tional License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, as long as you give appropriate credit
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license,
and indicate if changes were made.
Di Paolo, E. A., Thompson, E., & Beer, R. D. (2022). Laying down a forking path: Tensions
between enaction and the free energy principle.Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 3, 2.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2022.9187
©The author(s).https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369