Vol:.(1234567890)
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13415-024-01189-6
THEORETICAL REVIEW
When the interoceptive and conceptual clash: The case of oppositional 
phenomenal self‑modelling in Tourette syndrome
D. Parvizi‑Wayne1 · L. Severs2,3
Accepted: 15 April 2024 / Published online: 22 May 2024 
© Crown 2024
Abstract
Tourette syndrome (TS) has been associated with a rich set of symptoms that are said to be uncomfortable, unwilled, and 
effortful to manage. Furthermore, tics, the canonical characteristic of TS, are multifaceted, and their onset and maintenance 
is complex. A formal account that integrates these features of TS symptomatology within a plausible theoretical framework 
is currently absent from the field. In this paper, we assess the explanatory power of hierarchical generative modelling in 
accounting for TS symptomatology from the perspective of active inference. We propose a fourfold analysis of sensory, 
motor, and cognitive phenomena associated with TS. In Section 1, we characterise tics as a form of action aimed at sensory 
attenuation. In Section 2, we introduce the notion of epistemic ticcing and describe such behaviour as the search for evidence 
that there is an agent (i.e., self) at the heart of the generative hierarchy. In Section 3, we characterise both epistemic (sensation-
free) and nonepistemic (sensational) tics as habitual behaviour. Finally, in Section  4, we propose that ticcing behaviour 
involves an inevitable conflict between distinguishable aspects of selfhood; namely, between the minimal phenomenal 
sense of self—which is putatively underwritten by interoceptive inference—and the explicit preferences that constitute the 
individual’s conceptual sense of self. In sum, we aim to provide an empirically informed analysis of TS symptomatology 
under active inference, revealing a continuity between covert and overt features of the condition.
Keywords Active inference · Embodied cognition · Free energy principle · Tourette's · Mental health · Development
Introduction
Tourette syndrome (TS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder 
diagnosed on the basis of multiple chronic motor and vocal tics 
(Johnson et al., 2023; Leckman, 2002). Despite considerable 
advances in our understanding of the pathophysiological 
basis of TS, the condition has resisted explanation in terms 
of either its neurological and psychiatric aetiology, and many 
factors are known to contribute to the unique expression and 
symptomatology of TS. Therefore, the goal of this paper is not 
to attempt to provide a unified explanation of its genesis, nor 
of its expression and maintenance. Nevertheless, consistent 
with naturalistic approaches to phenomenology, we aim to 
provide an initial account of the sensory, cognitive, and motor 
symptoms of TS via a neurocomputational perspective. Indeed, 
this account accommodates many of the qualitative aspects of 
TS symptomatology and attempts to systematically link the 
phenomenological level of description and empirical level of 
description in TS such that both levels mutually constrain one 
another in a productive manner (Lutz, 2002; Ramstead et al., 
2022; Smith et al., 2022; Varela, 1997). More specifically, we 
assess the role of hierarchical generative (self) modelling in 
TS, from the perspective of active inference—according to 
which organisms take actions that change subsequent sensory 
input in order to realise the predictions generated by a model 
of the kind of thing it is (Friston, 2009, 2010, 2019; Ramstead 
et al., 2023a).
Despite a careful focus on the phenomenology of TS and its 
role in diagnosis, treatment, and phenotyping, there is still a rela-
tive paucity of formal approaches to link the symptomatology 
of TS to underlying constructs in computational neuroscience 
D. Parvizi-Wayne and L. Severs contributed equally to this paper.
 * D. Parvizi-Wayne 
 darius.parvizi-wayne@rhul.ac.uk
1 Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway University 
of London, London, UK
2 Centre for the Philosophy of Science, Faculty of Sciences, 
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal
3 Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Institute of Philosophy II, 
Bochum, Germany
661Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680 
and biology (Grados & Mathews, 2009; McNaught & Mink, 
2011; Patel et al., 2014). This is unfortunate, because, for a 
theoretical account, the phenomenology of TS is likely to be 
highly informative, as has been illustrated with respect to other 
psychopathologies, including social anxiety disorder (Gerrans 
& Murray, 2020) and major depressive disorder (Ramstead 
et al., 2023b). Individuals with TS report a rich set of sensory 
and cognitive symptoms, including canonical characteristics, 
such as tics, which possess their own unique (and complex) 
phenomenological variability (Jankovic, 1997). Indeed, tics are 
a multifaceted and unique set of behaviours that can vary from 
simple, reflex-like movements (e.g., eye blinking) to complex, 
compound, and seemingly goal-directed sequences of action 
that include several muscle groups (e.g., touching, sniffing, 
or jumping over an object). More generally, they have been 
described as “repetitive, patterned, and misplaced in context 
and time” (Beste & Münchau, 2018, p. 238).
Many of the sensory and cognitive symptoms of TS are 
shaped by ticcing behaviour and its expression, as well as 
its management through self-initiated coping strategies. 
Tics are often reported to be “unwilled” and not entirely 
voluntary (Cavanna & Rickards, 2013; Rae et al., 2019a). 
In a large portion of cases, the generation of tics is preceded 
by sensory phenomena called premonitory sensations (i.e., 
urges that precede tics), which are notably “uncomfortable” 
and require relief through action, i.e., via tics (Leckman 
et al., 1993). Furthermore, the deployment of inhibitory 
control over tics is said to be an “effortful” process (Brandt 
et al., 2016). However, there is considerable disagreement 
with respect to the interpretation of these phenomena within 
current studies of TS. For example, the volitional nature of 
tics remains a topic of contentious debate within the field 
(Cavanna & Rickards, 2013; Ganos et al., 2018; Haggard 
et al., 2002; Jankovic, 1997; Kwak et al., 2003; Lang, 
1991; Rae et al., 2020). Without an overarching theoretical 
framework that accounts for both the experiential and 
behavioural characteristics of TS symptomatology, empirical 
results alone are unlikely to yield any clear resolution to 
such debates. Given that active inference often is proposed 
to be the grand unifying theory of cognition, it is at least a 
plausible framework through which the phenomenology and 
mechanisms of TS can be explained (Clark, 2013, 2015). 
We thus leverage active inference to offer both a synchronic 
analysis of the belief architecture of the ticcing individual 
and a diachronic account of that individual’s phenomenal 
and physiological trajectory.
In Section  1, we characterise tics as merely reflexive, 
active inference deployed as a perceived means of maintain-
ing homeostasis. We describe a simple form of ticcing in 
response to premonitory sensation, whereby the release of 
a tic is likened to scratching an itch. In both scenarios, as a 
result of hypersensitivity to sensory data, overly precise pre-
diction errors ascend the generative hierarchy, prompting the 
organism into action to suppress those errors, which are expe-
rienced as certain qualitative feelings (Barrett, 2017). This 
is consistent with clinical observations that TS patients have 
a “thinner barrier to stimulation” (Leckman & Cohen, 1999, 
p. 149). Crucially, we propose that tic behaviour effectively 
suppresses premonitory sensations, because it necessarily 
involves sensory attenuation. The effect is likely twofold: the 
organism actively changes their proprioceptive and intero-
ceptive sensorium by ticcing, thus mechanically altering the 
likelihood distribution associated with the sensory data and 
minimising the prediction error at hand (i.e., the premonitory 
sensation); at the same time, the very act of ticcing—and 
action more broadly—engenders the attenuation of sensory 
afferents within the proprioceptive arc of the action, includ-
ing, in the case of TS, those underlying premonitory sensa-
tions. This type of sensory attenuation through neuromodula-
tory (cf., precision weighting) control is necessary for motor 
behaviour in the first place.
In Section 2, we describe some ticcing behaviour as a form 
of epistemic foraging. We characterise this investigative form 
of tics (notably in the absence of premonitory sensations) as 
actions which serve to provide evidence of the existence of 
an agent. Specifically, epistemic ticcing can be construed as 
an attempt to resolve uncertainty about whether the “I” is the 
agentive cause of its own sensations, a belief that has been 
called into question because of the hyperprecision weight 
afforded sensory prediction errors, as described in Sec-
tion 1. This follows because the failure to attenuate sensory 
precision weight entails the relative weakening of previous 
beliefs, which include the inferred capacities and intentions 
of the individual herself. We will suggest that this epistemic 
affordance is underscored by a subpersonal pragmatic prefer-
ence to provide evidence for the reliability of one’s actions 
in causing certain outcomes, such that the epistemic tic does 
not only resolve ambiguity, but it also reinforces the belief 
that there is an agent at the heart of its generative (a.k.a., 
world) model. In summary, a propensity to tic within certain 
contexts is geared towards the discovery of evidence for the 
individual’s self-model, integrated therein by disambiguat-
ing the outcomes of self-generated action and worldly events 
(Clarke, 1996; Perrykkad et al., 2023).
In Section 3, we characterise both epistemic (sensation-
free) and nonepistemic (sensational) tics as habitualised 
behaviour, cast as strong (habitual) prior beliefs about 
policy selection. This perspective sheds light on the sub-
jectively effortless, or “unvoluntary,” nature of ticcing, as 
well as how tic behaviour might be influenced by negative 
emotions (Deane et al., 2024; Hesp et al., 2021; Parr et al., 
2023). This is particularly salient within the context of adap-
tive behavioural control in TS, whereby the deployment of 
(intentional) inhibition to suppress ticcing behaviour is 
reported to be effortful, requiring intense attentional focus 
(Brandt et al., 2016; Rae et al., 2019a).
662 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680
Finally, in Section  4, we propose that at the broadest, 
diachronic level of analysis, the aberrant action-perception 
loops—characteristic of TS—generate conflicting evidence 
for the state of the organism’s agency and self-coherence, 
leading to what we term oppositional phenomenological 
self-modelling . We propose that, in TS, the organism is 
drawn both towards ticcing as a way to minimise interocep-
tive prediction error, as well as away  from ticcing because 
the action provides evidence against the higher-order pref-
erence that there is an socially sensitive, non-ticcing agent 
guiding the course of that organism’s life. This could be said 
to lead to a type of duality of desires.
In summary, we aim to show that this fourfold (active 
inference) account of TS symptomatology explains the 
diversity of TS phenomena, from the seemingly simple to 
the complex.
Tourette syndrome
Tourette syndrome (TS) is a highly heterogeneous 
neurodevelopmental condition characterised by chronic 
and persistent tics (Rae & Critchley, 2022; Robertson 
et al., 2017). TS is assumed to be continuous with tics, a 
multifaceted set of behaviours that can vary from simple, 
reflex-like movements (e.g., eye blinking) to complex, 
compound and seemingly goal-directed sequences of action 
that include several muscle groups (e.g., touching, sniffing, 
or jumping over an object). In clinical contexts, tics are 
classified across dimensions, including time, type, frequency, 
location, and severity (DSM-IV; Leckman et al., 1989). 
Tics also carry a distinctive phenomenology in TS. Indeed, 
despite their intentional appearance, tics are experienced 
as “unvoluntary” and inflexible actions (Rae et al., 2020). 
Furthermore, tic expression is thought to be driven by many 
factors, including environmentally salient information (e.g., 
socioemotional triggers), suggestibility, psychological 
arousal, and autonomic status (Rae & Critchley, 2022; Rae 
et al., 2018). Hence, among hyperkinetic spectrum disorders, 
tics in TS possess the greatest clinical variability, reflecting 
a rich and complex range of human motor behaviour and its 
expression. Importantly, sensory phenomena also can be a 
prevalent feature of TS symptomatology. For example, tics 
are often preceded by uncomfortable urges or compulsions 
(i.e., premonitory sensations), which are, in turn, transiently 
relieved by the execution of the tic. Interestingly, the 
corresponding sense of relief resulting from tic release 
often is said to be akin to “scratching an itch” (Scholl et al., 
2022; Singer, 2016). Finally, in many cases individuals 
with TS engage in self-initiated coping strategies and the 
management of tics (Matsuda et al., 2016). These include 
so-called tic suppression, an ability that allows those 
with TS to inhibit their tics through effortful, endogenous 
inhibitory control. Indeed, voluntary (i.e., intentional) 
inhibition appears to be intact in TS, whilst there is evidence 
of an asymmetry in automatic (i.e., reactive) inhibition in TS 
(Filevich et al., 2012; Morand-Beaulieu et al., 2017; Rawji 
et al., 2020).
Although it is not yet clear how to delineate precisely 
the complex symptomatology of TS in terms of its 
underlying (neuro)physiological mechanisms, neuroimaging 
studies have identified a degree of disconnection 
between frontoparietal networks (Naro et  al., 2020). 1 
Much of the recent progress made on understanding the 
physiological basis of TS symptomatology has been 
facilitated by concurrent theorising about the complex 
phenomenological profile individuals with TS present. 
This literature has further benefited from the contribution 
of psychophysiological and other empirical, task-based 
approaches to TS, alongside computational approaches to 
modelling its symptomatology (Palminteri & Pessiglione, 
2013; Rae et al., 2019a; Scholl et al., 2022). However, 
contemporary approaches maintain a primary focus on 
modelling the overt symptoms of TS symptomatology 
(e.g., tics and their formation as habitual behaviour) whilst 
overlooking many of the covert, qualitative characteristics of 
TS and its expression. These include premonitory sensations 
and the autonomic, contextual influences of stressors within 
the social and cultural environment on the expression of tics 
and (dis)inhibition. For example, emotional variables are 
known to influence ticcing behaviour, whereby negatively 
valenced states of anxiety or stress are perceived by those 
with TS to intensify their ticcing (Bornstein et al., 1990; 
Eapen et al., 2004; Leisman & Sheldon, 2022; Silva et al., 
1995). In many cases, this co-occurs with even stronger and 
more uncomfortable premonitory sensations.
Tic‑prone brain states in TS
Whilst the occurrence of tics is transient and bound to 
particular events, empirical studies have suggested the 
presence of “tic-prone brain states” in TS, which predispose 
the individual to certain habitual behaviours and facilitate 
tic expression (Rae & Critchley, 2022). More specifically, 
a well-documented impairment of the interactions between 
limbic, paralimbic, and cortico-striatal-thalamo-cortical 
pathways (i.e., CSTC loops) has been shown to underwrite 
the pathophysiology of TS (Naro et al., 2020). In particular, 
neuroimaging evidence highlights the role of interactions 
between the basal ganglia, presupplementary motor area 
(preSMA), and affective, motivational regions of the insula 
1 For a summary of the controversy surrounding the pathophysiologi-
cal basis of TS, see Singer and Augustine (2019).
663Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680 
in generating ticcing behaviour and its expression (Brass & 
Haggard, 2010; Jackson et al., 2015; Rae et al., 2018).
Indeed, the basal ganglia, which is constituted, in part, 
by the striatum, interfaces with cortical regions via the 
thalamus, forming CSTC loops that effectively gate the 
context-sensitive initiation of movement. Regulating the 
relative balance of neuronal excitation-inhibition during 
voluntary action and its control involves the so-called direct, 
indirect, and hyperdirect pathways of the basal ganglia. 
Within the direct, excitatory pathway, the globus pallidus 
(internal) and the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNpr) 
are inhibited by striatal medium spiny GABAergic neurons, 
allowing for disinhibition of the ventral anterior (VA) and 
ventrolateral (VL) nuclei of the thalamus and the promotion 
of movement (i.e., excitatory signals propagated from 
thalamus to cortex). Within the indirect, inhibitory pathway, 
the globus pallidus (external) is inhibited by the striatum, 
allowing for the disinhibition of the glutamatergic neurons 
of STN. This activates SNpr and global pallidus (internal) 
GABAergic neurons, which project to the VL and VA nuclei 
of the thalamus and, ultimately, prohibit movement. Finally, 
a hyperdirect pathway enables the pausing of movement, 
with direct connections between the cortex and STN that 
feedback to globus pallidus (internal) and prompt inhibitory 
signals to thalamus (Calabresi et al., 2014; DeLong, 1990; 
Friend & Kravitz, 2014; Nambu, 2004; Rae & Critchley, 
2022; Young et al., 2024).
Dysfunction of these pathways has been shown to 
underwrite a number of movement-related pathologies, 
including Parkinson’s disease (Blandini et al., 2000) and 
Huntington’s disease (Starr et al., 2008). With respect to 
tic behaviour, glutamatergic inputs from the supplementary 
motor area (SMA) to the striatum alongside a reduction 
in striatal inhibitory interneurons have been proposed to 
amplify activity within the direct pathway of the basal 
ganglia, which leads to thalamic disinhibition and the 
release of movement signals to M1 (Albin & Mink, 2006, 
Conceição et al., 2017; Ganos et al., 2013; Neuner et al., 
2013; Mink, 2001; Polyanska et al., 2017; Rae & Critchley, 
2022; Rae et al., 2018; Redgrave et al., 2010; Singer, 2005; 
Zapparoli et al., 2015). However, in TS, there is evidence 
of atypical interactions across many other areas, including 
premotor cortex, insular cortex, and S1 (Bohlhalter et al., 
2006; Neuner et al., 2014; Polyanska et al., 2017; Wang 
et al., 2011). For example, the insular cortex (a still largely 
enigmatic system, see Uddin et al., 2017) has been proposed 
to play a common yet overlooked role in TS, especially 
as a potential substrate for premonitory sensations—the 
characteristic “feeling-states” associated with sensory 
discomfort and compulsions—which commonly precede the 
generation and expression of tics (Bohlhalter et al., 2006; 
Cavanna et al., 2017; Conceição et al., 2017; Neuner et al., 
2014; Rae et al., 2018). Indeed, the grey-matter thickness 
of the insula has been shown to be negatively correlated 
with the intensity of premonitory sensations (Draper et al., 
2016), as measured by the Premonitory Urges for Tics Scale 
(PUTS) (Reese et al., 2014). Furthermore, the strength of 
functional connectivity between the anterior insula and the 
SMA (at resting state) has been shown to positively correlate 
with high PUTS scores (Tinaz et al., 2015). In Section  1, 
we go beyond the broad-brush account provided here and 
offer a more fine-grained analysis of the dysfunctional 
interactions within CSTC loops—with a particular focus 
on the connection between the insula and the SMA—which 
underscore sensation-based ticcing behaviour.
Finally, some individuals with TS are able to engage 
in “tic suppression,” which refers to the highly “effortful” 
deployment of inhibitory control to withhold tics. This abil-
ity has been documented within neuroimaging literature in 
an attempt to better understand the neurocognitive processes 
that influence ticcing behaviour. Here, tic suppression is 
associated with effortful, top-down modulation, specifically 
through inhibitory control processes that exploit a hyperdi-
rect pathway, primarily implicating the inferior frontal gyrus, 
preSMA, and subcortical networks involved in action control, 
such as the basal ganglia (Aron et al., 2016; Ganos et al., 
2014; Rae et al., 2015, 2019a, 2020).
Given the structure of interactions across CSTC loops and 
their integrated nature, it has been shown that hierarchical 
mechanisms can be applied to successfully model the known 
pathophysiology of ticcing behaviour in TS and its links to 
phenomenology (Rae et al., 2019a). We thus examine the 
consistency of this hierarchical model within the overarch-
ing theoretical framework of active inference to account 
formally for the sensory, cognitive, and motor symptoms of 
TS. It is to this framework that we now turn.
Active inference
For those familiar with the active inference framework (AIF), 
the following section can be passed over. However, given 
that we utilise the framework in our explanation of TS, it is 
worth unpicking its background theory somewhat broadly, 
before outlining how it can be used as an explanatory tool in 
the analysis of TS. Note, we have chosen not to cover every 
detail of active inference for simplicity’s sake (cf., Friston, 
2019; Ramstead et al., 2023a for a comprehensive treatment 
of the framework).
Active inference is a corollary of the Free Energy Princi-
ple, which holds that any thing that persists through time—in 
so far as it frequents a limited set of characteristic states—
attains a nonequilibrium steady state (Friston, 2009, 2010, 
2019; Friston et al., 2017a; Kirchhoff et al., 2018; Ramstead 
et al., 2023a). In doing so, such things look as if they are per-
forming (variational) Bayesian inference—insofar as internal 
664 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680
states (e.g., neuronal activity) can be read as modelling exter-
nal states (e.g., the physiological state of the body or states 
of affairs in the environment). More specifically, the ensuing 
behaviour can be read as maximising evidence for a genera-
tive model that the existence of the entity entails, which also 
can be cast as minimising variational free energy, an informa-
tion theoretic term that acts as an upper bound on surprisal or 
Shannon self-information. In the active inference literature, 
this process often is called “self-evidencing” (Hohwy, 2016).
Note that, at least in energetically bound entities like 
humans, this process cannot involve true Bayesian inference, 
because two quantities—the model evidence P (o|m) and 
the posterior P (s,u| o)—cannot be computed because 
of the indefinite number of hidden states that need to be 
marginalised and because such marginalisation requires 
integrals that are computationally intractable. As is common 
within the AIF, o stands for observations, u are actions, and 
s are latent states. Thus, we can only conduct approximate 
Bayesian inference, whereby the true posterior is replaced 
by a tractable (Bayesian) belief known as recognition 
density (Q) and the accuracy of that approximation can be 
expressed in terms of a Kullback-Liebler (KL) divergence. 
Mathematically, minimising variational free energy entails 
both minimising this KL divergence—which can be read as 
perception—and then acting to sample new observations to 
ensure the maximisation of model evidence: P (o|m). This 
permits the formulation of the equation for variational free 
energy F, as a functional (function of a function) of the 
recognition density Q and observations o (Equation 1).
Equation 1. Variational free energy equation.
In complex creatures, such as humans—who infer states 
of the world given sensory impressions upon exteroceptive, 
interoceptive, and proprioceptive modalities—it has been 
proposed that the minimisation of variational free energy for 
the organism at large occurs via a (temporally) deep, (hier -
archical) generative model, in which “higher,” more abstract 
levels track slower, regular flows in the external states and 
contextualise and constrain “lower,” more context-bound 
levels, which are (statistically) attuned to rapid environ -
mental dynamics. This has frequently been described from 
a predictive coding, or more broadly, a predictive process-
ing perspective, whereby prediction errors at a lower level 
Q (s,u) = argmin Q F
F = EQ [In Q (s,u)
/uni23DF.l/uni23DF.m/uni23DF.r
posterior
−ln P(o/uni007C.vars,u)
/uni23DF.l/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DF.m/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DF.r
likelihood
−ln P(s,u)
/uni23DF.l/uni23DF.m/uni23DF.r
prior
]
= D KL [Q(s, u)∥ P(s,u/uni007C.varo)]
/uni23DF.l/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DF.m/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DF.r
divergence
− ln P(o/uni007C.varm )
/uni23DF.l/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DF.m/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DF.r
log evidence
= D KL [Q(s, u)∥ P(s,u)]
/uni23DF.l/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DF.m/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DF.r
complexity
− EQ [ln P(o/uni007C.vars,u)]
/uni23DF.l/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DF.m/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DF.r
accuracy
are dynamically shuttled up the cognitive hierarchy and are 
“explained away” by higher levels, which are issuing cascad-
ing predictions (Clark, 2013, 2015).2
Technically speaking, a prediction error is the divergence 
between my prior belief—the probability of being in a state 
s—and my posterior belief—the probability of being in a 
state s, given an observation o . Upon registering a predic-
tion error, I can resolve it by either updating my beliefs, so 
that my posterior provides an apt explanation of the observa-
tions, or change the way I sample the world through action, 
so that my observations aligns more closely with my prior 
expectations. However, the very presence of this binary deci-
sion is predicated on the fact that a prediction error has suf-
ficient (precision) weight (cf., postsynaptic gain) to force me 
to (subpersonally) make a choice; otherwise, I can simply 
ignore it. Thus, an important feature of the implicit cognitive, 
predictive dynamics is so-called precision weight. Precision is 
technically the inverse dispersion of a probability distribution 
and can be understood as the confidence afforded to proba -
bilistic (Bayesian) beliefs. For example, perception entails 
the inversion of the generative model such that the predictive 
system infers a specific hidden state (s) given a sensory obser-
vation (o) (cf., Kalman filter). If the likelihood in Equation 1 
has high precision—or low entropy—then the system will 
have high confidence in its inference: i.e., that o  was truly 
caused by s. The likelihood is generally parameterised within 
the A tensor in POMDP schema. An observation with high 
precision implies a precise, unambiguous mapping between 
cause and consequence, whereas for a low precision obser -
vation, a multiplicity of causes might underlie it. Crucially, 
there is a difference between sensory precision, as a purely 
mathematical construct connoting the inverse dispersion of a 
probability distribution, and sensory precision weight, which 
refers to how much postsynaptic gain a signal is afforded and, 
thus, how much it biases the posterior in its direction, given 
that the posterior is a sort of compromise between the likeli-
hood of a sensory signal (given a hypothesised state) and the 
prior expectation of that state. Precision certainly factors into 
precision weight, because minimising variational free energy 
entails accurate inference of the true hidden state that caused 
an observation, it is not the only factor at play (cf., Parvizi-
Wayne, 2024 for a thorough discussion of this topic). It is for 
this reason that we will refer to precision weight rather than 
precision when discussing the postsynaptic gain of signals 
per se.
2 Note that this is the predominant model when accounting for 
behaviour in continuous state spaces. When discrete variables are 
considered, such as when decisions are made, the requisite hierarchi-
cal generative model frequently takes the form of partially observable 
Markov decision processes (POMDPs) (Da Costa et al., 2023; Friston 
et al., 2017b).
665Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680 
In the setting of continuous state space, which is typically 
used to model low-level sensorimotor activity, a precisely 
weighted likelihood corresponds to a precisely weighted pre-
diction error, which has a greater effect on belief updating 
higher in the hierarchy. Physiologically, this is thought to 
rest on neuromodulatory mechanisms that tune postsynap-
tic gain of neuronal populations reporting prediction errors. 
The complement of postsynaptic gain is sensory attenua-
tion: namely, a reduction in the precision weight of sensory 
prediction errors (or, more generally, sensory likelihoods). 
Sensory attenuation is an important faculty in the context of 
active sensing and motor control in the following sense: it 
enables individuals to ignore sensory evidence that they are 
not moving and thereby realise prior beliefs that correspond 
to the anticipated sensory consequences of intended move-
ments (Adams et al., 2013; Brown et al., 2013). Perhaps the 
best example of this is saccadic suppression: namely, the 
loss of precisely weighted visual prediction errors during 
saccadic eye movements. This precludes our perception of 
the ensuing optic flow and permits swift and graceful palpa-
tion of the visual scene. In short, any volitional movement 
is accompanied by sensory attenuation—i.e., an attenuation 
of sensory precision weight.
It is important to note that precision weight can be 
granted to beliefs encoded in a generative model, including 
beliefs about how the world evolves (parameterised by the B 
tensor in POMDP schema), prior expectations over sensory 
outcomes (encoded by the C tensor), and prior beliefs about 
policy selection (E tensor). Recent work has suggested that 
inferring and deploying these second-order beliefs (i.e., 
beliefs about the precision weight of beliefs) underwrites 
mental action (Limanowski & Friston, 2018; Sandved-Smith 
et al., 2021). An explication of the (aberrant) dynamics 
unfolding among these second-order beliefs is required for 
the active inference account of TS that follows.
Fourfold analysis of active inference and TS 
symptomatology
Section 1: A (believed) restoration of homeostasis
With this background in place, we can describe a simple 
form of ticcing, namely those preceded by premonitory sen-
sations, as enacting a form of (technically) Bayes-optimal 
action selection, albeit with precision weighting dynam -
ics that lead to broadly maladaptive consequences. To this 
end, we will draw upon the preexisting model of TS from 
a Bayesian perspective constructed by Rae et al. (2019a). 
These researchers ground the generation of tics and premon-
itory sensations in two respective modulations of the preci-
sion weighting of the generative model. These are abnor -
mally precisely weighted priors for action—technically the 
habit, or E tensor, in POMDP schema—and abnormally high 
sensory precision weight (Fig.  1). Note that, with respect 
to the latter, Rae et al. (2019a) do not specify whether this 
constitutes aberrant precision weight over preferred sensory 
observations—C tensor—or the likelihood distribution—A 
tensor. In the variant of the model that we employ, we will 
focus on the likelihood precision weight, in relation to the 
precision weight of prior beliefs about state transitions (B 
tensor), although we recognise that prior preferences (C ten-
sor) and initial state priors (D tensor) will invariably have a 
role to play. We will leave our discussion of habit formation 
in TS to Section 3.
It is important to note that not all tics are associated with 
premonitory sensations; some estimates suggest up to 40% 
of tics occur in their absence (Leckman et al., 1993). This 
fact motivates a theoretical dissociation of the sensory and 
prior precision weight, because one need not experience 
sensory symptoms, putatively generated through ascending 
prediction error from the putamen to the anterior insula, to 
engage in ticcing behaviour. Indeed, according to Rae et al. 
(2019a), tic frequency is (merely) ramped up by the signals 
sent from the anterior insula to the SMA; however, given that 
premonitory sensations are not necessary for tic behaviour, 
they propose that, in TS, there is already overactivity in the 
SMA and reduced GABAergic interneurons in the putamen, 
leading to the disinhibition of the thalamus, the activation 
of M1 and the production of tics, as described in §2.1. 
However, in this section, we will focus on those tics that are 
driven by uncomfortable sensations.
According to Rae et al. (2019a, 2019b), TS involves hyper-
precise sensations, generated at the posterior insula, which 
are “explained away” at the anterior insula as unwanted feel-
ings (i.e., premonitory sensations). For example, in a case 
reported by Bullen and Hemsley ( 1983), a patient with TS 
(“J”) described a “horrible” sensation in her upper back that 
she could only “get rid of by moving” whilst undergoing habit 
reversal therapy. The closest analogy to this sensation was 
to compare it to an “itch.” We read this as the consequence 
of hyperprecision weighting over the A (likelihood) tensor, 
which statistically draws the posterior away from the prior 
density. This increased precision weight over the likelihood of 
the sensation maps onto an increase in prediction error—cast 
as the divergence between prior and posterior densities. To 
reduce this prediction error, it is incumbent on the model the 
organism embodies to achieve both perceptual adequacy—
technically the minimisation of the KL divergence between 
the true posterior and the recognition density Q—and norma-
tive adequacy—the minimisation of surprise. Whereas the lat-
ter is realised (both phenomenologically and computationally) 
by the state inference that there is an uncomfortable feeling at 
hand, the latter occurs through motoric action, engendered by 
a prediction to not be in this uncomfortable state. To resolve 
the present prediction error, therefore, the anterior insula 
666 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680
sends signals for action to the SMA, leading to tic generation 
via descending proprioceptive predictions (i.e., glutaminer-
gic inputs) to the motor cortex and putamen (Somogyi et al., 
1981). In POMDP schema, this might be cast as the result of 
high precision weight over the C tensor, which encodes the 
preferred outcomes of action. To return to patient J, it was 
reported that the itch (i.e., prediction error) disappeared (i.e., 
the resolution of prediction error) once such movement was 
initiated, giving the individual a temporary sense of relief.
Crucially, we propose that this resolution of prediction 
error through sensory attenuation is likely twofold. To a 
certain degree, the prediction error might be reduced directly 
and mechanically by the mere act of ticcing, which changes 
the proprioceptive and interoceptive state of the organism 
such that the sensory data it receives now accords more 
strongly with its prior expectations. From this perspective, 
ticcing behaviour can be seen as the result of a failure of 
sensory attenuation in a manner different from how such a 
failure putatively underwrites movement disorders (Brown 
et al., 2013; Pareés et al., 2014; Seth, 2014), and is strongly 
akin to scratching an itch.
Conversely, the type of sensory attenuation that, according 
to active inference, necessarily accompanies the emission of 
any action is also implicated in ticcing. This is because action 
involves the attenuation of sensory afferents, which otherwise 
indicate to the organism that they are not moving, as explained 
above, whilst higher precision weight is granted to the final 
sensory consequences of an intended action (Adams et al., 
2013; Brown et al., 2013; Limanowski, 2017; Parr et al., 2018). 
Crucially, in the case of tics, these target afferents include those 
underlying premonitory sensations, because they belong to an 
anatomical region that constitutes part of the (predicted) action 
Fig. 1  The model of TS used by Rae et al. (2019a), within which tics and premonitory sensations are generated via aberrant precision weighted 
prediction dynamics in a predictive hierarchy. Reprinted from Rae et al. (2019a)
667Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680 
arc of tics. In other words, there is strong overlap between where 
one tics and where one feels premonitory sensations. Given that, 
to be able to act at all, the precision weight over the sensory 
data - whether proprioceptive, interoceptive or exteroceptive 
- belonging to the (current) relevant action arc needs to be 
attenuated, ticcing, by necessity, entails reduced precision weight 
over the interoceptive prediction errors constituting premonitory 
sensations, thereby alleviating the individual’s discomfort.
In summary, at this sensorimotor level, we hold that, 
due to synaptic dysfunction, premonitory sensations are the 
result of an abnormally high level of precision weighting 
deployed onto the A tensor (i.e., weighted precision error), 
which draws the organism to act to minimise the variational 
free energy of their generative model. Note that given the 
relationship between the A tensor and attention, it is no 
surprise that premonitory sensations are said to powerfully 
occupy the mental lives of those suffering from TS (Martino 
et al., 2013). To resolve the prediction error yielded from 
hyperprecision weight over the A tensor, the organism 
must act to engender the necessary sensory attenuation. 
We hold this active response likely involves two processes: 
the mechanical, direct alteration of sensory data; and the 
modulation of precision weight entailed by action itself. 
The degree to which one type of sensory attenuation 
predominates over another in ticcing is an open question 
and ought to be answered empirically.
Section 2: Tics as epistemic foraging
In the BBC series, “The Mind Traveller” with neurologist 
Oliver Sacks (Rawlence et al., 1998), we are introduced to 
Shane Fistell, who has TS, and characterises his tics as a way 
of disambiguating the limits of, for example, social norms, 
and describes ticcing behaviour as “at its highest… a form 
of investigation… and it could be also an emotional, not 
just physical, investigation.” This seemingly introduces a 
different motivation underlying tics: namely, information 
gain rather than the maximisation of pragmatic value 
through sensory attenuation. We propose that in many of 
the aforementioned contexts when tics occur in the absence 
of premonitory sensations (Leckman et al., 1993), it is this 
type of epistemic tic at play.
More precisely, we hold that the propensity to tic within 
certain contexts serves to resolve ambiguity about the sta-
tus of the inferred, agentive self by disambiguating the out-
comes of self-generated action and worldly events (Clarke, 
1996). This crucially involves both information gain about 
the agent “that I am” and the fulfilment of a supervening 
pragmatic imperative, which draws me to act so that “I will 
be able to observe the sensations that I cause”—perhaps 
the most overt expression of self-evidencing (see e.g., self-
stimming behaviour in severe autism (Nwaordu & Charlton, 
2023).
This need to buttress my belief—about the type of agent 
that I am—stems from the failure of sensory attenuation out-
lined above. This is because unduly highly weighted sen-
sory signals will necessarily attenuate the relative precision 
weight of state priors (encoded in the B tensor), which, in 
turn, will act as evidence for the higher-order inference that 
the latent states that I encounter (my world) are unpredict -
able, imprecise, and volatile. Crucially, this belief in volatility 
also is self-referential, because, in active inference, the self 
is cast as just another latent state or cause of multimodal 
sensory information—albeit a unique one in its capacity to 
stably bring about the precise sensory expectations the agent 
has of her actions (Deane, 2020; Deane et al., 2020; Deane, 
2021; Hohwy & Michael, 2017; Friston, 2018; Limanow-
ski & Blankenburg, 2013; Limanowski & Friston, 2020). In 
other words, the self has been described as a constructed 
hypothesis, resulting from an inference that there is a stable, 
persisting thing at the heart of the cognitive system, which 
can autonomously bring about desired (predicted) sensory 
outcomes (Metzinger, 2004, 2008, 2013).
The maintenance of this stable sense of selfhood therefore 
is contingent on the alignment of predicted and observed sen-
sory data, which means that the observations resulting from 
self-generated action need to be minimally surprising, given 
the individual’s generative model (see Equation 1) (Frith, 
2012; Hohwy, 2007). With weak priors and strong likeli-
hoods in play, however, the precision weight of the posterior 
belief about the cause of sensation—in this case, that it was 
the agentic being I call me—is reduced with accompanying 
uncertainty. This engenders a pernicious cycle in which the 
continuous aggregation of uncertainty continues to reduce 
the precision weight of the individual’s belief about their 
agentive nature. Although confidence in that belief will be, 
in part, reinforced by the individual’s ticcing, which, recall, is 
aimed at sensory attenuation, we propose that many individu-
als suffering from TS will take further steps to seek evidence 
of their own agency and autonomy.
Thus, we introduce the notion of epistemic ticcing, which 
we suggest is motoric action designed simultaneously to 
test the individual’s capacity to bring out about a predicted 
sensory outcome—thereby yielding information gain about 
the hidden causes of which “I” am one—and to reinforce the 
belief that, indeed, there is an agent within the generative 
model that can bring about the sensory outcomes it predicts 
will result from its action. This means that there is a utility 
achieved through epistemic ticcing, which underwrites its 
associated information gain. In other words, the individual 
only seeks to gain information about the status of their con-
trol to provide evidence for an overarching preference that 
they actually are creatures with agency. Our proposal here is 
consonant with the findings of Perrykkad et al. (2023, p. 617), 
who show experimentally that “participants can learn to use 
environments to their advantage in facilitating unequivocal 
668 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680
judgements of agency,” given that uncertainty in the belief 
of one’s own agency impedes the pursuit of other rewards, 
whether they be instrumental or epistemic (Inglis, 2000).
Section 3: Habitualised tics and their connection 
to valence
It is noteworthy that, as mentioned earlier, certain 
individuals can suppress their tics as a self-initiated coping 
strategy (Ganos et al., 2014; Matsuda et al., 2016; Rae et al., 
2020; Rawji et al., 2020). However, such inhibitory control 
is said to be effortful and tiring (Brandt et al., 2016). In fact, 
for some individuals the sensory discomfort and/or effort 
of suppression is so unpleasant that it symptomatically 
outweighs the tic itself (Stern, 2018). For example, one 
young person with TS summarises the subjective experience 
of suppressing tics as follows:
“…I’m holding them in, it puts pressure on me…that 
makes me stressed and then makes me upset…” (Smith 
et al., 2016).
This is of particular relevance from an active inference 
perspective, because it has recently been proposed that 
a sense of cognitive effort is rooted in the selection of a 
policy3 that diverges from prior beliefs over policies—i.e., 
what I would normally do in this situation (Parr et al., 
2023). Priors over policies are thus associated with habits 
in active inference, which are acquired by the individual 
performing an action policy and subsequently inferring 
what action was taken in a given context. This information 
can then be stored as a prior probability, or value, over 
policies associated with specific states (encoded in the E 
tensor in POMDP schema) such that when the individual 
infers itself to be in a given context, the prior value of an 
action policy influences the selection of the policy itself 
(Maisto et al., 2019). This is because the total probability 
of a policy is determined by a combination of priors before 
(E) and after evaluating EFE (G) (Equation 2).
Equation 2. Contribution of Prior Values and EFE to Action 
Selection.
Note that the σ notation refers to a normalised exponen-
tial - i.e., SoftMax - function.
This equation shows that the most likely action—i.e., the 
one that possesses the highest posterior probability Q (u)—
has a high prior habitual value E  and a low associated EFE 
G, which recall, is in part predicated on preferred sensory 
observations (encoded by a C tensor or its parameters c).
Q(u) = /u1D70E(E − G)
The role prior, habitual values have in action selec-
tion is closely tied to the notion of “canalisation,” as 
described by Carhart-Harris et al. (2023), who repurpose 
the original meaning of the word—phenotypic stabiliza-
tion (Waddington, 1942, 1959)—so that it now refers to 
the entrenchment of cognitive and behavioural patterns 
over time through associative (Hebbian) learning that 
strengthens neural connections (Cicchetti & Tucker, 1994; 
Deane et al., 2024). As Deane et al. (2024, p. 6) nicely put 
it: “many disorders feature the pathological stabilization 
of particular cognitive–behavioral pathways, reflecting 
their shared reliance on (Hebbian) neuroplastic processes 
of canalization gone awry.”
Like Deane et al. (2024), we propose that habits may 
underscore pathological behavioural processes, which we 
explore within the context of tics. Our central point is that 
the more the individual responds to premonitory sensations 
through tic behaviour, the greater the habitual prior of that 
tic policy becomes in association with that state of inferred 
discomfort. It is for this mechanistic reason that ticcing 
behaviour seems so effortless as to be unvoluntary (Rae 
et al., 2019a). This description is useful, because it captures 
the strength of the canalised ticcing behaviour; however, 
it does not preclude the possibility for top-down control 
that certain individuals can evidently deploy to suppress 
tic behaviour. That said, it has been noted that such top-
down inhibition is incredibly effortful (Brandt et al., 2016; 
Rae et al., 2019a, 2023). We show that such inhibitory 
control within TS can be accounted for through the AIF by 
recognising that tic suppression involves action selection 
that is divergent from what the individual would normally do 
in that context—namely, tic. In other words, tic suppression 
possesses a low habitual prior in that inferred state, unlike 
tic behaviour. When the tic is not suppressed, the posterior 
over action is dominated by habitual priors. This means that 
the divergence between the posterior and prior over action 
is small and—on the formal arguments that this divergence 
corresponds to effort— the path of least effort is to select 
the tic behaviour.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that canalised behaviour 
arguably underwrites both tics aimed at sensory 
attenuation and epistemic foraging. Whilst the contextual 
cue for the former is often the presence of the premonitory 
sensation, the trigger for the second type of behaviour 
might be an inferred loss of precision weight over beliefs 
about the capacity for autonomous control and agency.
We can embellish this story further by folding in the 
notion of action precision weight, γ, a parameter in the 
generative model that tracks beliefs the agent has in its 
own action selection (Deane et al., 2024; Hesp et al., 
2021). More precisely, this gamma parameter is said to 
scale EFE estimates, formalised by Equation 3, which is a 
modification of Equation 2.
3 Note that, in this treatment, for simplicity, we are equating the next 
action (u) with policy. When a policy entails a sequence of actions, it 
is usually denoted by π in the active inference literature.
669Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680 
Equation 3. How action precision weight influences the 
contribution of EFE to policy selection.
Note that the “dot” notation indicates a backwards 
matrix multiplication and normalisation.
Importantly, Hesp et al. (2021) propose that γ can be 
treated as a hidden state within the generative model, such 
that the system can infer its own confidence estimate in its 
action model, and that this state inference corresponds to pos-
itive and negative valence. Put another way, if an individual 
infers herself to have high confidence in its action selection, 
it will feel good (i.e., confident in the sense “I know exactly 
what to do next”); if it does not, it will feel bad (i.e., the angst 
that attends “I don’t know what to do in this situation”) As 
Equation 3 shows, as gamma tends to zero—as low affect 
grows—action selection becomes dominated by E  because 
(negative) EFE is multiplied by gamma in its contribution 
to Q(u). This might explain why negative emotions, such as 
anxiety, stress, tension, and frustration, are associated with 
tics (Bornstein et al., 1990; Eapen et al., 2004; Leisman & 
Sheldon, 2022; Silva et al., 1995). Given that negative affect 
biases policy selection towards habits (E) and that tic behav-
iour can be cast as fundamentally habitual, it is expected 
that as negative affect builds, ticcing becomes even harder to 
resist. Note that, perhaps for reasons we will suggest below, 
a lower quality of life is strongly associated with TS (Eapen 
et al., 2016). This means that a pernicious cycle is likely at 
play in TS, whereby habitualised tic behaviour drives low 
affect, which drives tic behaviour and so on. Interestingly, 
changes in gamma have been associated with dopaminer -
gic firings in the midbrain (Hesp et al., 2021; Friston et al., 
2015; Schwartenbeck et al., 2015). This aligns with the afore-
mentioned mediating role of dopamine with respect to tic 
expression in negatively valenced states of anxiety or stress, 
because such contexts will entail the “reporting” of negative 
prediction error—i.e., a drop in gamma—via dopaminergic 
pathways (Schultz, 2016; Schultz et al., 1997).
It is worth clarifying that, in terms of these low-level sen-
sorimotor loops, the action policy that individuals would 
otherwise select on the basis of their preferred sensory 
observations would likely not be strongly divergent from 
the habitualised tic action. The tic only became habitualised 
(i.e., obtained a high prior value) because it was selected 
initially either as a result of its inherent pragmatic value in 
suppressing premonitory sensations (with respect to the tics 
described in Section 1)  or its combined epistemic and prag-
matic value (with respect to the tics described in Section 2). 
Thus, if we only look at this level of the generative hierarchy, 
we can plausibly suggest that beliefs encoded both in the C 
tensor and the E tensor drive tic behaviour. If this is the case, 
it means that the reason why tics become more frequent in 
Q(u) = /u1D70E(E − /u1D6FE⋅G)
negatively affective states cannot be because of the reduced 
influence of EFE in action selection in and of itself. Rather, 
habitualised behaviours might become more impervious to 
top-down control: i.e., the beliefs encoded in high-level C 
tensors. It is to these higher-order priors that we now turn.
Section 4: Self‑modelling and TS
In this section, we shall adopt a broad, diachronic perspective 
and explore how tic behaviour can gradually erode the prior 
beliefs the individual entertains about herself, which are 
putatively encoded at the deepest (or highest) levels of the 
generative hierarchy and thus should act as constraints over 
the unfolding of lower-level sensorimotor behaviour (Clark, 
2013, 2015; Hohwy & Michael, 2017). Before doing so, it 
is worth examining the hierarchical structure of a generative 
model that putatively underwrites the ability to reflect on 
oneself as a self – what Parvizi-Wayne et al. ( 2024) call 
a conceptually-represented-self-as-object (cf., Gallagher & 
Zahavi, 2020). 
As mentioned, the deeper levels of the hierarchy are 
said to track slower narratives, trajectories, or fluctuations 
in external states. Crucially, encoded in these neuronal 
pathways (i.e., the neuronal instantiation of the tensors in 
POMDP formulations) will not only be beliefs about worldly 
contingencies, such as seasonal changes, but also beliefs 
about “endogenous”, interacting, latent, long-term patterns 
(or causes), such as personality traits, likes and dislikes and 
so on, which map onto (or engender) patterned sensory data 
from which those latent, internal patterns/causes can be 
inferred (Hohwy & Michael, 2017, p. 8). This is because, 
in terms of the generative modelling utilised by the active 
inference framework, these beliefs are not considered funda-
mentally different from those that target states in the world, 
since, as mentioned in Section 2, both the self and the world 
are cast as inferred latent causes of sensory observations (cf., 
Deane, 2021; Hohwy & Michael, 2017; Limanowski & Fris-
ton, 2020; Woźniak, 2018). Thus, it has been proposed that 
the target of these self-referential beliefs are “deeply hidden 
internal causes of the agent” (Hohwy & Michael, 2017, p. 
7), and that the (hierarchical) net of these beliefs constitute 
the represented self, or self-concept. 4 In other words, when 
these higher-order beliefs are aggregated, they can be said 
4 The question of whether active inference can account for so-called 
pre-reflective self-awareness - i.e., the “for-me-ness” immanent (and 
yet not objectified) in experience - is beyond the scope of this paper and 
ought to be explored elsewhere (cf., Parvizi-Wayne et al., 2024). This is 
not something that Hohwy and Michael (2017) consider: indeed, they 
argue that “the self is identical to these causes” (p. 8), without justifying 
how this gives rise to subjectivity and not (merely) the sense of self-as-
object, to which certain features or contents are attributed (cf., Hohwy & 
Michael, 2017, p. 27; Legrand & Ruby, 2009).  However, this is also not 
the critical issue on which this paper rests.
670 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680
to answer the question: “what type of agent am I?” (Hohwy 
& Michael, 2017, p. 9). Note that this conceptual self-as-
object is often termed the narrative self; however, it is worth 
recognising that this narrational aspect to the generative 
hierarchy need not be entirely coherent or linguistic (Den-
nett, 1991; Strawson, 2004); rather, as put by Hohwy and 
Michael (2017, p. 9), they are narrative “in the sense that the 
subsumption of events under higher-level regularities (i.e., 
hierarchical Bayes) structures and constrains our interpreta-
tion of those events.” We simply add to this elegant summary 
that, if the individual is to continue being the thing that it 
is, those higher-level regularities should also constrain the 
actions deployed at lower sensorimotor levels, because higher 
levels issue predictions about lower-level beliefs, which are 
fulfilled through action.
Crucially, however, we need not remain exactly the same 
thing into the future (Clark, 2017). Rather, we have (often 
personal, linguistic) preferences about the types of things we 
want to be, which might be different from what we perceive 
ourselves to be now (Rosfort & Staghellini, 2009). Put dif-
ferently, what might be termed the veridical self-concept  
might differ from the desired self-concept. Importantly, this 
type of temporally extended, dynamic self-modelling will 
be shaped by individuals’ cultural surroundings, including 
their community’s language (Nelson, 2003), social norms 
(Gilbert 1990; Searle 1995), and the general behaviour of 
proximate conspecifics (Gergely et al. 2002; Meltzoff, 1995). 
Given the perceived pathological status of TS (Hirschtritt 
et al., 2015), as well as the prejudice faced by those who 
suffer from it (Malli & Forrester-Jones, 2022), its (inferred) 
presence is unlikely to be a desired feature within a given 
individual’s generative model.5 This intuition is buttressed 
by the fact that those with TS suppress and conceal their tics 
to avoid being labelled disabled (Buckser, 2008) and charac-
terise their syndrome with the negatively valenced notion of 
difference: i.e., as something that prevents them from being 
normal (Malli et al., 2019). To quote Participant 15 from the 
qualitative study of Malli et al. (2019):
“It's a disorder that just makes me, separates me 
from the rest, and in my eyes, it's quite a big distance, 
because I don't feel as though I can live a normal life 
most of the time with it. And it's not even just things that 
people can see on me when they first meet me. They are 
the things that happen behind closed doors that no one 
sees and only I see, or sometimes don't see.”
Note that the study of Malli et al. (2019) discusses other 
reasons why TS sufferers adopt a negative attitude towards the 
syndrome; however, for the sake of this theoretical analysis, 
it suffices to say that, in terms of explicit desires, supposedly 
encoded at the higher, more fixed levels of the generative hier-
archy, individuals with TS would prefer not to exhibit (ego-
dystonic) tic behaviour and execute tic suppression in line 
with this (ego-syntonic) preference. In active inference, pref-
erences and beliefs are elided, whereby an agent’s preference 
for a course of action can be described as a belief about what it 
will do, or, more precisely, the future states it will find itself in 
(Friston et al., 2014; Friston et al., 2015). Thus, we can plau-
sibly propose that TS sufferers possess a higher-order belief 
that they will not enact their tics in line with their expectations 
about what socially situated agents should be like.
However, given what we have said about tics deriving 
from sensorimotor preferences to mitigate failures of sensory 
attenuation and/or gain information about the state of the 
individual’s capacity for autonomous control—and that 
these beliefs continue to be held even after ticcing becomes 
canalised—it now becomes plausible to suggest that TS 
involves a clash of preferences, or a duality of desires. This 
is because at higher-levels of the generative hierarchy the 
individual prefers not to tic, in order to maximise evidence 
for the belief in (them being) a non-ticcing, socially 
acceptable agent. However, at lower-levels tics are sub-
personally and implicitly preferred, because they possess 
pragmatic or epistemic value, given the belief architecture 
at that level of the generative model. Crucially, we propose 
that this maps onto the phenomenology of selfhood: whereas 
tic suppression will provide model evidence for a belief in 
the presence of a certain, desired (aspect of a) self-concept 
(i.e., I am not a ticcing thing), it prevents the realisation of 
the (perceived) need for sensory attenuation. This second 
point is pivotal because interoceptive inference, achieved 
through sensory attenuation, has been argued to underwrite 
a minimal sense of self or minimal phenomenal self (MPS) 
(Barrett & Simmons, 2015; Blanke & Metzinger, 2009; 
Critchley & Seth, 2012; Limanowski & Blankenburg, 2013; 
Metzinger, 2008; Seth, 2013; Seth et al., 2011; Suzuki et al., 
2013). For example, Blanke & Metzinger (2009, p. 8) write:
“The essence of selfhood, the representational con-
tent of MPS, is that it indicates to the system that a 
specific state in its internal neural dynamics has been 
reached, namely an integrated functional state, which 
for the first time makes the body available for atten-
tion and global control. MPS, characterized by self-
identification, self-location, and weak 1PP [1st person 
perspective], is the outcome of this process on the level 
of conscious experience.”
Similarly, Critchley & Seth (2012, p. 425) write:
“Self-consciousness is grounded on the feeling states 
that emerge from the interaction of interoceptive pre-
dictions and prediction errors.”
5 Although it is worth noting that, in many cases, those with TS 
advocate for wider acceptance within society, and make a deliberate 
choice not to manage their tics through medication.
671Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680 
A thorough analysis of the MPS and the validity of 
grounding it in interoceptive inference is beyond the scope 
of this paper (Christoff et al., 2011; Legrand, 2006, 2007; 
Legrand & Ruby, 2009; Limanowski & Blankenburg, 2013); 
nevertheless, if interoceptive prediction error suppression, 
which ticcing achieves, underwrites the MPS—even if this 
just means that they are necessarily involved in “our intui-
tive sense of being ourselves located where the body is felt 
and represented” (Legrand & Ruby, 2009, p. 272)—then the 
proposed conflict at hand becomes clear. Our point is that, 
in ticcing, the individual can be described as retaining the 
integrity not only of its own body but also its MPS. How -
ever, in ticcing, she is denying evidence for more explicit 
hypotheses about the type of agent that she is: that is, a 
non-ticcing thing. We term this oppositional phenomenal 
self-modelling (OPSM) (Fig. 2).
 This is not to say that ticcing leads to the disappearance 
of the self-concept, for a veridical self-concept is always 
available to the individual. Rather, it just acts as evidence 
against the preferences associated with that individual’s 
desired self-concept. Faced with this dialectic, she can 
either update her model and conclude that she is not a 
socially adaptive being, suppress her tics, or continue to tic, 
reinforcing the duality of desires and the prediction error 
therein. A thorough discussion of which of these options best 
serves the wellbeing of those with TS is beyond the scope of 
this paper; that said, we recognise that behavioural therapy 
for TS involves exposure and response prevention (ERP) 
and habit-reversal training (HRT) via tic suppression (Fründt 
et al., 2017; McGuire et al., 2015; Verdellen et al., 2007, 
2011) and propose that the function of these interventions 
can be cast as the weakening of habitual ticcing behaviour, 
which thereby affords evidence for the (desired) presence of 
a non-ticcing, higher-order self(-concept) and thus increases 
a global sense of wellbeing. However, clearly more empirical 
work—informed by phenomenology—is necessary to 
disentangle the numerous forms of self-experience that are 
altered as a consequence of TS and the management of tics 
across development.
Empirical Predictions, Limitations, 
and Future Directions
Although this paper is fundamentally theoretical, it is 
worth recognising that our model makes testable predic-
tions worth exploring. In Section  1, we claimed that TS is 
marked by hyperprecision weighting over (the likelihood 
of) interoceptive sensory data. This is strongly consonant 
with the findings of Rae et al. (2019b), who found that 
participants with TS had an objectively lower interocep-
tive accuracy on a heartbeat tracking task, as well as an 
increased (self-reported) sensitivity to interoceptive signals 
(Ganos et al., 2015; Narapareddy et al., 2022). However, 
these researchers did not investigate the mechanism underly-
ing tics and the subsequent attenuation of the premonitory 
sensation.
We have proposed that two processes might be at play. 
First, tics might engender a direct (mechanical) alteration of 
the interoceptive and proprioceptive state of the individual, 
as if scratching an itch. Second, tics entail an indirect down-
weighting of the interoceptive prediction errors, because this 
form of sensory attenuation is necessary for movement along 
the proprioceptive arc. The degree to which one process 
predominates over another is testable: one would expect that 
if the occurrent sensory attenuation was solely due to the 
down-weighting of interoceptive prediction errors necessary 
to allow for movement, there would be minimal change in 
the underlying state of the epithelial receptors following the 
tic, and, rather, a change only in the precision weighting of 
sensory afferent signals.
Furthermore, given the causal role of insula reactivity 
within our model of tics and premonitory sensations, we 
propose that the validity of our account can be empirically 
tested with noninvasive methods such as low-intensity 
focused ultrasound (LIFU) (Bystritsky et  al., 2011). 
Importantly, LIFU can be used to modulate neuronal activity 
in deeper areas of the brain like the insula. One prediction 
that our model makes is that direct inhibition of both the 
posterior and anterior insula will result in the transient 
suppression of tics (compared with sham), as shown for 
other interoceptive, homeostatic processes, including both 
the reaction to and perception of pain (Legon et al., 2023).
With respect to Section  2, we argue that sensation-free 
ticcing constitutes a form of epistemic foraging in the pursuit 
of evidence for one’s own agency (Perrykkad et al., 2023). 
To this end, we expect that individuals with TS may express 
tics as a form of exploratory behaviour that is driven by the 
opportunity to learn self-referential information. This could 
be tested via a multiarm bandit task within which partici-
pants could either opt for reliable, nonself-referential infor-
mation in an exploitative fashion or pursue a riskier “arm,” 
which could offer self-referential information or none at all. 
This is in line with findings that receiving information is 
inherently rewarding (Bromberg-Martin & Hikosaka, 2009; 
Bromberg-Martin & Monosov, 2020; Charpentier et al., 
2018; FitzGibbon et al., 2020; Garvin & Krishnan, 2022). 
Similarly, we would expect that, in the paradigm used by 
Perrykkad et al. (2023), participants with TS would spend 
more time foraging in environments that yield accurate 
beliefs about their own agency than a control group and 
would be more sensitive to an increase of prediction error 
regarding the state of their own agentive control. We there-
fore predict that TS participants would switch environments 
672 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680
Fig. 2  Hierarchical generative model of OPSM in TS. A hierarchical 
Bayes graph representing the inferential architecture that we propose 
is responsible for the experience of OPSM in TS. Some dependen-
cies (i.e., edges) have been omitted for clarity. Arrows indicate the 
direction pf dependencies between variables. Shaded circles repre-
sent inferred beliefs about states s and actions u given observations o 
and the parameters of the generative model in square boxes (A, B, C, 
D, E, and β). The parameter A denotes the likelihood mapping, i.e., 
the probability of making an observation o given state s. B Beliefs 
about how states transition into others. C Prior beliefs (preferences) 
about sensory outcomes. D Beliefs about the initial state before any 
observations. E Priors over policies—what the agent would normally 
do, independent of the EFE in the current situation. β Prior over 
gamma (γ), whereby γ—i.e., expected action precision weight—is 
the inverse of β. This generative model evinces hierarchical depth, 
in so far as the orange level (L2) contains higher-level states which 
constrain the state and policy priors at the level below (L1). These 
higher-level states are informed by the policy and preference priors 
that “belong” to a higher-order self that is enculturated and capable 
of being reflected upon. With respect to OPSM in TS, these param-
eters guide active tic suppression. However, they do not determine 
the beliefs at the lower (blue level). Here, the policy and preference 
priors—that shape action—are geared towards the suppression of 
interoceptive free energy (i.e., prediction errors). The agent makes 
the implicit inference by inverting their generative model: the hidden 
state that best explains observed outcomes is inferred, based on initial 
state beliefs (D), a likelihood mapping (A)—which, in this case, has 
extremely high precision weighting—and beliefs about state transi-
tions (B). Although tics serve to suppress free energy at this lower-
level, sensorimotor (blue) level, when their sensory outcomes associ-
ated are observed at the (orange) higher-level, free energy increases 
given that level’s architecture
673Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680 
in the pursuit of greater certainty earlier than control groups, 
given the steady accumulation of uncertainty about agency 
in their current environment (Cohen et al., 2007, p. 937).
Finally, we suggested in Section 4 that TS likely engenders 
a type of OPSM, marked by a clash between the preferences 
associated with a higher-order, socially embedded, desired 
self-concept and those relating to lower-order sensorimotor 
arcs. Given the abstract nature of this account of ticcing 
behaviour and selfhood, we appeal to descriptions of TS 
phenomenology. We expect discernable differences in specific 
phenomenological aspects of the lived experience of those 
with TS and those without. More precisely, one hypothesis is 
that those with TS experience a lack of self-coherence—i.e., 
they often feel attracted by different desires: in this case, 
to tic or not to tic. This may have downstream effects on 
the sense of agency in TS. These experiential distinctions 
should be carefully studied using novel questionnaires, 
as well as (micro) phenomenological interviews (Bevan, 
2014; Petitmengin et al., 2019; Valenzuela-Moguillansky 
& Vásquez-Rosati, 2019). It is worth stressing that the 
dynamics underpinning OPSM are likely at play in other 
psychopathologies; thus, the predictions made above should 
be transferable. For example, ERP also is the first-line 
psychotherapy for obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) 
(Foa & Goldstein, 1978; Foa & McLean, 2016; Marks et al., 
1975) and involves the provocation of anxiety-producing 
obsessions and the inhibition of compulsions that, whilst 
alleviating short-term anxiety, reinforce the individual’s 
fear (Hezel & Simpson, 2019). Thus, like TS, OCD can be 
described from the perspective of a duality of desires, which 
maps onto distinct temporal horizons: to tic/compulse (i.e., 
short-term alleviation of premonitory sensation/anxiety) 
versus to not-tic/not-compulse (i.e., long-term reinforcement 
of desired conceptual self-model). This, again, could be 
tested via questionnaires and phenomenological interviews.
In fact, we suggest that our four-tiered model may 
provide explanatory power beyond TS and OCD, especially 
because it is unclear to what degree tics (or at least tic-like 
movements) are exclusive to TS. Indeed, certain aspects 
of our model might be able to generate insights into the 
neurocognitive processes relevant to the expression of 
motoric phenomena that resemble tics within both hypo- 
and (especially) hyper-kinesias, including self-stimming 
in autism spectrum disorder ASD (Nwaordu & Charlton, 
2023) but also stimulus utilisation behaviours (Janik et al., 
2018), functional tics (Cavanna et al., 2023), and attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). For example, in 
ASD, individuals may produce self-initiated (rhythmic) 
actions to regulate sensory input (e.g., to ameliorate 
symptoms of hypersensitivity), otherwise known as self-
stimming. We propose that these movements may be aptly 
described within the lower-level sensorimotor aspects of 
our model, which provides a general mechanism by which 
to reduce sensorimotor prediction error through movement. 
Furthermore, qualitative work by Kapp et  al. (2019) 
highlights that autistic individuals perceive self-stimming 
to be generally socially unacceptable and yet capable of 
being understood if explained to others, which suggests 
that there is likely an element of OPSM at play among self-
stimming individuals, which nevertheless can be tempered 
or moderated given social acceptance. However, whilst the 
present model may in fact shed light upon the expression 
of such behaviours at a conceptual level, its generalisation 
to other conditions, such as ASD, also must be empirically 
tested. A key challenge to our account is therefore to 
disambiguate TS specific phenomena from non-TS specific 
phenomena and assess the degree to which our model has 
explanatory power beyond the purview of TS.
It is worth noting some of the limitations of this paper 
and the model it proposes. One such limitation of our model 
is that it does not make concrete predictions about when 
one preference within the OPSM dialectic might predomi-
nate over the other. As mentioned, however, the behavioural 
therapy that is typically employed for the management of TS 
could be described as weakening the prior value—encoded 
in the E tensor—of tics, whilst strengthening the prior value 
of tic suppression. With respect to OPSM, this can be cast 
as biasing the duality of desires towards the (non-ticcing) 
states consequent on the actions associated with the desired 
self-concept (the non-ticcing agent), in spite of the felt dis-
comfort that accompanies tic suppression. In other words, 
one would expect that the explicit preferences associated with 
the higher-order self-concept (i.e., tic suppression) will domi-
nate action selection in those individuals with TS who have 
undergone ERP or HRT compared to those who have not.
In terms of other limitations, it is worth mentioning that 
the ambitious scope of our model should be tempered with 
rigorous empirical tests of our key hypotheses. As noted, 
we provide an analysis of four levels of ticcing behaviour 
and suggest specific predictions that can be used to assess 
the overall viability of our model. Importantly, however, we 
do not intend to provide a unitary explanation of ticcing 
behaviour, but instead aim to account for greater variability 
in ticcing behaviour in TS. For example, we suggest that 
the insula cortex plays a causal role in the generation and 
expression of tics, such that the transient inhibition of both 
anterior and posterior insula will result in the cessation of 
tics. However, the development of ticcing behaviour in the 
first place is an issue that we do not address, and it is likely 
that other neurocognitive processes contribute to the emer -
gence (and maintenance) of such actions.
Another future challenge to address with our model is 
whether it can better account for observable behaviour 
over and above current models, including reinforcement 
learning (RL)-based approaches, which have demonstrated 
considerable success in characterising the computational 
674 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680
basis of exploratory behaviour, which, in Section  2, we 
suggested underlies sensation-free ticcing (Alejandro & 
Holroyd, 2024; although see Friston et al., 2009; Tschantz 
et al., 2020). To this end, further evidence through model 
comparison is needed and can be applied to specific levels of 
analysis to evaluate the relative strengths and weaknesses of 
our characterisation of ticcing behaviour. However, we need 
more data; despite a steady increase in the public awareness 
of aspects of TS, there is still a noticeable absence of 
research programmes that can address many of the issues in 
TS mentioned in this work. Our hope is to motivate further 
experimental research in these directions and, alongside 
open and data-driven methods, promote a more holistic 
understanding of TS.
Conclusions
We have provided a formal account of the symptomatology 
of TS through the lens of active inference and hierarchical 
generative modelling, offering a novel perspective on the 
interplay between sensorimotor, cognitive, and phenomeno-
logical aspects of the condition. We have offered a four -
fold analysis of the cardinal features of TS, including tic-
cing behaviour and its control and variable complexity. We 
first focused on simple forms of ticcing behaviour aimed at 
reinstating sensory attenuation, which we theorise is driven 
by an episodic failure to attenuate sensory precision weight 
(that engenders premonitory sensations). We then analysed 
an epistemic variety of tics—a form of epistemic foraging—
that occur in the absence of atypical sensation and described 
how these tics provide evidence for the organism’s world 
model and their status as agentive selves therein. We then 
characterised both epistemic (sensation-free) and nonepis-
temic (sensational) tics as habitualised behaviour, cast as 
strong prior beliefs about action selection. Finally, we show 
how such dynamics plausibly underscore a conflict in infer-
ence over the minimal phenomenal sense of self and a con-
ceptual self-construction. The form of OPSM that we have 
proposed sheds light on the duality of desires experienced 
by individuals with TS, navigating between the urge to tic 
for homeostatic restoration and the imperative to suppress 
tics within the social environment. This formal account not 
only advances our understanding of TS but also invites fur-
ther empirical and theoretical exploration into the intricate 
dynamics of self-experience and adaptive behavioural con-
trol in psychopathology more broadly, whose various mani-
festations might be defined, to a lesser or greater degree, by 
the mechanisms underwriting OPSM.
Acknowledgments The authors are extremely grateful to all the attend-
ants of a virtual theoretical neurobiology meeting hosted by the Well-
come Centre for Human Neuroimaging, where we presented the first 
version of this paper. They are especially appreciative of the direct 
feedback given by Karl Friston, Ryan Smith, Alexey Tolchinsky and 
two anonymous reviewers. The preprint of this paper was first pub-
lished on PsyArXiv.
Data Availability The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums 
is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited 
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance 
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction 
is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Adams, R. A., Shipp, S., & Friston, K. J. (2013). Predictions not com-
mands: active inference in the motor system. Brain Structure and 
Function, 218, 611–43.
Albin, R. L., & Mink, J. W. (2006). Recent advances in Tourette 
syndrome research. Trends in Neurosciences, 29(3), 175–182. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. tins. 2006. 01. 001
Alejandro, R. J., & Holroyd, C. B. (2024). Hierarchical control over 
foraging behavior by anterior cingulate cortex. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 105623. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. neubi 
orev. 2024. 105623
Aron, A. R., Herz, D. M., Brown, P., Forstmann, B. U., & Zaghloul, 
K. (2016). Frontosubthalamic circuits for control of action and 
cognition. The Journal of Neuroscience, 36(45), 11489–11495. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1523/ JNEUR OSCI. 2348- 16. 2016
Barrett, L. F. (2017). The theory of constructed emotion: An active 
inference account of interoception and categorization. Social 
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 12(1), 1–23. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1093/ scan/ nsw154
Barrett, L. F., & Simmons, W. K. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in 
the brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 16(7), 419–429. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nrn39 50
Beste, C., & Münchau, A. (2018). Tics and Tourette syndrome—Sur -
plus of actions rather than disorder? Movement Disorders, 33(2), 
238–242. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ mds. 27244
Bevan, M. T. (2014). A Method of Phenomenological Interviewing. 
Qualitative Health Research, 24(1), 136–144. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1177/ 10497 32313 519710
Blandini, F., Nappi, G., Tassorelli, C., & Martignoni, E. (2000). Func-
tional changes of the basal ganglia circuitry in Parkinson’s dis-
ease. Progress in Neurobiology, 62(1), 63–88. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/ s0301- 0082(99) 00067-2
Blanke, O., & Metzinger, T. (2009). Full-body illusions and minimal 
phenomenal selfhood. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(1), 7–13. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. tics. 2008. 10. 003
Bohlhalter, S., Goldfine, A., Matteson, S., Garraux, G., Hanakawa, T., 
Kansaku, K., Wurzman, R., & Hallett, M. (2006). Neural cor -
relates of tic generation in Tourette syndrome: An event-related 
functional MRI study. Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 129(Pt 8), 
2029–2037. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ brain/ awl050
675Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680 
Bornstein, R. A., Stefl, M. E., & Hammond, L. (1990). A survey of 
Tourette syndrome patients and their families: The 1987 Ohio 
Tourette Survey. The Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical 
Neurosciences, 2(3), 275–281. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1176/ jnp.2. 3. 275
Brandt, V. C., Beck, C., Sajin, V., Baaske, M. K., Bäumer, T., Beste, C., 
Anders, S., & Münchau, A. (2016). Temporal relationship between 
premonitory urges and tics in Gilles de la Tourette syndrome. Cor-
tex; A Journal Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System and 
Behavior, 77, 24–37. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cortex. 2016. 01. 008
Brass, M., & Haggard, P. (2010). The hidden side of intentional 
action: The role of the anterior insular cortex. Brain Struc-
ture & Function, 214(5–6), 603–610. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s00429- 010- 0269-6
Bromberg-Martin, E. S., & Hikosaka, O. (2009). Midbrain dopamine 
neurons signal preference for advance information about upcom-
ing rewards. Neuron, 63(1), 119–126. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
neuron. 2009. 06. 009
Bromberg-Martin, E. S., & Monosov, I. E. (2020). Neural circuitry of 
information seeking. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences,  
35, 62–70. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cobeha. 2020. 07. 006
Brown, H., Adams, R. A., Parees, I., Edwards, M., & Friston, K. 
(2013). Active inference, sensory attenuation and illusions. 
Cognitive Processing, 14(4), 411–427. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s10339- 013- 0571-3
Buckser, A. (2008). Before your very eyes: Illness, agency, and the 
management of Tourette Syndrome. Medical Anthropology 
Quarterly, 22(2), 167–192. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1548- 1387. 
2008. 00013.x
Bullen, J. G., & Hemsley, D. R. (1983). Sensory experience as a trigger 
in Gilles de la Tourette’s syndrome. Journal of Behavior Therapy 
and Experimental Psychiatry, 14(3), 197–201. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/ 0005- 7916(83) 90048-4
Bystritsky, A., Korb, A., Douglas, P., Cohen, M., Melega, W., Mul-
gaonkar, A., De Salles DeSalles, A., Min, B.-K., & Yoo, S.-S. 
(2011). A review of low-intensity focused ultrasound. Brain 
Stimulation, 4, 125–136. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. brs. 2011. 03. 
007
Calabresi, P., Picconi, B., Tozzi, A., Ghiglieri, V., & Di Filippo, M. 
(2014). Direct and indirect pathways of basal ganglia: A critical 
reappraisal. Nature Neuroscience, 17(8), 1022–1030. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1038/ nn. 3743
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Chandaria, S., Erritzoe, D. E., Gazzaley, A., 
Girn, M., Kettner, H., Mediano, P. A. M., Nutt, D. J., Rosas, F. 
E., Roseman, L., Timmermann, C., Weiss, B., Zeifman, R. J., & 
Friston, K. J. (2023). Canalization and plasticity in psychopathol-
ogy. Neuropharmacology, 226, 109398. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
neuro pharm. 2022. 109398
Cavanna, A. E., Black, K. J., Hallett, M., & Voon, V. (2017). Neu-
robiology of the Premonitory Urge in Tourette’s Syndrome: 
Pathophysiology and Treatment Implications. The Journal of 
Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 29(2), 95–104. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1176/ appi. neuro psych. 16070 141
Cavanna, A. E., Purpura, G., Riva, A., Nacinovich, R., & Seri, S. 
(2023). Functional tics: Expanding the phenotypes of functional 
movement disorders? European Journal of Neurology, 30(10), 
3353–3356. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ ene. 15967
Cavanna, A. E., & Rickards, H. (2013). The psychopathological spec-
trum of Gilles de la Tourette syndrome. Neuroscience and Biobe-
havioral Reviews, 37(6), 1008–1015. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
neubi orev. 2012. 10. 011
Charpentier, C. J., Bromberg-Martin, E. S., & Sharot, T. (2018). Valua-
tion of knowledge and ignorance in mesolimbic reward circuitry. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(31), 
E7255–E7264. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1073/ pnas. 18005 47115
Christoff, K., Cosmelli, D., Legrand, D., & Thompson, E. (2011). 
Specifying the self for cognitive neuroscience. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 15(3), 104–112. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
tics. 2011. 01. 001
Cicchetti, D., & Tucker, D. (1994). Development and self-regulatory 
structures of the mind. Development and Psychopathology, 6(4), 
533–549. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ S0954 57940 00046 73
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and 
the future of cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,  
36(3), 181–204. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ S0140 525X1 20004 77
Clark, A. (2015). Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the 
Embodied Mind. Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2017). How to knit your own markov blanket: Resisting the 
second law with metamorphic minds. Philosophy and Predictive 
Processing. https:// doi. org/ 10. 15502/ 97839 58573 031
Clarke, R. (1996). Agent Causation and Event Causation in the Produc-
tion of Free Action. Philosophical Topics, 24(2), 19–48.
Cohen, J. D., McClure, S. M., & Yu, A. J. (2007). Should I stay or 
should I go? How the human brain manages the trade-off between 
exploitation and exploration. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 362(1481), 933–942. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1098/ rstb. 2007. 2098
Conceição, V. A., Dias, Â., Farinha, A. C., & Maia, T. V. (2017). Pre-
monitory urges and tics in Tourette syndrome: Computational 
mechanisms and neural correlates. Current Opinion in Neurobi-
ology, 46, 187–199. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. conb. 2017. 08. 009
Critchley, H., & Seth, A. (2012). Will studies of macaque insula reveal 
the neural mechanisms of self-awareness? Neuron, 74(3), 423–
426. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. neuron. 2012. 04. 012
Da Costa, L., Sajid, N., Parr, T., Friston, K., & Smith, R. (2023). 
Reward maximization through discrete active inference. Neural 
Computation, 35(5), 807–852. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1162/ neco_a_ 
01574
Deane, G., Mago, J., Fotopoulou, A., Sacchet, M., Carhart-Harris, R., 
& Sandved-Smith, L. (2024). The computational unconscious: 
Adaptive narrative control, psychopathology, and subjective 
well-being. OSF. https:// doi. org/ 10. 31234/ osf. io/ x7aew
Deane, G. (2020). Dissolving the self: Active inference, psychedelics, 
and ego-dissolution. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(1), 1. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 33735/ phimi sci. 2020.I. 39
Deane, G. (2021). Consciousness in active inference: Deep self-models, 
other minds, and the challenge of psychedelic-induced ego-disso-
lution. Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021(2), niab024. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1093/ nc/ niab0 24
Deane, G., Miller, M., & Wilkinson, S. (2020). Losing Ourselves: 
Active Inference, Depersonalization, and Meditation. Frontiers 
in Psychology, 11, 539726. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyg. 2020. 
539726
DeLong, M. R. (1990). Primate models of movement disorders of basal 
ganglia origin. Trends in Neurosciences, 13(7), 281–285. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0166- 2236(90) 90110-v
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Real patterns. Journal of Philosophy, 88(1), 27–51. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 20270 85
Draper, A., Jackson, G. M., Morgan, P. S., & Jackson, S. R. (2016). 
Premonitory urges are associated with decreased grey matter 
thickness within the insula and sensorimotor cortex in young 
people with Tourette syndrome. Journal of Neuropsychology,  
10(1), 143–153. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ jnp. 12089
Eapen, V., Cavanna, A. E., & Robertson, M. M. (2016). Comorbidi-
ties, Social Impact, and Quality of Life in Tourette Syndrome. 
Frontiers in Psychiatry, 7, 97. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyt. 
2016. 00097
Eapen, V., Fox-Hiley, P., Banerjee, S., & Robertson, M. (2004). 
Clinical features and associated psychopathology in a Tou -
rette syndrome cohort. Acta Neurologica Scandinavica, 109(4), 
255–260. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1046/j. 1600- 0404. 2003. 00228.x
Filevich, E., Kühn, S., & Haggard, P. (2012). Intentional inhibition in 
human action: the power of “no.” Neuroscience and Biobehavioral 
676 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680
Reviews, 36(4), 1107–1118. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. neubi orev. 
2012. 01. 006
FitzGibbon, L., Lau, J. K. L., & Murayama, K. (2020). The seduc-
tive lure of curiosity: Information as a motivationally salient 
reward. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 35, 21–27. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cobeha. 2020. 05. 014
Foa, E. B., & Goldstein, A. J. (1978). Continuous exposure and 
complete response prevention in the treatment of obsessive-
compulsive neurosis. Behavior Therapy, 9(5), 821–829. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0005- 7894(78) 80013-6
Foa, E. B., & McLean, C. P. (2016). The efficacy of exposure therapy 
for anxiety-related disorders and its underlying mechanisms: 
The case of OCD and PTSD. Annual Review of Clinical Psy -
chology, 12, 1–28. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1146/ annur  ev- clinp 
sy- 021815- 093533
Friend, D. M., & Kravitz, A. V. (2014). Working together: Basal 
ganglia pathways in action selection. Trends in Neurosciences,  
37(6), 301–303. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. tins. 2014. 04. 004
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the brain? 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(7), 293–301. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. tics. 2009. 04. 005
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain the-
ory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nrn27 87
Friston, K. (2018). Am I Self-Conscious? (Or Does Self-Organiza-
tion Entail Self-Consciousness?). Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 
579. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyg. 2018. 00579
Friston, K. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics  
(arXiv:1906.10184). arXiv. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv.  
1906. 10184
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., & Kiebel, S. J. (2009). Reinforcement 
Learning or Active Inference? PLOS ONE, 4(7), e6421. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. pone. 00064 21
Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T., Moutoussis, M., 
Behrens, T., & Dolan, R. J. (2014). The anatomy of choice: 
Dopamine and decision-making. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society of London Series B, Biological Sciences,  
369(1655), 20130481. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1098/ rstb. 2013. 0481
Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., & 
Pezzulo, G. (2015). Active inference and epistemic value. Cog-
nitive Neuroscience, 6(4), 187–214. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 
17588 928. 2015. 10200 53
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, 
G. (2017a). Active inference: A process theory. Neural Com-
putation, 29(1), 1–49. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1162/ NECO_a_ 00912
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., & de Vries, B. (2017b). The graphical brain: 
Belief propagation and active inference. Network Neuroscience 
(Cambridge, Mass.), 1(4), 381–414. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1162/ 
NETN_a_ 00018
Frith, C. (2012). Explaining delusions of control: The compara-
tor model 20 years on. Consciousness and Cognition, 21(1), 
52–54. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. concog. 2011. 06. 010
Fründt, O., Woods, D., & Ganos, C. (2017). Behavioral therapy for 
Tourette syndrome and chronic tic disorders. Neurology Clini-
cal Practice, 7(2), 148–156. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1212/ CPJ. 00000 
00000 000348
Gallagher, S., & Zahavi, D. (2020). The phenomenological mind  
(3rd ed.). Routledge. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4324/ 97804 29319 792
Ganos, C., Roessner, V., & Münchau, A. (2013). The functional anatomy 
of Gilles de la Tourette syndrome. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral 
Reviews, 37(6), 1050–1062. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. neubi orev. 2012. 
11. 004
Ganos, C., Kahl, U., Brandt, V., Schunke, O., Bäumer, T., Thomalla, 
G., Roessner, V., Haggard, P., Münchau, A., & Kühn, S. 
(2014). The neural correlates of tic inhibition in Gilles de la 
Tourette syndrome. Neuropsychologia,  65, 297–301. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. neuro psych ologia. 2014. 08. 007
Ganos, C., Garrido, A., Navalpotro-Gómez, I., Ricciardi, L., Mar -
tino, D., Edwards, M. J., Tsakiris, M., Haggard, P., & Bhatia, 
K. P. (2015). Premonitory urge to tic in Tourette’s is associated 
with interoceptive awareness. Movement Disorders: Official 
Journal of the Movement Disorder Society, 30(9), 1198–1202. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ mds. 26228
Ganos, C., Rothwell, J., & Haggard, P. (2018). Voluntary inhibi-
tory motor control over involuntary tic movements. Movement 
Disorders, 33(6), 937–946. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ mds. 27346
Garvin, B., & Krishnan, S. (2022). Curiosity-driven learning in adults 
with and without dyslexia. Quarterly Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 75(1), 156–168. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 17470  
21821 10374 74
Gergely, G., Bekkering, H., & Király, I. (2002). Rational imitation in 
preverbal infants. Nature, 415(6873), 6873. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1038/ 41575 5a
Gerrans, P., & Murray, R. J. (2020). Interoceptive active inference and 
self-representation in social anxiety disorder (SAD): Exploring 
the neurocognitive traits of the SAD self. Neuroscience of Con-
sciousness, niaa026. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ nc/ niaa0 26
Gilbert, M. (1990). Walking together: A paradigmatic social phenom-
enon. Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 15(1), 1–14. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1111/j. 1475- 4975. 1990. tb002 02.x
Grados, M. A., & Mathews, C. A. (2009). Clinical phenomenology 
and phenotype variability in Tourette syndrome. Journal of Psy-
chosomatic Research, 67(6), 491–496. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
jpsyc hores. 2009. 07. 011
Haggard, P., Clark, S., & Kalogeras, J. (2002). Voluntary action and 
conscious awareness. Nature Neuroscience, 5(4), 382–385. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nn827
Hesp, C., Smith, R., Parr, T., Allen, M., Friston, K. J., & Ramstead, M. 
J. D. (2021). Deeply felt affect: The emergence of valence in deep 
active inference. Neural Computation, 33(2), 398–446. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1162/ neco_a_ 01341
Hezel, D. M., & Simpson, H. B. (2019). Exposure and response pre-
vention for obsessive-compulsive disorder: A review and new 
directions. Indian Journal of Psychiatry, 61(Suppl 1), S85–S92. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 4103/ psych iatry. India nJPsy chiat ry_ 516_ 18
Hirschtritt, M. E., Lee, P. C., Pauls, D. L., Dion, Y., Grados, M. A., 
Illmann, C., King, R. A., Sandor, P., McMahon, W. M., Lyon, G. 
J., Cath, D. C., Kurlan, R., Robertson, M. M., Osiecki, L., Scharf, 
J. M., Mathews, C. A., for the Tourette Syndrome Association 
International Consortium for Genetics. (2015). Lifetime preva-
lence, age of risk, and genetic relationships of comorbid psychi-
atric disorders in Tourette syndrome. JAMA Psychiatry, 72(4), 
325–333. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1001/ jamap sychi atry. 2014. 2650
Hohwy, J. (2007). The sense of self in the phenomenology of agency 
and perception. PSYCHE: An Interdisciplinary Journal of 
Research On Consciousness, 13.
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs, 50(2), 259–285. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ nous. 12062
Hohwy, J., & Michael, J. (2017). Why does any body have a self? In F. 
de Vignemont & A. J. T. Alsmith (Eds.), The body and the self, 
revisited (pp. 363–391). MIT Press.
Inglis, I. R. (2000). Review: The central role of uncertainty reduction in 
determining behaviour. Behaviour, 137(12), 1567–1599. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1163/ 15685 39005 02727
Jackson, G. M., Draper, A., Dyke, K., Pépés, S. E., & Jackson, S. R. 
(2015). Inhibition, disinhibition, and the control of action in Tou-
rette syndrome. Trends in cognitive sciences, 19(11), 655–665. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. tics. 2015. 08. 006
Janik, P., Milanowski, L., & Szejko, N. (2018). Phenomenology and 
clinical correlates of stimulus-bound tics in Gilles de la Tourette 
677Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680 
syndrome. Frontiers in Neurology, 22(9), 477. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
3389/ fneur. 2018. 00477
Jankovic, J. (1997). Tourette syndrome. Phenomenology and classifica-
tion of tics. Neurologic Clinics, 15(2), 267–275. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/ s0733- 8619(05) 70311-x
Johnson, K. A., Worbe, Y., Foote, K. D., Butson, C. R., Gunduz, A., 
& Okun, M. S. (2023). Tourette syndrome: Clinical features, 
pathophysiology, and treatment. The Lancet Neurology, 22(2), 
147–158. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S1474- 4422(22) 00303-9
Kapp, S. K., Steward, R., Crane, L., Elliott, D., Elphick, C., Pellicano, 
E., & Russell, G. (2019). ‘People should be allowed to do what 
they like’: Autistic adults’ views and experiences of stimming. 
Autism, 23(7), 1782. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 13623 61319 829628
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. 
(2018). The Markov blankets of life: Autonomy, active inference 
and the free energy principle. Journal of The Royal Society Inter-
face, 15(138), 20170792. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1098/ rsif. 2017. 0792
Kwak, C., Dat Vuong, K., & Jankovic, J. (2003). Premonitory sensory 
phenomenon in Tourette’s syndrome. Movement Disorders: Offi-
cial Journal of the Movement Disorder Society, 18(12), 1530–
1533. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ mds. 10618
Lang, A. (1991). Patient perception of tics and other movement disor-
ders. Neurology, 41(2 part 1), 223–223. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1212/ 
WNL. 41.2_ Part_1. 223
Leckman, J. F. (2002). Tourette’s syndrome. Lancet (London, England), 
360(9345), 1577–1586. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0140- 6736(02) 
11526-1
Leckman, J. F., & Cohen, D. J. (1999). Tourette’s syndrome-tics, obses-
sions, compulsions: Developmental psychopathology and clinical 
care (15th ed., p. 584). John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Leckman, J. F., Riddle, M. A., Hardin, M. T., Ort, S. I., Swartz, K. L., 
Stevenson, J., & Cohen, D. J. (1989). The Yale global tic severity 
scale: initial testing of a clinician-rated scale of tic severity. Journal 
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 28(4), 
566–573. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ 00004 583- 19890 7000- 00015
Leckman, J. F., Walker, D. E., & Cohen, D. J. (1993). Premonitory 
urges in Tourette’s syndrome. The American Journal of Psychia-
try, 150(1), 98–102. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1176/ ajp. 150.1. 98
Legon, W., Strohman, A., In, A., Stebbins, K., & Payne, B. (2023). 
Non-invasive neuromodulation of sub-regions of the human 
insula differentially affect pain processing and heart-rate vari-
ability. bioRxiv, 2023.05.05.539593. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1101/ 
2023. 05. 05. 539593
Legrand, D. (2006). The bodily self: The sensori-motor roots of pre-
reflective self-consciousness. Phenomenology and the Cognitive 
Sciences, 5, 89–118. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11097- 005- 9015-6
Legrand, D. (2007). Pre-reflective self-as-subject from experiential 
and empirical perspectives. Consciousness and Cognition: An 
International Journal, 16(3), 583–599. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
concog. 2007. 04. 002
Legrand, D., & Ruby, P. (2009). What is self-specific? Theoretical inves-
tigation and critical review of neuroimaging results. Psychological 
Review, 116(1), 252–282. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ a0014 172
Leisman, G., & Sheldon, D. (2022). Tics and Emotions. Brain Sci-
ences, 12(2), 242. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ brain sci12 020242
Limanowski, J. (2017). (Dis-)attending to the body - action and self-
experience in the active inference framework. In T. Metzinger & W. 
Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy and Predictive Processing: 18. Frankfurt 
am Main: MIND Group.
Limanowski, J., & Blankenburg, F. (2013). Minimal self-models and 
the free energy principle. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fnhum. 2013. 00547
Limanowski, J., & Friston, K. (2018). ‘Seeing the dark’: Grounding 
phenomenal transparency and opacity in precision estimation 
for active inference. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 643. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyg. 2018. 00643
Limanowski, J., & Friston, K. (2020). Attenuating oneself: An active 
inference perspective on “selfless” experiences. Philosophy 
and the Mind Sciences,  1(1), 1. https:// doi. org/ 10. 33735/ phimi 
sci. 2020.I. 35
Lutz, A. (2002). Toward a neurophenomenology as an account of 
generative passages: A first empirical case study. Phenomenol-
ogy and the Cognitive Sciences, 1(2), 133–167. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1023/a: 10203 20221 083
Maisto, D., Friston, K., & Pezzulo, G. (2019). Caching mechanisms 
for habit formation in active inference. Neurocomputing, 359, 
298–314. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. neucom. 2019. 05. 083
Malli, M. A., & Forrester-Jones, R. (2022). Stigma and adults with 
tourette’s syndrome: “never laugh at other people’s disabili-
ties, unless they have Tourette’s—because how can you not?” 
Journal of Developmental and Physical Disabilities, 34(5), 
871–897. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10882- 021- 09829-2
Malli, M. A., Forrester-Jones, R., & Triantafyllopoulou, P. (2019). 
“Tourette’s Is a lonely place”: An interpretative phenomeno-
logical analysis of the personal experience and identity of 
adults with Tourette’s syndrome. Journal of Developmental 
and Physical Disabilities, 31(6), 819–845. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ s10882- 019- 09676-2
Marks, I. M., Hodgson, R., & Rachman, S. (1975). Treatment of 
chronic obsessive-compulsive neurosis by in-vivo exposure. A 
two-year follow-up and issues in treatment. The British Journal 
of Psychiatry: The Journal of Mental Science, 127, 349–364. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1192/ bjp. 127.4. 349
Martino, D., Madhusudan, N., Zis, P., & Cavanna, A. E. (2013). 
Chapter One—An Introduction to the Clinical Phenomenology 
of Tourette Syndrome. In D. Martino & A. E. Cavanna (Eds.), 
International Review of Neurobiology (112th ed., pp. 1–33). 
Academic Press. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ B978-0- 12- 411546- 0. 
00001-9
Matsuda, N., Kono, T., Nonaka, M., Fujio, M., & Kano, Y. (2016). 
Self-initiated coping with Tourette’s syndrome: Effect of tic sup-
pression on QOL. Brain & Development, 38(2), 233–241. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. brain dev. 2015. 08. 006
McGuire, J. F., Ricketts, E. J., Piacentini, J., Murphy, T. K., Storch, 
E. A., & Lewin, A. B. (2015). Behavior therapy for tic disor -
ders: An evidenced-based review and new directions for treat-
ment research. Current Developmental Disorders Reports, 2(4), 
309–317. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s40474- 015- 0063-5
McNaught, K. S. P., & Mink, J. W. (2011). Advances in understanding 
and treatment of Tourette syndrome. Nature Reviews Neurology, 
7(12), 667–676. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nrneu rol. 2011. 167
Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of others: Re-
Enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old children. Devel-
opmental Psychology, 31(5), 838–850. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ 
0012- 1649. 31.5. 838
Metzinger, T. (2013). The myth of cognitive agency: Subpersonal 
thinking as a cyclically recurring loss of mental autonomy. Fron-
tiers in Psychology, 4. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyg. 2013. 00931
Metzinger, T. (2004). Being No One: The Self-Model Theory of Sub-
jectivity. MIT Press.
Metzinger, T. (2008). Empirical perspectives from the self-model 
theory of subjectivity: A brief summary with examples. Pro -
gress in Brain Research, 168, 215–245. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 
S0079- 6123(07) 68018-2
Mink, J. W. (2001). Basal ganglia dysfunction in Tourette’s syndrome: 
A new hypothesis. Pediatric Neurology, 25(3), 190–198. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0887- 8994(01) 00262-4
Morand-Beaulieu, S., Grot, S., Lavoie, J., Leclerc, J. B., Luck, D., 
& Lavoie, M. E. (2017). The puzzling question of inhibitory 
control in Tourette syndrome: A meta-analysis. Neuroscience & 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 80, 240–262. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
neubi orev. 2017. 05. 006
678 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680
Nambu, A. (2004). A new dynamic model of the cortico-basal ganglia 
loop. Progress in Brain Research (143rd ed., pp. 461–466). Else-
vier. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0079- 6123(03) 43043-4
Narapareddy, A., Eckland, M. R., Riordan, H. R., Cascio, C. J., & 
Isaacs, D. A. (2022). Altered interoceptive sensibility in adults 
with chronic tic disorder. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 13. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyt. 2022. 914897
Naro, A., Billeri, L., Colucci, V. P., Le Cause, M., De Domenico, C., 
Ciatto, L., Bramanti, P., Bramanti, A., & Calabrò, R. S. (2020). 
Brain functional connectivity in chronic tic disorders and Gilles 
de la Tourette syndrome. Progress in Neurobiology, 194, 101884. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. pneur obio. 2020. 101884
Nelson, K. (2003). Narrative and self, myth and memory: Emergence 
of the cultural self. In R. Fivush & C. A. Haden (Eds.), Auto -
biographical memory and the construction of a narrative self: 
Developmental and cultural perspectives (pp. 3–28). Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Neuner, I., Schneider, F., & Shah, N. J. (2013). Functional neuroanatomy 
of tics. International Review of Neurobiology, 112, 35–71. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/ B978-0- 12- 411546- 0. 00002-0
Neuner, I., Werner, C. J., Arrubla, J., Stöcker, T., Ehlen, C., Wegener, 
H. P., Schneider, F., & Shah, N. J. (2014). Imaging the where and 
when of tic generation and resting state networks in adult Tou -
rette patients. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 362. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fnhum. 2014. 00362
Nwaordu, G., & Charlton, R. A. (2023). Repetitive behaviours in autis-
tic and non-autistic adults: Associations with sensory sensitivity 
and impact on self-efficacy. Journal of Autism and Developmen-
tal Disorders. . https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10803- 023- 06133-0
Palminteri, S., & Pessiglione, M. (2013). Reinforcement learning and 
Tourette syndrome. International Review of Neurobiology, 112, 
131–153. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ B978-0- 12- 411546- 0. 00005-6
Pareés, I., Brown, H., Nuruki, A., Adams, R. A., Davare, M., Bhatia, K. 
P., Friston, K., & Edwards, M. J. (2014). Loss of sensory attenu-
ation in patients with functional (psychogenic) movement dis-
orders. Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 137(Pt 11), 2916–2921. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ brain/ awu237
Parr, T., Rees, G., & Friston, K. (2018). Computational neuropsychol-
ogy and Bayesian inference. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 
12, 61.
Parr, T., Holmes, E., Friston, K. J., & Pezzulo, G. (2023). Cognitive 
effort and active inference. Neuropsychologia, 184, 108562. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. neuro psych ologia. 2023. 108562
Parvizi-Wayne, D. (2024). How preferences enslave attention: Calling into 
question the endogenous/exogenous distinction from an active infer-
ence perspective. OSF. https:// doi. org/ 10. 31234/ osf. io/ u3j28
Parvizi-Wayne, D., Sandved Smith, L., Pitliya, R., Limanowski, J., 
Tufft, M. R., & Friston, K. (2024). Forgetting ourselves in flow: 
An active inference account of flow states and how we experience 
ourselves within them. Frontiers in Psychology, 15. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyg. 2024. 13547 19
Patel, N., Jankovic, J., & Hallett, M. (2014). Sensory aspects of move-
ment disorders. The Lancet Neurology, 13(1), 100–112. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S1474- 4422(13) 70213-8
Perrykkad, K., Robinson, J. E., & Hohwy, J. (2023). Foraging for the 
self: Environment selection for agency inference. Psychonomic 
Bulletin & Review, 30(2), 608–620. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3758/ 
s13423- 022- 02187-w
Petitmengin, C., van Beek, M., Bitbol, M., Nissou, J.-M., & Roepstorff, 
A. (2019). Studying the experience of meditation through Micro-
phenomenology. Current Opinion in Psychology, 28, 54–59. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. copsyc. 2018. 10. 009
Polyanska, L., Critchley, H. D., & Rae, C. L. (2017). Centrality of 
prefrontal and motor preparation cortices to Tourette Syndrome 
revealed by meta-analysis of task-based neuroimaging studies. 
NeuroImage. Clinical, 16, 257–267. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
nicl. 2017. 08. 004
Rae, C. L., & Critchley, H. D. (2022). Chapter Six—Mechanistic 
insight into the pathophysiological basis of Tourette syndrome. 
In M. E. Lavoie & A. E. Cavanna (Eds.), International Review 
of Movement Disorders (3rd ed., pp. 209–244). Academic Press. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ bs. irmvd. 2021. 11. 001
Rae, C. L., Hughes, L. E., Anderson, M. C., & Rowe, J. B. (2015). The 
prefrontal cortex achieves inhibitory control by facilitating sub-
cortical motor pathway connectivity. Journal of Neuroscience,  
35(2), 786–794. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1523/ JNEUR OSCI. 3093- 13. 
2015
Rae, C. L., Polyanska, L., Gould van Praag, C. D., Parkinson, J., Bouya-
goub, S., Nagai, Y., Seth, A. K., Harrison, N. A., Garfinkel, S. N., 
& Critchley, H. D. (2018). Face perception enhances insula and 
motor network reactivity in Tourette syndrome. Brain, 141(11), 
3249–3261. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ brain/ awy254
Rae, C. L., Critchley, H. D., & Seth, A. K. (2019a). A Bayesian 
Account of the Sensory-Motor Interactions Underlying Symp-
toms of Tourette Syndrome. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 10, 29. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyt. 2019. 00029
Rae, C. L., Larsson, D. E. O., Garfinkel, S. N., & Critchley, H. D. 
(2019b). Dimensions of interoception predict premonitory urges 
and tic severity in Tourette syndrome. Psychiatry Research, 271, 
469–475. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. psych res. 2018. 12. 036
Rae, C. L., Parkinson, J., Betka, S., Gouldvan Praag, C. D., Bouyagoub, 
S., Polyanska, L., Larsson, D. E. O., Harrison, N. A., Garfin-
kel, S. N., & Critchley, H. D. (2020). Amplified engagement of 
prefrontal cortex during control of voluntary action in Tourette 
syndrome. Brain Communications, 2(2), fcaa199. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1093/ brain comms/ fcaa1 99
Rae, C. L., Raykov, P., Ambridge, E. M., Colling, L. J., Gould van 
Praag, C. D., Bouyagoub, S., Polanski, L., Larsson, D. E. O., 
& Critchley, H. D. (2023). Elevated representational similarity 
of voluntary action and inhibition in Tourette syndrome. Brain 
Communications, 5(5), fcad224. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ brain 
comms/ fcad2 24
Ramstead, M. J. D., Seth, A. K., Hesp, C., Sandved-Smith, L., Mago, 
J., Lifshitz, M., Pagnoni, G., Smith, R., Dumas, G., Lutz, A., 
Friston, K., & Constant, A. (2022). From Generative Models 
to Generative Passages: A Computational Approach to (Neuro) 
Phenomenology. Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 13(4), 
829–857. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s13164- 021- 00604-y
Ramstead, M. J. D., Sakthivadivel, D. A. R., Heins, C., Koudahl, M., 
Millidge, B., Da Costa, L., Klein, B., & Friston, K. J. (2023a). 
On Bayesian mechanics: A physics of and by beliefs. Interface 
Focus, 13(3), 20220029. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1098/ rsfs. 2022. 0029
Ramstead, M. J. D., Wiese, W., Miller, M., & Friston, K. J. (2023b). 
Deep neurophenomenology: An active inference account of 
some features of conscious experience and of their disturbance in 
major depressive disorder. In Expected experiences. Routledge.
Rawji, V., Modi, S., Latorre, A., Rocchi, L., Hockey, L., Bhatia, K., 
Joyce, E., Rothwell, J. C., & Jahanshahi, M. (2020). Impaired 
automatic but intact volitional inhibition in primary tic disorders. 
Brain, 143(3), 906–919. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ brain/ awaa0 24
Rawlence, C., Chrichton-Miller, E., & Sacks, O. W. (1998). The mind 
traveller: Oliver Sacks. Films for the Humanities.
Redgrave, P., Rodriguez, M., Smith, Y., Rodriguez-Oroz, M. C., 
Lehericy, S., Bergman, H., Agid, Y., DeLong, M. R., & Obeso, 
J. A. (2010). Goal-directed and habitual control in the basal 
ganglia: Implications for Parkinson’s disease. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 11(11), 760–772. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nrn29 15
Reese, H. E., Scahill, L., Peterson, A. L., Crowe, K., Woods, D. W., 
Piacentini, J., Walkup, J. T., & Wilhelm, S. (2014). The premon-
itory urge to tic: Measurement, characteristics, and correlates in 
679Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680 
older adolescents and adults. Behavior Therapy, 45(2), 177–186. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. beth. 2013. 09. 002
Robertson, M. M., Eapen, V., Singer, H. S., Martino, D., Scharf, J. M., 
Paschou, P., Roessner, V., Woods, D. W., Hariz, M., Mathews, 
C. A., Črnčec, R., & Leckman, J. F. (2017). Gilles de la Tourette 
syndrome. Nature Reviews. Disease Primers, 3, 16097. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nrdp. 2016. 97
Rosfort, R., & Stanghellini, G. (2009). The person in between moods and 
affects. Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology, 16(3), 251–266.
Sandved-Smith, L., Hesp, C., Mattout, J., Friston, K., Lutz, A., & Ram-
stead, M. J. D. (2021). Towards a computational phenomenology 
of mental action: Modelling meta-awareness and attentional con-
trol with deep parametric active inference. Neuroscience of Con-
sciousness, 2021(1), niab018. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ nc/ niab0 18
Scholl, C., Baladron, J., Vitay, J., & Hamker, F. H. (2022). Enhanced 
habit formation in Tourette patients explained by shortcut modu-
lation in a hierarchical cortico-basal ganglia model. Brain Struc-
ture and Function, 227(3), 1031–1050. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s00429- 021- 02446-x
Schultz, W. (2016). Dopamine reward prediction error coding. Dia-
logues in Clinical Neuroscience, 18(1), 23–32.
Schultz, W., Dayan, P., & Montague, P. R. (1997). A Neural Substrate 
of Prediction and Reward. Science,  275(5306), 1593–1599. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1126/ scien ce. 275. 5306. 1593
Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T. H. B., Mathys, C., Dolan, R., & 
Friston, K. (2015). The dopaminergic midbrain encodes the 
expected certainty about desired outcomes. Cerebral Cortex,  
25(10), 3434–3445. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ cercor/ bhu159
Searle, J. R. (1995). The Construction of Social Reality. Free Press.
Seth, A. K. (2014). The Cybernetic Bayesian Brain. In T. Metzinger 
& J. M. Windt (Eds.), Open MIND. Open MIND. Frankfurt am 
Main: MIND Group. https:// doi. org/ 10. 15502/ 97839 58570 108
Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the 
embodied self. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(11), 565–
573. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. tics. 2013. 09. 007
Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K., & Critchley, H. D. (2011). An interoceptive 
predictive coding model of conscious presence. Frontiers in Psy-
chology, 2, 395. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyg. 2011. 00395
Silva, R. R., Munoz, D. M., Barickman, J., & Friedhoff, A. J. (1995). 
Environmental Factors and Related Fluctuation of Symptoms in 
Children and Adolescents with Tourette’s Disorder. Journal of 
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 36(2), 305–312. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1111/j. 1469- 7610. 1995. tb018 26.x
Singer, H. S. (2005). Tourette’s syndrome: From behaviour to biology. 
The Lancet Neurology, 4(3), 149–159. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 
S1474- 4422(05) 01012-4
Singer, H. S. (2016). Habitual and goal-directed behaviours and Tou-
rette syndrome. Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 139(Pt 2), 312–
316. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ brain/ awv378
Singer, H. S., & Augustine, F. (2019). Controversies surrounding the 
pathophysiology of tics. Journal of Child Neurology, 34(13), 
851–862. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 08830 73819 862121
Smith, R., Varshney, L. R., Nagayama, S., Kazama, M., Kitagawa, T., 
& Ishikawa, Y. (2022). A computational neuroscience perspec-
tive on subjective wellbeing within the active inference frame -
work. International Journal of Wellbeing, 12(4). https:// inter 
natio naljo urnal ofwel lbeing. org/ index. php/ ijow/ artic le/ view/ 2659
Smith, H., Fox, J. R., Hedderly, T., Murphy, T., & Trayner, P. (2016). 
Investigating young people’s experiences of successful or helpful 
psychological interventions for tic disorders: An Interpretative 
Phenomenological Analysis study. Journal of Health Psychology, 
21(8), 1787–1798. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 13591 05314 566647
Somogyi, P., Bolam, J. P., & Smith, A. D. (1981). Monosynaptic cortical 
input and local axon collaterals of identified striatonigral neurons. 
A light and electron microscopic study using the Golgi-peroxidase 
transport-degeneration procedure. The Journal of Comparative Neu-
rology, 195(4), 567–584. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ cne. 90195 0403
Starr, P. A., Kang, G. A., Heath, S., Shimamoto, S., & Turner, R. S. 
(2008). Pallidal neuronal discharge in Huntington’s disease: Sup-
port for selective loss of striatal cells originating the indirect 
pathway. Experimental Neurology, 211(1), 227–233. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/j. expne urol. 2008. 01. 023
Stern, J. S. (2018). Tourette’s syndrome and its borderland. Practi-
cal Neurology, 18(4), 262–270. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ pract 
neurol- 2017- 001755
Strawson, G. (2004). Against narrativity. Ratio, 17(4), 4.
Suzuki, K., Garfinkel, S. N., Critchley, H. D., & Seth, A. K. (2013). 
Multisensory integration across exteroceptive and interoceptive 
domains modulates self-experience in the rubber-hand illusion. 
Neuropsychologia, 51(13), 2909–2917. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
neuro psych ologia. 2013. 08. 014
Tinaz, S., Malone, P., Hallett, M., & Horovitz, S. G. (2015). Role of the 
right dorsal anterior insula in the urge to tic in Tourette syndrome. 
Movement Disorders: Official Journal of the Movement Disorder 
Society, 30(9), 1190–1197. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ mds. 26230
Tschantz, A., Millidge, B., Seth, A. K., & Buckley, C. L. (2020). Rein-
forcement Learning through Active Inference(arXiv:2002.12636). 
arXiv. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 2002. 12636
Uddin, L. Q., Nomi, J. S., Hébert-Seropian, B., Ghaziri, J., & Boucher, 
O. (2017). Structure and function of the human insula. Journal of 
Clinical Neurophysiology: Official Publication of the American 
Electroencephalographic Society, 34(4), 300–306. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1097/ WNP. 00000 00000 000377
Valenzuela-Moguillansky, C., & Vásquez-Rosati, A. (2019). An analy-
sis procedure for the micro-phenomenological interview. Con-
structivist Foundations, 14(2), 2.
Varela, F. J. (1997). The naturalization of phenomenology as the tran-
scendence of nature: Searching for generative mutual constraints. 
Alter: Revue de Phénoménologie, 5, 355–385.
Verdellen, C. W. J., Hoogduin, C. A. L., & Keijsers, G. P. J. (2007). Tic 
suppression in the treatment of Tourette’s syndrome with expo-
sure therapy: The rebound phenomenon reconsidered. Movement 
Disorders: Official Journal of the Movement Disorder Society,  
22(11), 1601–1606. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ mds. 21577
Verdellen, C., van de Griendt, J., Hartmann, A., Murphy, T., & ESSTS 
Guidelines Group. (2011). European clinical guidelines for 
Tourette syndrome and other tic disorders. Part III: Behav -
ioural and psychosocial interventions. European Child & Ado-
lescent Psychiatry, 20(4), 197–207. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s00787- 011- 0167-3
Waddington, C. H. (1942). Canalization of development and the inher-
itance of acquired characters. Nature, 150(3811), 3811. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1038/ 15056 3a0
Waddington, C. H. (1959). Canalization of development and genetic 
assimilation of acquired characters. Nature, 183(4676), 1654–
1655. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ 18316 54a0
Wang, Z., Maia, T. V., Marsh, R., Colibazzi, T., Gerber, A., & Peterson, 
B. S. (2011). The neural circuits that generate tics in Tourette’s 
syndrome. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 168(12), 1326–
1337. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1176/ appi. ajp. 2011. 09111 692
Woźniak, M. (2018). “I” and “Me”: The self in the context of con-
sciousness. Frontiers in Psychology, 9. https:// www. front iersin. 
org/ journ als/ psych ology/ artic les/ 10. 3389/ fpsyg. 2018. 01656 
Young, C. B., Reddy, V., & Sonne, J. (2024). Neuroanatomy, Basal 
Ganglia. StatPearls StatPearls Publishing. http:// www. ncbi. nlm. 
nih. gov/ books/ NBK53 7141/ 
Zapparoli, L., Porta, M., & Paulesu, E. (2015). The anarchic brain in 
action: The contribution of task-based fMRI studies to the under-
standing of Gilles de la Tourette syndrome. Current Opinion in 
Neurology, 28(6), 604–611. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ WCO. 00000 
00000 000261
680 Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2024) 24:660–680
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.