 1 
How preferences enslave attention: calling into question the endogenous/exogenous distinction from an active inference perspective  Author: Darius Parvizi-Wayne1,2 darius.parvizi-wayne@rhul.ac.uk   Institutions: 1. Department of Experimental Psychology, University College London, United Kingdom 2. Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway University of London, United Kingdom   Acknowledgements  I would like to thank Karl Friston, Lance Da Costa and Liberty Severs for their feedback on the first draft of this manuscript.  Statements and Declarations No funding was received to assist with the preparation of this manuscript. The author has no competing interests to declare that are relevant to this manuscript. ORCID Number 0009-0004-4119-8903  Abstract  It is easy to think of attention as a sensory mechanism divorced from the influence of an agent’s preferences and needs. However, according to active inference, such strict divisions cannot be invoked, since all cognitive and behavioural processes can be described as maximising the evidence for an agent’s generative model, which entails preferences that make an entity the thing it is. As such, attention — and perception more broadly — is constrained (or enslaved) by prior beliefs for which an agent must seek evidence. This paper demonstrates that this imperative is always at play in cognitive systems endowed with attentional schema, and that the preferences in question transcend the contingent, task-relevant goals that bias attention. Rather, attention is powerfully tuned by the most-deep rooted priors the agent possesses, such that, when sensory evidence against these priors is observed and free energy spikes, the agent attentionally prioritises the homeostatic restoration of these preferred states over their shorter-term desires. Thus, at its core, attention is a goal-driven process, which calls into question the putative distinction between endogenous – goal-directed, top-down – attention and exogenous – bottom-up, stimulus-driven, automatic – attention. What emerges in its place is a symbiotic relationship between attention and preferences, whereby the fulfilment of the latter rests on successful application of the former, and the former derives its function from the organismic need to confirm the latter.     
 2 
Introduction  It is almost trivial to say that there is no single psychological person-type. Despite their shared phylogeny, humans evince ostensibly strong differences in outward behaviour and their reported qualitative experiences, even within often near-identical contexts (Albarracín & Wyer, 2000; Van Geert et al., 2022). This observation underlies Lewin’s (1939) famous formula, B = f (P, E), which holds that behaviour (B) is a function of the person (P) and the environment (E), and thus cannot be determined by the putatively “objective” aspects of the relevant situation (cf., Kesberg & Keller, 2018). Noting the behaviourism that dominated Lewin’s time (cf., Watson, 1913), we can re-term this formula’s B as being, which should be taken to reflect both the “internal” states of the organism – whatever they might be – and their behaviour.1 In this paper, rather than considering the entire gamut of psychological variety, I will attempt to provide a mechanistic explanation of just one domain in which individual differences emerge: attention. More precisely, I will consider the operation of attention from an active inference perspective, according to which organisms act and perceive in order to realise the predictions generated by a model of the thing that it is – i.e., by the generative model entailed by its behaviour (Friston, 2009, 2010; Ramstead et al., 2023).   Within the active inference framework, action, perception and attention are cast as the optimisation of the marginal likelihood of sensory data under an agent’s generative model. In virtue of the fact that the marginal likelihood corresponds to model evidence, this can be read as seeking evidence for agents model of the world — or self evidencing (Hohwy 2016). Attention in particular has been associated with optimising the precision of a perceptual belief; namely, the Bayesian likelihood of sensory data given a hypothesised, hidden state (Feldman & Friston, 2010; Mirza et al., 2019; Parr & Friston, 2017, 2019). I will not endeavour to revise this claim. Rather, I will suggest that this perceptual process is always enslaved by higher-order organismic preferences or (Bayesian) priors (Andersen et al., 2022; Sladky et al., 2023). In and of itself, this is not a novel claim. Indeed, Mirza et al. (2019, p. 1) show that, during a visual search task, attention “selectively samples task-relevant observations”, indicating the causal role of top-down goals in shaping the targets of attention. This paper plans to take this further and suggests that there are goals – or preferences more broadly – whose targets are not exclusively or explicitly task-relevant which modulate our attentional schema at all times. Following Sladky et al. (2022, p. 3), we shall term these “preference priors” and suggest that, by virtue of their location at the deepest (or highest) levels of the generative hierarchy, they not only define what the creature is but also what it priorities attentionally (Vervaeke et al., 2012). Importantly, in constructing this argument, I will be consistently calling into question the strict distinction between so-called “endogenous” and “exogenous” attention that some researchers draw (Keefe, 2022; Meyer et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2020).   My claim is licensed by the fact that, according to active inference, attention is realised by and within a hierarchical, generative (predictive) model, within which the highest-level – or most deeply entrenched – expectations contextualise and constrain belief updating at the lower levels (Clark 2013; 2015; Hohwy, 2013). It is worth recognising that some higher-level beliefs might metamorphosise over time, given sufficient sensory data.2 It has thus been  1 That said, given the breadth of the formula, it can be fruitfully applied to the study of Dasein or being-in-the-world (Heidegger, 2010).  2 Not all higher-level beliefs can be significantly altered. Experiencing the bitter cold a thousand times will not have a drastic impact on my sub-personal preference to occupy a body temperature of around 370 Celsius (although see Cabanac, 2006).  
 3 
claimed that such hierarchies evince a form of “empirical Bayes”, whereby the prior at one level furnishes constraints on the posterior of the level above in such a manner that the whole constrained hierarchy is simultaneously tuned by the real-time incoming sensory data (Friston, 2005).    Crucially, the nature of these highest-level prior preferences is not arbitrary; rather, it is claimed that the most context-invariant, diachronic patterns are encoded there, which track not only slow flows in the external environment – such as nature’s seasons – but also self-referential, long-term and often inflexible beliefs, such as personality traits, likes and dislikes, as well as proprioceptive and interoceptive bodily expectations (Hohwy & Michael, 2017). These corporeal beliefs encode the homeostatic setpoints of the organism – such as its preferred body temperature or glucose level – which must be frequented for it to continue existing. Thus, these beliefs are often called phenotypic priors (Ramírez & Marshall, 2017; Ramstead et al., 2021). If the reader is puzzled by the alignment of preferences and beliefs, it is worth noting that, in active inference, preferences, desires and goals, whether personal or sub-personal, are formalised as just being Bayesian, statistical beliefs (i.e. probabilistic expectations; Smith et al., 2022). More specifically, these are encoded within a prior distribution, whereby the outcome which is wanted by the organism – either in an explicit or implicit manner – has a high probability. This follows as active inference is a corollary of the free energy principle, which states that any thing which persists through time has a defining set of characteristic states and can, additionally, be described as performing variational Bayesian inference over its external world, in order to remain in and return to these characteristic states (Friston, 2009, 2010, 2019; Hohwy, 2016). These characteristic, or phenotypic, states thus come to possess high probability within the generative model that describes the organism, because those are the states it must frequent as it exists. This allows us to distinguish between beliefs in the philosophical, propositional sense (Schwitzgebel, 2006) and Bayesian beliefs, which need not be explicit and can be leveraged to describe3 the activity of persisting entities, from a neuron to a planet (Isomura & Friston, 2018; Montgomery & Hipólito, 2023).  Thus, this paper will propose that preference priors act not only as the statistical setpoint from whose deviation comes the disintegration of the organism, but also as attention’s permanent guide. This means that preference priors constitute the attracting set for both the organism’s being and their attentional deployment, whereby the latter draws the organism into action-perception loops geared towards free energy minimisation (Friston et al., 2014; Linson et al., 2018). A virtuous circle thus follows, whereby that which we pay attention to is governed by the priors which make us what we are, and evidence for those priors is accrued by way of attending to evidence that we are what we are. Notably, this effort to align attention, relevance, adaptive behaviour and identity has strong theoretical implications, both in terms of the strict computational mechanisms that underwrite self-organisation and the phenomenological reality of lived experience.   To provide just one example, aberrant attentional schema, as described by active inference, have been thought to underlie many psychological disorders, including anxiety, depression and PTSD (Linson & Friston, 2019; Smith et al., 2021). If it is the case that there is a direct link between one’s priors, including those encoded at the deepest levels of one’s generative hierarchy, and one’s attention, even greater therapeutic emphasis ought to be placed on  3 The question of whether active inference describes what entities literally do or acts solely as a useful theoretical instrument for scientists is a live question and beyond the scope of this paper (cf., Bruineberg et al., 2022; van Es & Hipólito, 2020) 
 4 
restructuring the core beliefs of those suffering from poor mental health (Dazois & Rnic, 2015; Millings & Carnelley, 2015).   Attention: a brief history and its conceptual troubles In this section, I will set the stage for my analysis of attention within the active inference framework by considering how it has been historically described in psychology and cognitive neuroscience. Before doing so, it is worth noting that attention, as expressed by Lindsay (2020, p. 1), “has many definitions within and across many multiple fields”. Its analysis therefore lends itself to equivocation (Hommel et al., 2019). Given this, I will use a broad phenomenological formulation as my starting-point, before attempting to explain this experiential phenomenon in terms of computational biology (Ramstead et al., 2022). As with many other accounts of attention, I will define attention in accordance with the famous description given by William James (1890): “Everyone knows what attention is. It is the taking possession by the mind, in clear, and vivid form, of one out of what seems several simultaneously possible objects or trains of thought.”4 It is worth keeping this — admittedly broad — phenomenological background in mind as a useful guide for the theoretical analysis of attention that this paper will pursue, especially given the historical confusion surrounding the topic (Lindsay, 2020; Ramstead et al., 2022; Varela, 1997). By recognising that, at its core, attention is a process whereby awareness centres on a phenomenal object, this paper prioritises what different analyses of attention have in common (Jack & Roepstorff, 2002, p. 333). This is important because my central claim is that attention’s central function — bringing that which is relevant right now to the situated organism — can be powerfully explained within the active inference framework and that, by focussing on what attention fundamentally affords intelligent agents, we can deflate some of the defining dichotomies present in the attentional literature (Hommel et al., 2019). Indeed, it could be argued that this Jamesian articulation encompasses and, thus, undermines one of the classic dichotomies at the heart of the attentional literature; namely, that of endogenous versus exogenous attention. Put simply, endogenous, or top-down, attention is described as a voluntary, goal-driven process, (Maclean et al., 2009; Nguyen et al., 2020; Posner, 1980), whereas exogenous, or bottom-up, attention is putatively caused by external stimuli (Yantis & Jonides, 1984; Anton-Erxleben & Carrasco, 2013), even if these are not “task-relevant” (Berger et al., 2005; Theeuwes, 1991). This distinction maps neatly onto the central claims of Biased Competition Theory, a model of attention which proposes that the competition between external stimuli for neural representation is biased by two determinants of attentional weight: bottom-up features of the stimulus and top-down goals (Beck & Kastner, 2009; Desimone & Duncan, 1995). In any case, regardless of whether attention is consciously deployed or attracted in a seemingly passive manner, the mind is still “taking possession” of an “object … of thought”, as James (1890) articulated. Furthermore, the exogenous/endogenous dichotomy is not without controversy, and is arguably better described as a (potentially multi-dimensional) spectrum, given that, as put by Hommel et al. (2019, p. 2292): “endogenous attention is sometimes too automatic and exogenous attention is sometimes too dependent on the current prioritized stimulus feature or action goal to make this dichotomy fruitful and tenable”. It is therefore tempting to collapse the dichotomy into a single criterion: relevance (Andersen et al., 2022; Treue, 2003; Vervaeke et al., 2012; Watzl,  4 Although not everybody would subscribe to this: for example, Friston (2009) writes: “When I hear attention is ‘taking possession by the mind, in clear and vivid form,...’, I think ‘No it’s not; attention is simply the process of optimising precision during hierarchical inference’. This might not have the poetry of Jamesian formulations but it helps understand the simplicity of attention and its necessary role in perception.” 
 5 
2011, 2017). This theoretical move is licensed by the simple phenomenological fact that the object of attention is always relevant to the situated organism, whether that relevance derives from the organism’s explicit goals or from the intrinsic features of the stimulus itself.  This simple fact should not be overlooked: whatever emerges at the forefront of conscious awareness by way of attention is always the object of maximal relevance for an individual in their Umwelt, or lived environment, as it is right now for that individual (Merleau-Ponty, 1962; Thompson, 2007). Importantly, the Umwelt is not “equivalent to the world seen simply through the lenses of physics and chemistry” (Thompson, 2007, p. 153), for physical and chemical phenomena, in and of themselves, have no relevance to the organism. Only by living in a coupled relationship with the world does relevance, or meaning, emerge for the organism (Varela, 1991). Attention, from this perspective, can be considered the apotheosis of sense-making, in so far as it relativises our experiences so that, at a given time, certain phenomenal objects mean a lot whereas others do not (D’Angelo, 2018). Crucially, it is a process which only functions in an Umwelt: that is, by the organism bringing forth its own domain of relevance through its very being-in-the-world (Heidegger, 2010; Stendera, 2015; Thompson, 2007) and — herein lies the contribution of active inference — its maintaining-in-the-world through adaptive control (Di Paolo, 2005; Friston, 2010). Such phenomenological claims call into question the idea that attention might ever be a purely passive occurrence, since the very act of attentionally centring on an object of awareness entails some (often pre-reflexive) creative sense-making on the part of the organism (Watzl, 2011, 2017). For this reason, I am suggesting that, with attention’s fundamental function in mind, the endogenous versus exogenous dichotomy need not be as strict as it may first seem.  This position is further buttressed by the theoretical implications of active inference. Recall that, under active inference and the free energy principle, the organismic system and its subcomponents are shown to encode prior beliefs about their preferred or characteristic states (Friston et al., 2023). Considering the statistical boundary separating it from the environment—known as a Markov blanket—this assertion can be augmented with the recognition that the internal states of organisms (such as a neuron or a body) can be described as inferring their external states (Clark, 2017; Pearl, 1988). The Markov blanket partitions the coupled agent-arena system into internal and external states, which influence one another vicariously through blanket (i.e. active and sensory) states (Friston, 2013). More specifically, internal states influence external states via active states, which are not, in turn, influenced by external states. Reciprocally, external states influence internal states via sensory states which are not, in turn, influenced by internal states. Furthermore, complex, hierarchical systems can be defined by embedding and composing Markov blankets, through which each set of internal states behave as if they are inferring Markov blankets lower in the hierarchy (Palacios et al., 2020). More precisely, these internal states can be described as minimising an information-theoretic term known as variational free energy — which acts as an upper bound on surprisal or self-information — or, equivalently, maximise an evidence lower bound (or ELBO, as it is known in machine learning) (Friston, 2019; Shannon, 1948). Minimising surprisal or self information entails minimising the entropy of blanket states, since entropy is the long-term average of surprisal. Thus, according to the free energy principle, entities that have a Markov blanket will look as if they are maximising evidence for a model describing the type of thing that they are, as they continue to exist. This process is otherwise known as self-evidencing (Hohwy, 2016).  This is made formally explicit in the formula for variational free energy – cf., Equation 1.  
 6 
Equation 1 Variational Free Energy Equation    
   Here, F stands for variational free energy, Q is the recognition density, or the Bayesian belief encoded by the agent, which replaces the (typically computationally intractable) true posterior P(s,u | o) over latent states s and action policies u, and o are observations. What is most important for my current deflation of the exogenous-endogenous distinction is the fact that the minimisation of free energy entails the maximisation of model evidence P(o|m). This constitutes an existential imperative for things that persist over time, which changes our interpretation of neuronal activity and calls into question the putatively automatic, non-goal-driven response to attractive stimuli in the unfolding of exogenous attention.  Indeed, it is important to stress that neurons too have Markov blankets (Isomura & Friston, 2018; Kiebel & Friston, 2011; Ramstead, 2021). By necessity, therefore, each neuron has a preferred set of internal states and parameterises Bayesian beliefs about external states. This claim underwrites the neuronal packet hypothesis, which holds that “cortical neurons perform inference about the causes of patterns in sensory neuron stimulation by forming neuronal packets, which are neural ensembles wrapped in a Markov blanket, such that neuronal packets come to represent recoverable features of the stimulus” (Ramstead et al., 2021, p. 110; cf., Friston et al., 2021; Yufik, 2019; Yufik & Friston, 2016, Isomura et al., 2023). In this way, cortical neurons appear to recapitulate the structure of their sensory targets in a particularly fascinating way (Kiefer & Hohwy, 2022). More precisely, they appear to be endowed with priors to synchronise in response to action potentials issued from the sensory cortex (Palacios et al., 2019; Ramstead et al., 2021). The resultant self-organisation — i.e., the assemblance of neural packets following sensory perturbations — can be considered a form of posterior inference or hypothesis about the external states, whereby the prior expectation to belong to a superordinate neuronal group is fulfilled through such action. The crucial point here is that mere perception — i.e., the modality through which attention is made manifest — involves active inference at its very core. In particular, it involves an inversion of a generative model, whereby a cause is inferred from a sensation. Active inference at this (neuronal) scale calls into doubt the so-called “passivity” of exogenous attention (Nguyen, 2020; Suchy-Dicey & Watanabe, 2010). So too does the activity of the sensory neurons. Indeed, sensory neurons appear to have preferences (priors) over the stimuli they detect in their receptive fields, which leads them to send signals (action potentials) to cortical regions, triggering the cortical assemblage explicated above (Darlington et al., 2018; 
	 (, ) a r g m i n
[ln ( , ) ln ( | , ) ln ( , )]
[( , ) | | ( ,|) ]l n (| )
[( , ) | | ( , ) ] [ l n (
Q
Q
posterior likelihood prior
KL
log evidencedivergence
KL Q
complexity
Qsu F
FQ s u P o s u P s u
DQ s uP s u o P o m
DQ s uP s u P
=
=- -
=-
=-
E
E
    
  
  |,) ]
accuracy
os u

 7 
Ramstead et al., 2021; Verstynen & Sabes, 2011).5 This suggests that cognition as an act of sense-making is not just a phenomenological claim and can also be grounded out in terms of theoretical neuroscience.  For the sake of this paper, it is not necessary to explore in any great depth how priors and sensory data interact in attentional perception (cf., Harrison, 2023; Park, 2023). Rather, we can simply stress that so-called exogenous attention ought not be taken as a purely passive phenomenon. Perception, a necessary aspect of attention, always entails a sort of “best compromise” between the sensory data (or, more formally, its likelihood) and the organism’s priors. Given this, the dichotomy of exogenous versus endogenous attention turns out to be less fundamental than perhaps once thought, since all perception, attentional or not, is geared towards the fulfilment of the same objective: the minimisation of variational free energy.  That said, I do recognise the potential counter-argument that exogenous attention feels passive, in the sense it describes how attention appears to be involuntarily attracted to a salient object, whereas endogenous attention is experienced as initiated and controlled by the organism, given their intentions and goals (Carrasco, 2011; Nguyen et al., 2020). This phenomenological point is not trivial; however, it does not necessarily undercut my first claim, namely that, regardless of whether attention is attracted exogenously or deployed endogenously, it still transforms an otherwise neutral environment into an Umwelt of fluctuating significances and is, thus, a crucial cognitive tool for sense-making organisms (Watzl, 2011, 2017). Furthermore, this contention does not undermine the fact that all instances of attention are, from a descriptive, statistical perspective, purposive, in the sense that they are a constituent part of a perceptual apparatus that is constantly negotiating between prior expectations and incoming sensory data. This, again, stresses the idea that both exogenous and endogenous attention are fundamentally goal-driven, even if their unified objective is not recognised by the living organism. Nevertheless, the question of why — despite fringe cases (cf., Hommel et al., 2019) — there appears to be a phenomenological distinction between “voluntary”, endogenous attention and “involuntary”, exogenous attention is interesting and certainly up for debate, albeit beyond the scope of this paper. In the next section, I will take the line of reasoning pursued above even further and suggest that both forms of attention are unified in their enslavement by the hierarchy of preferences encoded within the organism. However, this account recognises the bidirectionality of information flows in such a hierarchy. Thus, I will argue that endogenous attention — as well as being goal-driven — is contingent on the encoding and registration of rapid sensory flows at the lowest-levels of the generative hierarchy, and that exogenous attention — as well as being dictated by sensory data — is tuned too by the organism’s preference priors, which include both phenotypic and learnt expectations. From this active inference perspective, any strong separation between top-down versus bottom-up attentional processing thus collapses6, leaving in its place a dynamical, environmentally-coupled Bayesian hierarchy, whereby what the organism expects (because of the thing it is) is always shaped and tuned by sensory data,  5 Interestingly, it has been suggested that all cells, not only neurons, are free-energy minimising agents, whose prior expectation is to reach a target morphology and maintain physical integrity in that morpho-space (Kuchling et al., 2020; Pio-Lopez et al., 2022). The very emergence, therefore, of sensory neurons, cortical neurons and neuronal packages can be seen as a process of active inference (Fields & Levin, 2019; Friston et al., 2015a). 6 Note that this claim pertains specifically to the functional organisation of attentional schema. A discussion of how active inference changes our understanding of the top-down/bottom-up dichotomy in perceptual processing more broadly is beyond the scope of this paper (cf., Rauss & Pourtois, 2013).  
 8 
whose (in this case, attentional) processing is, in turn, always guided by those higher-order expectations (Awh et al., 2012; Pezzulo et al., 2018; Rauss & Pourtois, 2013).  Attention as active inference Attention is sometimes operationalised in the active inference framework as the “precision associated with some sensory input” (Parr et al., 2022, p. 217) or the “selective sampling of sensory data that have high precision” (Feldman & Friston, 2010, pp. 16-17). Technically, precision refers to the inverse dispersion of a probability distribution. It is, therefore, often associated with the confidence we have in our probabilistic beliefs. As such, it can be described as a second-order aspect of a posterior probability: if the prior is more precise than the likelihood, the posterior will be biased in the direction of the prior, and vice-versa.7 Consequently, precision has been associated with gain control within the active inference literature, where large synaptic gain over sensory information represents precise prediction errors ascending the generative hierarchy and biasing resultant posterior probabilities in its direction (Friston, 2008; Friston et al., 2011; Limongi et al., 2018). Given that attention has been identified as the mechanism underlying gain control (Hillyard et al., 1998; Parr & Friston, 2019), the convergence of precision and attention is not surprising. Indeed, attending to highly precise sensory data is necessary for organisms seeking a descriptively viable model of their lived world – or, in mathematical terms, an as-minimal-as-possible KL divergence between their recognition density and the true posterior over states, as it ensures that the hidden state causing the observation is inferred accurately.  However, identifying attention with sensory precision is arguably a false move. As Ransom et al. (2020) point out, an account of attention which identifies it purely with the precision of sensory signals — i.e., the likelihood that this sensory signal came from this latent cause — fails to explain certain aspects of lived experience. To use their example, why would I pay extra attention to the front yard of a house where I have previously encountered a vicious dog, even if no dog is now present? In this case, it is not only that an imprecise signal is being attended to; rather, there is no signal to attend to in the first place. Broadening this argument somewhat, it becomes clear that a purely “sensory precision is attention” account fails to explain why, given equal precision, we pay attention to certain signals rather than others. Ransom et al. (2020, p. 1) propose that “cases such as these appear to pose a significant challenge to predictive processing (PP) models of attention, and therefore to the prospects of PP as a unified theory of all mental functioning.”8 I do not believe the issue is as grave as Ransom et al. (2020) imply. In fact, the issue is resolved by recognising that attention is not sensory precision; rather, it is the process underlying the optimisation of precision-weighting (or precision control) over the likelihood distribution — i.e., the likelihood of the observation given a state (Mirza et al., 2019; Parr & Friston, 2019; Crucially, this optimisation rests upon the precision-weight of prior beliefs higher in the hierarchy. In other words, whereas sensory precision just is the ambiguity of the sensory signal, sensory precision-weighting refers to how much synaptic gain that sensory signal is afforded and, thus, how much it biases the posterior in its direction. Although  7 Note that one way to formalise the influence of precision is to use a Gibbs form with an inverse temperature parameter (Parr & Friston, 2017).  8 Predictive processing is often used to model active inference in continuous state space with continuous time variables. Other schema, such as partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) are utilised in discrete state space active inference (cf., Friston et al., 2017). The distinction does not warrant further investigation in this paper. 
 9 
precision per se may influence gain control – recall that free-energy minimisation entails attending to precise signals – it is not the sole influencing factor at play. Indeed, as Andersen et al. (2022, p. 9) make clear, it is worth expanding the notion of noise beyond the mere statistical entropy of a sensory signal, recognising that “the very concept of signal and noise doesn’t make sense outside of an agent with goals.” Thus, the reason why I pay attention to the lawn where the dog was previously barking is because I have a precise preference that I will stay out of harm’s way, and I select an attentional action which ensures that this preference isn’t violated. Note that deploying attention on the lawn itself is not sufficient to guarantee my safety; I might well pay attention to a dog that is nevertheless biting me. What the attentional act does is yield information about whether the vicious dog is present. Without resolving this potential source of ambiguity, I will be unable to take the subsequent pragmatic action to run away, if, indeed, the dog is present. To use the language of Parr and Friston (2019), my eye saccades to the lawn are highly salient, since they reduce uncertainty about what I would see if I looked “over there”. This is formally equivalent to salience as defined by Itti and Baldi (2009), who propose that the salience of an observation can be scored by the Bayesian surprise – i.e., the KL divergence between posterior and prior beliefs about future states (cf., Friston et al., 2015).9 Note that we have now moved from attention as some form of low-level gain control to the deployment of attention that is quintessentially enactive; albeit, as a covert or mental kind of action (cf., Limanowski 2017). This aspect of attention is, in active inference, seen as a response to epistemic affordances in the sensorium described, technically, as salience. The distinction between salience and attention here lies in the conceptualisation of attention as gain control, thereby rooting it in the amplification of the signals of certain, already-available sensory data. Conversely, the term salience is used to refer to action not yet taken (Parr and Friston, 2019). Nonetheless, they can be reconciled, since both contribute to the agent’s fundamental goal of deriving a viable posterior: i.e., self-evidencing. Crucially, according to Equation 1, this posterior cannot just be descriptively viable, in the sense that the KL divergence between the recognition density and the true posterior is small. Rather, it must also be normatively viable, meaning that model preferences must be realised, rendering the states it frequents less surprising. In other words, the organism’s model needs not, and does not, explain every latent cause in its econiche, because not every latent cause is relevant to it (Andersen et al., 2022). For example, adjudicating between a pair of competing hypotheses —say, a floating leaf versus a swooping bird — that might explain the slight perturbation in the corner of my visual field is not a calculation worth computing for an energy-bound human, because the gain in the descriptive adequacy of my generative model is not accompanied by a gain in its normative adequacy. Put simply, whether it is a bird or a leaf is simply not relevant to me. However, if I began to sense that this blurry figure was steadily occupying more and more of my visual field and was, therefore, getting closer and closer, it is in my interest to pay attention to that object, so that I can discern what it is and take the necessary action to realise my preference of not being struck by a flying object. Therefore, my attentional act becomes highly salient and amplifies the gain on the relevant signal. This covert mental action - as opposed to an overt action such as a saccadic eye movement (Rizzolatti et al., 1987) — allows me to determine that sensory datum’s hidden cause rapidly and accurately. This evinces how closely connected salience and attention are: the former describes attentional acts that resolve epistemic ambiguity. Furthermore, selecting the sensory data whose hidden cause is worth discovering is not an arbitrary act; rather, it is governed by  9 Note, however, that whereas Itti and Baldi (2009) speak of salient observations, Parr and Friston (2019) refer to salient actions, i.e. actions that yield informative observations. 
 10 
a higher-order preference that makes the relevant object worth paying attention to. In this way, we can begin to see how attention is deeply enslaved by the preferences of the organism.  Crucially, this coupling of attention and goals powerfully cuts through the endogenous/exogenous dichotomy. In the case of the approaching flying object, endogenous and exogenous attention might be paired to amplify the gain control on the sensory signal, such that I am involuntarily drawn to the figure as it gets closer, before I (seemingly) decide to turn my attention towards it in my effort to discern its hidden cause. Interestingly, this may shed light on the function of endogenous attention as a process by which extra synaptic gain is assigned to certain sensory signals, aligning it closely with the metaphor of attention as a spotlight (Fazekas & Nanay, 2015, 2021; Gentner & Jeziorski, 1993; but see Cave & Bichot, 1999). However, if we are to take this metaphor seriously, we must recognise that the hand holding the spotlight is clearly biased, shedding light solely on the information that is relevant to it (Bruineberg et al., 2018). Furthermore, to fulfil its function, the movements of this metaphorical hand might often be involuntary, reinforcing the claim that supposedly voluntary (endogenous) attention ought not to be privileged when analysing the relationship between goals and attention. My claim that our predictive machinery controls attention such that it is deployed on relevant information is strengthened by computational work, which illustrates that, in a visual search task which involves the acquisition of task-relevant information, in-silico agents selectively sample task-relevant observations (Mirza et al., 2019). This finding is of particular interest because attentional selection is taken to be “proactive” (Mirza et al., 2019, p. 1). By this, Mirza et al. (2019) mean that certain sensations are given more precision-weight even before they are sampled, indicating that, relative to our goals, we up-weight features of the object we are seeking (e.g., “redness” and “pen-ness” if we are seeking a red pen), and down-weight precision of task-irrelevant information (e.g., “blueness” or “cup-ness”). Again, according to my definition of the word, this does not amount to increasing precision10 per se, because precision is a mathematical construct referring to the inverse (co)variance of a probability distribution. Rather, we actively increase the precision-weight allotted to certain sensations before they are even observed, indicating that we hold “attentional templates in visual working memory to control what information is selected” (Carlisle et al., 2011, p. 1; Desimone & Duncan, 1995; Bundesen et al., 2005). This complexifies the notion of attention, since it seems no longer tenable to suggest that it is simply gain control over sensory data already present (cf., Parr & Friston, 2019). Although the deployment of precision-weight is likely a function of attention (cf., Blaser et al., 1999; Fazekas & Nanay, 2015, 2021; Hillyard, 1998), this portrayal of attention as a purely amplifying phenomenon is insufficient. This is because, as demonstrated by Mirza et al. (2019), attention not only impacts gain control but is also impacted by it, since not-yet-perceived stimuli which, through pre-emptive action, possess high precision-weight, are attentionally attractive. This points to an interesting circular relationship between attention and synaptic sensory gain, where the latter directly heightens the latter (Posner, 1980), and yet is initially drawn to stimuli occupying a relatively high level of synaptic gain before amplifying that already-increased gain. This also seems to resolve a long-standing tension in the attention literature between those who cast attention as a mechanism of selection (Broadbent, 1958; Petersen & Posner, 2012) and those who cast it 
 10 Note that Mirza et al. (2019) do use the word precision in the way that I warn against in this paper. 
 11 
as a mechanism of amplification or extra-processing (Fazekas & Nanay, 2015, 2021). From the perspective of this paper, it is both. This fact may encourage those who wish to uphold the distinction between exogenous and endogenous attention, as it seems that the latter emerges from this pre-emptive, unconscious assignment of weight to relevant sensations, whilst the former involves the maximisation of synaptic gain of a “chosen” stimulus. To this rebuttal, I can simply respond that both types of attention still involve the maximisation of task-relevant information given certain higher-order goals. This fact is foundational: whether or not this is done in an apparently (phenomenologically) purposive fashion is secondary. In addition to this, it is striking that Mirza et al. (2019, p. 1) state that their aim is to “provide a “first principle” account of endogenous attention” (italics added). However, as mentioned above, their model applies too to exogenous attention, insofar as being drawn to faces or objects (cf., Yarbus, 1967) in a task-relevant fashion — for this is the paradigm these researchers used — still involves attention being attracted to certain features of the scene that have, presumably, had their precision-weight up-regulated. This further illustrates the elision of endogenous and exogenous attention that I have been arguing is entailed from an active inference perspective, where attention is always enslaved by preferences and goals such that it makes little sense to speak of non-goal-driven or non-purposive attention.  Beyond task-relevance Whether or not one maintains the endogenous/exogenous dichotomy, to curtail the scope of goals underlying attention solely to the level of task-relevance is clearly an arbitrary decision. This is because, from an active inference perspective, task goals are subsumed under the broader goals of the organism, and, thus, belong to the same explanatory framework as those longer-term, often invariant preferences. In other words, goals, whether they are short-term in their relationship to a given task, or long-term in their contribution to the lifecycle of the organism, can be cast as Bayesian priors for which the organism seeks out evidence (Friston et al., 2012; Pezzulo et al., 2018). Given this isomorphy between task-relevant priors and higher-order, preference priors, it seems reasonable to suggest that the latter guide attention in the same way as the former.  In fact, the two types of priors likely interact constantly. For example, I may have task-relevant priors which encode a statistical preference that I complete this paper. Thus, my attention is directed towards features of my Umwelt that are relevant to these ends, such as my laptop keys, the books around me and so on. This would be achieved by the mechanisms elucidated by Mirza et al. (2019), whereby, when I am in the mode of paper writing, I selectively and pre-emptively attenuate features of my environment that are task irrelevant (including those not immediately in my field of perception), such that task-relevant features are assigned relatively high precision-weight and are thus attended to. However, what if a fellow researcher brings her fluffy poodle into the room and I, as a dog-lover, suddenly find my attention drawn away from the words on the screen. It is as if an even more precise prior has now taken precedence, so that precision-weight over the sensory signals associated with my paper are down-regulated, allowing me to focus wholeheartedly on the dog. This preference to be in the company of a dog may, in turn, be superseded by my preference to be a successful academic, which then guides my attention back to the paper.  What this everyday example illustrate is that attention follows a type of “metastable” path, never settling down on a particular object but rather shifting from attractor to attractor in 
 12 
accordance with the activity-dependent state of the organism (Bressler & Kelso, 2001; Friston, 2000; Varela, 2001). Underwriting these dynamics are not simply the preferences encoded in the organism’s generative hierarchy; rather, it is the preference that the system has assigned high precision-weight in the present moment because it recognises that the specific situation is affording it the possibility of minimising (expected) free energy right now with respect to that particular preference. Indeed, Equation 2 shows us that, in addition to resolving epistemic ambiguity, maximising instrumental value over a specific preference is a constituent part of the minimisation of expected free energy. Equation 2 Expected Free Energy Formula  
 This equation describes the expected free energy of a particular action policy u, where actions are chosen to minimise expected free energy. Note that c stands for a model parameter that encodes the preferred outcomes of the agent in question, and Q denotes the agent’s inferences conditioned on an action policy (‘what would happen if I did that?’). The preferences constrain action selection (including attention) by rendering certain outcomes costly. However, the number of preference values that can be entertained at any moment must also be contextualised (i.e., conditioned upon inferred state of affairs), which implies the presence of a higher-order action policy that delimits the possible number of prior preferences that might underwrite the expected free energy of a singular action, given the inferred context. This permits the organism to select actions relating to the preferences that might actually be fulfilled in a given situation (Friston et al., 2023).  Thus, when the dog walks in, my cognitive system implicitly acts to minimise the free energy at hand by paying attention to it, since this very attentional act fulfils the desire to be in the company of a dog. However, I am not always looking for dogs, indicating that my preference space is constrained by what the context offers me. This speaks to the Umwelt as “a field of affordances”, which offers possibilities for action relative to the needs and preferences of the living organism (Bruineberg & Rietveld, 2014; Gibson, 1979). To offer another example, I am not always paying attention to my own level of hunger, although my generative hierarchy always encodes a preferred state of satiety. This is because, hopefully most of the time, that preference is being fulfilled and, in fact, eating would actually spike free energy by making me feel bloated, breaking my diet and so on. If I fast however, my current condition (i.e., the presence of high free energy deriving from my low glucose levels) engenders a perceptual metamorphosis of the environment into landscape rich full of affordances for eating. This calls upon me to pay attention to where food might lie and then consequently eat it. This might start 

 13 
with the resolution of uncertainty about where food might be through salient actions (e.g., eye saccades). This consequently transforms my Umwelt from an epistemic field of affordances into one where I can maximally exploit the instrumental affordances pertaining to my current goal: i.e., by eating. The above example evidences the role of attention in aiding the organism to minimise free energy, both in terms of information gain and utility maximisation.  Thus far, I have recognised that attention is constrained by the limited set of (precise) prior preferences the organism can entertain in any one moment in a particular context. From this analysis, it is unclear however why I might prioritise writing my paper over paying attention to the dog, or why I pay attention to finding food rather than writing my paper. The reason for this attentional hierarchy is multifaceted: for example, if I am slightly hungry, I may wait a while and continue writing; if I am ravenous, nothing will stop me in my pursuit of food. Thus, the amount11 of free energy that I can minimise following an action is all important.  Crucially, the depth at which the preference is encoded will also have an impact on attentional selection. The reason why I cannot stop paying attention to my sense of starvation (when hungry), or pain (when I’ve broken my leg), or child’s safety (when they are in the middle of the road), is because my preferences over these outcomes are encoded at the deepest level of my generative hierarchy and garner high precision-weight, given the relevant contextual cue, which cannot be revised or conditioned on context. Again, it is not the case that these priors have such a permanently high level of precision-weight that they always dominate attention, at least not in a way that is explicit to the organism. Rather, when free energy with respect to these priors grows, the organism will prioritise action to garner evidence for those priors before anything else, indicating the presence of a higher-order preference determining the prioritisation of action selection (including attentional behaviour) in accordance with the hierarchy of the generative model. Put another way, this policy dictates that, given relevant contextual cues (e.g., decreasing glucose levels), higher precision-weight should be deployed onto the deep-level preference priors whose maintenance appears to be at risk of violation. This (mental) policy has the effect of governing the organism’s attentional schema and lower-level, physical policy selection – e.g., I will go find food when hungry. The deep position of these preferences in the hierarchy is necessary because it ensures that all dynamics which unfold at the shallower levels of the model subserve that ultimate goal; their high-precision weight simply means that they cannot be revised and that, consequently, the organism takes action to change its sensorium (e.g., eat), rather than update its priors, which, in this case, may afford the model greater descriptive adequacy in the moment, but will ultimately lead to the disintegration of the organism as it starves to death. Furthermore, although these preference priors might not wholly determine the direction of attention at all times, their influence can be pervasive. This explains why our attention is drawn to potential sexual partners, sweet-smelling food and lethal animals, even if we are not necessarily aroused, hungry, or in the jungle. This is likely due to a hyper-sensitivity to the contextual cues that govern the mental deployment of precision-weight over these preference priors, such that the slightest trigger is enough to prioritise fulfilment of those preferences through action and attention. What’s more, I propose that these priors possess an already-high level of precision-weight prior to the observation of their associated contextual cue, making the threshold for their prioritisation naturally low. This claim also underlies my next suggestion, namely that there is not a strong disconnect between what appear to be more superficial attractors of attention and those that are deeper and organism-defining. In a generative hierarchy, the presence of context-variant, shallow attractors rest on and develop  11 Indeed, free energy is calculated in terms of natural units of information (proportional to bits of information).  
 14 
out of deeper, homeostatic requirements. To provide an example, my context-specific preference to finish this paper subserves my preference to acquire a position on a doctoral program which subserves my preference to be a successful academic which subserves my preference to live a fulfilled life and so on. This implies that deep preference priors have, always have had, and will always have a prerequisite high level of precision-weight (synaptic gain), and that the role of specific context is to trigger extra-high precision-weight, such that a specific preference takes real-time precedence at a specific moment, shaping what attention is paid to in the here-and-now. In the language of dynamical systems theory, attention jumps from attractor to attractor in a metastable manner, but some wells are deeper than others and may, in fact, envelop more superficial divots (Jaeger & Monk, 2014). In the language of neurophenomenology and naturalised experience, the generative hierarchies we embody shape  what we pay attention to, not only right now but also over the course of a lifetime (Lutz, 2002; Varela, 1997).  Conclusion  This paper has drawn on the active inference account of attention as the optimisation of the precision-weighting granted to sensory signals and tied it inextricably to the higher-order preferences and goals that constitute the organism’s generative model. In turn, this argument calls into question the dichotomy of endogenous versus exogenous attention, given that all instances of attention can be described as contributing to a sentient agent’s self-evidencing. In other words, the organism’s preference priors aid its sense-making by transforming the environment into an Umwelt replete with affordances, which are prioritised, in part, according to the generative hierarchy the organism embodies. In sum, there are no goals without attention; equally, however, there is no attention without goals.    
 15 
Bibliography Albarracín, D., & Wyer, R. S. (2000). The Cognitive Impact of Past Behavior: Influences on Beliefs, Attitudes, and Future Behavioral Decisions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(1), 5–22. Andersen, B. P., Miller, M., & Vervaeke, J. (2022). Predictive processing and relevance realization: Exploring convergent solutions to the frame problem. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-022-09850-6 Anton-Erxleben, K., & Carrasco, M. (2013). Attentional enhancement of spatial resolution: Linking behavioural and neurophysiological evidence. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 14(3), 188–200. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3443 Awh, E., Belopolsky, A. V., & Theeuwes, J. (2012). Top-down versus bottom-up attentional control: A failed theoretical dichotomy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(8), 437–443. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.06.010 Beck, D. M., & Kastner, S. (2009). Top-down and bottom-up mechanisms in biasing competition in the human brain. Vision Research, 49(10), 1154–1165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visres.2008.07.012 Berger, A., Henik, A., & Rafal, R. (2005). Competition Between Endogenous and Exogenous Orienting of Visual Attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134(2), 207–221. https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.134.2.207 Blaser, E., Sperling, G., & Lu, Z.-L. (1999). Measuring the amplification of attention. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 96(20), 11681–11686. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.20.11681 Bressler, S. L., & Kelso, J. a. S. (2001). Cortical coordination dynamics and cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5(1), 26–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1364-6613(00)01564-3 
 16 
Broadbent, D. E. (1958). Perception and communication (pp. v, 340). Pergamon Press. https://doi.org/10.1037/10037-000 Bruineberg, J., Dołęga, K., Dewhurst, J., & Baltieri, M. (2022). The Emperor’s New Markov Blankets. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 45, e183. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X21002351 Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not a scientist: The free-energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective. Synthese, 195(6), 2417–2444. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1239-1 Bruineberg, J., & Rietveld, E. (2014). Self-organization, free energy minimization, and optimal grip on a field of affordances. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00599 Bundesen, C., Habekost, T., & Kyllingsbaek, S. (2005). A neural theory of visual attention: Bridging cognition and neurophysiology. Psychological Review, 112(2), 291–328. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.112.2.291 Cabanac, M. (2006). Adjustable set point: To honor Harold T. Hammel. Journal of Applied Physiology, 100(4), 1338–1346. https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.01021.2005 Carlisle, N. B., Arita, J. T., Pardo, D., & Woodman, G. F. (2011). Attentional Templates in Visual Working Memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 31(25), 9315–9322. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1097-11.2011 Carrasco, M. (2011). Visual attention: The past 25 years. Vision Research, 51(13), 1484–1525. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visres.2011.04.012 Cave, K. R., & Bichot, N. P. (1999). Visuospatial attention: Beyond a spotlight model. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6(2), 204–223. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03212327 
 17 
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(3), 181–204. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X12000477 Clark, A. (2015). Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind. Oxford University Press. Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket:How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds: Resisting the Second Law with Metamorphic Minds. Philosophy and Predictive Processing. https://doi.org/10.15502/9783958573031 D’Angelo, D. (2018). A Phenomenology of Creative Attention: Merleau-Ponty and Philosophy of Mind. Phänomenologische Forschungen, 2, 99–116. Darlington, T. R., Beck, J. M., & Lisberger, S. G. (2018). Neural implementation of Bayesian inference in a sensory-motor behavior. Nature Neuroscience, 21(10), 1442–1451. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-018-0233-y Dozois, D., & Rnic, K. (2015). Core Beliefs and Self-Schematic Structure in Depression. Current Opinion in Psychology, 4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2014.12.008 Desimone, R., & Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms of selective visual attention. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 18, 193–222. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ne.18.030195.001205 Di Paolo, E. A. (2005). Autopoiesis, Adaptivity, Teleology, Agency. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 4(4), 429–452. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-005-9002-y Fazekas, P., & Nanay, B. (2015). The ‘Deployment of Extra Processing’ Account of Attention: EAPCogSci 2015. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, 756–761. Fazekas, P., & Nanay, B. (2021). Attention is Amplification, Not Selection. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 72(1), 299–324. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjps/axy065 
 18 
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. (2010). Attention, Uncertainty, and Free-Energy. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 4. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215 Fields, C., & Levin, M. (2019). Somatic multicellularity as a satisficing solution to the prediction-error minimization problem. Communicative & Integrative Biology, 12(1), 119–132. https://doi.org/10.1080/19420889.2019.1643666 Friston, K. (2000). The labile brain. II. Transients, complexity and selection. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences, 355(1394), 237–252. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2000.0561 Friston, K. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 360(1456), 815–836. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2005.1622 Friston, K. (2008). Hierarchical models in the brain. PLoS Computational Biology, 4(11), e1000211. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000211 Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the brain? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(7), 293–301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005 Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2), Article 2. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787 Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 10(86), 20130475. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475 Friston, K. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics (arXiv:1906.10184). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1906.10184 Friston, K., Da Costa, L., Sajid, N., Heins, C., Ueltzhöffer, K., Pavliotis, G. A., & Parr, T. (2023). The free energy principle made simpler but not too simple. Physics Reports, 1024, 1–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2023.07.001 
 19 
Friston, K. J., Fagerholm, E. D., Zarghami, T. S., Parr, T., Hipólito, I., Magrou, L., & Razi, A. (2021). Parcels and particles: Markov blankets in the brain. Network Neuroscience, 5(1), 211–251. https://doi.org/10.1162/netn_a_00175 Friston, K., Levin, M., Sengupta, B., & Pezzulo, G. (2015a). Knowing one’s place: A free-energy approach to pattern regulation. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 12(105), 20141383. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2014.1383 Friston, K., Mattout, J., & Kilner, J. (2011). Action understanding and active inference. Biological Cybernetics, 104(1), 137–160. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00422-011-0424-z Friston, K., Parr, T., & de Vries, B. (2017). The graphical brain: Belief propagation and active inference. Network Neuroscience (Cambridge, Mass.), 1(4), 381–414. https://doi.org/10.1162/NETN_a_00018 Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., & Pezzulo, G. (2015). Active inference and epistemic value. Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(4), 187–214. https://doi.org/10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053 Friston, K. J., Salvatori, T., Isomura, T., Tschantz, A., Kiefer, A., Verbelen, T., Koudahl, M., Paul, A., Parr, T., Razi, A., Kagan, B., Buckley, C. L., & Ramstead, M. J. D. (2023). Active Inference and Intentional Behaviour (arXiv:2312.07547). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2312.07547 Friston, K., Samothrakis, S., & Montague, R. (2012). Active inference and agency: Optimal control without cost functions. Biological Cybernetics, 106(8), 523–541. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00422-012-0512-8 Friston, K., Sengupta, B., & Auletta, G. (2014). Cognitive Dynamics: From Attractors to Active Inference. Proceedings of the IEEE, 102, 427–445. https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2014.2306251 
 20 
Gentner, D., & Jeziorski, M. (1993). The shift from metaphor to analogy in Western science (p. 480). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139173865.022 Gibson, J. J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception: Classic Edition. Houghton Mifflin. Harrison, W. J., Bays, P. M., & Rideaux, R. (2023). Neural tuning instantiates prior expectations in the human visual system. Nature Communications, 14(1), Article 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41027-w Heidegger, M. (2010). Being and Time. SUNY Press. Hillyard, S. A., Vogel, E. K., & Luck, S. J. (1998). Sensory gain control (amplification) as a mechanism of selective attention: Electrophysiological and neuroimaging evidence. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 353(1373), 1257–1270. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.1998.0281 Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind. https://philpapers.org/rec/HOHTPM-2 Hohwy, J. (2016). The Self-Evidencing Brain. Noûs, 50(2), 259–285. https://doi.org/10.1111/nous.12062 Hohwy, J., & Michael, J. (2017). Why Should Any Body Have a Self? https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/10462.003.0043 Hommel, B., Chapman, C. S., Cisek, P., Neyedli, H. F., Song, J.-H., & Welsh, T. N. (2019). No one knows what attention is. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 81(7), 2288–2303. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13414-019-01846-w Isomura, T., & Friston, K. (2018). In vitro neural networks minimise variational free energy. Scientific Reports, 8(1), 16926. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-35221-w Isomura, T., Kotani, K., Jimbo, Y., & Friston, K. J. (2023). Experimental validation of the free-energy principle with in vitro neural networks. Nature Communications, 14(1), Article 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-40141-z 
 21 
Itti, L., & Baldi, P. (2009). Bayesian surprise attracts human attention. Vision Research, 49(10), 1295–1306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visres.2008.09.007 Jack, A. I., & Roepstorff, A. (2002). Introspection and cognitive brain mapping: From stimulus-response to script-report. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6(8), 333–339. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(02)01941-1 Jaeger, J., & Monk, N. (2014). Bioattractors: Dynamical systems theory and the evolution of regulatory processes. The Journal of Physiology, 592(Pt 11), 2267–2281. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2014.272385 James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology, Vol I. (pp. xii, 697). Henry Holt and Co. https://doi.org/10.1037/10538-000 Keefe, J. M. (2022). Evaluating Attention’s Theoretical Dichotomy: A Comparison of Exogenous and Endogenous Attention [UC San Diego]. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/602750wb Kesberg, R., & Keller, J. (2018). The Relation Between Human Values and Perceived Situation Characteristics in Everyday Life. Frontiers in Psychology, 9. https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01676 Kiebel, S., & Friston, K. (2011). Free Energy and Dendritic Self-Organization. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 5. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnsys.2011.00080 Kiefer, A., & Hohwy, J. (2022). Bayesian Realism and Structural Representation. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 45, e199. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0140525x22000231 Kuchling, F., Friston, K., Georgiev, G., & Levin, M. (2020). Morphogenesis as Bayesian inference: A variational approach to pattern formation and control in complex biological systems. Physics of Life Reviews, 33, 88–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2019.06.001 Lewin, K. (1939). Field Theory and Experiment in Social Psychology: Concepts and Methods. American Journal of Sociology, 44(6), 868–896. 
 22 
Limanowski, J. (2017). (Dis-)Attending to the Body: Action and Self-Experience in the Active Inference Framework. https://doi.org/10.15502/9783958573192 Limongi, R., Bohaterewicz, B., Nowicka, M., Plewka, A., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Knowing when to stop: Aberrant precision and evidence accumulation in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 197, 386. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2017.12.018 Lindsay, G. W. (2020). Attention in Psychology, Neuroscience, and Machine Learning. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 14. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fncom.2020.00029 Linson, A., Clark, A., Ramamoorthy, S., & Friston, K. (2018). The Active Inference Approach to Ecological Perception: General Information Dynamics for Natural and Artificial Embodied Cognition. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 5. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frobt.2018.00021 Linson, A., & Friston, K. (2019). Reframing PTSD for computational psychiatry with the active inference framework. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 24(5), 347–368. https://doi.org/10.1080/13546805.2019.1665994 Lutz, A. (2002). Toward a Neurophenomenology as an Account of Generative Passages: A First Empirical Case Study. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 1(2), 133–167. https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1020320221083 MacLean, K. A., Aichele, S. R., Bridwell, D. A., Mangun, G. R., Wojciulik, E., & Saron, C. D. (2009). Interactions between Endogenous and Exogenous Attention during Vigilance. Attention, Perception & Psychophysics, 71(5), 1042–1058. https://doi.org/10.3758/APP.71.5.1042 Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of Perception (D. A. Landes, Ed.). The Humanities Press. 
 23 
Meyer, K. N., Du, F., Parks, E., & Hopfinger, J. B. (2018). Exogenous vs. endogenous attention: Shifting the balance of fronto-parietal activity. Neuropsychologia, 111, 307–316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.02.006 Millings, A., & Carnelley, K. B. (2015). Core belief content examined in a large sample of patients using online cognitive behaviour therapy. Journal of Affective Disorders, 186, 275–283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2015.06.044 Mirza, M. B., Adams, R. A., Friston, K., & Parr, T. (2019). Introducing a Bayesian model of selective attention based on active inference. Scientific Reports, 9(1), Article 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-50138-8 Montgomery, C., & Hipólito, I. (2023). Resurrecting Gaia: Harnessing the Free Energy Principle to preserve life as we know it. Frontiers in Psychology, 14, 1206963. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1206963 Nguyen, K. N., Watanabe, T., & Andersen, G. J. (2020). Role of endogenous and exogenous attention in task-relevant visual perceptual learning. PLoS ONE, 15(8), e0237912. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0237912 Palacios, E. R., Isomura, T., Parr, T., & Friston, K. (2019). The emergence of synchrony in networks of mutually inferring neurons. Scientific Reports, 9(1), Article 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-42821-7 Palacios, E. R., Razi, A., Parr, T., Kirchhoff, M., & Friston, K. (2020). On Markov blankets and hierarchical self-organisation. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 486, 110089. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2019.110089 Park, J., Kim, S., Kim, H. R., & Lee, J. (2023). Prior expectation enhances sensorimotor behavior by modulating population tuning and subspace activity in sensory cortex. Science Advances, 9(27), eadg4156. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adg4156 
 24 
Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2017). Uncertainty, epistemics and active inference. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 14(136), 20170376. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0376 Parr, T., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Attention or salience? Current Opinion in Psychology, 29, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.10.006 Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., & Friston, K. J. (2022). Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior. The MIT Press. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/12441.001.0001 Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible inference (pp. xix, 552). Morgan Kaufmann. Petersen, S. E., & Posner, M. I. (2012). The Attention System of the Human Brain: 20 Years After. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 35, 73–89. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-062111-150525 Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Hierarchical Active Inference: A Theory of Motivated Control. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 22(4), 294–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.01.009 Pio-Lopez, L., Kuchling, F., Tung, A., Pezzulo, G., & Levin, M. (2022). Active inference, morphogenesis, and computational psychiatry. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 16. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fncom.2022.988977 Posner, M. I. (1980). Orienting of attention. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32(1), 3–25. https://doi.org/10.1080/00335558008248231 Ramírez, J. C., & Marshall, J. A. R. (2017). Can natural selection encode Bayesian priors? Journal of Theoretical Biology, 426, 57–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2017.05.017 Ramstead, M. J.D., Hesp, C., Tschantz, A., Smith, R., Constant, A., & Friston, K. (2021). Neural and phenotypic representation under the free-energy principle. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 120, 109–122. 
 25 
Ramstead, M. J. D., Sakthivadivel, D. A. R., Heins, C., Koudahl, M., Millidge, B., Da Costa, L., Klein, B., & Friston, K. J. (2023). On Bayesian mechanics: A physics of and by beliefs. Interface Focus, 13(3), 20220029. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsfs.2022.0029 Ramstead, M. J. D., Seth, A. K., Hesp, C., Sandved-Smith, L., Mago, J., Lifshitz, M., Pagnoni, G., Smith, R., Dumas, G., Lutz, A., Friston, K., & Constant, A. (2022). From Generative Models to Generative Passages: A Computational Approach to (Neuro) Phenomenology. Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 13(4), 829–857. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164-021-00604-y Ransom, M., Fazelpour, S., Markovic, J., Kryklywy, J., Thompson, E. T., & Todd, R. M. (2020). Affect-biased attention and predictive processing. Cognition, 203, 104370. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2020.104370 Rauss, K., & Pourtois, G. (2013). What is Bottom-Up and What is Top-Down in Predictive Coding? Frontiers in Psychology, 4. https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00276 Rizzolatti, G., Riggio, L., Dascola, I., & Umiltá, C. (1987). Reorienting attention across the horizontal and vertical meridians: Evidence in favor of a premotor theory of attention. Neuropsychologia, 25(1A), 31–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/0028-3932(87)90041-8 Schwitzgebel, E. (2006). Belief. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/Belief/ Shannon, C. E. (1948). A Mathematical Theory of Communication. Bell System Technical Journal, 27(3), 379–423. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.tb01338.x Sladky, R., Kargl, D., Haubensak, W., & Lamm, C. (2023). An active inference perspective for the amygdala complex. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, S1364661323002838. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2023.11.004 Smith, R., Feinstein, J. S., Kuplicki, R., Forthman, K. L., Stewart, J. L., Paulus, M. P., Tulsa 1000 Investigators, & Khalsa, S. S. (2021). Perceptual insensitivity to the modulation of 
 26 
interoceptive signals in depression, anxiety, and substance use disorders. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 2108. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-81307-3 Smith, R., Friston, K. J., & Whyte, C. J. (2022). A step-by-step tutorial on active inference and its application to empirical data. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 107, 102632. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2021.102632 Stendera, M. (2015). Being-in-the-World, Temporality and Autopoiesis. Parrhesia, 24, 261–284. Suchy-Dicey, C., & Watanabe, T. (2010). Re-thinking the active-passive distinction in attention from a philosophical viewpoint. Journal of Vision, 10(7), 218. https://doi.org/10.1167/10.7.218 Theeuwes, J. (1991). Exogenous and endogenous control of attention: The effect of visual onsets and offsets. Perception & Psychophysics, 49(1), 83–90. https://doi.org/10.3758/bf03211619 Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in life: Biology, phenomenology, and the sciences of mind (pp. xiv, 543). Belknap Press/Harvard University Presst Treue, S. (2003). Visual attention: The where, what, how and why of saliency. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 13(4), 428–432. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0959-4388(03)00105-3 van Es, T., & Hipolito, I. (2020, December 7). Free-Energy Principle, Computationalism and Realism: A Tragedy [Preprint]. http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/18497/ Van Geert, E., Moors, P., Haaf, J., & Wagemans, J. (2022). Same stimulus, same temporal context, different percept? Individual differences in hysteresis and adaptation when perceiving multistable dot lattices. I-Perception, 13(4), 20416695221109300. https://doi.org/10.1177/20416695221109300 Varela, F. J. (1991). Organism: A Meshwork of Selfless Selves. In A. I. Tauber (Ed.), Organism and the Origins of Self (pp. 79–107). Springer Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-3406-4_5 
 27 
Varela, F. J. (1997). The Naturalization of Phenomenology as the Transcendence of Nature: Searching for Generative Mutual Constraints. Alter: Revue de Phénoménologie, 5, 355–385. Varela, F., Lachaux, J.-P., Rodriguez, E., & Martinerie, J. (2001). The brainweb: Phase synchronization and large-scale integration. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2(4), Article 4. https://doi.org/10.1038/35067550 Verstynen, T., & Sabes, P. N. (2011). How Each Movement Changes the Next: An Experimental and Theoretical Study of Fast Adaptive Priors in Reaching. Journal of Neuroscience, 31(27), 10050–10059. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6525-10.2011 Vervaeke, J., Lillicrap, T., & Richards, B. (2012). Relevance Realization and the Emerging Framework in Cognitive Science. J. Log. Comput., 22, 79–99. https://doi.org/10.1093/logcom/exp067 Watson, J. B. (1913). Psychology as the behaviorist views it. Psychological Review, 20(2), 158–177. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0074428 Watzl, S. (2011). Attention as Structuring of the Stream of Consciousness. In C. Mole, D. Smithies, & W. Wu (Eds.), Attention: Philosophical and Psychological Essays (p. 145). Oxford University Press. Watzl, S. (2017). Structuring Mind. The Nature of Attention and How It Shapes Consciousness. Oxford University Press. Yantis, S., & Jonides, J. (1984). Abrupt visual onsets and selective attention: Evidence from visual search. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human Perception and Performance, 10(5), 601–621. https://doi.org/10.1037//0096-1523.10.5.601 Yarbus, A. L. (1967). Eye Movements and Vision. Springer US. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-5379-7 Yufik, Y. M. (2019). The Understanding Capacity and Information Dynamics in the Human Brain. Entropy (Basel, Switzerland), 21(3), 308. https://doi.org/10.3390/e21030308 
 28 
Yufik, Y. M., & Friston, K. (2016). Life and Understanding: The Origins of “Understanding” in Self-Organizing Nervous Systems. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 10. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnsys.2016.00098 