EXPECTED WAVE ENERGY FLUX OF PREDICTED SEA STATES 
 
 
Paolo Pezzutto, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, paolo.pezzutto@cnr.it  
 
INTRODUCTION 
Whether coupled into an earth-system model or as 
separate tool, third-generation wave models (e.g. 
WAVEWATCHIII, WAM, SWAN) are the tools used by 
weather centers and researchers to describe the evolution 
of expected sea-states. Due to the complicated nature of 
the wave generation process, wave phases are 
unpredictable, thus the sea states are represented by the 
distribution of the wave action density over a finite 
frequency range. 
The conservative part of the wave action equation, which 
is obtained disregarding sources and sinks, is the kinetic 
equation first introduced by Hasselmann (see Komen et 
al., 1996). It is understood that the term which is usually 
named as “non-linear source” is not a proper source term 
but constitutes the bulk of the dynamics, accounting for the 
energy transfer among the modes. 
The Hasselmann kinetic equation can be derived starting 
from the four wave Zakharov equation (later ZE; see 
Zakharov, 1968; Krasitskii, 1994) after invoking a 
statistical closure which eliminates the phases (see e.g. 
Zakharov, 1999; Onorato and Dematteis, 2020). 
Therefore, the ZE is the backbone of the third-generation 
wave models. 
The ZE resolves phases and amplitudes of a normal 
variable that can be interpreted as a representation of the 
free wave modes. Since the ZE is obtained from the Euler 
equation after a nonlinear canonical transformation, the 
latter describes the associated bound modes. In practice, 
the relevant dynamics are described by the ZE, but the 
physical variables must be recovered applying the 
canonical transformations, i.e. dressing the normal 
variable with the bound modes. We must also add that the 
wave action density is proportional to the square of 
Zakharov normal variable. 
Clearly now, we see that the wave action propagated in 
spectral wave models does not coincide with the 
observable wave action. In order to recover the 
observable sea spectrum, one has to invoke the Zakharov 
canonical transformation, i.e. account for the contribution 
of the bound modes. 
As shown by Janssen (2009) the zero-th moment of the 
spectrum, that is the significant wave height (HS), is not 
affected by the bound modes’ contribution, whereas any 
other integral is. Therefore, except for HS, any other 
diagnostic quantity, such as mean spectral periods, mean 
squared slope, spectral width to name a few, should not 
be straightforwardly derived from the spectral wave model 
output, but computed after a nonlinear correction. 
This operation is not always necessary. The modelled 
wave action is, in some sense, the small-steepness 
approximation of the observable one. Thus, for mild sea 
states the weight of the nonlinear correction is negligible. 
For relevant steepness, however, depending on the 
diagnostic quantity we are interested in, we need the 
above-described higher order corrections to get a proper 
representation of the sea states. 
Other important quantities cannot be derived in a 
straightforward manner from the corrected spectrum, still 
they deserve the same kind of accuracy. For example, the 
radiation stresses, or similar quadratic quantities, are 
necessary for earth-system models because they are part 
of the information that is transferred from the wave model 
to the circulation model (see e.g. Arduhin et al. 2017). 
Similarly, the wave energy flux is useful to assess the 
severity of a sea state or to quantify the available wave 
power. 
The evidence of the importance of high order corrections 
to these quantities is not new. Starting from fifth order 
Stokes solution obtained by Fenton (1985), Jonsson and 
Arneborg (1995) showed the importance of higher order 
corrections for determining the energy properties of long 
crested waves. For example, depending on the relative 
water depth and steepness, the first nonlinear correction to 
the mean wave energy flux can reach values which are on 
the order of 10% of the linear contribution. These results 
apply to regular long crested waves only. 
To find the nonlinear corrections for a broad banded 
directional sea state one needs to start from a consistent 
third order two-dimensional theory. It has been lately 
reported that the Zakharov Hamiltonian formulation and its 
transformations, previously considered incomplete 
because of the presence of some singularities in 
intermediate waters, are instead self-sufficient (Pezzutto 
and Shira, 2023). We make use of these results to pursue 
our aim, that is to find an expression for the nonlinear 
correction of the simplest of the wave energy properties, 
i.e. the wave energy flux, in two dimensions for short 
crested waves. And then, introduce the formulation to be 
applied to the output of phase averaged models. 
 
WAVE ENERGY FLUX 
To obtain the general form of the wave energy flux we 
make no special assumptions about the shape of the 
spectrum. We directly proceed from Longuet-Higgins and 
Stewart (1960) and disregard the ambient current. 
We then Taylor-expand the vertical integral for small 
surface elevation gradient. At this point we use Krasitskii 
(1994) canonical transformations, one after the other, 
applying proper symmetrization procedures and 
neglecting fifth order terms. The result is a fourth order (in 
amplitude) form of the rate of transfer of energy across a 
surface fixed in space. 
We then assume that phases of the free modes are totally 
uncorrelated. Therefore, after phase averaging the 
deterministic equation previously obtained, we finally get 
the wanted average energy flux. If computed across a 
vertical surface of unit width, the flux r reads: 
 
 
(1) 
 
The first term is well known, it is an integral in R2, with the 
integration variable k indicating the wavevector. The vector 
cg stands for the group-celerity and the scalar a for the 

wave amplitude. The second term is a double integral in R2, with n and m indicating the two separate wavenumber spaces. The main result is contained in the vector dn,m which expresses the energy flux due to the “interaction” of two wave modes. The expression for dn,m is too long to be presented in this abstract. Instead, we will give the audience some interesting results obtainable from Eq.1 for bi-chromatic waves and general broad banded sea conditions. In this abstract we only wish to present the simplest situation of a long-crested sea state. For a monochromatic wave, that is considering a Dirac-delta in wavenumber space, from Eq. 1 we find:   (2)  The second term in brackets, which is nondimensional, derives from the second term of Eq. 1, and it is therefore proportional to dn,n, which is a function of kh only, and to the square of the wave steepness (ka). In practice γ measures the weight of the second order correction of the energy flux, with respect to first order. To understand its potential importance, in Figure 1., we have plotted its value for the maximum theoretical steepness, which is obtained from the known breaking conditions:   (3)  Figure 1 – Weight of second order energy flux, with respect to first order, for long crested regular waves at maximum theoretical steepness.  Therefore, for a monochromatic wave the resulting equations are compared with truncated expressions given by Jonsson and Arneborg (1995), confirming that second order (in wave energy) contributions can be relevant, depending on steepness, at any water depth. It is also important to note that Eq.2 does not blow up in the limit of shallow waters, it therefore provides meaningful results at any water depth.   REFERENCES Ardhuin, Suzuki, McWilliams and Aiki (2017) Comments on “A Combined Derivation of the Integrated and Vertically 
Resolved, Coupled Wave–Current Equations”. J. Phys. Oceanogr., Vol. 47, pp. 2377-2385. Fenton (1985): A Fifth-Order Stokes Theory for Steady Waves. Journal of Waterway, Port, Coastal, and Ocean Engineering, Vol. 111(2), pp. 216–234. Janssen (2009): On some consequences of the canonical transformation in the Hamiltonian theory of water waves. J. Fluid Mech., Vol. 637, pp. 1–44. Jonsson and Arneborg (1995): Energy properties and shoaling of higher-order stokes waves on a current. Ocean Engineering, Vol. 22(8), pp. 819–857. Komen, Cavaleri, Donelan, Hasselmann, Hasselmann, Janssen (1996): Dynamics and Modelling of Ocean Waves. Cambridge University Press. Krasitskii (1994): On reduced equations in the Hamiltonian theory of weakly nonlinear surface waves. J. Fluid Mech., Vol. 272, pp. 1–20. Longuet-Higgins and Stewart (1960): Changes in the form of short gravity waves on long waves and tidal currents. J. Fluid Mech., Vol. 8(04), pp. 565–583. Onorato, Dematteis (2020): A straightforward derivation of the four-wave kinetic equation in action-angle variables. J. Phis. Comm., Vol. 4(9), pp. 1-7. Pezzutto and Shrira (2023): Apparent singularities of the finite-depth Zakharov equation. J. Fluid Mech, Vol. 972, n. A35. Zakharov (1968): Stability of Periodic Waves of Finite Amplitude on the Surface of a Deep Fluid. Z. Prildadnoi Mek. Tek. Fiz., Vol. 9(2), pp. 86-94. Zakharov (1999): Statistical theory of gravity and capillary waves on the surface of a finite-depth fluid. European J. Mech B/Fuids, Vol. 18(3), pp. 327-344.  
