1
Phillips W. BMJ Neurol Open 2025;7:e001309. doi:10.1136/bmjno-2025-001309
Open access 
Pathophysiology of functional 
neurological disorder for the 
general neurologist
Wendy Phillips    
To cite: Phillips W.  
Pathophysiology of functional 
neurological disorder for 
the general neurologist. 
BMJ Neurology Open 
2025;7:e001309. doi:10.1136/
bmjno-2025-001309
Received 08 August 2025
Accepted 06 October 2025
Neurology, University of 
Melbourne VCCC, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia
Correspondence to
Dr Wendy Phillips;  
 wpphillips@ unimelb. edu. au
Review
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2025. Re- use 
permitted under CC BY- NC. No 
commercial re- use. See rights 
and permissions. Published by 
BMJ Group.
ABSTRACT
Functional neurological disorder (FND) is a common 
condition and outcome depends on good patient 
understanding. This article aims to summarise and simplify 
the prevailing model of FND, active inference, with key 
illustrative papers.
INTRODUCTION
Functional neurological disorder (FND) 
comprises sensorimotor dysfunction with 
signs on examination that demonstrate 
inconsistency, and incongruence with known 
structural neurological conditions. Most signs 
demonstrate normalisation of function with 
distraction of attention, or abnormal predic-
tions about illness. It is common (incidence 
10–22/100 000 and prevalence 80–140/100 
000),1 so every general neurologist will see 
many patients with FND. FND is costly, 2 but 
much expense is wasted on inappropriate 
and iatrogenically harmful investigations 
rather than treatment.3 4
There remains a misunderstanding about 
the disorder, with implications of misogyny 5 
and malingering. 6 Patients’ understanding 
is vital before embarking on treatment, is 
important for prognosis 7 and can be cura-
tive.8 In a survey of 580 patients (FND Action 
2024), only 10% strongly agreed with the 
statement ‘My neurologist explained clearly 
what FND was when diagnosed’ (almost half 
disagreed). It is important we can communi-
cate with our patients and explain the nature 
of FND to them. I have found that patients 
with FND are curious about the mechanism 
of the disorder, and there are some excellent 
patient- led resources discussing the concepts 
referred to in this article (eg, FND Portal). 
So, patients will expect their neurologist to 
be familiar with some of this research.
THE ACTIVE INFERENCE MODEL OF FND
I will focus on the active inference model of 
FND9 as the best established, although there 
are other well- respected models, some of 
which are related to the same framework.10–15 
However, the theory itself is not without 
critics16 and it is difficult to provide direct 
proof for any mechanism.
The active inference model of FND and the 
decades of research since it was first intro-
duced have allowed us to propose explana-
tions for many hitherto puzzling facets of 
FND: Why is it so common? Why do people 
with childhood trauma develop FND years 
later? Why can it be produced by physical 
triggers that influence the form that the 
FND takes? Why would excessive attention 
produce negative symptoms like numbness? 
What is the explanation for mass hysteria and 
why is there such an influence from society 
and culture? Why do patients say they are 
not depressed when they look like they are? 
Why are neurodiverse people more likely to 
have FND? Why does explanation help some 
patients get better?
Active inference can be used as a frame-
work for other cognitive models; as an expla-
nation for processes including consciousness, 
placebo, hypnosis, pain, and emotion; and 
for disorders, such as autism and depression 
(all of which have links with FND). It has its 
roots in the work of scientists such as Helm-
holtz, but more recently has been promoted 
and developed by Friston, among others. 17 I 
am certainly no expert in active inference but 
will attempt to explain it in a simplified way, 
to allow an understanding of how it can be 
applied to FND.
What is active inference?
The model is based on the premise that the 
brain is continually making predictions for 
efficiency, to allow physiological regulation 
in anticipation of stress, promoting survival 
via energy budgeting, as opposed to simply 
reacting to external stimuli. The brain 
works as an inference machine, a statistical 
(Bayesian) organ, to predict and make sense 
of the world around it, and these predictions 
2
Phillips W. BMJ Neurol Open 2025;7:e001309. doi:10.1136/bmjno-2025-001309
Open access 
Figure 1 The brain generates predictions, influenced by our past experiences, which are ‘sense checked’ by comparisons at 
multiple levels (arrows, representing the laminar hierarchy of the cortex) with environmental information.
Table 1 Nomenclature of terms commonly used when describing active inference models
Prediction/belief/model/prior The use of the word ‘belief’ can cause misunderstandings with patients. Rather than the 
everyday sense of our conscious thoughts, it is used here as an implicit/pre- conscious 
model of the world. Prediction/belief/model/prior are often used interchangeably.
Pre- conscious/unconscious/
subconscious/automatic/implicit
Without access to conscious thought. These terms are used largely interchangeably.
Feedback Feedback from outside the brain is exteroceptive (visual, auditory, taste, etc), 
proprioceptive and interoceptive. Feedback can also refer to descending predictions and 
‘feed- forward’ to ascending prediction errors.
Posterior belief The brain’s final estimate of the likely cause of an event (bearing in mind the prior 
expectation and the sensory information from the environment—the reality).
Prediction error The difference between the prior belief (expectation) and reality (sensory information from 
the environment).
Efference copy/corollary discharge The prediction of a sensory consequence of a particular movement (at least, a prediction in 
another modality).
Sensory attenuation The reduction in sensation when the action is mediated by ourselves.
Agency The awareness an action is mediated by ourselves.
Interoception The real- time modelling of the internal physiological state of the body.
Allostasis The forecasting of the energy needs of the body.
Salience The importance of an event, or a prediction, or a prediction error.
Affect (particularly with reference 
to this model)
An ill- defined awareness of the energy state of the body (and in that sense reflects 
interoception).
Valence A sub- division of affect and reflects the quality of the feeling, for example, pleasant or 
unpleasant (and arousal can be high or low).
Alexithymia Difficulty in identifying/understanding emotions.
Patients Patients in this article refer to people with FND.
FND, functional neurological disorder.
3
Phillips W. BMJ Neurol Open 2025;7:e001309. doi:10.1136/bmjno-2025-001309
Open access
and explanations constantly change as the environment 
changes (figure 1).
The brain generates predictions
The brain generates predictions (table 1), based on 
beliefs and expectations, influenced in turn by expe-
riences accrued over a lifetime. These predictions are 
‘sense checked’ by comparisons with environmental 
information. ‘Top- down’ predictions (diffuse, ‘low- 
dimensional’ representations) travel from higher- level 
simple- laminar cortical structures, towards lower- level 
higher- laminar structures, where higher- dimensional 
representations (posterior beliefs) are generated. What 
we perceive is not just what the environment dictates—it 
is also what we infer and predict, so is subjective and can 
be manipulated. At the extreme end of this spectrum, we 
can perceive something that is not there at all—such as 
symptoms that arise with ‘no medical explanation’, 11 or 
that are suggested by a hypnotist.18
The predictions are compared with the environment
These predictions, or internal models, are compared at 
multiple hierarchical levels in the brain (reflecting the 
laminar structure of the cortex) with incoming sensory 
information from the environment and from our bodies 
(ie, interoception—our ability to perceive internal bodily 
states). They are pre- conscious, that is, not subject to meta- 
cognitive awareness. Normally, these are adjusted slightly 
at each level, and if a prediction with the highest prob-
ability matches incoming sensory inputs, a perception 
or movement is produced. Because these predictions/
inputs match, we feel we are agents of our own actions.
If they do not match, a prediction error is generated
If the prior beliefs and incoming sensory information do 
not match, a prediction error is generated. The point 
of the system is to minimise prediction errors to reduce 
‘surprise’ (which is inefficient and uses up energy). 
We can choose (to a certain extent) which prediction 
errors are the most important to be prioritised and so 
minimised. So, if an ascending prediction error (ie, it 
cannot be explained by descending predictions, so must 
go further up the chain to be processed/explained) 
is important, the brain selects this prediction error to 
attend to by increasing gain—these prediction errors are 
then ‘weighted’. It is these selected prediction errors that 
update our original predictions. The system is designed 
to ‘explain away’ prediction errors—predictive coding 
was even first developed as a data compression strategy.19 
It is important we do not attend to all our prediction 
errors because otherwise we would become ‘information 
overloaded’, which would be costly.
We can minimise prediction errors by changing our 
predictions (‘changing our minds’) or changing the 
incoming sensory information by moving and so renewing 
sensory sampling. Or, we can ignore prediction errors, 
if they’re not that important. If sensory information is 
‘noisy’ (less precise), the organism will tend to move to 
seek better data. Conversely, if sensory information is 
precise, it is the prediction that is likely to change.
Sensory information and prediction errors shape the prior 
towards a better model
At each layer in the hierarchy are prediction units and 
error units. Error units (encoded by superficial pyramidal 
cells) receive predictions from the same level and the 
level above (because predictions descend). Conversely, 
prior beliefs (encoded by deep pyramidal cells) are influ-
enced by prediction errors from the same level and the 
level below (errors ascend). These bottom- up and lateral 
messages shape our prior beliefs towards a better predic-
tion/explanation, reducing the prediction error in the 
level below. Predictions are generated primarily in the 
default mode network (DMN) and in ‘intermediate’ level 
cortices20 (large in humans—unique among animals for 
being able to generate concepts and model the future 
world—as Robert Burns knew well). Burns was the 
patron saint of Scottish poetry and wrote ‘To A Mouse’, 
describing his sorrow at destroying the home of a field 
mouse while ploughing—‘Still, thou art blest compar’d wi’ 
me; The present only toucheth thee: But Och! I backward cast my 
e’e, on prospects drear! And forward’ tho’ I canna see, I guess—
an’ fear’. Because priors are usually generated at an inter-
mediate level, they are ‘high’ enough to be abstract, but 
not ‘high’ enough to be subject to conscious awareness.
Active inference and probability distributions
Active inference, predictive coding and predictive 
processing might seem to be used largely interchange-
ably, but active inference is the process whereby 
prediction error is minimised by moving our bodies 
to change sensory sampling. 19 A generative model is a 
learning model that uses probability of training data 
to generate new models, as opposed to, say, discrimi-
native models, that classify data.
Precision is the reliability/certainty of a signal. Gain 
(or weighting) refers to excitability of a neuronal 
population encoding predictions and prediction 
errors (by modulation of synapses via glutamate and 
dopamine receptors 21and/or via cortical oscillations).
‘Posterior’ refers to beliefs, considering priors  
(one’s prior experience, which is what generates the 
prediction—so prior/expectation/prediction can be 
used largely interchangeably) and sensory informa-
tion from the environment (‘likelihood’)—it is the 
brain’s final estimate of the likely cause (figure 2). So, 
confusingly, ‘beliefs’ can refer to a prior belief and a 
posterior belief (the final estimate).
Examples
For an example of motor inference, ‘the cup 
example’: imagine there is a cup of water in front 
of you. You assume it is full. You pick it up to take 
a drink—but, whoops! The cup is nearly empty and 
your arm overshoots, spilling the drink behind your 
back. The next time you take a sip, your prediction 
4
Phillips W. BMJ Neurol Open 2025;7:e001309. doi:10.1136/bmjno-2025-001309
Open access 
will have changed, and your motor command will 
have changed accordingly.
Predictions form the basis of many visual illusions 
(figure 3): The squares A and B are the same colour 
(the ‘reality’) but because we are so used to chequer -
boards alternating from dark to light, our brains 
predict (the ‘expectation’ or ‘prior’) that A is dark 
and B is light. Even when we are shown the squares 
are the same colour (right figure), it is difficult to 
accept. The hollow mask illusion (appreciated best by 
video) works using the same principle.
FND results from a disorder of active inference
It is proposed that FND is a disorder of the brain’s predic-
tive processing networks9:
 ► Patients with FND pre- consciously attend to aberrant 
and overly precise predictions,
 ► and have poor quality sensory (including interocep-
tive) feedback.
Reflecting on the chequerboard example above, in 
FND, the patient has a strong prediction (as we do for 
‘A is dark and B is light’) and their sensory inputs (for 
us, the squares are the same colour) are not enough 
to change this prediction. This is another explanation 
of the involuntariness of FND (after all, we are not 
‘pretending’ we see the squares as different colours). 
In FND, there is an abnormal prediction either de novo  
or triggered by a structural problem, approximating 
to an abnormal ‘illness belief’. With attention, the 
prediction is magnified and less attention is paid to the 
incoming sensory information. Thus, the ‘illness belief’ 
predominates.
How might such a ‘rogue’10 prediction occur? Imagine 
yourself in a road traffic accident. Your brain is on high 
alert. Any symptoms are important to the brain, so initial 
attention is paid to it—such as confusion, slowness of 
thinking, ‘brain fog’. Thus, the prediction (which may 
well be preconscious) of slowed thinking becomes rein-
forced the more attention is paid to it. You are aware of 
cognitive errors (perhaps normal—such as going into a 
room and forgetting why), and that in turn, makes you 
more aware of your ‘poor memory’. The presence of 
such cognitive symptoms may make you worry you have 
sustained structural damage to your brain, which is a 
further source of worry. And so on. Often the problems 
are iatrogenically reinforced unwittingly by the medical 
profession—perhaps you will be sent to a head injury 
facility, or conversely, be ‘reassured’ and must find your 
own explanation as to why you still have such severe symp-
toms (‘has a brain injury been missed?’). It is important 
to note, however, that such predictions can also arise with 
no specific trigger, and because they are pre- conscious, 
we may not be aware of them.
Figure 3 Edward H Adelson’s chequerboard illusion.
Figure 2 Probability distributions: the blue likelihood 
probability (in the top example) is fairly precise (sharp/narrow/
tall), so the posterior will be more influenced by this—the 
green curve is closer to the blue than the red (as the red prior 
is less precise/certain). The red/prior and blue/likelihood 
curves can move left- right and become wide- narrow, which 
will influence the appearance and position of the green 
posterior curve. Thus, in the bottom left example, much like 
a patient with FND, the prior is strong and precise, which 
influences the posterior belief—it all depends which curve 
(the prior or the reality) has the most ‘pull’. In the bottom 
right example, the prediction matches reality, so there is no 
prediction error—all is well and as expected.
5
Phillips W. BMJ Neurol Open 2025;7:e001309. doi:10.1136/bmjno-2025-001309
Open access
Integral to the active inference model of FND are inter- 
related changes in:
 ► Attention.
 ► Agency
 ► Emotional processing.
 ► Sensory processing including interoception.
MISDIRECTED ATTENTION
Our ‘attentional spotlight’ is not always within our voluntary 
control
We can toggle between action and perception by sensory 
attenuation of the other modality. An example of invol-
untary sensory attenuation is during saccadic eye move-
ments, to produce a stable image of the world. Another 
example is the reduction in prediction errors to ‘smooth’ 
out our movements. If self- generated movements were 
associated with large prediction errors, the jerky move-
ments of the cup example might occur. So, there is less 
attention paid to sensory information, that is, sensory 
attenuation occurs, during self- generated movement.22
Some information is more generally salient than 
others—the tendency to see faces, for example 23 
(figure 4), and once we ‘see’ something in a shape, the 
prediction has become established, and it is difficult to 
‘unsee’.
Attention can be manipulated (by reducing gain of 
prediction errors via dopamine or glutamate receptors) 
using neuromodulatory medication, cognitive therapies, 
meditation and hypnosis, for example. These interven-
tions can relax our prior beliefs and reduce previously 
overly precise priors, so we can learn a new way of doing 
things.
Attention (and emotion) affects explicit rather than implicit 
movements
We are all aware of explicit movements being slower, 
effortful and clumsier, compared with implicit automatic 
movement. Most of us remember learning to drive, and 
once we have learnt, driving is so automatic we can almost 
get to our destination without much conscious thought 
at all (unless, of course, we are emotionally affected by a 
critical backseat driver). In professional sport, ‘choking’ 
is well known—under pressure, the professional attends 
too much to the mechanics of moving and is unable to 
produce the overlearned practised movement.22 24
Patients with FND shift from an implicit/automatic/habitual to 
an explicit motor programme with excessive attention to the 
movement
A patient can walk and climb onto the examination 
couch (implicit) but cannot move their limb against 
resistance when asked to do so (explicit) (the ‘motor 
inconsistency’ sign). 25 A patient is very aware of func-
tional symptoms because they are predominantly 
present when attending to them. 26
Like the ‘choking’ athletes, patients attend too 
much to the mechanics of movement, 24 so their 
movements end up clumsier and jerky—the ‘robotic 
gait’. Precipitating events in FND may be perceived 
as loss of control, leading to excessive monitoring of 
actions. 27 Attending too much to the consequences 
of movement increases the precision of the incoming 
sensory information—the opposite of the sensory 
attenuation required for smooth movement. 22
As well as increased attention to visual feedback, 24 
it is thought that this impairment in explicit motor 
processing in FND represents impairment in motor 
conceptualisation. 28–30  It is also thought to be due 
to an impairment in motor planning and prepara-
tion. Contingent negative variation is a slow nega-
tive cortical wave and reflects anticipatory attention 
and motor preparation. The amplitude was lower in 
patients (not feigners) but normalised with clinical 
improvement after neurophysiotherapy. 31
Patients with FND rapidly form a fixed belief
In the bead task, used to detect probabilistic reasoning 
and so the ‘jumping to conclusions bias, subjects must 
choose which hidden jar of beads the experimenter 
took a particular colour from (having been exposed 
to trials of bead draws of red and blue beads from jars 
filled with predominantly blue or red beads). Patients 
were quicker than controls in changing their proba-
bility decisions given new potentially disconfirmatory 
evidence. 32 33  The authors suggested that new infor -
mation from a triggering event (eg, headache after 
a head injury) resulted in the rapid formation of a 
fixed belief. The shift from voluntary/goal- directed 
(ventral cortico- striatal) to automatic/habitual/fixed 
beliefs (dorsal cortico- striatal) in the initial develop-
ment of FND could be due to this bias.
Once the fixed belief has been formed, patients with FND 
are less able to update the prior with incoming sensory 
information
Once this fixed belief has been established, patients 
are then slower in processing sensory information 
Figure 4 Faces, faces everywhere.
6
Phillips W. BMJ Neurol Open 2025;7:e001309. doi:10.1136/bmjno-2025-001309
Open access 
(see below 34). Similarly, sensory (tactile) cueing was 
reduced in patients with a functionally weak limb on 
the affected side. 35
In our ‘real world’ example, the patient with a head 
injury after a road traffic accident initially attends to 
their new symptoms, quickly develops a strong prior 
belief, and then attends less to their objective feed-
back thereafter and more to the prior belief. It is inter -
esting to reflect that patients are more responsive to 
hypnotic suggestions 36; this not only makes hypnosis 
a promising tool for both modelling and treating 
FND—it might imply that patients readily form fixed 
priors in response to suggestion from outside influ-
ences. 18 van der Bergh et al argue that patients, rather 
than experiencing an uncomfortable state of unre-
solved priors, take an ‘inferential leap’; based on less 
data than ‘normal’, they infer that uncertainty is a 
symptom, which at least resolves the uncomfortable 
state of uncertainty, although ultimately, of course, is 
maladaptive.
AGENCY AND THE COMPARISON BETWEEN PRIORS AND 
SENSORY FEEDBACK
Agency (ownership, schema and embodiment) results when 
a prediction with the highest probability matches incoming 
sensory inputs, and prediction error is minimised
Agency is our awareness that our actions are our own, 
and can be implicit (a feeling of agency) or explicit (an 
expressed judgement). When there is a gap between what we 
expect will happen (the prior) and what actually happens 
(the resulting perception or movement), as in FND, our 
sense of agency is disrupted.
If there is a prediction error—ignore it, re-sample or change 
the prediction. If not, agency will suffer!
So, what is going wrong in FND? Why do patients not just 
ignore/re- sample/re- predict when a prediction error has 
been generated? They do not ignore the prediction error 
because of their attentional spotlight. And:
Patients with FND have difficulty updating their prior….
The initial stumble felt on entering a moving travellator 
is due to the brain using a previously over- learnt motor 
programme (ie, normal walking on stationary surfaces). 
The ‘locomotor after- effect’ is due, similarly, to a pre- 
emptive adjustment of one’s posture, carried forward 
from walking onto the moving platform, so again using 
a prior motor programme. It has been previously estab-
lished that entering a moving travellator uses implicit 
learning, and exiting, explicit; we are more consciously 
aware of the sensation of exiting the travellator. A study in 
202037 used this phenomenon to explore patients’ ability 
to adapt to changing environmental inputs. Gait anal-
ysis, muscle response (electromyography) and feelings of 
instability were recorded. Patients had slower gaits and 
increased sway initially but could increase their gait speed 
on a moving platform, like healthy controls, because 
attention is diverted to the novel challenge of dealing 
with the moving platform. However, patients walking 
onto a stationary platform after a moving one were slow 
to re- adapt (a persistent locomotor after- effect). This 
could be interpreted as the patients’ strong ‘prior’ of 
their abnormal gait/learnt motor programme persisting.
…and their incoming sensory data are unreliable and not 
good enough to update the prior, so the prediction error 
remains unresolved, so agency is reduced
Patients have sensory processing deficits as well as 
persistently slower reaction times, that is, it takes them 
longer to decide based on sensory feedback, correlating 
with task difficulty, in a way that would be difficult to 
feign.34 In this study, accuracy and reaction time were 
modelled using the drift diffusion model, which estimates 
the rate of information accumulation (drift rate), which 
in turn depends on the quality of the information, and 
the level (boundary) at which enough evidence has accu-
mulated to allow a decision to be made. The temporal 
discrimination threshold (when a stimulus is felt as 
two, as opposed to one point on the skin) was used in 
this study to measure sensory processing and decision 
making. Patients were less accurate, took longer to decide 
and learnt poorly. At comparable levels of accuracy, reac-
tion time between controls and patients was the same (so 
unlikely due to feigning), but when task difficulty was 
increased and accuracy decreased, patients took longer to 
decide—representing response uncertainty. Thus, atten-
tion was not directed to the task in hand (the bottom- up 
sensory feedback), thereby reducing the quality of the 
data.
Objective measurement of agency
The intentional binding effect, or action- effect binding, 
refers to the time interval between a voluntary action 
(pressing a lever) and its sensory consequence (bell 
sound). Patients experience a subjective compression 
between action and effect, demonstrating a reduction 
in the sense of agency. 38 In the Libet clock paradigm, 
subjects attend to a marker on a clock face when they 
feel the intention to move in some trials or actual move-
ment in other trials, and awareness of intention to move 
(‘W’ for will) precedes awareness of the actual movement 
(‘M’). There are several areas involved with intention to 
move, particularly the supplementary motor area (SMA) 
(usually hypoactive in FND, implying that patients are 
impaired in their ability to initiate or inhibit actions). W 
and M move close together in FND, such that patients feel 
less awareness of intention to move. 39 40 This was associ-
ated with lower inferior parietal cortex activity in patients 
(associated with ‘wanting to move’)—perhaps explaining 
patients’ difficulty with voluntary movement. Judgement 
of intention to move was more precise in patients, perhaps 
reflecting increased attention to movement—not to be 
expected in malingering.
Sensory attenuation is the reduction in sensation when 
the action is mediated by ourselves and is described above. 
7
Phillips W. BMJ Neurol Open 2025;7:e001309. doi:10.1136/bmjno-2025-001309
Open access
It is the reason why we cannot tickle ourselves. 41 Patients 
have a reduction in sensory attenuation in experimental 
studies reflecting reduced agency. Subjects were asked to 
gauge the force required to press on their fingertips, when 
pressing directly or when pressing via a robotic hand (as if 
being pressed by someone else). 42 Controls press harder 
directly because of sensory attenuation. Patients do not—
they have less agency, so less sensory attenuation, so do 
not need to press harder. A second experiment essentially 
replicated the first but using sensory evoked potentials.43
Patients have preserved explicit agency (ie, judgement 
rather than feeling of agency) for tapping movements of 
a rubber hand (which extends the body schema to involve 
an external object), and preserved sense of body owner -
ship.44 45 The authors 44 suggested this was because prior 
beliefs affect judgement of agency for symptoms, not unaf-
fected voluntary movements. Patients felt some degree of 
explicit agency over the hand in an anatomically implau-
sible position, in contrast to controls. This is reminiscent 
of patients with functional dystonia who feel that their 
abnormally postured limb is in more of a ‘correct’ posi-
tion than when the foot is returned passively to its normal 
position.46
Healthy controls exhibit a distal shift (in perception of 
their body schema) with an alien (rubber) hand because 
it effectively lengthens the body schema; irritable bowel 
syndrome (IBS) patients also, but not as much. Patients 
have a proximal bias, that is, perceive their arm to be 
shorter than it is (using the forearm bisection task—the 
subject indicates the midpoint of the forearm while blind-
folded), suggesting a resting state disruption of body 
schema.47 In the synchronous experimental condition—
taps on the alien hand correspond with the subjects’ own—
priors and feedback are aligned, so agency is preserved 
as the subjects, including patients do not need to update 
their priors. However, when there is asynchrony, subjects 
must update their priors, but patients cannot.45 They rely 
on their previous priors (it was suggested), producing 
proximal bias (perception of the shortened forearm).
And embodiment? Patients frequently experience 
dissociation. Further, certain brain areas and networks 
that go wrong in FND—like the temporoparietal junction 
(TPJ)—can result in out- of- body experiences.48
The master comparator of priors and sensory input (TPJ) is 
hypoactive in FND and stimulating it might improve symptoms
The right TPJ is a crucial node in the agency network 
and one of its functions is to be the master comparator 
of priors with incoming environmental information. In 
a within- subject study,49 subjects with functional tremor 
underwent fMRI while experiencing tremor, and again 
when they were not, but feigning the same symptom. 
When the images were overlapped, the right TPJ was 
hypoactive during the real (functional) tremor versus the 
feigned tremor. We can infer, then (assuming the TPJ was 
functioning as the comparator of priors and ‘reality’), that 
the patients had agency during the feigned tremor—they 
knew they were doing it—but not during the functional 
tremor—they did not know they were doing it. This is 
another demonstration of the involuntariness of func-
tional disorders.
Excitingly, non- invasive stimulation of the TPJ has been 
found to improve symptoms in some early studies.50
Interoceptive inference is also important for sense of 
self and agency and will be dealt with further below.
EMOTIONAL PROCESSING
Patients with FND are more likely to have suffered adversity 
and have abnormalities in areas of the brain associated with 
emotional processing
Adverse life events, particularly childhood traumas, are 
more common in patients with FND. 51 Affective disor -
ders such as anxiety are commonly comorbid in FND.14 52 
Areas in the brain important for emotional processing 
(eg, amygdala) are hyperactive in FND and these areas 
are more interconnected with other relevant areas—
motor control, the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal (HPA) 
axis, the salience and the central executive network. 53 
These studies suggest that there is heightened salience of 
emotional events in patients.54 Altered regulation of stress 
is apparent in patients, from studies showing high stress 
hormone (cortisol) levels. 14 55 It is unclear how much of 
these effects are causal or secondary.
The limbic-motor fast track
Several studies have demonstrated increased functional 
connectivity between the limbic and motor brain in some 
patients with FND. 12 54 56  So, voluntary movement (and 
agency) networks could be ‘highjacked’ by interference 
from emotional networks and areas. Motor areas (partic-
ularly the SMA), important for self- initiated action and 
for the readiness potential/Bereitschaftspotential 57 and 
emotional processing,54 in this study displayed increased 
activity during affective- based tasks 56 including illness- 
relevant life- event stressors in FND. 58 The right SMA 
and right amygdala had increased functional connec-
tivity in patients when viewing different valenced stimuli 
(both happy and fearful faces)—this might indicate a 
general hyper- reactivity of the amygdala. 59 The left SMA 
in patients had lower functional connectivity with bilat-
eral dorsolateral prefrontal cortices, and it was proposed 
that ‘previously mapped conversion motor representa-
tions’ (akin to a prior) may (in emotionally salient situ-
ations) ‘hijack the voluntary action selection system, 
which is both hypoactive and functionally disconnected 
from prefrontal top- down regulation’. 12 There was also 
increased connectivity between the right TPJ and the 
insula (important for interoception) in patients.60 As well 
as threat, a hyperactive amygdala may be signalling ‘this 
is an uncertain stimulus’ (see Shaffer et al 61); another 
reason why patients might take an ‘inferential leap’ and 
develop somatic symptoms.
A trauma subtype?
This limbic- motor fast track, and/or increased activity of 
certain areas/networks in the brain dealing with emotions/
8
Phillips W. BMJ Neurol Open 2025;7:e001309. doi:10.1136/bmjno-2025-001309
Open access 
threat, might represent a ‘trauma- subtype’.52 60 62 63  This 
might imply a more ‘hard- wired’ issue, which may be 
more difficult to treat. Patients with childhood and early 
adult adversity have poorer outcomes than patients who 
do not64 and more subtle forms of adversity, even in adult-
hood, can cause network changes and may be important 
in predisposition to FND.54
Abuse leads to aberrant interoception
Childhood abuse might lead to aberrant interoception; 
this might produce relatively more precise exteroceptive 
over interoceptive inputs, and so the tendency to inter -
pret affective stimuli as somatic. 54 Further, hyperarousal 
in post- traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), for example, 
can trigger muscle tension and pain, and gastrointestinal 
symptoms/IBS,65 furthering somatic symptoms.
Neurodiversity
Several studies have identified deficits in theory of mind66 
and sensory processing deficits 67 in FND. This is inter -
esting given the increased prevalence of FND in neurodi-
verse populations.68
The theory of constructed emotion
The classical view of emotions is: an event occurs—a 
part of our brain is activated—we feel that emotion—
that emotion is universally recognisable. The theory 
of constructed emotion 20 suggests instead that we 
construct our emotions based on past experience. Our 
brains are predictive, rather than reactive, which fits 
with the active inference model. It is the preparation 
and priming for action that gives rise to experience. If 
one set of incoming sensory information matches our 
previous experience of having had a specific emotion, 
then that set of sensory information is experienced as that 
predicted emotion (depending on context). If that same 
set of sensory information in another person matches a 
non- emotional construct, that is what will be perceived, 
for example, fatigue, as opposed to sadness—which is 
inefficient emotion construction. 69 This might underlie 
the frequently observed alexithymia in patients and the 
phenomenon seen frequently in functional seizures, 
‘panic without panic’. 70 Another explanation for this is 
cognitive dissonance, an attempt to make experiences 
more predictable and less threatening.11 13
INTEROCEPTION
Interoception is the moment- to- moment modelling 
of the internal physiological state of the body, to allow 
efficient forecasting of the energy needs of the body 
(the forecasting is termed allostasis). It requires integra-
tion and awareness of bodily signals (eg, inflammatory, 
autonomic, visceral, hormonal) and is important for 
inference, allostasis, emotions and sense of self. 71 Intero-
ception can be consciously experienced as awareness of 
heart rate, for example, and this can be measured exper-
imentally (although only as one metacognitive aspect) 
or perceived through affect. Interoceptive signals are 
detected by thermal/chemical/mechanical/osmotic/
humoral/nociceptive receptors, relayed via the sympa-
thetic/parasympathetic tract or HPA axis to relay in the 
nucleus tractus solitarius/thalamus/locus coeruleus, to 
be processed in the insula (as well as other areas such as 
anterior cingulate). Descending pathways are autonomic/
immunological/endocrine.
Allostatic priors are (likely) generated in the DMN
The DMN includes the medial prefrontal cortex, precu-
neus and lateral temporo- parietal cortex, and is active 
when we are introspecting. Most limbic regions are found 
within the DMN and salience network (SN). The DMN 
(and hippocampus) may be where priors are primarily 
generated during allostasis, while the SN prioritises 
specific prediction errors.61 It has been hypothesised that 
disconnection of the precuneus within the DMN accounts 
for dissociation during functional seizures. 72 There are 
intriguing abnormalities in this network in patients. 27 
Increased activity was found in the DMN in patients 
(implying increased self- referential activity) in one study, 
with reduced connectivity between the DMN and SN 
(implying dissociation and inhibition of movement).73
Interoception is (likely) abnormal in FND
There is some evidence of inaccurate interoception in 
FND,74–76 as well as other somatoform disorders. 77 78  
There is reduced insula activity in FND in affective tasks 
(an important interoceptive processing area). 79 There is 
a correlation between interoceptive inaccuracy and disso-
ciation in functional seizures. 80 Importantly, interocep-
tive awareness and symptoms improve in FND following 
interoceptive training.81
FND is often associated with autonomic symptoms, although 
with variable objective deficits
FND is often associated with mild subjective autonomic 
symptoms, but findings across a range of objective auto-
nomic tests have been variable in both FND54 82 and other 
functional disorders. 11 There is an association between 
postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) and 
FND, although this might be due to the historically ill- 
defined criteria of POTS. 83 The heart rate increase on 
head- up tilt may be due to a fear conditioned stimulus 
(in one study), 84 and, consistent with this, it can be 
attenuated with deep breathing techniques. 85 There is 
an overlap between complex regional pain syndrome 
(CRPS), where there are peripheral autonomic changes, 
and FND. 86 Deconditioning commonly occurs in FND 
and other illnesses and can lead to autonomic symptoms 
and disturbance. Thus, it is unclear how much these, and 
similar, illnesses are distinct or overlap with FND.
Reasons for alterations in autonomic function and 
symptoms in FND may be due to alteration in the function 
of the limbic system, in particular amygdala and insula, 
dysfunction of the HPA stress axis, 14 deconditioning and 
altered interoception.
9
Phillips W. BMJ Neurol Open 2025;7:e001309. doi:10.1136/bmjno-2025-001309
Open access
IMPLICATIONS FOR FND
The active inference model of FND explains many clin-
ical observations of the disorder. There are other models 
for FND, some of which are complementary and there 
may be a better model developed in future. Further, 
there are many ways of approaching, explaining, contex-
tualising and understanding FND; active inference is 
just one. I have chosen this model to focus on because 
it is well- established; active inference is thought now to 
explain many other brain processes; it helps explain many 
different facets of FND; it has been well studied both in 
FND and widely; and can be used as a framework for (at 
least does not preclude) other models and observations.
In summary, in FND, patients quickly form a strong 
prior belief (‘jumping to conclusions bias’) either spon-
taneously or in response to novel information (like 
symptoms from a head injury), especially when that infor-
mation is salient, and in some patients perhaps this infor-
mation is more salient because of the ‘limbic fast track’. 
Body schema is altered in FND. The prior belief is resistant 
to being updated—it is ‘fixed’ (reminiscent of Janet’s idée 
fixe), for example, the broken escalator study,37 the prox-
imal bias rubber hand study. The quality of the incoming 
sensory information is poor, for example, reduced drift 
rate and interoceptive studies, and so less likely to update 
the prior. Sense of agency is reduced in FND (because 
of unresolved prediction errors, or abnormalities in the 
agency circuitry especially the TPJ, or both), leading to 
involuntariness. Explicit movements and learning are 
impaired in FND, while implicit movements and learning 
are preserved, due to attentional focus on visual feed-
back, heightened precision of incoming sensory infor -
mation for self- generated movements (and reduced sensory 
attenuation), and emotional influence on explicit motor 
pathways.
The active inference model can explain:
 ► FND is common: if we accept FND is a disorder of 
active inference, and active inference underpins much 
of the brain’s day- to- day function, it is not surprising 
both that FND exists and that symptoms occur on a 
continuum with everyday examples such as the cup 
spill and visual illusions.87
 ► Predisposition by trauma: trauma might produce a 
‘limbic scar’ or hyper- reactivity of our trauma- alert 
systems and a limbic- motor fast track. This might 
provide an explanation for the undue influence of 
emotion on motor symptoms. Being a predisposition, 
not everyone with trauma will develop FND and not 
everyone with FND will have experienced trauma. 
It explains why many patients experience symptoms 
years after their trauma, and not at the time.
 ► FND is often triggered by physical or psychological 
events: patients have higher suggestibility (again, 
not in the everyday sense of gullibility), quickly form 
overly precise priors and the priors are resistant to 
being updated. This could explain, for example, 
the formation of ‘post- concussion syndrome’ after 
accident- induced minor head injuries.
 ► Broad versus narrow symptomatology in medically 
unexplained symptoms in different patients. van der 
Bergh et al11 suggested that a highly precise prior about 
one symptom would lead to only that symptom at a 
debilitating level, but many low precision priors would 
lead to multiple symptoms and higher reporting, that 
is, a somatisation disorder.
 ► It can explain positive and negative phenomena. Intu-
itively, it would make more sense if functional posi-
tive phenomena like tingling or tremor were due to 
increased attention, and negative phenomena like 
numbness or weakness were due to reduced atten-
tion. But we know clinically that is not true. The active 
inference theory reconciles this because the strong 
prior can be whatever phenotype it likes—the form it 
takes does not depend on attention; rather, the ampli-
tude of the effect is greater with attention.
 ► Influence of society/media etc: this was nicely exem-
plified by ‘TikTok Tics’ over lockdown. 88 It can 
explain ‘mass hysteria’ and historical phenomena 
such as ‘railway spine’. The formation of priors is 
influenced by our societal milieu. This also explains 
the positive signs that reflect what might be seen as 
‘common sense’ (yet anatomically incorrect) predic-
tions about illness, for example, tubular visual field 
defects, midline splitting of sensory loss, drift without 
pronation, for example. It can explain the observation 
that symptoms can change depending on how symp-
toms are interrogated by healthcare professionals 11 
and iatrogenic harm.3
 ► Inconsistency which can look like feigning (but is 
not): patients’ symptoms are mediated by attention, 
and it is explicit movements that are affected, while 
implicit automatic movements are preserved.
 ► When patients tell you they do not feel depressed or 
anxious despite seeming otherwise, this might be due 
to inefficient emotion construction.
 ► Jerky, robotic, effortful movements: patients with FND 
have reduced ability to sensory attenuate, impairing 
their ability to produce smooth movements.
 ► Involuntariness: patients’ sense of agency is reduced. 
Several studies have demonstrated unfeinable 
biomarkers, in different modalities.87
 ► Co- morbidity and overlap with disorders involved with 
abnormalities in the stress axis, emotional processing, 
sensory processing and autonomic disturbance, for 
example, PTSD, autism, chronic pain, depression, 
anxiety, POTS, CRPS, etc
 ► Possibility of improvement: while priors are largely 
pre- conscious, they can with practice be subject to 
conscious influence. The longer the duration of 
symptoms, the more time the prior has to become 
established and the more difficult they are to reverse. 
Principles of treatment include changing the prior, 
distraction of attention, reduction of avoidance 
10
Phillips W. BMJ Neurol Open 2025;7:e001309. doi:10.1136/bmjno-2025-001309
Open access 
behaviour, biofeedback, and allostatic maintenance 
(ie, ensuring optimal mood, sleep, nutrition etc., and 
reducing stress).
 ► Importance of explanation: as well as duration of 
symptoms, the patients’ understanding of their symp-
toms is paramount for prognosis. A change of prior 
beliefs might alter the course of their disorder. Clearly, 
this model is only one (possibly small) facet of expla-
nation for an individual patient. I have found in clinic 
that some patients want to know as much as possible 
about this type of research and others are more inter-
ested in how their own experiences have shaped their 
symptoms and do not feel these explanations are 
relevant to them—both perfectly valid approaches. 
Either way, each patient has their own individual back-
ground, symptoms and circumstances, and each indi-
vidual management plan will be different.
CONCLUSION
I hope I have managed to explain the current under -
standing of the pathophysiology of FND in a simple way, 
with a few key papers illustrating important points. I 
hope, in turn, this will allow a greater understanding of 
the involuntariness of FND and an ability to communi-
cate this and other key points to our patients. Imparting 
a genuine understanding of the patients’ condition will 
hopefully help them as a first and vital step on their 
journey to rehabilitation.
Further reading
 ⇒ Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind, Brain and 
Behaviour’ by Thomas Parr, Giovanni Pezzulo and Karl Friston, pub-
lished by The MIT Press (2022).
 ⇒ How Emotions Are Made: The Secret Life of the Brain, by Lisa 
Feldmann Barret, published by Macmillan, (2017).
 ⇒ The Expectation Effect by David Robson, published by Canongate 
(2022)
Acknowledgements WP would like to thank Professor Mark Edwards for reading 
the first draft
Contributors WP is the sole author. WP conceived, planned, designed and 
executed the work.
Funding The author has not declared a specific grant for this research from any 
funding agency in the public, commercial or not- for- profit sectors.
Competing interests WP works as an expert witness in the medicolegal setting 
and is on the advisory panel of FND Hope and Action.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY- NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non- commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non- commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
ORCID iD
Wendy Phillips https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8864-2881
REFERENCES
 1 Finkelstein SA, Diamond C, Carson A, et al. Incidence and 
prevalence of functional neurological disorder: a systematic review. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2025;96:e334767:383–95:. 
 2 O’Mahony B, Nielsen G, Baxendale S, et al. Economic Cost of 
Functional Neurologic Disorders: A Systematic Review. Neurology 
(ECronicon) 2023;101:e202–14. 
 3 Mcloughlin C, Lee WH, Carson A, et al. Iatrogenic harm in functional 
neurological disorder. Brain (Bacau) 2025;148:27–38. 
 4 Stephen CD, Fung V, Lungu CI, et al. Assessment of Emergency 
Department and Inpatient Use and Costs in Adult and Pediatric 
Functional Neurological Disorders. JAMA Neurol 2021;78:88–101. 
 5 McLoughlin C, Hoeritzauer I, Cabreira V, et al. Functional neurological 
disorder is a feminist issue. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
2023;94:855–62. 
 6 Kanaan RAA, Ding JM. Who thinks functional neurological symptoms 
are feigned, and what can we do about it? J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry 2017;88:533–4. 
 7 Gelauff J, Stone J. Prognosis of functional neurologic disorders. 
Handb Clin Neurol 2016;139:523–41. 
 8 Razvi S, Mulhern S, Duncan R. Newly diagnosed psychogenic 
nonepileptic seizures: health care demand prior to and following 
diagnosis at a first seizure clinic. Epilepsy Behav 2012;23:7–9. 
 9 Edwards MJ, Adams RA, Brown H, et al. A Bayesian account of 
“hysteria”. Brain (Bacau) 2012;135:3495–512. 
 10 Brown RJ. Psychological mechanisms of medically unexplained 
symptoms: an integrative conceptual model. Psychol Bull 
2004;130:793–812. 
 11 Van den Bergh O, Witthöft M, Petersen S, et al. Symptoms and the 
body: Taking the inferential leap. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral 
Reviews 2017;74:185–203. 
 12 Voon V, Brezing C, Gallea C, et al. Aberrant supplementary motor 
complex and limbic activity during motor preparation in motor 
conversion disorder. Mov Disord 2011;26:2396–403. 
 13 Brown RJ, Reuber M. Towards an integrative theory of psychogenic 
non- epileptic seizures (PNES). Clin Psychol Rev 2016;47:55–70. 
 14 Keynejad RC, Frodl T, Kanaan R, et al. Stress and functional 
neurological disorders: mechanistic insights. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry 2019;90:813–21. 
 15 de Lange FP , Roelofs K, Toni I. Increased self- monitoring during 
imagined movements in conversion paralysis. Neuropsychologia 
2007;45:2051–8. 
 16 Mangalam M. The myth of the Bayesian brain. Eur J Appl Physiol 
2025;125:2643–77. 
 17 Friston K. The free- energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat Rev 
Neurosci 2010;11:127–38. 
 18 Phillips W, Price J, Molyneux PD, et al. Hypnosis. Pract Neurol 
2022;22:42–7. 
 19 Clark A. Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the 
future of cognitive science. Behav Brain Sci 2013;36:181–204. 
 20 Barrett LF . The theory of constructed emotion: an active inference 
account of interoception and categorization. Soc Cogn Affect 
Neurosci 2017;12:1–23. 
 21 Diederen KMJ, Fletcher PC. Dopamine, Prediction Error and Beyond. 
Neuroscientist 2021;27:30–46. 
 22 Brown H, Adams RA, Parees I, et al. Active inference, sensory 
attenuation and illusions. Cogn Process 2013;14:411–27. 
 23 Alais D, Xu Y , Wardle SG, et al. A shared mechanism for facial 
expression in human faces and face pareidolia. Proc Biol Sci 
2021;288:20210966. 
 24 Huys A- CML, Haggard P , Bhatia KP , et al. Misdirected attentional 
focus in functional tremor. Brain (Bacau)  2021;144:3436–50. 
 25 Pareés I, Kassavetis P , Saifee TA, et al. Failure of explicit movement 
control in patients with functional motor symptoms. Mov Disord 
2013;28:517–23. 
 26 Pareés I, Saifee TA, Kassavetis P , et al. Believing is perceiving: 
mismatch between self- report and actigraphy in psychogenic tremor. 
Brain (Bacau) 2012;135:117–23. 
 27 Demartini B, Nisticò V, Edwards MJ, et al. The pathophysiology 
of functional movement disorders. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
2021;120:387–400. 
 28 Spence SA, Crimlisk HL, Cope H, et al. Discrete neurophysiological 
correlates in prefrontal cortex during hysterical and feigned disorder 
of movement. Lancet 2000;355:1243–4. 
 29 Voon V, Cavanna AE, Coburn K, et al. Functional Neuroanatomy 
and Neurophysiology of Functional Neurological Disorders 
(Conversion Disorder). J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 
2016;28:168–90. 
 30 Roelofs K, van Galen GP , Keijsers GPJ, et al. Motor initiation and 
execution in patients with conversion paralysis. Acta Psychol (Amst) 
2002;110:21–34. 
11
Phillips W. BMJ Neurol Open 2025;7:e001309. doi:10.1136/bmjno-2025-001309
Open access
 31 Teodoro T, Koreki A, Meppelink AM, et al. Contingent negative 
variation: a biomarker of abnormal attention in functional movement 
disorders. Eur J Neurol 2020;27:985–94. 
 32 Pareés I, Kassavetis P , Saifee TA, et al. “Jumping to conclusions” 
bias in functional movement disorders. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry 2012;83:460–3. 
 33 Sainz- Amo R, Morillo- González J, Gómez- Corral J, et al. Revisiting 
the jumping to conclusions bias in functional movement disorders. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2024;95:888–90. 
 34 Sadnicka A, Daum C, Meppelink AM, et al. Reduced drift rate: 
a biomarker of impaired information processing in functional 
movement disorders. Brain (Bacau) 2020;143:674–83. 
 35 McIntosh RD, McWhirter L, Ludwig L, et al. Attention and sensation 
in functional motor disorder. Neuropsychologia 2017;106:207–15. 
 36 Wieder L, Brown R, Thompson T, et al. Suggestibility in functional 
neurological disorder: a meta- analysis. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry 2021;92:150–7. 
 37 Lin D, Castro P , Edwards A, et al. Dissociated motor learning and 
de- adaptation in patients with functional gait disorders. Brain (Bacau) 
2020;143:2594–606. 
 38 Kranick SM, Moore JW, Yusuf N, et al. Action- effect binding is 
decreased in motor conversion disorder: implications for sense of 
agency. Mov Disord 2013;28:1110–6. 
 39 Baek K, Doñamayor N, Morris LS, et al. Impaired awareness of 
motor intention in functional neurological disorder: implications for 
voluntary and functional movement. Psychol Med 2017;47:1624–36. 
 40 Edwards MJ, Moretto G, Schwingenschuh P , et al. Abnormal 
sense of intention preceding voluntary movement in patients with 
psychogenic tremor. Neuropsychologia 2011;49:2791–3. 
 41 Blakemore SJ, Wolpert D, Frith C. Why can’t you tickle yourself? 
Neuroreport 2000;11:R11–6. 
 42 Pareés I, Brown H, Nuruki A, et al. Loss of sensory attenuation in 
patients with functional (psychogenic) movement disorders. Brain 
(Bacau) 2014;137:2916–21. 
 43 Macerollo A, Chen JC, Pareés I, et al. Sensory Attenuation Assessed 
by Sensory Evoked Potentials in Functional Movement Disorders. 
PLoS One 2015;10:e0129507. 
 44 Marotta A, Bombieri F , Zampini M, et al. The Moving Rubber 
Hand Illusion Reveals that Explicit Sense of Agency for Tapping 
Movements Is Preserved in Functional Movement Disorders. Front 
Hum Neurosci 2017;11:291. 
 45 Nisticò V, Conte F , Rossetti I, et al. Exploring specific alterations 
at the explicit and perceptual levels in sense of ownership, 
agency, and body schema in Functional Motor Disorder: A 
pilot comparative study with Irritable Bowel Syndrome. Cortex 
2025;184:106–19. 
 46 Stone J, Gelauff J, Carson A. A “twist in the tale”: altered 
perception of ankle position in psychogenic dystonia. Mov Disord 
2012;27:585–6. 
 47 Nisticò V, Ilia N, Conte F , et al. Forearm bisection task suggests an 
alteration in body schema in patients with functional movement 
disorders (motor conversion disorders). J Psychosom Res 
2024;178:111610. 
 48 Blanke O, Landis T, Spinelli L, et al. Out- of- body experience and 
autoscopy of neurological origin. Brain (Bacau) 2004;127:243–58. 
 49 Voon V, Gallea C, Hattori N, et al. The involuntary nature of 
conversion disorder. Neurology (ECronicon) 2010;74:223–8. 
 50 Bühler J, Weber S, Loukas S, et al. Non- invasive neuromodulation 
of the right temporoparietal junction using theta- burst stimulation in 
functional neurological disorder. BMJ Neurol Open 2024;6:e000525. 
 51 Ludwig L, Pasman JA, Nicholson T, et al. Stressful life events and 
maltreatment in conversion (functional neurological) disorder: 
systematic review and meta- analysis of case- control studies. Lancet 
Psychiatry 2018;5:307–20. 
 52 Perez DL, Williams B, Matin N, et al. Corticolimbic structural 
alterations linked to health status and trait anxiety in functional 
neurological disorder. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
2017;88:1052–9. 
 53 Pick S, Goldstein LH, Perez DL, et al. Emotional processing 
in functional neurological disorder: a review, biopsychosocial 
model and research agenda. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
2019;90:704–11. 
 54 Sojka P , Bareš M, Kašpárek T, et al. Processing of Emotion in 
Functional Neurological Disorder. Front Psychiatry 2018;9:479. 
 55 Sundararajan T, Tesar GE, Jimenez XF . Biomarkers in the diagnosis 
and study of psychogenic nonepileptic seizures: A systematic review. 
Seizure 2016;35:11–22. 
 56 Aybek S, Nicholson TR, O’Daly O, et al. Emotion- motion interactions 
in conversion disorder: an FMRI study. PLoS One 2015;10:e0123273. 
 57 Shibasaki H, Hallett M. What is the Bereitschaftspotential? Clin 
Neurophysiol 2006;117:2341–56. 
 58 Aybek S, Nicholson TR, Zelaya F , et al. Neural correlates of 
recall of life events in conversion disorder. JAMA Psychiatry 
2014;71:52–60. 
 59 Voon V, Brezing C, Gallea C, et al. Emotional stimuli and motor 
conversion disorder. Brain (Bacau) 2010;133:1526–36. 
 60 Maurer CW, LaFaver K, Ameli R, et al. Impaired self- agency 
in functional movement disorders: A resting- state fMRI study. 
Neurology (ECronicon) 2016;87:564–70. 
 61 Shaffer C, Westlin C, Quigley KS, et al. Allostasis, Action, and Affect 
in Depression: Insights from the Theory of Constructed Emotion. 
Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2022;18:553–80. 
 62 Diez I, Larson AG, Nakhate V, et al. Early- life trauma 
endophenotypes and brain circuit- gene expression relationships 
in functional neurological (conversion) disorder. Mol Psychiatry 
2021;26:3817–28. 
 63 Weber S, Bühler J, Vanini G, et al. Identification of biopsychological 
trait markers in functional neurological disorders. Brain (Bacau) 
2023;146:2627–41. 
 64 Selkirk M, Duncan R, Oto M, et al. Clinical differences 
between patients with nonepileptic seizures who report 
antecedent sexual abuse and those who do not. Epilepsia 
2008;49:1446–50. 
 65 Ng QX, Soh AYS, Loke W, et al. Systematic review with meta-  
analysis: The association between post- traumatic stress 
disorder and irritable bowel syndrome. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2019;34:68–73. 
 66 Stonnington CM, Locke DEC, Hsu C- H. Somatization is associated 
with deficits in affective Theory of Mind. J Psychosom Res 
2013;74:479–85. 
 67 Ranford J, MacLean J, Alluri PR, et al. Sensory Processing Difficulties 
in Functional Neurological Disorder: A Possible Predisposing 
Vulnerability? Psychosomatics 2020;61:343–52. 
 68 Gonzalez- Herrero B, Happé F , Nicholson TR, et al. Functional 
Neurological Disorder and Autism Spectrum Disorder: A 
Complex and Potentially Significant Relationship. Brain Behav 
2024;14:e70168. 
 69 Jungilligens J, Paredes- Echeverri S, Popkirov S, et al. A new science 
of emotion: implications for functional neurological disorder. Brain 
(Bacau) 2022;145:2648–63. 
 70 Goldstein LH, Mellers JDC. Ictal symptoms of anxiety, avoidance 
behaviour, and dissociation in patients with dissociative seizures. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2006;77:616–21. 
 71 Seth AK, Friston KJ. Active interoceptive inference and 
the emotional brain. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
2016;371:20160007. 
 72 van der Kruijs SJM, Jagannathan SR, Bodde NMG, et al. Resting- 
state networks and dissociation in psychogenic non- epileptic 
seizures. J Psychiatr Res 2014;54:126–33. 
 73 Monsa R, Peer M, Arzy S. Self- reference, emotion inhibition 
and somatosensory disturbance: preliminary investigation of 
network perturbations in conversion disorder. Eur J Neurol 
2018;25:888–e62. 
 74 Pick S, Rojas- Aguiluz M, Butler M, et al. Dissociation and 
interoception in functional neurological disorder. Cogn 
Neuropsychiatry 2020;25:294–311. 
 75 Apazoglou K, Mazzola V, Wegrzyk J, et al. Biological and 
perceived stress in motor functional neurological disorders. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 2017;85:142–50. 
 76 Ricciardi L, Demartini B, Crucianelli L, et al. Interoceptive awareness 
in patients with functional neurological symptoms. Biol Psychol 
2016;113:68–74. 
 77 Pollatos O, Herbert BM, Wankner S, et al. Autonomic imbalance is 
associated with reduced facial recognition in somatoform disorders. 
J Psychosom Res 2011;71:232–9. 
 78 Bogaerts K, Van Eylen L, Li W, et al. Distorted symptom perception 
in patients with medically unexplained symptoms. J Abnorm Psychol 
2010;119:226–34. 
 79 Espay AJ, Maloney T, Vannest J, et al. Dysfunction in emotion 
processing underlies functional (psychogenic) dystonia. Mov Disord 
2018;33:136–45. 
 80 Koreki A, Garfkinel SN, Mula M, et al. Trait and state interoceptive 
abnormalities are associated with dissociation and seizure 
frequency in patients with functional seizures. Epilepsia 
2020;61:1156–65. 
 81 Schaefer M, Egloff B, Gerlach AL, et al. Improving heartbeat 
perception in patients with medically unexplained symptoms reduces 
symptom distress. Biol Psychol 2014;101:69–76. 
 82 Paredes- Echeverri S, Maggio J, Bègue I, et al. Autonomic, 
Endocrine, and Inflammation Profiles in Functional Neurological 
Disorder: A Systematic Review and Meta- Analysis. J Neuropsychiatry 
Clin Neurosci 2022;34:30–43. 
12
Phillips W. BMJ Neurol Open 2025;7:e001309. doi:10.1136/bmjno-2025-001309
Open access 
 83 Olshansky B, Cannom D, Fedorowski A, et al. Postural Orthostatic 
Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS): A critical assessment. Prog 
Cardiovasc Dis 2020;63:263–70. 
 84 Norcliffe- Kaufmann L, Palma JA, Martinez J, et al. Fear conditioning 
as a pathogenic mechanism in the postural tachycardia syndrome. 
Brain (Bacau) 2022;145:3763–9. 
 85 Stick M, Leone A, Fischer F , et al. Deep abdominal breathing reduces 
heart rate and symptoms during orthostatic challenge in patients 
with postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome. Euro J of Neurology 
2024;31:e16402. 
 86 Popkirov S, Hoeritzauer I, Colvin L, et al. Complex regional pain 
syndrome and functional neurological disorders - time for 
reconciliation. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2019;90:608–14. 
 87 Edwards MJ, Yogarajah M, Stone J. Why functional neurological 
disorder is not feigning or malingering. Nat Rev Neurol 
2023;19:246–56. 
 88 Nilles C, Martino D, Berg L, et al. What are the Key 
Phenomenological Clues to Diagnose Functional Tic- Like 
Behaviors in the Pandemic Era? Mov Disord Clin Pract 
2024;11:398–402. 