 1 
  Revision 2  The Energy Resistance Principle   Martin Picard1,2,3,4 and Nirosha J Murugan 5,6  1 Department of Psychiatry, Division of Behavioral Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, United States  2 Department of Neurology, H. Houston Merritt Center for Neurological and Mitochondrial Disorders, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, New York 10032, United States 3 New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, NY 10032, United States 4 Robert N Butler Columbia Aging Center, Mailman School of Public Health, New York, NY 10032, United States 5 Department of Health Sciences, Wilfrid Laurier University, N2L3C5, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada 6 Allen Discovery Center, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts, 02155, United States  Correspondence: martin.picard@columbia.edu  
 2 
Summary  Living organisms are physical-energetic systems that must obey simple principles guiding energy transformation across physical and temporal scales. The Energy Resistance Principle (ERP) describes behavior and transformation of energy in the carbon-based circuitry of biology. We show how energy resistance (éR) is the fundamental property that enables transformation, converting into useful work the unformed energy potential of food-derived electrons fluxing towards oxygen. Although éR is required to sustain life, excess éR directly causes reductive and oxidative stress, heat, inflammation, molecular damage, and information loss – all hallmarks of disease and aging. We discuss how disease-causing stressors elevate éR and circulating GDF15 levels; whereas sleep, physical activity, and restorative interventions that promote healing minimize éR. The ERP is a testable general framework for discovering the modifiable bioenergetic forces that shape development, aging, and the dynamic health-disease continuum.   Keywords: energy; transformation; physical laws; biological circuits; mitochondria; oxygen; cytokines; inflammation; GDF15; biomarkers; exercise; healing; disease         
 3 
 “If you want to find the secrets of the universe, think in terms of  energy, frequency and vibration” ― Nikola Tesla    The Energy Resistance Principle Science systematically gathers knowledge about the natural world, condensing it into laws and principles 1. Physics has identified simple, generalizable principles captured in Newton’s gravity 2, Maxwell’s electromagnetism 3, and Einstein’s mass-energy equivalence E=mc2, which revealed, for example, how mass is energy constrained by the constant speed of light squared (m=E/c2) 4. Much of modern science and technology has developed from this and Feynman’s subsequent quantum electrodynamics (QED) principle 5, illustrating the value of principled knowledge synthesis for how energy behaves across the natural world. Biology has similarly discovered valuable organizing principles. They include the encoding of biological information into the 4-letter genetic code 6, the allometric scaling of body size, fractal biological structures, and metabolic rates 7,8, electrical coordination of cellular and organismal functions 9, how mitochondria convert chemistry into an electrochemical force to power ATP synthesis 10, and how limits to mitochondrial energy transformation or flow capacity cause devastating human diseases 11. However, in contrast to physics, biology has lacked a simple, principled formulation that quantitatively defines the relation between energy flow and more specific biological pathways and processes linked to health, aging, and healing – key distinguishing features of living organisms.   The Energy Resistance Principle (ERP) is a testable framework that describes the behavior and transformation of energy in living systems. The ERP builds on Prigogine’s concept of dissipative structures and efficiency as “order emerges through fluctuations” 12,13, and the notion that energy is the driving force of life and biological complexity 14-16. The ERP draws formalism from physical laws accounting for the behavior of energy in simpler electrical and hydraulic systems, extended to biology. In essence, the ERP relates the organism’s energy potential (i.e., voltage or pressure) and its capacity to support energy flow (i.e., current or flux), showing how together they quantitatively determine and regulate the system’s energy resistance (éR) and therefore its transformation capacity.  In the present manuscript, we refer to the éR principle as a heuristic—an emergent generalization from the existing body of work—rather than as a fundamental or universally accepted law. In this sense, the ERP functions as a guiding framework derived from empirical observations and quantitative relationships, operationalized as a simple formula that helps generate models and testable hypotheses. Our hope is that it guides theorists and experimentalists to think energetically about the beautiful complexity of living systems.  The ERP is based on three simple assumptions (Figure 1):  1. Life cannot exist without energy resistance. As in electrical systems where resistance is required for power dissipation (Power law: P=R·I2, if R is zero, P also is zero), resistance is required to transform different forms of energy into work and information (Box 1). In wet biological systems, this transformation powers the molecular operations of life. Resistance regulates energy flux to ensure that energy is transformed into useful biological work rather than being entirely dissipated as heat, as in a burning flame. 
 4 
 2. Organisms vary resistance to direct energy flux and compute information. Energy flows down the path of least resistance, so varying resistance is the simplest way to direct energy. In microcircuits and other physical systems, varying resistance is the basis of computation and information processing. Biology harnesses the same principle. Neural, vascular, and other anatomical networks distribute and transform energy (blood, bioelectricity, nutrients) into information by varying éR across massively distributed parallel systems.   3. Organisms adapt and optimize fitness by achieving lasting changes in energy resistance. Resistance to energy flux (éR) triggers signaling outputs whose information content activates (epi)genetic regulatory pathways, which communicate and produce enduring cellular, physiological, anatomical, and behavioral changes. These changes feedback to minimize and optimize éR over the long-term, enhancing the system’s efficiency, fitness, and health.  Energy flows through biological circuitry from food to oxygen The fundamental difference between a cadaver and the living organism is the flow of energy 17. Breathing organisms use their mitochondria to sustain energy flux in the forms of electrons (é) towards oxygen, the second most electronegative element of the periodic table. This process begins with ingested foods, proceeds through digestion and biochemical cascades that simplify macromolecules into metabolites, and culminates in electron flux within the mitochondrial electron transport chain 18, where oxygen acts as the ultimate electron acceptor 19. In biological circuits, oxygen acts like the positive (+) pole of a battery towards which the electrons arising from the negative (-) pole, foodstuff, spontaneously flow (Figure 2, inset). This is the basis for respiration in breathing creatures like humans and other animals. At every step, the movement of electrons from one molecule to another, involving either chemical reactions with covalent bonds or electron transfer in the electron transport chain, faces biophysical constraints. Under certain conditions, electron flux may involve tunneling 20, a quantum-scale mechanism that facilitates electron mobility and locally reduces energy barriers (electrons pass through, rather than over, energy barriers), shaped by both classical and quantum physical constraints21.  The mitochondrial electron transport chain is partially encoded by the mitochondrial DNA, the only DNA outside the nucleus. The mitochondrial system evolved to offer precisely sufficient resistance to electron flux, which powers three proton pumps (complexes I, III, IV). These molecular pumps each carry an H+ atom across the inner mitochondrial membrane, for each fluxing electron. By constraining electron flux, the mitochondrial electron transport chain accepts an electron from the electron donor NADH, transforming current (one form of energy) into the proton-motive force (ΔμH+, another form of energy) 22,23. Therefore, the energetic cascade within the organism involves the transformation of energy first from chemistry to fluxing electrons (i.e., electricity), then into the flexible electrochemical ΔμH+ energy gradient. All animal multicellular life is powered by this precisely resistive, transformative, energetic process.  Mitochondria then use ΔμH+ to generate ATP 10, to concentrate ions like Ca2+ and others, and to produce a multitude of high-energy chemical intermediates such as GTP, NADPH, and GSH that power cellular activities. In each cell, these chemical intermediates provide the activation energy, stored as latent potential within covalent bonds, for enzymatic reactions that enable the creation, function, and preservation of biological structures – to resist entropy 24. 
 5 
Mitochondria are the auspicious site where food-derived electrons meet and re-unite with oxygen, releasing water (H2O) and carbon dioxide (CO2) in the process. This closes the life cycle between the breathing animals and photosynthesizing plants 17, which is ultimately sustained by solar radiation. Chloroplasts transform light into matter, trapping electrons in biochemistry. Mitochondria then dematerialize biochemistry into membrane potential and bioelectricity, a flexible energy form widely used across biology 25.  The ERP highlights how as bearers of the electron transport chain, also known as the “respiratory chain”, mitochondria together with other metabolic networks have evolved as the ideal bioelectrical circuit where the vital pull of oxygen on electrons provides the driving force for life. As energy flows through the finely tuned resistive circuitry of biology, energy resistance (éR) acts as the medium of transformation that powers all of life’s operations. Using our electrical circuit analogy, the energetic cascade of life can be understood as a series of transistors, or variable resistances, connected to one another; some in series, and some in parallel (Figure 2). If resistance increases in one transistor, it increases the resistance of the whole circuit. Whereas in electrical circuits resistance propagates instantaneously, biochemical networks exhibit natural elasticity buffering against fluctuations in resistance. Nevertheless, from first principles we would predict that if resistance increases in mitochondria – ~40,000 trillion parallel transistors – the effects on the flux of electrons/substrates would rapidly ripple upwards through the biochemical circuitry to alter the flux of electron-carrying metabolites across metabolic pathways, the cell membrane (e.g., causing glucose intolerance), and other organ systems.   Organismal energetics, health and aging Two specific notions around animal energetics offer useful premises to understand the vital requirement and significance of éR.  Energy expenditure Energy expenditure reflects the amount of work required to survive, resulting in the pressure or demands for energy transformation that an animal must expend or “burn” per unit of time 24. Interestingly, energy expenditure measured via O2 consumption and CO2 production per unit mass scales inversely with lifespan. This means that organisms with higher mass-specific metabolic rates generally have shorter lifespans. The resulting striking mathematical regularities reveal an energy-lifespan relationship that scales across twenty orders of magnitude from mitochondria to the largest mammals on Earth 8,26,27. Faster breathing animals also exhibit faster telomere shortening rates 28, accumulate point mutations more quickly 29, and have developmental clocks that tick faster 30,31. Faster mitochondrial metabolism sets faster species-specific molecular tempo across biological processes.  In humans, people with higher energy expenditure also die earlier 32,33, leading to the incomplete conclusion that breathing faster makes you die earlier. The so-called “rate of living” theory of aging has been closely examined, revealing inconsistencies and exceptions 34 among which is the notion that temperature is a more important driver of lifespan than energy expenditure, at least in mice 35,36. Temperature is the rate of molecular jiggling, or Brownian motion, and is a direct biophysical consequence of energy constraints and resistance (éR). All else being equal, increasing éR increases the system’s temperature. Thus, the ERP predicts that entropy production rates from energy fluxing across the resistive biology of an organism 
 6 
should most accurately predict aging dynamics and mouse lifespan, as recently reported 37. Therefore, energy expenditure and other related parameters reflect the demand or energy “potential” (EP) of the system, which is an important parameter, yet alone is insufficient to accurately account for the dynamics of health and lifespan. Mitochondrial energy flux regulates aging biology A second well-established energetic fact of life is that energy flux (f) by the main cellular energy transformer – mitochondria – is a major determinant of health and aging biology. We have learned a great deal on this topic from individuals with rare genetic mtDNA defects. mtDNA mutations alter electron transport chain components, and thus, increase the biophysical constraints to fluxing electrons within mitochondria. As a result, mtDNA defects reduce maximal respiration, directly increasing the resistance to energy flow across the whole physiological system 38.  Impaired mitochondrial biology has been linked to most medical conditions and chronic illnesses 39 and become a canonical hallmark of disease and aging 40,41. There is a common, while often untested, assumption that mitochondrial contributions to disease pathogenesis and aging are primarily driven by ATP deficiency. However, in cells, animals, and humans with impaired mitochondria, ATP is often not lower than in healthy conditions 42. Thus, primary mitochondrial diseases caused by genetic defects in the OxPhos system may decrease electron flux capacity, but not ATP levels. Moreover, mitochondrial defects do not decrease energy expenditure as might be logically expected, but rather produce cellular and physiological recalibrations that increase the organism’s pressure or potential to transform energy – a state termed hypermetabolism 43. Thus, ATP levels cannot explain how reduced energy flow capacity influences health. Therefore, in living organisms, both the energy potential (EP) and rate of energy flux (f) are meaningful energetic parameters. However, EP and f are insufficient on their own to understand physiology and lifespan regulation. How do these basic energetic parameters interact to drive health and disease processes?  Deriving éR from energy potential (EP) and flux (f) The solution to integrating energy potential (EP) and flux (f) within biology is energy resistance (éR). Simple physical systems convert or transform energy (e.g., electricity) into work through variable resistance following simple quantitative laws (Box 2).  The simplest such law relevant here is the Power law, where resistance is power divided by current squared (R=P/I2). Here we extend this law to biological systems, where electrons flux from food (cathode) to oxygen (anode), albeit at a remarkably slower rate than in electrical systems. For Ohmic physical material, resistance (R) is typically treated as a constant, but in biology, changing biophysical, molecular, cellular, and physiological processes dynamically alter resistance. For a cell or organism experiencing a given EP, we obtain that energy resistance (éR) is the ratio of EP constrained (i.e., divided) by the rate of energy flux f, following éR=EP/f2.  While this parallels Ohm’s law and the electrical power equation (P=R·I²), here éR is a derived bioenergetic parameter with units analogous to resistance, but emerging from dynamic biophysical constraints unique to living systems (molecular, anatomical, systemic). We use the 
 7 
term energy resistance to distinguish it from purely electrical resistance, and to emphasize its role as a biological transformation constraint. The terms of the ERP are defined as follows: • Energy potential (EP) is the scalar quantity representing the total drive to perform work within a system. In electricity, resistance scales according to voltage (V) relative to power (P) following R=V2/P – the larger the drive (V) and the lower the work being done (P), the higher the resistance. For biology, the ERP proposes that EP subsumes both i) the voltage-like accumulation of energetic substrates (e.g., glucose and lipids), and ii) the power-like physiological demand for energy transformation (e.g., physical work, in Watts or Joules). Analogous to voltage in electrical systems, EP provides the “push” for transformation, or the thermodynamic gradient for energy flux. • Energy flux (f) is the rate of electron transfer from substrates (food) to terminal electron acceptors (oxygen) in aerobic organisms. The maximal capacity, or the ceiling for f, is set by biophysical factors including mitochondrial content and OxPhos capacity, vascularization, cofactor availability (e.g., NAD⁺), tissue oxygenation, and others. Analogous to current in electrical systems, f reflects the rate of energy flux. In the ERP, as in the power law (see Box 2), The squaring of flux (f²) reflects the nonlinear dynamics of biological energy transformations, akin to Joule’s law, where dissipated power scales with current squared. In biological systems, this scaling captures how modest changes in flux capacity can produce disproportionately large effects on energy transformation and éR. • Energy resistance (éR) is the system’s property that opposes energy flux. éR emerges from the system’s biophysical constraints as they interact with energy flux. It regulates the conversion of energy potential (EP) into biologically usable work. By setting how easily free electrons or electrons trapped within molecules (i.e., metabolites) flux across biological structures, éR determines both the rate and efficiency of transformations—from ATP synthesis to signal propagation—across physical and temporal scales.   This simple formulation éR=EP/f2 leads to testable predictions. This definition of éR means that if flux capacity is drastically diminished, for example after the ingestion of cyanide, which inhibits mitochondrial electron flux towards oxygen, the denominator f 2➞0 and the organism’s fixed cost of life or EP then produces infinite resistance (éR➞∞). Excessive resistance is incompatible with transformation, and therefore with life. On the other hand, if the system contained excess mitochondria and a theoretically infinite capacity to flux electrons that offers no biophysical constraint (f➞∞), then resistance would be zero and energy would be consumed instantaneously without performing meaningful work. The system would burst into flames. However, because increasing éR to non-infinite levels will also increase the system’s temperature, the relationship between temperature and éR is non-linear. This principle is relatable to biology in a simple analogy. Consider a candle, in which the dense and impure carbon-based substrate of wax combined with the structure of the wick allows the candle to burn at a fixed, relatively sustainable rate. Similarly, the wet, impure carbon-based substrate of animal biology allows us to live at a fixed, relatively sustainable rate. All known living organisms operate within a fairly narrow evolutionary range of energy flux f 44, and do not carry excess mitochondria or flux capacity 19, likely to preserve éR within the optimal window for life. The ERP proposes that the behavior of energy in biological systems follows similar 
 8 
principles as in more simple energetic systems, operationalized in the formula éR=EP/f2, illustrated in Figure 3. In essence, we propose that in biology the transformation of chemical, thermal, electrical, and other forms of energy requires finely tuned biophysical constraints, out of which emerges resistance energy flux. We refer to this resulting property as energy resistance – éR.   Factors influencing éR In mitochondria, cells, and other metabolic systems, biophysical constraints emerge from the intrinsic molecular composition and structures of biology to create éR, a force that transforms the energy of flowing electrons into life-sustaining energetic intermediates such as bioelectricity and ATP (see Box 1B). The structure of the formula éR=EP/f2 stipulates that éR is determined by the ratio of energy potential and flux. Thus, two main classes of factors can increase or decrease the system’s resistance (see Figure 3, left). Factors that decrease éR. éR decreases in response to either i) decreasing demands or signals that drive energy potential (EP); or ii) increasing flux (f). Factors that decrease EP include interventions well-known to increase lifespan, including calorie restriction and fasting, which decrease blood glucose and insulin levels37,45, as examples. Sleep and other physiologically calming states achieved through meditation or mindfulness, which are associated with lower heart rate, body temperature, and sympathetic activity, also decrease work done by the body (EP, imperfectly estimated in healthy systems by steady state energy expenditure) 46,47, thereby decreasing éR (top left in Figure 3).  éR is also lowered by factors that increase the formula’s denominator, f 2. Mitochondrial biogenesis increases the number of channels for electron flux to oxygen 48,49, angiogenesis increases delivery of oxygen and the removal of metabolites that can slow down biochemical reactions and increase constraints 50, and other factors that increase the oxidative or respiratory capacity of a tissue 36 are expected to coordinately decrease éR (bottom left in Figure 3). Supplementation with electron-carrying cofactors such as NAD+ 51 or specific diets that increase circulating ketone bodies 52,53 may also increase flux (or increase maximum flux capacity), and thereby decrease éR, possibly accounting for their healthspan and lifespan extension effects. Note that given the mathematical structure of the proposed formula (following the Power law), we initially propose that the term for flux f is squared. Consequently, changes in f are expected to produce an exponential effect on éR, compared to linear changes in EP. Factors that increase éR. Factors that increase EP include cellular and physiological processes that either increase energy demands or supply. This includes hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, and the elevation in other metabolites that readily seek an outlet to offload their electrons. In fact, the reason hyperglycemia and hyperlipidemia (i.e., glucolipotoxicity in diabetes) are health liabilities may, in fact, be because they increase EP (without a rise in energy flow), and therefore increase éR; similarly, in the electrical Power law the energetic gradient V2 (e.g., glucose gradient) exponentially drives resistance (R) following R=V2/P. Other factors that elevate EP are linked with the pathophysiology of various disorders, including cell (hyper)proliferation, which increases work performed and energy demands in excess of typical energy demands for a given tissue 54. This occurs in cancer and in activated immune cells 55,56, but EP may also increase in response to cell-cell communication, secondary to the cellular energy demands required to send, process, and receive information 57-60 (top right in Figure 3). 
 9 
Muscle contraction and other processes during physical activity also trigger several-fold elevations in both local and whole-body energy demand 19, thereby linearly increasing EP, and therefore éR. Factors that decrease f include poor vascularization and tissue hypoxia, because it depletes the vital negative pole in the energetic circuit, oxygen (bottom right in Figure 3). Without oxygen’s pull on electrons, the system’s flux decreases, increasing éR. Naturally, mitochondrial DNA mutations or environmental toxins that poison mitochondrial complex I or alter the OxPhos system (even in the absence of ATP depletion) also directly impede electron flux (e.g., 61), increasing the biological constraints to energy flow from food to oxygen. Thus, among its most straightforward prediction, the ERP predicts that primary mitochondrial defects directly elevate éR, as confirmed below.  Biological effects of energy resistance (éR) Origin and molecular signaling effects of excessive éR Among both physical and biological systems, resistance comes with inevitable side effects. In electrical systems excessive resistance (motor or overloaded GPU) causes overheating, leading to damage that accelerates the degradation of microcircuit components. In wet and warm cellular circuits, energy transformation also necessarily comes with energy loss as dissipative processes generating heat (thermal damage, protein unfolding) 62, reactive oxygen species (oxidative stress), biophotons (ultraweak photon emission), and other forms of energy loss limiting both mitochondrial and whole-body energy efficiency 63,64 (Figure 3, middle). These dissipative energy losses are inevitable, although modifiable, consequences of resistance. We understand dissipative losses to underlie the stochastic information loss 65,66 and seemingly inevitable damage accumulation 67 associated with the aging process. Beyond increasing the entropic dissipative loss that naturally drives the information loss, éR also produces adaptive signals. The origin of éR-derived signals can be traced back to electrons in mitochondria. As electrons encounter excessive constraints that limit their flux through the mitochondrial electron transport chain, electron or EP builds up, like water accumulates across a dam as the flood gate is progressively closed. Electrons then build up in the electron transport chain upstream of their final desired destination, cytochrome c oxidase (complex IV), where electrons are efficiently and safely transferred to molecular oxygen, producing water and closing the integrated life circuit.  With excessive constraints to flux, electrons quickly backflow onto NAD+, converting it back to NADH. The resulting increase in NADH/NAD+ ratio is a state termed reductive stress 68. With reductive stress, the overly reduced electron transport chain ectopically leaks electrons onto molecular oxygen, this time creating reactive oxygen species (ROS). When produced in excess relative to antioxidant defenses, this leads to oxidative stress 69. Thus, first reductive stress, and secondarily oxidative stress are the most direct molecular manifestations of impeded electron flux, or éR in mitochondria. éR triggers stress responses and specific cytokines To drive cellular and organismal adaptations, mitochondria experiencing increasing éR must act as signaling organelles. Accordingly, both the NADH/NAD+ ratio and rising levels of ROS independently act on the cell as signaling molecules 70,71. Within minutes to hours, these 
 10 
mitochondrial outputs trigger and stimulate cytoplasmic signal transduction cascades that converge on well-conserved stress responses gene programs related to cell fate. These in turn driving apoptotic, cell differentiation, innate immune, hypoxic, and quiescence/senescence programs 72-74. Cell fate transitions and behaviors are under control of mitochondrial éR signals 75,76. Beyond the cell, these mitochondrial éR-initiated stress responses involve cell-to-cell signaling via paracrine and endocrine secondary signals. Cells communicate their éR state by turning on nuclear genes, synthesizing and secreting specific combinations of small proteins called cytokines (cyto, meaning “cell”; kine meaning “to move” or “set in motion”). Cytokines are the universal language of intercellular communication. They are produced by any cell, not just immune cells 77. Notable cytokines known to be triggered by metabolic cues related to éR include interleukin 6 (IL6) 78, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 79, and growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF15, see below). Thus, the cell nucleus translates excessive éR into cytokines to communicate the cell’s energetic status—excessive éR—to other cells. The result is the “cytokine storm” in the blood that is traditionally termed “inflammation”. Thus, understood through the lens of the ERP, inflammation is a systemic signal of energetic stress; or more precisely, cytokines are signals of excessive energy resistance. Organisms handle reductive stress through inter-organ crosstalk Excessive éR also produces “metabolic” signals. Backflowing electrons increasing the NADH/NAD+ ratio inhibit the Krebs cycle, causing pyruvate to backflow onto the cytoplasmic enzyme lactate dehydrogenase, which converts it to lactate 68. This reaction relieves reductive stress by regenerating NAD+. Lactate, with two electrons in tow, is then promptly excreted from high-éR cells into the extracellular space and blood, acting as a pressure valve to eliminate excess electrons that mitochondria don’t have the capacity to flux to oxygen. In addition to lactate, accumulating pyruvate is converted to alanine, an amino acid that similarly carries excess electrons and diffuses to the bloodstream. As a result, both lactate and alanine are biomarkers of electron transport chain defects caused by mtDNA mutations, or primary mitochondrial diseases 80.  The release of so-called “anaerobic” metabolites like lactate and alanine in the presence of oxygen is an apparent paradox termed aerobic glycolysis, or the Warburg effect. It reflects the metabolism of many tumors 81. The ERP allows us to understand this state as one of high éR, driven for example by rapid cell proliferation. In cancer, the ERP predicts that increasing éR is necessary to sustain the biomolecular transformation and biomass production necessary to fuel rapid cell division. But in breathing animals, every electron, including the excess electrons released from highly resistive cells such as lactate and alanine, must eventually be respired and end up on oxygen in a mitochondrion, even if the first part of the circuit (e.g., glycolysis) was performed in a different cell or organ. Organisms are an integrated energetic circuit. So, lactate oxidation is accomplished by surrounding tissues and other organs that have oxidative capacity to spare, such as the heart and brain 82. Thus, through this inter-organ crosstalk, the organism acts as a true cell collective that respires each food-derived electron, completing the vital cascade of electrons flux from food hydrocarbons to oxygen.   Feedback and éR regulation  
 11 
 Understanding the molecular signals arising from éR helps us to resolve the mechanisms of adaptation that keep éR within the narrow goldilocks zone required for life. The key idea is that éR signals adaptations, which bring éR back into the most efficient state. For maximal efficiency, these adaptive changes can occur simultaneously at the level of mitochondria, cells, surrounding cells and tissues, physiology, and at the behavioral level (Figure 4A).  As one example, high intensity endurance exercise training can “max out” the respiratory capacity of muscle mitochondria 83. When the contracting myofibers’ workload exceeds what is called the “anaerobic threshold” or “lactate threshold” 84, the energy potential (EP) created by contraction overwhelms mitochondrial respiratory capacity, the tissue can become hypoxic, and lactate is released. During recovery, the adaptations that follow can all be understood to reduce éR. The first three operate by increasing flux f2, while the fourth one acts by reducing EP: 1) Mitochondrial biogenesis: new mitochondria are created, thereby increasing the number of parallel channels for electrons to flow 49.  2) Cell and tissue level angiogenesis: myofibrils experiencing excessive éR secrete cytokines such as VEGF, which stimulates the growth of new capillary blood vessels to increase oxygen and nutrient supply to the newly formed mitochondria 50.  3) Physiological delivery: energy substrates are mobilized via the sympathetic nervous system (norepinephrine) and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (cortisol), increasing circulating blood glucose and lipid concentrations to support energy flow in the system 85.  4) Behavioral adaptations: maximal exercise in untrained individuals is aversive and elicits brain-derived ratings on the perceived exertion scale 86, dampening one’s motivation to pursue effort, thereby reducing EP, and preventing excessive and potentially damaging elevations in éR. The multiscale adaptations to éR are illustrated in Figure 1 (right). As predicted by the ERP, all éR-driven adaptive features to exercise are recapitulated by primary mitochondrial defects that increase biophysical constraints within the electron transport chain, decrease f 2, and thus elevate éR. People with genetic mitochondrial diseases exhibit: 1) Excess mitochondrial biogenesis mimicking endurance training 87,88. 2) Increased VEGF and angiogenesis around cells with defective mitochondria 89. 3) Elevated catecholamines associated with excess blood glucose and lipids 43,90. 4) Constant feelings of fatigue and aversion to exercise or other efforts (e.g., climbing stairs) 91. Thus, increased constraints to electron flux in mitochondria is sufficient to stimulate multi-level adaptations that recapitulate exercise-induced adaptations, pointing to a central role of mitochondrial éR in driving both short- and long-term human physiology and health.   Temporal dynamics in éR regulation EP can vary within minutes by 10-20x at the whole organism level, and by over two orders of magnitude in muscle cells from rest to maximal contraction 19,92. Under healthy conditions, the increase in work performed is rapidly followed by a rise in energy flow in a demand-driven manner (e.g., ADP stimulates electron flux and respiration 93). But the maximal capacity for electron flux is relatively fixed on the scale of hours to days, largely determined by 
 12 
the integrated biophysical constraints of the existing energy delivery hardware or infrastructure: ventilatory, cardiocirculatory, cellular, cytoplasmic, and mitochondrial components 19. As proposed in our initial formula, éR scales linearly with EP but exponentially with f 2, a relation which predicts that organisms can accommodate relatively large fluctuations in EP on the scale of seconds to hours via relatively small changes in flux. In addition, over the long-term, relatively minor adjustments in flux, for example by making more mitochondria or growing more blood vessels, can effectively relieve biophysical constraints and afford sustained lowering of éR (Figure 4A).  Because building and sustaining the biological hardware required to rapidly flux and transform energy is energetically costly 94,95, this dual regulatory strategy appears as an optimal solution to maximize the system’s flexibility or resilience, while remaining efficient. The ERP shows how the relation and scaling of EP and f 2 derived from the power law allows biological systems to accommodate rapid changes in EP (required to face acute challenges) while minimizing the energetic costs of adaptation (Figure 4B).  One energy-inspired way to interpret cellular and physiological adaptations is to view them as transformative processes. When the system never encounters resistance, there is little transformation possible, and therefore little potential to build and sustain tissue mass. This logic accounts for the high éR in cancer mentioned above (high éR→high transformation→rapid growth possible) 81. This concept also accounts for the use-it-or-lose-it principle: without effort, muscles atrophy; but with resistance training, muscles grow bigger and stronger. The same applies to endurance exercise and mitochondria. Use them, feel the resistance (i.e., the discomfort of being out of breath), and the organism adapts by making more mitochondria and vasculature to decrease éR. Alternatively, never be out of breath and you shall eliminate the unnecessary mitochondria that are costing energy to sustain 94,95. A possible corollary for understanding sub-cellular control of mitochondrial mass is that cells tune the number of mitochondria they have not by tracking actual mitochondrial mass, but by monitoring éR.  Adaptations likely cannot proceed during periods of high éR, and must rather be mobilized after, during recovery when éR returns to lower levels. This explains why the onset of skeletal muscle mitochondrial biogenesis does not take place during exercise (when éR is maximal), but in the recovery phase when éR returns to normal levels 49. The ERP also allows us to understand why a week-long fasting/starvation period triggers gene expression and biochemical adaptations that actively suppress mitochondrial carbohydrate influx and respiratory capacity 96: as the energy potential (EP) of the starved organism diminishes, mitochondrial flux (f 2) must also decrease to balance the energetic state of the organism and stabilize overall éR. So mitochondria restrict electron import.  Milder fluctuations in metabolic states across sleep and wake cycles may similarly provide broader fluctuations of elevated and reduced éR in specific organs 97, respectively, allowing for the stimulation (catabolic) and adaptation (anabolic) cycles that permeate biology and health 47. Figure 4C outlines the timescales across which éR manifests to produce molecular, cellular, physiological, behavioral, and anatomical recalibrations.  Measuring éR and its association with disease and behavior One way to examine the ERP in relation to human health is to define éR drivers, markers, and phenotypes/consequences (Figure 5).  
 13 
éR drivers: As summarized in Figure 3, direct éR drivers are factors that elevate EP on the system, including elevated concentrations of oxidizable glucose and lipids in the bloodstream, energy expenditure, stress hormones such as norepinephrine and cortisol. And factors that reduce f 2 such as poisons and toxins, or physical inactivity that reduce mitochondrial content. Specific cytokines acting on target cells can either increase98 or decrease99 mitochondrial OxPhos capacity (max capacity for f2), regulate blood flow100, and have widespread activatory or repressing effects on cellular activities (EP), thus modulating cellular or tissue éR. Genetically-encoded tools also exist to directly elevate 101 or decrease 102,103 the NADH/NAD+ ratio (and NADPH) in cells and organisms, acting on the system’s f2 to shape éR and GDF15 levels 73. éR markers: The best available éR marker in humans is the secreted cytokine growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF15), a member of the TGF-β family 104. GDF15 increases when mitochondrial éR is elevated in in cells 43,73, mice 105-107 and humans 68,80,108 with mtDNA defects that increase the biophysical constraints for electrons to reach oxygen. Mitochondria-deficient cells and animals experience high éR and an elevated NADH:NAD+ ratio reflecting reductive stress 68. This activates the nuclear integrated stress response (ISR) 43,72,73,109 and stimulates the production and release of cytokines signaling excessive energy resistance, particularly GDF15. The cytokine fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21), but interestingly, not other traditional cytokines (interleukins, interferons), has also been reported to be elevated in animals and people with mtDNA defects 68,107,110. In ERP terms, mtDNA-mutant organisms have reduced capacity for flux f 2. Thus, for a given EP – which is either the same, or may in fact be elevated in mitochondrial disorders 42 – reduced f 2 should exponentially elevate éR (following éR=EP/f2). This state is detectable as elevated circulating GDF15 107,110, an éR marker validated across cellular, preclinical, and clinical studies. éR Phenotypes: The best mapped éR phenotypes are produced by the brain 111. GDF15 is expressed in all organs and tissues in the body except the brain 108. In turn, the receptor for GDF15, GFRAL, is expressed only in a subset of neurons in the brainstem region 104. This expression pattern is a robust example of a canonical body-to-brain metaboception signaling axis conveying somatic energetic distress to the brain. In parallel with other metaboceptive cues, the brain appears to respond to the éR signal GDF15 by triggering phenotypes that decrease the system’s EP 111. This includes visceral malaise 112, nausea and fasting 113, social isolation 114, depression 115. Thus, physiological and behavioral phenotypes of excessive éR offer opportunities to examine how subcellular éR relates to human health. To facilitate empirical testing of the ERP in various contexts and systems, we provide an ERP Measurement Toolkit. Summarized in Table 1, this toolkit provides established and tentative approaches to selectively increase or decrease EP and f 2 in mitochondria, cells or tissues, and whole organisms. We also highlight an initial set of strategies to monitor éR at each level. ERP and human health Several attempts have been made to define health both biologically and functionally, recognizing that health is more the absence of disease 116,117. Aiming to define health from first principles, we recently proposed that health is a field-like state emerging from the dynamic interplay of energy, communication, and structure within the organism, giving rise to robustness/resilience, plasticity, performance, and sustainability 118. Extending this definition to the ERP, we propose that health is the ability to sustain life at an optimal level of éR. This then 
 14 
predicts that deviations in éR, quantified from either éR drivers or éR markers, should predict and/or track with changes in health status. On the other hand, healing may be defined as the dynamic process of achieving functional or structural adaptations that optimize éR dynamics. These proposed operationalizations provide a basis to develop heretofore missing quantitative metrics and to eventually track human health and healing processes over time. This is supported by UK Biobank results in >52,000 individuals where the top circulating protein associated with prevalent and incident diabetes, cardiovascular, psychiatric, and other disorders is the éR marker GDF15 119. Supplemental File 1 summarizes UK Biobank results 119 validating initial ERP predictions: 1) metabolic oversupply, immune profiles, and tissue damage markers expected to increase EP are linked to elevated éR. 2) éR is associated with metabolite profiles of reductive stress including lactate and alanine. And 3) elevated GDF15 is linked to éR phenotypes—experiences, behaviors, and physiology—including fatigue, pain, sedentarity, neuroticism, and suppression of growth/anabolic axes. Considering non-pathological examples where éR is partitioned across the mammalian body, we suggest that pregnancy is an example where the ERP integrates heretofore disconnected processes. For reasons that remain unclear, the placenta expresses exceptionally high GDF15 levels (Figure 6). Based on evidence reviewed above, this may reflect how placental biology operates at high éR. This contention accounts for: i) why maternal blood GDF15 reaches levels >100-fold higher than in the non-pregnant state, driven by systemic GDF15 placental secretion 113,120; ii) why the high éR of the placenta may be required to counterbalance or “insulate” the proliferative and low éR proliferative state of the foetus (as in an electrical circuit, low energy resistance components operate as energy sinks and must be counterbalanced by resistive elements), balancing each other to protect the mother 121,122; and iii) why the placenta ages faster than other human tissues 123,124, a predicted necessary consequence of the dissipative losses and pro-aging effects in tissues chronically operating at high éR values.   Limitations and future outlook  The ERP provides a predictive framework that can be applied to understand the behavior of energy in living systems; however, its full explanatory potential will remain untapped unless several outstanding limitations can be addressed. While we have provided initial definitions for key states and processes subsumed under three terms (EP, f 2, éR), these should be reflexively informed by empirical data. Because falsifiable hypotheses can be generated with the ERP, experimentation will either confirm its validity in different contexts or provide guidance for its successive iterations. One general prediction is that éR is the vital parameter, and that cells and organisms directly respond to changes in éR, rather than to energy potential (EP) or flux (f 2) parameters. The existence of biophysical structures or processes that display features of energy capacitors would further develop the framework. In particular, the nature of resistance in biological circuits should be further characterized. Can any energy-transducing molecular structure act as a resistor? If so, what are the necessary and sufficient elements of a biological resistor? Further, it will be necessary to determine which factors, material or otherwise, contribute to the efficiency of the interaction between energy flux and particular biophysical constraints. When cells and tissues vary their resistance to energy flux, for example with insulin resistance, is the effect on work and/or heat dissipation additive, multiplicative, or uniquely tied 
 15 
to a particular configuration? Despite the many parallel lines of evidence in support of the ERP discussed above, foundational experiments are needed toward its validation.  One of the many benefits of paradigm shifts in our understanding of human health is their ability to reveal hidden connections between diseases and disorders that were previously unrecognized, until viewed through a new lens. The ERP may offer such a lens bringing into focus causal links between comorbidities, potentially revealing a common underlying etiology to diverse syndromes. Just as germ theory identified the pathogenic microorganism as the common factor in consumption (tuberculosis, caused by M. tuberculosis), lockjaw (trismus, tetanus caused by C. tetani), and Saint Vitus Dance (Sydenham’s chorea, caused by autoimmune response to S. pyogenes), new perspectives on energy flux may similarly reveal hidden connections positioning excessive éR (or insufficient éR) as the Rosetta stone that underlies common, co-morbid clinical conditions 125-127.  Such insights could motivate new approaches to diagnose and treat disease states using bioenergetic principles, in conjunction with molecular and pharmacological approaches. Mechanistic insights into interventions and human experiences Beyond a formal energetic perspective on disease states, the ERP may provide a fertile ground to critically examine the touted effects and healing potential of interventions and therapies that are widely used worldwide, yet remain mechanistically elusive. These include transcranial magnetic stimulation 128, meditation, breathwork and other contemplative practices 47,129, the use of psychedelics substances 130, cryotherapy 131, acupuncture 132, and photobiomodulation 133, among others. Rather than acting molecularly like conventional pharmacotherapy, could these approaches operate by modulating éR directly? The ERP provides a quantitative framework to begin testing this possibility. Similarly, the ERP offers an energy-informed testing ground to understand the mechanisms underlying the broad ranging health effects exercise 134, sleep 135, nutritional states including ketosis 136-138, social (dis)connection and loneliness associated with elevated GDF15 114, as possible éR regulators. If a causal connection between exposures and éR was substantiated, this could yield additional clarity into their underlying psychobiological processes that confer resilience or modify the rate of aging 139,140. In the context of embodied cognition where experiences can arise through somatic biological processes 25,141, could sudden increases in éR be felt directly, for example as the pain during an ischemic myocardial infarction (causing a sudden rise in éR) or the burning sensation in skeletal muscle during strenuous exercise (increasing EP above flux capacity, thus acutely elevating éR)? Should the ERP extend to the transformation of biochemical energy into mental energy (i.e., brain-body processes underlying cognitive processes), then the spectrum of human experiences including pain and mental health disorders could emerge also as manifestations of excessive or insufficient éR involving mitochondria 142,143. Initial evidence relating GDF15 to fatigue and psychosocial factors 119,144, as well as brain reductive stress (elevated NADH/NAD+) in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder 145 support this contention, calling for more research grounded into a quantitative framework like the ERP. Technical considerations As our goal here was to focus on the transformation of energy within biological systems, we centered our perspective on this specific aspect, leaving related processes such as energy distribution and diffusion as promising avenues for future discussions. The relationship between 
 16 
éR and temperature likely plays a significant role in shaping energy diffusion rates within biological systems, potentially generating feedback effects that remain to be fully characterized. These effects may depend on factors such as the density of resistors within the system or localized measures of energy density within distinct cellular compartments. Given the inordinate number of boundary conditions present within cells, from membranes to microtubules, developing in silico models with tunable complexity could provide a powerful tool for evaluating these dynamics on a larger scale.  Furthermore, while our focus remained on aerobic systems and mitochondria, there is ample opportunity for future work to investigate analogous mechanisms governing the role of resistance to energy flow as an engine of transformation in anaerobic organisms, including methanogens, archaea, and bacteria. Exploring how extreme environments such as high-pressure, low-temperature, and high-salinity conditions found on the ocean floor affect these parameters could also yield valuable insights into the behavior of energy in biology more generally.   The ERP may extend beyond humans to other life forms. Organisms with broader thermal ranges may offer natural experiments in éR modulation, representing opportunities to link temperature, metabolism, and lifespan 35,36,146,147. Within organisms, temperature gradients also could reflect meaningful éR distributions. For example, the brain's higher temperature 148 and limited regenerative capacity may signal elevated baseline éR, whereas the liver’s cooler profile 149 could reflect lower éR and align with its greater regenerative capacity. In relation to diseases, elevated systemic or regional temperatures often accompany pathological processes, consistent with ERP predictions that higher éR contributes to disease, including neurodegeneration and dementia that are linked to both elevated brain temperature 150 and blood GDF15 151. Mitochondrial heat generation (some evidence suggests they operate at ~50°C 152,153) and diurnal temperature variation 148 could suggest that rhythmic shifts in éR are necessary to sustain health; this could be the basis of the universal requirement for sleep across breathing organisms 154. When evaluating energy dynamics in living systems across diverse environments, it is crucial to consider how time scales influence patterns of energy transformation. The ERP may offer a valuable framework for understanding the conditions under which life emerges and health is sustained, by defining the constraints necessary for energy transformation and flow under different environmental or psychobiological conditions. For example, different phases of human development and lifespan may feature different éR dynamics, where it possibly exhibits the highest fluctuations in childhood 155 and during stressful life transitions 75, becoming chronically elevated in the aging body where GDF15 increases exponentially 140,156.  By shaping the balance between energy potential and resistance, the ERP could help identify the physical parameters that pattern the organization of matter into life-sustaining systems. Applied to humans, this includes the emergence of the mind and conscious experiences that necessarily arise from the patterned flow of energy through the resistive and otherwise inert matrix of our biology. Summary The ERP extends the general energetic principle of the Power law to biology, explaining how biological systems live, transform, and age because they offer fine-tuned resistance to energy flow. Living systems flux energy through their imperfect, carbon-based biological circuitry, constraining the available energy potential (EP) through a limited oxidative capacity to 
 17 
flux (f 2) energy, generating energy resistance (éR). Our initial proposal that the relation between these terms follows EP=éR·f2 (Box 2) calls for empirical validation. While this formula serves as a foundational scaffold, a more complete equation will need to incorporate variables such as capacitance, elasticity, energy conversion efficiency, and system-scale constraints. We envision this process of pressure testing the validity of specific ERP formulations evolving iteratively alongside experimental and translational work in diverse models, and across the lifespan.  The ERP makes three core assumptions: 1) Life cannot exist without energy resistance, 2) Organisms vary resistance to direct energy flux and compute information, and 3) Organisms adapt and optimize fitness by producing lasting changes in energy resistance. Integrating existing evidence under this simple energetic framework supports these assumptions and leads to several questions, some of which are discussed above, and many of which remain to be tested.  The ERP explains why energy expenditure or mitochondrial oxidative capacity alone are insufficient to fully account for health dynamics and longevity: because one can compensate for a change in the other. Positioning éR as the vital parameter that is monitored and regulated sheds light on the quantitative interdependency of energy expenditure and mitochondrial biology, and other domains relevant to health maintenance. Energy is the largely missing dimension of biomedicine. The ERP offers a general formal framework for understanding the role of energy across various domains of life, including human health, disease, and the experiences that define the human condition.   
 18 
Box 1 | Resistance is the basis for transformation and life. To perform meaningful work, simple physical systems harness the transformative power of resistance. Resistance emerges as an intrinsic property of the system that modulates and regulates the flow of energy through biophysical constraints. By the action of the right resistance pattern, energy in one form is thus transformed into one or more different forms. Below we provide some examples highlighting the fundamental expressions of this principle across non-living and living systems. Light resistance in photosynthesis. In plants, chlorophyll constrains the flux of light, generating resistance that transforms light energy into the unlikely separation of carbon and oxygen from CO2, into edible hydrocarbons (CHOs) and breathable oxygen (O2). Aerodynamic resistance and flight. For a plane in motion, the convex wing aerodynamically constrains the flow of air, generating resistance that transforms kinetic energy into lift by creating pressure differences, enabling the airplane to ascend. Mechanical resistance. In a combustion engine, the piston constraints the pressure of explosions, generating resistance that transforms the ignited chemical energy of fuel into mechanical work and kinetic energy, propelling the car forward. Hydrodynamic resistance. In a hydroelectric dam, the bladed electromagnet turbine rotor constrains the flow of water, generating resistance that transforms the kinetic energy of the water into electrical energy. Reproductive resistance: In the reproductive act, the female vagina constrains the movement of the male penis, generating resistance that transforms the stored potential energy of sperm into kinetic energy to reach the oocyte. For procreation also, resistance needs to be just right; too little or too much is no good. Psychological resistance. In the human mind, theories, problems, and unresolved questions constrain the movement of the human mind, generating resistance that transforms the unformed electrical energy of the brain or consciousness into new ideas, concepts, and technologies, advancing human knowledge. Scientific problems thus give purpose and transform the otherwise unformed potential of the human mind, making resistance a fundamental agent of mental and cultural change in the world. The pictograms below illustrate how (A) in space or in an ideal medium, energy flows without resistance leaving no opportunity for transformation nor work to be performed (top). But in contact with adequate biophysical constraints, such as the carbon-based matrix of biology, the path for electron flux is tortuous, from which emerges resistance that 1) dissipates energy as Brownian motion (i.e., heat) and 2) transforms raw energy into work (molecular bonds, other useful processes) that counteracts entropy (middle three rows). When energy resistance is too high, energy stalls and dissipative losses increase, damaging its substrates and failing to power the self-sustaining living system. Thus, organisms must maintain a “just right” degree of energy resistance for optimal health, efficiency, and lifespan. (B) Example of a simple system with energy fluxing through a non-resistive matric (top) or through a substrate offering the appropriate constraint (bottom), generating energy resistance (éR) that transforms, through high-energy intermediates, raw energy ① into different end products (②,	③,	④). (C) Specific biological examples where éR transforms an initial form of energy into another, powering negentropic reactions and physical actions in living systems.    
 19 
Box 2 | Simple laws dictate the behavior of energy.  In electrical systems, Ohm’s law relates the voltage potential (V) of a system to its resistance (R) and current (I) following V=R·I. In turn, the Power law or Joule’s law states that the Power (P, in watts) of a system is equal to the voltage multiplied by current following P=V·I. (A) Here, substituting V for Ohm’s law, we get that P=(R·I)·I, or P=R·I2. This describes how electron flux in an electrical system is modulated by the biophysical constraints of its components, with resistance dissipating energy as heat. In devices like electric motors, controlled resistance converts electrical energy into useful work, despite inevitable thermal energy loss. Similarly, in biological systems, energy dissipation stabilizes flux and drives essential transformations that sustain life processes. (B) The same principle applied to cellular and clinical data reveals how energy potential (EP) constrained by energy flux capacity (f 2) generates energy resistance (éR). We propose that these features scale following EP=éR·f 2, extending the power law P=R·I 2 to living systems. The use of f 2 reflects the nonlinear dynamics of biological energy flux, where increases in flux capacity lead to disproportionately larger effects on energy transformation due to the complex scaling properties of biological networks. This formalized relation relates whole body EP and f 2, yielding energy resistance (éR), generating warmth (heat dissipation) and transformative capacity, both of which sustain life. The Power law and the ERP formulations recall the mass-energy equivalence principle E=m·c2. (C) Solving for mass (m=E/c2) suggests that matter emerges from constraining energy (E) by the flux rate constant of the speed of light (c2). In the ERP, solving for éR emphasizes the intuitive notion that éR, and thus the potential for life, results from constraining the energy potential (EP) by the limited electron flux rate (f 2) through mitochondria and other digestive, convective, enzymatic steps along the biological circuit (see Figure 2).  In electric circuit design, resistors limit current flux to specific portions of the system. This helps in setting the operating points of each component, determining how much flux passes through each. In biological organisms, the meaningful components are cells, organs, and anatomical regions of the body. Their resistance to blood flow, and therefore to oxygen and nutrients, is tuned dynamically by vasoconstriction and vasodilation, tuning how much blood/energy flow passes through each biological component commensurate with energy demand. Importantly, resistances applied in series – similar to cascades of enzymatic reactions, or electron transfer components in the mitochondrial electron transport chain – are cumulative. They add up to their total resistance following Rtotal=R1+R2+R3+Rn. In contrast, resistances applied in parallel – like the 100-1000’s of mitochondria in each cell – behave differently. Each resistance applied in parallel decreases the circuit’s total resistance following 1/Rtotal=1/R1+1/R2+1/R3+1/Rn. Therefore, in relation to electron flux in biology, this means that the production of additional mitochondria through mitochondrial biogenesis decreases the system’s total éR.      
 20 
Financial competing interests  The authors have no competing interests to declare.  Author contributions M.P. and N.J.M. wrote the manuscript. M.P. prepared the figures.  Acknowledgements We are grateful to Judyann McNamara for inspiring, foundational discussions, to Janell Smith, Jack Devine, Cynthia Liu, David Shire, Christopher Kempes, Alan Cohen, Eugene Mosharov, Michael Levin, Evan Shaulson, Caroline Trumpff, Vanessa Giardino, Mattia Bonzanni, Martin Grube, Carlo Ventura, Joseph McCard, Iain George Johnston, and to members of the Mitochondrial Psychobiology Group and Murugan Lab for helpful discussions and input. We gratefully acknowledge support from NIH grants R01MH119336, R01MH122706, R01AG066828, RF1AG076821, R01AG086764, R01MH137190, and Baszucki Group to M.P., and the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada Discovery grant RGPIN-2021-03783 to N.J.M.   
 21 
References 1 Wilson, E. O. Consilience: The unity of knowledge.  (Vintage Books, 1999). 2 Newton, I. Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica.  (1687). 3 Maxwell, J. C. Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism.  (Calendron Press, 1873). 4 Einstein, A. On the electrodynamics of moving bodies. Annalen der Physik 17, 891-921 (1905).  5 Feynman, R. Mathematical formulation of the quantum theory of electromagnetic interaction. Phys Rev 80, 440 (1950).  6 Watson, J. D. & Crick, F. H. Molecular structure of nucleic acids: A structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid. Nature 171, 737-738 (1953).  7 Kleiber, M. Body size and metabolic rate. Physiol Rev 27, 511-541 (1947). https://doi.org:10.1152/physrev.1947.27.4.511 8 West, G. B., Brown, J. H. & Enquist, B. J. A general model for the origin of allometric scaling laws in biology. Science 276, 122-126 (1997). https://doi.org:10.1126/science.276.5309.122 9 Levin, M. Molecular bioelectricity: how endogenous voltage potentials control cell behavior and instruct pattern regulation in vivo. Mol Biol Cell 25, 3835-3850 (2014). https://doi.org:10.1091/mbc.E13-12-0708 10 Mitchell, P. & Moyle, J. Chemiosmotic hypothesis of oxidative phosphorylation. Nature 213, 137-139 (1967).  11 Wallace, D. C. Mitochondrial genetics: a paradigm for aging and degenerative diseases? Science 256, 628-632 (1992).  12 Prigogine, I. in Evolution and consciousness   (eds E. Jantsch & C.H. Waddington)  99-133 (Addison-Wesley, 1976). 13 Penocchio, E., Rao, R. & Esposito, M. Thermodynamic efficiency in dissipative chemistry. Nat Commun 10, 3865 (2019). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41467-019-11676-x 14 Lane, N. Transformer: The Deep Chemistry of Life and Death.  (WW Norton, 2022). 15 Lane, N. & Martin, W. The energetics of genome complexity. Nature 467, 929-934 (2010). https://doi.org:nature09486 [pii]10.1038/nature09486 16 Wallace, D. C. Bioenergetics, the origins of complexity, and the ascent of man. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 Suppl 2, 8947-8953 (2010). https://doi.org:0914635107 [pii]10.1073/pnas.0914635107 17 Picard, M. Energy transduction and the mind–mitochondria connection. The Biochemist 44, 14-18 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1042/bio_2022_118 18 Xin, H. et al. Quantum biological tunnel junction for electron transfer imaging in live cells. Nat Commun 10, 3245 (2019). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41467-019-11212-x 
 22 
19 Hoppeler, H. & Weibel, E. R. Limits for oxygen and substrate transport in mammals. J Exp Biol 201, 1051-1064 (1998).  20 Mostajabi Sarhangi, S. & Matyushov, D. V. Electron Tunneling in Biology: When Does it Matter? ACS Omega 8, 27355-27365 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1021/acsomega.3c02719 21 Trixler, F. Quantum Tunnelling to the Origin and Evolution of Life. Curr Org Chem 17, 1758-1770 (2013). https://doi.org:10.2174/13852728113179990083 22 Fiedorczuk, K. et al. Atomic structure of the entire mammalian mitochondrial complex I. Nature 538, 406-410 (2016). https://doi.org:10.1038/nature19794 23 Letts, J. A., Fiedorczuk, K. & Sazanov, L. A. The architecture of respiratory supercomplexes. Nature 537, 644-648 (2016). https://doi.org:10.1038/nature19774 24 Schrödinger, E. What Is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell.  (Cambridge University Press, 1944). 25 McMillen, P. & Levin, M. Collective intelligence: A unifying concept for integrating biology across scales and substrates. Commun Biol 7, 378 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1038/s42003-024-06037-4 26 Darveau, C. A., Suarez, R. K., Andrews, R. D. & Hochachka, P. W. Allometric cascade as a unifying principle of body mass effects on metabolism. Nature 417, 166-170 (2002). https://doi.org:10.1038/417166a 27 West, G. B., Woodruff, W. H. & Brown, J. H. Allometric scaling of metabolic rate from molecules and mitochondria to cells and mammals. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 Suppl 1, 2473-2478 (2002). https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.012579799 28 Whittemore, K., Vera, E., Martinez-Nevado, E., Sanpera, C. & Blasco, M. A. Telomere shortening rate predicts species life span. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116, 15122-15127 (2019). https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.1902452116 29 Cagan, A. et al. Somatic mutation rates scale with lifespan across mammals. Nature 604, 517-524 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41586-022-04618-z 30 Iwata, R. et al. Mitochondria metabolism sets the species-specific tempo of neuronal development. Science 379, eabn4705 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1126/science.abn4705 31 Diaz-Cuadros, M. et al. Metabolic regulation of species-specific developmental rates. Nature 613, 550-557 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41586-022-05574-4 32 Ruggiero, C. et al. High basal metabolic rate is a risk factor for mortality: the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 63, 698-706 (2008). https://doi.org:10.1093/gerona/63.7.698 33 Jumpertz, R. et al. Higher energy expenditure in humans predicts natural mortality. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 96, E972-976 (2011). https://doi.org:10.1210/jc.2010-2944 34 Speakman, J. R. Body size, energy metabolism and lifespan. J Exp Biol 208, 1717-1730 (2005). https://doi.org:10.1242/jeb.01556 
 23 
35 Zhao, Z. et al. Body temperature is a more important modulator of lifespan than metabolic rate in two small mammals. Nat Metab 4, 320-326 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1038/s42255-022-00545-5 36 Arroyo, J. I., Diez, B., Kempes, C. P., West, G. B. & Marquet, P. A. A general theory for temperature dependence in biology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 119, e2119872119 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.2119872119 37 Semercioz-Oduncuoglu, A. S., Mitchell, S. E., Ozilgen, M., Yilmaz, B. & Speakman, J. R. A step toward precision gerontology: Lifespan effects of calorie and protein restriction are consistent with predicted impacts on entropy generation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 120, e2300624120 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.2300624120 38 Taivassalo, T. et al. The spectrum of exercise tolerance in mitochondrial myopathies: a study of 40 patients. Brain 126, 413-423 (2003).  39 Picard, M., Wallace, D. C. & Burelle, Y. The rise of mitochondria in medicine. Mitochondrion 30, 105-116 (2016). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.mito.2016.07.003 40 Lopez-Otin, C., Blasco, M. A., Partridge, L., Serrano, M. & Kroemer, G. Hallmarks of aging: An expanding universe. Cell 186, 243-278 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cell.2022.11.001 41 Hanahan, D. Hallmarks of Cancer: New Dimensions. Cancer Discov 12, 31-46 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-1059 42 Sercel, A. J. et al. Hypermetabolism and energetic constraints in mitochondrial disorders. Nat Metab 6, 192-195 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1038/s42255-023-00968-8 43 Sturm, G. et al. OxPhos defects cause hypermetabolism and reduce lifespan in cells and in patients with mitochondrial diseases. Commun Biol 6, 22 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1038/s42003-022-04303-x 44 Makarieva, A. M. et al. Mean mass-specific metabolic rates are strikingly similar across life's major domains: Evidence for life's metabolic optimum. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105, 16994-16999 (2008). https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.0802148105 45 Di Francesco, A. et al. Dietary restriction impacts health and lifespan of genetically diverse mice. Nature 634, 684-692 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41586-024-08026-3 46 Wallace, R. K., Benson, H. & Wilson, A. F. A wakeful hypometabolic physiologic state. Am J Physiol 221, 795-799 (1971). https://doi.org:10.1152/ajplegacy.1971.221.3.795 47 Crosswell, A. D. et al. Deep rest: An integrative model of how contemplative practices combat stress and enhance the body's restorative capacity. Psychol Rev 131, 247-270 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1037/rev0000453 48 Wu, Z. et al. Mechanisms controlling mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration through the thermogenic coactivator PGC-1. Cell 98, 115-124 (1999). https://doi.org:S0092-8674(00)80611-X [pii]10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80611-X 49 Neufer, P. D. et al. Understanding the Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Physical Activity-Induced Health Benefits. Cell Metab 22, 4-11 (2015). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cmet.2015.05.011 
 24 
50 Chinsomboon, J. et al. The transcriptional coactivator PGC-1alpha mediates exercise-induced angiogenesis in skeletal muscle. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106, 21401-21406 (2009). https://doi.org:0909131106 [pii]10.1073/pnas.0909131106 51 Desdin-Mico, G. et al. T cells with dysfunctional mitochondria induce multimorbidity and premature senescence. Science 368, 1371-1376 (2020). https://doi.org:10.1126/science.aax0860 52 Roberts, M. N. et al. A Ketogenic Diet Extends Longevity and Healthspan in Adult Mice. Cell Metab 27, 1156 (2018). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cmet.2018.04.005 53 Williams, A. S. et al. Ketone flux through BDH1 supports metabolic remodeling of skeletal and cardiac muscles in response to intermittent time-restricted feeding. Cell Metab 36, 422-437 e428 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cmet.2024.01.007 54 DeBerardinis, R. J., Lum, J. J., Hatzivassiliou, G. & Thompson, C. B. The biology of cancer: metabolic reprogramming fuels cell growth and proliferation. Cell Metab 7, 11-20 (2008). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cmet.2007.10.002 55 Marchingo, J. M. & Cantrell, D. A. Protein synthesis, degradation, and energy metabolism in T cell immunity. Cell Mol Immunol 19, 303-315 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41423-021-00792-8 56 Wang, A. & Medzhitov, R. Counting Calories: The Cost of Inflammation. Cell 177, 223-224 (2019). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cell.2019.03.022 57 Bryant, S. J. & Machta, B. B. Physical Constraints in Intracellular Signaling: The Cost of Sending a Bit. Phys Rev Lett 131, 068401 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1103/PhysRevLett.131.068401 58 Mehta, P. & Schwab, D. J. Energetic costs of cellular computation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109, 17978-17982 (2012). https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.1207814109 59 Wang, T.-L., Kuznets-Speck, B., Broderick, J. & Hinczewski, M. The price of a bit: energetic costs and the evolution of cellular signaling. bioRxiv, 2020.2010.2006.327700 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1101/2020.10.06.327700 60 Lan, G., Sartori, P., Neumann, S., Sourjik, V. & Tu, Y. The energy-speed-accuracy tradeoff in sensory adaptation. Nat Phys 8, 422-428 (2012). https://doi.org:10.1038/nphys2276 61 Kuznetsov, A. V. et al. Analysis of mitochondrial function in situ in permeabilized muscle fibers, tissues and cells. Nat Protoc 3, 965-976 (2008). https://doi.org:nprot.2008.61 [pii]10.1038/nprot.2008.61 62 Losa, J. et al. Perspective: a stirring role for metabolism in cells. Mol Syst Biol 18, e10822 (2022). https://doi.org:10.15252/msb.202110822 63 Cavallini, C., Olivi, E., Tassinari, R. & Ventura, C. Mechanotransduction, cellular biophotonic activity, and signaling patterns for tissue regeneration. J Biol Chem 300, 107847 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107847 64 Melanie, B., Caroline, R., Yann, V. & Damien, R. Allometry of mitochondrial efficiency is set by metabolic intensity. Proceedings. Biological sciences / The Royal Society 286, 20191693 (2019). https://doi.org:10.1098/rspb.2019.1693 
 25 
65 Lu, Y. R., Tian, X. & Sinclair, D. A. The Information Theory of Aging. Nat Aging 3, 1486-1499 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1038/s43587-023-00527-6 66 Meyer, D. H. & Schumacher, B. Aging clocks based on accumulating stochastic variation. Nat Aging 4, 871-885 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1038/s43587-024-00619-x 67 Moldakozhayev, A. & Gladyshev, V. N. Metabolism, homeostasis, and aging. Trends Endocrinol Metab 34, 158-169 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.tem.2023.01.003 68 Sharma, R. et al. Circulating markers of NADH-reductive stress correlate with mitochondrial disease severity. J Clin Invest 131 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1172/JCI136055 69 Turrens, J. F. Mitochondrial formation of reactive oxygen species. J Physiol 552, 335-344 (2003). https://doi.org:10.1113/jphysiol.2003.049478jphysiol.2003.049478 [pii] 70 Shadel, G. S. & Horvath, T. L. Mitochondrial ROS signaling in organismal homeostasis. Cell 163, 560-569 (2015). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.001 71 Xiao, W., Wang, R. S., Handy, D. E. & Loscalzo, J. NAD(H) and NADP(H) Redox Couples and Cellular Energy Metabolism. Antioxid Redox Signal 28, 251-272 (2018). https://doi.org:10.1089/ars.2017.7216 72 Han, S. et al. Mitochondrial integrated stress response controls lung epithelial cell fate. Nature 620, 890-897 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41586-023-06423-8 73 Mick, E. et al. Distinct mitochondrial defects trigger the integrated stress response depending on the metabolic state of the cell. eLife 9 (2020). https://doi.org:10.7554/eLife.49178 74 Cheng, Y. W., Liu, J. & Finkel, T. Mitohormesis. Cell Metab 35, 1872-1886 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cmet.2023.10.011 75 Monzel, A. S., Levin, M. & Picard, M. The energetics of cellular life transitions. Life Metab 3, load051 (2024).  76 Turner, L. et al. Single-cell NAD(H) levels predict clonal lymphocyte expansion dynamics. Sci Immunol 9, eadj7238 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1126/sciimmunol.adj7238 77 Medzhitov, R. Origin and physiological roles of inflammation. Nature 454, 428-435 (2008). https://doi.org:10.1038/nature07201 78 Kistner, T. M., Pedersen, B. K. & Lieberman, D. E. Interleukin 6 as an energy allocator in muscle tissue. Nat Metab 4, 170-179 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1038/s42255-022-00538-4 79 Morland, C. et al. Exercise induces cerebral VEGF and angiogenesis via the lactate receptor HCAR1. Nat Commun 8, 15557 (2017). https://doi.org:10.1038/ncomms15557 80 Hubens, W. H. G. et al. Blood biomarkers for assessment of mitochondrial dysfunction: An expert review. Mitochondrion 62, 187-204 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.mito.2021.10.008 81 Bartman, C. R. et al. Slow TCA flux and ATP production in primary solid tumours but not metastases. Nature 614, 349-357 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41586-022-05661-6 
 26 
82 Lee, W. D. et al. Lactate homeostasis is maintained through regulation of glycolysis and lipolysis. Cell Metab (2025). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cmet.2024.12.009 83 Holloszy, J. O. & Coyle, E. F. Adaptations of skeletal muscle to endurance exercise and their metabolic consequences. J Appl Physiol 56, 831-838 (1984).  84 Tanaka, K. et al. Relationships of anaerobic threshold and onset of blood lactate accumulation with endurance performance. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 52, 51-56 (1983). https://doi.org:10.1007/BF00429025 85 Greiwe, J. S., Hickner, R. C., Shah, S. D., Cryer, P. E. & Holloszy, J. O. Norepinephrine response to exercise at the same relative intensity before and after endurance exercise training. J Appl Physiol (1985) 86, 531-535 (1999). https://doi.org:10.1152/jappl.1999.86.2.531 86 Schamne, J. C., Ressetti, J. C., Bertuzzi, R., Okuno, N. M. & Lima-Silva, A. E. Acute Caffeine Intake Reduces Perceived Exertion But Not Muscle Pain during Moderate Intensity Cycling Exercise in Women with Fibromyalgia. J Am Nutr Assoc 41, 720-727 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1080/07315724.2021.1958102 87 Vincent, A. E. et al. Subcellular origin of mitochondrial DNA deletions in human skeletal muscle. Ann Neurol 84, 289-301 (2018). https://doi.org:10.1002/ana.25288 88 Tarnopolsky, M. A. & Raha, S. Mitochondrial myopathies: diagnosis, exercise intolerance, and treatment options. Med Sci Sports Exerc 37, 2086-2093 (2005). https://doi.org:00005768-200512000-00011 [pii] 89 Taivassalo, T., Ayyad, K. & Haller, R. G. Increased capillaries in mitochondrial myopathy: implications for the regulation of oxygen delivery. Brain 135, 53-61 (2012). https://doi.org:awr293 [pii]10.1093/brain/awr293 90 Jeppesen, T. D., Orngreen, M. C., van Hall, G., Haller, R. G. & Vissing, J. Fat metabolism during exercise in patients with mitochondrial disease. Arch Neurol 66, 365-370 (2009). https://doi.org:66/3/365 [pii]10.1001/archneurol.2009.24 91 Gorman, G. S. et al. Perceived fatigue is highly prevalent and debilitating in patients with mitochondrial disease. Neuromuscul Disord 25, 563-566 (2015). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.nmd.2015.03.001 92 Hoppeler, H. et al. Endurance training in humans: aerobic capacity and structure of skeletal muscle. J Appl Physiol (1985) 59, 320-327 (1985).  93 Gouspillou, G. et al. Accurate determination of the oxidative phosphorylation affinity for ADP in isolated mitochondria. PLoS One 6, e20709 (2011). https://doi.org:10.1371/journal.pone.0020709PONE-D-11-03674 [pii] 94 Basan, M. et al. Overflow metabolism in Escherichia coli results from efficient proteome allocation. Nature 528, 99-104 (2015). https://doi.org:10.1038/nature15765 95 Lynch, M. & Marinov, G. K. The bioenergetic costs of a gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112, 15690-15695 (2015). https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.1514974112 96 Kolnes, K. J. et al. Effects of seven days' fasting on physical performance and metabolic adaptation during exercise in humans. Nat Commun 16, 122 (2025). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41467-024-55418-0 
 27 
97 Jacobi, D. et al. Hepatic Bmal1 Regulates Rhythmic Mitochondrial Dynamics and Promotes Metabolic Fitness. Cell Metab 22, 709-720 (2015). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cmet.2015.08.006 98 Ip, W. K. E., Hoshi, N., Shouval, D. S., Snapper, S. & Medzhitov, R. Anti-inflammatory effect of IL-10 mediated by metabolic reprogramming of macrophages. Science 356, 513-519 (2017). https://doi.org:10.1126/science.aal3535 99 Lewis, J. A., Huq, A. & Najarro, P. Inhibition of mitochondrial function by interferon. J Biol Chem 271, 13184-13190 (1996). https://doi.org:10.1074/jbc.271.22.13184 100 Sharma, S. et al. A pathogenic role for IL-10 signalling in capillary stalling and cognitive impairment in type 1 diabetes. Nat Metab 6, 2082-2099 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1038/s42255-024-01159-9 101 Pan, X. et al. A genetically encoded tool to increase cellular NADH/NAD(+) ratio in living cells. Nat Chem Biol 20, 594-604 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41589-023-01460-w 102 Patgiri, A. et al. An engineered enzyme that targets circulating lactate to alleviate intracellular NADH:NAD(+) imbalance. Nat Biotechnol 38, 309-313 (2020). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41587-019-0377-7 103 Goodman, R. P. et al. Hepatic NADH reductive stress underlies common variation in metabolic traits. Nature 583, 122-126 (2020). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41586-020-2337-2 104 Lockhart, S. M., Saudek, V. & O'Rahilly, S. GDF15: A hormone conveying somatic distress to the brain. Endocr Rev 41 (2020). https://doi.org:10.1210/endrev/bnaa007 105 Morrow, R. M. et al. Mitochondrial energy deficiency leads to hyperproliferation of skeletal muscle mitochondria and enhanced insulin sensitivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114, 2705-2710 (2017). https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.1700997114 106 Kang, S. G. et al. Differential roles of GDF15 and FGF21 in systemic metabolic adaptation to the mitochondrial integrated stress response. iScience 24, 102181 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.isci.2021.102181 107 Forsstrom, S. et al. Fibroblast Growth Factor 21 Drives Dynamics of Local and Systemic Stress Responses in Mitochondrial Myopathy with mtDNA Deletions. Cell Metab 30, 1040-1054 e1047 (2019). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cmet.2019.08.019 108 Huang, Q. et al. The Energetic Stress Marker GDF15 is Induced by Acute Psychosocial Stress. bioRxiv (2024). https://doi.org:10.1101/2024.04.19.590241 109 Kaspar, S. et al. Adaptation to mitochondrial stress requires CHOP-directed tuning of ISR. Sci Adv 7 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1126/sciadv.abf0971 110 Lehtonen, J. M. et al. Diagnostic value of serum biomarkers FGF21 and GDF15 compared to muscle sample in mitochondrial disease. J Inherit Metab Dis 44, 469-480 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1002/jimd.12307 111 Lui, C. C. et al. Metaboception Via GDF15 Conveys Energetic Pain to the Brain. Nat Rev Endocrinol ((under review)).  
 28 
112 Borner, T. et al. GDF15 Induces an Aversive Visceral Malaise State that Drives Anorexia and Weight Loss. Cell Rep 31, 107543 (2020). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107543 113 Fejzo, M. et al. GDF15 linked to maternal risk of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy. Nature 625, 760-767 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41586-023-06921-9 114 Shen, C. et al. Plasma proteomic signatures of social isolation and loneliness associated with morbidity and mortality. Nat Hum Behav (2025). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41562-024-02078-1 115 Li, Y., Mei, T., Sun, T., Xiao, X. & Peng, R. Altered circulating GDF-15 level predicts sex hormone imbalance in males with major depressive disorder. BMC Psychiatry 23, 28 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1186/s12888-023-04527-z 116 López-Otín, C. & Kroemer, G. Hallmarks of Health. Cell 184, 33-63 (2021). https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.034 117 Ayres, J. S. The Biology of Physiological Health. Cell 181, 250-269 (2020). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.036 118 Cohen, A. A. et al. ntrinsic Health as a Foundation for a Science of Health. https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/q7a84. Open Sci Founda (under review) (2024).  119 Deng, Y. T. et al. Atlas of the plasma proteome in health and disease in 53,026 adults. Cell 188, 253-271 e257 (2025). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cell.2024.10.045 120 Huang, Q. et al. Mitochondrial health, prenatal distress, and gestational age: investigation of cf-mtDNA and GDF15 in two pregnancy studies from the USA and Turkey. Mitochondrion 84, 102057 (2025). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.mito.2025.102057 121 Diaz, P., Powell, T. L. & Jansson, T. The role of placental nutrient sensing in maternal-fetal resource allocation. Biology of reproduction 91, 82 (2014). https://doi.org:10.1095/biolreprod.114.121798 122 Dimitriadis, E. et al. Pre-eclampsia. Nat Rev Dis Primers 9, 8 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41572-023-00417-6 123 Lai, T. P. et al. Telomeres and replicative cellular aging of the human placenta and chorioamniotic membranes. Scientific reports 11, 5115 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41598-021-84728-2 124 Pan, M. et al. The role of placental aging in adverse pregnancy outcomes: A mitochondrial perspective. Life Sci 329, 121924 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.lfs.2023.121924 125 Sprah, L., Dernovsek, M. Z., Wahlbeck, K. & Haaramo, P. Psychiatric readmissions and their association with physical comorbidity: a systematic literature review. BMC Psychiatry 17, 2 (2017). https://doi.org:10.1186/s12888-016-1172-3 126 Lee, D. S. et al. The implications of human metabolic network topology for disease comorbidity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105, 9880-9885 (2008). https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.0802208105 
 29 
127 Greene, J. A. & Loscalzo, J. Putting the Patient Back Together - Social Medicine, Network Medicine, and the Limits of Reductionism. N Engl J Med 377, 2493-2499 (2017). https://doi.org:10.1056/NEJMms1706744 128 Siebner, H. R. et al. Transcranial magnetic stimulation of the brain: What is stimulated? - A consensus and critical position paper. Clin Neurophysiol 140, 59-97 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.clinph.2022.04.022 129 Havenith, M. N. et al. Decreased CO(2) saturation during circular breathwork supports emergence of altered states of consciousness. Commun Psychol 3, 59 (2025). https://doi.org:10.1038/s44271-025-00247-0 130 Yaden, D. B. & Griffiths, R. R. The Subjective Effects of Psychedelics Are Necessary for Their Enduring Therapeutic Effects. ACS Pharmacol Transl Sci 4, 568-572 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1021/acsptsci.0c00194 131 Kwiecien, S. Y. & McHugh, M. P. The cold truth: the role of cryotherapy in the treatment of injury and recovery from exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol 121, 2125-2142 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1007/s00421-021-04683-8 132 Nielsen, A., Dusek, J. A., Taylor-Swanson, L. & Tick, H. Acupuncture Therapy as an Evidence-Based Nonpharmacologic Strategy for Comprehensive Acute Pain Care: The Academic Consortium Pain Task Force White Paper Update. Pain Med 23, 1582-1612 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1093/pm/pnac056 133 Zein, R., Selting, W. & Hamblin, M. R. Review of light parameters and photobiomodulation efficacy: dive into complexity. J Biomed Opt 23, 1-17 (2018). https://doi.org:10.1117/1.JBO.23.12.120901 134 Bishop, D. J., Lee, M. J. & Picard, M. Exercise as Mitochondrial Medicine: How Does the Exercise Prescription Affect Mitochondrial Adaptations to Training? Annu Rev Physiol 87, 107-129 (2025). https://doi.org:10.1146/annurev-physiol-022724-104836 135 Markwald, R. R. et al. Impact of insufficient sleep on total daily energy expenditure, food intake, and weight gain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110, 5695-5700 (2013). https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.1216951110 136 Phillips, M. C. L., Thotathil, Z., Dass, P. H., Ziad, F. & Moon, B. G. Ketogenic metabolic therapy in conjunction with standard treatment for glioblastoma: A case report. Oncol Lett 27, 230 (2024). https://doi.org:10.3892/ol.2024.14363 137 Mujica-Parodi, L. R. et al. Diet modulates brain network stability, a biomarker for brain aging, in young adults. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117, 6170-6177 (2020). https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.1913042117 138 Martin-McGill, K. J., Bresnahan, R., Levy, R. G. & Cooper, P. N. Ketogenic diets for drug-resistant epilepsy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6, CD001903 (2020). https://doi.org:10.1002/14651858.CD001903.pub5 139 Poganik, J. R. et al. Biological age is increased by stress and restored upon recovery. Cell Metab 35, 807-820 e805 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cmet.2023.03.015 140 Shaulson, E. D., Cohen, A. A. & Picard, M. The brain-body energy conservation model of aging. Nat Aging 4, 1354-1371 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1038/s43587-024-00716-x 
 30 
141 Varela, F. J., Rosch, E. & Thompson, E. The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience.  (The MIT Press, 1992). 142 Gimenez-Palomo, A. et al. Reduced mitochondrial respiratory capacity in patients with acute episodes of bipolar disorder: Could bipolar disorder be a state-dependent mitochondrial disease? Acta Psychiatr Scand 149, 52-64 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1111/acps.13635 143 Campbell, I. H. & Campbell, H. The metabolic overdrive hypothesis: hyperglycolysis and glutaminolysis in bipolar mania. Mol Psychiatry 29, 1521-1527 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41380-024-02431-w 144 Liu, C. C., Trumpff, C., Huang, Q., Juster, R. P. & Picard, M. Biopsychosocial Correlates of Resting and Stress-Reactive Salivary GDF15: Preliminary Findings. bioRxiv (2025). https://doi.org:10.1101/2025.02.27.640377 145 Andreazza, A. C. et al. Brain and body energy metabolism and potential for treatment of psychiatric disorders. Nature Mental Health (2025). https://doi.org:10.1038/s44220-025-00422-6 146 Keil, G., Cummings, E. & de Magalhaes, J. P. Being cool: how body temperature influences ageing and longevity. Biogerontology 16, 383-397 (2015). https://doi.org:10.1007/s10522-015-9571-2 147 Lee, H. J. et al. Cold temperature extends longevity and prevents disease-related protein aggregation through PA28gamma-induced proteasomes. Nat Aging 3, 546-566 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1038/s43587-023-00383-4 148 Rzechorzek, N. M. et al. A daily temperature rhythm in the human brain predicts survival after brain injury. Brain 145, 2031-2048 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1093/brain/awab466 149 Graf, W. Liver temperature in relation to changes in body postition and activity. Acta Physiologica Scandinavica 46, 91-96 (1959).  150 Yulug, B., Velioglu, H. A., Sayman, D., Cankaya, S. & Hanoglu, L. Brain temperature in healthy and diseased conditions: A review on the special implications of MRS for monitoring brain temperature. Biomed Pharmacother 160, 114287 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.biopha.2023.114287 151 Guo, Y. et al. Plasma proteomic profiles predict future dementia in healthy adults. Nat Aging 4, 247-260 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1038/s43587-023-00565-0 152 Chretien, D. et al. Mitochondria are physiologically maintained at close to 50 degrees C. PLoS Biol 16, e2003992 (2018). https://doi.org:10.1371/journal.pbio.2003992 153 Jacobs, H. T., Rustin, P., Benit, P., Davidi, D. & Terzioglu, M. Mitochondria: great balls of fire. FEBS J 291, 5327-5341 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1111/febs.17316 154 Sarnataro, R., Velasco, C. D., Monaco, N., Kempf, A. & Miesenböck, G. Mitochondrial origins of the pressure to sleep. Nature (in press), 2024.2002.2023.581770 (2025). https://doi.org:10.1101/2024.02.23.581770 155 Pontzer, H. et al. Daily energy expenditure through the human life course. Science 373, 808-812 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1126/science.abe5017 
 31 
156 Tanaka, T. et al. Plasma proteomic signature of age in healthy humans. Aging Cell 17, e12799 (2018). https://doi.org:10.1111/acel.12799    
 32 
Figure legends  Figure 1. Assumptions of the Energy Resistance Principle – ERP. 1) Without resistance to energy flux (e.g., in the vacuum of outer space) transformation is not possible. Energy resistance allows for transformation and dissipative energy loss, providing warmth and other required conditions for life (see Box 1). Optimal health processes occur within a narrow window of éR where life is maintained at a minimum energy cost and information loss, optimizing longevity. Factors that increase energy consumption beyond sustainable levels (e.g., sepsis, stress) or block electron flux in mitochondria (e.g., asphyxiation) rapidly lead to death by excessively elevating éR. 2) Dynamic regulation and processing/computing of information occurs via rapid changes in éR within the biological network (e.g., neuronal networks, vascular networks, organellar networks, gene networks). As in electrical systems, the reduction in resistance acts in a demand-driven manner to draw more energy flux through specific components. In addition, éR regulated by top-down processes (e.g., brain-mediated endocrine signaling, vasoconstriction of vascular bed) directs and stabilizes whole-organism éR. 3) Adaptive recalibrations and long-term adaptation operate by producing salutary structural and functional changes that minimize éR at different levels of complexity spanning molecular, cellular, physiological, and anatomical components, whole-organism behaviors, and subjective experiences.  Figure 2. The energetic cascade of electrons from food to oxygen in mitochondria in the biological circuitry. Energy flux through the organism can be abstracted as a simple electrical or hydraulic flow diagram. The flux of electrons from ingested food to oxygen culminates in the mitochondrial electron transport chain where electrons sequestered by photosynthesis from H2O and CO2 onto organic molecules are electronegatively attracted by oxygen. Each “step down” transformation, or transition step, is marked by energy resistance (éR) that enables the transformation of energy from one form to another (e.g., chemical to electrical, electrical to protonmotive force). At the scale of the organism, physiological steps of resistance positioned in series include ① digestion (stomach) and assimilation (intestines), ② cardiac output (heart and vasculature), ③ tissue perfusion (capillary beds), ④ transport across the cell membrane (insulin-regulated and independent transport), ⑤ intracellular enzymatic cascades (e.g., glycolysis), ⑥ mitochondrial import (e.g., carnitine shuttle) and the Krebs cycle, ⑦	electron transport chain (ETC) that generates ΔμH+. With ⑧ oxygen supply this set of biophysical constraints largely determines the system’s respiratory capacity – or energy flux capacity. ⑨ The ATP synthase dissipates ΔμH+ and enable electron flux when ATP is consumed. ⑩ Excessive resistance leads to electron backflow onto pyruvate, converted to lactate or alanine that can be exported to relieve excess cellular éR. Note the parallel arrangement of mitochondrial electron transport chain transistors, which decreases the circuit’s total effective resistance each time a new mitochondrion is added to the system via mitochondrial biogenesis.   Figure 3. Health- or disease-promoting factors act through energy resistance to produce the hallmarks of disease. Factors influencing energy resistance (éR) can act on either the numerator (energy potential, EP) or the denominator (flux capacity, f2). Over time, éR generates the key hallmarks of human diseases either directly driven by impaired electron flux (reductive stress, oxidative stress, molecular damage) or indirectly by activating gene programs (pro-inflammatory states and cytokines, integrated stress response [ISR], and growth differentiation 
 33 
factor 15 [GDF15]). Thus, the biological origin of the hallmarks of disease can be traced back to excessive energy resistance, accounting also for why they frequently are co-morbid.  Figure 4. Dynamic changes and regulation in energy resistance in physiology and pathology. (A) Energy resistance (éR) triggers cell-autonomous, brain-based, and whole-organism responses that act either to i) conserve energy and decrease energy expenditure (i.e., inhibitory, lowering the numerator; top axis) or ii) compensate and increase flux capacity (i.e., activation, increasing the denominator; bottom axis). Excessive éR also triggers damage mitigation processes. (B) Depiction of dynamic energetic processes illustrating how: i) physical activity acutely increases energy potential (EP), eliciting a rapid increase in flux (f 2), whereas max flux capacity remains unchanged (quasi-constant on short time scales). Mild and moderate physical activity produce minimal increases in éR that trigger adaptive, health-promoting changes. Exercise intensities above maximal flux capacity (anaerobic threshold) trigger large rises in éR. ii) Sleep decreases EP, but like exercise does not alter f2 producing a sustained reduction in éR associated with recovery, consolidation, growth, and repair. iii) Exposure to a toxin (or going to high altitude with low O2) that linearly inhibits mitochondrial respiration produces an exponential rise in éR, likely experienced as exhaustion. iv) Exercise training over weeks has a minimal effect on EP (energy compensation) but gradually increases f 2, exponentially reducing éR. We postulate that the effects of “aerobic fitness” and the feeling arise from the reduction in éR. (C) Changes éR manifest across levels of biological complexity over wide time scales.  Figure 5. Testable predictions and operationalization of key terms in the ERP model. Measurable factors that contribute to elevate Energy Potential (EP) or that decrease flux (f 2) are “éR drivers”. Factors that become elevated directly or indirectly with high éR are “éR markers”. Signs and symptoms that result from acute or chronically elevated éR are “éR phenotypes”. FFAs, free fatty acids, GDF15, growth differentiation factor 15; HbA1c, glycated hemoglobin; GLT, glucolipotoxicity; NE, norepinephrine; RMR, resting metabolic rate.  Figure 6. Distribution of energy resistance in the context of pregnancy. (Left) The placenta syncytiotrophoblasts express unusually high levels of GDF15 protein—the highest reported of all human tissues in the Fantom RNAseq dataset (Antibody HPA011191, https://www.proteinatlas.org/). According to the ERP, GDF15 is a marker of elevated energy resistance (éR), implying that the placenta operates at remarkably high éR, accounting for the >2 orders of magnitude increase in maternal blood GDF15 during pregnancy. On the other hand, the ERP predicts that the stemness and proliferative state during embryogenesis requires an abnormally low éR environment. From an energetic circuit perspective, excessively low éR is unsustainable at the whole organism level since the low éR state of the foetus would operate as a sink (energy flows down the path of least resistance), uncontrollably drawing in organismal energy resources. The ERP suggests that the female body establishes a rapidly aging, signaling (through GDF15) high éR barrier, balancing out the low éR state of its embryonic content, thereby normalizing éR at the whole organism level.  
Energy Potential Flux Energy Resistance 
Measurement
•Pyruvate, Glutamate, Malate, other substrates 
•NADH
•Oxygen consumption (Respirometry) •NADH/NAD+ ratio 
•ROS production
‐ •Substrates (Pyruvate, Succinate, others) 
•Calcium uptake and TCA cycle activity?
•Uncoupling (DNP, FCCP) 
•ADP (State 3 respiration) 
•NAD+ (↑ flux capacity?)
— 
‑ •Substrate import inhibitors (UK5099, BPTES, Etomoxir) 
•Anaplerosis?
•Hypoxia, ETC defects, OxPhos inhibitors (Pier A, Oligo, others) 
•Low or no ADP (State 4 resp) 
•mitosEcSTH (mito-targeted)
 — 
Measurement
•Glucose, lipids, ketone bodies, other substrates 
•Contraction, action potentials, secretion, ↑ work
•Oxygen consumption (respirometry) 
•Metabolic flux analysis
•NADH/NAD+ ratio 
•Lactate, Alanine, Lac/Pyr ratio 
•ISR activation, GDF15
‐ •Stimulation, activation, etc. 
•↑ [glucose], [fatty acids] 
•Anabolic (Testosterone) and stress hormones (NE, GC)?
•Mito biogenesis, perfusion system (vs stagnant media) 
•Uncoupling (DNP, FCCP) 
•LbNOX (NADH oxidase)
—  
‑ •↓ glucose, other substrates 
•↓ growth factors
•Hypoxia, ↓ substrate import 
•Insulin resistance 
•EcSTH (transhydrogenase)
— 
Measurement
•Work performed (Watts) 
•Blood pressure 
•Heart rate, other organ-specific measures of work performed
•Oxygen consumption (indirect calorimetry) 
•Metabolic flux analysis
•Blood and saliva GDF15 
•Lactate, Alanine, Lac/Pyr ratio 
•N-lactoyl-aa (Tyr, Leu, Val, Phe), BOHCAs, BOHFAs 
•Perceived fatigue, pain?
‐ •Muscle contraction, physical activity (acute exercise) 
•Mental stress, stress hormones 
•Eating
•Muscle contraction, physical activity (acute exercise) 
•Physical movement, laughing, crying, hyperventilation
 — 
‑ •Fasting (GLP-1 agonists) 
•Sleep 
•Contemplative practices (e.g., meditation)
•Physical inactivity, behavioral inhibition 
•Hypoxia, breath holding 
•LOXCAT (lactate oxidase)
— 
EP f 2 éR
Organelle / MitochondrionCell / TissueSystem / Organism
Table 1
 34 
Table 1. ERP Measurement Toolkit. Upward and downward arrows indicate strategies to acutely increase or decrease EP or f 2; applied chronically, some treatments can produce compensatory responses with the opposite effect. Energy resistance (éR) is the product of EP flowing through constrained flux f 2, so we emphasize experimental approaches to manipulating EP and f 2, and to measuring all three variables at the organellar, cellular, and systemic level.  Abbreviations: BOHCAs, β-hydroxy acylcarnitines 68; BOHFAs, β-hydroxy fatty acids 68; BPTES, Bis-2-(5-phenylacetamido-1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-yl)ethyl sulfide; Cort, cortisol or glucocorticoids; DNP, 2,4-dinitrophenol; Etomoxir, carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1a (CPT1a) inhibitor (mitochondrial fatty acid uptake inhibitor); EcSTH, soluble transhydrogenase from Escherichia coli101; FCCP, carbonyl cyanide-p-trifluoromethoxyphenylhydrazone (proton uncoupler); GDF15, growth differentiation factor 15; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide 1; Lac/Pyr ratio, lactate-to-pyruvate ratio; LbNOX, water-forming NADH oxidase from Lactobacillus brevis103; LOXCAT, bacterial lactate oxidase (LOX) and catalase (CAT) fusion protein 102; mitoEcSTH, soluble transhydrogenase from Escherichia coli targeted to mitochondria101; NAD+, oxidized nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (reducing equivalent); NADH, reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (containing an electron to donate); N-lactoyl-aa (Tyr, Leu, Val, Phe), N-lactoyl-amino acids (Tyrosine, Leucine/Isoleucine, Valine, Phenylalanine) 68; NE, norepinephrine; Oligo, oligomycin A (ATP synthase inhibitor); Pier A, piericidin A (complex I inhibitor); TCA, tricarboxylic acid cycle (or Krebs cycle); UK5099, pyruvate carrier inhibitor.  
Figure 1
ENERGY RESISTANCE PRINCIPLE — ERP
Energy Potential 
 Transformation
Heat
Movement of life
No life possible
Flux without  
resistance
1⏐Life requires optimal éR2⏐Regulation, computation, and patterning by varying éR3⏐Development and long-term adaptation achieved via éR
EP
EP
EP
EP
Energy pattern
Energy potential of system “patterned” by applying variable resistances
Molecular Cellular PhysiologicalAnatomicalBehavioral
éR
DNAm
mRNA
Epigenome Gene expression
Mito biogenesis
Angiogenesis Blood flow Cytokines
Atrophy Hypertrophy Activity Inactivity
Feedback regulation at multiple levels 
éR sensors & regulators
Negative feedback acting to decrease local and/or systemic éR
éR
Local computation
Top-down regulation
Health
Energy Resistance (éR)Vital éR window
Sustainable health window
Death
Figure 2
Electron cascade from food to oxygen, encountering sequential sources of resistance
Electron transfer NADH→Complex I
Quantum tunneling (FeS clusters)
Electron transport (CoQ10, Cyt c)
Protonmotive force (ΔμH+)
NADHNAD+
O
2 H2O
mtDNA
NADH
O
2H2O
CO2
CO2
Food
Pyruvate
Lipids
Proteins
Carbs
Lactate
RATE LIMITING ? GENERALLY NOT RATE LIMITING
O 
2 ⊕
⊖
⊕⊕ ⊕⊕
O 
2
 O 
2
 O 
2
 O 
2
é
ATP synthesis rate dictates ΔμH+ and éR
Oxygendiﬀusion(lungs)
Alanine
H2O
CO2
O2
              CX HY Oz
①
②
③
④
⑤
⑥
⑦
⑧
⑩
Electron transport chain
⑨
é
 é
 é
é
é
é
é
⑥
CO2
“Excess” electrons carried to other  cells and tissues  to be respired
Cell
Mitochondrion
The organism behaves like an integrated electrical circuit

Figure 3
•Mito biogenesis 
•Perfusion, oxygenation 
•Angiogenesis 
•NAD+ synthesis/supplement 
•Mitochondrial uncoupling 
•Substrate import 
•Ketosis, alternate fuels
‐ Flux (f2)
•Hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia  
•Cell proliferation, activation  
•Information processing 
•Hormones (e.g., thyroid) 
•Infection, immune activation 
•Trauma, damage accumulation 
•Exercise, activity
‐ Energy Potential (EP)
•Decreased blood perfusion 
•Hypoxia 
•mtDNA defects, mutations 
•Toxins (inhibiting mitochondria) 
•Cytokine signaling 
•Protein aggregates 
•Fibrosis
‑ Flux (f2)
=
rRNAComplex IComplex IIIComplex IVF0F1 ATP synthasetRNAsmRNAnon-codingrRNAComplex IComplex IIIComplex IVF0F1 ATP synthasetRNAsmRNAnon-codingrRNAComplex IComplex IIIComplex IVF0F1 ATP synthasetRNAsmRNAnon-codingrRNAComplex IComplex IIIComplex IVF0F1 ATP synthasetRNAsmRNAnon-codingrRNAComplex IComplex IIIComplex IVF0F1 ATP synthasetRNAsmRNAnon-codingrRNAComplex IComplex IIIComplex IVF0F1 ATP synthasetRNAsmRNAnon-codingEPFlux f 2 éR
•Calorie restriction (CR) 
•Fasting 
•Sleep 
•Rest, relaxation response 
•Meditation 
•Parasympathetic NS  
•Inactivity
‑ Energy Potential (EP)
⊕⊖
Energy Potential
⊕⊖
•Reductive stress, lactate 
•Oxidative stress 
•Integrated stress response (ISR) 
•Cytokines and “inflammation” 
•GDF15 
•Molecular damage
Cellular hallmarks of disease
The biological origin of all hallmarks of diseases traced back to energy resistance
P R O M O T E S   é R D E C R E A S E S   é R  
Constrained electron ﬂux down the energy cascade
Cardiovascular diseases
Neurodegeneration
Diabetes, metabolic syndrome
Cancers
Mitochondrial diseases
Aging
Mental illnesses
Exercise training (mito biogenesis)
Figure 4
=
EPf 2 éR
⊖
⊕
Feedback responses to minimize éR involve energy conservation and compensation strategies, optimizing health
•↓ cell division (quiescence, senescence) 
•Fasting 
•Fatigue, ↓ physical activity 
•Torpor, ↓ temperature
Compensation
Energy conservation
Damage mitigation
•Antioxidant defenses 
•HSPs 
•Cell and organelle turnover 
•Cytokine secretion  
•Stress responses (ISR)
•↑ Glucose uptake (GLUT4) 
•↑ HR, O2 carrying capacity 
•↑ glucose, fatty acids, ketones in blood 
•↑ blood flow, swelling 
•↑ Mitochondrial biogenesis (PGC1𝛼, ISR) 
•↑ Angiogenesis
Second
Days
Cell-autonomous
Brain
A
Mitochondrial toxin
Time (hours)
New VO2max
EP
f 2
éR
100 -
0 -
100 -
0 -
Sleep
Mild
Recovering/healing
Chronic fatigue
BInfluence of Energy Potential (EP) and Flux (f2) dynamics on éR
Vitality?
Exponential
<1sec
éR Weeks-months
∆𝛹m NADH/NAD+ mRNA
GDF15 VEGF Cytokines
Fatigue Brain and experience
Fibrosis Tissue remodeling
Atrophy/hypertrophy Anatomy
Manifestations of ERP across time scalesC
eif2ɑ TFs
Transformation Cell fate  and behaviors
Sensations?
Oxygen debt
Medium
MaxPhysical activity
Runner’s  high?
‐Lactate
Linear
VO2max
Metabolic compensation
Time (weeks)
‐Reserve capacity
Delayed beneﬁts
Limited capacity
Acute    . recovery
•Glucose, FFAs, HbA1c [Nutrient oversupply, GLT] 
•Inflammation [Hypermetabolism] 
•Cortisol, NE [Stress hormones] ? 
•mtDNA mutations, mitochondrial OxPhos defects [Genetic] 
•[Poisons and toxins] 
•[Sleep deprivation]
•NADH/NAD+ ratio [Direct] 
•Lactate:Pyruvate, Alanine [Indirect] 
•GDF15*, other cytokines? [Cell-derived, non-immune cytokines] 
•Oxidative damage [Oxidative stress] 
•Telomeres, DNAm [Secondary] 
•Local temperature [Heat production]
•Lack of energy, fatigue, anxiety, psychopathology symptoms [Subjective] 
•Suppressed anabolism,  ↓ testosterone [Metabolic shift] 
•Catabolism & atrophy: HPA axis activation [Metabolic shift] 
•Loss of function in low priority systems, reproduction [Physiological] 
Figure 5
éR DRIVERS éR MARKERS éR PHENOTYPES
 ‐ Energy Potential  (EP)
‐ WORK / DEMAND
Stress hormones
Repair & proliferation
Flux (f 2)
‐ SUPPLY
Excess nutrients
Metabolic oversupply
éR
Cytokines 
GDF15
ROS
NADH/  NAD+
ATP turnover
Glucose 
FFAs
Ketones
Toxins  
Hormones
Lactate Metabolites
Energy potential constrained through electron ﬂux
+
CatabolismAnabolism

Placenta HIGH éR
Foetus LOW éR
High éR barrier to shield  the mother’s organism  from the low éR foetus
HEALTHY
↑↑↑ GDF15 Rapid aging
Slow aging
Placenta  (pregnancy)Uterus
GDF15
Figure 6
Box 1
A Energy flow through structural constraints  produces energy resistance (éR)
Range of éR compatible with work (physics) and life (biology)
B
C
NO/LITTLE RESISTANCE
ENERGY RESISTANCE (éR)
Ideal for communication
Chemical ➡ Electrochemical
 Chemical ➡ Kinetic
 Electrical ➡ Chemical
 Multiple ➡ Structure
•Light traveling through space 
•Action potential conduction in 
myelinated axon 
•Biofluid circulation 
•Minimal information loss/created
Energy constraint Resistive matrix
Energetic/metabolic intermediates
New forms   of energy
Energy Form ①
éR
Biosynthesis
 & signaling
Movement
O2 H2O
NADH
ΔµH+ 
ATP
Force
Na+, K+, Ca2+
Dopamine release
Metabolites + Electrical
Protein synthesis, mass
H+H+
H+
H+ H+
H+ H+H+ éR
éR éR éR
+ + + + +
Biological time
Energy
Light speed Mass
mE
c 2 =Energy (E) Mass (m)
E = m· c 2 Solve for m
Energy behavior in physical world
Light speed (c)
Mass (m) is energy potential (E) constrained by the limited speed of light (c2), necessary to transform or condense energy into matter
C
Mass-energy equivalence principle
Box 2
Energy Potential
Flux Energy Resistance
éREP
f   2 =Energy Potential (EP) Energy Resistance (éR)
B
EP = éR· f   2 Solve for éR
Energy behavior in living system
Electron ﬂux towards O2 (f) Energy resistance (éR) is energy potential (EP) constrained by the  limited electron flux (f 2), necessary to transform energy into life
Energy Resistance Principle (ERP)
Power
Current Resistance
RP
I 2 =Current (I)
Resistance (R) Work
P = R· I 2 Solve for R
Energy behavior in electrical system (Power Law)
Electrical resistance (R) is power (P) constrained by the limited electron flux (I 2), necessary to transform energy into work
Power (P)A
V = R· IOhm’s law
Power law
Voltage (V)
Supplemental File 1 Energy Resistance Principle 
 1 
Clinical, metabolic, endocrine, behavioral and other UKB trait associations with the energy resistance (éR) marker, circulating plasma GDF15 A total of 986 traits were analyzed in relation to serum GDF15 concentration in up to 52,140 UKB participants using https://proteome-phenome-atlas.com from Deng et al. Cell 20251. 403 traits demonstrated significant associations at a Bonferroni-corrected significance threshold (p < 10-9). 166 traits were positively associated with circulating GDF15; 237 traits were negatively associated with circulating GDF15. ERP components    EP: energy potential    f: electron flux    éR: energy resistance  Traits and biomarkers analyzed include variables related to:  1) Energy metabolism and mitochondrial Krebs cycle 2) Metabolic oversupply markers that increase EP 3) Physiological and immune energy costs 4) Tissue damage markers 5) General illnesses, pain, and medications 6) Perceived health and reduced functional capacity 7) Physical activity 8) Mood, effort, and fatigue  9) Systemic anabolic signaling 10) Parental age at death   Testing the ERP in the UK Biobank  Building on the availability of the éR marker GDF15 in the atlas of the human plasma proteome from >52,000 UK Biobank participants1, we tested several predictions of the ERP. This section summarizes the primary findings using the stringent Bonferroni-corrected p value (p < 10-9) as threshold to guard us against false positives. As expected, UKB participants with elevated éR (GDF15) also had elevated metabolite markers of reductive stress (pyruvate, alanine, others, ps < 10-10), validating the reductive stressàGDF15 connection in this cohort. Unsurprisingly, lactate, which is more labile and has a shorter circulating half-life than these metabolites, was not associated with GDF15 here.  As predicted by the ERP, elevated blood glucose and lipids acutely contributing to increase the system’s energy potential (EP), as well as elevated BMI or adiposity reflecting chronic metabolic oversupply, were associated with high GDF15 levels (ps < 10-59). Elevated heart rate and white blood cell counts, which contributing to increase the energetic cost of life, and therefore EP, were also linked to elevated levels of the éR marker GDF15 (ps < 10-10).  Cellular healing processes also incur cellular energetic costs and increase the amount of cellular “work” done, increasing EP, predicted to increase éR. Accordingly, multiple markers of cellular damage (e.g., alkaline phosphatase) and inflammation (c-reactive protein) were particularly robustly associated with éR (ps < 10-125), as were all illnesses (p = 10-298) and self-reported pain (p = 10-43).  
Supplemental File 1 Energy Resistance Principle 
 2 
On the other hand, people who performed more total physical activity (p = 10-10), particularly vigorous exercise (p = 10-76), exhibited lower éR. This is as expected from éR=EP/f2, as exercise triggers mitochondrial biogenesis and inter-organ communication that increases flux (f2) capacity. Using our electrical circuit analogy, mitochondrial biogenesis provides more parallel transistors to flux and accomodate the body’s energy potential EP, thereby reducing éR. How do we subjectively experience or “feel” éR? Animal studies show that GDF15 causes visceral malaise2 and GDF15 signaling on the brain is the cause of morning sickness in human pregnancy3. This suggests that we have the capacity for metaboception – the ability to perceive and regulate the state of energy resistance in our mitochondria via GDF15-mediated brain signaling – and that éR is aversive and uncomfortable. Consistent with energy conservation behaviors (e.g., sickness behavior4) initiated by other cytokines signaling on the brain to trigger fatigue, UKB individuals with elevated éR were less likely to walk for pleasure or enjoy taking the stairs (ps < 10-28), reported more fatigue (p < 10-20), spent more time watching television (p < 10-54), and scored higher on the “low energy” neuroticism facet of personality (p = 10-11). Thus, elevated GDF15 may contribute to the subjective experience of fatigue and aversion to activities that increase energy expenditure, whereas low GDF15 may contribute to vitality.  Subsequently, consistent with the notion that the brain integrates energetic signals and can respond to excessive éR by downregulating costly physiological systems5,6, high éR in UKB was associated with reduced markers of physiological growth and maintenance processes. People with high GDF15 exhibited lower testosterone and lower insulin growth factor 1 (IGF1) (ps < 10-18), two key anabolic factors. High éR also predicted elevated steroid hormone binding protein (SHBP, p < 10-130), which binds and antagonizes anabolic steroid signaling, and thus should conserve energy and decrease EP, normalizing or preventing a rise in éR. One interpretation of these findings consistent with the ERP is that as a negative feedback mechanism aiming to reduce EP, the organism experiencing elevated éR naturally puts the breaks on costly anabolic systems5. Other disease states marked by elevated éR include diabetes, where we propose that the degree of insulin resistance is a marker of systemic éR. Consistent with this prediction, insulin resistance was negatively correlated with testosterone levels7.  Overall, these data summarized in table form below are consistent with the notion that GDF15 communicates éR to the brain, which in turn deploys energy-saving physiological and behavioral strategies that likely contribute to transduce cell-level energetic stress to whole-body functional limitations during aging and other pathological conditions5.  1) Krebs cycle spillover and metabolites of energetic stress are linked to elevated éR Trait Direction of effect on GDF15 Effect size (β) SE 95% C.I. p Alanine ↑ 0.007 0.001 0.006 to 0.009 10-16 Pyruvate ↑ 0.002 0.0004 0.002 to 0.003 10-10 Citrate ↑ 0.003 0.0002 0.003 to 0.003 10-96 Urea ↑ 0.63 0.01 0.61 to 0.66 <10-300 Creatinine ↑ 0.008 0.0001 0.007 to 0.008 <10-300 Reference of metabolomic changes with energy resistance in individuals with primary mitochondrial diseases exhibiting OxPhos defects8. 
Supplemental File 1 Energy Resistance Principle 
 3 
  2) Metabolic oversupply that increase EP are linked to elevated éR Trait Direction of effect on GDF15 Effect size (β) SE 95% C.I. p BMI  ↑ 1.87 0.04 1.79 to 1.95 <10-300 HbA1c ↑ 3.26 0.06 3.15 to 3.38 <10-300 Total triglycerides ↑ 0.14 0.009 0.12 to 0.16 10-59 Glucose ↑ 0.45 0.01 0.40 to 0.45 10-271   3) Physiological energy-consuming processes that increase EP are linked to elevated éR Trait Direction of effect on GDF15 Effect size (β) SE 95% C.I. p Heart rate ↑ 3.33 0.18 2.99 to 3.68 3.4-79 Total protein ↑ 0.41 0.04 0.34 to 0.50 10-27 White blood cell count ↑ 0.63 0.02 0.59 to 0.66 10-267 Neutrophil count ↑ 0.50 0.01 0.47 to 0.52 10-300 Lymphocyte count  ↑ 0.06 0.01 0.04 to 0.08 10-10 Monocyte count ↑ 0.05 0.002 0.046 to 0.053 10-162 Basophil count ↑ 0.17 0.02 0.13 to 0.21 10-19 Eosinophil count ↑ 0.015 0.001 0.013 to 0.018 10-35   4) Tissue damage and healing markers that increase EP are linked to elevated éR Trait Direction of effect on GDF15 Effect size (β) SE 95% C.I. p Alkaline phosphatase ↑ 7.1 0.23 6.7 to 7.6 10-199 Aspartate aminotransferase ↑ 3.5 0.10 3.3 to 3.7 10-276 Gamma glutamyltransferase ↑ 14.5 0.37 13.8 to 15.3 <10-300 Alanine aminotransferase ↑ 2.9 0.12 2.67 to 3.14 10-125 c-reactive protein ↑ 1.4 0.04 1.28 to 1.43 10-263   5) General illnesses, pain and medications linked to elevated éR Trait Direction of effect on GDF15 Effect size (β) SE 95% C.I. p Number of self-reported non-cancer illnesses  ↑ 0.75 0.02 0.71 to 0.79 10-298 Pain all over body last month ↑ 0.60 0.04 0.52 to 0.69 10-43 Number of treatments or medication taken ↑ 0.98 0.02 0.94 to 1.02 <10-300   6) Poor self-perceived health and reduced functional capacity linked to elevated éR Trait Direction of effect on GDF15 Effect size (β) SE 95% C.I. P Self-rated health today ↓ -3.88 0.32 -4.51 to -3.24 10-33 Grip strength (right) ↓ -1.88 0.07 -2.02 to -1.75 10-169 Grip strength (left) ↓ -1.84 0.07 -1.97 to -1.71 10-163 
Supplemental File 1 Energy Resistance Principle 
 4 
Fluid intelligence ↓ -0.23 0.03 -0.29 to -0.18 10-17 Mobility problems ↑ 0.45 0.4 0.37 to 0.52 10-30 Mobility problems ↑ 0.45 0.4 0.37 to 0.52 10-30 Self-care problems today ↑ 0.47 0.05 0.37 to 0.58 10-33 Difficult taking care of household responsibilities ↑ 0.47 0.04 0.39 to 0.55 10-32   7) Regular physical activity and vigorous exercise associated lower éR Trait Direction of effect on GDF15 Effect size (β) SE 95% C.I. P Sum MET minutes per week for all activity  ↓ -171.9 27.4 -225.6 to -118.2 10-10 MET minutes per week vigorous activity ↓ -0.37 0.02 -0.41 to -0.33 10-76 Type of physical activity last 4 weeks: strenuous ↓ -0.49 0.04 -0.57 to -0.42 10-37 Hematocrit ↓ -0.75 0.03 -0.80 to -0.70 10-177 Interpretation: In 39,962 UK Biobank participants higher total physical activity levels (sum of metabolic equivalents-minutes per week) exhibited lower blood GDF15 (unadjusted β = -171.8, SE = 27.4, 95% CI = -225.6 to -118.2, p = 3.6-10). Similar findings are found for intense physical activity, consistent with the long-term effects of endurance exercise training on increasing mitochondrial content 9. These data align with the ERP prediction that regular physical activity and greater oxygen carrying capacity – indexed by blood hematocrit (% of blood volume occupied by red blood cells) – are associated with lower éR.   8) Fatigue and aversion to effort and social interactions are linked to elevated éR Trait Direction of effect on GDF15 Effect size (β) SE 95% C.I. P Liking for taking stairs ↓ -0.35 0.03 -0.41 to -0.29 10-28 Walking for pleasure ↓ -0.35 0.02 -0.38 to -0.31 10-69 Difficulty for joining in community activities ↑ 0.35 0.04 0.26 to 0.43 10-15 Difficulty standing for long periods ↑ 0.50 0.04 0.43 to 0.57 10-42 Fatigue severity over past week ↑ 0.33 0.03 0.26 to 0.39 10-21 Feeling tired or  having little energy over last 2 weeks  ↑ 0.32 0.04 0.25 to 0.39 10-20 Time spent watching television ↑ 0.31 0.02 0.27 to 0.34 10-54 Little interest doing things over the last two weeks ↑ 0.30 0.04 0.22 to 0.38 10-14 Poor appetite or overeating over  last two weeks ↑ 0.30 0.04 0.22 to 0.39 10-54 Neuroticism score ↑ 0.12 0.02 0.08 to 0.15 10-11   9) éR is associated with suppression of growth/anabolic programs Trait Direction of effect on GDF15 Effect size (β) SE 95% C.I. p IGF-1  ↓ -0.61 0.05 -0.71 to -0.51 10-34 
Supplemental File 1 Energy Resistance Principle 
 5 
Testosterone ↓ -0.22 0.03 -0.27 to -0.17 10-18 SHBP ↑ 5.68 0.23 5.22 to 6.14 10-130   10) Older parental age at death (i.e., longevity) is associated with lower éR Trait Direction of effect on GDF15 Effect size (β) SE 95% C.I. p Mother’s age at death  ↓ -0.91 0.15 -1.19 to -0.62 10-10 Father’s age at death ↓ -0.98 0.13 -1.24 to -0.71 10-13 Interpretation: Individuals whose mother lived to an older age have lower blood GDF15 levels: unadjusted β = -0.91, SE = 0.15, p = 3.4-10. Similar findings are noted for the father. Genetic factors and/or inherited cultural and lifestyle factors transmitted across generations could account for these effects and suggest a link between GDF15 biology, aging, and human lifespan – a robust association across multiple studies.    References 1 Deng, Y. T. et al. Atlas of the plasma proteome in health and disease in 53,026 adults. Cell 188, 253-271 e257 (2025). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.cell.2024.10.045 2 Borner, T. et al. GDF15 Induces an Aversive Visceral Malaise State that Drives Anorexia and Weight Loss. Cell Rep 31, 107543 (2020). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107543 3 Fejzo, M. et al. GDF15 linked to maternal risk of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy. Nature 625, 760-767 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41586-023-06921-9 4 Dantzer, R., O'Connor, J. C., Freund, G. G., Johnson, R. W. & Kelley, K. W. From inflammation to sickness and depression: when the immune system subjugates the brain. Nat Rev Neurosci 9, 46-56 (2008). https://doi.org:10.1038/nrn2297 5 Shaulson, E. D., Cohen, A. A. & Picard, M. The brain-body energy conservation model of aging. Nat Aging 4, 1354-1371 (2024). https://doi.org:10.1038/s43587-024-00716-x 6 Bobba-Alves, N., Juster, R. P. & Picard, M. The energetic cost of allostasis and allostatic load. Psychoneuroendocrinology 146, 105951 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2022.105951 7 Pitteloud, N. et al. Relationship between testosterone levels, insulin sensitivity, and mitochondrial function in men. Diabetes Care 28, 1636-1642 (2005). https://doi.org:10.2337/diacare.28.7.1636 8 Sharma, R. et al. Circulating markers of NADH-reductive stress correlate with mitochondrial disease severity. J Clin Invest 131 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1172/JCI136055 9 Bishop, D. J., Lee, M. J. & Picard, M. Exercise as Mitochondrial Medicine: How Does the Exercise Prescription Affect Mitochondrial Adaptations to Training? Annu Rev Physiol 87, 107-129 (2025). https://doi.org:10.1146/annurev-physiol-022724-104836 