TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED /two.tnum/four.tnum November /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
DOI /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
James Tee,
University of Canterbury, New Zealand
REVIEWED BY
Anna Ciaunica,
University of Porto, Portugal
Andrew W. Corcoran,
Monash University, Australia
Mark Leonard Solms,
University of Cape Town, South Africa
*CORRESPONDENCE
Michael Levin
michael.levin@tufts.edu
RECEIVED /zero.tnum/seven.tnum July /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
ACCEPTED /one.tnum/seven.tnum October /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
PUBLISHED /two.tnum/four.tnum November /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
CITATION
Pio-Lopez L, Kuchling F, Tung A,
Pezzulo G and Levin M (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum) Active
inference, morphogenesis, and
computational psychiatry.
Front. Comput. Neurosci./one.tnum/six.tnum:/nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum.
doi: /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
COPYRIGHT
© /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum Pio-Lopez, Kuchling, Tung,
Pezzulo and Levin. This is an
open-access article distributed under
the terms of the
Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY) . The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which
does not comply with these terms.
Active inference,
morphogenesis, and
computational psychiatry
Léo Pio-Lopez/one.tnum, Franz Kuchling /one.tnum, Angela Tung /one.tnum,
Giovanni Pezzulo /two.tnumand Michael Levin /one.tnum,/three.tnum*
/one.tnumAllen Discovery Center, Tufts University, Medford, MA, United St ates, /two.tnumInstitute of Cognitive
Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council, Rome, Ital y, /three.tnumWyss Institute for Biologically
Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston, MA, United Sta tes
Active inference is a leading theory in neuroscience that provid es a simple
and neuro-biologically plausible account of how action and percept ion are
coupled in producing (Bayes) optimal behavior; and has been recen tly used to
explain a variety of psychopathological conditions. In parallel, morphogenesis
has been described as the behavior of a (non-neural) cellular coll ective
intelligence solving problems in anatomical morphospace. In thi s article, we
establish a link between the domains of cell biology and neurosci ence, by
analyzing disorders of morphogenesis as disorders of (active ) inference. The
aim of this article is three-fold. We want to: (i) reveal a connecti on between
disorders of morphogenesis and disorders of active inference as apparent
in psychopathological conditions; (ii) show how disorders of m orphogenesis
can be simulated using active inference; (iii) suggest that activ e inference can
shed light on developmental defects or aberrant morphogeneti c processes,
seen as disorders of information processing, and perhaps sugge sting novel
intervention and repair strategies. We present four simula tions illustrating
application of these ideas to cellular behavior during morpho genesis. Three
of the simulations show that the same forms of aberrant active inf erence
(e.g., deﬁcits of sensory attenuation and low sensory precisi on) that have been
used to explain psychopathological conditions (e.g., schizoph renia and autism)
also produce familiar disorders of development and morphogen esis when
implemented at the level of the collective behavior of a group o f cells. The
fourth simulation involves two cells with too high precision, in which we show
that the reduction of concentration signaling and sensitivity t o the signals
of other cells treats the development defect. Finally, we presen t the results
of an experimental test of one of the model’s predictions in ear ly Xenopus
laevis embryos: thioridazine (a dopamine antagonist that may reduce sensory
precision in biological systems) induced developmental (anatom ical) defects
as predicted. The use of conceptual and empirical tools from neuro science
to understand the morphogenetic behavior of pre-neural agen ts oﬀers the
possibility of new approaches in regenerative medicine and evo lutionary
developmental biology.
KEYWORDS
active inference, development, morphogenesis, defect, Xenopus, computational
psychiatry
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /zero.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
/one.tnum. Introduction
Embryonic self-assembly requires large numbers of cells to
cooperate and compete toward speciﬁc morphologies ( Pezzulo
and Levin, 2016 ). Moreover, the repair and remodeling of
complex anatomical structures under novel circumstances
(injury, changes in cell size or number, etc.) illustrates that
this process is not hardwired. Numerous examples, such
as tadpoles with scrambled craniofacial organs that move
in un-natural paths to nevertheless construct normal frog
faces (
Vandenberg et al., 2012 ), and similar data even in
early chordates ( Voskoboynik et al., 2007 ), reveal control of
growth and form to exhibit the ability to solve problems in
morphospace—dealing with novel circumstances to arrive at the
correct target morphology despite unexpected perturbations. It
has been argued (
Levin, 2019 , 2022b) that morphogenesis is
an example of a kind of basal intelligence, meeting William
James’ deﬁnition of “same ends through diﬀerent means” (
James,
1890), due to its ability to restore amputated structures (and
then stop), produce the same size body using very large, or
very few cells, or remodel after organs are placed in incorrect
conﬁgurations (reviewed in
Pezzulo and Levin, 2016 ; Levin,
2022a). Speciﬁcally, it has been proposed that the sorts of
problem-solving capacities observed when nervous systems
navigate the 3D world via behavior evolved by speed-optimizing
much more ancient versions of the same system in pre-neural
cells (
Buznikov and Shmukler, 1981 ; Fields et al., 2020 ).
In an important sense, morphogenetic tissues and brains
both represent a kind of collective intelligence, emergent
from groups of cells (
Fields et al., 2020 ; Fields and Levin,
2022). Much as neural cells connect in networks to process
information and control muscles, collections of cells navigate
anatomical morphospace by processing information toward the
control of non-excitable cell types (resulting in cell migration,
diﬀerentiation, etc.). Morphogenesis can thus be seen as the
behavior of a collective in morphospace. Indeed, all of the
machinery used in the central nervous system (CNS) to
support adaptive functions (ion channels, electrical synapses,
neurotransmitter signaling, etc.) is ancient, and is implicated
in the control of growth and form (
Levin and Martyniuk,
2018). Consistent with this are the many examples over the
last decade of tools from neuroscience being used to probe
and control animal shape in vivo: tools like optogenetics, ion
channel pharmacology, etc. cannot distinguish neural from
non-neural applications and work well in both arenas (
Bates,
2015; Harris, 2021 ; Levin, 2021a ). Given the high conservation
between mechanisms regulating canonical behavior and those
regulating morphogenesis (
Pezzulo and Levin, 2015 ), it becomes
interesting to ask: which conceptual models from neuroscience
shed light on the collective dynamics of morphogenesis? This
is especially important, both for regenerative medicine and
for fundamental evolutionary developmental biology: progress
on molecular genetics mechanisms must now be augmented
by a better understanding of the algorithms and organ-level
decision-making, to develop prediction and control strategies
for large-scale structure and function. Here, we focus on one
speciﬁc set of ideas from neuroscience—the active inference
framework—
Parr et al. (2022) exploring interesting parallels that
allow it to generate insights for open problems in the science of
dynamic morphogenesis.
What paradigm can be used to understand the dynamic
information processing that underlies both, adaptive behavior
and morphogenesis? Active inference is a general framework
in theoretical neuroscience that proposes a uniﬁed account of
perception, learning, and action (
Friston et al., 2006 ; Friston,
2010). The framework is built around the idea that biological
agents must maintain homeostasis and have to reach a limited
range of states deﬁned by their phenotype and avoid “surprising”
states (
Friston et al., 2010 ). However, as the states of the
environment and the internal states of the organism itself
are hidden (i.e., not directly observable), a biological agent
must infer them from incoming sensory information. The
framework claims that an agent is a probabilistic machine that
embodies an internal generative model of its environment and
continuously tries to minimize the surprise of its own sensations.
In other words, an agent minimizes the diﬀerence between
its expectations of the world (that can be priors on its own
sensorium for perception, or goals for actions) and its sensory
evidence. In turn, this requires that organisms continuously try
to predict the internal (proprioceptive or interoceptive) and
external (exteroceptive) consequences of their behavior and
others—hence the idea of the brain as a “prediction machine.”
More formally, in active inference, action, perception, and
learning occur through a process of variational free energy
minimization (where variational free energy is an upper
bound on surprise) (
Friston K. et al., 2017 ). In this context,
perception resolves exteroceptive prediction errors by selecting
the predictions that best explain the current sensations; action
serves to change the world in such a way that it generates the
agent’s preferred sensations (as encoded in its priors, or prior
preferences); and learning is the update of the generative model.
The framework of active inference has been initially
developed in computational neuroscience (
Friston K. J. et al.,
2017; Walsh et al., 2020 ) but was recently extended beyond
it, to address problems of morphogenesis and developmental
biology (
Friston et al., 2015 ; Kuchling et al., 2020 ). In this
perspective, cells are minimal active inference agents that
minimize their surprise (or free-energy) in order to reach
(collectively) a target morphology and maintain anatomical
homeostasis (see
Figure 1). This novel perspective on the
coordination of migration and diﬀerentiation of cells suggests
an interpretation of cellular behavior as being driven by an error
minimization mechanism akin to usual conceptualizations of
goal-directed organismal behaviors in neuroscience, cybernetics,
and philosophy (
Millikan, 1987 ; Friston et al., 2015 ; Fields
and Levin, 2019 ; Kuchling et al., 2020 ). This top-down
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /zero.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
FIGURE /one.tnum
Representation of active inference. (A) Standard (non-pathological) behavior. We have one target morphology. D uring morphogenesis, cells
start undiﬀerentiated and at the same locations (middle-left p anel). Given their generative model they believe they have to r each a speciﬁc
planar target morphology (upper panel). They will receive diﬀere nt kind of sensory information during morphogenesis (bioelectrical pattern,
biochemical and mechanical signals, see lower panel). This gath ers sensory evidence that allows the cells to update their inte rnal model of their
target identity. Ultimately, they develop the appropriate targe t morphology (see middle-right panel) by action (migration, diﬀeren tiation, release
of signals, see second lower panel). (B) Dysfunctional behavior. In this case, the prior on the target morphol ogy is much higher for one speciﬁc
type of cells (intestinal in the example, see upper-left pane l). The cells have a strong (rigid) belief that they have to be th is type of cell and
therefore won’t take into account contrary sensory evidence (lower panel) and the prediction errors; in turn, this will lead to a dy sfunctional
update of the model and an inappropriate development (see middl e panels).Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /zero.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
approach to developmental biology may complement bottom-
up strategies that currently focus on molecular pathways and
could help understand regeneration, morphogenesis, and their
associated disorders.
In which sense can this framework help understand
disorders of morphogenesis? Within the active inference
framework, psychopathological conditions such as
schizophrenia, hallucinations, and depression can be understood
as disorders of inference (
Montague et al., 2012 ; Friston et al.,
2014). Along similar lines, active inference can help formalize
developmental defects or aberrant morphogenetic processes
as disorders of inference—when the inference is about (for
example) a target morphology, as in
Friston et al. (2015).
Similarly, in developmental biology, focus is beginning to
shift toward an understanding of measurement, memory, and
prediction in cells and tissues (
Barkai and Shilo, 2009 ; Abouchar
et al., 2014 ; Cervera et al., 2019 ; Levin, 2021a).
The aim of this article is three-fold. Our ﬁrst aim is
to establish a formal link between disorders of inference
apparent in psychopathological conditions and disorders
of morphogenesis/development, via active inference. We
exemplify our ideas by focusing mainly on schizophrenia and
autism, because these conditions have been studied deeply
under active inference and they depend on a key mechanism
(aberrant precision control) that we believe could help explain
developmental disorders, too (see below). However, we will
not attempt to establish exact, one-to-one correspondences
between these two (or other) psychopathological conditions
and developmental disorders. Rather, our goals are to
establish more general formal correspondences between
psychopathological and morphogenetic/developmental
problems—for example, using the concept of precision control
that might be heuristic in both ﬁelds—and simultaneously to
oﬀer some speciﬁc examples, which could guide more speciﬁc
future investigations. Our second aim is to show how disorders
of morphogenesis can be simulated using active inference.
Our third aim is to discuss how the formalization oﬀered here
could help design novel intervention strategies for repairing
developmental defects or aberrant morphogenetic processes
seen as disorders of information processing. We recognize
that psychopathological conditions are very complex and
multifarious (e.g., fundamentally shaped and constrained by
complex cultural and sociological factors). The examples we
are oﬀering in this paper do not imply a reductionist view of
these phenomena but are limited to modeling some speciﬁc
computational aspects of them. Indeed, in this aspect our
approach to cognition parallels the arguments made in our
prior work about morphogenesis, where we suggest that a
more eﬀective understanding of collective cell behavior in
embryogenesis and regeneration requires not only reductive
molecular biology-based mechanistic information, but also
a consideration of information processing and goal-directed
action (
Pezzulo and Levin, 2015 ; Levin, 2022a,c).
We present four simulations of disorders of morphogenesis
as disorders of active inference. These simulations use active
inference to model the behavior of groups of cells and show
that endowing the cells with aberrant values of a key parameter
(precision) leads to developmental defects in much the same
way that manipulating the precision of more sophisticated
active inference models could reproduce some aspects of
psychopathological conditions, such as the positive symptoms of
schizophrenia (
Brown et al., 2013 ) or aberrant statistical learning
in autism ( Arthur et al., 2021 ). We also present a simulated
biomedical intervention of the reduction of concentration
signaling and sensitivity to the other cells signals of two
cells having a too high precision. Finally, we present the
experimental result of the test of one of the predictions of our
model: thioridazine (a dopamine antagonist that may reduce
sensory precision in biological systems) is shown to induced
developmental (anatomical) defects in Xenopus laevistadpoles,
illustrating the ability of these conceptual models to drive novel
empirical results in developmental biology.
/two.tnum. Computational psychiatry,
aberrant precision, and sensory
attenuation
Active inference is a computational framework for action
and perception and has been linked to various psychiatric
disorders (
Montague et al., 2012 ). From this point of view,
psychopathological conditions can be understood as disorders of
(active) inference. False inference could explain symptoms, like
hallucinations or delusions in schizophrenia (
Fletcher and Frith,
2009), to the loss of coherence in autism ( Pellicano and Burr,
2012).
While there have been several alternative proposals about
what exactly causes psychopathological conditions ( Friston
et al., 2014 ; Paulus et al., 2019 ; Van den Bergh et al., 2021 ),
many focus on deﬁcits of a speciﬁc parameter of the (active)
inference: the precision parameter that weights prior beliefs and
sensory evidence (and hence prediction errors, which measure
the discrepancy between predicted and sensed observations).
The precision parameter encodes the expected uncertainty or in
other words the degree of conﬁdence of an agent in the sensory
information it is receiving in any given context (
Angela and
Dayan, 2005 ; Brown et al., 2013 ; Iglesias et al., 2013 ). A correct
regulation of the precision parameter is key for the success
of hierarchical (active) inference, because the balance between
prior beliefs and sensory evidence during the process of evidence
accumulation is determined by the precision of prediction
errors at each level of the hierarchy. If the precision is set
incorrectly (e.g., if an unreliable source of evidence is assigned
excessively high precision, or a reliable source of evidence is
assigned excessively low precision), the resulting inference can
be misleading.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /zero.tnum/four.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
More formally, precision is deﬁned in active inference as
the inverse of the variance of a given variable; and it can be
interpreted as a measure of signal-to-noise, or the conﬁdence
associated to an incoming information stream. For the brain, it
can be represented by the modulation of the gain or excitability
of neurons that compute prediction errors (
Clark, 2013 ; Moran
et al., 2013 ). This is particularly important, because many
psychological disorders implicate modulatory neurotransmitter
systems and a putative failure of post-synaptic gain control
(
Feldman and Friston, 2010 ).
One of the reasons why the precision parameter is so
important in explaining psychopathological conditions is that
it mediates the so-called sensory attenuation that necessarily
accompanies action. In active inference, actions are realized by
descending proprioceptive predictions, which in turn engage
motor reﬂexes that enact the intended or predicted movement
(
Adams et al., 2013 ). In other words, in order to realize an
action, an active inference agent has to imagine the action
outcome and then enact a movement that fulﬁlls the prevision.
In parallel, it has to attenuate the sensory precision—in order to
disregard the evidence that one is not moving. The attenuation
of sensory precision is necessary for action, because otherwise,
ascending (proprioceptive) prediction errors would lead to the
revision of predictions about actions (i.e., correctly infer that
one is not moving) instead of realizing the intended actions.
Phenomenologically, the attenuation of sensory precision
produces sensory attenuation—or the transient suspension of
attention to the sensory consequences of an action—that is
commonly observed during movement (
Brown et al., 2013 ).
Sensory attenuation is an important theme in many
psychiatric disorders, too. It has been proposed that prior
expectations on sensory precision are compromised in
schizophrenic patients—and hence the patients are unable
to attenuate sensory precision. More speciﬁcally, the sensory
precision of schizophrenic patients might be too high in
relation to the precision of their (prior) beliefs about the
causes of sensations. Therefore, schizophrenic patients cannot
ignore sensory evidence. Deﬁcits of sensory attenuation
in schizophrenic patients may also produce disorders of
movement, given that movement itself depends on correct
precision control (see
Brown et al., 2013 for a detailed
discussion). The failure in sensory attenuation might explain
two types of false inference in schizophrenia: false positives and
false negatives (
Limongi et al., 2018 ). Positive symptoms, like
hallucinations or delusions ( Powers et al., 2017 ), correspond
to prior beliefs that are accorded too much precision. Negative
symptoms, like the resistance to illusions and the failure of slow
pursuit movements, correspond to a compromised capacity to
elicit predictions informed by prior beliefs.
One symptom that shows this deﬁcit is slow pursuit eye
movements. Patients with schizophrenia present a disorder in
the anticipation of movement. This failure can be measured
experimentally using a mask during the motion of an object,
with the subject having to anticipate the re-appearance of the
object behind the mask. A computational model of this process
that used active inference and manipulated precision could
account for several features of smooth pursuit in schizophrenia:
a reduction in anticipatory eye movements during visual
occlusion, a paradoxical improvement in tracking unpredicted
deviations from target trajectories, and a failure to recognize
and exploit regularities in the periodic motion of visual
targets (
Adams et al., 2012 ).
Disorders of beliefs about agency are also common in
schizophrenia (in the sense of agency as the property of feeling
that one is the agent in control of one’s actions). One example
is the resistance of patients with schizophrenia to the force-
matching illusion (
Shergill et al., 2005 , 2014). During this task,
a patient’s hand is touched by a device and therefore the patient
can sense an external force. Patients have to press directly on
themselves, or use a robot to reproduce the magnitude of the
perceived pressure of the external force. The force-matching
illusion consists in the fact that healthy people underestimate the
magnitude of the force that they apply (i.e., self-pushing power),
which results in pushing the device with a larger force than the
external pressure. Patients with schizophrenia, instead, present
a better accuracy on this task, which suggests that they might
not attenuate their sensations. This result has been modeled
using active inference and corresponds to an attenuation of
the sensory precision that would create this illusion (
Brown
et al., 2013 ). Similarly, depersonalization disorder has been
linked to a deﬁcit of somatosensory attenuation and precision-
weighting (
Ciaunica et al., 2022 ).
Autism has also been linked to an aberrant account of
precision (Lawson et al., 2014 ). Autism is a neurodevelopmental
disorder of variable severity that is characterized by diﬃculties
in social interaction and communication and by restricted or
repetitive patterns of thought and behavior. Aberrant precision
may explain diﬀerent features of autistic perception, action, and
social behavior. One hypothesis is that autism is characterized
by excessively high sensory precision (compared to the
precision of priors) leading to the diﬃculty in contextualizing
sensory information (
Frith and Frith, 1999 ; Baron-Cohen,
2000). Furthermore, in autism, the failure to attenuate sensory
precision has been interpreted in a developmental context—
and particularly in the context of the acquisition of generative
models that distinguish between self and other. It is proposed
that an infant with autism may have diﬃculties distinguishing
between autonomic responses elicited by the mother and those
caused by its own interoceptive predictions. This could also
explain autonomic over-responsiveness to interoceptive cues or
interoceptive hypersensitivity and a deﬁcit in engaging with
social (exteroceptive) cues (
Paton et al., 2012 ).
In sum, here we have highlighted that psychopathological
conditions, such as schizophrenia and autism, can be described
in terms of aberrant values of key parameters of active inference,
and most notably the precision parameter that weights sensory
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /zero.tnum/five.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
evidence and prior information [see also chapter 9 of Parr
et al. (2022) for the discussion of other psychopathological
conditions in terms of maladaptive active inference]. Below we
highlight that these information- and system-level disorders
have parallels outside of CNS-mediated behavior—in the
domain of morphogenesis.
/three.tnum. Disorders of morphogenesis as
disorders of inference
A key fact of development and regeneration is that
individual cells must cooperate in networks to achieve speciﬁc
outcomes in morphospace, to very tight tolerances, despite
noise, environmental inﬂuences, and imperfections in the
components themselves. Doing this in real-time, to achieve
the correct target morphology via novel paths, requires
collective decision-making and active measurements of current
shapes as well as the ability to recognize errors (perhaps
through a memory of correct states). Morphogenesis has
been simulated in the active inference framework (
Friston
et al., 2015 ; Kuchling et al., 2020 ). From this perspective,
cells are information processing agents, where the driving
force behind morphogenesis is the minimization of a cell’s
variational free energy. Each cell is equipped with a generative
model that encodes its beliefs about what are the chemotactic
signals it should receive or express, relative to its location
in the target morphology. Cells reach their morphogenetic
goal by performing actions (expression of receptors and other
biochemical signals) according to their internal (i.e., generative)
model of what type of receptors and other signals they
should express.
Within this framework, Friston et al. simulated
morphogenesis and dysmorphogenesis (e.g., induced birth
defects) by manipulating the inﬂuence of extracellular signals,
without changing the generative model (genetic and epigenetic
processes) (
Friston et al., 2015 ).
Using a similar strategy, Kuchling et al. simulated alterations
of anterior–posterior axial polarity (i.e., the induction of two
heads or two tails) as in planarian regeneration (
Kuchling
et al., 2020 ). Furthermore, they simulated the ﬁrst steps of
carcinogenesis by imposing false inference of a single cell on
what it should sense and how it should act within the cellular
ensemble. They also showed that mis-patterning of development
and regeneration can be caused (or can be rescued) by simple
modiﬁcations of the inference process without changing the
implicit generative model of a cell as determined (for example)
by its DNA.
However, the previous work on this topic did not investigate
the impact of precision and sensory attenuation. In other words,
the generative model had remained untouched in these prior
simulations. Kuchling et al. manipulated external parameters
to show disorders of morphogenesis (
Kuchling et al., 2020 ),
and Friston et al. (2015) manipulated the extracellular signals,
both without changing the generative model or the precision of
its parameters.
Here, we show that disorders of inference resulting from
precision changes can produce disorders of morphogenesis in
cell-like agents, analogous to the way aberrant precision control
might produce psychopathological conditions in sophisticated
(human-like) agents.
/four.tnum. Active inference and free-energy
minimization
/four.tnum./one.tnum. Active inference formalism
In this section, we summarize the mathematical foundation
that underlies the Bayesian interpretation of non-equilibrium
steady-state dynamics [based on
Kuchling et al. (2020)] and
introduce the formulations necessary to set up and discuss our
morphogenetic inference model based on the minimization of
variational free energy.
To that end, we begin by stating the dynamics of our system
in generalized coordinates of motion, denoted with a tilde, where
˜x is deﬁned as:
˜x = (x, ˙x, ¨x, ...). (1)
This expression deﬁnes a state not just through its
position, but also with its velocity, acceleration, etc. Generalized
coordinates of motion allow the inclusion of temporal
correlations in random ﬂuctuations, assuming a suﬃciently
smooth dynamical system, through the Langevin equation:
˙
˜x = f (˜x) + ˜ω, (2)
where f (˜x) is the generalized ﬂow (or time evolution) of states
under forces acting on the states and random ﬂuctuations ˜ω
that are conﬁned by the typical Wiener assumptions; in other
words, the ﬂow of states is made up of a process of independent,
Gaussian increments that follow a continuous path.
In statistical physics, the ensuing dynamics are readily
described in terms of density or ensemble dynamics, i.e., the
evolution of the probability density p(˜x), through the Fokker-
Planck equation. We obtain the Fokker Planck equation from
any Langevin equation using the conservation of probability
mass:
˙p(˜x) = ∇ · [˙
˜xp(˜x)] = 0 , (3)
where ˙
˜xp(˜x) describes the probability current. This turns the
Fokker-Planck equation into a continuity equation, which reads:
˙p(˜x) = ∇ · Ŵ∇p − ∇ · (f (x)p) . (4)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /zero.tnum/six.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
This is a partial diﬀerential equation that describes the
time evolution of the probability density p(˜x) under dissipative
(ﬁrst term) and conservative (second term) forces. At non-
equilibrium steady-state, the density dynamics is just the
solution to the Fokker Planck equation:
L(˜x) = − ln p(˜x). (5)
In other words, we can express a physical potential or a
Lyapunov function L(˜x) simply as the negative log probability
of ﬁnding the system in any (generalized) state L(˜x) = − ln p(˜x).
This is also known in information theory as the self-information
of a state (also known as surprisal, or more simply surprise). In
Bayesian statistics it is known as the negative log evidence.
This function can be bounded from above by the variational
free energy function that is the foundation of the free energy
principle underlying Bayesian inference.
Variational free energy is a function of internal states that
allows one to associate the Lyapunov function with Bayesian
model evidence and therefore characterize the system dynamics
in terms of Bayesian inference and the implicit generative
models. The key statistical mechanics tool employed to do this
is to unpack the non-equilibrium steady-state ﬂow of external,
internal, and blanket states, called a Markov blanket partition.
A Markov partition, deriving from conditional
independencies in Markov processes, which are implicit in
the system’s equations of motion or dynamics, separates all
states x ∈ X into external e ∈ E, sensory s ∈ S, active a ∈ A, and
internal states i ∈ I (with their generalized versions ˜x, ˜e, ˜s, ˜a, and
˜i, respectively), so that
˜x ∈ X = E × S × A × I . (6)
The Markov blanket states separating external and internal
states consist of S × A. Importantly, external and internal states
depend only on the blanket states, with the further constraint
that sensory states are not inﬂuenced by internal states and active
states are not inﬂuenced by external states.
We note that the deﬁnition of a Markov blanket in
a biological context is fairly intuitive, as robust literature
demonstrates the ability of cells and many other aneural systems
to measure aspects of their environment via speciﬁc sensors
(
Baluška and Levin, 2016 ). In fact, all biological systems can
be analyzed in terms of sensory and internal states and the
relationships between them (
Rosen, 2012).
Following this Markov partition of states (and associated
inﬂuences), we can decompose the ﬂow f (˜x) into fe(˜e, ˜s, ˜a),
fs(˜e, ˜s, ˜a), fa(˜s, ˜a, ˜i), and fi(˜s, ˜a, ˜i).
We can derive a gradient descent for the Markov states using
Equation (5) and its standard form expression for a ﬂow f (x)
subject to conservative and dissipative forces at non-equilibrium
steady-state following ( Yuan et al., 2014 ):
f (x) = v = (Q − Ŵ)∇L(˜x) , (7)
where Ŵ is the diﬀusion tensor deﬁned as half the covariance of
the dissipative random ﬂuctuations, and a tensor Q describing
friction satisfying ∇ · Q∇L(˜x) = 0. The responses of active
and internal states, to sensory stimuli under Markov partition
m, therefore, become
(a) fa(˜s, ˜a, ˜i) = (Qa − Ŵa)∇˜aL(˜s, ˜a, ˜i)
(b) fi(˜s, ˜a, ˜i) = (Qi − Ŵi)∇˜iL(˜s, ˜a, ˜i)
(c) L(˜s, ˜a, ˜i) = − ln p(˜s, ˜a, ˜i|m) .
(8)
Inserting the Lyapunov function from (c) into (a) and (b),
gives us the resulting ﬂow of active and sensory states as gradient
descents on a log probability density:
(a′) fa(˜s, ˜a, ˜i) = (Ŵa − Qa)∇˜a ln p(˜s, ˜a, ˜i|m)
(b′) fi(˜s, ˜a, ˜i) = (Ŵi − Qi)∇˜i ln p(˜s, ˜a, ˜i|m).
(9)
Crucially, the autonomous states (i.e., states that do not
depend upon external states: active and internal) of an agent
depend upon the same quantity, which we have reduced to
the log probability of ﬁnding the agent in a particular state;
where the agent’s states consist of the internal states and their
Markov blanket.
Solving Equation (9) for the time evolution or ﬂow f of
active and internal states thus is equivalent to evaluating the
gradients of the log probabilities above, corresponding to the
Lagrangian of an open system. By minimizing the internal and
active states of the partition instead of minimizing the Lyapunov
or Lagrangian function (such as for a thermodynamic potential)
as would be done in a classical physics approach, we can now
replace the Lagrangian with a variational free energy functional
of a probabilistic model of how a system thinks it should behave,
as follows.
Using the above Markov blanket partition, we can now
interpret internal states as parameterizing some arbitrary
probability density q(˜e) over external states. This allows us to
express the Lagrangian or Lyapunov function as a free energy
functional of beliefs, and implicitly a function of the internal
states. We can express this variational free energy through the
introduction of the Kullback-Leibler Divergence:
DKL(p∥q) =
∫ ∞
−∞
p(x) ln p(x)
q(x) dx, (10)
which is the expectation of the logarithmic diﬀerence between
the probabilities p and q, where the expectation is taken using
the probabilities p.
Thus, instead of taking the log density ln p(˜s, ˜a, ˜i|m) above,
we can now express a variational free energy F that corresponds
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /zero.tnum/seven.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
to the logarithmic diﬀerence between the (variational) density or
Bayesian beliefs about external states q(˜e) and actual probability
densities p(˜e, ˜s, ˜a, ˜i|m) of all states under the Markov blanket m:
F(˜s, ˜a, ˜i) =
∫
˜e
q(˜e) ln q(˜e)
p(˜e, ˜s, ˜a, ˜i|m)
d˜e
= − ln p(˜s, ˜a, ˜i|m) + DKL(q(˜e)∥p(˜e|˜s, ˜a, ˜i)) .
(11)
The ﬁrst term is referred to as (Bayesian negative log) model
evidence, or marginal likelihood, which denotes the likelihood
that the sensory inputs were generated by a generative model
implicit in the Markov blanket m. The second term is called
relative entropy and works as to minimize the divergence
between the variational and posterior density q(˜e) and p(˜e|˜s, ˜a, ˜i),
respectively. As a result, maximizing model evidence results
in minimizing the free energy of the system, and because the
divergence of the second term can never be less than zero, free
energy is an upper bound on the negative log evidence. Using
this expression, the ﬂow of autonomous (i.e., active and internal)
states becomes
(a′′) fa(˜s, ˜a, ˜i) = (Qa − Ŵa)∇˜aF(˜s, ˜a, ˜i)
= (Ŵa − Qa)∇˜a ln p(˜s, ˜a, ˜i|m) − (Ŵa − Qa)∇˜aDKL
(b′′) fi(˜s, ˜a, ˜i) = (Qi − Ŵi)∇˜iF(˜s, ˜a, ˜i)
= (Ŵi − Qi)∇˜i ln p(˜s, ˜a, ˜i|m) − (Ŵi − Qi)∇˜iDKL .
(12)
Crucially, the gradient descent on variational free energy
reduces the divergence in Equation (10) to its lower bound of
zero (because the divergence cannot be less than zero). At that
point, the gradients of the divergence in Equation (12) disappear
and the dynamics reduce to the self-organization in Equation
(9), which is what we aim to solve.
Now we can evaluate the variational free energy bound
in Equation (11) in a straightforward way given a generative
model; i.e., the joint probability over (generalized) external,
internal, and blanket states. We can therefore associate the
joint probability in Equation (11) with a likelihood; that is, the
probability of a cell’s states, given external states and a prior,
in our case the prior probability of a cell’s states (i.e., internal
states and their Markov blanket). This means that q(˜e) plays
the role of a posterior density over hidden or external states
under a particular Markov blanket or model (m). Importantly,
this variational posterior is parameterized by internal states and
we can talk about the internal states encoding beliefs about
external states.
We now turn to the construction of this generative
model, where we employ variational ﬁltering as the method of
quantiﬁcation and minimization of a variational free energy,
which places an upper bound on the dispersion of a particle’s
internal states and their Markov blanket (
Friston, 2010; Buckley
et al., 2017 ). This allows us to convert any process of
self-organization into a gradient descent on a free energy
landscape, where basins (minima) correspond to attractor
states, or goal states—akin to the target morphology—as
described next.
/four.tnum./two.tnum. Active inference as a computational
framework for morphogenesis
In this section, we introduce self organization to non-
equilibrium steady-state under the lens of morphogenesis, using
the variational principles described above. To that end, we
simulated morphogenesis by specifying a generative model—
and an implicit variational free energy function—and simulated
self-organization by solving the equations of motion in Equation
(12), as in
Friston et al. (2015) and Kuchling et al. (2020).
Given a target morphology speciﬁed in terms of the location
and diﬀerentiation of eight (undiﬀerentiated) cells, we deﬁne
a body morphology that the cells (collectively) have to reach,
composed of a head, a body, and a tail (a single primary axis
of positional identity, as exists for example in many metazoa).
Migration and diﬀerentiation of each cell are key components
of reaching a speciﬁc target morphology. In the active inference
framework, it means that undiﬀerentiated cells migrate and
diﬀerentiate by minimizing free-energy. The dynamics of
morphogenesis are mediated by chemotactic, biophysical, and
electrochemical signals. Cell division is not taken into account in
our model for the sake of simplicity. All cells are identical at the
beginning of the simulation and they don’t have any information
on what kind of cell they are or where they are. Although they all
have the same model, they are pluripotent and can diﬀerentiate
into any kind of cell at the end.
In this multi-agent system, the active states of one cell
(e.g., its secreted signaling molecules) are the external states
to other cells (whose diﬀused concentrations it measures
through it sensory states). Indeed, each cell has internal
states and sensory states (of the Markov blanket) that
correspond either to chemoreceptors of either extracellular and
intracellular concentrations, while cell migration or the release
of chemotactic signals are caused by the active states.
In terms of active inference, each cell is equipped with a
generative model that encodes the beliefs it has about what
chemotactic signals it should receive or express relative to its
location in the target morphology.
We need to specify the generative model given by the
probability density p(˜s, ˜a, ˜i|m) of sensory states s, active states a,
and internal states i, as well as the dynamics of the environment,
determined through the ﬂow f˜e and f˜s of external states e
and sensory states s, respectively. This allows us to specify the
requisite equations of motion for the system and its external
states. Here, we will adopt a probabilistic nonlinear mapping
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /zero.tnum/eight.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
with additive noise:
s = g(1)(e(1)) + ω(1)
e(1) = g(2)(e(2)) + ω(2) ,
(13)
where the superscripts denote the ﬁrst and second levels of our
hierarchical model g. Gaussian assumptions about the random
ﬂuctuations or noise ω mean that we can write the requisite
likelihood and priors as:
p(˜s, ˜a, ˜i|˜e1) = N(g(1)(e(1)), /Pi1 (1))
p(˜e1|˜e2) = N(g(2)(e(2)), /Pi1 (2)).
(14)
where N is the normal distribution, and /Pi1 (t) denotes the
precision (or inverse variance) of the random ﬂuctuations.
We then construct the approximate posterior density q(˜e)
introduced in Equation (10) using the associated Lagrangian or
Lyapunov function
L(˜x) = − ln p(˜s, ˜a, ˜i, ˜e|m)
= − ln p(˜s, ˜a, ˜i|˜e1) − ln p(˜e1|˜e2).
(15)
Under a Laplace assumption, the variational density
becomes a normal distribution:
q(˜e) = N(˜i, −∇˜i˜iL(˜s, ˜a, ˜i, ˜i)) , (16)
where ∇˜i˜iL(˜s, ˜a, ˜i, ˜i)) denotes the curvature of the Lagrangian
with respect to internal states. With this generative model and
assumed form for the variational density, we can now evaluate
the variational free energy for any given sensory state and
perform a gradient descent according to Equation (12).
An agent minimizing variational free energy is essentially
updating beliefs of its environment and itself, under the
generative model, so that the evolution of the system will
inevitably lead to a non-equilibrium steady state of minimal free
energy. Again, this appears rather intuitive in a developmental or
regenerative biological context: cells function to remodel tissues
and organs, in order to minimize the global diﬀerence between
the current conﬁguration and a species-speciﬁc anatomical
goal state (
Pezzulo and Levin, 2015 ; Pezzulo and Cisek, 2016 ).
Such cellular behavior is based on perceived signals from their
environment, and act with respect to expectations that are
genetically encoded, and shaped by cellular learning (
Baluška
and Levin, 2016 ).
As free energy corresponds to (an upper bound on) Bayesian
model evidence − ln p(˜s, ˜a, ˜i|m) as introduced in Equation
(11)—the ensuing self-organization is also self-evidencing. Self-
evidencing in neuroscience refers to the idea that the brain
is separated from its environment by a “statistical boundary, ”
which can be formally described by the statistical construct
of a Markov blanket (
Kirchhoﬀ et al., 2018 ). We note that
such a description of a system’s dynamics in Bayesian terms
[such as Bayesian beliefs q(˜e)] and self-evidencing is a purely
technical formulation based on the underlying mathematical
deﬁnitions within the framework, which can be ascribed to
simple systems like macromolecules and cells, as opposed to just
higher cognitive organisms.
The simulations in this work encompass a small set of
cells that are each equipped with the same generative model—
such that they collectively self-organize to minimize variational
free energy in an interdependent way, which has all the
characteristics of morphogenesis. This example is appropriate to
models such as the highly-regenerative planaria (
Durant et al.,
2016; Levin et al., 2019 ), which we will use multiple times in
illustrating the principles in this work.
All the cells in our simulations are initialized with random
signaling proﬁles near the center of their environment. The
morphogenetic task of self-organization to a target conﬁguration
thus corresponds, in this framework, to each cell inferring its
own location within the ensemble by forming and testing its
beliefs (or predictions) q(e) about the hidden causes of the
signaling concentrations it senses (i.e., the signaling molecule
secretion proﬁles and hence cell identities of the other cells
(
Figure 2).
The active states a cell has control are the type of signals
it can secrete, and its movement in any direction in 2D.
Furthermore, each cell possesses a place-encoded model of a
target conﬁguration common to all cells based on signaling
concentrations that would be sensed under that conﬁguration.
Therefore, for each of the four possible cell types corresponding
to speciﬁc positions in the cell cluster, cells expect to sense
speciﬁc concentrations of signaling molecules.
Sensory states s are therefore chemotactic concentrations of
intracellular, exogenous and extracellular signals:
s =



sc
sx
sλ


 =



ec
ex
λ(ex, ec)


 + ω , (17)
where e are the external states of concentrations c and positions
x of other cells. The signal concentration sλ at each position
of the i-th cell is given through the secretion and diﬀusion of
signaling molecules of each other cell j and of itself, determined
by the coeﬃcient:
λi(ex, ec) = τ ·
∑
j
ecj ·exp(−k dij) . (18)
Here, ecj is the combination of the four signals expressed at
each position j, depicted in
Figure 2B as color coded around the
target positions e∗, that are deﬁned in Figure 2C, and
dij =| exi − exj | , (19)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /zero.tnum/nine.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
FIGURE /two.tnum
Schematic of variational Bayesian simulation of simple body sh ape morphogenesis illustrated by the example of regenerative pa tterning
observed in planarian ﬂatworms. (A) When dissecting out the center piece of a planarian ﬂatworm, th e constituent cells will remodel into a
whole new worm with normal body axis. For the purpose of illustratin g our simulation and for simplicity, cells that form diﬀerent tis sue types
were grouped together as one cell. (B) Expected Signal concentrations (background color hues) at each tar get ﬁnal position (colored stars) in
the target morphology encode the cellular model of inference, with t he same color encoding cell type from (A). (C) The target morphology for
the arrangement of cells is encoded by expectations of external signals e∗
c for any given position e∗
x in the deﬁned target morphology that
constitutes the ﬁnal conﬁguration of cells. Each row in e∗
c corresponds to a diﬀerent signaling type, while every column rep resents the signal
expression states for a diﬀerent cell. Adapted from
Kuchling et al. (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/zero.tnum).
is the distance between the i-th cell and the remaining cells, to
which the secreted signal diﬀuses with diﬀusion coeﬃcient k.
Analogous to stem cell-like behavior, we specify the same
generative model g for each cell:
g(e) =



e∗
c
e∗
x
λ∗


 σ (e), (20)
where λ∗ = λ(e∗
c , e∗
x) is the signal concentration at the target
locations, and
σ (ej) =
exp ej
∑
j exp ej
(21)
is the softmax function (or normalized exponential). This is a
commonly utilized function in neural networks to enforce a sum
to one constraint, which allows an interpretation as a categorical
distribution over mutually exclusive outcomes.
Using these expressions—and the equations of motion from
the previous section—we can express the ﬂow of internal and
active (i.a. autonomous) states from Equation (12) as
(a′′) fa(˜s, ˜a, ˜i) = (Qa − Ŵa)∇˜aF(˜s, ˜a, ˜i) = D˜a − ∇ ˜a˜s ·/Pi1 (1) ˜ǫ
(b′′) fi(˜s, ˜a, ˜i) = (Qi − Ŵi)∇˜iF(˜s, ˜a, ˜i) = D˜i − ∇ ˜a ˜ǫ ·/Pi1 (1) ˜ǫ
− /Pi1 (2)˜i ,
(22)
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /one.tnum/zero.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
while suppressing higher order terms. Here, ǫ = s − g(i) is
the prediction error associated with sensory states—the state of
chemotactic signal receptors—and can hence be expressed as:
ǫ =



ǫc
ǫx
ǫλ


 =



sc − e∗
c σ (i)
sx − e∗
xσ (i)
sλ − λ∗σ (i)


 . (23)
D is the matrix derivative operator on generalized states and
the signal precision /Pi1 (1) is set to 1. We assumed Gaussian priors
(with a mean of 0) over the hidden states with a small precision
/Pi1 (2) (i.e., high variance) with a log precision of minus two.
With this generative model in place, the internal states
organize themselves to minimize (precision-weighted)
prediction error based upon predictions of sensed signaling
states from neighboring cells. In neuroscience, this scheme is
also referred to as predictive coding and can be viewed as a
generalized form of Bayesian (variational) ﬁltering as described
earlier. Predictive coding describes the dynamics of the system
in terms of prediction errors ǫ through accumulation of model
evidence lnp(˜s, ˜a, ˜i|m), which maximizes likelihood p(˜s, ˜a, ˜i|˜e1)
(
Friston et al., 2009 ). This is exactly the type of process
underlying the formulation of variational free energy above.
Matlab software running these simulations, under diﬀerent
conditions can be downloaded as part of the academic
SPM software from
https://www.ﬁl.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/
(accessed via a graphical user interface invoked with the
command >> DEM). The code of the simulations can be found
at
https://github.com/LPioL/active_inference_morphopsy/.
/five.tnum. Developmental defects as the
result of a deﬁcit of sensory
attenuation or aberrant precision
Here, we use active inference to simulate dysmorphogenesis
and disorders of sensory attenuation, similarly to what we
discussed above, in relation to schizophrenic and autistic
patients. We ﬁrst present the standard (non-pathological)
simulation of morphogenesis by setting appropriate values of
sensory and prior precisions. Then, we show and analyze three
simulations of aberrant morphogenesis. The ﬁrst simulation
illustrates the eﬀects of high sensory precision in driving
aberrant morphogenesis, analogous to what is observed in
negative symptoms of schizophrenia and autism. The second
simulation illustrates the eﬀects of excessive prior precision in
driving aberrant morphogenesis, analogous to so-called positive
symptoms of schizophrenia (e.g., hallucinations and delusions,
Powers et al., 2017 ). The third simulation illustrates the eﬀects
of low sensory precision in driving dysmorphogenesis, which
might be analogous to forms of hyporeactivity.
/five.tnum./one.tnum. Standard (non-pathological)
morphogenesis
Setting appropriate values for the precision terms leads
to normal morphogenesis and the normal diﬀerentiation and
migration of cells, which reach the appropriate location in
the morphospace. The cells correctly infer their locations
by forming predictions about the hidden causes of the
signaling concentrations (without any perturbation of their
precision parameters) and they reach the target morphology (see
Figure 3).
In this simulation, ascending prediction errors are associated
with an appropriate sensory precision, and sensory signals are
processed in a context-sensitive way leading to an appropriate
collective inference.
/five.tnum./two.tnum. Excessively high sensory precision in
morphogenesis
This simulation illustrates a deﬁcit of sensory attenuation
(analogous to what is observed in autism and schizophrenia).
For this, we assigned an excessively high precision to the
biochemical signals sensed by all cells (see
Figure 4), i.e., a value
that greatly exceeds the optimal value in this case. An excessively
high sensory precision will increase the inﬂuence of ascending
prediction errors of sensory channels in which the cells will place
more conﬁdence. We can observe that during diﬀerentiation, all
cells become intestinal cells and they migrate without following
the body plan of the planaria; in other words, the cells tend to
stay around a circle. By assigning a high sensory precision, the
cells develop a deﬁcit of sensory attenuation and do not behave
properly. They secrete chemicals as if they were already intestinal
cells and the collective organization and communication fail to
give them the appropriate information necessary to reach the
appropriate morphology. Sensory prediction errors stay high
during development, and top-down prediction errors are not
taken into account by the cells leading to this development
defect. Cells only integrate local cues, and high sensory precision
leads to their inability to contextualize sensory information.
This behavior renders sensory prediction errors too precise and
context insensitive as top-down information won’t be taken
into account.
This example illustrates a possible development of a
homogeneous tumor from a deﬁcit of sensory attenuation.
The majority of the cells stay close to each other and do not
migrate appropriately. We can also observe some cells that
migrate very fast at the beginning of the morphogenesis. We
can draw a parallel in development with neurocristopathies
(
Bolande, 1974 ). Neurocristopathies are a developmental defect
that are characterized by the abnormal speciﬁcation, migration,
diﬀerentiation, or death of neural crest cells during embryonic
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /one.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
FIGURE /three.tnum
(A) Time-lapse movie montage of simulation of normal morphogenesis. The eight initially unspeciﬁed cell types perform chemotaxis and u pdate
their posterior beliefs in order to infer the correct target morphology . (B) Diﬀerentiation proﬁle of the eight cells during morphogenesis. (C)
Free-energy minimization during morphogenesis.
FIGURE /four.tnum
(A) Time-lapse movie montage of simulation of morphogenesis with a deﬁc it of sensory attenuation high precision on the sensory signals
received by the cells. The eight initially unspeciﬁed cell ty pes perform chemotaxis and update their posterior beliefs in order to infer the correct
target morphology. (B) Diﬀerentiation proﬁle of the eight cells during morphogenesis. (C) Free-energy minimization during morphogenesis.
development. High sensory precision leads to increased
estimates of and larger updates about environmental volatility
as is sometimes observed in relation to autism (
Lawson et al.,
2017). Excessively precise systems (including cells) try to extract
too much information from noisy signals (or too close signals),
instead of treating noise as irreducible. This implies that such
a system will update its generative model frequently, without
improving its estimate over time. The system remains with some
unaccounted uncertainty and this may be stressful in biological
systems looking for homeostasis.
In
Figure 5A, from two cells having too high precision,
we have a developmental defect where one head (red) cell
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /one.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
FIGURE /five.tnum
(A) Results of the simulations for one to eight cells having a too high pr ecision. (B) Results of the simulations for one to eight cells having a too high pr ior on their identity, the cells think they are
intestinal cells.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /one.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
FIGURE /six.tnum
(A) Time-lapse movie montage of simulation of morphogenesis with a deﬁc it of sensory attenuation via high prior on identity of the cells. T he
eight initially unspeciﬁed cell types perform chemotaxis and u pdate their posterior beliefs in order to infer the correct target m orphology. (B)
Diﬀerentiation proﬁle of the eight cells during morphogenesis. (C) Free-energy minimization during morphogenesis.
can’t reach the appropriate location, but instead stays close
to intestinal cells and doesn’t completely diﬀerentiate. With
the increasing number of cells having too high precision, the
development of the tumor composed only of intestinal cells is
also increasing. The cells fail to infer their location and identity
as a collective, they are no longer able to communicate and infer
with the other cells.
/five.tnum./three.tnum. Excessively high prior on the identity
of cells in morphogenesis
This second simulation illustrates the eﬀects of assigning
an excessively high prior on the identity of the cells analogous
to what is hypothesized for the positive symptoms of
schizophrenia (see
Figure 6). Too strong of a prior makes the
cells not accept contradictory information eﬀectively, sensory
attenuation is too high reducing their ability to handle novel
circumstances (such as regenerative repair). Here, all cells
believe before diﬀerentiation and migration that they are
intestinal cells. We can observe that at the beginning of
morphogenesis (see
Figure 6), cells are confused and migrate
in all directions and mostly at the center as if they were
intestinal cells. The diﬀerentiation in intestinal (yellow) cells
last 28 steps of the simulation and then the cells undergo
a partial diﬀerentiation to their appropriate identity trying
to recover the target morphology. We can observe that the
cells of the head and tail do not migrate perfectly to the
target morphology. Their location and their diﬀerentiation
are incomplete. Biologically, this resembles the remodeling of
scrambled “Picasso head” in tadpoles, with eyes, jaws, and other
organs in the wrong locations, into normal frog faces (
Levin,
2021a).
This example also illustrates the pluripotential capacities of
the cells and the ability of self-assembly to recover from drastic
changes in precision and sensory attenuation.
Similar to the previous simulation, we can observe an
abnormal migration of cells as in neurocristopathies that result
from a derangement of neural crest migration, colonization, or
diﬀerentiation (
Bolande, 1974, 1997).
As we can observe in Figure 5B, from four cells with a too
high expectation on their identities, we can observe incomplete
diﬀerentiation of several cells. After a period of time, cells
recover the target morphology with respect to the migration
to the appropriate locations, but the diﬀerentiation is not
complete. There is an important developmental noise, which
leads to a disorder of inference for the other cells in terms
of diﬀerentiation.
/five.tnum./four.tnum. Excessively low sensory precision in
morphogenesis
This simulation illustrates the eﬀects of setting a very low
sensory precision for all cells in the collective (see
Figure 7).
A low sensory precision relative to the precision of prediction
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /one.tnum/four.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
FIGURE /seven.tnum
(A) Time-lapse movie montage of simulation of morphogenesis with a deﬁc it of sensory attenuation via low sensory precision of the cells. T he
eight initially unspeciﬁed cell types perform chemotaxis and u pdate their posterior beliefs in order to infer the correct target m orphology. (B)
Diﬀerentiation proﬁle of the eight cells during morphogenesis. (C) Free-energy minimization during morphogenesis.
errors higher in the hierarchy, will bias perception toward prior
beliefs, which in this case are randomly initialized.
We can observe that intestinal cells do not successfully
diﬀerentiate; this is indicated by the fact that they remain brown
throughout the entire simulation. Only one pharynx cell (blue)
diﬀerentiates properly. The other pharynx cell is between an
undiﬀerentiated state (brown) and a tail state (green). Overall
the cells didn’t migrate to the exact location of the target
morphology, but this brown-green incompletely diﬀerentiated
pharynx cell deviated the most from its target.
Low sensory precision is associated with hyporeactivity (
Idei
et al., 2021 ). In this case, the cells would not react enough
to the chemicals they were sensing, leading to incomplete
diﬀerentiation and migration of several cells of the collective;
this in turn leads to failure of anatomical maturation.
/five.tnum./five.tnum. Simulated biomedical intervention to
rescue a collective with two cells having
too high sensory precision
This simulation shows the eﬀect of the reduction of
concentration signaling and sensitivity to the other cells signals
of the two cells having a too high precision (see
Figure 8).
Without this intervention, the collective is unable to reach
the target morphology and one head (red) cell stays close to
intestinal cells and never fully diﬀerentiates. After the simulated
biomedical intervention, as we can observe in
Figure 8, the
developmental defect is cured and all cells reach their location
with the appropriate diﬀerentiation. The developmental noise
we can observe in the pathological case is also removed.
This resembles the eﬀects of antipsychotics for the treatment
of schizophrenia. Most of them are antagonists of D2 receptors
and therefore reduce the sensitivity of neurons to dopamine
(
Seeman and Kapur, 2000 ). In our simulation, we reduced the
sensitivity to the other cell signals for the two cells having a
too high precision, suggesting that dopaminergic drugs acting as
antagonists could be tested in morphogenesis. Indeed, in active
inference, the precision of sensory information is assumed to be
mediated by neuromodulators, such as dopamine (
Friston et al.,
2012) or acetylcholine ( Vossel et al., 2014 ).
/six.tnum. Experimental test of the dopamine
antagonist thoridazine on the
development of Xenopus laevis
embryos
Our framework emphasizes strong parallels between the
dynamics of cognition and those of collective cell behavior
during embryogenesis and regeneration. Due to evolutionary
conservation (
Fields et al., 2020 ), these parallels are not
only functional but are mechanistic: the same machinery
used to drive information processing in the brain should be
implicated in the control of anatomical development. While
this ﬁrst generation of such models do not have the detail
to be able to predict precisely that anatomical outcome of
speciﬁc perturbations, they do make a surprising prediction
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /one.tnum/five.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
FIGURE /eight.tnum
Timelapse of the rescue of two cells with too high precision via r eduction of concentration signals and sensitivity to cell signal s of the other cells.
not implied by other existing models of developmental events:
that perturbation of dopamine signaling will cause errors
in morphogenesis, including of non-neural tissues. Thus, we
next tested a prediction of our models—that ﬁnely-tuned
levels of sensory precision in cells are necessary for correct
embryogenesis—using a loss-of-function pharmacological assay
in early frog embryos. Thioridazine is a dopamine receptor
antagonist and has been used to treat schizophrenia (
Fenton
et al., 2007 ). In the active inference framework, as a
dopamine receptor antagonist, this drug may reduce sensory
precision in biological systems (
Friston et al., 2012 ) and
according to our simulations this drug should induce diﬀerent
developmental defects. Thus, we applied this drug to Xenopus
laevis embryos during early stages (see section 6) and
scored their morphogenesis by the swimming larva stage.
Compared to normal embryos (
Figures 9A-left, Figures 9B-
top), treated embryos exhibited abnormalities that included
hypopigmentation, kinked primary axes, edemas, abnormal face
shapes, malformed guts, and cleft cement glands (
Figures 9A-
right, Figures 9B-bottom). The percentage of embryos with each
defect is shown in Figure 9C; raw counts are shown in Table 1.
These results are consistent with our models, which suggest
that modulation of mechanisms, such as neurotransmitter
signaling (known to be involved in information processing
in the ﬁeld of behavioral and brain sciences), can regulate
morphogenesis of non-neural structures. More broadly, these
results contribute to the study of morphogenesis as behavior of a
collective cellular agent in anatomical morphospace (
Fields and
Levin, 2022).
/six.tnum./one.tnum. Experimental methods
/six.tnum./one.tnum./one.tnum. Animal husbandry
Xenopus laevistadpoles were raised in 0.1X Marc’s Modiﬁed
Ringers solution (MMR), pH 7.8, and were staged according
to
Nieuwkoop et al. (2020). All embryos (pooled from separate
female frogs and then randomly divided) were raised at 14 ◦C.
Feeding stage animals were fed three times a week with Sierra
Micron powdered diet, and media changes were performed
on alternate days. Tadpoles were raised at a density of 100
tadpoles per 40 ml of media in 100 × 20 mm petri dishes.
All experiments were approved by the Tufts University Animal
Research Committee (M2020-35) in accordance with the guide
for care and use of laboratory animals.
/six.tnum./one.tnum./two.tnum. Pharmacological exposures
Thioridazine (thioridazine-HCl, Sigma-Aldrich) was
dissolved in deionized water at 1mM, and were then frozen
in single use aliquots to prevent continuous re-thawing. Drug
exposure occurred at 90 µ M in 0.1X MMR conducted on NF
stage 12.5–26 embryos that had been reared at 14 ◦C prior to
exposure. During the treatment, experimental and controls
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /one.tnum/six.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
FIGURE /nine.tnum
Experimental results showing the eﬀects of thioridazine on the development of Xenopus laevisembryos. Compared to normal embryos in (A),
treated embryos exhibit signiﬁcant levels of abnormalities th at include hypopigmentation, kinked bodies, edemas, abnormal face shapes,
malformed guts, and cleft cement glands (B). The percent of embryos that had each defect is shown in (C). Treated embryos had higher
incidents of hypopigmentation (/seven.tnum./one.tnum/seven.tnum%), edemas (/one.tnum/two.tnum./six.tnum/seven.tnum%), abnormal face shapes (/one.tnum/three.tnum./five.tnum%), and cleft cement glands (/four.tnum./five.tnum%) than their control
counterparts, summarized in (C). Each point represents one separate trial of /one.tnum/zero.tnum/zero.tnum embryos each and is graphed as a mean with SEM and ** p <
/zero.tnum./zero.tnum/one.tnum and *p < /zero.tnum./zero.tnum/five.tnum.
TABLE /one.tnum Raw counts of thioridazine induced defects in six separatetrials of /one.tnum/zero.tnum/zero.tnum embryos.
Thioridazine Control
Hypopigmentation 7 1 1 22 1 11 0 0 0 0 0 0
Kinked body 4 4 4 1 2 14 0 0 6 5 3 0
Edema 4 1 1 46 18 6 0 0 6 2 1 0
Abnormal face shape 12 2 2 55 0 10 0 0 0 0 0 0
Gut 9 0 0 0 0 3 2 0 3 0 2 0
Cleft cement gland 0 4 4 0 0 19 0 0 0 0 0 0
embryos were kept at 18 ◦C. After the exposure they were
returned to 14 ◦C until they reached scoring stage 45. Scoring
was performed by inspection of morphology using transmitted
light microscopy.
/seven.tnum. Discussion
In this article, we simulated disorders of morphogenesis as
disorders of (collective) inference. The decision of one cell is a
function of the states of the other cells; or in other words, the
collective sends the appropriate signals to each individual cell. In
a functional sense, the collective “remembers” the body shape;
if one cell diverges, the collective continues emitting signals
that guide that cell until it again reaches the correct position.
We implemented deﬁcits of sensory attenuation and aberrant
precision that are usually invoked as explanations of autism and
schizophrenia and also considered a low precision simulation
that has been linked to hyporeactivity. All of these simulations
lead to developmental defects via aberrant sensory precision
relative to the prior precision. We presented a proof of concept
appealing to disorders of inference and showed that precision
control is useful in understanding not only psychopathological
conditions, but also developmental defects and morphogenesis
(see
Table 2).
We have furthermore shown how manipulations of the
information processing modes, in terms of precision and prior
strength, interplay with biochemical signals in developmental
biology, such as signaling ligand concentration and receptor
sensitivities. Crucially, our (simulated) results showed that the
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /one.tnum/seven.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
TABLE /two.tnum Table of the associations between active inference, psychopathology, and dysmorphogenesis.
Active inference Psychopathology Dysmorphogenesis
Excessively high sensory precision
Autism
Deﬁcit of sensory attenuation
like in schizophrenia
Larger update about environmental volatility
Homogeneous tumor
Neurocristopathies
Total disorganization
Excessively high prior
(e.g., on belief states or the identity of cells)
Deﬁcit of sensory attenuation
like in schizophrenia
Organs in the wrong place (
Robin and Nadeau, 2001 )
Not enough of one organ
Incomplete diﬀerentiation
Excessively low sensory precision Hyporeactivity
No diﬀerentiation of some cells (not enough growth)
Deﬁcits of migration
Wrong organ
disrupting eﬀect of individual cells’ signaling aberrations on the
overall morphology can be rescued by decreasing the diﬀusion of
signaling ligands and receptor sensitivities, an eﬀect that would
have been hard to predict without our proposed view of certain
morphological defects as disorders of inference and precision
control (
Pezzulo and Levin, 2015 ). This simulated result remains
to be experimentally tested in vivoand is left as future work. This
new framework that focuses on the precision of spatiotemporal
signal progression during development comes at an opportune
moment, when tools such as optogenetics (
Bugaj et al., 2017 )
and microﬂuidics ( Sonnen and Merten, 2019 ) have provided
us for the ﬁrst time with enough spatiotemporal precision to
study and manipulate these events in real time on a single
cell level.
If developmental defects are the results of disorders of active
inference similar to what we can ﬁnd in psychopathologies
like schizophrenia or autism, it may be possible that the
psychoparmacology used for hyper- or hyporeactivity,
hallucinations, or other symptoms related to these diseases
could be used to address developmental defects. Various
case studies highlight this possibility. Indeed, by applying
diﬀerent reagents targeting the glutamatergic, adrenergic,
and dopaminergic pathways to Xenopus laevis embryos
from gastrulation to organogenesis stages, Sullivan and
Levin observed numerous developmental defects, including
craniofacial defects, hyperpigmentation, muscle mispatterning,
and miscoiling of the gut (
Sullivan and Levin, 2016 ). Serotonin
pathways are also implicated in left-right asymmetry and the
pre-neural morphogenesis (
Fukumoto et al., 2005 ; Levin et al.,
2006). Serotonin signaling has also been linked to autism
and may be involved in this pathology during early brain
development (
Yang et al., 2014 ). In addition, usually, dopamine,
serotonin, and adrenaline receptors, are molecular targets for
antipsychotics and schizophrenia (
Stepnicki et al., 2018 ); and
we have now provided evidence that modulators of decision-
making in traditional behavioral systems have predicted eﬀects
on morphogenetic behavior of cell collectives. Therefore, by
targeting similar pathways during development, we may be able
to reverse developmental defects.
These ideas are part of a bigger eﬀort to solve the
inverse problem in regenerative medicine (
Lobo et al.,
2014): strategies such as CRISPR and genome editing cannot
reach their full potential because it is usually too diﬃcult
to know what to change at the hardware level (DNA
and pathways) to achieve desired changes at the level of
anatomy. Fortunately, neuroscience has blazed the trail in
a pluralistic understanding of complex systems: work in
that ﬁeld (and types of intervention targets) ranges across
studies of ion channel protein structure, synaptic plasticity,
network roles in image processing and memory, behavioral
responses, and psychological drives and analysis. Neuroscience
would greatly beneﬁt from understanding how non-neural
cells work, because neurons share many molecular and
functional properties with non-neural cells. Thus, while
current biomedical approaches have focused entirely on
manipulating the lowest level (gene regulatory networks
and protein structure/pathways), we propose to begin to
deploy interventions across scales in regenerative medicine, as
commonly occurs in the behavioral sciences. We have previously
proposed that high-level manipulation of tissues’ perceptions
and memories (via training for example) may be a better way
to manipulate large-scale properties of morphogenesis in health
and disease than bottom-up micromanagement of the protein-
level hardware (
Pezzulo and Levin, 2015 ; Mathews and Levin,
2018).
The active inference framework is a very powerful aspect
of system-level functionality in cognition ( Friston K. et al.,
2017; Pezzulo et al., 2018 ; Parr et al., 2022 ), and a key target
of strategies to exploit invariants between neuroscience and
other ﬁelds (
Friston, 2013 ; Fields and Levin, 2020 ; Fields et al.,
2021). Thus, once we reach a better understanding of the
role of precision in development and morphogenesis, it may
be possible to apply “reverse inference” as we can see for
computational psychiatry (
Schwartenbeck and Friston, 2016 ).
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /one.tnum/eight.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
Reverse inference in development/morphogenesis reﬂects the
probability of a developmental process being present given
the knowledge of activation in a particular tissue region.
The aim is to infer from a speciﬁc anatomy which precision
parameters caused it (i.e., which precision parameters were
incorrectly set). Similarly to
Schwartenbeck and Friston (2016)
where the researchers infer the model parameters of a single
subject or a group of subjects from measured behavioral
or neuronal responses, it could be possible to develop a
“computerized clinical diagnosis” for developmental defects
leading to speciﬁc biomedical interventions. These are just
the ﬁrst steps on a roadmap to regenerative medicine that
borrows from neuroscience the highly fruitful approaches
focused on modulation of systems at diﬀerent levels, from
molecular pathways to behavioral decision-making. A future
computational somatic psychiatry will take advantage of the
tools of behavioral and cognitive sciences to manipulate not
only the hardware of cellular pathways, but also the decision-
making of cellular collectives. By taking seriously the native
competencies of tissues (
Levin, 2021b, 2022c), it may eventually
be possible to eﬀectively modulate outcomes in birth defects,
traumatic injury, and cancer, not by micromanagement but by
quantitative behavior shaping in morphospace.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are
included in the article/supplementary materials, further
inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.
Author contributions
LP-L and FK wrote code, performed computational
experiments, and analyzed data. AT performed Xenopus
experiments and analyzed data. GP and ML developed
the project, guided the experimental design and conceptual
foundations, and provided oversight and funding. All authors
contributed intellectually to the work, co-wrote the manuscript,
and approve the submitted version.
Funding
This research received funding from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research
and Innovation under the Speciﬁc Grant Agreement No.
945539 (Human Brain Project SGA3) to GP and the
European Research Council under the Grant Agreement
No. 820213 (ThinkAhead) to GP. ML gratefully acknowledges
support by the Templeton World Charity Foundation
(grant TWCF0606) and the John Templeton Foundation
(grant 62212).
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in
the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential conﬂict
of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed
or endorsed by the publisher.
References
Abouchar, L., Petkova, M. D., Steinhardt, C. R., and Gregor, T . (2014). Fly
wing vein patterns have spatial reproducibility of a single cell. J. Roy. Soc. Interface
11:20140443. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.0443
Adams, R. A., Perrinet, L. U., and Friston, K. (2012). Smooth pursuit and visual
occlusion: active inference and oculomotor control in schizo phrenia. PLoS ONE
7:e47502. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047502
Adams, R. A., Shipp, S., and Friston, K. J. (2013). Predictions not commands:
active inference in the motor system. Brain Struct. Funct. 218, 611–643.
doi: 10.1007/s00429-012-0475-5
Angela, J. Y., and Dayan, P. (2005). Uncertainty, neuromodula tion, and
attention. Neuron 46, 681–692. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.04.026
Arthur, T., Harris, D., Buckingham, G., Brosnan, M., Wilson, M ., Williams, G.,
et al. (2021). An examination of active inference in autistic adults using immersive
virtual reality. Sci. Rep.11:20377. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-99864-y
Baluška, F., and Levin, M. (2016). On having no head: cognitio n throughout
biological systems. Front. Psychol.7:902. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00902
Barkai, N., and Shilo, B.-Z. (2009). Robust generation and de coding
of morphogen gradients. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 1:a001990.
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a001990
Baron-Cohen, S. (2000). Theory of mind and autism: a review. Int.
Rev. Res. Ment. Retard. 23, 169–184. doi: 10.1016/S0074-7750(00)80
010-5
Bates, E. (2015). Ion channels in development and cancer. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev.
Biol. 31, 231–247. doi: 10.1146/annurev-cellbio-100814-125338
Bolande, R. P. (1974). The neurocristopathies: a unifying con cept of
disease arising in neural crest maldevelopment. Hum. Pathol. 5, 409–429.
doi: 10.1016/S0046-8177(74)80021-3
Bolande, R. P. (1997). Neurocristopathy: its growth and develo pment in 20 years.
Pediatr. Pathol. Lab. Med.17, 1–25. doi: 10.1080/15513819709168343
Brown, H., Adams, R. A., Parees, I., Edwards, M., and Friston , K. (2013).
Active inference, sensory attenuation and illusions. Cogn. Process. 14, 411–427.
doi: 10.1007/s10339-013-0571-3
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /one.tnum/nine.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
Buckley, C. L., Kim, C. S., McGregor, S., and Seth, A. K. (2017). The free energy
principle for action and perception: a mathematical review. J. Math. Psychol.81,
55–79. doi: 10.1016/j.jmp.2017.09.004
Bugaj, L. J., O’Donoghue, G. P., and Lim, W. A. (2017). Interro gating cellular
perception and decision making with optogenetic tools. J. Cell Biol.216, 25–28.
doi: 10.1083/jcb.201612094
Buznikov, G. A., and Shmukler, Y. B. (1981). Possible role of "pren ervous"
neurotransmitters in cellular interactions of early embryogen esis: a hypothesis.
Neurochem. Res.6, 55–68. doi: 10.1007/BF00963906
Cervera, J., Pai, V. P., Levin, M., and Mafe, S. (2019). From n on-excitable single-
cell to multicellular bioelectrical states supported by ion channels and gap junction
proteins: electrical potentials as distributed controllers. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol.,
149, 39–53. doi: 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2019.06.004
Ciaunica, A., Seth, A., Limanowski, J., Hesp, C., and Friston , K. J. (2022).
I overthink–therefore I am not: an active inference account of altered sense
of self and agency in depersonalisation disorder. Conscious. Cogn. 101:103320.
doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2022.103320
Clark, A. (2013). The many faces of precision (replies to comment aries on
“whatever next? neural prediction, situated agents, and the future of cognitive
science”).Front. Psychol.4:270. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00270
Durant, F., Lobo, D., Hammelman, J., and Levin, M. (2016). Phy siological
controls of large-scale patterning in planarian regeneration: a m olecular and
computational perspective on growth and form. Regeneration (Oxf.) 3, 78–102.
doi: 10.1002/reg2.54
Feldman, H., and Friston, K. (2010). Attention, uncertainty , and free-energy.
Front. Hum. Neurosci.4:215. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215
Fenton, M., Rathbone, J., and Reilly, J. (2007). Thioridazine for schizophrenia.
Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.3:CD001944. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001944.pub2
Fields, C., Bischof, J., and Levin, M. (2020). Morphological co ordination: a
common ancestral function unifying neural and non-neural s ignaling. Physiology
35, 16–30. doi: 10.1152/physiol.00027.2019
Fields, C., Glazebrook, J. F., and Levin, M. (2021). Minimal phys icalism
as a scale-free substrate for cognition and consciousness. Neurosci. Conscious.
2021:niab013. doi: 10.1093/nc/niab013
Fields, C., and Levin, M. (2019). Somatic multicellularity as a sa tisﬁcing solution
to the prediction-error minimization problem. Commun. Integr. Biol.12, 119–132.
doi: 10.1080/19420889.2019.1643666
Fields, C., and Levin, M. (2020). Scale-free biology: integrat ing evolutionary and
developmental thinking. Bioessays 42:e1900228. doi: 10.1002/bies.201900228
Fields, C., and Levin, M. (2022). Competency in navigating arb itrary spaces:
intelligence as an invariant for analyzing cognition in divers e embodiments.
Entropy 24:819. doi: 10.3390/e24060819
Fletcher, P. C., and Frith, C. D. (2009). Perceiving is believi ng: a bayesian
approach to explaining the positive symptoms of schizophrenia. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
10, 48–58. doi: 10.1038/nrn2536
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain t heory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 10:20130475.
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., an d Pezzulo,
G. (2017). Active inference: a process theory. Neural Comput. 29, 1–49.
doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00912
Friston, K., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energ y principle for the
brain. J. Physiol. Paris100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001
Friston, K., Levin, M., Sengupta, B., and Pezzulo, G. (2015). Kn owing one’s place:
a free-energy approach to pattern regulation. J. Roy. Soc. Interface12:20141383.
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.1383
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., and Kiebel, S. J. (2009). Reinf orcement learning or
active inference? PLoS ONE4:e6421. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006421
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., Kilner, J., and Kiebel, S. J. (20 10). Action
and behavior: a free-energy formulation. Biol. Cybern. 102, 227–260.
doi: 10.1007/s00422-010-0364-z
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., and de Vries, B. (2017). The graphica l brain:
belief propagation and active inference. Netw. Neurosci. 1, 381–414.
doi: 10.1162/NETN_a_00018
Friston, K. J., Shiner, T., FitzGerald, T., Galea, J. M., Adams, R., Brown, H., et al.
(2012). Dopamine, aﬀordance and active inference. PLoS Comput. Biol.8:e1002327.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002327
Friston, K. J., Stephan, K. E., Montague, R., and Dolan, R. J. (2 014).
Computational psychiatry: the brain as a phantastic organ. Lancet Psychiatry 1,
148–158. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(14)70275-5
Frith, C. D., and Frith, U. (1999). Interacting minds–a biolo gical basis. Science
286, 1692–1695. doi: 10.1126/science.286.5445.1692
Fukumoto, T., Kema, I. P., and Levin, M. (2005). Serotonin si gnaling is a very
early step in patterning of the left-right axis in chick and frog embryos. Curr. Biol.
15, 794–803. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2005.03.044
Harris, M. P. (2021). Bioelectric signaling as a unique regulato r of development
and regeneration. Development 148:dev180794. doi: 10.1242/dev.180794
Idei, H., Murata, S., Yamashita, Y., and Ogata, T. (2021). Pa radoxical
sensory reactivity induced by functional disconnection in a robot
model of neurodevelopmental disorder. Neural Netw. 138, 150–163.
doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2021.01.033
Iglesias, S., Mathys, C., Brodersen, K. H., Kasper, L., Piccir elli, M., den Ouden,
H. E., et al. (2013). Hierarchical prediction errors in midbra in and basal forebrain
during sensory learning. Neuron 80, 519–530. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.09.009
James, W. (1890). Principles of Psychology, Vol. 1. New York, NY: Henry Holt
and Co. doi: 10.1037/10538-000
Kirchhoﬀ, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., and Kivers tein, J. (2018). The
Markov blankets of life: autonomy, active inference and the fr ee energy principle.
J. Roy. Soc. Interface15:20170792. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0792
Kuchling, F., Friston, K., Georgiev, G., and Levin, M. (2020). M orphogenesis
as bayesian inference: a variational approach to pattern forma tion
and control in complex biological systems. Phys. life Rev. 33, 88–108.
doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2019.06.001
Lawson, R. P., Mathys, C., and Rees, G. (2017). Adults with auti sm
overestimate the volatility of the sensory environment. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1293–
1299. doi: 10.1038/nn.4615
Lawson, R. P., Rees, G., and Friston, K. J. (2014). An aberrant precision account
of autism. Front. Hum. Neurosci.8:302. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00302
Levin, M. (2019). The computational boundary of a “self”: deve lopmental
bioelectricity drives multicellularity and scale-free cognitio n. Front. Psychol.
10:2688. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02688
Levin, M. (2021a). Bioelectric signaling: reprogrammable circ uits
underlying embryogenesis, regeneration, and cancer. Cell 184, 1971–1989.
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.02.034
Levin, M. (2021b). Bioelectrical approaches to cancer as a proble m of
the scaling of the cellular self. PProg. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 165, 102–113.
doi: 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2021.04.007
Levin, M. (2022a). Collective intelligence of morphogenesis as a teleonomic
process. PsyArXiv. doi: 10.31234/osf.io/5ywqu
Levin, M. (2022b). Tame: Technological approach to mind everyw here.
PsyArXiv. doi: 10.31234/osf.io/t6e8p
Levin, M. (2022c). Technological approach to mind everywhere: an
experimentally-grounded framework for understanding divers e bodies and minds.
Front. Syst. Neurosci.16:768201. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2022.768201
Levin, M., Buznikov, G. A., and Lauder, J. M. (2006). Of minds a nd embryos:
left-right asymmetry and the serotonergic controls of pre-neu ral morphogenesis.
Dev. Neurosci.28, 171–185. doi: 10.1159/000091915
Levin, M., and Martyniuk, C. J. (2018). The bioelectric code: an ancient
computational medium for dynamic control of growth and form. Biosystems 164,
76–93. doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2017.08.009
Levin, M., Pietak, A. M., and Bischof, J. (2019). Planarian re generation
as a model of anatomical homeostasis: recent progress in bioph ysical
and computational approaches. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 87, 125–144.
doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2018.04.003
Limongi, R., Bohaterewicz, B., Nowicka, M., Plewka, A., and F riston, K. J.
(2018). Knowing when to stop: aberrant precision and evidence accumulation in
schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res. 197, 386–391. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2017.12.018
Lobo, D., Solano, M., Bubenik, G. A., and Levin, M. (2014). A line ar-encoding
model explains the variability of the target morphology in regene ration. J. R. Soc.
Interface 11:20130918. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2013.0918
Mathews, J., and Levin, M. (2018). The body electric 2.0: rece nt advances in
developmental bioelectricity for regenerative and synthetic bioengineering. Curr.
Opin. Biotechnol.52, 134–144. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2018.03.008
Millikan, R. G. (1987). Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories: New
Foundations for Realism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /two.tnum/zero.tnum frontiersin.org
Pio-Lopez et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fncom./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/eight.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/seven.tnum/seven.tnum
Montague, P. R., Dolan, R. J., Friston, K. J., and Dayan, P. (20 12). Computational
psychiatry. Trends Cogn. Sci.16, 72–80. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2011.11.018
Moran, R. J., Campo, P., Symmonds, M., Stephan, K. E., Dolan,
R. J., and Friston, K. J. (2013). Free energy, precision and lea rning:
the role of cholinergic neuromodulation. J. Neurosci. 33, 8227–8236.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4255-12.2013
Nieuwkoop, P. D., Faber, J., Gerhart, J., and Kirschner, M. (20 20). Normal
Table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin): A Systematical and ChronologicalSurvey of the
Development From the Fertilized Egg Till the End of Metamorphosis. New York:
Garland Science.
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., and Friston, K. J. (2022). Model-based da ta analysis.
in Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior, eds
T. Parr, G. Pezzulo, and K. J. Friston (Cambridge: The MIT Press ), 173–190.
doi: 10.7551/mitpress/12441.001.0001
Paton, B., Hohwy, J., and Enticott, P. G. (2012). The rubber ha nd
illusion reveals proprioceptive and sensorimotor diﬀerences in a utism spectrum
disorders. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 42, 1870–1883. doi: 10.1007/s10803-011-
1430-7
Paulus, M. P., Feinstein, J. S., and Khalsa, S. S. (2019). An act ive inference
approach to interoceptive psychopathology. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol.15, 97–122.
doi: 10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-050718-095617
Pellicano, E., and Burr, D. (2012). When the world becomes ‘too r eal’:
a bayesian explanation of autistic perception. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16, 504–510.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2012.08.009
Pezzulo, G., and Cisek, P. (2016). Navigating the aﬀordance lan dscape: feedback
control as a process model of behavior and cognition. Trends Cogn. Sci. 20,
414–424. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2016.03.013
Pezzulo, G., and Levin, M. (2015). Re-membering the body: applica tions
of computational neuroscience to the top-down control of rege neration of
limbs and other complex organs. Integr. Biol. 7, 1487–1517. doi: 10.1039/C5IB0
0221D
Pezzulo, G., and Levin, M. (2016). Top-down models in biology: expla nation
and control of complex living systems above the molecular level. J. R. Soc. Interface
13:20160555. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2016.0555
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Hierarchica l active
inference: a theory of motivated control. Trends Cogn. Sci. 22, 294–306.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2018.01.009
Powers, A. R., Mathys, C., and Corlett, P. R. (2017). Pavlovian conditioning–
induced hallucinations result from overweighting of perceptual priors. Science 357,
596–600. doi: 10.1126/science.aan3458
Robin, N. H., and Nadeau, J. H. (2001). Disorganization
in mice and humans. Am. J. Med. Genet. 101, 334–338.
doi: 10.1002/1096-8628(20010715)101:4<334::AID-AJMG1233>3.0.CO;2-7
Rosen, R. (2012). “Anticipatory systems, ” in Anticipatory Systems, ed R. Rosen
(New York, NY: Springer), 313–370.
Schwartenbeck, P., and Friston, K. (2016). Computational phe notyping
in psychiatry: a worked example. ENeuro 3:ENEURO.0049-16.2016.
doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0049-16.2016
Seeman, P. and Kapur, S. (2000). Schizophrenia: more dopamine, more D2
receptors. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.97, 7673–7675. doi: 10.1073/pnas.97.14.7673
Shergill, S. S., Samson, G., Bays, P. M., Frith, C. D., and Wolpert, D. M. (2005).
Evidence for sensory prediction deﬁcits in schizophrenia. Am. J. Psychiatry 162,
2384–2386. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.162.12.2384
Shergill, S. S., White, T. P., Joyce, D. W., Bays, P. M., Wolpert,
D. M., and Frith, C. D. (2014). Functional magnetic resonanc e imaging of
impaired sensory prediction in schizophrenia. JAMA Psychiatry 71, 28–35.
doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.2974
Sonnen, K. F., and Merten, C. A. (2019). Microﬂuidics as an
emerging precision tool in developmental biology. Dev. Cell 48, 293–311.
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2019.01.015
Stepnicki, P., Kondej, M., and Kaczor, A. A. (2018). Current c oncepts and
treatments of schizophrenia. Molecules 23:2087. doi: 10.3390/molecules23082087
Sullivan, K. G., and Levin, M. (2016). Neurotransmitter signali ng pathways
required for normal development in Xenopus laevis embryos: a pharmacological
survey screen. J. Anat.229, 483–502. doi: 10.1111/joa.12467
Van den Bergh, O., Brosschot, J., Critchley, H., Thayer, J. F. , and
Ottaviani, C. (2021). Better safe than sorry: a common signa ture of general
vulnerability for psychopathology. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. , 16, 225–246.
doi: 10.1177/1745691620950690
Vandenberg, L. N., Adams, D. S., and Levin, M. (2012). Normali zed shape
and location of perturbed craniofacial structures in the xeno pus tadpole reveal
an innate ability to achieve correct morphology. Dev. Dyn. 241, 863–78.
doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23770
Voskoboynik, A., Simon-Blecher, N., Soen, Y., Rinkevich, B. , De Tomaso,
A. W., Ishizuka, K. J., et al. (2007). Striving for normality: w hole body
regeneration through a series of abnormal generations. FASEB J.21, 1335–1344.
doi: 10.1096/fj.06-7337com
Vossel, S., Bauer, M., Mathys, C., Adams, R. A., Dolan, R. J., St ephan,
K. E., et al. (2014). Cholinergic stimulation enhances Bayesia n belief
updating in the deployment of spatial attention. J. Neurosci. 34, 15735–15742.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0091-14.2014
Walsh, K. S., McGovern, D. P., Clark, A., and O’Connell, R. G. (2020) . Evaluating
the neurophysiological evidence for predictive processing as a model of perception.
Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.1464, 242–268. doi: 10.1111/nyas.14321
Yang, C.-J., Tan, H.-P., and Du, Y.-J. (2014). The development al disruptions
of serotonin signaling may involved in autism during early brai n development.
Neuroscience 267, 1–10. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.02.021
Yuan, R.-S., Ma, Y.-A., Yuan, B., and Ao, P. (2014). Lyapunov f unction
as potential function: a dynamical equivalence. Chin. Phys. B 23:010505.
doi: 10.1088/1674-1056/23/1/010505
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience /two.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org