ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 1 — #1
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
OPEN ACCESS
Citation: PriorelliM,StoianovIP,PezzuloG
(2025)Embodieddecisionsasactiveinference.
PLoSComputBiol21(6):e1013180.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180
Editor: MingBoCai,UniversityofMiami,
UNITEDSTATESOFAMERICA
Received: October4,2024
Accepted: May29,2025
Published: June18,2025
Copyright: © 2025 Priorellietal.Thisisan
openaccessarticledistributedundertheterms
ofthe CreativeCommonsAttributionLicense ,
whichpermitsunrestricteduse,distribution,
andreproductioninanymedium,providedthe
originalauthorandsourcearecredited.
Data availability statement: Thecodeis
availablehere: https:
//github.com/priorelli/embodied-decisions.
Funding: Thisresearchreceivedfundingfrom
theEuropeanResearchCouncilundertheGrant
AgreementNo.820213(ThinkAhead)toGP,the
ItalianNationalRecoveryandResiliencePlan
(NRRP),M4C2,fundedbytheEuropeanUnion
–NextGenerationEU(ProjectIR0000011,CUP
B51E22000150006,“EBRAINS-Italy”;Project
PE0000013,“FAIR”;ProjectPE0000006,
“MNESYS”)toGP,theEuropeanUnion’s
HorizonH2020-EIC-FETPROACT-2019
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Embodied decisions as active inference
Matteo Priorelli
 
 
1,2, Ivilin Peev Stoianov
 
 
1, Giovanni Pezzulo
 
 
1∗
1 Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council, Rome, Italy,2 DIAG,
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
∗ giovanni.pezzulo@istc.cnr.it
Abstract
Decision-making is often conceptualized as a serial process, during which sensory evi-
dence is accumulated for the choice alternatives until a certain threshold is reached, at
which point a decision is made and an action is executed. Thisdecide-then-act perspec-
tive has successfully explained various facets of perceptual and economic decisions in
the laboratory, in which action dynamics are usually irrelevant to the choice. However,
living organisms often face another class of decisions—calledembodied decisions—that
require selecting between potential courses of actions to be executed timely in a dynamic
environment, e.g., for a lion, deciding which gazelle to chase and how fast to do so. Stud-
ies of embodied decisions reveal two aspects of goal-directed behavior in stark contrast
to the serial view. First, that decision and action processes can unfold in parallel; second,
that action-related components, such as the motor costsassociated with selecting a par-
ticular choice alternative or required to “change mind” between choice alternatives, exert
a feedback effect on the decision taken. Here, we show that these signatures of embod-
ied decisions emerge naturally in active inference—a framework that simultaneously opti-
mizes perception and action, according to the same (free energy minimization) imper-
ative. We show that optimizing embodied choices requires a continuous feedback loop
between motor planning (where beliefs about choice alternatives guide action dynamics)
and motor inference (where action dynamics finesse beliefs about choice alternatives).
Furthermore, our active inference simulations reveal the normative character of embod-
ied decisions in ecological settings – namely, achieving an effective balance between a
high accuracy and a low risk ofmissing valid opportunities.
Author summary
In this study, we introduce a novel modeling approach to explore embodied decision-
making, where decisions and actions occur simultaneously in dynamic environments.
Unlike traditional models that treat decision and action as separate, our framework,
based on active inference, reveals that crucial features of embodied decisions—such
as feedback loops between decision and action dynamics—emerge naturally. By sim-
ulating real-time decision-making tasks, we show how organisms continuously refine
their choices by integrating sensory information and motor dynamics. This allows them
to strike a balance between decision accuracy and the need for fast, adaptive actions.
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 1/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 2 — #2
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
Our model offers a new perspective on how decisions are influenced by the actions
taken, highlighting the importance of considering motor control as an integral part of
decision processes. This approach broadens the scope of decision-making research and
provides new insights into behavior in ecologically valid, time-sensitive contexts, with
potential implications for neuroscience, cognitive science, and fields involving human
and animal behavior.
ProgrammeforResearchandInnovationunder
GrantAgreement951910toIPS,andthe
MinistryofUniversityandResearch,PRIN
PNRRP20224FESYandPRIN20229Z7M8Nto
GP.Thefundershadnoroleinstudydesign,
datacollectionandanalysis,decisionto
publish,orpreparationofthemanuscript.
Competing interests: Theauthorshave
declaredthatnocompetinginterestsexist.
1. Introduction
Decision-making is traditionally conceptualized as a serial,decision-then-act process, in
which sensory evidence is accumulated until a certain threshold, at which point a decision
is made and an action is executed. This approach, as formalized bydrift-diffusion and related
models, has been very useful in analyzing behavioral and neural data from laboratory studies
of perceptual and economic decisions [1–3]. In these studies, participants select between fixed
choice alternatives (usually two) reflecting perceptual judgments (e.g., motion discrimination)
or economic offers (e.g., lotteries).
However, animals often face a different class ofembodied decisions, which imply the choice
between courses of actions to be immediately executed in dynamic environments; for exam-
ple, for a lion, the choice of which gazelle to chase or for a soccer player, the choice of which
teammate to which passing the ball [4–10]. To face with the demands of these embodied deci-
sions, animals often need to specify, prepare and sometimes execute actions in parallel to the
decision process—as captured by the notion ofaffordance competition[5,11].
These considerations motivate a series of experiments that use continuous measures
of performance during perceptual and economic choices;for example, tracking hand
kinematics—using a computer mouse—during the movement from the start position to a
response button[12,13]. Despite their simplicity, these experiments permit analyzing the
dynamic processes leading to a decision and the reciprocal influences between the ongoing
deliberation and movement (i.e.,decide-while-acting or continuous decisions[14]). They reveal
that participants move and deliberate simultaneously: they generally start moving very early,
either toward a specific target or in the middle, if they are more uncertain; they often revisit
their decisions in the middle of the trial, as apparent by the curvature of their movements; and
they sometimes change mind between the targets, as evident by drastic changes of trajectory
[15–18]. These findings eschew serial models and are better explained by parallel [19] or con-
tinuous flow models [20] in which unfolding perceptual and decision processes concurrently
drive the preparation and possibly the overt execution of one or more responses in parallel—
meaning that movements during the task provide a continuous readout of the ongoing delib-
eration. From a normative perspective, parallel models provide a way to realize decisions
faster, which is crucial to survival as it avoids the risk of losing valued opportunity—although
sometimes at the cost of reduced accuracy [21].
Crucially, some studies of embodied decisions reveal feedback effects of action dynamics
to decision processes that were previously ignored in serial and even parallel decision-making
models. For example, a recurring finding is that motor costs associated with different choice
alternatives influence perceptual and economic decisions. During ambiguous perceptual deci-
sions [22,23] and value-based decisions [24], participants show a bias to select the response
choice associated with the less costly movement. Changes of mind during a perceptual task
are less frequent if the costs associated with changing movement direction are greater, such
as when response buttons are farther apart [25]. Similarly, during an economic task, changes
of mind following a perturbation of the movement trajectory are sensitive to the current state
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 2/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 3 — #3
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
(position and velocity) of the motor system andare less frequent when counteracting the
perturbation would be more costly [26].
These and other studies suggest not only that deliberation continues after movement
onset (in accordance with parallel models) but also that it is affected by feedback from action
dynamics (e.g., motor costs). This motivates a novel class ofembodied decisionmodels in
which action is not the inert outcome of a decision process but influences it, forming a closed
loop [21,27]. These models are motivated by the fact that, from an embodied perspective, the
goal of the agent is not just selecting between choice alternatives (as in classical setups) but
also simultaneously selecting between potential courses of action to reach the targets (often
within a deadline) and tracking the action itself—which means that both decision and action
processes need to be jointly and continuously optimized. In turn, at the neural level, embod-
ied decisions might require adistributed consensusacross various brain networks that process
outcome values and motor plans, rather than a centralized process as traditionally assumed
[28].
Here, we show that the key signatures of embodied decisions emerge naturally inactive
inference, a framework that models perception and action selection as two aspects of the
same objective of free energy minimization [29–33]. By simulating embodied decisions as an
active inference process, we are able to reproduce various empirical findings about the parallel
unfolding of actions and decisions in time, as well as feedback effects of movement dynamics
in perception. Furthermore, we illustrate the normative advantages of embodied choices over
serial choices under time pressure.
2. Results
We illustrate the functioning of an active inference model of embodied decisions by simu-
lating a two-alternative forced choice (2AFC) decision task with time-varying information,
i.e., in which evidence for one choice or the other, expressed in terms of sequentially pro-
vided cues, changes throughout each trial, as in [34,35] (Fig 1A). The agent has to move the
3-DoF arm from a start position (small blue dot at the center) to reach a left (red circle) or
right (green circle) target button, to report which target has or will have more cues in it. Dur-
ing the task, 15 cues appear, one after the other, either in the left or the right circle, and then
disappear leaving only the last one visible. The agent can start moving at any moment and the
cues continue to appear normally during movement. The trial ends when the agent reaches
one of the two buttons (or within a deadline).
Crucially, by manipulating the sequence of cues, we compare the agent’s decision dynam-
ics in three conditions (or trial types):congruent, in which a greater proportion of cues ini-
tially appears in the correct target;incongruent, in which a greater proportion of cues ini-
tially appears in the incorrect target; andneutral, in which the proportion of cues initially
appearing in both targets is balanced.
Below, we show that a hybrid active inference model (i.e., a model composed of both
discrete and continuous variables) that jointly optimizes decisions and actions reproduces
these signatures of embodied choices. The model can be decomposed into four interacting
processes—evidence accumulation, motor planning, motor inference, and statistical learn-
ing across trials (along with habit formation)—seeFig 1Bfor a schematic illustration and
Section 4.1for technical details. Below, we discuss theseprocesses and present simulations
about how they affect the agent’s decision and action processes.
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 3/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 4 — #4
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
Fig 1.Embodied decision setup and active inference model.(a) Experimental setup, during three consecutive discrete time steps𝜏. The agent controls a 3-DoF arm
(the three segments in blue), which starts at a home position (blue dot) at an equal distance from the two targets (red and green circles). The current cue is represented
with a big purple dot, while the old cues are represented with smaller gray dots. For each trial, the agent has to reach with the hand the target it believes will contain more
cues. The hand trajectory is represented with a thinner blue line. (b) Hybrid active inference model for embodied decisions. The model comprises four processes, num-
bered from 1 to 4. In the first process, discrete hidden statess, encoding the probability that each target is the correct choice for the current trial, are iteratively inferred
by discrete cuesoc by inverting the cue likelihood matrixAc. In the second process, the hidden statess generate a particular combination of discrete hand dynamicsoh
through the extrinsic likelihood matrixAh. Each hand dynamicsoh,m is related to a continuous dynamics functionfm, where the target positions are defined (see [36,37]
for more details). A forward message imposes a prior over the hand velocity (in Cartesian coordinates)x′
h, while a backward message infers the related Cartesian position
of the handxh, ready for kinematic and dynamic inversions. In the third process, for each continuous time stept, the current position and velocity of the hand (in a
visual domain) are inferred by continuous observationsyv and y′
v, via the corresponding likelihood functions (gv and g′
v). The inferred hand trajectory flows back toward
the prior𝜂h for action execution (seeSection 4.2). For each discrete time step𝜏, the target probabilitiess are also inferred by the current motor trajectory. Finally, in the
fourth process, the priorD over the correct target is updated across trials, implementing habitual learning. Of note, some readers may find the edge froms (the agent’s
belief about the latent state) tooc (an observation) somewhat unconventional. This is because, in many contexts, observations are typically assumed to be generated from
the true latent states rather than the agent’s beliefs about them. However, this formulation is standard in active inference studies, even when representing the agent’s
generative model as in this figure.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180.g001
2.1. The firstprocess: evidence accumulation for the choice alternatives
The firstprocess is responsible for the accumulation of sequential evidence for the choice
alternatives. It includes discrete hidden statess, which encode the probability that each tar-
get is the correct choice for the current trial (i.e., the one that will contain the most cues).
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 4/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 5 — #5
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
They are sampled from a categorical (here, binomial) distribution, i.e.,s = Cat(D) = [st1 st2],
where D are the parameters of a Dirichlet distribution and define the agent’s prior beliefs. In
the following simulations, we initialize them with a uniform distribution for each trial. The
discrete hidden statess generate two discrete predictions in parallel. The former—computed
through the likelihood matrixAc—is a prediction of the cue that the agent will observe next,
with 𝛼c playing the role of aprecision (i.e., a confidence or certainty in the likelihood map-
ping between cause and consequence), similar to the drift rate in drift diffusion models. The
latter—computed through the likelihood matrixAh—corresponds to the hand dynamics: it
predicts whether the hand will move toward the left target, toward the right target, or not
move at all (with probability1 –𝛼h). In short, precision or inverse uncertainty (i.e., ambiguity)
of the two mappingsaffects how fast evidence accumulation unfolds, and which movement
strategy the agent adopts:
Ac = [ 𝛼c 1 –𝛼c
1 –𝛼c 𝛼c
] Ah =
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
𝛼h 0
0 𝛼h
1 –𝛼h 1 –𝛼h
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(1)
Since the agent has to update its (Bayesian) beliefs based upon continuous observations,
the requisite probability transition matricesB (as defined inSection 4.1) reduce to the identity
matrix; such that in the absence of any observations, posterior estimates of latent or hidden
states do not change.At each discrete step𝜏, a particular cueoc and a particular hand dynam-
ics oh are observed and compared with the corresponding predictions. Hence, the inference of
the discrete hidden statess follows the equation:
s𝜏 = 𝜎w(kd ln s𝜏–1 + ln AT
c oc,𝜏 + kh ln AT
h oh,𝜏) (2)
where 𝜎w is a weighted softmax function:
𝜎w(x) = ewxi
∑k ewxk
(3)
with slope (or precision)w. A high value ofw ensures fast transitions between discrete states,
thus avoiding positions within the two targets. In short, the discrete update is a combina-
tion of a prior from the previous step (which is equal toD at the beginning of the trial) and
two likelihoods. The first contributes to the accumulation of sensory evidence and iteratively
refines the choice based on the sensory cues. The second likelihood links target estimation
and hand dynamics; in this way, the variableoh behaves as a sensory signal for the discrete
model (similar tooc) and permits accumulating evidence from the agent’s movements. We
will unpack the role of the second likelihood in the next sections; here, to simulate the stan-
dard evidence accumulation, we let thethird term depend on a parameterkh, which we set
here to 0 so that the inference of the correct choice only relies on sensory cuesoc. Finally, we
include a parameterkd acting as a forgetting factor (which might be useful to deal with non-
stationary tasks), which we keep fixed at 1 in our simulations. Also, we set𝛼h = 1.0 (so that the
agent starts moving at the beginning of the trial) and𝛼c = 0.6.
We test the active inference model with the three conditions explained above. Incongru-
ent trials, cues move toward the correct target with an initial probability of 80%, which then
gradually increases and reaches 100% after 8 cues. Inneutral and incongruent trials, the prob-
abilities of the correct target are respectively initialized to 50% and 20% and then increase as
in congruent trials. Each trial comprises 21 discrete time steps𝜏, each in turn comprising 30
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 5/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 6 — #6
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
continuous stepst. At𝜏 = 0, no cue is presented, but the agent can move. For the next 15 time
steps, a cue per time step is presented. Finally, in the last 4 time steps, no cue is presented, but
the agent can still move and reach the target.
Fig 2shows that, under all conditions, when movement onset is immediate the agent
moves in between the two targets. In theincongruent condition, the agent first moves toward
the wrong target and eventually changes mind. These results match qualitatively key empirical
findings discussed in the Introduction [15–18]. To assess whether the model generates statis-
tically different trajectories under the three conditions, we simulated 100 trials per condition
and considered a widely used index of choice uncertainty: themaximum deviationof the tra-
jectories from an ideal, straight line between the start and the correct target [10,12]. We found
significantly larger maximum deviation inincongruent (M = 125.97, SD = 25.0) compared
to neutral (M = 88.19, SD = 30.73) trials andneutral compared tocongruent (M = 56.64,
SD = 18.56) trials (for all tests,p < .001).
Fig 2.Evidence accumulation during (a) congruent trials, (b) neutral trials, and (c) incongruent trials.The first row shows the dynamics of a sample trial for each
condition: specifically, the first plot shows the discrete hidden statess encoding the two target probabilities over continuous time; the second plot shows the cumulative
sum of the cue observationsoc; the third plot shows the distances between the hand and the two targets. Note that the discrete signals are maintained for a whole dis-
crete period𝜏, generating a stepped behavior. The second row shows the agent’s average trajectory (in dark blue) across 100 trials for each condition. A dotted line of
minimum distance between the initial hand position and the left target is also displayed.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180.g002
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 6/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 7 — #7
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
2.2. The secondprocess: motor planning and urgency
When facing the same task, different groups of participants might show different strategies;
for example, a conservative strategy to postpone movement until they feel sufficiently confi-
dent, or a risky strategy to guess the correct choice and start moving immediately [38].
In our model, the selection of a conservative versus risky strategy depends on two things.
First, the rate of evidence accumulation depends upon the precision parameter𝛼c, such that a
greater precision (i.e., less ambiguity) enables the agent to form more precise posterior beliefs
about the correct target. Second, the movement urgency rests upon the precision parameter
𝛼h (of the likelihood mapping to kinematics), which determines the confidence—the agent
has about the correct target—required to initiate movement.Recall thatoh (the discrete set of
hand dynamics) encodes the probability that the two targets generate a movement toward the
left, toward the right, or no movement (i.e.,oh = [oh,t1, oh,t2, oh,s]).
Importantly,oh specifies potential action plans, as it communicates with continuous hid-
den states specifying the instantaneous trajectory (positionxh and velocityx′
h) of the agent’s
hand in extrinsic (e.g., Cartesian) coordinates. Specifically, each element ofoh is linked to a
dynamics function:
f(𝜇h) =
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
ft1
ft2
fs
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
=
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
𝜆(pt1 – 𝜇h)
𝜆(pt2 – 𝜇h)
0
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(4)
where 𝜇h is the belief over the hand positionxh, 𝜆 is an attractor gain, whilept1 and pt2 are
the positions of the two targets – assumed to be known and fixed. This mechanism imple-
ments the simultaneous preparation of competing motor plans, as also reported in monkey
premotor cortex [39].
The mapping between discrete and continuous signals in these hybrid models—with mixed
continuous and discrete states—rests on a form of Bayesian model averaging; namely, esti-
mating the movement trajectory by averaging over some discrete models (i.e., hidden states)
generating possible trajectories—as explained inSection 4.1. In particular, a prior𝜂′
x,h over
the hand velocityx′
h is computed by weighting the three potential trajectories (to reach the
two targets and to stay) with their respective probabilitiesoh that the agent plans for a given
discrete goal:
𝜂′
x,h = oh ⋅ f(𝜇h) (5)
This desired velocity enters the update of the continuous hidden states as a dynamics pre-
diction error𝜀x,h = 𝜇′
h – 𝜂′
x,h, expressing a composite motion that the continuous model will
realize. The inverse process, i.e., the inference of the current trajectory, is explained in the
following section, and more details are found inSection 4.1.
Fig 3illustrates the effect on movement onset and velocity with three levels of urgency,
during an incongruent trial. Sincekh = 0, the evidence accumulation is the same for the three
cases, but the trajectories change depending on the agent’s urgency to move, giving rise to
risky, medium and conservative strategies. High and intermediate levels of urgency produce
riskier strategies that initially move toward the wrong target and then manifest changes of
mind. Low urgency produces a conservative strategy that moves directly toward the correct
target, but has higher reaction times when the two target probabilities are too close, failing to
complete the trial within the deadline. This is because the trajectories generated by the dis-
crete model are constantly weighted by thestay dynamics, hencelow precision𝛼h (which
means low urgency) results not just in late movement onset but also in slower motion. This
simulation illustrates that manipulating urgency provides flexibility in the link between evi-
dence accumulation and movement dynamics. With high urgency, the agent moves earlier
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 7/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 8 — #8
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
Fig 3.Motor planning with (a) a risky strategy (high urgency, or𝜶𝐡 = 𝟏.𝟎), (b) a medium strategy (medium urgency, or
𝜶𝐡 = 𝟎.𝟓𝟓), and (c) a conservative strategy (low urgency, or𝜶𝐡 = 𝟎.𝟓). (d) First panel: dynamics of the discrete hidden
state of the first target over discrete time𝝉, which in this case are the same for every strategy.Second panel: dynamics of
the discrete variableot1 of the first target. Third panel: dynamics of the discrete variableos of staying in position. The fourth
panel shows the L2-norm of the belief𝝁′
h over the hand velocity in continuous timet. The vertical dashed lines represent the
movement onset for each strategy (using ||𝜇′
h|| > 10 as threshold).
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180.g003
and takes the risk of failing, whereas with low urgency, the agent may wait until it accumu-
lates sufficient evidence to reach very high confidence about the correct target. Interestingly,
urgency and speed of evidence accumulation can interact, as shown inFig 4. Finally, this
example illustrates that when urgency is set to a very low level, the embodied model approx-
imates – or even transforms into—a serialdecide-then-act model, initiating movement only
after complete evidence accumulation. This result highlights the critical role of urgency in
shaping the interaction between decision-making and movement.
2.3. The thirdprocess: motor inference and commitment
Various studies found that participants who initiate a movement show high commitment
to the initially selected target—even in the face of contrasting evidence—when the costs
required to reach the alternative target increase [25,26]. Interestingly, in our model, this com-
mitment emerges automatically during model inversion. As the agent jointly infers the cor-
rect target and the optimal discrete hand dynamics to reach it, there is a reciprocal interaction
between the (top-down)process of motor planningand its dual (bottom-up)process of motor
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 8/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 9 — #9
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
Fig 4.Interaction between urgency and speed of evidence accumulation.(a) Fast evidence accumulation (𝛼c = 0.9) and
low urgency to move (𝛼h = 0.5). (b) Slow evidence accumulation (𝛼c = 0.51) and high urgency to move (𝛼h = 0.8). (c)
While movement dynamics look similar, the evolution of the hidden states and hand dynamics are different.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180.g004
inference (Fig 1B). This is because in our model, not only the agent makes predictions over the
cue that will be observed next (i.e.,Acs), but also over the hand trajectory (i.e.,Ahs). The lat-
ter prediction entails a causal relation between discrete goals (in this case, the probability of
the two targets) and the agent’s movements (here, the dynamics needed to reach the targets)—
as explained inSection 4.1. The key implication of this perspective is that the probability of
the two targets can be estimated from the hand trajectory itself (oh). As a consequence, aself-
evidencing mechanism takes place, during which a target inferred by some cues produces a
plan to reach it, which in turn confirms the initial agent’s estimate. In other words, via motor
inference, movementstabilizes (i.e., reduces the uncertainty about) the decision and creates
commitment to the initially selected target.
The rich interplay between evidence accumulation, motor planning and motor infer-
ence gives rise to three competitive processes. The first competition occurs when estimat-
ing the continuous hidden states of the hand trajectory, defined by the generalized beliefs
̇̃ 𝜇h = [𝜇h, 𝜇′
h]:
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 9/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 10 — #10
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
̇̃ 𝜇h = D ̃ 𝜇h – 𝜕 ̃𝜇h F =
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
𝜇′
h – 𝜋𝜂,h𝜀𝜂,h + 𝜕𝜇h gT
v 𝜋v𝜀v + 𝜕𝜇h fT𝜋x,h𝜀x,h
𝜕𝜇′
h
g′T
v 𝜋′
v𝜀′
v – 𝜋x,h𝜀x,h
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(6)
This update rule comprises three main components. First, a prior prediction error𝜀𝜂,h
(along with its precision𝜋𝜂,h) that biases the belief over the hand position. Although not
shown in the model, the latter is linked, through forward kinematics, to an intrinsic contin-
uous model encoding proprioceptive trajectories (e.g., expressed in joint angles). As a con-
sequence, the backward message sent from the belief over the hand position to the intrinsic
model performs inverse kinematics, eventually driving action. SeeSection 4.2and [40,41]
for more details about kinematic inference. Second, visual prediction errors𝜀v = gv(𝜇h) – yv
and 𝜀v = g′
v(𝜇′
h) – y′
v computed through likelihood functionsgv and g′
v, and expressing the dif-
ference between predicted and observed hand position/velocity. These terms are backpropa-
gated for both orders, to keep the belief close to the actual hand trajectory. Third, the dynam-
ics prediction error𝜀x,h defined in the previous section, affecting both orders as a forward or
backward message.
The second (and most interesting) competition happens when this continuous belief
clashes with the desired hand dynamics needed to reach the selected target. While from a
top-down perspective the dynamics defined inEq 4act as potential trajectories averaged
by the probabilitiesoh, from a bottom-up perspective they are used to infer the most likely
explanation of the real trajectory. More formally, the discrete hand dynamicsoh at time𝜏 is
found via Bayesian model comparison, i.e., by comparing the discrete predictionAhs𝜏 with
the continuous evidenceLh of the hand trajectory, accumulated over a time windowT:
oh,𝜏 = 𝜎w(ln Ahs𝜏 + ∫
T
0
Lhdt) (7)
As before,𝜎w is a weighted softmax whose slopew here controls how fast the transition
between different dynamics occurs. High and low values ofw correspond to abrupt and grad-
ual movement onsets, respectively.In practice, evidence accumulation reduces to a sum over
the continuous steps that comprise a single discrete step.For eachmth dynamics ofEq 4, the
log evidenceLh,m is computed by:
Lh,m = 1
2(𝝁′T
h,mpx,h𝝁′
h,m – fm(𝝁h)T𝝅x,hfm(𝝁h) – 𝝁′T
h px,h𝝁′
h + 𝜼′T
x,h𝝅x,h𝜼′
x,h) (8)
More details about the reduced posteriors𝝁′
h,m and prior precisionspx,h can be found in
Section 4.1, and in [36,37,42]. Here, we note that each potential dynamics functionfm is com-
pared to the current dynamics𝝁h inferred via sensory observations. As a result, the log evi-
dence Lh assigns higher values to the potential trajectories that better match the real one.
For instance, if the arm moves toward the red target, the difference in magnitude between
the real trajectory and the potential trajectory associated with reaching the red target will be
lower, while the one associated with the opposite trajectory will be higher. Hence, the agent
can understand which of the two targets is reaching. This evidence is further compared with
the discrete predictionAhs𝜏 encoding the agent’s desires (reaching the red target, reaching the
green target, or staying), so the final hand dynamics will be a combination of the two contri-
butions. The third and final competition emerges at the intersection between motor inference
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 10/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 11 — #11
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
and evidence accumulation, as highlighted inEq 2. Since the discrete hand dynamics are con-
stantly steered toward the current hand trajectory, the latter becomes a predictor for the cor-
rect target. This ultimately produces a commitment toward the chosen dynamics—expressed
in the rightmost term ofEq 2.
One way to appreciate commitment is to consider that, as the distance between the two tar-
gets increases, human participants make fewer changes of mind [25]. In line with this, when
simulating 100neutral trials with targets at different distances, we found that changes of mind
were more frequent with targets at low distance (n = 29) than at medium (n = 20) and high
distance (n = 8)—see Fig 5for some sample trials. The reason for this result lies inEq 7. Since
the discrete hand dynamicsoh are used to infer the correct choice alternative, closer targets
are scored with greater probabilities than farther targets. Furthermore, since the softmax func-
tion amplifies the differences between current and potential trajectories, a target is assigned
an increasingly lower probability, the farther it is from the other one. This is evident inFig 6,
which shows the potential trajectories to reach both targets for the entire trial, the actual tra-
jectory, and the log evidence accumulated over time. Another way to appreciate commit-
ment is by comparing the agent’s behavior duringcongruent and incongruent conditions, with
motor inference (kh > 0) and without it (kh = 0)—see Fig 7. When motor inference is active
in thecongruent condition (Fig 7B), the hand dynamics stabilize the decision: the target is
inferred faster than without motor inference (Fig 7A) and the second wrong cue (observed at
𝜏 = 9) is ignored. When motor inference is active under theincongruent condition (Fig 7D),
Fig 5.Commitment during an incongruent trial, with (a) low, (b) medium, and (c) high distance between the two targets, withkh = 0.15 and𝛼h = 1.0. For each
condition, the first plot shows the discrete hidden statess; the second plot shows the L2-norms of the estimated and true hand velocities𝝁′
e and x′
e; the third plot shows
the distances between the hand and the two targets. For each condition, the second row also shows the agent’s final trajectories, in dark blue.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180.g005
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 11/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 12 — #12
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
Fig 6.Commitment during an incongruent trial, with (a) low, (b) medium, and (c) high distance between the two
targets; continued fromFig 5. (a–c) The panels show the direction and magnitude of the estimated velocity𝝁′
h (in dark
blue), the potential trajectory needed to reach the first targetft1 (in red) and the second targetft2 (in green), for each con-
dition. These potential trajectories are used to estimate which of the two targets is more likely to have generated the current
trajectory. (d) The top panel shows the discrete hand dynamicsoh,t1 of the first target over discrete time𝜏; the middle panel
shows the log evidenceLh,t1 of the hand trajectory associated with the first target, on a logarithmic scale; the bottom panel
shows the normalized log evidence of the first target.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180.g006
the agent could commit to a wrong decision ignoring contrasting evidence—a behavior that is
not observed without motor inference (Fig 7C).
Finally, we considered the tradeoffs between various models:a serial,decide-only model
that makes decisions between targets by considering the discrete hidden statess and then
moves instantaneously to the selected target; a serialdecide-then-act model that is identi-
cal to the decide-only model, but requires a fixed movement time of 125 time steps (i.e., the
average movement time in our setup) to reach the selected target;and two embodied choice
models, one with motor inference(kh = 0.1) and one without it (kh = 0). For this compari-
son, we simulated 100neutral trials, by varying the urgency𝛼h and the drift rate𝛼c to obtain
a wide range of solutions.Fig 8Ashows the results of the comparison. As expected, the speed-
accuracy curve of thedecide-only modelappears to be the best (i.e., the leftmost).However,
this advantage is misleading, as the model moves instantaneously. It is therefore inappropri-
ate as a model of human decision-making behavior, but it is shown here to illustrate ideal-
ized performance.When movement time is accounted for, thedecide-only modelbecomes
the decide-then-act model, which is outperformed by both embodied models—whether with-
out or with motor inference—the latter being the best overall.Furthermore, Fig 8Bshows
that across various levels of urgency𝛼h, there is a significant correlation between the speed
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 12/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 13 — #13
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
Fig 7.Commitment to an initially selected target resulting from motor inference.Panels a–b compare two agents—
without motor inference (a,kh = 0) and with motor inference (b,kh = 0.2)—during acongruent trial. Panelsc–d compare
the same two agents—without motor inference (c, kh = 0) and with motor inference (d, kh = 0.2)—during anincongruent
trial. In all conditions,𝛼h = 0.8. For each panel, the first plot shows the discrete hidden statess; the second plot shows the
discrete hand dynamics for reaching both targets and staying in position; the third plot shows the L2-norms of the esti-
mated hand velocity𝝁′
h, compared with the three potential trajectoriesft1, ft2, andfs. Note that although thestay dynamics
function fs is (initially) the closest to the actual trajectory, the related probabilityoh,s decreases rapidly, as soon as the pre-
dictions Ahs shift toward one of the targets, showing the top-down influence from choice to movement. The fourth (bottom)
plot shows the agent’s movement trajectories, in dark blue.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180.g007
of embodied choice and confidence (i.e., probability of the correct choice) as reported empir-
ically [43]. In summary, embodied choice models show a better speed-accuracy curve than
serial decide-then-act models. The fact that they afford faster decisions might be particularly
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 13/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 14 — #14
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
Fig 8.(a) Speed-accuracy curves for four models: two serial models (decide-only, decide-then-act) and two active
inference models (with and without motor inference).The former two were sampled by varying the decision threshold
in 500 trials, while the latter two were sampled by running 100 trials for different values of urgency (from medium-high
urgency, i.e.,𝛼h = 0.7, to low urgency, i.e.,𝛼h = 0.5). The samples were then fitted into a curve. Motor inference was realized
with kh = 0.1. For all conditions,𝛼c = 0.6. To allow the agents to complete the trials on time with low levels of urgency,we
set the maximum trial duration to 630 time steps. (b) Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient between the belief
over the hand trajectory𝝁′
h and the probability of the correct choice, computed for two conditions (with and without motor
inference), with 500 neutral trials per condition, and with different levels of urgency.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180.g008
advantageous in ecological settings, where slow decisions imply missing valuable alterna-
tives [4,21]. The relative advantages of including or not including motor inference are likely to
be task-dependent. The embodied model using motor inference appears to be advantageous
when processing congruent (Fig 7) and neutral trials (Fig 8A), but its commitment to the ini-
tially selected target can lead to more incorrect decisions when processing incongruent trials
(Fig 5).
2.4. The fourthprocess: statistical learning and habit formation
During various cognitive tasks such as the Flanker [44] and the Posner task [45], it is possible
to learn statistical regularities, such as the probability of the correct response or the validity
of cues across trials. In these tasks, trial sequence effects are often reported, indicating that
participants form expectations across trials that influence their subsequent responses and
movements [46]. The fourthprocess of our model implements this kind of statistical learning,
which simply amounts to keeping count of the Dirichlet priors over the discrete hidden states
s across trials. After every trial, these counts are updated according to:
dn = 𝜔dn–1 + 𝜂s (9)
where n is the trial number,𝜔 is a forgetting factor of older trials, and𝜂 is the learning rate
of new trials (usually initialized with a reasonably high value, reflecting a high confidence
over the prior belief,d0). Then, the counts are normalized to compute the priors of the correct
response for the next trial.
Fig 9shows the effects of learning the prior over the correct response, during 50 incon-
gruent trials. During the first 10 trials, the correct (left) response remains stable and then it is
reversed. During the early trials of the first (learning) phase (dark blue inFig 9A), the agent
moves toward the wrong direction and then changes mind. However, in later trials (dark red
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 14/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 15 — #15
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
Fig 9.Statistical learning of the prior for the correct choice over 50 incongruent trials.The correct choice is fixed in
the first 10 trials, but is reversed in the next 40 trials. (a) Hand trajectories in equally spaced trials, during learning (top)
and reversal learning (bottom). Dark blue trajectories represent early trials, while dark red trajectories are late trials. Here,
kh = 0, 𝜔 = 0.99, 𝜂 = 0.2, 𝛼c = 0.6, and𝛼h = 0.6. (b) The five panels show Dirichlet countsd; discrete priorsD; time step of
movement onset across trials; discrete hidden states1 in 5 equally spaced trials for learning; and for reversal learning over
discrete time𝜏. The vertical dashed lines indicate the time step when reversal occurs.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180.g009
in Fig 9A) it gradually begins to move early toward the correct target, anticipating the transi-
tion in the accumulation of wrong cues. In parallel, movement onset decreases (Fig 9B). These
results show that a strong prior can overcome conflicting evidence. After the reversal at trial
10, the discrete prior for the first target slowly decreases, as the Dirichlet counts for the second
target begin to increase (Fig 9B). In early trials, movement curvature increases and movement
onset is slower, as the agent is uncertain about the correct distribution underneath the cue
sampling. In late trials, movement curvature decreases and movement onset fastens, as the
agent learns the novel contingencies.
These results show that our model can incorporate sequence effects that emerge during
cognitive tasks [46]. Note that while we focus on learning the prior probability of the correct
choice, other model parameters, such as the uncertainties of the likelihood matricesAc and
Ah, could be updated using the same approach– see also [47].
3. Discussion
For many years, the dominant view regarding human and animal behaviors has been that of
a serial,decide-then-act strategy. However, various studies show that during embodied deci-
sions that require simultaneously specifying and selecting between alternative action plans,
the serial view is insufficient. These studies report early movement onset, changes of mind,
and the influence of motor costs over decisions, suggesting that decision and action processes
unfold in parallel and reciprocally influence each other [10,12,13,21,27]. Here, we show that
these signatures of embodied decisions emerge naturally in active inference: a framework that
jointly optimizes decisions and actions under a free energy minimization imperative [29,31].
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 15/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 16 — #16
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
Our simulations highlight that four modelprocesses—evidence accumulation, motor plan-
ning, motor inference, and statistical learning—form a closed loop, allowing decision and
action processes to influence each other reciprocally. The resulting embodied models attain
a better speed-accuracy tradeoff, compared to serial models (Fig 8A)—suggesting that they
could confer ecological advantages [4,21].
An innovative aspect of our model is the reciprocal interaction between motor planning
and motor inference. During motor planning, the agent’s inference of the correct choice gen-
erates predictions about the next discrete hand dynamics, which are converted into a continu-
ous motor plan to reach the associated target. In turn, during motor inference, the agent uses
the action dynamics as evidence for the correct choice.In other words, the agent treats its own
behavior as a source of information [48]. This mechanism implies that movement stabilizes
decisions and creates commitment. Furthermore, it explains key aspects of embodied deci-
sions, such as the fact that motor costs apparent before a task [22] or changing during it [26]
influence decision outcomes.
Note that there are two alternative perspectives on (or interpretations of) motor costs
in embodied decisions. According to the value-based perspective [21,25,27], during move-
ment the agent continuously estimates the cost of the actions to make the alternative choices,
then combines the estimated cost with the correct choice (inferred by sensory evidence) to
decide the next move. Instead, the perspective offered here is based on (active) inference. Our
model does not explicitly compute motor costs, but rather the probabilities of discrete hand
dynamics oh: in short, the agent just tries to infer the correct target from the information at
its disposal (including its own movements), and a high motor cost only means a potential
dynamics that poorly explains the present context. The two perspectives, active inference and
value-based, are mathematically related given the duality of inferential formulations (that
use probabilities) and control formulations (that use costs) [49,50]. But since in active infer-
ence (motor) costs are absorbed into (prior) probabilities, its appeal lies in affording embod-
ied decisions using the same inferential machinery required for action control, without the
need to compute additional quantities (such as motor costs) on the fly. The same inferential
machinery also permits considering other types of prior preferences (or motor costs). For
example, including in the model a prior preference for biomechanically simpler movements
would automatically favor targets that are closer or can be reached more easily, as empirically
observed [22]. Furthermore, while this study focused on perceptual decision tasks, the same
model could also be applied to value-based decisions, where different choice targets are asso-
ciated with varying values or rewards. This could be achieved by assigning a stronger prior
preference to targets with higher economic value. Such an extension would also enable the
study of how economic value influences motivation and movement vigor in embodied choice
tasks [51]. Another way prior preferences (over policies or outcomes) could be leveraged is
to account for biases, such as repetition biases that develop across trials. Studies have demon-
strated sequence effects in perceptual [52] and visuomotor tasks [53], showing that recent trial
history can bias subsequent decisions. The simulations inFig 9illustrate how certain biases or
habits can emerge from the statistical learning of previous responses. However, habits can also
arise from other aspects of interaction beyond simple repetition. For instance, a reward could
become associated with a target and influence movement even if the target changes position—
an effect that cannot be explained solely by repeating the same movement. Accounting for
these and other cognitive aspects of biases, beyond mere movement repetition, may require
increasing prior preferences for abstract outcomes (e.g., reaching a rewarding target regard-
less of its spatial position). Investigating this possibility remains an open question for future
research.
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 16/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 17 — #17
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
Another key aspect of our model is the fact that by modulating the urgency to move, it can
model a range of strategies—from riskier to more conservative—observed in empirical studies
[38]. Future work might explore how the generative model advanced here could be inverted,
to identify personalized parameters (e.g., a person’s urgency) from behavioral data. While
we covered several important aspects of embodied decisions in active inference, we kept the
focus on the relationship between discrete decisions and continuous dynamics. A more real-
istic model would also consider discrete dynamics, which may be crucial for explaining how
humans optimize the number of successes accumulated in a limited period—as analyzed in
[34]. Furthermore, while our model explains how movement can stabilize decisions, it does
not include other stabilization mechanisms,such as the modulation of sensory precision (i.e.,
Kalman gain)[54–56], which might be covered in future studies.
An important avenue for future research is the empirical validation of the embodied choice
models introduced here. In this study, we provided normative arguments for the benefits of
embodied models in terms of better speed-accuracy curves compared to serial strategies. Fur-
thermore, we have shown that the model reproduces qualitative aspects of data, such as the
increase in the curvature of trajectories and the frequency of “changes of mind” with choice
uncertainty [15–18], as well as the correlation between the speed of embodied choice levels
and confidence (i.e., probability of the correct choice) as reported empirically [43]. Future
studies could use embodied choice models to fit empirical data, by exploiting the fact that
different kinds of behavior can be elicited by changing the precision of various likelihood
mappings—as shown in [47]. In principle, it would be possible to optimize the precisions of
a generative model of a given experimental paradigm to match the behavior of an experimen-
tal subject. This would provide an opportunity for computational phenotyping of subjects (or
patients) in terms of the (precision of) key components of their generative models [57]. This
kind of computational phenotyping has been used to characterize the prior precisions and
preferences of psychiatric subjects using choice behavior and, in principle, could be extended
to cover the embodied decision-making considered in this work. This would allow for the sys-
tematic study of the sensitive dependence of behavior on the relative precision of various like-
lihood mappings as a potentially important aspect of embodied decision-making. Notably,
while each of the four processes illustrated in this study operates in a relatively straightfor-
ward manner, their interactions are more complex. It remains an open question whether cer-
tain parameter combinations are particularly effective in specific embodied contexts, such as
those characterized by varying levels of urgency or precision. For instance, our simulations
suggest that the benefits of motor inference depend on both trial statistics (e.g., the propor-
tion of congruent, neutral, and incongruent trials) and urgency, yet the interplay between
these factors remains to be explored. Additionally, it is unclear whether individuals can flex-
ibly select the most appropriate set of parameters for each context or whether they instead
reuse suboptimal parameterizations across different contexts.
From a neural perspective, embodied choice models align with sensorimotor theories of
decision-making and neural evidence from areas such as the posterior parietal cortex (PPC)
and dorsal premotor cortex (PMd), where action plans are dynamically represented and com-
pete for selection [58–60]. Importantly, in the embodied choice model, decision-making is
a distributed process that integrates multiple (sub)processes or pathways, consistent with
the concept of decision-making as a “distributed consensus” rather than a centralized pro-
cess [28]. The hybrid architecture shown inFig 1Bcould correspond to a (hierarchical) neu-
ral architecture involving recurrent dynamics and extensive cortico-basal ganglia-thalamo-
cortical loops, which support the continuous interaction between perception, action, and
decision processes [61]. For a more detailed discussion of the biological underpinnings of
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 17/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 18 — #18
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
movement control in active inference, see also [62]. Furthermore, the model’s precision-
weighting mechanism, which determines how likelihood mappings influence both decisions
and movements, could correspond to neuromodulatory processes regulating synaptic effi-
cacy, such as those mediated by dopamine and noradrenaline [63]. Future studies using neu-
roimaging and electrophysiology could further investigate the neural implementation of our
framework and how the variables inFig 1Bcorrespond to neural activity during embodied
decision-making tasks.
4. Methods
4.1. Dynamic hybrid models in active inference
Active inference is a computational theory that proposes a unifying paradigm to understand
cognitive processing and behavior in living organisms. It is based upon thefree energy prin-
ciple which states that, in order to survive, every creature must actively minimize surprise
[29,31,64].
Active inference models have been formulated both in discrete time and in continuous
time. However, it is possible to argue that a comprehensive account of living organisms might
require hybrid models, which combine both discrete and continuous time formulations [65,
66]. For example, in the human nervous system, the cerebral cortex might operate in a dis-
crete state-space, while the low-level sensorimotor loops might be better understood in terms
of continuous representations; the interface between the two is attributed to subcortical struc-
tures such as the thalamus or the superior colliculus [67]. Hybrid models have been used to
simulate many scenarios such as pictographic reading [65], movements under neurological
disorders [62], or interoceptive control [68]. Here, we briefly present a particular instance of
such models useful to infer and act upon dynamic trajectories [36,37,42]. See [31] for more
details about active inference and the free energy principle, and [69] about Bayesian model
selection.
Discrete models share resemblances with Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) and are
defined as partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) [70,71]. In particu-
lar, they are related to a subfield of machine learning known asplanning as inference[72,73].
Discrete models assume that organisms perceive the environment by optimizing an internal
generative model, inferring how external causes lead to sensory signals within the environ-
ment (called generative process). Denoting bys the discrete hidden states, byo the discrete
outcomes, by𝝅 the policies (which in active inference are sequences of actions), the agent’s
generative model after a discrete periodT is factorized as:
p(s1∶T, o1∶T, 𝝅) = p(s1) ⋅ p(𝝅) ⋅
T
∏
𝜏=1
p(o𝜏|s𝜏) ⋅
T
∏
𝜏=2
p(s𝜏|s𝜏–1, 𝝅) (10)
where every distribution is assumed to be categorical:
p(s1) = Cat(D)
p(𝝅) = Cat(E)
p(o𝜏|s𝜏) = Cat(A)
p(s𝜏|s𝜏–1, 𝝅) = Cat(B𝜋,𝜏)
(11)
Here, D is the prior over the initial state,E is the prior over policies,A is the likelihood
(or observation) matrix, andB𝜋,𝜏 is the transition matrix. In order to find the causes of their
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 18/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 19 — #19
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
perceptions, organisms try to infer the posterior distribution:
p(s1∶T, 𝝅|o1∶T) = p(o1∶T|s1∶T, 𝝅)p(s1∶T, 𝝅)
p(o1∶T) (12)
However, this requires computing the intractable model evidencep(o1∶T). Hence, organ-
isms are supposed to implement some sort of approximate Bayesian inference by relying on an
approximate posterior distributionq(s1∶T, 𝝅), and then minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence between the approximate and real posteriors:
0 ≤ = DKL[q(s1∶T, 𝝅)||p(s1∶T, 𝝅|o1∶T)]
= 𝔼
q
[ln q(s1∶T, 𝝅) – lnp(o1∶T, s1∶T, 𝝅)] + ln p(o1∶T)
= F + ln p(o1∶T)
(13)
The KL divergence still requires the computation of the log evidencep(o1∶T); however,
we can exploit its non-negativity to instead minimize the first RHS term of the second line
of Eq 13– called variational free energy (VFE) and known in machine learning as the neg-
ative ELBO – which ensures that surprise – lnp(o1∶T) is minimized. Then, expressing the
approximate posterior by its sufficient statisticss𝜋,𝜏 and conditioning upon a specific policy:
p(s1∶T|o1∶T, 𝝅) ≈ q(s1∶T, 𝝅) = q(𝝅)
T
∏
𝜏
q(s𝜏|𝝅)
q(𝝅) = Cat(𝝅)
q(s𝜏|𝝅) = Cat(s𝜋,𝜏)
(14)
We can infer the most likely discrete hidden state at time𝜏 and under policy𝜋 by comput-
ing the gradient of the VFEF𝜋 of that policy and applying a softmax function to ensure that it
is a proper probability distribution:
s𝜋,𝜏 = 𝜎(ln B𝜋,𝜏–1s𝜋,𝜏–1 + ln BT
𝜋,𝜏s𝜋,𝜏+1 + ln ATo𝜏) (15)
Via VFE minimization, organisms are able to capture the optimal representation of the
environment; however, they are unable to perform any sort of future planning. To do this,
they additionally consider unobserved outcomes as random variables, and they infer the most
likely policy or sequence of actions that will lead to their preferred outcomes. More formally,
if we denote byp(o𝜏|C) the probability distribution encoding the agent’s preferred outcomes
at some future point𝜏, the optimal policy is found by minimizing the free energy that the
agent expects to perceive in the future – calledexpected free energy(EFE) and denoted byG:
𝝅 = 𝜎(ln E – G)
G𝜋 ≈ ∑
𝜏
DKL[q(o𝜏|𝝅)||p(o𝜏|C)] + 𝔼
q(s𝜏|s𝜏–1,𝝅)
[H[p(o𝜏|s𝜏)]]
= ∑
𝜏
o𝜋,𝜏(ln o𝜋,𝜏 – C𝜏) + s𝜋,𝜏H
(16)
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 19/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 20 — #20
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
where:
o𝜋,𝜏 = As𝜋,𝜏 C𝜏 = ln p(o𝜏|C) H = –diag(AT ln A) (17)
Eq 16underlies a stark difference with theories of optimal control and reinforcement
learning. These theories assume that hidden states have intrinsic values and that agents infer
the optimal policy that maximizes the accumulation of future rewards obtained from the
environment. Rather, active inference only assumes that each organism believes that the envi-
ronment will evolve in a specific way, determined by its phenotype. Under this view, action is
just another way, complementary to perception, to minimize free energy (hence, surprise),
i.e., to reduce the difference between the agent’s prior beliefs and the actual generative pro-
cess. In other words, by acting, they make future observations coherent with their internal
model—a process known asself-evidencing. Furthermore, the two components of the sec-
ond and third lines ofEq 16entail the well-known tradeoff between exploitation and explo-
ration, with the addition that the latter, also calledambiguity, is involved in itinerant and
novelty-seeking behavior.
To get a discrete model working with the richness of the continuous input, it is linked to an
active inference continuous model [65,66]. The latter is highly similar to the discrete model
described above, with the difference that now only the VFE is minimized (for this reason, a
continuous model alone is not capable of advanced decision-making). The standard way to
link the two models is by letting a discrete outcome generate acausal variable(e.g., the posi-
tion of a target to reach) that in turn produces a continuous trajectory; in this way, inverting
the model means to infer the target based on the continuous trajectory, and then finding the
discrete outcome that best explains the inferred target by comparing it with some fixed posi-
tions that the agent knows a-priori. In order to render the agent’s representation more flexi-
ble, we can instead generate a continuous trajectory directly by a discrete outcome. Here, we
briefly describe this alternative approach.
First, we model the continuous environment with the following non-linear stochastic
equations:
̃y = ̃g( ̃x) + wy
D ̃x = ̃f( ̃x) + wx
(18)
where ̃x are continuous hidden states,̃y are continuous observations,̃g is a likelihood func-
tion defining how hidden states cause observations,̃f is a dynamics function expressing how
the hidden states evolve, and the letterw indicates Gaussian noise terms. Note that the sym-
bol ∼ denotes generalized coordinates of motion encoding instantaneous trajectories (e.g.,
position, velocity, acceleration, and so on), which in a continuous formulation replace the
future states. Also,D is a differential operator that shifts every coordinate of motion by one.
The joint distribution of thishybrid generative model is factorized into the following:
p( ̃x, ̃y, o𝜏) = p( ̃y| ̃x)p( ̃x|o𝜏)p(o𝜏) (19)
where the first two distributions are assumed to be Gaussian, while the last one is the categori-
cal (likelihood) distribution defined before:
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 20/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 21 — #21
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
p( ̃y| ̃x) = N( ̃g( ̃x), ̃Σy)
p( ̃x|o𝜏) = N(𝜼, ̃Σx)
p(o𝜏) = Cat(A)
(20)
Here, 𝜼 is the mean (also calledfull prior) of a complex model that defines the actual evo-
lution of the hidden states. We suppose that the agent maintainsM probability distributions
which are reduced versions of this full model. Each reduced distribution corresponds to a par-
ticular discrete dynamics o𝜏,m and encodes a specific way that the agent thinks the environ-
ment may evolve [36,37]:
p( ̃x|o𝜏,m) = N( ̃fm( ̃x), ̃Σx,m) (21)
where ̃fm is the dynamics function of themth reduced model, and̃Σx,m the related preci-
sion. These alternative hypotheses act as empirical priors at the lower continuous level. Fol-
lowing the theory of Bayesian model reduction [69,74], in order to infer the posterior of the
full model we first have to compute the posterior probability of each reduced model. In fact,
reduced means that the likelihood of some data is equal to that of the full model and the only
difference rests upon the specification of the priors – hence, the posterior of a reduced model
can be expressed in terms of the posterior of the full model:
p( ̃x| ̃y, o𝜏,m) = p( ̃x| ̃y, o𝜏) p( ̃x|o𝜏,m)p( ̃y|o𝜏)
p( ̃x|o𝜏)p( ̃y|o𝜏,m) (22)
As in the previous discrete formulation, we introduce a full andM approximate posteriors,
here assumed to be Gaussian:
q( ̃x) = N( ̃ 𝝁, ̃Cx)
q( ̃x|m) = N( ̃ 𝝁m, ̃Cx,m)
(23)
where ̃ 𝝁and ̃ 𝝁m are the full and reduced posterior means (also calledbeliefs), while ̃Cx and
̃Cx,m are the full and reduced posterior precisions. Replacing the real posteriors with these
approximate posteriors, we can write the free energy of each reduced model in terms of the
full model. As before, maximizing each reduced free energy makes it approximate the log
evidence:
F(o𝜏,m) = F(o𝜏) – ln∫
p( ̃x|o𝜏,m)
p( ̃x|o𝜏) q( ̃x)d ̃x ≈ ln p( ̃y|o𝜏,m) (24)
This relation implies that the free energy related to each discrete dynamicso𝜏,m can be
found from the approximate posteriorq( ̃x) of the full model, without directly computing the
reduced posteriors. With the Gaussian approximation ofEq 23, themth reduced free energy
breaks down to a simple formula:
F(o𝜏,m) = 1
2 ln | ̃𝚷x,m ̃Px ̃Cx,m ̃𝚺x|
– 1
2( ̃ 𝝁T ̃Px ̃ 𝝁– ̃ 𝝁T
m ̃Px,m ̃ 𝝁m – ̃ 𝜼T ̃𝚷x ̃ 𝜼+ ̃fm( ̃ 𝝁)T ̃𝚷x,m ̃fm( ̃ 𝝁))
(25)
where the mean and precision ofmth reduced model are:
̃ 𝝁m = ̃Cx,m( ̃Px ̃ 𝝁– ̃𝚷x ̃ 𝜼+ ̃𝚷x,m ̃fm( ̃ 𝝁))
̃Px,m = ̃Px – ̃𝚷x + ̃𝚷x,m
(26)
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 21/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 22 — #22
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
and we wrote the covariances̃𝚺 and ̃C in terms of precisions̃𝚷 and ̃P. In short, the free
energy assigns a score to each reduced model based on its fit with the full posterior, and two
models i and j can be compared through a log-Bayes factorF(o𝜏,i) – F(o𝜏,j). Crucially, this
posterior is a continuous trajectory and the agent’s hypotheses are constantly updated via sen-
sory observations. If a discrete step𝜏 corresponds to a continuous periodT, we integrate the
reduced free energies over this period and compare them with the prior surprise – lno𝜏. This
results in an ascending message that infers the most likely discrete dynamicso𝜏 that may have
generated the current continuous observations:
E𝜏,m = – lno𝜏,m – ∫
T
0
F(o𝜏,m)dt
o𝜏 = 𝜎(–E𝜏)
(27)
Instead, the descending message is computed as a simple Bayesian model average of the
agent’s hypotheses, e.g., by weighting the discrete dynamicso𝜏,m of a reduced model with the
related dynamics functioñfm( ̃ 𝝁):
̃ 𝜼= ∑
m
o𝜏,m ̃fm( ̃ 𝝁) (28)
Then, ̃ 𝜼embeds a prior over a continuous trajectory, which steers the inference of the
continuous hidden states toward preferred outcomes. The posterior over the hidden states is
finally found by computing the gradient of the free energy of the full model with respect to
the mean ̃ 𝝁of the full approximate posterior, and updating the latter via gradient descent:
̇̃ 𝝁– D ̃ 𝝁= –𝜕𝜇F(o𝜏) = 𝜕 ̃gT ̃𝚷y ̃𝜀y + 𝜕𝜇 ̃f
T ̃𝚷x ̃𝜀x – DT ̃𝚷x ̃𝜀x (29)
This update is expressed in terms of message passing of the following prediction errors:
̃𝜀y = ̃y – ̃g( ̃ 𝝁)
̃𝜀x = D ̃ 𝝁– ̃ 𝜼
(30)
and has a specular form of the discrete update ofEq 15, except that now the inference is done
over a continuous path—hence the additional termD ̃ 𝝁. This minimization entails the process
of perception, i.e., conforms the agent’s beliefs to the perceived sensations. In order to con-
form the environment to the agent’s beliefs (in short, to act), the free energy can be minimized
with respect to the motor commandsa. This additional mechanism reduces to a minimization
of sensory prediction errors:
̇a = –𝜕aF(o𝜏) = –𝜕a ̃gT ̃𝚷y ̃𝜀y (31)
where 𝜕a ̃g is an inverse mapping from sensations to actions. This mapping implements a
dynamics inversion and is thought to be realized by classical reflex arcs in the spinal cord
[75,76].
4.2. Inverse kinematics in active inference
Several methods have been proposed on how to realize inverse kinematics in active inference.
The most common approach for simulating a reaching task is to encode a target location in
extrinsic coordinates as a causal variable of a continuous model. This variable generates a pre-
diction for the 1st-order (e.g., velocity) of the hidden states—encoding the agent’s joint angles
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 22/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 23 — #23
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
in intrinsic coordinates—which therefore act as a dynamic attractor toward the desired loca-
tion. In this simple representation, the link between the causal variable and the hidden states
performs an inverse kinematics of the target location, whose product (i.e., a possible agent’s
configuration with the hand at the target) is compared with the extrinsic position of the hand
computed via forward kinematics. In this simple representation, both (intrinsic and extrinsic)
reference frames are used in a single active inference level.
An alternative and more powerful approach exploits an aspect of the theory inherited from
predictive coding, i.e., that the nervous system manages to approximate the real posterior
by building a hierarchical architecture wherein a particular level acts as an observation for
the level above and as a prior for the level below [40,41]. In this way, higher levels can con-
struct increasingly richer and more invariant representations of the environment, similar to
deep generative models of neural networks. Since a level communicates only with the levels
immediately above and below, the overall generative model can be factorized into indepen-
dent distributions, and every level can be analyzed as in the general formulations of discrete
and continuous active inference. Specifically, the hierarchical approach to inverse kinematics
is to design a structure of two levels, wherein anintrinsic unitencoding the agent’s joint angles
has a causal influence on anextrinsic unitencoding the agent’s hand. This approach follows
the natural flow of the generative process, with an efficient decomposition between intrinsic
and extrinsic dynamics. Here, we briefly describe this second approach.
The higher-level intrinsic unitUi is governed by the following equations:
̃yp = ̃gp( ̃xi) + wy,p
D ̃xi = ̃fi( ̃xi, ̃vi) + wx,i
(32)
where ̃yp are generalized (e.g., position, velocity, and so on) proprioceptive observations,̃gp
are the generalized proprioceptive likelihoods,̃xi are intrinsic hidden states encoding the
instantaneous trajectory of the agent (e.g., every joint angle of the arm),̃vi are intrinsic causal
variables encoding the trajectory priors, and̃fi are the related generalized dynamics. Also, the
letter w indicates Gaussian noises.
Instead, the lower-level extrinsic unitUe follows the system:
̃yv = ̃gv( ̃xe) + wy,v
D ̃xe = ̃fe( ̃xe, ̃ve) + wx,e
(33)
where the letterv indicates the visual (or, more in general, exteroceptive) domain. The two
units are related via connection between the 0th (i.e., position) temporal orders:
xe = ge(xi) = T(xi) + wi (34)
where T performs a forward kinematics between the agent’s joint angles and its hand. As a
consequence, the backward message fromUe to Ui realizes an inverse kinematics of anextrin-
sic prediction errorconveying the difference between the prediction ofUi and the actual
extrinsic belief ofUe:
𝜕gT
e 𝜀e = JT(xe – T(xi)) (35)
In this way, extrinsic trajectories (e.g., linear or circular motions) are easily realized by
defining appropriate dynamics iñfe, which then travels back to infer the most likely agent’s
configuration corresponding to that trajectory. The updates of the belief over intrinsic and
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 23/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 24 — #24
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
extrinsic hidden states are the following:
̇̃ 𝝁i – D ̃ 𝝁i = –𝜕𝜇i F = 𝜕 ̃gT
e ̃ 𝝅e ̃ 𝜺e + 𝜕 ̃gT
p ̃𝚷p ̃ 𝜺p + 𝜕 ̃f
T
i ̃𝚷x,i ̃ 𝜺xi – DT ̃𝚷x,i ̃ 𝜺x,i
̇̃ 𝝁e – D ̃ 𝝁e = –𝜕𝜇e F = – ̃𝚷e ̃ 𝜺e + 𝜕 ̃gT
v ̃𝚷v ̃ 𝜺v + 𝜕 ̃f
T
e ̃𝚷x,e ̃ 𝜺xe – DT ̃𝚷x,e ̃ 𝜺x,e
(36)
For both units, we note an extrinsic prediction error acting either as a prior or as an obser-
vation, a sensory-level observation (either proprioceptive or exteroceptive), and a dynam-
ics prediction error from previous or successive temporal orders. This two-level architec-
ture is highly effective in tasks that require dynamic constraints in both intrinsic and extrin-
sic domains (e.g., when moving the arm while keeping the hand’s palm up) but fails when
simultaneous coordination of multiple limbs is needed. In this case, we can extend the model
by designing anintrinsic-extrinsic modulefor every degree of freedom of the agent’s body.
Then, a dynamic attractor at the last (e.g., hand) level results in a prediction error that is back-
propagated throughout the whole hierarchy, eventually inferring an appropriate hierarchical
configuration of the body.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: Matteo Priorelli, Giovanni Pezzulo.
Data curation:Matteo Priorelli.
Formal analysis:Matteo Priorelli.
Funding acquisition:Giovanni Pezzulo.
Investigation: Matteo Priorelli.
Methodology: Matteo Priorelli, Ivilin Peev Stoianov, Giovanni Pezzulo.
Project administration:Giovanni Pezzulo.
Resources: Matteo Priorelli.
Software: Matteo Priorelli.
Supervision: Ivilin Peev Stoianov, Giovanni Pezzulo.
Validation:Matteo Priorelli, Ivilin Peev Stoianov, Giovanni Pezzulo.
Visualization: Matteo Priorelli.
Writing – original draft:Matteo Priorelli, Giovanni Pezzulo.
Writing – review & editing:Matteo Priorelli, Ivilin Peev Stoianov, Giovanni Pezzulo.
References
1. Ratcliff R, McKoon G. The diffusion decision model: theory and data for two-choice decision tasks.
Neural Comput. 2008;20(4):873–922.https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.2008.12-06-420 PMID:
18085991
2. Usher M, McClelland JL. The time course of perceptual choice: the leaky, competing accumulator
model. Psychol Rev. 2001;108(3):550–92.https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295x.108.3.550 PMID:
11488378
3. Shadlen MN, Newsome WT. Neural basis of a perceptual decision in the parietal cortex (area LIP)
of the rhesus monkey. J Neurophysiol. 2001;86(4):1916–36.
https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.2001.86.4.1916 PMID: 11600651
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 24/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 25 — #25
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
4. Cisek P, Pastor-Bernier A. On the challenges and mechanisms of embodied decisions. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2014;369(1655):20130479.https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0479
PMID: 25267821
5. Pezzulo G, Cisek P. Navigating the affordance landscape: feedback control as a process model of
behavior and cognition. Trends Cogn Sci. 2016;20(6):414–24.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.03.013 PMID: 27118642
6. Gordon J, Maselli A, Lancia GL, Thiery T, Cisek P, Pezzulo G. The road towards understanding
embodied decisions. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2021;131:722–36.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.09.034 PMID: 34563562
7. Maselli A, Gordon J, Eluchans M, Lancia GL, Thiery T, Moretti R. Beyond simple laboratory studies:
developing sophisticated models to study rich behavior. Phys Life Rev. 2023.
8. Resulaj A, Kiani R, Wolpert DM, Shadlen MN. Changes of mind in decision-making. Nature.
2009;461(7261):263–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08275 PMID: 19693010
9. Spivey MJ, Grosjean M, Knoblich G. Continuous attraction toward phonological competitors. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005;102(29):10393–8.https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0503903102 PMID:
15985550
10. Wispinski NJ, Gallivan JP, Chapman CS. Models, movements, and minds: bridging the gap
between decision making and action. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2020;1464(1):30–51.
https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.13973 PMID: 30312476
11. Cisek P. Cortical mechanisms of action selection: the affordance competition hypothesis. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2007;362(1485):1585–99.https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2007.2054
PMID: 17428779
12. Freeman JB, Dale R, Farmer TA. Hand in motion reveals mind in motion. Front Psychol. 2011;2:59.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00059 PMID: 21687437
13. Song J-H, Nakayama K. Hidden cognitive states revealed in choice reaching tasks. Trends Cogn
Sci. 2009;13(8):360–6.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.009 PMID: 19647475
14. Michalski J, Green AM, Cisek P. Reaching decisions during ongoing movements. J Neurophysiol.
2020;123(3):1090–102. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00613.2019 PMID: 32049585
15. Kane GA, Senne RA, Scott BB. Rat movements reflect internal decision dynamics in an evidence
accumulation task. bioRxiv, preprint, 2023:2023.09.11.556575.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.11.556575 PMID: 37745309
16. Kinder KT, Buss AT, Tas AC. Tracking flanker task dynamics: evidence for continuous attentional
selectivity. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform. 2022;48(7):771–81.
https://doi.org/10.1037/xhp0001023 PMID: 35653729
17. Barca L, Pezzulo G. Unfolding visual lexical decision in time. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35932.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0035932 PMID: 22563419
18. Barca L, Pezzulo G. Tracking second thoughts: continuous and discrete revision processes during
visual lexical decision. PLoS One. 2015;10(2):e0116193.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0116193 PMID: 25699992
19. Spivey M. The continuity of mind. Oxford University Press; 2008.
20. Eriksen CW, Schultz DW. Information processing in visual search: a continuous flow conception
and experimental results. Percept Psychophys. 1979;25(4):249–63.
https://doi.org/10.3758/bf03198804 PMID: 461085
21. Lepora NF, Pezzulo G. Embodied choice: how action influences perceptual decision making. PLoS
Comput Biol. 2015;11(4):e1004110.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004110 PMID: 25849349
22. Marcos E, Cos I, Girard B, Verschure PFMJ. Motor cost influences perceptual decisions. PLoS
One. 2015;10(12):e0144841.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0144841 PMID: 26673222
23. Hagura N, Haggard P, Diedrichsen J. Perceptual decisions are biased by the cost to act. Elife.
2017;6:e18422. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.18422 PMID: 28219479
24. Grießbach E, Raßbach P, Herbort O, Cañal-Bruland R. Embodied decisions during walking. J
Neurophysiol. 2022;128(5):1207–23.https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00149.2022 PMID: 36197022
25. Burk D, Ingram JN, Franklin DW, Shadlen MN, Wolpert DM. Motor effort alters changes of mind in
sensorimotor decision making. PLoS ONE. 2014;9(3):e92681.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0092681
26. Cos I, Pezzulo G, Cisek P. Changes of mind after movement onset depend on the state of the
motor system. eNeuro. 2021;8(6):ENEURO.0174-21.2021.
https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0174-21.2021 PMID: 34772692
27. Christopoulos V, Schrater PR. Dynamic integration of value information into a common probability
currency as a theory for flexible decision making. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015;11(9):e1004402.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004402 PMID: 26394299
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 25/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 26 — #26
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
28. Cisek P. Making decisions through a distributed consensus. Curr Opin Neurobiol.
2012;22(6):927–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2012.05.007 PMID: 22683275
29. Friston KJ, Daunizeau J, Kilner J, Kiebel SJ. Action and behavior: a free-energy formulation. Biol
Cybern. 2010;102(3):227–60.https://doi.org/10.1007/s00422-010-0364-z PMID: 20148260
30. Friston K. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat Rev Neurosci. 2010;11(2):127–38.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787 PMID: 20068583
31. Parr T, Pezzulo G, Friston KJ. Active inference: the free energy principle in mind, brain, and
behavior. MIT Press; 2022.
32. Priorelli M, Maggiore F, Maselli A, Donnarumma F, Maisto D, Mannella F, et al. Modeling motor
control in continuous time active inference: a survey. IEEE Trans Cogn Dev Syst.
2024;16(2):485–500. https://doi.org/10.1109/tcds.2023.3338491
33. Pezzulo G, Parr T, Friston K. Active inference as a theory of sentient behavior. Biol Psychol.
2024;186:108741. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2023.108741 PMID: 38182015
34. Cisek P, Puskas GA, El-Murr S. Decisions in changing conditions: the urgency-gating model. J
Neurosci. 2009;29(37):11560–71.https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1844-09.2009 PMID:
19759303
35. Eriksen BA, Eriksen CW. Effects of noise letters upon the identification of a target letter in a
nonsearch task. Percept Psychophys. 1974;16(1):143–9.https://doi.org/10.3758/bf03203267
36. Priorelli M, Stoianov IP. Deep hybrid models: infer and plan in the real world. arXiv, preprint, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.10088
37. Priorelli M, Stoianov IP. Dynamic planning in hierarchical active inference. Neural Netw.
2025;185:107075. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2024.107075 PMID: 39817980
38. Calluso C, Committeri G, Pezzulo G, Lepora N, Tosoni A. Analysis of hand kinematics reveals
inter-individual differences in intertemporal decision dynamics. Exp Brain Res.
2015;233(12):3597–611. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-015-4427-1 PMID: 26341932
39. Cisek P, Kalaska JF. Neural correlates of reaching decisions in dorsal premotor cortex:
specification of multiple direction choices and final selection of action. Neuron. 2005;45(5):801–14.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2005.01.027 PMID: 15748854
40. Priorelli M, Pezzulo G, Stoianov IP. Deep kinematic inference affords efficient and scalable control
of bodily movements. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023;120(51):e2309058120.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2309058120 PMID: 38085784
41. Priorelli M, Pezzulo G, Stoianov IP. Active vision in binocular depth estimation: a top-down
perspective. Biomimetics (Basel). 2023;8(5):445.https://doi.org/10.3390/biomimetics8050445
PMID: 37754196
42. Priorelli M, Stoianov IP. Dynamic inference by model reduction. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory;
2023. https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.10.557043
43. Dotan D, Meyniel F, Dehaene S. On-line confidence monitoring during decision making. Cognition.
2018;171:112–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2017.11.001 PMID: 29128659
44. Gratton G, Coles MG, Donchin E. Optimizing the use of information: strategic control of activation
of responses. J Exp Psychol Gen. 1992;121(4):480–506.
https://doi.org/10.1037//0096-3445.121.4.480 PMID: 1431740
45. Gómez CM, Arjona A, Donnarumma F, Maisto D, Rodríguez-Martínez EI, Pezzulo G. Tracking the
time course of Bayesian inference with event-related potentials:a study using the central cue
posner paradigm. Front Psychol. 2019;10:1424.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01424 PMID:
31275215
46. Ye W, Damian MF. Effects of conflict in cognitive control: evidence from mouse tracking. Q J Exp
Psychol (Hove). 2023;76(1):54–69.https://doi.org/10.1177/17470218221078265 PMID: 35045771
47. Priorelli M, Stoianov IP, Pezzulo G. Learning and embodied decisions in active inference. In:
Buckley CLea, editor. Active inference, IWAI 2024, Oxford. Cham: Springer Nature; 2025, pp.
72–87. Available from:https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-77138-5_5
48. Gangemi A, Mancini F, van den Hout M. Behavior as information: “If I avoid, then there must be a
danger”. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry. 2012;43(4):1032–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbtep.2012.04.005 PMID: 22651921
49. Kalman RE. A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems. J Basic Eng.
1960;82(1):35–45. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3662552
50. Todorov E. General duality between optimal control and estimation. In: 2008 47th IEEE conference
on decision and control. IEEE; 2008, pp. 4286–92.
51. Shadmehr R, Ahmed AA. Vigor: neuroeconomics of movement control. MIT Press; 2020.
52. Cicchini GM, Mikellidou K, Burr DC. Serial dependence in perception. Annu Rev Psychol.
2024;75:129–54. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-021523-104939 PMID: 37758238
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 26/ 27
ID: pcbi.1013180 — 2025/6/21 — page 27 — #27
PLOS COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Embodied decisions as active inference
53. Chapman CS, Gallivan JP, Wood DK, Milne JL, Culham JC, Goodale MA. Short-term motor
plasticity revealed in a visuomotor decision-making task. Behav Brain Res. 2010;214(1):130–4.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2010.05.012 PMID: 20472001
54. Buckley CL, Toyoizumi T. A theory of how active behavior stabilises neural activity: neural gain
modulation by closed-loop environmental feedback. PLoS Comput Biol. 2018;14(1):e1005926.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005926 PMID: 29342146
55. Harris KD, Thiele A. Cortical state and attention. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2011;12(9):509–23.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3084 PMID: 21829219
56. Salinas E, Sejnowski TJ. Gain modulation in the central nervous system: where behavior,
neurophysiology, and computation meet. Neuroscientist. 2001;7(5):430–40.
https://doi.org/10.1177/107385840100700512 PMID: 11597102
57. Schwartenbeck P, Friston K. Computational phenotyping in psychiatry: a worked example. eNeuro.
2016;3(4):ENEURO.0049-16.2016. https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0049-16.2016 PMID:
27517087
58. Cisek P, Kalaska JF. Neural mechanisms for interacting with a world full of action choices. Annu
Rev Neurosci. 2010;33:269–98.https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.051508.135409 PMID:
20345247
59. Thura D, Cabana J-F, Feghaly A, Cisek P. Integrated neural dynamics of sensorimotor decisions
and actions. PLoS Biol. 2022;20(12):e3001861.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001861 PMID:
36520685
60. Shadlen MN, Kiani R. Decision making as a window on cognition. Neuron. 2013;80(3):791–806.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.047 PMID: 24183028
61. Pezzulo G, Rigoli F, Friston KJ. Hierarchical active inference: a theory of motivated control. Trends
Cogn Sci. 2018;22(4):294–306.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.01.009 PMID: 29475638
62. Parr T, Limanowski J, Rawji V, Friston K. The computational neurology of movement under active
inference. Brain. 2021;144(6):1799–818.https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awab085 PMID: 33704439
63. Friston KJ, Shiner T, FitzGerald T, Galea JM, Adams R, Brown H, et al. Dopamine, affordance and
active inference. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012;8(1):e1002327.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002327 PMID: 22241972
64. Friston K, Kiebel S. Predictive coding under the free-energy principle. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B
Biol Sci. 2009;364(1521):1211–21.https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2008.0300 PMID: 19528002
65. Friston KJ, Parr T, de Vries B. The graphical brain: belief propagation and active inference. Netw
Neurosci. 2017;1(4):381–414.https://doi.org/10.1162/NETN_a_00018 PMID: 29417960
66. Friston KJ, Rosch R, Parr T, Price C, Bowman H. Deep temporal models and active inference.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2017;77:388–402.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.04.009 PMID:
28416414
67. Parr T, Friston KJ. The discrete and continuous brain: from decisions to movement-and back again.
Neural Comput. 2018;30(9):2319–47.https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_01102 PMID: 29894658
68. Tschantz A, Barca L, Maisto D, Buckley CL, Seth AK, Pezzulo G. Simulating homeostatic, allostatic
and goal-directed forms of interoceptive control using active inference. Biol Psychol.
2022;169:108266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2022.108266 PMID: 35051559
69. Friston K, Penny W. Post hoc Bayesian model selection. Neuroimage. 2011;56(4):2089–99.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.03.062 PMID: 21459150
70. Da Costa L, Parr T, Sajid N, Veselic S, Neacsu V, Friston K. Active inference on discrete
state-spaces: a synthesis. J Math Psychol. 2020;99:102447.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2020.102447 PMID: 33343039
71. Smith R, Friston KJ, Whyte CJ. A step-by-step tutorial on active inference and its application to
empirical data. J Math Psychol. 2022;107:102632.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2021.102632 PMID:
35340847
72. Botvinick M, Toussaint M. Planning as inference. Trends Cogn Sci. 2012;16(10):485–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.08.006 PMID: 22940577
73. Toussaint M. Probabilistic inference as a model of planned behavior. Künstliche Intell.
2009;3(9):23–9.
74. Friston K, Parr T, Zeidman P. Bayesian model reduction. arXiv, preprint, 2018.
75. Adams RA, Shipp S, Friston KJ. Predictions not commands: active inference in the motor system.
Brain Struct Funct. 2013;218(3):611–43.https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-012-0475-5 PMID:
23129312
76. Brown H, Friston K, Bestmann S. Active inference, attention, and motor preparation. Front Psychol.
2011;2:218. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00218 PMID: 21960978
PLOS Computational Biologyhttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013180 June 18, 2025 27/ 27