TYPE Hypothesis and Theory
PUBLISHED /zero.tnum/nine.tnum August /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
DOI /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Filippo Cieri,
Cleveland Clinic, United States
REVIEWED BY
Daniela Flores Mosri,
Universidad Intercontinental, Mexico
Matthew John Mellor,
University of Exeter, United Kingdom
*CORRESPONDENCE
Thomas Rabeyron
thomas.rabeyron@univ-lorraine.fr
SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to
Cognitive Neuroscience,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience
RECEIVED /two.tnum/seven.tnum April /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
ACCEPTED /one.tnum/nine.tnum July /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
PUBLISHED /zero.tnum/nine.tnum August /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum
CITATION
Rabeyron T (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum) Psychoanalytic
psychotherapies and the free energy
principle.
Front. Hum. Neurosci./one.tnum/six.tnum:/nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum.
doi: /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum
COPYRIGHT
© /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum Rabeyron. This is an
open-access article distributed under
the terms of the
Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY) . The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which
does not comply with these terms.
Psychoanalytic psychotherapies
and the free energy principle
Thomas Rabeyron /one.tnum,/two.tnum,/three.tnum*
/one.tnumDepartment of Psychology (Interpsy), University of Lorraine, Na ncy, France, /two.tnumDepartment of
Psychology (KPU), University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom , /three.tnumInstitut Universitaire de
France, Paris, France
In this paper I propose a model of the fundamental components of
psychoanalytic psychotherapies that I try to explicate with cont emporary
theories of the Bayesian brain and the Free Energy Principle ( FEP). I ﬁrst
show that psychoanalytic therapies require a setting (made u p of several
envelopes), a particular psychic state and speciﬁc processes (t ransference,
free association, dreaming, play, reﬂexivity and narrativity ) in order to
induce psychic transformations. I then analyze how these proces ses of
transformations operate and how they can be enlightened by th e FEP.
I ﬁrst underline the fact that psychoanalytic therapies imply n on-linear
processes taking time to unfold and require a setting containin g high
entropy processes. More precisely, these processes are characteriz ed by an
interplay between extension and reduction of free energy. Thi s interplay
also favors the emergence of new orders of subjective experien ce, which
occur following states of disorder, according to a certain energeti c threshold
allowing the modiﬁcation and improvement of mental functioning . These
high entropy states are also characterized by random functioni ng and psychic
malleability which favors the exploration of subjective exper ience in an original
manner. Overall, the approach proposed in this paper support t he dialogue
between psychoanalysis and other ﬁelds of research while underli ning how
psychoanalytical theoretical and conceptual constructs can also be us eful to
other disciplines, in particular the neurosciences of subjectiv ity.
KEYWORDS
psychoanalysis, free energy, entropy, free association, dream,psychoanalytic therapy,
transference, symbolization
Psychoanalytic psychotherapies and the free
energy principle
In this paper I propose a model of psychoanalytic psychotherapies associated with
the free energy principle (FEP). The FEP assumes that any living organism must
reduce its internal free energy, which is generated by the tendency of matter t oward
disorganization due to the second law of thermodynamics
(Friston, 2013) . This degree
of organization, or disorganization, can be measured in physics by the notion of e ntropy.
Living organisms must therefore manage to ﬁght against the increase of entropy (a nd
thus of disorganization) induce by the environment and maintain a suﬃcient level of
organization by reducing free energy. This principle is considered by Karl Friston as
being as fundamental as natural selection or gravity
(Badcock et al., 2019; Holmes, 2021) .
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org
Rabeyron /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum
The psychic apparatus can be considered as a hierarchically
organized subsystem having the same function of entropy and
free energy reduction by developing a set of predictions about
the environment based on Bayesian statistics
(Friston et al.,
2006; Hirsh et al., 2012; Badcock et al., 2019) . As summarized by
Cieri et al. (2021) : “According to the free energy principle, the
brain is an open, adaptive, complex system far from equilibrium
and as with any adaptive self-organizing biological system in
non-equilibrium steady-state with environment, it must reduce
its free energy to resist a natural tendency to disorder” (p.
2). Consequently, it might be relevant to try to understand
the psychic apparatus from the FEP
(Friston, 2013) knowing
that, when it is overwhelmed in its ability to regulate free
energy, it can rely on a second and external system to regain
its internal homeostasis
(Friston and Frith, 2015) . This process
is present from the start of the psychic life and corresponds to
complex interrelations between the infant and the attachment
ﬁgures
(Beebe and Lachmann, 2020) . Concretely, the states of
disorganization of the baby can be regulated by parental care
because the psychic apparatus of the baby, as well as its biological
functioning in a more general way, is not suﬃciently mature to
be autonomous. As Winnicott said “there is no such thing as
a baby.”
Psychotherapy consists of a relationship whose ﬁnal aim
is to help the patient to ﬁnd a form of psychic equilibrium
and the psychotherapeutic process may also be understood
from the point of view of the FEP
/one.tnum(Chekroud, 2015; Holmes,
2020, 2021) . Psychotherapies correspond to highly complex
processes and we still have diﬃculties in grasping precisely
the principles of their action
(Cuijpers et al., 2019) . They
are usually evaluated depending on their theoretical frame
of reference (psychoanalytic, cognitive-behavioral therapy,
humanistic, systemic, etc.) with the aim of demonstrating their
eﬀectiveness for diﬀerent forms of mental disorders. However,
such an approach has led to limited progress, notably because we
have great diﬃculty in discriminating the inﬂuence of common
and speciﬁc factors of therapeutic eﬀectiveness
(Cuijpers et al.,
2019). In addition, there is often a gap between what a clinician
says about what he or she is doing -particularly on the basis
of theoretical orientation- and what is actually done in clinical
practice
(Ablon and Jones, 1998) . Consequently, the most
important question is not if psychotherapies work, but how they
work. One of the ways to go beyond these controversies could be
to rely on more fundamental principles such as the FEP to better
understand the transformations induced by psychotherapies and
/one.tnum The FEP is a “scale free principle”. This characteristic is important
because, as Connolly and van Deventer (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/seven.tnum) point out, it means that
the free energy principle can potentially be applied to all leve ls of psychic
functioning. It can thus explain purely sensory and perceptual l evels of
information processing (e.g., visual perception) but also more com plex
levels of interactions pertaining to the interactions betwee n a therapist
and a clinician.
thus promote a “meta-perspective of psychotherapy integration”
(
Holmes, 2020 , p. 165). In this regard, the main processes
involved in psychoanalytical psychotherapies /two.tnumwill analyzed in
this paper within such a meta-perspective /three.tnum.
Setting and psychic state during
psychoanalytical therapies
I am going ﬁrst to propose a synthetic model of
psychoanalytical psychotherapies identifying several
components characteristic of this approach
(Figure 1)/four.tnum. I
propose to distinguish more precisely: (1) the setting (internal,
external and meta), (2) the psychic state of the patient and the
therapist, (3) the main processes (transference, associativity,
dream, play, reﬂexivity and narrativity), and (4) speciﬁc
indicators of the therapy eﬀectiveness (symptoms, object
relations, defense mechanisms, anxieties and inhibitions). Each
of these components will be described before determining to
what extent they can be addressed according to the FEP
/five.tnum.
Setting
Psychoanalytic psychotherapies are usually characterized by
paying particular attention to the setting (Bleger, 1979) . This
setting is made up of three complementary envelopes that
ﬁt together like Russian dolls: (1) the meta-setting, (2) the
external setting, and (3) the internal setting. The meta-setting
corresponds to the place where the therapy takes place (for
example, a hospital) and more broadly the anthropological
and sociological space where the therapy is conducted (for
example, in a speciﬁc country at a given time). Inside this
meta-setting, the external setting corresponds to the space
where the therapy takes place (most of the time a consultation
/two.tnum whose eﬀectiveness has been largely demonstrated by empirical
research (Shedler, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/zero.tnum; Fonagy, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/five.tnum; Leichsenring et al., /two.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/five.tnum; Steinert
et al., /two.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/seven.tnum).
/three.tnum I have chosen to focus the attention on psychoanalytical
psychotherapies because they seem to be particularly compati ble
with the theories of free energy as already shown in particular by
Holmes
(/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/zero.tnum). But it might be possible to propose a more global, integrative and
trans-theoretical model of psychotherapy based on the same appr oach.
/four.tnum I will propose a global approach of psychoanalytical psychotherapies
describing mainly what can be considered as common factors of thes e
therapies. I cannot, in this paper, address more precisely the speciﬁcities
of this approach because there are diﬀerent schools of psychoana lysis
and diﬀerent categories of mental disorders.
/five.tnum This topic would probably deserve a book given its complexity and I
will mainly propose in this paper a global overview. The reader lookin g for
a more in-depth analysis of psychotherapy from the point of view of FEP
might look at
Holmes (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/zero.tnum).
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org
Rabeyron /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum
FIGURE /one.tnum
Main components of psychoanalytical therapies.
room) and all the elements that characterize this therapeutic
space: arrangement of the furniture, decoration, light, noise,
etc. These elements create an atmosphere that in itself has
an impact on the nature of the processes that will take
place during the therapy
(Rebollar and Rabeyron, 2016) . This
setting must also be suﬃciently “tough” or “structured” in
the sense that it has to allow the patient to feel safe to
explore her or his psychic life in complete security. For
example, the patient has to be assured that what is said during
the sessions is strictly conﬁdential and cannot be overheard
outside the consultation room. The third dimension of the
setting corresponds to the clinician’s internal setting -also calls
“clinical positioning” (Roussillon et al., 2014)- which is based
on implicit principles and explicit rules that guide how the
clinician interact with the patient and considers the nature of
the therapeutic process.
From the point of view of the FEP , the setting appears
as a container whose structure allows, as we will see, a
double tendency of extension and reduction of free energy
during the therapy. In the same manner that the walls of
a nuclear reactor contain the reactions induced by nuclear
ﬁssion, the setting has to be resistant enough to contain the
psychological reactions that occur within it
/six.tnum. This is all the
/six.tnum The notion of container is used in reference to Bion’s writings,
insisting here on its “static” conﬁguration, which could give the f eeling
that the therapist container is entirely diﬀerentiated from th e patient’s
more important given that some patients, particularly suﬀering
from borderline personality disorder, regularly seek to “test”
the quality of the setting. These patients will also tend to
“dialogue” through the setting, i.e., project certain psychological
processes onto the setting
(Roussillon, 2014) . Thus, just as
the FEP implies in a living organism the constitution of an
envelope to diﬀerentiate the internal world from the external
world
/seven.tnum(Kirchhoﬀ et al., 2018) , the setting of a therapy operates
as an envelope that contains free energy. Understanding
the processes and eﬀects of psychoanalytic psychotherapies
therefore implies taking into account the properties of this
envelope represented by the diﬀerent layers of the setting. For
example, when this setting is too porous, unstable or even
implodes, the therapeutic process will lose its strength, or
even collapse, like a cell whose membrane no longer holds
psychic life. This notion is described in this manner in order to insist on
the containing and “solid” dimension of the setting, but actuall y, from a
Bionian perspective, the container is a far more labile and porous n otion
which can also include the patient’s psychic life.
/seven.tnum This envelope can be described, from a mathematical point of view,
as a Markov blanket
(Kirchhoﬀ et al., /two.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/eight.tnum). A Markov blanket accounts
for certain properties of Bayesian systems, and more precisely for the
set of “nodes that surround a node” forming a blanket that surround s an
initial node. This leads to a diﬀerentiation between a represe ntation of the
internal states of a system and the external states of its env ironment.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org
Rabeyron /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum
its role of delimitation between the internal and the external
worlds
/eight.tnum.
Psychic state
Psychoanalytic psychotherapies also rely on the
implementation of a speciﬁc psychic state shared by the
patient and the therapist. This state is favored by free
association
/nine.tnum, which encourages the patient to let go of the
usual cognitive psychological functioning (Barratt, 2017;
Rabeyron and Massicotte, 2020) . The patient is invited to
express spontaneously, and without restraint, everything that
comes to mind. In this way, the attention is focused on internal
experience in a very speciﬁc manner leading to the expression
of diﬀerent forms of aﬀects and representations. At the same
time, the clinician is also in a speciﬁc state of listening called
by
Freud (1919) “ﬂoating attention” which implies freely
associating in reaction to the patient’s free associations. The
result is a state of shared “reverie” for both the patient and the
clinician, which aims to catalyze the processes of symbolization
and transformation.
From the perspective of the FEP , this reverie state appears to
both promote the increase of emotional and primary processes
/one.tnum/zero.tnum
(which increase free energy) and the decrease of cognitive and
secondary processes (which reduce free energy). This psychic
state, which is also partly found in certain meditation practices
/one.tnum/one.tnum,
also leads to a state of receptivity -that Bion (1965) calls “negative
capability”- which allows the patient and the clinician to be
surprised by what emerges in the analytical setting
(Reik, 1935;
Scarfone, 2018). From a Bayesian perspective, surprise is seen as
the eﬀect of increased free energy due to a discrepancy between
the external world and the a priori predictions created by the
brain
(Friston et al., 2006) . The other forms of emotions and
aﬀects are also catalyzed in this psychic state and correspond
to an increase of bottom-up processes. In this sense, the setting
and a certain “disposition of mind” favors entropic functioning
and a form of disorganization of the usual psychological activity
during psychotherapy.
/eight.tnum This process can take diﬀerent forms in the clinic practice: the patient
no longer comes to the sessions, the therapist makes a mistake, et c.
/nine.tnum Free association will be analyzed in more details in the third part of
the paper.
/one.tnum/zero.tnum Especially emotions associated with primary processes as described
by
Panksepp (/one.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/eight.tnum).
/one.tnum/one.tnum With the fundamental diﬀerence that meditation can be practiced
alone whereas psychoanalytical practices suppose that free ass ociation
must be done in the presence of another person who is himself in a
particular psychic state so that the processes of symbolizati on operate
fully. Another diﬀerence is the relationship to time which is mor e focus
on the here and now in meditation while psychoanalysis rely on a lar ger
consideration of time
(Cieri, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum).
Main psychological processes of
psychoanalytic psychotherapies and
FEP
The setting and the psychic state which characterize
psychoanalytic therapies are necessary for the emergence
of more speciﬁc processes. In this regard, six fundamental
processes can be distinguished: transference, free association,
dreaming, play, reﬂexivity, and narrativity. I will brieﬂy outline
each of these notions through the prism of the FEP and
I will hypothesize that they might help to understand how
psychoanalytical psychotherapies lead to a “regulation, ” or even
a “handling, ” of free energy in order to induce psychological
transformations. These notions will be presented from the most
primary to the most secondary level, knowing, however, that
they are deeply interconnected and that distinguishing them in
this way is necessarily artiﬁcial.
(1) Therapeutic relationship and transference : the
therapeutic relationship is like a channel that allows two
psyches—those of the patient and the clinician—to become
suﬃciently attuned to each other to succeed in inducing
transformational processes. There is indeed a “we-mode”
characterizing the psychic functioning and allowing two people
to ﬁnd, through complex intersubjective exchanges, a new
state of equilibrium
(Frith, 2012; Friston and Frith, 2015) .
This we-mode is probably the core of the therapeutic process,
as shown by the importance of the therapeutic alliance in
therapeutic eﬀectiveness research
(Horvath and Luborsky, 1993;
Connolly, 2022) . However, it is a necessary but not suﬃcient
parameter for more complex processes to emerge. In this
respect, the clinician seems to represent an “auxiliary system”
for the self of the patient. The therapeutic relationship thus
appears to be a privileged tool for reducing free energy insofar
as the clinician’s psyche helps to regulate the patient’s psyche,
in the same way, metaphorically, that, in Newtonian physics,
one object transmits its energy to another object. Therapy can
thus be conceptualized, at its most basic level, as an energy
transference. For example, a patient in a state of agitation
necessarily transfers something of this state to the clinician
whose containment allows, at a strictly economic level, to
reduce the patient’s free energy as unbound and unelaborated
psychic energy. The passage through the other is thus both a
vector of regulation and symbolization
/one.tnum/two.tnumwhich implicitly rests
/one.tnum/two.tnum The term symbolization requires deﬁnition. The term symbol
comes from the ancient Greek symbolon, which derives from the verb
symballesthaï, which means “to put together”. Originally, in ancient
Greece, the symbol is more precisely a shard of pottery broken in
two, each part of which is given to a contracting party, that test iﬁes
the authenticity of the contract, which can be conﬁrmed by putt ing
them together. In a restricted sense, the term symbolization thu s
designates the operation by which one thing represents another th ing.
Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/four.tnum frontiersin.org
Rabeyron /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum
on a reduction of free energy according to a basic narcissistic
identiﬁcation
(Roussillon, 2014) . We are then dealing with a
very archaic and primary dimension of care relying mainly on
the containing, regulating and aﬀective function of the therapist
as a mother can be with the infant
(Bion, 1962).
This process of intersubjective regulation involves two
particular steps. The ﬁrst is a synchronization which implies that
the two psyches “agree” suﬃciently to exchange information.
This tuning can be analyzed from the point of view of Bayesian
systems by taking as a model the synchronization of two
birds
(Friston and Frith, 2015) and is also supported by the
observation of early relationships between babies and their
attachment ﬁgures
(Stern, 1989) . From this point of view,
psychotherapy can be considered as the meeting of two Bayesian
brains which, in order to improve their respective predictions,
must agree suﬃciently to progressively reﬁne their generative
models
/one.tnum/three.tnum. This permits a second step of “mixing” of the psyches
that goes beyond a simple tuning as noted by Connolly (2022) :
“the emergence of this synchrony involves a dissolution of
boundaries between the two participants where the sensory
input from one becomes the prior of the other, as if it emerged
from within” (p. 9).
Holmes (2020) also explains that “if two
inter-acting agents, drawing on the mirror neuron system,
mutually assume the other is like themselves, the energetic
boundaries between them are temporarily dismantled. Together
they build a shared brain or niche” (p. 57). This shared brain
evokes what is called the “analytical ﬁeld” in psychoanalysis,
which implies a state of psychic regression for the therapist
and the patient in order to produce enduring processes
of transformation
(Rabeyron, 2020a,b) . Such a psychological
functioning also seems to catalyzes the transferential processes
and induces a greater psychic malleability.
These processes are of great complexity and fall under
diﬀerent registers beyond the topic of therapeutic relationship,
which leads naturally to the notion of transference and
the unconscious dimension of the therapeutic relationship.
Transference is classically considered as the way in which the
patient spontaneously tends to unconsciously transfer relational
patterns onto the ﬁgure of the therapist and the therapeutic
In psychoanalytical models, symbolization concerns the various s tages
and processes that allow psychic reality to transform a “primar y psychic
matter” into a matter endowed with reﬂexivity and subjectivi ty. Thus,
the symbolization designates how a person transforms his or her own
experience in order to integrate it subjectively. We can more pr ecisely
distinguish the “primary symbolization” which corresponds to wh at
Freud designates by the term “representation of thing”, while s econdary
symbolization designates what Freud calls “word representation ” and
rather concern the processes of psychic transformation associat ed with
verbal language.
/one.tnum/three.tnum The generative model is, in Friston’s theory, the Bayesian model
developed by the brain to predict the propriety of reality and w hose main
aim is to reduce free energy.
relationship (Freud, 1919) . This is a central component of
psychoanalytic therapies and implies that the clinician accepts
to be “taken for another” and be “impregnated” by the patient’s
psychic life. For example, the patient will behave toward the
therapist in the same way that he or she has behaved toward
one of the parents (or, conversely, as one of the parents used
to behave toward the patient). These relational patterns are so
natural for the patients that they tend to interact with the others,
and thus with the therapist, according to the same principles,
which can lead to pathological relation patterns taking in
particular the form of the repetition compulsion
(Freud, 1920) .
In return, the clinician will be particularly attentive to the
countertransference, i.e., the way in which the patient induces,
often unconsciously at ﬁrst, speciﬁc relational patterns and
ways of thinking that inform the clinician about the patient’s
psychic life. How can such a conception of transference can be
interpreted from the point of view of the FEP?
First of all, we could consider that the patient express, within
the setting of the therapy, relationship patterns which have
previously led to a disorganization of the subjective experience.
The analysis of transference thus oﬀers the possibility for the
patient to play and integrate, in a reﬂexive manner, speciﬁc
psychological functioning and pathological relational patterns.
This reﬂexive loop is concomitant with the internalization of
therapeutic intersubjectivity which leads to the integration of
new styles of emotional regulation. In this sense, transference
allows, usually after a long period of therapy, a progressive
“updating” of the relational dimension of the generative model,
whose primary function is the reduction of free energy. As
Freud (1919) already pointed out, the most eﬃcient way to
do this “updating” consists in re-playing, in an unconscious
way, these relational patterns in the therapeutic setting. The
latter then becomes an “attractor” that will favor the emergence
of a “transference neurosis” which corresponds to the replay
of pathological relational patterns, in the here and now, on
the ﬁgure of the therapist. This process is what
Freud (1919)
has called the agieren and might be considered, in more
contemporary terms, as a process of enaction (Sapisochin, 2013).
(2) Free association is usually considered the most
fundamental rule of analytical practices (Barratt, 2017) and
requires a form of “letting go” of mental associations without
trying to control them. The patient often goes through
several steps and, in particular, through a phase of “focal
association” in which an event about reality is reported and
from which mental associations will be produced. Gradually, as
the therapy progresses, the patient learns -or rather unlearns-
to not control his or her thoughts, which leads to a more
“unbridled” or “extended” form of free association. This
allows, as in certain meditation practices, to observe—with
attention and without intention—the internal associative ﬂow of
consciousness
(Rabeyron and Finkel, 2020) . Thus, as explained
by Holmes (2020) , “The job of free association is to slow things
down so they can be identiﬁed and subjected to rational top-
down scrutiny” (2020, p. 108). This state seems to help the
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/five.tnum frontiersin.org
Rabeyron /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum
patient to express and explore his internal experience, and
to register and translate previous experiences in an original
manner, which favors reﬂexivity and transformational processes
(Rabeyron and Massicotte, 2020) /one.tnum/four.tnum. The withdrawing from the
external world favored by free association results in an increase
of free energy and a more chaotic and stochastic experience. Free
association then participates in a form of disorganization of the
experience which necessarily induces an increase of free energy,
which we shall return to in more details later.
(3) Dreaming and reverie also appear as fundamental
components of psychoanalytical therapies. It concerns both the
nocturnal dream activity that the patient may report during
the sessions -considering that dreams represent the “royal
road to the unconscious”
(Freud, 1900) - but it also concerns
the state of reverie into which the patient enters during the
sessions themselves. In this respect, it is worth remembering
that Freud (1940) initially proposed a distinction between free
energy and bound energy: “we seem to recognize that nervous
or psychic energy occurs in two forms, one freely mobile and
another, by comparison, bound” (p. 141). The ﬁrst corresponds
to primary processes in which the energy is considered freer,
more mobile, and leads to a rapid discharge in the psychic
apparatus. The result is a psychic functioning whose dreaming
activity is a typical example and in which a desire might be
expressed in a hallucinatory manner. At the opposite, the bound
energy corresponds to an energy that is the object of a linking
process in the psychic apparatus, notably by cathexis, and whose
integration at a higher level of organization induces a more
delayed and controlled discharge. There are thus for Freud two
levels of “ﬂow” of energy: the ﬁrst one corresponds to the most
primary and unconscious level in which free energy is freer as
expressed in the dreams, whereas the second level implies the
“handling” of small quantities of energy by consciousness.
Freud (1901) also considers that dreams allow the
unconscious processes to be revealed in a more “reliable”
manner than in the usual cognitive state as they express more
easily unconscious desires and traumatic experiences. Thus, the
clinician will pay particular attention to the dreams reported
by the patient and may propose interpretations about their
meaning. The therapist also plays a speciﬁc role during the
narrative of the patient’s dream by asking what are the mental
associations spontaneously emerging, with the aim to decipher
the latent content of the dreams. The dream creates a “virtual
reality space”
(Hopkins, 2016) that allows the exploration of
desires and traumatic experiences that have not been integrated
/one.tnum/four.tnum This state is probably associated with speciﬁc neurobiological
correlates as proposed by
Cieri et al. (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum): “during resting state,
the brain cortex prominently expresses alpha brainwaves (e.g. , /one.tnum/zero.tnum Hz),
associated with diﬀerent functions, including top-down inhibit ions, top-
down prediction and information processing. This activity seems t o be
associated with the Default Network activity, as part of neural correlated
of the ego integrity” (p. /one.tnum/three.tnum).
and that can be expressed in complete safety given that the
subject does not act-out in reality the content of the dreams.
Then, when the patient becomes capable of elaborating the
unelaborated, of making the unconscious conscious, notably
through this work focusing on dream expression and analysis,
he or she is more in contact with the feelings (internal reality)
and with the environment (external reality), and thus reﬁnes
and perfects the generative model. As proposed by
Holmes
(2020), the “granulosity” of the world has been improved and
more “nuances” are accessible to the patient. As a result, the
patient builds a model of reality that diminish free energy
because the ability to represent, to predict and to act precisely
has been enhanced.
But dream activity cannot be reduced to the nocturnal
dreams and there is actually a much bigger “dream function”
as shown by
Bion (1965) . The latter supposes that dream
processes are always present in the background of psychological
activity, even during the usual cognitive states, and have
the function of making perceptive, sensory and emotional
experiences “thinkable, ” integrable and subjectivable. This
process of symbolization through dreams would be catalyzed by
the states of reverie that we have already evoked. The patient
enters in a state that allows him to dream his experience
and to “dream undreamt dreams”
(Ogden, 2012) , this state
being catalyzed by the analyst’s own dream function that Bion
(1965) calls “dream-work-alpha.” Dreaming thus appears to
be essential in the integration of free energy as Holmes and
Nolte (2019) point out: “From the point of view of the FEP ,
dreaming elaborates the trauma so that it becomes thinkable
(p. 9).” This work of psychic integration passes, just as for
the free association, by a state of “letting go” which allows
the exploration of new states and new conﬁgurations of the
subjective experience, which, in ﬁne, transforms the psychic
apparatus and the generative model.
(4) Play is also a central component of psychoanalytic
therapies which can be considered as “space of play” for both the
clinician and the patient in order to explore new experiences. But
the patient has to be able to play as
Winnicott (1971) pointed out:
“Psychotherapy takes place in the overlap of two areas of playing,
that of the patient and that of the therapist. Psychotherapy has to
do with two people playing together. The corollary of this is that
where playing is not possible then the work done by the therapist
is directed toward bringing the patient from a state of not being
able to play into a state of being able to play” (p. 39). Play
appears more precisely as a “state” or a “capacity” that allows
unsymbolized and unplayed experiences to be “brought into
play”
(Roussillon, 2008) . But, these the traumatic components
of these experiences induce a potential increase of free energy
and a disorganization of the psychic apparatus.
Play then implies the regulation of this free energy in a
“transitional space”
(Winnicott, 1969), i.e., a space of transition
between the internal and the external world for experiences not
yet integrated. The play is to be distinguished from symptoms
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/six.tnum frontiersin.org
Rabeyron /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum
which, on the contrary, are “crystallized” and lead the subject
to remain the prisoner of pathological relational patterns
and behaviors, which ultimately disturb internal psychological
homeostasis. The transitional space also evokes certain cerebral
states of “criticality” which corresponds to a transition zone
between order and chaos
(Cieri et al., 2021) : “Critical behavior
means that activity of the brain continuously transits between
two phases, one in which activity increases and ampliﬁes over
time and another in which activity rapidly reduces and dies.
Between these two phases, there is a critical zone in which
the system increases information processing” (p. 12). The brain
alternates between phases of order and disorder, which also
characterizes the processes of play and the ability to tolerate a
certain degree of disorder to “order” the subjective experience
diﬀerently. This requires a form of “illusion” corresponding to
a particular conjunction between the internal and the external
world described by
Winnicott (1969) as the “paradox of found-
created”: the subject must have the impression that he creates
the world where he ﬁnds it. This paradox gives the feeling that
the representation of the world, as a complex “hallucination, ”
coincides suﬃciently with the world in itself. This is summed
up by
Frith (2007) “our perception of the world is a fantasy
that coincides with reality” (p. 111) and, in terms of the
FEP , a suﬃcient “co-incidence” between the generative model
and the environment seems to be necessary to “update” the
generative model.
Playing therefore represents an activity allowing the
transformation of psychic reality through the exploration of new
states of mind. This work of exploration aims in particular at
integrating the non-integrated and “playing the non-played, ”
which underlines the extent to which the nachträglichkeit
(afterwardness) is a fundamental aspect of psychological
functioning. The psychic apparatus is indeed constituted in such
a way that there is always a “gap” between what the subject can
integrate from his experience (internal and external) and what
he perceives or feels of it. In this sense, the play makes it possible
to rework non-integrated experiences in the nachträglichkeit,
and in particular traumatic experiences that could jeopardize
the structure of the psychic apparatus or the generative model
because of an uncontrolled inﬂux of free energy
/one.tnum/five.tnum. The play thus
/one.tnum/five.tnum This is probably what happens during an episode of
decompensation, particularly in the ﬁeld of psychosis
(Ciompi and
Tschacher, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum), which results in the destruction of the “apparatus
for thinking the thoughts” (Bion, /one.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/five.tnum). The subject is, for example,
invaded by the return of traumatic elements in the subjectiv ity but does
not manage to “play” enough with these elements to integrate them.
It then produces an implosion of the psychic apparatus and its mod els
of representation leaves a deep trace in the activity of thought from
which some subjects never really recover. We can therefore unde rstand
the importance for the psyche of regulating these energetic proce sses
because they can result in a deadly danger for the psychic appar atus
when the level of free energy reaches a critical level.
appears to be a complex activity of “putting back into play”
experiences that have induced too much entropy to be integrated
under “good enough” conditions. This is probably the reason
why play induces a form of disorder but suﬃciently controlled
to regulate free energy. Otherwise, the play is “overﬂowed” and
loses its fundamental characteristic of being a play
/one.tnum/six.tnum.
(5) Reﬂexivity appears as an additional level of psychological
functioning which corresponds to the ability to represent the
experience according to a “meta” layer
(Roussillon, 1991) . The
human species has developed a degree of reﬂexivity whose depth
is unique in the animal kingdom. This ability allows us to
“feel our feelings” and to “think our thoughts, ” in an extremely
complex manner, which permits us to project ourselves in space
and time, thus oﬀering new capacities of adaptation and control
of the environment. But this ability has a cost: as the human
being becomes more reﬂexive, he is more distant from his
primary perceptive and emotional experience
(Roustang, 2003).
This results in a “gap” between the more primary layers of
experience and the more secondarized and reﬂective layers of
the psychic apparatus. Psychoanalytical psychotherapies are thus
based on the idea that the subject may suﬀer from the non-
represented, the non-subjectivated, and that auto-representation
processes have potential therapeutic eﬀects. It proceeds to
accompany the patient toward an increased reﬂexivity which
allows him or her to feel the not felt and to think the not thought.
We can then diﬀerentiate more precisely two main registers
of reﬂexivity: (1) primary reﬂexivity concerning the relationship
to emotions
/one.tnum/seven.tnum; (2) secondary reﬂexivity which implies linguistic
and verbal language. The most primary level of reﬂexivity
concerns essentially how the mental apparatus manages to
integrate emotions and their more “entropic” dimension. The
second level relates to language and symbolic representations,
which organizes the activity of thought presented by Freud as
the manipulation of “small quantities of energy” by the psychic
apparatus. Reﬂexivity thus corresponds to a heterogeneous
and complex articulation of diﬀerent levels of psychological
functioning
/one.tnum/eight.tnum. The “work of reﬂexivity” in therapy also implies
/one.tnum/six.tnum Play involves a form of “pretending.” It is necessary to “pretend”
because this creates a “gap” with the real experience, which e ncourages
its potential integration. When the play “slips”, when we play f or “real”,
then we no longer play, and the risk is to see the game play overwhel med
in its function of regulation of psychic activity (Rabeyron, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/zero.tnuma,b).
/one.tnum/seven.tnum Emotions do not emerge at a reﬂexive meta layer of mental
functioning but rather at very primary layer of psychic life as shown in
particularly by
Panksepp (/one.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/eight.tnum). Consequently, what is described here
as a form of “emotional reﬂexivity” corresponds to the ability to “ feel”
emotions -emerging as “bottom-up” processes—that haven’t been “fe lt”
due to, for example, defense mechanisms as cleavage. So, reﬂexiv ity deals
with the way that emotions will be integrated (and thus felt) at m eta layer
of mental functioning.
/one.tnum/eight.tnum Some mental disorders might be the consequence of a
disintegration of these registers. For example, certain patien ts
Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/seven.tnum frontiersin.org
Rabeyron /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum
that the patient speaks and that he uses language to represent
his or her internal experience. But this progression through
language induces a form of “subjective revolution” and a radical
transformation of the relationship between oneself and others
(Lacan, 1966) . From the point of view of the FEP , a regulation
of the free energy occurs by the mediation of language which at
the same time represents and regulates the subjective experience
in an original manner. As
Holmes (2021) underlines “language,
whether spoken, sung or gestured, is structured, ordered,
negentropic” (p. 2) and language thus induces a new form of
order in the psychic apparatus: we pass from an energetic order
to a semiotic and signifying order. Through language, the patient
“becomes aware” of certain aﬀects and, more generally, how a
way of doing things, a dream, a symptom, can be apprehended in
an original and “more reﬂexive” way. Psychoanalytical therapies
thus aim at increasing the reﬂexivity with the idea that this
will help to patient be more in phase with the internal and the
external worlds, which ﬁnally leads to a better regulation of the
energetic aspects of the mind necessarily related to the FEP.
(6) Narrativity can be considered as a “meta” level of
reﬂexivity. It leads to integrate the reﬂexive experience into a
narrative framework. Reﬂexivity and narrativity thus maintain
a close relationship because reﬂexivity requires a form of
narrativity, an ability to “tell a story” and, conversely, narrativity
favors a certain degree of reﬂexivity. There are diﬀerent degrees
of narrativity of which one of the most primary forms consists of
what
Bion (1965) has called the “chosen fact” -a term borrowed
from the French physicist and philosopher Henri Poincaré- and
which corresponds to the linking of several psychic elements
(a feeling, a dream, an interpretation, etc.). The chosen fact
organizes and generates heuristic emergences that give meaning
to the subjective experience. They can be included into narrative
scenarios or more complex “narrative envelopes” that Bion calls
“vertexes” and that favor the coherence of the experience by
creating a more global meaning
(Rabeyron, 2018). This narrative
framework is fundamental because it permits the subject to
inscribe the experience in a story that represents a meta-level of
organization of desires, self-esteem, relationships, anxieties, etc.
(Mar and Peterson, 2013) . More precisely, narrativity implies an
origin, a goal, an end, scenarios, protagonists, even a spectator
or an “audience, ” like in a movie. The human experience
would otherwise be reduced to a succession of pictures without
coherence and meaning. Thus, some patients suﬀer from not
being able to tell themselves a story, or not being able to tell
certain parts of their story, when the trauma has broken into
the capacity of subjective elaboration. They can no longer ﬁnd
meaning in their story and psychoanalytic therapies aim to
increase, or “repair, ” narrativity.
described as “operative” ( opératoire; Marty, /one.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/eight.tnum) who seem to think
without experiencing emotions, while conversely certain patie nts are
overwhelmed by aﬀects and the inability to symbolize through lan guage
expression.
From the FEP perspective, as Holmes (2021) points out
“the brain’s aim is constantly to reduce informational entropy
and maximize meaning” (p. 2). Narrativity can then be
considered as the highest level of subjective experience which
nevertheless must be articulated with more basic energetic
aspects. In this regard, the brain can be in a “mode” called
“fact free learning” or “structured learning” which aims at
minimizing complexity by “compressing” representation models
(Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2019) : “one can reﬁne higher-
level models or narratives to make them simpler by removing
redundant parameters, thereby revealing the underlying core
structures and manifolds” (p. 332). This process leads to
“new perspectives resulting in “aha” or “eureka” moments that
“typically emerge spontaneously, ’out of the blue’ as simple,
elegant solutions, presumably because redundant models and/or
model parameters have been unconsciously stripped away,
leaving the ’bare truth beneath”’ (p. 332). Thus, the psyche
seems to regulate its energetic dynamics by meanings and
narratives processes that are supposed to be catalyzed during
psychoanalytical therapies.
Transformational processes between
chaos and order
Psychoanalytical therapies therefore require a setting
(with several envelopes), a speciﬁc psychic state and several
fundamental processes (transference, free association, dream,
play, reﬂexivity and narrativity) that favor symbolization.
These diﬀerent elements induce eﬀects on the subjectivity, the
suﬀering of the patient and its symptomatic expression
/one.tnum/nine.tnum. In
this respect, several “markers” of the therapeutic eﬀectiveness
of psychoanalytical therapies can be identiﬁed
/two.tnum/zero.tnum(Figure 1):
reduction of the symptoms, disappearance of anxieties, decline
of toxic object relationships, softening of defense mechanisms
and reduction of inhibitions. In comparison to therapies with
predetermined goals (focused explicitly on the suppression of
symptoms), psychoanalysis assumes, as Freud already proposed,
that “healing comes afterwards.” The therapeutic eﬀects will
thus become manifest in a second stage, as the “apparatus for
thinking the thinking, ” as
Bion (1965) calls it, will be transformed
in depth. This is why it could be preferable not to focus explicitly
/one.tnum/nine.tnum An analysis of the relationship between mental disorders and the
FEP will not be covered in this paper because the objective is rat her to
study the underlying secondary processes that can lead to diﬀe rent forms
of symptomatic expressions. A more speciﬁc analysis of the rela tionship
between psychopathology and FEP can be found in Rabeyron (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum).
/two.tnum/zero.tnum Other markers could probably be identiﬁed (for example, the
patient’s autonomy capacities), but it seems that these marker s were
the most frequently reported in the psychoanalytical literatur e. It might
also be relevant to study in more detail the relationships betw een these
diﬀerent markers, particularly from the point of view of free ene rgy.
Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/eight.tnum frontiersin.org
Rabeyron /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum
on the symptomatic expression in order to achieve lasting eﬀects
on psychic reality and it may be relevant to focus on the source
rather than the consequences. From the point of view of the
Bayesian brain theories and the FEP , psychoanalytic therapies
involve the transformation of the generative model with the idea
that this will induce transformation of the subject’s relationship
to the internal and the external world. This is probably what
Bion (1965) has tried to theorize with the “alpha function” which
corresponds to the way in which the subject manages to “think”
or “dream” the real, thanks to a global “psychic function” which
transforms the beta elements (corporal, sensorial, emotional
and non-thinkable in themselves) into alpha elements (the ﬁrst
“bricks” of the thought). Psychoanalytic therapies thus aim
at transforming the quality of this psychic function of global
integration which is necessarily, employed, in its foundations
and its most basic logics, toward the need for the minimization
of free energy.
The transformation of this global psychic function involves
processes of great complexity and non-linear logic
(Galatzer-
Levy, 2016; Turtz, 2020) . The interconnection of these processes
is of such complexity that any attempt to separate them in
order to extract empirically testable variables may lead to the
destruction of the holistic character of their structure which
gives them a “hyper-complex” dimension
(Morin, 2005). We can
therefore understand why a therapy probably cannot be carried
out in all its depth in just a few sessions. A suﬃcient frequency
and duration are needed for these processes emerge and to
induce profound transformations
(Leuzinger-Bohleber et al.,
2019). They require time for the transference to be established
and for the patient to be able to express freely about intimate
experiences. The gradual establishment of a relationship of trust
also takes time before allowing the patient and the clinician
to be able “play” together and co-create a “narrative” of the
therapy, which guarantees the coherence and the meaning of the
therapeutic process.
The transformations induced by the therapy can also be
envisioned as the consequence of variations of entropy and
free energy. From this point of view, let us ﬁrst recall that the
term entropy was initially used by Clausius from the Greek
êtropê ( η τ ρ oπη ) meaning “contained transformation.” The
notion of entropy thus implies, from its origin, the idea of a
transformation in a closed system. This evokes several of
Bion
(1970) notions and in particular this idea: “the analysis in its
totality can be seen as a transformation in which an intense
catastrophic explosion O has occurred at the aﬀective level” (p.
44). This explosion can be conceived as a high level of free
energy that results from a “catastrophic change” contained by the
analytic setting. The processes of transformation thus seem to be
catalyzed by an increase of free energy within the psychoanalytic
setting which allows the containment and the “manipulation”
of energy, implicating the setting and the containing dimension
of the therapeutic relationship. Thus, for
Holmes and Nolte
(2019) “the therapeutic duo is an aid to binding potentially
disruptive free energy in creative ways” (p. 6). The therapeutic
relationship is thus fundamental to “containing” these entropic
logics, otherwise there is a risk that they will overﬂow or frighten
the subject’s capacities of elaboration. This implies, as already
mentioned, a “negative capability”
(Bion, 1965) , on the part of
the clinician, which allows the patient to tolerate the uncertainty
and the doubt which characterize states of high entropy. Both
the patient and the clinician must therefore share a tolerance to
uncertainty
(Turtz, 2020) and a “suﬃcient mental space” for the
development of symbolization and maturation processes.
If we try to understand these entropic processes more
precisely in the therapeutic setting, they seem to involve
a complex interplay between an extension and a reduction
of entropy, disorder and order, stochastic and deterministic
processes, disinhibition and inhibition. Interestingly, this
interplay between order and disorder is also reported in the
neuroscience literature as noted by
Cieri et al. (2021) : “the
fact that the brain is considered a system that wanders near
a critical dynamic zone between states of order and disorder
is widely accepted in cognitive neuroscience” (p. 11). This
“double logic” appears to be intimately linked to the processes of
transformational processes as noted by
Holmes (2021): “a degree
of chaos/uncertainty/free energy needs to be tolerated before
new generative models can evolve. Homeostatic imprecision
needs to be tolerated for a while” (p. 3). The transformation
of psychic reality, and the improvement of the generative
model, thus implies disorder before creating new forms of order
(Figure 2).
The psychic state that characterize psychoanalytic therapies
seems to favor the transition between these diﬀerent states
of organization. The subject can thus explore the internal
experience in an original and less organized way than in the
usual state of mind, as explained by
Connolly (2022) : “for
stochastic change processes in psychotherapy, Tschacher and
Haken have suggested that techniques such as mindfulness,
or free association in psychoanalysis, may be examples of
interventions that do not push the system state in a particular
direction, but may have the eﬀect of making a wider
range of experience or behavior possible (p. 4). One of the
neurobiological correlates of this state of disorganization and
exploration seems to be the Default Mode Network: “It has
been proposed that the Default Network has expanded its
functions in support of spontaneous cognition. An entropy-
extension as one of the processes of human consciousness
evolution, subsequently followed by an entropy-reduction might
be a speciﬁc characteristic adaptable both in phylogenetic and
ontogenetic sense” (
Carhart-Harris et al., 2014; Cieri et al., 2021 ,
p. 14).
The more entropic states of psychic functioning also appear
to be related to an increase of free energy at the level of emotional
and primary processes and a decrease of more cognitive and
secondary processes. This leads to a state of disorganization, and
surprise, which must not, however, limit the subject’s integration
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /zero.tnum/nine.tnum frontiersin.org
Rabeyron /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum
FIGURE /two.tnum
Metaphoric representation of the evolution of psychological functi oning during a psychoanalytic therapy from an initial order to a ﬁn al order
after a more chaotic and entropic phase.
capacities, at the risk otherwise of tipping over into fright /two.tnum/one.tnumas
explained by Holmes (2020) “Psychotherapy attempts to create
the “duet for one” conditions where surprise becomes allowable
and ultimately pleasurable (...) in the form of healing tears”
(p. 45). The psychic apparatus must thus combine the need to
extract and integrate new information from the internal and
external world while accepting the danger of being overwhelmed
while processing these new and potential disruptive information.
Thus, a balance is needed between these processes of extension
and reduction of free energy. We could here take as a metaphor
a rice ﬁeld in which the irrigation of the various plots requires
a suﬃcient supply of water (at the risk otherwise of drying up
the crops) but also a regulation of the hydraulic ﬂow (at the risk
otherwise of inducing a ﬂood). The psychic apparatus seems to
operate according to the same principle with a certain energetic
“threshold” that allows to adjust these diﬀerent processes
adequately. Certain mental disorders can then be considered
as pathologies of entropic drying
(Holmes, 2020) , in particular
addictions, anorexia, autism, etc. (e.g., Wooldridge, 2018 ).
Conversely, other mental disorders can be seen as pathologies
of entropic excess: schizophrenia
(Ciompi and Tschacher, 2021) ,
manic episodes, ADHD, etc. (Rabeyron, 2021).
These high-entropy states can also be approached from
the perspective of the randomness they induce in psychic
functioning. Free association and daydreaming “soften”
associative activity which makes it more random. Like a person
who wanders randomly in a forest, the subject then makes
discoveries while exploring internal psychic landscapes. He
or she is surprised while discovering feelings, images, desires,
anxieties, of which he or she did not suspect the existence
/two.tnum/one.tnum This state of fright probably corresponds to an emergency
procedure which results in the “stopping” of the processes of int egration
of the environment, at the risk otherwise of “exploding” the gener ative
model as can be seen in psychosis.
and which are then the object of a subjective and reﬂexive
appropriation. This is probably a natural and spontaneous
process of the psychic apparatus which is catalyzed by the
psychoanalytical setting. Indeed, human beings spontaneously
goes through states of reverie as notably shown by the research
on mind wandering
(Mooneyham and Schooler, 2013) . The
psyche needs moments of release from the external world,
which induces a state of disengagement from the perceptual,
sensorial and motor experience because the psyche cannot, at
the same time, transform itself and be in interaction with the
world
(Buckner et al., 2008) . These transformational processes
also imply a certain plasticity of the psyche as illustrated by
this metallurgical metaphor proposed by
Connolly (2022) :
“Where chaotic itinerancy is mediated through randomness,
its positive eﬀect on the functioning of the system has been
formally described as simulated annealing, which is itself
analogous to the process of annealing in metallurgy, where a
metal is heated up over several occasions, becoming stronger
in the process. By the heating process (either real or simulated
such as by neural excitability), the system reaches a state of
greater plasticity, allowing it to settle again, this time in a new,
potentially more optimal attractor state” (p. 5). In the same
manner, the psychoanalytical setting “heats” psychic reality and
places the patient in a certain state of malleability.
Finally, and in passing, such a state seems to be catalyzed
by psychedelics, an observation which may illuminate the
nature of these processes. Psychedelics target in particular
“high levels of the brain’s functional hierarchy, primarily
aﬀecting the precision weighting of high-level priors or
beliefs” (
Carhart-Harris and Friston, 2019 , p. 334). They
may induce transformations through “pivotal mental states”
which correspond to states of great plasticity
/two.tnum/two.tnumwhose fate
/two.tnum/two.tnum These states can also be induced by stress as shown also in the ﬁeld
of exceptional experiences (Rabeyron and Loose, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/five.tnum).
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /one.tnum/zero.tnum frontiersin.org
Rabeyron /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum
can be transformative or pathological /two.tnum/three.tnum(Brouwer and Carhart-
Harris, 2021) . These states favor in-depth transformation of
pathological patterns, thus allowing therapeutic impact on
many diﬀerent clinical symptoms. It could be a common
factor with psychoanalytic therapies, given that such states
favor the transformation of the structure of the psychic
apparatus, which is diﬀerent from psychotherapies that aim
the reduction of speciﬁc symptoms. Psychedelics also induce
a greater sensitivity to the environment, which also occurs
in psychoanalysis when the patient regresses and projects
unconscious elements onto the setting
(Bleger, 1979) . This
underlines the fact that the internal malleability requires a
malleable environment, as proposed by
Winnicott (1969) with
the notion transitional space and Milner (1952) with the concept
of “pliable medium.” These theories suppose that processes
of internal transformation require to be “projected” in the
external world, and in particular on objects having speciﬁc
properties. The psyche has also to be able to “synchronized”
suﬃciently with the environment to project these psychic
contents that are then introjected in order to be symbolized.
The activity of symbolization thus requires a passage through
exteriority, which means that the internal malleability has to
be coupled with an external malleability in order to let the
processes of transformation occurring during these states of
high entropy.
Conclusion
This paper has proposed a model of the fundamental
principles of psychoanalytic therapies articulated with
contemporary theories of the Bayesian brain and the FEP.
In this view, the main components of psychoanalytic
therapies which favor transformational processes have
been examined, especially the importance of the setting
(with several envelopes), a particular psychic state and
speciﬁc processes (transference, free association, dream, play,
reﬂexivity, narrativity). The combination of these diﬀerent
elements induces after eﬀects on the patient suﬀering and
/two.tnum/three.tnum At a cerebral level, three speciﬁc eﬀects of psychedelicsare observed
(Brouwer and Carhart-Harris, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum): decreased modularity, decreased
hierarchy, and increased overall functionality. This gives the sense that the
brain functioning is “ﬂattened” (Carhart-Harris and Friston, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/nine.tnum)resulting
in a “reset” eﬀect. In these very special moments, brain connec tivity
increases, modularity decreases, and brain plasticity incr eases. Brouwer
and Carhart-Harris (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum)also show speciﬁc pharmacodynamics aspects
associated with these processes with serotonin /two.tnumA receptors thatare
blocked by psychedelics. The more these receptors are blocked, t he
greater the subjective eﬀects of the psychedelics will be. Th e impact
on these receptors seems to participate in neuronal plasticity , which
would promote long-lasting eﬀects as well as a hyper-sensitivity to the
environment when taking psychedelics.
symptoms. Several “markers” of this therapeutic eﬀectiveness
on psychic reality have also been identiﬁed: reduction of
symptoms, disappearance of anxieties, decline of toxic object
relationships, softening of defense mechanisms and reduction
of inhibitions.
Such a model of psychoanalytical therapies can be compared
to some contemporary research in the ﬁeld of cognitive
neurosciences, and in particular those related to the Free
Energy Principle (FEP). We can see a certain aﬃnity between
psychoanalytical metapsychology and the FEP as pointed out by
Holmes (2021) : “contemporary psychoanalysis psychotherapy
and revitalized Freudian ideas resonate with the FEP” (p. 3).
There are indeed several points of similarity between these
models which help to construct a global understanding of
psychic functioning taking into account the contributions of the
science of subjectivity and neurosciences. This also favors the
dialogue between psychoanalysis and other ﬁelds of knowledge,
which puts psychoanalytic metapsychology to the test while
underlining how its theoretical constructs could be useful for
other disciplines, in particular the neurosciences of subjectivity.
The transformational processes induce by psychoanalytical
therapies have also been analyzed by proposing several parallels
with the FEP. In this regard, psychological processes seem to
implicate non-linear dimensions aiming at transforming the
psychic apparatus in its totality. This process of transformation
takes time and requires a setting that allows the containment
of high entropy processes. More precisely, these processes take
place according to an interplay of extension and reduction of
free energy. They create new orders from states of disorder
according to a certain energetic “threshold” which allow to
“update” the generative model. These states of high entropy
are also characterized by their random functioning, a necessary
preliminary to explore subjective experience in an original
manner. States of plasticity associated with this high entropy
then favor in-depth transformations of the psyche, which
also requires a certain psychic malleability that has to be
coupled with a suﬃcient malleability of the environment.
The hypothesis proposed in this work nevertheless remain as
a global and conceptual overview and would require much
more development to be speciﬁc about the relations between
psychological processes, psychotherapy and FEP.
Finally, in order to go beyond the thinking proposed in
this paper, future developments could attempt to describe
more accurately the links between subjectivity, consciousness,
information, matter and energy. In this respect, let ﬁrst
recall that matter is condensed energy and that information
can be considered as a certain organization of matter that
requires energy. From this point of view, psychic reality can
be considered as a part of matter with a highly structured
organization which requires a considerable quantity of energy
to be created, developed and maintained. Psychic reality is,
moreover, structured in a heterogeneous way according to
a fundamental divide between conscious and unconscious
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /one.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org
Rabeyron /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum
processes. Consciousness thus appears as a “manipulation”
of information, notably in the form of representations, and
is thus indirectly a form of manipulation of energy
/two.tnum/four.tnum. One
could then consider a continuum starting from energy going
the most complicated aspects of subjective experience (energy
<> matter <> information <> subjectivity). It implies that
energetic dimensions that organize matter -in particular the
second law of thermodynamics- may have a profound, but
indirect and discreet impact, on psychic functioning. What
begins to take form in this way could then be a theory that
would tackle the hard problem of consciousness
(Solms, 2019)
from the precise description of such a continuum and its
potential discontinuities.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are
included in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries
can be directed to the corresponding author/s.
/two.tnum/four.tnum Subjective experience corresponds to a highly complex process
constituted by a set of representations whose properties can be
studied very precisely thanks to microphenomenology and microana lysis
(Rabeyron and Finkel, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/zero.tnum).
Author contributions
The author conﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work
and has approved it for publication.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Ian Tierney and the two
reviewers for their numerous and particularly useful comments
concerning the initial versions of this paper.
Conﬂict of interest
The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed
or endorsed by the publisher.
References
Ablon, J., and Jones, E. (1998). How expert clinicians’ prototype s of an ideal
treatment correlate with outcome in psychodynamic and cognit ive-behavioral
therapy. Psychother. Res. 8, 71–83. doi: 10.1093/ptr/8.1.71
Badcock, P. B., Friston, K. J., and Ramstead, M. J. D. (2019). The hierarchically
mechanistic mind: a free-energy formulation of the human psyc he. Phys. Life Rev .
31, 104–121. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2018.10.002
Barratt, B. B. (2017). Opening to the otherwise: the discipline of listening and the
necessity of free-association for psychoanalytic praxis. Int. J. Psychoanal. 98, 39–53.
doi: 10.1111/1745-8315.12563
Beebe, B., and Lachmann, F. (2020). Infant research and adult treatment
revisited: cocreating self-and interactive regulation. Psychoanal. Psychol . 37,
313–323. doi: 10.1037/pap0000305
Bion, W. (1962). Aux Sources de l’Expérience (2003e ed.). Paris: PUF.
Bion, W. (1965). Transformations (2002e ed.). Paris: PUF.
Bion, W.-R. (1970). L ’Attention et l’Interprétation (1990e ed.). Paris: Payot.
Bleger, J. (1979). Psychanalyse du Cadre Psychanalytique . Crise Rupture et
déPassement. Paris: Dunod.
Brouwer, A., and Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2021). Pivotal ment al states. J.
Psychopharmacol. 35, 319–352. doi: 10.1177/0269881120959637
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., and Schacter, D. L. (20 08). The brain’s
default network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease . Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.
1124, 1–38. doi: 10.1196/annals.1440.011
Carhart-Harris, R.obin L., Leech, R., Hellyer, P. J., Shanaha n, M., Feilding, A.,
Tagliazucchi, E., et al. (2014). The entropic brain: A theory of conscious states
informed by neuroimaging research with psychedelic drugs. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
8:20. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00020
Carhart-Harris, R. L., and Friston, K. J. (2019). REBUS and t he anarchic brain:
toward a uniﬁed model of the brain action of psychedelics. Pharmacol. Rev . 71,
316–344. doi: 10.1124/pr.118.017160
Chekroud, A. M. (2015). Unifying treatments for depression: an application
of the Free Energy Principle. Front. Psychol. 6:153. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.
00153
Cieri, F. (2022). Memory for the future: psychodynamic approac h to time
and self through the default network. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 16:885315.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2022.885315
Cieri, F., Zhuang, X., Caldwell, J. Z., and Cordes, D. (2021). Br ain entropy during
aging through a free energy principle approach. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 15:139.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.647513
Ciompi, L., and Tschacher, W. (2021). Aﬀect-logic, embodimen t, synergetics, and
the free energy principle: new approaches to the understanding an d treatment of
schizophrenia. Entropy 23:1619. doi: 10.3390/e23121619
Connolly, P. (2022). Instability and uncertainty are critical for psychotherapy:
how the therapeutic alliance opens us up. Front. Psychol. 12:784295.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.784295
Cuijpers, P., Reijnders, M., and Huibers, M. (2019). The role o f common
factors in psychotherapy outcomes. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 15, 207–231.
doi: 10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-050718-095424
Fonagy, P. (2015). The eﬀectiveness of psychodynamic psychot herapies: an
update. World Psychiatry 14, 137–150. doi: 10.1002/wps.20235
Freud, S. (1900). L ’Interprétation des Rêves(2010e éd.). Paris: PUF.
Freud, S. (1919). La Technique Psychanalytique (1981e éd.). Paris: PUF.
Freud, S. (1920). Au-Delà du Principe de Plaisir (1979e éd.) . Paris: Payot.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /one.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org
Rabeyron /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fnhum./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./nine.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum/four.tnum/zero.tnum
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 10:20130475.
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K., and Frith, C. (2015). A duet for one. Conscious. Cogn. 36, 390–405.
doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2014.12.003
Friston, K., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energ y principle for the
brain. J. Physiol. 100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001
Frith, C. (2007). Making Up the Mind: How the Brain Creates Our Mental World .
London: Wiley-Blackwell.
Frith, C. D. (2012). “Implicit metacognition and the we-mode, ” in Workshop
on “Pre-reﬂective and Reﬂective Processing in Social Interactio n” (Clare College,
University of Cambridge).
Galatzer-Levy, R. M. (2016). The edge of chaos: a nonlinear
view of psychoanalytic technique. Int. J. Psychoanal . 97, 409–427.
doi: 10.1111/1745-8315.12363
Hirsh, J. B., Mar, R. A., and Peterson, J. B. (2012). Psycholog ical entropy: a
framework for understanding uncertainty-related anxiety. Psychol. Rev . 119:304.
doi: 10.1037/a0026767
Holmes, J. (2020). The brain Has a Mind of Its Own: Attachment, Neurobiology,
and the New Science of Psychotherapy . London: Confer Books.
Holmes, J. (2021). Friston’s free energy principle: new life for ps ychoanalysis? Br.
J. Psychiatry Bull. 1–4.
Holmes, J., and Nolte, T. (2019). “Surprise” and the Bayesian br ain:
implications for psychotherapy theory and practice. Front. Psychol. 10:592.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00592
Hopkins, J. (2016). Free energy and virtual reality in neurosc ience and
psychoanalysis : a complexity theory of dreaming and mental diso rder. Front.
Psychol. 7:922. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00922
Horvath, A. O., and Luborsky, L. (1993). The role of the therape utic alliance in
psychotherapy. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol . 61:561. doi: 10.1037/0022-006X.61.4.561
Kirchhoﬀ, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., and Kivers tein, J. (2018). The
Markov blankets of life: autonomy, active inference and the fr ee energy principle.
J. R. Soc. Interface 15:20170792. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0792
Lacan, J. (1966). Écrits. Paris: Le seuil.
Leichsenring, F., Luyten, P., Hilsenroth, M. J., Abbass, A., Barber, J. P., Keefe,
J. R., et al. (2015). Psychodynamic therapy meets evidence-ba sed medicine:
a systematic review using updated criteria. Lancet Psychiatry 2, 648–660.
doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(15)00155-8
Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., Kaufhold, J., Kallenbach, L., Negele, A ., Ernst, M.,
Keller, W., et al. (2019). How to measure sustained psychic trans formations
in long-term treatments of chronically depressed patients: sympt omatic and
structural changes in the LAC Depression Study of the outcome of cognitive-
behavioural and psychoanalytic long-term treatments. Int. J. Psychoanal . 100,
99–127. doi: 10.1080/00207578.2018.1533377
Mar, R. A., and Peterson, J. B. (2013). Personal narratives a s the
highest level of cognitive integration. Behav. Brain Sci . 36, 216-217.
doi: 10.1017/S0140525X12002269
Marty, P. (1998). L ’ordre Psychosomatique. Paris: Payot.
Milner, M. (1952). Aspects of symbolism in comprehension of the n ot-self. Int. J.
Psychoanal. 33, 181–194.
Mooneyham, B. W., and Schooler, J. W. (2013). The costs and ben eﬁts of
mind-wandering: a review. Can. J. Exp. Psychol . 67, 11–18. doi: 10.1037/a0031569
Morin, E. (2005). Introduction to Complex Thinking . Paris: Le Seuil.
Ogden, T. H. (2012). Cet Art qu’est la Psychanalyse : Rêver des Rêves Inrêvés et des
Cris Interrompus. Paris: Ithaque.
Panksepp, J. (1998). Aﬀective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human and
Animal Emotions. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rabeyron, T. (2018). Constructions ﬁnies et constructions inﬁnies. Analysis 2,
143–155. doi: 10.1016/j.inan.2018.07.002
Rabeyron, T. (2020a). Le paradigme clinique du jeu. Bull. Psychol. 566, 83–98.
doi: 10.3917/bupsy.566.0083
Rabeyron, T. (2020b). Transformational processes and the an alytic ﬁeld: a
new paradigm for clinical models and practices. Psychiatr. Evol . 85, 101–114.
doi: 10.1016/j.evopsy.2019.05.005
Rabeyron, T. (2021). Beyond the death drive: entropy and free energy. Int. J.
Psychoanal. 102, 878–905. doi: 10.1080/00207578.2021.1932514
Rabeyron, T., and Finkel, A. (2020). Consciousness, free ene rgy and cognitive
algorithms. Front. Psychol. 11:1675. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01675
Rabeyron, T., and Loose, T. (2015). Anomalous experiences, tr auma,
and symbolization processes at the frontiers between psychoan alysis
and cognitive neurosciences. Front. Psychoanal. Neuropsychoanal. 6:1926.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01926
Rabeyron, T., and Massicotte, C. (2020). Entropy, free energ y, and symbolization:
free association at the intersection of psychoanalysis and ne uroscience. Front.
Psychol. 11:366. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00366
Rebollar, G., and Rabeyron, T. (2016), Clinique et processus de sym bolisation de
l’atmosphère dans les problématiques psychotiques. L ’Evol. Psychiatr.81, 476–492.
doi: 10.1016/j.evopsy.2015.05.008
Reik, T. (1935). Le Psychologue Surpris: Deviner et Comprendre les Processus
Inconscients (2001e ed.) . Paris: Denoël.
Roussillon, R. (1991). Un sujet qui ne va pas de soi, le sujet en
procès. Rev. Française Psychanal . 55, 1753–1756. doi: 10.3917/rfp.g1991.55
n5.1753
Roussillon, R. (2008). Le Jeu et L ’entre-je(u). Paris: PUF.
Roussillon, R. (2014). Manuel de la Pratique Clinique en Psychologie et
Psychopathologie. Paris: Masson.
Roustang, F. (2003). Qu’Est-ce Que L ’hypnose?Paris: Éditions de Minuit.
Sapisochin, G. (2013). Second thoughts on Agieren: listening t o the enacted. Int.
J. Psychoanal. 94, 967–991. doi: 10.1111/1745-8315.12095
Scarfone, D. (2018). Free association, surprise, trauma, an d transference.
Psychoanal. Inquiry 38, 468–477. doi: 10.1080/07351690.2018.1480232
Shedler, J. (2010). The eﬃcacy of psychodynamic psychotherapy. Am. Psychol .
65, 98–109. doi: 10.1037/a0018378
Solms, M. (2019). The hard problem of consciousness and the free energy
principle. Front. Psychol. 9:2714. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02714
Steinert, C., Munder, T., Rabung, S., Hoyer, J., and Leichse nring, F. (2017).
Psychodynamic therapy: as eﬃcacious as other empirically support ed treatments?
A meta-analysis testing equivalence of outcomes. Am. J. Psychiatry 174, 943–953.
doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2017.17010057
Stern, D. (1989). Le Monde Interpersonnel du Nourrisson (2006e ed.). Paris: PUF.
Turtz, J. S. (2020). Mysteries of the psychoanalytic process: r eﬂections
on chaos, complexity, and emergence. Am. J. Psychoanal . 80, 176–195.
doi: 10.1057/s11231-020-09246-y
Winnicott, D. W. (1969). From Pediatrics to Psychoanalysis . London: Routledge.
Winnicott, D. W. (1971). Play and Reality (1975e ed.) . Paris: Gallimard.
Wooldridge, T. (2018). The entropic body: primitive anxieties and
secondary skin formation in anorexia nervosa. Psychoanal. Dial . 28, 189–202.
doi: 10.1080/10481885.2018.1432949
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience /one.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org