TYPE Hypothesis and Theory
PUBLISHED /zero.tnum/nine.tnum October /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum
DOI /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Todd L. Matthews,
Sacred Heart University, United States
REVIEWED BY
Nathalie Gontier,
University of Lisbon, Portugal
Karl Friston,
University College London, United Kingdom
*CORRESPONDENCE
Shagor Rahman
Shagor.a.rahman@gmail.com
RECEIVED /zero.tnum/one.tnum August /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum
ACCEPTED /one.tnum/three.tnum September /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum
PUBLISHED /zero.tnum/nine.tnum October /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum
CITATION
Rahman S (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum) Myth of objectivity and the
origin of symbols. Front. Sociol./eight.tnum:/one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum.
doi: /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
COPYRIGHT
© /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum Rahman. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY) . The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is
permitted, provided the original author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that
the original publication in this journal is cited, in
accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is
permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Myth of objectivity and the origin
of symbols
Shagor Rahman *
Independent Researcher, Westﬁeld, NJ, United States
An age-old challenge in epistemology and moral philosophy is whether objectivity
exists independent of subjective perspective. Alfred North W hitehead labeled it a
“fallacy of misplaced concreteness”; after all, knowledge is rep resented elusively
in symbols. I employ the free energy principle (FEP) to argue th at the belief in
moral objectivity, although perhaps fallacious, amounts to an ancient and universal
human myth that is essential for our symbolic capacity. To percei ve any object
in a world of non-diminishing (perhaps irreducible) uncertaint y, according to the
FEP, its constituent parts must display common probabilistic t endencies, known as
statistical beliefs, prior to its interpretation, or active i nference, as a stable entity.
Behavioral bias, subjective emotions, and social norms scale th e scope of identity
by coalescing agents with otherwise disparate goals and aligning th eir perspectives
into a coherent structure. I argue that by declaring belief in no rms as objective, e.g.,
expressing that a particular theft or inﬁdelity was generally wrong, our ancestors
psychologically constructed a type of identity bound only by shar ed faith in a
perspective that technically transcended individual subjectivity. Signaling explicit
belief in what were previously non-symbolic norms, as seen in man y non-human
animals, simulates a top-down point of view of our social interact ions and thereby
constructs our cultural niche and symbolic capacity. I demonstrat e that, largely
by contrasting with overly reductive analytical models that assum e individual
rational pursuit of extrinsic rewards, shared belief in moral conceptions, i.e., what
amounts to a religious faith, remains a motivational cornerst one of our language,
economic and civic institutions, stories, and psychology. Fin ally, I hypothesize that
our bias for familiar accents (shibboleth), plausibly repres ents the phylogenetic
and ontogenetic contextual origins of our impulse to minimiz e social surprise by
declaring belief in the myth of objectivity.
KEYWORDS
free energy principle, semiotics, epistemology, anthropology, economics, morality, social
ontology, linguistics
/one.tnum. Introduction
I MET a seer,
Passing the hues and objects of the world,
The ﬁelds of art and learning, pleasure, sense,
To glean eidólons.
Ever the mutable,
Ever materials, changing, crumbling, re-cohering,
Ever the ateliers, the factories divine,
Issuing eidólons.
Exaltè, rapt, ecstatic,
The visible but their womb of birth,
Frontiers in Sociology /zero.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
Of orbic tendencies to shape and shape and shape,
The mighty earth-eidólon.
The noiseless myriads,
The inﬁnite oceans where the rivers empty,
The separate countless free identities, like eyesight,
The true realities, eidólons.
- Excerpts from Walt Whitman’s poem Eidólons
The boundary between us and non-human animals is likely
symbolic./one.tnumThough semiotics and information processing are
a fundamental phenomenon throughout biology and physics
(
Deacon, 1998; Fields and Levin, 2020 ), we are the one species that
employs symbolic thought and expression to cognitively displace
time and space and inhabit a social reality (
Searle, 2010a ). We
pray to icons, worship written texts, watch stories, don uniforms,
purchase branded goods, salute ﬂags, and gift material alms to
our dead. Our own intimate sense of identity is a psychological
conception constructed within extensive cultural units (
Leﬂot et al.,
2010).
The question is what are the developmental and historical
foundations of this capacity? What motivates us to acquire the
complex cognitive architecture to learn and adopt social conventions,
language, and symbolic ornamentation? Rethinking the set of core
factors that generally govern social science models, that often
assume individual rational pursuit of extrinsic rewards, may allow
for better modeling in the deeply complex interactions we face,
economically, psychologically, and linguistically. I believe any
answer to these questions involves an appreciation for the dynamic
nature of identity, i.e., how disparate lower-level constituents join
a coherent hierarchical and self-organizing structure. Adopting
Levin (2019) notion that the scope of cognition and agency that
constitutes a self is analogous to the projected illumination of a light
cone (p. 1):
I propose a fundamental deﬁnition of an Individual based
on the ability to pursue goals at an appropriate level of scale and
organization[. . .]. Any Self is demarcated by a computational
surface—the spatio-temporal boundary of events that it can
measure, model, and try to aﬀect. This surface sets a functional
boundary - a cognitive “light cone” which deﬁnes the scale and
limits of its cognition.
Meeting Levin’s metaphor, my argument is that our symbolic
capacity is founded on the ability to take, or imagine, a top-down
perspective and shine the light cone upon our social interactions
and thereby scale the scope of our capacity through a cultural
/one.tnum Heyes describes the elemental mechanisms of human distinction as our
cognitive “grist” rather than “mills.” The former are the causal factors whereas
the latter are only subsequently made possible (Heyes, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/eight.tnum). Cultural
evolution, for instance, requires the ability to ﬁrst acquire a nd share cultural
information. Other grist candidates such as tool use, vocal communi cation,
theory of mind (Heyes and Frith, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/four.tnum), and even social rituals (Alcorta and
Sosis, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum), appear distinct to humanity largely to the extent that they a re
symbolized, and hence are more likely mills.
niche. Moral objectivity, of course, requires taking a neutral, third-
party view, i.e., above the fray of individual perspectives. As we
will explore in more detail later, Judith Burkart and colleagues
have pointed out that our use of objective, third-party perspective
distinguishes social norms exhibited by primates and human
morality (
Burkart et al., 2018 ). This is broadly true of all use of
all symbols and the social reality we inhabit. Words have meaning
as speakers conform to deontic conventions to maintain abstract
meaning across individual subjective contexts though, as we will
explore (see Section
3.1), objectivity remains an elusive construct.
Despite the immutability of subjectivity, my use of the phrase
myth of objectivity seeks to capture an often earnest and often
conspicuous attempt to adopt a neutral bird’s eyeperspective upon
social relationships is fundamental to our use of symbols.
By myth, I aim to emphasize that humanity’s symbolic
innovation was less a discovery of an underlying structure and
more a social construction that served group interest and individual
cognitive sensibility, i.e., it minimized surprises related to social
interactions and facilitated shared expectations. As we will explore,
although behavioral and social sciences prefer to describe behavior
and motivation in terms of a rational pursuit of individual goals,
we continually defy, or demonstrate analytically, a need for such
deﬁance of these expectations by identifying with others, often
using arbitrary markings and particularly accents (Section
4).
However, by indicating our central symbolic myth is objectivity
and not a supernatural entity, I emphasize that our symbolic
consciousness is inherently an earnest search for truth based
on an attempt to transcend individual subjectivity and form an
objective viewpoint and that this technical transcendence emerged
to solve traditional problems of a meek primate during the
Pleistocene and, speciﬁcally, to update our beliefs about the beliefs
of our conspeciﬁcs, expanding the scope of our cultural niche
(Section
5). This is exempliﬁed in the quintessentially moral and
foundational concept of our economic system known as social
commons, i.e., those resources and elements of production that
extend beyond private ownership and are often facilitated by a top-
down perspective of our economic and civic institutions. These
and similar factors became understood speciﬁcally in light of the
extremely reductive neoclassical economic model (Section
3.2).
An equivalent moral conception anchors the otherwise arbitrary
signiﬁcation process of our linguistic systems, i.e., transcendental
signiﬁcation, which emerged by contrasting with the equally
reductive structuralists (Section
3.1). Finally, our moral practice
itself is an extension of emotional mental states, a phenomenon
that is now studied in species that are as diverse as people and
fruit ﬂies by contrasting behavioral expectations of behaviorists
(Section
3.3).
Symbolic thought can be viewed, in accordance with the free
energy principle (FEP), as a culmination of a broader epistemic
ontology. Rather than beginning its analysis with stable systems
or well-deﬁned agents in pursuit of selﬁsh goals (Section
3.2), the
FEP emphasizes the imperative for subjects to establish and update
beliefs about relevant features of its environment, beginning with
the partition that distinguishes and deﬁnes its own identity. Life, in
other words, is inherently scientiﬁc in the sense that living systems
seek evidence for internal models of their lived world. We will see
later that this can viewed as seeking evidence for generative models
of how our sensations are caused (see Section
2).
Frontiers in Sociology /zero.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
This evidence-seeking behavior may be an existential
imperative. Under the free energy principle, this is neatly
summarized as self evidencing (
Hohwy, 2016 ), wherein the primal
inquiry of the Self develops and evolves through an implicit version
of
Hofstadter and Sander (2013) view of symbolic thought as
inherently analogical, i.e., just as we extrapolate our conceptual
understanding by ﬁnding connections among otherwise distinct
events or experiences, biological entities are connected through the
interpretation of similarities. In FEP terms, this is a common prior
belief that forms a coherent, if fuzzy (probabilistic), Self. Symbols
are a way of explicitly engaging with this existential process of self
and environmental understanding. Viewed in another way, science
itself is an explicated and shared version of the epistemic nature of
existence grounded in a religious orientation, primarily one that is
geared toward signaling our own and understanding the beliefs of
our conspeciﬁcs.
Although the FEP uses belief speciﬁcally as deﬁned in Bayesian
statistics,
/two.tnumi.e., the movement of particles in an atom and the
behavior of organelles in a cell appear to be a statistical model of
their environment, Thomas Bayes originally conceived his insights
into probability within a religious context (
Earman and The Society
of Christian Philosophers, 1993 ). As the FEP emphasizes the scale
invariant properties of self-organization across cells ( Friston, 2013),
society (Albarracin et al., 2022 ), and culture ( Ramstead et al., 2016 ;
Constant et al., 2019 ), it is in the originally Bayesian context of
religion, e.g., belief in supernatural entities and imaginary cultural
narratives that represent a unique ability to explicitly compute or
conceptualize foundational elements of personal identity and give
shape to our social reality, that I attempt to extend its scale.
The FEP’s emphasis of statistical boundaries, i.e., Markov
blankets (MB), as a foundational element in the computations
of self-organizing and biological systems, oﬀers a useful view
of emotions, norms, societies, and the morphological form of
identity that I apply to our social reality. Our impulse to inhabit
symbolic selves is anchored primarily in morality, i.e., the shared
belief in objective norms and moral character types based on
responses to established behavioral expectations. Note that I am
taking a pragmatic (although as with all claims around morality,
not incontrovertible) view of morality, as a symbolic abstraction
of social norms and grounded in the expectation of shared faith
in a cultural niche (Section
3.3). This takes an evolutionary
viewpoint, as social norms observed in similar primates and
other nonhuman animals suggest our ancestors inhabited a similar
normative structure. This does not conﬁne morality to this view
but hopefully oﬀers a convincing and useful starting point. Most
importantly, it oﬀers morality as a useful gradation to understand
our developmental and historical ascent to the realm of symbolic
thought.
The view of Markov blankets as fuzzy, mutable, and
multiplicative allows us to understand how various distinct
cognitive light cones are woven together to form more complex
/two.tnum Under the FEP, Bayesian beliefs refer to conditional probabilit y
distributions encoded by the biophysical states of a particle or person. For
example, neuronal activity might encode the average (a.k.a., exp ectation) of
some probabilistic or fuzzy belief about the identity of a visual ob ject causing
visual sensations.
selves. This characterization was developed by Andy Clark who
asserted, in defense of the extended mind thesis, that the MB
should not be thought of as a singular and rigid structure (
Clark,
2017). The attributes of fuzzy, mutable, and multiplicative need
some careful qualiﬁcation. By fuzzy, I refer here to the probabilistic
nature of representations, even when symbolic or discrete. For
example, I may believe that you are American but there is a
nontrivial possibility that you may be Italian, and this is represented
probabilistically in the biophysical conﬁguration of my brain.
There is also a sense in which Markov blankets can be fuzzy,
in the sense that strict conditional independence can be replaced
by weak conditional independence. With this relaxation, it can
be shown that any dynamical system (with sparse coupling) of
suﬃcient size admits multiple Markov blankets with probability
one
Sakthivadivel (2022). Crucially, there is no unique Markov
blanket: there can be Markov blankets of Markov blankets and so on
in a scale-free sense. Generally, smaller Markov blankets (e.g., cells
in a body) exist for a shorter period of time than Markov blankets
of Markov blankets (e.g., conspeciﬁcs in a population). This is what
is implied by mutable and multiplicative.
This view of the Self as constitutive of a shared bias of sub-units
informed by fuzzy, layered, and ultimately movable boundaries that
contextualize a common sentient experience frames the subjective,
qualitative hedonic valence that allows agents to distinguish
between good and bad experiences in order to navigate its
environment favorably and persist across generational lineages.
Under the FEP ,good and bad experiences are simply predictable and
surprising experiences, respectively. This follows from the fact that
navigating the sensed world entails a minimization of free energy—
and free energy can be read as surprise. Crucially, negative free
energy can also be read as the log evidence for the generative models
upon which free energy rests. In other words, avoiding surprising
sensations is maximizing the evidence for generative models of how
those sensations were caused (please see Section
2).
Aﬀect and emotion can be seen in this view as enabling complex
organisms to respond to varying bodily and environmental
demands by compartmentalizing various environmental needs and
prioritizing among disparate internal systems, this amounts to
nested Markov blankets enjoined into a coherent identity (
Solms,
2019, 2022; Anderson, 2022 ), and sets the ground for in-group
preferences and social identity ( Moﬀett, 2013 ; Masuda and Fu,
2015; Palacios et al., 2020 ). Coherence of identity, however, does not
imply unity ( Levin, 2019), it is closer to a political coalition than the
harmony of an infantry march.
Cooperation broadly emerges not just as expectations of
future reciprocal selﬁsh rewards but in the very ambiguities
of the self. Organelles were once free-roaming molecules that
were appropriated within a cellular identity, and cells in turn
enjoined, partly by receiving information signals through gap
junctions in their formerly rigid boundaries, to form parts of
more complex organisms (Section
3.2). Daniel Dennett and
Michael Levin speciﬁcally employ the mathematical framework
from economics, the prisoner’s dilemma, based on rational
and selﬁsh interested actors, to demonstrate how bioelectricity
enables otherwise individuated cells to occupy multiple identities
by sharing information through gap junctions using protein
connection (
Levin and Dennett, 2020 ). As Michael Levin put it
(Carroll, 2021),
Frontiers in Sociology /zero.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
“We’re doing [ . . .] simulations of prisoner’s dilemma,
where the agents, instead of just cooperating and defecting [ . . .]
they can merge. [ . . .] you ﬁnd out that cooperation doesn’t just
emerge, it’s inevitable, because you can’t cheat against yourself,
because yourself is now bigger.”
Regarding societies, each chimp and lion is part of a
community and pride of its individual subjective understanding.
The boundaries of a society are actively inferred or interpreted
by each potential group member based on individual intimacy
(
Moﬀett, 2019 ). In addition to the physical and social partitions
that parallel our primate relatives, we inhabit communities, clans,
countries, companies, and various “micro-selves” (
Ramstead et al.,
2016, p. 15), contextualizing our expectations and follow intricate
norms that would otherwise be computationally intractable. As the
basis of sentient life can be understood in FEP terms as a search
for and aﬃrmation of self identity that grounds the subsequent
epistemic environmental search (
Hohwy, 2016), human psychology
can likewise be understood as a continual search for symbolic selves
within a social reality.
As symbols can be seen as an explicit representation of implicit
cognitive representation in other animals, the social rituals and
belief systems of religion are simply a more elaborated explication
of fundamental elements of our symbolic social reality, as I
attempt to elucidate by contrasting with reductive, selﬁsh views of
biology and social sciences (see Section
3.2). I propose a causal
narrative that maps our trajectory from a non-symbolic primate
and deconstruct modern symbolic social systems to reveal their
core components (Section
3.1). Regarding the latter, the structure
of the social reality we each inhabit, including our personal self-
conception (
MacKinnon and Heise, 2010 ), is most explicitly evident
in ancient and modern religious practices wherein, according to
researchers Candace Alcorta and Richard Sosis, the expression of
belief in arbitrary narratives involving supernatural entities are
used both as an extrinsic signal of social identity and intrinsic
psychological motivation in shaping personal identity. Religious
belief fulﬁlls a social and innate need to bind us to other
social constituents, often through social rituals (
Alcorta and Sosis,
2005). The enjoining of individual identity to a symbolic Self is
represented in Jungian scholar M.L. Von Franz description of
various mythological motifs collectively as the “cosmic man, ” as he
put (
Jung et al., 1968 , p. 274–277):
The Cosmic Man appears in many myths and religious
teachings [as] a common representation of the Self in myths
and dreams. [ . . .] He appears as Adam, as the Persian
Gayomart, or as the Hindu Purusha [ . . .] In ancient Chinese
[. . .] a colossal divine man called P’an Ku. [T]he Cosmic Man
is not only the beginning but also the ﬁnal goal of all life—of the
whole of creation. [ . . .] The whole inner psychic reality of each
individual is ultimately oriented toward this archetypal symbol
of the Self.
I characterize this feature of religion as concertizing the
transcendent view of the Self as inclusive of an expansive
and coherent cultural niche. Myth and social ritual provide a
psychological motive to moral practices, yielding their extensive
cooperative beneﬁts (
Curry, 2016 ), which is an elaboration of
the minimal symbolizing of the Self as constituted by declaring
explicit beliefs in moral objectivity. Religion serves to integrate
each personal story within a uniﬁed cultural narrative. Moreover,
archaeological ﬁndings such as the Rising Star cave in South Africa
not only demonstrate symbolic thought through fossilized social
ritual, they suggest the ancient role of belief in the supernatural
served for individual and cultural identity (
Berger et al., 2015 ).
The pattern of the symbolic Self is similarly explicated
in modern and ancient storytelling. Chris Booker applied
an equivalent Jungian perspective to cultural narratives from
Gilgamesh to Terminator 2, ﬁnding that plot structures frequently
involve a protagonist confronting a threat not just to his or her
own well-being but to the greater culture or symbolic Self that
ultimately determines their own fortunes and personal identity
(
Booker, 2004).
Religion and storytelling are a higher-order symbolic
explication of the implied faith humanity possessed in an abstract
symbolic Self and cultural identity, promoting the pursuit of
synthetic intimacy of trusted conspeciﬁcs that demonstrate
allegiance to its corpus. They also serve to establish a cultural
common ground to aﬃrm and construct social expectations by
aligning subjective perspectives to a common reference frame.
In my view, they explicate the technically transcendent, from
above perspective of social interactions. This reinforces moral
principles common to most cultures, e.g., though shall not kill
(in-group members), and also expands it to broader conventional
norms that have more ﬂexibility as cultural and environmental
challenges evolve. The questions I seek to answer are as follows:
Why are supernatural deities, heroes, and villains so central to the
human experience? What does this imply for language and our
symbolic capacity? Are beliefs in supernatural deities and villains
that threaten a symbolic cultural identity central to our social
reality?
The bulk of the evidence I draw on to support this
developmental and historical narrative is drawn from analysis that
approaches social and even biological systems as if they were rigid
structures and composed of selﬁsh agents. This overly reductive
scientiﬁc stance represents an important tendency of Western
Educated Industrialized and Democratic (WEIRD) societies. It is
worth understanding Henrich’s proposed distinctions of WEIRD
people. We are unique, according to
Henrich (2020), in our strongly
individualistic and analytically oriented perspectives, ideologies,
and cultural institutions. This encouraged, in addition to the
scientiﬁc and industrial revolutions, the stance to reduce behavioral
motivation to extrinsic forces to the exclusion of subjective,
intrinsic, and emotional internal states. Behaviorists in psychology,
neoclassical economists, and structural linguistics all attempted to
reduce the complexity of our social behavior to observable and
objective causes (Section
3).
However, this viewpoint is not novel to modern Western
culture. Extant nomadic hunter-gatherers or multi-band societies
are similarly analytically oriented (Section
3.1). This suggests that
the tendency that informs the scientiﬁc view of rigidly individuated
selﬁsh agents motivated exclusively by extrinsic rewards seen in
economics (
Kay and King, 2020 ), biology ( Noble, 2017 ), and
psychology ( Anderson, 2022 ) represents a culmination of an
Frontiers in Sociology /zero.tnum/four.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
ancient and human bias to construct hierarchical taxonomies of our
world, conspeciﬁcs, and personal identities.
What have these reductive and selﬁsh views concluded? Many
researchers have most eﬀectively used them as Null Hypotheses.
The implications can be largely bucketed into three areas. Firstly,
there is no underlying mechanism that allows individuated agents
to fully resolve complexity and uncertainty and account for the
structures we construct and inhabit. Secondly, the Self is not a
rigid and immutable construct. Thirdly, humanity employs moral
conceptions to harness the ambiguities of the Self, yielding the
cooperative gain earned from integrating disparate agents. As
hunter-gatherers have long inhabited arbitrarily demarcated social
systems that rely on mythologized belief to foster mutual trust
in their symbolic cultural identity and aﬃrmed through various
practices that encourage group alignment and labeling deviants, so
too do our modern social systems and symbolic psychology.
Regarding economics (Section
3.2), in contrasts to the
neoclassical economists’ expectations of rational, self-interested
agents with stable preferences (
Friedman, 2008 ; Jehle and Reny,
2011), where group identity is generally treated as a psychological
bias that impedes the rational pursuit of selﬁsh utility ( Kahneman,
2003; Simler and Hanson, 2018 ), the existence of ﬁrms, labor
unions, educational institutions, and even countries occurs
precisely to leverage the ability of economic agents to align their
individual utils, interests, and preferences with others as part of a
larger group identity. Most fundamentally, all economic systems
rely on the concept of social trust in a web of inhabited groups
(
Simon, 1992 ; Fukuyama, 1996 ). Social trust and similar concepts
such as social commons and public goods are classiﬁed as market
failures and are eﬀectively moral in nature, i.e., the necessary
expectations that economic agents are reliable and do not sell
goods that are harmful or generally misrepresent their quality.
These Neoclassical market failures suggest a requisite shift from the
subjective perspective of an individual selﬁsh agent and toward a
symbolically social, morally objective, or technically transcendent
orientation.
Of course, our group biases are a double-edged sword: on the
maladaptive side of our social systems, terrorist organizations and
criminal gangs exists and are able to recruit members, according
to Michael Hogg, because the risk they pose for their constituents
is valued less than the assurance a group identity provides in
times of social uncertainty (
Hogg, 2000 ), and where social trust is
inadequate. This is worth noting because it emphasizes, more so
than ﬁrms and countries, that aligning our attention, preferences,
interests, and ultimately our identity is not just a response
to extrinsic threats and rewards but an innate psychological
impulse.
In the ﬁeld of linguistics Claude Lévi-Strauss and others known
as structuralists attempted to reduce various languages and cultural
myths to a stationary system, identifying the core components of
this system identiﬁed across cultures and languages. However, this
attempt was undermined by Jacques Derrida and Jacques Lacan
who demonstrated that language unavoidably involves bespoken
interpretations that are inﬂuenced by historical, social, cultural,
and individual context (Section
3.1). The lack of ﬁxed or common
boundaries around signiﬁed concepts in linguistic systems however
does not mean there are a few common elements. Linguistic
signiﬁers (words) and concepts ﬁrstly gain meaning through binary
opposition, wherein it is the distinction between words and their
meaning that allows us to understand individual words, concepts,
and expressions, e.g., cat vs. hat (signiﬁer opposition), and black vs.
white (signiﬁed opposition).
However this play of diﬀerences needs to exist as a predictable
structure in order to be intelligible and functional across individuals
within a given culture to enable complex symbolic communication,
this is achieved by often arbitrarily privileged concepts, what
Derrida called transcendental signiﬁeds . For example, God, the
monarch, democracy, liberty, etc. possess unquestioned value and
serve as the top of a hierarchy below which other concepts are
arranged. Even more prosaic concepts are given a normative quality
that we can understand as giving language a common hierarchical
structure within a given cultural context that orients the subsequent
values or philosophical arguments, e.g., presence is privileged over
absence that leads to, for example, Socrates’ philosophical argument
of speech over written text, an argument that eﬀectively relies on a
very arbitrary belief, akin to mythology (
Derrida and Bass, 1998 ;
Collins and Mayblin, 2011 ; Derrida and Spivak, 2016 ). This is
similar to Heidegger’s distinction of ontology vs. ontics and his
claim that Western philosophy tends to concertize foundational
ontological questions as ideas, e.g., Platonic forms, God, reason,
etc. while failing to address the very nature of these or any beings.
Both Derrida’s transcendental signiﬁers and Heidegger’s ontics
critiques can be understood as the tendency to anchor the technical
transcendent perspective to a ﬁxed point.
The emergence of transcendental signiﬁeds enable our
symbolic consciousness to satisfy the FEP stated imperative of
epistemically seeking general coherence, framing our linguistic
systems as the product of a search for a symbolic Self suggests
that privileging certain concepts as good for the collective self is
necessary. The notion of coherence here is technically important.
From the perspective of the FEP , an ensemble of creatures or
conspeciﬁcs, constitutes a collection of Markov blankets, each
trying to minimize their free energy or surprise by acting in a
way that renders their co-constructed niche maximally predictable.
The inevitable consequence of this is that the exchange among
conspeciﬁcs tends to minimize the joint free energy through some
kind of belief sharing and convergence on a shared generative
model or narrative that can be read as common ground , i.e.,
a practice observed in the cooperative exchanges of children,
where a shared identity motivates participant to establish suﬃcient
trust and co-construct solutions to problems (
Tomasello, 2016 ).
Mathematically, this manifests as something called generalized
synchrony or synchronization of chaos, namely, a coherent and
mutually predictable exchange that constrains sensory trajectories
to a synchronization manifold. This fundamental tendency to
a non-equilibrium steady-state (with minimum free energy) is
relatively straightforward to simulate and again foregrounds the
emergence of common ground and a shared generative model
(
Friston and Frith, 2015 ; Isomura et al., 2019 ). Heuristically, if
auditory sensations are generated by you or me, I can minimize my
surprise by ensuring we are singing from the same hymn sheet, and
all that needs to be inferred is whose turn it is to sing. However,
to infer we share a generative model means I have to identify you
as being something like me (i.e., we share a language or dialect).
We will return to this key issue of identiﬁcation and discrimination
later.
Frontiers in Sociology /zero.tnum/five.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
Hence, although both Derrida’s transcendental signiﬁcation
and Heideggar’s ontics were presented biases that thwarted
sound philosophical and political arguments, expressing beliefs
in objective norms, even implicitly, whether in abstract social
ideals or supernatural identities, eﬀectively provides evidence of a
shared symbolic Markov blanket and thus represents a necessary
component of symbolic communication. It establishes a cultural
common ground. It also aligns with the idea of “cooperative
communication, ” the idea that speakers are motivated to employ
symbolic language to align mental states, i.e., beliefs, intentions, and
emotions (
Vasil et al., 2020 ), at least as an intermediate if not end
objective (see Tison and Poirier, 2021 ). Declaring belief, whether
in supernatural deities or principles, represents a fundamental
deontic mode of social behavior that suggests a shared identity and
subsequently motivates further alignment of mental states.
This ties to the last area that reductive analysis has proven useful
as eﬀectively a Null-Hypothesis. It also illuminates the contiguity of
our symbolic practices with the animal kingdom because it applies
to a broad range of organisms, i.e., emotions and norms (Section
3.3). Firstly, emotions represent a higher level of biological control
seen in homeostatic autonomic processes, e.g., metabolism and
thermoregulation, that drive compartmentalized systems toward
stable set points. Researchers David Anderson and Ralph Adophs
deﬁne emotions by contrasting the physiological responses of
organisms that respond to things like predators and threats in ways
that contrast with expectations of immediate stimulus response,
forwarded by behaviorism, a school that sought to avoid the
vexing problem of assuming subjective emotional states in non-
symbolic animals. Instead, Anderson and Adolphs cast emotions
as internal states that serve as “intervening variables, ” motivating a
range of behavior based on contextualized stimuli (
Adolphs, 2013 ;
Anderson, 2022).
Secondly, these emotionally motivated behaviors include the
implicit social norms observed in cooperative animals including
great apes, marmoset monkeys, dolphins, elephants, wolves, and
certain rodents (
Bekoﬀ and Pierce, 2009 ; Burkart et al., 2018 ).
Norms emerge from the inevitably variable interactions of social
life given the individual and social challenges each agent confronts.
The collective expression of anger by female chimps toward
the alpha male (
Boehm, 2012 ), or the convention of sticking
one’s butt in the air as a signal of submission in a within-
group conﬂict, for instance, (
Bekoﬀ and Pierce, 2009 ), ensures
stability of the social unit by exerting a harmonizing inﬂuence
over the disparate needs of constituents and managing occasions
of conﬂict and adversity while allowing for the beneﬁts of bounded
competition.
Norms thus enable social constituents to realize a more
proﬁtable position along what researchers Dupré and O’Malley
call the “collaboration continuum, ” (for an intuitive example of
dynamics of the complex dynamics of cooperation and cooperation
that this term implies, think of the cooperation within a sports
team that exists simultaneously alongside individual team members
striving to contribute the most, i.e., the MVP award (
Dupré
and O’Malley 2009 , p. 1). Finally, emotions underwrite the
social phenomenon of play where, for instance, primates and
other mammals act out varying roles such as alpha and beta,
shifting between the behavioral constraints and indulgences of
these roles (
Solms, 2022 ). These are the most important implicit
phenomena we share with nonhuman animals that we explicit via
symbolic expression.
The other main question I seek to explore is how we eﬀectively
exported these internal states as symbolic expressions, how it was
that we transitioned from what Terrence Deacon labeled as the
broader indexical and iconic signal processing seen across the
animal kingdom, to our symbolic practices (Section
4). Given that
our social systems evolve and persist in the face of potential free
riders and deviants by minimizing social surprise with objective
norms, moral concepts, and types, how did we (unlike other animals
including our close primate kin) develop the ability to do so? The
answer is likely found in some of the earliest signal processing
we engage in and post utero, and how this enables us not only to
socialize with intimates but ultimately move beyond them (
Moﬀett,
2019; Kinzler, 2021).
Although the semiotician Jacques Lacan focused on our
visual perception as the primal sensory modality when trying to
understand the developmental of our symbolic Self conception,
and focused on intimate caretakers as the most relevant context
of psychological symbolic identiﬁcation for a given subject, it
is increasingly evident human infants instinctively synthesize
intimacy using sounds, i.e., shibboleth (
Liberman et al., 2017 )./three.tnumWe
display a preference for our caretaker’s accent in utero and later
generalize this bias toward those with familiar accents (
Kinzler,
2021).
While primates and other suﬃciently complex and social
animals rely on individual intimacy to cohabit with conspeciﬁcs in
order to persist as a stable group (
Moﬀett, 2013 , 2019), we innately
employ visual and audible markers to construct social categories
over which we exhibit bias. Often investigated for its anti-social
and harmful impacts, the instinctive bias to interpret accents to
signal social categories, along with preferences over them, emerges
in infancy (
Kinzler et al., 2009 ; Kinzler, 2021 ). Though potentially
harmful, this represents an ability to expand our social bonds by
eﬀectively synthesizing intimacy, a process that can be framed in
semiotic terms as involving the transfer of cognitive sign meaning
via analogy (
Hofstadter and Sander, 2013 ), but an analogy based on
a natural reference grounded in natural (i.e., indexical and iconic)
representation; given that accents are fuzzy (i.e., probabilistic) yet
reliable indicators of identity and norm abidance (
McElreath et al.,
2003).
This marks an important evolutionary and developmental step
in our symbolically ordered world and cultural identity ( Cohen,
2012; Moﬀett, 2019 ). The symbolic patterning of our psychology
may not simply extend from our intimates to anonymous social
relations, rather they are intertwined from early in our ontogeny
via the interpretation of accents as dialectic. Although the depth of
the psychological experience among our intimates might be most
relevant individually, as a species it is the breadth of connections
that are the most signiﬁcant, given that it likely facilitates cultural
identity and evolution (
Tomasello, 2003 ; Henrich, 2016 ; Moﬀett,
/three.tnum Intimate relations here are contrasted with the conspeciﬁcs we know
only through audio of visible markings or insignia. In humanity’s case, we
use accents, uniforms, and more recently online proﬁles. This t ype of social
relation extends to non-human animals, for example, ants and be es (see
Moﬀett, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/nine.tnum).
Frontiers in Sociology /zero.tnum/six.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
2019). In Levin’s framing, this expanded our cognitive light cone,
albeit not yet in the technically transcendent angular shift necessary
for objectivity, it does provide a furtive ﬁeld doing so.
Evolutionarily, this is adjacent to primate vocalizations, e.g., the
chimpanzee pant-hoot. Some researchers suggest this vocalization
is used to generate in-group cohesion (
Moﬀett, 2019 ). However,
unlike human accents there is evidence that the individual
diﬀerences in this chimp vocalizations are greater than group
(
Desai et al., 2022 ), aligning with Moﬀett’s claim that chimp social
units are based on individual intimacy. Hence the pant-hoots are
not dialogic in chimps because their groups depend not on accents
as a signal of in-group membership but direct indication of a
familiar conspeciﬁc. This also aligns with cross-species vocalization
research led by Jarvis, who ﬁnds that vocal production is only
possible with predators. Hence our meek ancestors were able
to adapt accents as dialogue largely because vocal variation was
limited and hence was reliable as a signal of provenance (
Jarvis,
2006), that further suggested adherence to normative expectations
and social behavior ( McElreath et al., 2003 ).
Transitioning to anonymous social units for a complex social
organism that evolved from a species that were intimate with
all social compatriots requires something like synthetic intimacy ,
i.e., they are like me or people with whom I an intimate, can
identify with, and can trust to adhere to behavioral expectations
McElreath et al. (2003), like food sharing, collaboration during
hunting and gathering, cooperative breeding practices, etc. This
creates a vulnerability, i.e., potential unwelcome social surprise
that would need minimization in order to ensure the continued
in-habitation and cooperative gain of an anonymous social unit
(Section
5). Explicating emotional states and social norms using
what linguistics call a “performative utterance” ( Austin and
Urmson, 2009 ; Searle, 2010b ), provides both with a likely starting
point for our cultural identity and symbolic communication that
would have been important for our ancestors (Section
3.1).
Expressing belief in expectations as objective, i.e., presented
as if from a neutral bystander, oﬀers a minimal modiﬁcation
of vocalizations seen in our primate relatives yet suﬃcient to
aﬃrm an anonymous social unit. Our vocalizations, of course,
played a large role both in the declaration itself where we began
by labeling actions as wrong and as an initial signal of in-
group or shared identity (of course, wrong just means surprising
in this encultured, co-constructed, niche). The latter established
an expectation of cooperator while the former allowed us to
minimize the social surprise that followed acts seen as deviant. This
constitutes an explication of belief in both the Bayesian statistical
sense traditionally employed by the FEP (Section
2) but also tethers
the statistical concept to our common understanding of faith in a
culture, supernatural entity, or a universal moral code.
Harnessing the energetic process of a complex symbolic reality
is suﬃciently and parsimoniously achieved through a declarative,
or explicit, belief in relatively egalitarian rules, i.e., policies that
place a minimum value on all participants. Objective, symbolic,
and “golden” (i.e., treat others as you would like to be treated)
rules aﬃrm the symbolic cultural identity that is likely the most
ancient and foundational form of human morality as distinct from
behavioral norms of other animals (
Pfaﬀ and Wilson, 2007 ; Boehm,
2012; Burkart et al., 2018 ). Logically, objectivity goes hand in hand
with egalitarianism, given that a rule that applies to everyone
implies that everyone (i.e., within-group) is, in at least a narrow
sense, equal under the law. This view also aligns with
Lorenz (1974)
claim that hunter-gatherer groups generally have a word for in-
group members of their tribe that corresponds to human and non-
human. Thus, in this view, shared belief, egalitarian norms, and the
very signiﬁed conception of humanity, i.e., human beings, represent
both an agent’smoral circle and at least an important foundation for
our symbolic capacity.
This thesis has precedence in and implications for moral
philosophy. A belief in objectivity reconciles Søren Kierkegaard’s
challenge to Hegel’s argument that the power of objective
rationality was suﬃcient to progress moral truth and practices
further by insisting that objective analysis is (at most) backward
looking while forward action requires faith (
Halvorson, 2022 ).
Belief need not be in a religious doctrine or a supernatural entity,
shared faith in the pursuit of quest for moral rules and principles
can be suﬃcient to guide moral progress. In other words, the very
belief in objectivity can and does encourage us to ﬁnd the necessary
common ground to discover it. This also follows Nietzsche’s
critique of Schopenhauer’s pessimism, i.e., his claim that morality
is essentially negative. We inhabit symbolic selves that can come
into being by abstracting negative behavioral norms, hence the
underlying motivation is a positive construction and aﬃrmation of
identity. Also, given our morality ultimately follows from dyadic
social connections, the emphasis of some moral philosophers, e.g.,
Socrates and Zhuangzi (Section
6), upon the relationship of love
and moral behavior or virtue is bolstered.
/two.tnum. FEP and Markov blankets
Before proceeding to unpack the FEP in an encultured setting,
it might be useful to review its elements. The FEP oﬀers a simple—
perhaps almost tautological—description of self-organization. It
starts with the notion of things that can be individuated from
everything else in virtue of possessing a Markov blanket (
Parr et al.,
2020). This blanket provides a boundary that separates the interior
of something from its external milieu (e.g., a particle within an
atom, a ﬁsh in water, and a cat on dry land).
The very existence of a Markov blanket licenses an
interpretation of the internal states as parameterizing probabilistic
(i.e., Bayesian) beliefs about external states of aﬀairs (
Ramstead
et al., 2023 ). This follows from the fact that, when conditioned on
the Markov blanket, internal and external states are independent.
This means for every external state there is an expected internal
state and vice versa. In consequence, expected internal states can
be read as encoding Bayesian beliefs about external states. Wherein
external states inﬂuence internal states and are subsequently
inﬂuenced through intermediate sensory and action states. For
example, homeostasis ensures that a body’s temperature is in
predictable ranges relative to its environment.
The dénouement of this physics of sentience or Bayesian
mechanics is that anything that exists can be read as if it is trying
to infer the causes of sensory impressions on its Markov blanket
(
Ramstead et al., 2023 ). This can be viewed as a tendency to
minimize surprise (i.e., variational free energy) or, equivalently,
maximize (Bayesian model) evidence for an implicit world or
generative model entailed by the internal states. This is sometimes
Frontiers in Sociology /zero.tnum/seven.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
known as self-evidencing ( Hohwy, 2016 ). In short, every thing or
object can be understood as acting and perceiving to minimize
surprise or maximize predictability.
It follows that all choices and decisions are in the service of
minimizing expected surprise (i.e., expected free energy), which
has an interesting mathematical interpretation: expected surprise—
or uncertainty—is entropy in information theory, which means
that we are compelled to resist the second law of thermodynamics
in virtue of minimizing uncertainty. This can be formalized by
decomposing expected free energy into two parts (
Da Costa
et al., 2020 ). The ﬁrst corresponds to expected information gain,
which is the objective function for Bayes optimal experimental
design (
Lindley, 1956 ; MacKay, 1992 ); namely, the intrinsic or
epistemic value that underwrites exploration and information-
seeking behavior (
Schmidhuber, 2006 ; Friston et al., 2017 ). The
second part can be read as expected value, where value is
just the log probability of preferred or characteristic states.
This part corresponds to the extrinsic or pragmatic value that
underwrites preference-seeking behavior (
Attias, 2003 ; Botvinick
and Toussaint, 2012 ; Lanillos et al., 2021 ). So, how does this help
in terms of communication and culture?
Consider an ensemble of particles or a community of
conspeciﬁcs. Each member of the ensemble is trying to minimize
their free energy and—in so doing—minimize the collective free
energy of the community in question. Technically, this takes us
into the world of Markov blankets in the sense that if a community
is a thing, then it has a Markov blanket (
Palacios et al., 2020 ).
Indeed, the very existence of Markov blankets at nested scales
speaks to the scale invariant application of the FEP—an application
that mandates the collective resolution of uncertainty. This has
been used to useful eﬀect to understand cultural niche construction
in the context of the hierarchically mechanistic mind and active
inference (
Ramstead et al., 2018 ; Badcock et al., 2019 ; Vasil et al.,
2020).
Many aspects of the active inference entail exchanges across
our Markov blanket in terms of questions and answers—i.e.,
communication—in the service of resolving uncertainty (see
Friston et al. (2015, 2020) for numerical illustrations). This
speaks to theory of mind and the cohesion of Markov blankets
that follows from rendering everything mutually predictable.
Technically, this is sometimes read as a form of generalized
synchrony (
Friston et al., 2015 ) or distributed cognition. Note
the emphasis here is on working toward a shared narrative or
common ground (
Tomasello, 2016 ), allowing me to predict you—
and therefore minimize surprise. In other words, it paints a
cooperative picture of collective self-organization in relation to
adversarial and exploitative constructs seen, for example, in game
theoretic accounts which assume that self-interested individuals
only cooperate when there is clear evidence of extrinsic beneﬁt (e.g.,
ﬁtness, caloric, monetary). These accounts often fail to understand
that intrinsic motivation of agents is due to the implicit assumption
of ﬁxed and static boundaries around the agents, rather than
accepting the mutable and multiplicative interpretation of identity
or “selfhood” (Section
3.2), one that extends to moral communities
(Curry, 2016).
However, this is not the full story, it is clearly the case that
people, institutions and cultures do not necessarily converge on
the same world model. This is evident in all scales and levels of
life and points to the complexity inherent in occupying numerous
and hierarchically nested blankets, requiring coordination and
prioritization of lower-level needs that gives rise to emotions
and subjective conscious experience (
Solms, 2019 ). Moreover, this
may also reﬂect the fact that the world is constantly changing,
therefore, providing the epistemic aﬀordance that renders us
curious creatures.
In a cultural setting, this means that there will always be
an imperative to resolve uncertainty about others, in the service
of being able to explain or predict their behavior (e.g., through
stereotyping): an important aspect of active inference is to ﬁnd the
simplest account for another’s behavior, in terms of their kind or
type (e.g., does this person “speak my language” or “sound like
a familiar person”). There is a deep mathematical reason for this
tendency to explain self and others in simple coarse-grained terms,
which follows from a decomposition of free energy into accuracy
and complexity (
Da Costa et al., 2020 ). In short, in building our
encultured world or generative models, we will try to provide an
accurate account of the sensed world that is minimally complex
in accord with Occam’s principle and try to share that worldview
with everyone we choose to engage with (
Albarracin et al., 2022 ). In
what follows, we will unpack the ensuing imperatives for sentient
behavior in terms of cultural transactions to explore the proposal
that humanity’s symbolic capacity is underwritten by belief in an
abstract morality, i.e., in a myth of objectivity.
/three.tnum. WEIRD null hypotheses
The mission the FEP sets forth is to pinpoint the fuzzy, mutable,
and multiplicative boundaries and common shared frames of
reference (or subjective context) that make up the structures of
our world (
Clark, 2017 )./four.tnumThe FEP allows us to reframe emotions,
norms, societies, and language, that were initially approached
with assumptions of rigid individuation that emphasizes extrinsic
motivation to the inclusion of the psychologically innate (
Noble,
2017; Kay and King, 2020 ), as a statistical imperative to maintain
coherence while cohabiting numerous nested Markov blankets at
various scales.
The reductive tendency however is important for this analysis
primarily for two reasons. Firstly, one tried and true method for
fulﬁlling the FEP’s mission is by deconstructing the boundaries
erected by more reductionist-oriented ideologies. Many researchers
have eﬀectively used static systems as null hypotheses to oﬀer
contrasting theories that imply sounder ontologies. Secondly, the
/four.tnum Markov blankets are equivalent to the “reference frames” that Einstein
used in his formulation of general relativity. Before Einstein p hysicists
distinguished between universal forces, such as gravity, and t he ﬁctional
forces experienced by objects within an accelerating frame of reference.
The theory of general relativity concluded however there is no pr ivileged
or observer-independent objective perspective (Einstein and Lawson, /one.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/one.tnum).
The notion of a reference frame extends other discipline’s includ ing Dennis
Noble’s Biological Relativity (Noble, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/seven.tnum), to the modern understanding
of linguistic communication in terms of “common ground” or shared pri or
semantic context (Seising, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/two.tnum; Tomasello, /two.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/six.tnum), and to the lowest known
levels of reality in mathematical formulations of quantum inf ormation theory
in terms of aligned quantum reference frames (QRF) (Fields et al., /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum).
Frontiers in Sociology /zero.tnum/eight.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
analytical tendency is not unique to WEIRD societies but also
shared by our nomadic ancestors, a tendency necessary for a species
capable of reducing the natural world into discretized sounds
(i.e., words). Words expand the normative framework that follows
harmonious expectations of an expanded social unit or enjoined
blankets by creating modular, mutable, and multiplicative symbolic
structures.
/three.tnum./one.tnum. Deconstructing symbols
The philosopher Jacques Derrida’s terms “trace” and
“transcendental signiﬁed” capture how humanity actively
knits Markov blankets around shared beliefs in objective morality.
In an eﬀort to deﬁne the foundational structure of language he
(unwittingly) aligns to the FEP , noting how words gain meaning
from distinction but are essentially modeled oﬀ the linguistic,
cultural, and natural environment from which they emerge. Much
of the context of Derrida’s work was a critique of the structuralist
school’s alleged treatment of language as a static, atemporal, and
a historical structure that existed outside of speakers themselves.
Particularly the approach of structuralist Claude Lévi-Strauss to
language is analogous to single equilibrium analysis in physics,
i.e., seeking to resolve uncertainty about what words could mean
(
Derrida and Bass, 1998 ).
Instead, Derrida returns to and expands on de Saussure et al.
(1986) assertion that words gain their meaning from a play of
diﬀerences, wherein the inherently fuzzy boundaries of signiﬁed
conceptions are most visible when juxtaposed to their opposites,
i.e., the word cat is somewhat meaningful as it is diﬀerent from
mat but more meaningful when contrasted with dog. However, this
latter example only oﬀers clarity for interpreters who are suﬃciently
acquainted with cultures wherein the top two domestic pets are
cats and dogs and contrasted frequently in media portrayals and
common idioms (e.g., “ﬁghting like cats and dogs”). Moreover, the
structure of each word (or morpheme) itself is possible because
it conforms to the conventional norms of (some local version of)
English and if spoken would be pronounced in an accent indicative
of a dialect, etc.
Meaning is continually modiﬁed by the more immediate
context that precedes and succeeds it in a given sentence, speech,
or text. Thus each morpheme is itself a “trace” of the various
threads of the individual, linguistic, and more broadly cultural
contexts from which it emerges (
Derrida and Bass, 1998 , 2017;
Collins and Mayblin, 2011 ; Derrida and Spivak, 2016 ). In FEP terms
then, each signiﬁed conception is not a ﬁxed structure demarcated
with a stationary partition; words are fuzzy models of a particular
symbolic environment constructed within the mind of a particular
interpreter, where distinct textual or audible signiﬁers, along
with the conceptual “binary opposition, ” e.g., cat-dog distinctions
of the signiﬁeds are analogous to free energy minimization at
nonequilibrium steady-state in physics.
Framing linguistic structures according to FEP terms and
adopting a technically transcendent view of Levin’s light cone as the
dynamic scope of Self (see Section 1), suggests that the conceptual
chain ultimately gains coherence as a hierarchy of conceptual
identities, each with their own self-evidencing agenda, including a
level that represents the cultural niche itself. As a psychoanalyst,
Jacques Lacan studied the pathologies that befall those who reach
adulthood with poorly developed self-concept, i.e., those who fail
to inhabit a part of their respective cultural identity. Moreover, any
participation in a symbolic or social reality demands its participants
maintain some level of coherence in the web of symbols bound by
innumerabledeontic conventions conventions. How do we ground
an identity that is essentially symbolic?
Derrida’s solution lies in his allegation that not only
structuralists but much of Western (WEIRD) metaphysics amounts
to an attempt to halt the otherwise endless conceptual pairing
and linking chain using one central signifying concept, the
“transcendental signiﬁed, ” i.e., a single concept that holds the center
of gravity and acts as the ultimate source of meaning and inviolable
truth. This reductive, or what Derrida called the “logocentric” bias
treated, in eﬀect, an inherently steady state system with fuzzy and
mutable boundaries as stationary, allowing philosophical, legal,
moral, and even mundane arguments to yield to the invocation of
a central cultural myth such as God or democracy. Viewed in FEP
terms, culture itself represents the superordinate identity and all
concepts are subordinate to its ultimate authority.
However, the transcendence could also seemingly be more
trivial and even neutral, that emerges within the context of a
philosophical claim or general argument, i.e., implied axioms.
Derrida treated this as a bias that follows the diﬃculty in making
objective claims. Transcendental signiﬁcation, however, may be
more fundamental to the structure of language than Derrida
emphasized. It is not just a WEIRD metaphysical bias; it is a
bias necessary for our symbolic capacity. Symbolic communication
represents channels that allow speakers the chance to exchange
thoughts, ideas, etc. by relying on a shared superordinate identity,
one that itself requires deontic aﬃrmation. According to the view
of “cooperative communication, ” the symbolic world, i.e., the social
reality we each create with language, is one enjoined to others,
founded on our psychological motivation to align mental states
(
Tomasello, 2016 ; Vasil et al., 2020 ). This can include sharing
attention over common objects and events and responding to them
similarly, at times with anonymous (though likely compatriot)
conspeciﬁcs. This follows from the “adaptive prior” beliefs that we
inhabit similar niches to certain conspeciﬁcs that may be otherwise
anonymous (
Vasil et al., 2020 ). Asking for directions, the time, or
weather updates aligns the priors of our generative models with our
often anonymous interlocutor.
Most viscerally, however, sharing an emotional response while
“gossiping” about a neighbor’s extramarital aﬀair or a local news
story of political corruption, while seemingly trivial exposes
the motivation to aﬃrm the integrity of the social reality the
speakers cohabitate by calling attention to someone who violated
a foundational norm (
Dunbar, 2004 ; Hartung et al., 2019 ). This
establishes a communicative “common ground” that implicitly
assumes a shared cultural identity and promotes the explicit
semantic analogizing of a common symbolic Self (
Tomasello,
2016).
This would have been helpful for our ancestors who occupied
a dynamic nomadic social niche and consequently shared the
WEIRD bias for analytical thinking (
Henrich, 2016 ), i.e., the myth
of objectivity and the practice of discretizing reality by employing
fuzzy boundaries around sounds was motivated largely by the need
for common constraints around behavior. Moreover, the ultimate
Frontiers in Sociology /zero.tnum/nine.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
driver of the human analytical worldview was the normative
frameworks that arose in response to the ecological and social
challenges common generally to nomadic hunter-gatherers that
shifted only following the move to agriculture and a relaxation of
individual normative expectations and a strengthening of clans and
other collectives with a more rigid social hierarchy. A species needs
to suﬀer from a reiﬁcation fallacy (as “misplaced” as it may be,
see
Whitehead, 2010 ), in order to embark on the road of symbols
and social reality. In order to take a technically transcendent view
and shine Levin’s cognitive light cone over our cultural niche (see
above). In
Henrich (2020) words (p. 224):
Mobile hunter-gatherers, who possess extensive (not
intensive) kin-based institutions, are ﬁeld-independent [an
indicator of an analytical vs. gestalt bias]. Anthropologists
have long argued that, compared to farmers and herders who
have more intensive kin-based institutions, hunter-gatherers
emphasize values that focus on independence, achievement,
and self-reliance while deemphasizing obedience, conformity,
and deference to authority.
It follows that all of humanity is constitutionally disposed to
construct hierarchical taxonomies, i.e., we are all to varying degrees
WEIRD scientists but perhaps with a paradoxically mythical
grounding. We are motivated to label in-group conspeciﬁcs
with moral concepts in order to update our beliefs about the
beliefs of our compatriots. The simplest view of the Markov
blanket is that it is a common constraint on movement, it aligns
internal constituents, e.g., organelles within a cell’s membrane,
tissues, and organs within a body, etc., against the exterior
environment. Providing the interior with evidence of a cohesive
self (
Hohwy, 2016 ). Generally, norms follow the constraints that
are a consequence of a shared identity. Employing a speech act
to explicitly declare an act a norm violation reverses this causal
sequence, providing evidence of a shared belief in behavioral
constraints that imply a natural allegiance to an expansive,
cultural identity—one that underwrites the very use of language
generally. We can only participate in what Ludwig Wittengestein
called “language games” if enough people with suﬃcient ﬁdelity
mythologize the rules of the game (
Wittgenstein et al., 1969 )./five.tnum
/three.tnum./two.tnum. Selﬁshly expanding the self
The critique that structuralism seeks to impose static,
atemporal structures on language is a common refrain that alleges
WEIRD societies are biased toward a reductive state-oriented
metaphysics that seeks to resolve the uncertainty of biological
agents, economic systems, or even the psychology behind human
behavior. This opposes the more expansive view the FEP warrants
which is that natural and cultural evolution progress by continually
enjoining the blanketed boundaries of selves. This is what he called
/five.tnum Similar to Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem, Wittengstein
challenged the ability to mathematically pursue objective tr uth that Bertrand
Russell, for instance, arguably did in Principia Mathematica in his “axiom of
reducibility.”
logocentrism, or what is most, in line with the FEP focus on beliefs,
the myth of objectivity.
The neoclassical economic model of selﬁsh, utility maximizing
agents with stable preferences attempts to resolve uncertainty by
assuming a singular equilibrium system that eﬃciently distributes
scarce resources using market prices that signal and satisfy those
preferences (
Friedman, 2008 ; Jehle and Reny, 2011 ). However,
economists since Keynes (2008) and Knight (2014) have argued
that this reductive model leaves no room for evident economic
phenomena including growth, recession, or even ﬁrms and their
branding (
Kay and King, 2020 ).
What Homo Economicus has aﬀorded economists, however,
are “neoclassical market failures” ( Cowen and Crampton, 2003 ),
that perhaps best demonstrates the ultimate utility of overly
reductive analysis as an analytically potent null hypothesis demarks
the necessary features of our social reality. Externalities, which
deﬁne costs and beneﬁts that are not internalized to a given agent,
have been invoked, for instance, to explain persistent pollution
and even economic growth, e.g., investments in research and
development, education, and job training can only be partially
captured by the initial proprietor, allowing the beneﬁts to spill
over into the wider society (
Romer, 1994 ). Intriguingly, similarly
to Derridean transcendental signiﬁcation, economic structures are
ultimately founded on the belief in shared adherence to deontic or
ethical norms, i.e., “social trust, ” that not only permit self-seeking
behavior using market prices but ultimately allow individuals
to transcend individual perspectives and interest and inhabit
social levels of ﬁrms, nations, and communities (
Fukuyama, 1996 ;
Carney, 2021).
The point here however is not whether these indictments
accurately capture the beliefs of any or the most notable adherents
of these paradigms in these polemics, but the admittedly extreme
reductionist caricature of these paradigms are precisely what
allowed their detractors to emphasize the fuzzy boundaries,
attractors, and overall dynamics that exist in a complex world
of steady-state equilibria and ultimately irreducible uncertainty.
Oliver Scott Curry likewise uses Game Theory to deﬁne morality
across human cultures as a cooperative force within symbolic
groups such as culture and kin (
Curry, 2016 ). This ability to
expand the interiors of the self can also be described as overcoming
another neoclassical market failure, “information asymmetry” (see
Hidalgo, 2015). Arrow and Akleroﬀ demonstrated the problems of
uncertainty between producers and consumers in healthcare and
used car markets respectively. Healthcare costs can be diﬃcult to
manage and buying used cars is challenging because the agent or
entity that possesses or produces market goods always has more
information than potential buyers (
Akerlof, 1970; Arrow, 2004).
These problems in principle exist in every market, hucksters,
snake oil salesmen, and other potential deviants always and
everywhere threatening to exploit economic commons to
personally beneﬁt but lower the overall trust in the marketplace as
a whole. These problems are overcome with company branding,
government regulation/accreditation, uniforms, etc. Importantly,
these represent a promise of future behavior, or contribute to the
“regimes of expectations” within the FEP framework (
Constant
et al., 2019 ).
The competitive, cooperative, and collaborative dynamics
correspond to the distance of the numerous social identities we
Frontiers in Sociology /one.tnum/zero.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
occupy that serve to overcome information asymmetries and the
levels of “social trust” we place within them (
Fukuyama, 1996 ).
Information asymmetry is also present in dyadic or intimate
relations in the case of the “principal-agent” problem, how to
trust someone to manage someone’s business or assets to act in
the best interest of the proprietor. This highlights the inescapable
deontology or, at its core, simple morality that ultimately grounds
market transactions of any scale and inclusive of intimate or
anonymous participants.
Perhaps the most telling market failure, as Ronald Coase
pointed out, if prices can eﬃciently signal value and motivate the
movement of scarce resources there should be no need for ﬁrms,
particularly the large, bureaucratic entities we commonly observe
in the marketplace (
Coase, 1937). Simon (1992) oﬀered a plausible
solution to the ultimate failure of the neoclassical market paradigm,
i.e., to align the otherwise disparate goals if autonomous agents (p.
78):
[Company Employees] perceive the organization’s goals
as their goals—which is precisely what identiﬁcation means.
“We” and “they” are fundamentally important pronouns in the
language, and an individual’s conception [ . . .] of who “we” are
deﬁnes his or her frame of reference in making decisions.
Just as our civic institutions, including churches and schools,
generate general social patterns of behavior by structuring with and
around individual self interests, economic institutions transcend
what neoclassical school has traditionally taken as the lodestone
of the economic agent, private self interest. The ﬁrm exploits our
ability to inhabit social selves that requires mutual social trust
both externally and internally. Employees need to have trust in
co-workers and the ﬁrm’s hierarchical structure in order not just
to receive a paycheck but to freely contribute time and energy
and align what may be otherwise disparate preferences and goals
with those of the ﬁrm, and portion of the ﬁrm that they are
employed. Other companies and customers need to trust ﬁrms
and their branding to engage and purchase their products. This
demonstrates that ﬁrms exist largely within the social commons.
An idea supported by the notion of corporate identity (
Balmer and
Greyser, 2003).
Though modern companies exist in a web of social institutions
that include constitutions, representative governments, legal
precedence, etc. that are products of complex historical eﬀorts
to establish common social identities, it still may be tempting to
see them as vehicles for unvarnished self-interest. However, social
group identity theory details how people, particularly in times
of uncertainty, are prone to joining malevolent groups such as
terrorist organizations and criminal gangs despite the violation of
self-interested motivation (
Hogg, 2000). Revealing that without the
presence of prosocial group labels humans tend toward shibboleth
in its more raw, biased form.
Modern educational, economic, and political institutions are
far from the only extant consequence of humanity’s need to ﬁnd
meaning and self identity as well as minimize uncertainty within
groups and the connection with members therein. The most
psychologically potent exploitation of groups remains religion.
According to
Alcorta and Sosis (2005), religion has much in
common with social rituals in non-human animals but distinct
in cultivating shared emotional responses to abstract symbols.
Religion, in their view, serves both as an extrinsic signal of
one’s identity for others as well as an intrinsic motivation to
ﬁnd one’s own identity, particularly during adolescence. Through
rituals, particularly during adolescence, nomadic hunter-gatherers
facilitated the alignment of members into a broader cultural
identity in order to face a range of broad ecological problems
and norms that would ideally be ﬁt to serve the group in
such circumstances (e.g., individual vs. collective, see
Greene,
2013). Religious and moral communities, companies, countries,
and cultures all converge on the common tendency to produce
transcendental signiﬁcation or mythologize belief in objective
norms in order to foster an individual’s self-belief as part of a greater
whole.
/three.tnum./three.tnum. The feeling of objectivity
The fuzzy nature of FEPs treatment of the Markov Blanket
and scale invariance of uncertainty minimization allow us to
highlight the imaginary boundary that partitions humanity from
other animals and identify the contiguous slope from which our
ancestral trajectory began. Although this symbolic dimension of
our psychology is uniquely practiced by humanity, the mechanisms
that innately, impulsively, and instinctively drive us to do so are
likely more common in the animal world. Mark Solms employed
the FEP to argue the presence of emotions themselves gives rise to
consciousness. Monkeys, dolphins, elephants, and even fruit ﬂies
operate in suﬃciently complex behavioral patterns that require
active and rapid prioritization, emotions aﬀord organisms precisely
the management function so demanded. In his words, (
Solms, 2022,
p. 194):
[Emotions oﬀer a] capacity to compartmentalise,
[enabling] the system to rank its needs and their attendant
predictions (i.e., the salient sources of expected free energy)
categorically, over time, and to focus its computational eﬀorts
upon the prioritised compartment. This is the statistical-
mechanical basis for the observed fact that each aﬀect possesses
not only a continuous hedonic valence [ . . .] but also a
categorical quality [ . . .] they possess both quantity and quality.
[. . .] aﬀects are always subjective, valenced and qualitative.
They have to be, given the control problem they evolved to
handle.
Researchers Anderson (2022) and Adolphs (2013) formalize
the notion of emotions as an “intervening variable, ” i.e., mental
states that can be triggered by a variety of stimuli and ultimately
evoke a variety of diﬀerent responses. A shadow from above
can either elicit no physiological response, or trigger fear in a
mouse. The mouse can respond by ﬁghting, freezing, ﬂeeing,
etc. Intriguingly they partly deﬁne behavior as indicative of
emotional brain states by contrasting them with another reductive,
objective oriented framework, behaviorism, that reduces behavior
to stimulus and response (
Anderson, 2022 ). In Anderson and
Adolfo’s framework, behavior that meets a number of dimensions
that indicate deviations from a purely physiological response, i.e.,
reﬂexes or conditioned responses which were thought suﬃcient to
account for organic behavior in Watson and B.F. Skinner’s view,
suggests the presence of an intervening brain state.
Frontiers in Sociology /one.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
The view of intervening emotional brain states as management
tools of competing priorities aligns with humanity’s moral
practices. Morality, in this view, is simply a symbolically scaled
version of the hedonic valence (pleasure vs. unpleasure) animals
feel in order to persist, i.e., how they continue to carry out
their relative pursuit of evidence to verify the belief in their own
existence. Our impulse to sacriﬁce ourselves in war to protect our
country or tackle a thief or simply watch morality-laden media, e.g.,
Law and Order SVU (see
Knop-Huelss et al., 2020 ), speaks to either
an implicit or explicit belief in a broader, and symbolic identity and
the adherence to objective norms on which it is reiﬁed. A make
believe self that, given the decomposition between extrinsic and
instinct motivation to minimize uncertainty (
Friston et al., 2015 ),
can either be seen as authentically altruistic or cynically signaling,
or at any point in between. Behaving in compliance with moral
norms or simply uttering support of them (e.g., gossip, see
Dunbar,
2004) provides evidence of a symbolic identity that oﬀers structure
and stability for constituents and generally fosters a constructive
feedback loop.
It is precisely the objective, i.e., neutral, third-party perspective
that both distinguishes humanity’s moral practice and enables
our extensive and anonymous social existence (
Burkart et al.
2018, p. 9). According to Burkart et al. (2007) many of the
foundational traits of our moral practice are found in other species
including our primate relatives, particularly those that engage in
cooperative breeding such as marmoset and callitrichid monkeys
display “unsolicited prosociality, ” i.e., they spontaneously cooperate
without the assurance of reciprocation (
Burkart et al., 2007 ).
Chimps, our nearest relations with whom we share a common
ancestor, do not rank high in terms of other-regarding behavior
but even they display implicit rules such as a prohibition against
infanticide and even experience arousal when the victim is an
in-group member. They pay cognitive attention (stare) to those
who violate the “putative” norm regardless of group membership
and experience heightened arousal when the victim is an in-group
conspeciﬁc (
Burkart et al. 2018 , p. 6).
Bekoﬀ and Pierce (2009) cite the observations of evident
compassion and sympathy animals display in the wild and captivity
to argue that morality is not an exclusive human enterprise.
However, they explicitly note that if our deﬁnition of morality
includes the use of symbolic rules then it becomes exclusively
human. The trouble with this carve-out, however, is that according
to
Schein and Gray (2018) human moral practice, while it includes
common elements we share with other animals such as beliefs,
emotions, and sociality, for humans it also demands a symbolic
dimension. It is the abstraction of the implicit rules, the drive
to take a neutral stance (even if we retain a parochial bias for
intimates and kin), that makes morality fundamental for our social
and symbolic existence.
Moral objectivity additionally goes hand in hand with a “golden
rule” or egalitarian moral emphasis. According to researchers
Chris Boehm and David Pfaﬀ, the most foundational, ancient,
and preferred human moral system supports a ﬂat hierarchical
structure. Simply put, a mental model where everyone is treated
equally is an easier sell for existing and potential inhabitants. In
FEP terms, sharing a generative model that places a minimum
value on all participants, as opposed to one that more aggressively
prioritizes some agents over others, presents an alluring model
to encourage adoption and alignment of the model, and hence a
mutually supportive feedback loop.
/four.tnum. Beliefs by babel
Change your tone and shape so often that they can never
categorize you
- Charles Bukowski
Our adaptation for prior beliefs that align our cognitive
perspective with anonymous conspeciﬁcs (see Vasil et al., 2020 ),
was likely cultivated in the evolutionary expansion of “in-group
favoritism” (
Masuda and Fu, 2015 ), using a tag based social unit
(Cohen, 2012 ; Moﬀett, 2019 ). Speciﬁcally one that responds to
what Derrida called our phonocentric bias, i.e., our voice, as
evident in our accent bias that emerges early in infancy (
Kinzler,
2021). Within the context of depersonalized, stereotyped groups
along with our own self-conceptualized roles and identities therein
(
Hogg, 2000 ; Burke and Stets, 2009 ), the need to call attention to
a norm violator and share in a state of moral outrage would not
only be an extremely high-priority speech act, but it would also
serve as what
Searle (2010b) calls a “constitutive” act, a symbolic
communicative event that brings about a structure that would not
otherwise exist.
Chimps and other animals with comparable cognitive
capacity cohabit with intimates. Individuals can exist in a stable
environment among the vicissitudes of environmental uncertainty.
As their social units grow to include more members than an
individual can keep tabs over, the group tends to fracture (
Moﬀett,
2013, 2019). Demonstrated above is humanity’s ability to eﬀectively
synthesize this intimacy, we construct generative models of the
behavior of innumerable conspeciﬁcs beyond those we are familiar
with based largely on branding, insignia, uniforms, and ﬁnally
accents. A process that involves, at times explicitly (e.g., ﬁctive kin)
paradigmatic analogy (
Hofstadter and Sander, 2013 ).
The most innate and impulsive method of interpersonal
synthesis is documented in research on social bias, e.g.,
stereotyping, entitizing, depersonalizing, etc. A topic that deﬁes
our modern rational expectations and a practice we hope, often
for important historical reasons, we could extinguish. However, as
Kinzler noted this bias is a, or maybe the, double edged sword of
humanity. It is at the foundation of our desire to make meaningful
connections (
Kinzler, 2021 ) and thus points to the developmental
and evolutionary origins of our symbolic semiotic capacity. While
our ability to extensively cohabit with anonymous individuals may
be a consequence and not a cause of our symbolic capacity, it seems
more likely that the former acted as a bridge to the latter. Infants
display early signs of expansive prosociality and moral preferences
(
Warneken and Tomasello, 2009 ; Bloom, 2013 ), and they also
display signs of group bias ( Kinzler, 2021).
This is further suggested by the limits of human innate
moral or altruistic impulse. Researcher Bloom (2013) notes that
while infants display “certain moral foundations” (p. 8), including
prosocial behavior, their kindness is bounded. Bloom argues for
contingent altruism , the idea that ﬁtness maximizing behavior can
be cooperative rather than harmful or competitive but is biased.
This bias, as we saw with in-group bias in primates generally, can
be genetic/inclusive as in ants or bees, can be based on familiarity
Frontiers in Sociology /one.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
or intimacy as in primates generally, or can be symbolic as in
human groups. One interim step that sets the social milieu of this
hypothesis of our origins of symbolic groups is suggested by our
vocals. Cognitive Anthropologist Cohen suggests that Game theory
simulations show how tag-based simulation can achieve contingent
altruism or expand our group size. In her words (
Cohen, 2012 ,
p. 588):
Existing evidence warrants the preliminary conclusion that
accent markers meet the demands of an evolutionarily viable
tag and potentially aﬀorded a cost-eﬀective solution to the
challenges of maintaining viable cooperative relationships in
diﬀuse, regional social networks.
Our ancestors along with extant hunter-gatherers occupied
social units that expanded well beyond intimates and kin. Hill
et al. (2011) analyze extant hunter-gatherer communities and
ﬁnd that most individuals in residential groups are genetically
unrelated. Mark Moﬀett goes further and asserts that included
within the fuzzy boundaries of a typical hunter-gatherer society
are thousands of individuals that extends well beyond not only
kin but intimates. This suggests anonymous societies are a distinct
and universal feature of human social existence. As
Moﬀett (2019)
describes (p. 116):
Numerous accounts tell how hunter-gatherers of recent
centuries felt secure in the presence of their “own kind.” Asked
who they were, typically a hunter-gatherer would give you the
name for a community encompassing several, often a dozen or
more, bands spread over a wide geographic range. These band
societies had populations ranging from a few dozen to perhaps
a couple of thousand individuals.
Anthropologists have long focused on identity signals as a
possible origin of our symbolic behavior, one prior to speech,
art, and language. The ubiquity of body ornamentation and
hair dress, for instance, across human cultures including extant
hunter-gatherers along with its ancient discovery, and ﬁnally the
evolutionary utility identity signaled would have served makes it an
attractive candidate for the origins of human semiotics. Particularly
the use of red ochre dye and its frequent use to signal cultural
identity (
Henshilwood et al., 2011 ).
Given evidence from modern humanity along with pan, our
nearest extant primate relatives, the tag we ﬁrst employed to
facilitate this transition was likely our voice (
Cohen, 2012; Moﬀett,
2013, 2019; Kinzler, 2021 ). Although accents are now by-products
of our symbolic system of speech, they are adjacent to any general
vocally produced Shibboleth that, at its core, is not symbolic. Nor
did accents necessarily evolve as an identity signal, conditions
that fostered capacities for vocal imitation and production such as
social learning and communication later could have aﬀorded our
ancestors the opportunity to exploit it later as one. Cohen suggests
the dynamic of population isolation, dispersal, and drift would have
raised the likelihood of accents as an identity maker.
She argues that accents possess a variety of features that make
them a promising candidate to overcome many of the common
objections to tag based cooperation while oﬀering as a bridge, i.e.,
a cognitive “mill” in
Heyes (2018) preferred terms. These include
salience (easy to notice), honesty (hard to fake), discernible, and
dynamic (allows for numerous accents based social categories, e.g.,
idiolect, sociolect, etc.). For instance, their salience is evident given
that children as young as 6 can discern a speaker’s provenance
before they complete a single word. Accents furthermore map
to social and economic class and demarcate social identity more
generally (
Moﬀett, 2019 ; Kinzler, 2021).
From an FEP perspective this allows individuals to use accents
to actively and parsimoniously infer one’s identity, promoting the
likelihood that the phenotype and cultural incentive for vocal
learning remains high. Moreover, the continuous nature of accents,
wherein someone growing up in Rhode Island will sound distinct
from someone from Boston, but both will sound more alike
than someone from Canada. Accents remain a reliable signal of
provenance given the diﬃculty it is to acquire a new one past
childhood. This example also covers the discriminable quality as
well.
Regarding the ancient criteria, the population drift and
dispersal that our ancestors endured during the adverse climate
events of the African Middle Stone Age likely contributed to
the value of accents at this juncture. Furthermore, the body
ornamentation referenced earlier suggests identity tags stretch far
into our evolutionary past (
Henshilwood et al., 2011 ). Finally, with
regard to ontogeny, as mentioned above Kinzler (2021) have noted
that infants prefer their mother’s vocals and those who speak in
their mother tongue over foreign dialect and speech.
In addition,
Jarvis (2006) notes that in species ranging from
primates to birds, due to concerns related to exposure only
predators can exhibit a high vocal production range, the type
necessary for speech. As our ancestors were meek primates amongst
ﬁerce competitors and predators, their accents were likely a reliable
signal of provenance and hence indicated adherence to certain
social norms that would aid in minimizing surprise. As population
viscosity increased due to environmental predation, vocals would
reliably signal provenance and hence behavioral norms, hence the
claim that modern ethnic centrism continues to functionally signal
an overlap of norms and conventions (
Boyd and Richerson, 1988 ).
Moﬀett (2019, p. 29 ) uses the example of a prominent vocalization
used in Apes to suggest a mechanism our ancestors may have
employed to signal in-group vs. out-group identity, in his words:
[A] simple shift in how the apes use one of their
vocalizations, the pant-hoot, could make that sound essential
for identifying each other as society members. [ . . .] The cry
expresses excitement among apes on an outing together, a yay
team cheer that strengthens the bonds between males and helps
parties within earshot keep tabs on each other. [ . . .] It’s the
pant- hoots from a foreign community that really agitate the
apes.
/five.tnum. Declaring deviance
Humans are caught [ . . .] in a net of good and evil. I think
this is the only story we have and that it occurs on all levels of
feeling and intelligence. Virtue and vice were warp and woof of
our ﬁrst consciousness
- John Steinbeck, East of Eden
Frontiers in Sociology /one.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
The anonymous social units our ancestors inhabited through
shibboleth were nonetheless vulnerable to the problem of fee-
riders and deviants. The unexpected observation of socially deviant
behavior of a compatriotic and anonymous conspeciﬁc required
a general, rather than a particular, categorization. Our ancestors,
instead of simply treating a deviant as an out-group member and
thereby threatening the expectations of social harmony, applied a
generalized label to make explicit the conﬂicting priorities that arise
from inhabiting multiple blankets or social identities (individual,
familial, cultural). As emotions manage our physical and social
identities, thought and language may have emerged, following this
account, to facilitate our adoption of novel symbolic ones.
Declaring that a conspeciﬁc occupies the role of a deviant and
the subsequent surprise minimization, create an implicit belief in a
shared symbolic identity. In linguistics, the evil tag represents a type
of speech “declaration” known as a “performative utterance, ” i.e.,
one that modiﬁes the reality in which it was uttered (
Searle, 2010b).
“You are ﬁred , ” “the meeting is adjourned , ” “we are at war with
France” are all utterances that potentially modify the social reality
from which it emerged. Moreover, evil represents an elemental
form of a directive known as a “feature placement” (
Strawson,
2011), this is a singular word directive that need not be symbolic
and attached to uniquely human contexts, they are seen elsewhere
in the animal kingdom. For example, the waa-bark and pant-hoot
or vervet Monkeys above or below calls that signal speciﬁc types of
predators inﬂuence their conspeciﬁcs and eﬀectively social world
(
Wilson, 2020).
Hence this faculty was available to our pre-linguistic
ancestors and may have been repurposed for psychological
social construction. Declaring someone a villain gives them a new
identity and implies that we exist in a shared community in which
he played this novel role. After employing a modiﬁed version of a
pant-hoot to signal identity, our ancestors employed a modiﬁed
hominin version of a waa-bark (
Boehm, 2012) to label anonymous
yet ostensibly faithful compatriots as deviants. Non-believers
that threatened the continuity of our fuzzy identities due to the
negatively valenced aﬀect the surprise aroused, accelerating our
capacity for socially constructed aﬀect (
Barrett, 2017 ), i.e., pairing
this vocalization with the unwelcome feeling of surprise. Thereby
employing the “supra-communicative dimension” of language and
bolstering individual abstract conception of the alleged deviant
(
Clark 2016, p. 282).
Although socially constructed aﬀect likely emerged from causes
that explicitly threatened individual survival, e.g., distress in the
absence of a mother, given that social construction typically serves
a wider social purpose (e.g., the typical example given of the
phenomena is money), it is feasible that once established, higher
order emotional capacity was exploited at the level of cultural
identity. This would serve to discourage harmful in-group behavior,
promote outward signals of allegiance, and cultivate the emotional
and cognitive awareness of cultural identity.
Evil, wrong, and similar labels of moral concepts and types may
have been fostered in the malleability of child’s play. Mark Solms
points to this emotion (Section
3.3) as the likeliest to be involved
in the origins of human cognition. Play cultivates the mind at its
most creative and inventive. While non-symbolic roles are creative,
they are based on natural or observable models, i.e., playing as alpha
or dominant vs. submissive. Playing as a deviant or as police/norm
enforcer, while based on likely observations within the context of an
anonymous social unit, necessarily involves essentially something
unnatural: the will or agency to determine one’s identity through
action.
/six.tnum. Conclusion: equivocal
transcendence
I know virtually nothing, except a certain small subject—
love, although on this subject, I’m thought to be amazing, better
than anyone else, past or present.
- Socrates
The Way is lost in the gloriﬁcation of right and wrong. The
Way is lost in the completion of love .
- Zhuangzi
While there is likely an inherent limit to human knowledge
that elides our pursuit of objective understanding, the FEP
oﬀers a forward epistemic trajectory through consilience, i.e.,
ﬁnding common patterns across various disciplines even if each is
independently incomplete, as Gödel demonstrated. This application
to morality, social science, and anthropology through symbolic
semiotics demonstrates humanity possesses an existential freedom
as licensed from the symbolic personal and social identity we
inhabit, but also that along with this freedom is the imperative to
ﬁll that freedom, with faith. At minimum we require a belief in a
technically transcendent perspective, that an objective viewpoint
hovers over our social reality. This combines the privileged
objective “spectator” view of the past, as proposed by Hegel, with
Kierkegaard’s “leap of faith, ” which is necessary for forward-looking
action (
Halvorson, 2022). The most parsimonious statement of this
faith is the belief that we are all parts of a greater whole.
Emanuel Kant and Arthur Schopenhauer both espoused a view
of human morality as eﬀectively negative, i.e., viewing them as
constraints that impose a burden and thwart the instinctive desires
of mankind to be free and in eﬀect, happy. This implies that in
the past there was an untrammeled human existence without such
irksome impediments. Not only is this perspective unwarranted,
but it can also be eﬀectively reversed. Our norms, though negative
on their own, are in fact more broadly creative aspects that, often
implicitly and unconsciously, rely on an aﬃrmative attachment,
identiﬁcation, or belief in a symbolic identity that, at minimum,
exceeds the individual self. This feeling ranges from more quotidian
and surface-level attachments such as aligning mental states using
words as detailed above (
Vasil et al., 2020 ), it also reaches more
deeply, such as the phenomenon documented in neuroscience
as a “transcendental experience” that is not only experienced
through intimate social relationships but also when we identify with
ﬁctional or anonymous characters in stories (
Fletcher, 2021 ). This
emphasizes what Zhuangzi and Socrates alike understood, that to
achieve morality we cannot stare exclusively at rights and wrongs;
we need to be guided by underlying benevolent feelings that allow
us to transcend our own identity and inhabit a broader, or even,
non-self.
Frontiers in Sociology /one.tnum/four.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
The simplest and perhaps oldest explanation of human
morality, short of oversimpliﬁcation (to follow Einstein’s
adage/Occam’s principle), is that moral virtue represents
behavior that serves a greater good while oﬀering individuals
the promise of purpose, meaning, status, and self-esteem that
overcome the individual costs and risks associated with moral
behavior. The symbolic self can be seen in several diﬀerent
frameworks: the Hindu notion of the individual “Atman” as bound
within the structure of the body of a cosmic being “Purusha”
(
Eknath, 2007 ); Aristotle’s conception of proper citizenship
within a community; the union of the faithful with the God
of Abraham and in the Confucianist and Taoist concept of
Wu-Wei that deﬁnes morality as the spontaneous behavior
that follows an authentic connection of the individual to the
greater good (
Ivanhoe and Van Norden, 2005 ; Slingerland,
2014). Virtue, in all these frameworks, is achieved when the
individual identiﬁes and serves a particular part of an abstract
whole.
This confronts perhaps the ﬁnal act in the litany of WEIRD Null
Hypotheses, i.e., western moral philosophy. Both utilitarianism
(the idea that computing the aggregate welfare of behavior is
the ultimate determinant of moral value) along with deontology
(the idea that morality boils down to adherence to preset
moral principles) represent victims of the fallacy of misplaced
concreteness in trying to absolve, a priori, the presence of
uncertainty in the realm of moral decision making (
Greene,
2013). While moral practices are concerned with aggregate
welfare impact and employ principles to navigate the dictates
of behavioral norms that do so—by attempting to compute
speciﬁc rules and principles—these theories take too literally the
myth of objectivity, essentially presuming the ability to overturn
the Second Law of Thermodynamics, i.e., the non-diminishing
character of uncertainty. Practically speaking, the problems
morality addresses involve nuanced and complex ecological,
cultural, and social contexts that can be known either ex-ante or
ex-post.
Morality is best thought not as an objective function,
wherein the rules themselves should be computed a priori, but
as orthogonal dimensions of the subjective goals and desire.
Although believing that each subject bears responsibility is
central to both human morality and in turn, our distinctive
symbolic capacity, it does so largely by reshaping our subjectivity.
We become aligned to a nested web of groups, within which
we impulsively cooperate, and beyond which we ﬁercely
compete, but even then we are constrained by our higher
order allegiances. Our passions for political parties is morally
justiﬁed in so far as they are ultimately constrained by
the desire to aﬃrm our national allegiances; our corporate
competitiveness is likewise so long as private interest is aligned
with the longer-term interest of the market, consumers, and social
stakeholders.
The experience of morality is not in the meticulous accounting
of speciﬁc rights or wrongs nor in whether they conform to
preset moral principles. Ultimately our symbolic morality and
the human condition generally is an eﬀort to overcome the
informational asymmetries that are an inevitable and necessary
consequence of the personal, social, and cultural boundaries
that permit our distinctive existence yet the same boundaries
through which we come to understand an important lesson of
essences, concepts, or signiﬁcation, which is simply that our
uniqueness is truly convergent with the experience of universal
connection. Both developmentally and historically we migrate from
the technical transcend subjective perspectives that underwrite
even basic symbol use to self-transcendence that allows us a
visceral or physiologically felt connection to others and the wider
world.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the
study are included in the article/supplementary
material, further inquiries can be directed to the
corresponding author.
Author contributions
SR: Writing—original draft.
Funding
The author(s) declare that no ﬁnancial support was received for
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Acknowledgments
Thank you to Professor Paul Badcock for his patience and
providing invaluable guidance and wisdom. Thank you to Alex
De Foe for invaluable suggestions related to Jung and animal
norms and morality. Thank you to Marcos Jazzan for demanding
a parsimonious abstract. Thank you to Alyssa Marie for fearlessly
providing expert feedback on a very unusual manuscript. Finally,
thank you to two additional reviewers, without one in particular
this would not have been possible.
Conﬂict of interest
SR was employed by Orion Advisor Solutions at the time he
prepared the manuscript but that it was done independently of his
duties and obligations therein.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of
their aﬃliated organizations, or those of the publisher,
the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be
evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by
its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the
publisher.
Frontiers in Sociology /one.tnum/five.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
References
Adolphs, R. (2013). The biology of fear. Curr. Biol . 23, R79R93.
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.11.055
Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The market for “lemons”: quality uncertain ty and the market
mechanism. Q. J. Econ . 84, 488. doi: 10.2307/1879431
Albarracin, M., Demekas, D., Ramstead, M. J. D., and Heins, C. (2022). Epistemic
communities under active inference. Entropy 24, 476. doi: 10.3390/e24040476
Alcorta, C. S., and Sosis, R. (2005). Ritual, emotion, and sacr ed symbols:
the evolution of religion as an adaptive complex. Hum. Nat . 16, 323–359.
doi: 10.1007/s12110-005-1014-3
Anderson, D. J. (2022). The Nature of the Beast: How Emotions Guide Us , 1st ed.New
York, NY: Basic Books.
Arrow, K. J. (2004). Uncertainty and the welfare economics of medical care. 1963.
Bull. World Health Organ . 82, 141–149.
Attias, H. (2003). Planning by probabilistic inference. Proc. Mach. Learn. Res . R4,
9–16.
Austin, J. L., and Urmson, J. O. (2009). How to Do Things with Words: The William
James Lectures Delivered at Harvard University in 1955 , 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Univ. Press.
Badcock, P. B., Friston, K. J., and Ramstead, M. J. (2019). Th e hierarchically
mechanistic mind: a free-energy formulation of the human psyc he. Phys. Life Rev . 31,
104–121. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2018.10.002
Balmer, J. M. T., and Greyser, S. A. (eds) (2003). Revealing the Corporation:
Perspectives on Identity, Image, Reputation, Corporate Brandin g, and Corporate-Level
Marketing: An Anthology . London: Routledge. doi: 10.4324/9780203422786
Barrett, L. F. (2017). How Emotions Are Made: The Secret Life of the Brain . Boston,
MA: Houghton Miﬄin Harcourt.
Bekoﬀ, M., and Pierce, J. (2009). Wild Justice: The Moral Lives of Animals . Chicago,
IL: The University of Chicago Press. doi: 10.7208/chicago/ 9780226041667.001.0001
Berger, L. R., Hawks, J., De Ruiter, D. J., Churchill, S. E., Sch mid, P., Delezene, B., et
al. (2015). Homo naledi, a new species of the genus Homo from the D inaledi Chamber,
South Africa. Elife 4, e09560. doi: 10.7554/eLife.09560.031
Bloom, P. (2013). Just Babies: The Origins of Good and Evil , 1st ed. New York, NY:
Crown Publishers.
Boehm, C. (2012). Moral Origins: The Evolution of Virtue, Altruism, and Shame .
New York, NY: Basic Books.
Booker, C. (2004). The Seven Basic Plots: Why We Tell Stories . London: Continuum.
Botvinick, M., and Toussaint, M. (2012). Planning as inferen ce. Trends Cogn. Sci .
16, 485–488. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2012.08.006
Boyd, R., and Richerson, P. J. (1988). Culture and the Evolutionary Process ,
paperback edition. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Burkart, J. M., Brügger, R. K., and van Schaik, C. P. (2018). E volutionary
origins of morality: insights from non-human primates. Front. Sociol . 3, 17.
doi: 10.3389/fsoc.2018.00017
Burkart, J. M., Fehr, E., Eﬀerson, C., and van Schaik, C. P. (2 007). Other-regarding
preferences in a non-human primate: common marmosets provisio n food altruistically.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci . 104, 19762–19766. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0710310104
Burke, P. J., and Stets, J. E. (2009). Identity Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195388275.001.0001
Carney, M. (2021). Value(s): Building a Better World for All . New York, NY: Public
Aﬀairs.
Carroll, S. (2021). Michael Levin on Growth, Form, Information, and the SelfPodcast.
Available online at: https://www.preposterousuniverse.com/podcast/2021/02/01/132-
michael-levin-on-growth-form-information-and-the-self/
Clark, A. (2016). Surﬁng Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind .
Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/ 9780190217013.001.0001
Clark, A. (2017). “How to knit your own Markov Blanket: resisti ng the second
law with metamorphic minds: resisting the second law with metam orphic minds, ” in
Philosophy and Predictive Processing , eds T. Metzinger, and W. Wiese (Frankfurt am
Main: MIND Group), p. 1.
Coase, R. H. (1937). The nature of the ﬁrm. Economica 4, 386–405.
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0335.1937.tb00002.x
Cohen, E. (2012). The evolution of tag-based cooperation in hu mans: the case for
accent. Curr. Anthropol. 53, 588–616. doi: 10.1086/667654
Collins, J., and Mayblin, B. (2011). Introducing Derrida: A Graphic Guide . London:
Icon Books.
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., and Fri ston, K. (2019). Regimes
of expectations: an active inference model of social conform ity and human decision
making. Front. Psychol. 10, 679. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00679
Cowen, T., and Crampton, E. (eds) (2003). Market Failure or Success: The New
Debate, reprint edition. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. doi: 10.4337/978 1781950005
Curry, O. S. (2016). “Morality as cooperation: a problem-centre d approach, ” in
The Evolution of Morality , eds T. K. Shackelford, and R. D. Hansen (Cham: Springer
International Publishing), 27–51. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319 -19671-8_2
Da Costa, L., Parr, T., Sajid, N., Veselic, S., Neacsu, V., and Friston, K. (2020).
active inference on discrete state-spaces: a synthesis. J. Math. Psychol . 99, 102447.
doi: 10.1016/j.jmp.2020.102447
de Saussure, F., Bally, C., Sechehaye, A., and Riedlinger, A. (1 986). Course in General
Linguistics. LaSalle, IL: Open Court.
Deacon, T. W. (1998). The Symbolic Species: The Co-Evolution of Language and the
Brain, 1. publ. as a norton paperback edition. New York, NY: Norton.
Derrida, J., and Bass, A. (1998). Positions, paperback ed. [nachdr.]. Chicago, IL:
Univ. Chicago Press.
Derrida, J., and Bass, A. (2017). Writing and Diﬀerence. London: Routledge.
Derrida, J., and Spivak, G. C. (2016). Of Grammatology, fortieth-anniversary edition.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. doi: 10.56021 /9781421419954
Desai, N. P., Fedurek, P., Slocombe, K. E., and Wilson, M. L. (20 22). Chimpanzee
pant-hoots encode individual information more reliably than g roup diﬀerences. Am. J.
Primatol. 84, e23430. doi: 10.1002/ajp.23430
Dunbar, R. I. M. (2004). Gossip in evolutionary perspective. Rev. Gen. Psychol . 8,
100–110. doi: 10.1037/1089-2680.8.2.100
Dupré, J., and O’Malley, M. A. (2009). Varieties of living things : life
at the intersection of lineage and metabolism. Philos. Theory Biol . 1, 1–3.
doi: 10.3998/ptb.6959004.0001.003
Earman, J., and The Society of Christian Philosophers (1993). Bayes, hume, and
miracles. Faith Philos. 10, 293–310. doi: 10.5840/faithphil19931039
Einstein, A., and Lawson, R. W. (1961). Relativity: The Special and the General
Theory. New York, NY: Crown Trade Paperbacks.
Eknath, E. (ed.) (2007). The Bhagavad Gita. The Classics of Indian Spirituality , 2nd
ed. Tomales, CA: Nilgiri Press.
Fields, C., Friston, K., Glazebrook, J. F., and Levin, M. (2022) . A free energy
principle for generic quantum systems. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol . 173, 36–59.
doi: 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2022.05.006
Fields, C., and Levin, M. (2020). How do living systems create m eaning? Philosophies
5, 36. doi: 10.3390/philosophies5040036
Fletcher, A. (2021). Wonderworks: The 25 Most Powerful Innovations in the History
of Literature , ﬁrst Simon & Schuster Hardcover edition. New York, NY: Simo n &
Schuster.
Friedman, M. (2008). Price Theory. Denver, CO: The Richest Man in Babylon.
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 10, 20130475.
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K., and Frith, C. (2015). A duet for one. Conscious. Cogn . 36, 390–405.
doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2014.12.003
Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald , T., Pezzulo, G.,
et al. (2015). Active inference and epistemic value. Cogn. Neurosci . 6, 187–214.
doi: 10.1080/17588928.2015.1020053
Friston, K. J., Lin, M., Frith, C. D., Pezzulo, G., Hobson, J. A. , Ondobaka, S., et
al. (2017). Active inference, curiosity and insight. Neural Comput . 29, 2633–2683.
doi: 10.1162/neco_a_00999
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., Yuﬁk, Y., Sajid, N., Price, C. J., Ho lmes, E., et al. (2020).
Generative models, linguistic communication and active infer ence. Neurosci. Biobehav.
Rev. 118, 42–64. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.07.005
Fukuyama, F. (1996). Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity. A Free
Press Paperbacks Book , 1. free press paperback edition. New York, NY: Free Press.
Greene, J. D. (2013). Moral Tribes: Emotion, Reason, and the Gap between Us and
Them. New York, NY: The Penguin Press.
Halvorson, H. (2022). “The philosophy of science in Either-Or, ” in Cambridge
Critical Guide to Either-Or , eds R. Kemp, and W. Wietzke (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press), p. 19.
Hartung, F.-M., Krohn, C., and Pirschtat, M. (2019). Better than its reputation?
Gossip and the reasons why we and individuals with “dark” person alities talk about
others. Front. Psychol. 10, 1162. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01162
Henrich, J. (2016). The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving Human
Evolution, Domesticating Our Species and Making Us Smarter . Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press. doi: 10.1515/9781400873296
Henrich, J. P. (2020). The WEIRDest People in the World: How the West Became
Psychologically Peculiar and Particularly Prosperous . New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux.
Frontiers in Sociology /one.tnum/six.tnum frontiersin.org
Rahman /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fsoc./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/six.tnum/nine.tnum/six.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum
Henshilwood, C. S., d’Errico, F., van Niekerk, K. L., Coquinot , Y., Jacobs, Z.,
Lauritzen, S.-E., et al. (2011). A 100,000-year-old ochre-pro cessing workshop at
Blombos Cave, South Africa. Science 334, 219–222. doi: 10.1126/science.1211535
Heyes, C. M. (2018). Cognitive Gadgets: The Cultural Evolution of
Thinking. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Pres s.
doi: 10.4159/9780674985155
Heyes, C. M., and Frith, C. D. (2014). The cultural evolution of mind reading.
Science 344, 1243091. doi: 10.1126/science.1243091
Hidalgo, C. A. (2015). Why Information Grows: The Evolution of Order, from Atoms
to Economies. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Hill, K. R., Walker, R. S., Boži ˇcevi´c, M., Eder, J., Headland, T., Hewlett, B., et al.
(2011). Co-residence patterns in Hunter-Gatherer societie s show unique human social
structure. Science 331, 1286–1289. doi: 10.1126/science.1199071
Hofstadter, D. R., and Sander, E. (2013). Surfaces and Essences: Analogy as the Fuel
and Fire of Thinking . New York, NY: Basic Books.
Hogg, M. A. (2000). Subjective uncertainty reduction throu gh self-categorization:
a motivational theory of social identity processes. Eur. Rev. Soc. Psychol . 11, 223–255.
doi: 10.1080/14792772043000040
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain: the self-eviden cing brain. Noûs 50,
259–285. doi: 10.1111/nous.12062
Isomura, T., Parr, T., and Friston, K. (2019). Bayesian ﬁlter ing with multiple
internal models: toward a theory of social intelligence. Neural Comput. 31, 2390–2431.
doi: 10.1162/neco_a_01239
Ivanhoe, P. J., and Van Norden, B. W. (eds) (2005). Readings in Classical Chinese
Philosophy, 2nd ed. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Pub.
Jarvis, E. D. (2006). Selection for and against vocal learning in birds and mammals.
Ornithol. Sci. 5, 5–14. doi: 10.2326/osj.5.5
Jehle, G. A., and Reny, P. J. (2011). Advanced Microeconomic Theory , 3rd ed.
Munich: Financial Times Prentice Hall.
Jung, C. G., von Franz, M.-L., Henderson, J. L., and Jacobi, J. Jaﬀé, A. (eds) (1968).
Man and His Symbols . New York, NY: Laurel. Dell.
Kahneman, D. (2003). Maps of bounded rationality: psychology fo r behavioral
economics. Am. Econ. Rev . 93, 1449–1475. doi: 10.1257/000282803322655392
Kay, J. A., and King, M. A. (2020). Radical Uncertainty: Decision-Making beyond the
Numbers, 1st ed. New York, NY: W. W. Norton Company.
Keynes, J. M. (2008). The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money . BN
Pub.
Kinzler, K. D. (2021). How You Say It: Why You Talk the Way You Do And What It
Says about You . Boston, MA: MARINER BOOKS.
Kinzler, K. D., Shutts, K., DeJesus, J., and Spelke, E. S. (2009) . Accent
trumps race in guiding children’s social preferences. Soc. Cogn . 27, 623–634.
doi: 10.1521/soco.2009.27.4.623
Knight, F. H. (2014). Risk, Uncertainty and Proﬁt.
Knop-Huelss, K., Rieger, D., and Schneider, F. M. (2020). Thin king about right
and wrong: examining the eﬀect of moral conﬂict on entertainm ent experiences, and
knowledge. Media Psychol. 23, 625–650. doi: 10.1080/15213269.2019.1623697
Lanillos, P., Meo, C., Pezzato, C., Meera, A. A., Baioumy, M., O hata, W., et al.
(2021). Active inference in robotics and artiﬁcial agents: survey and challenges. arXiv.
Available online at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.01871
Leﬂot, G., Onghena, P., and Colpin, H. (2010). Teacher-child inte ractions:
relations with children’s self-concept in second grade. Infant Child Dev . 19, 385–405.
doi: 10.1002/icd.672
Levin, M. (2019). The computational boundary of a “self”: deve lopmental
bioelectricity drives multicellularity and scale-free cognitio n. Front. Psychol. 10, 2688.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02688
Levin, M., and Dennett, D. (2020). Cognition All the Way Down . London: Aeon.
Liberman, Z., Woodward, A. L., and Kinzler, K. D. (2017). The o rigins of social
categorization. Trends Cogn. Sci . 21, 556–568. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2017.04.004
Lindley, D. V. (1956). On a measure of the information provided by an experiment.
Ann. Math. Stat. 27, 986–1005. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177728069
Lorenz, K. (1974). On Aggression. A Harvest Book, HB 291 . New York, NY: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich.
MacKay, D. J. C. (1992). Information-based objective funct ions for active data
selection. Neural Comput. 4, 590–604. doi: 10.1162/neco.1992.4.4.590
MacKinnon, N. J., and Heise, D. R. (2010). Social Reality and Human Subjectivity .
New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan US, 219–234. doi: 10.1057/978 0230108493_9
Masuda, N., and Fu, F. (2015). Evolutionary models of in-group favoritism.
F1000Prime Rep. 7, 27. doi: 10.12703/P7-27
McElreath, R., Boyd, R., and Richerson, P. J. (2003). Shared n orms and the evolution
of ethnic markers. Curr. Anthropol. 44, 122–130. doi: 10.1086/345689
Moﬀett, M. W. (2013). Human identity and the evolution of soci eties. Hum. Nat .
24, 219–267. doi: 10.1007/s12110-013-9170-3
Moﬀett, M. W. (2019). The Human Swarm: How Our Societies Arise, Thrive, and
Fall. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Noble, D. (2017). Dance to the Tune of Life: Biological Relativity . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Palacios, E. R., Razi, A., Parr, T., Kirchhoﬀ, M., and Friston , K. (2020). On
Markov blankets and hierarchical self-organisation. J. Theor. Biol . 486, 110089.
doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2019.110089
Parr, T., Da Costa, L., and Friston, K. (2020). Markov blanket s, information
geometry and stochastic thermodynamics. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng.
Sci. 378, 20190159. doi: 10.1098/rsta.2019.0159
Pfaﬀ, D. W., and Wilson, E. O. (2007). The Neuroscience of Fair Play: Why We
(Usually) Follow the Golden Rule . New York, NY: Dana Press.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering
Schrödinger’s question: a free-energy formulation. Phys. Life Rev . 24, 1–16.
doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Ramstead, M. J. D., Sakthivadivel, D. A. R., Heins, C., Koudah l, M., Millidge, B., Da
Costa, K. J., et al. (2023). On Bayesian mechanics: a physics of and by beliefs. Interface
Focus 13, 20220029. doi: 10.1098/rsfs.2022.0029
Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., and Kirmayer, L. J. (2 016).
Cultural aﬀordances: scaﬀolding local worlds through shared in tentionality
and regimes of attention. Front. Psychol . 7, 1090. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.
01090
Romer, P. M. (1994). The origins of endogenous growth. J. Econ. Perspect . 8, 3–22.
doi: 10.1257/jep.8.1.3
Sakthivadivel, D. A. R. (2022). Weak Markov blankets in high-d imensional,
sparsely-coupled random dynamical systems. arXiv. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2207.07620
Schein, C., and Gray, K. (2018). The theory of dyadic morality: reinventing
moral judgment by redeﬁning harm. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Rev . 22, 32–70.
doi: 10.1177/1088868317698288
Schmidhuber, J. (2006). Developmental robotics, optimal arti ﬁcial
curiosity, creativity, music, and the ﬁne arts. Conn. Sci . 18, 173–187.
doi: 10.1080/09540090600768658
Searle, J. (2010a). Searle: Philosophy of Language, Lecture 2 .
Searle, J. R. (2010b). Making the Social World: The Structure of
Human Civilization . Oxford; New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
doi: 10.1093/acprof:osobl/9780195396171.001.0001
Seising, R. (2012). “Warren weaver’s “science and complexity ” revisited, ” in Soft
Computing in Humanities and Social Sciences , Vol. 273, eds R. Seising, and V. Sanz
González (Berlin: Springer), 55–87. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-2 4672-2_3
Simler, K., and Hanson, R. (2018). The Elephant in the Brain: Hidden Motives in
Everyday Life. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Simon, H. A. (1992). Altruism and economics. East. Econ. J . 18, 73–83.
Slingerland, E. G. (2014). Trying Not to Try: The Art and Science of Spontaneity , 1st
ed. New York, NY: Crown Publishers.
Solms, M. (2019). The hard problem of consciousness and the free energy principle.
Front. Psychol. 9, 2714. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02714
Solms, M. (2022). Hidden Spring: A Journey to the Source of Consciousness . New
York, NY: W. W. NORTON.
Strawson, P. F. (2011). Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics . London:
Routledge.
Tison, R., and Poirier, P. (2021). Active inference and coope rative communication:
an ecological alternative to the alignment view. Front. Psychol . 12, 708780.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.708780
Tomasello, M. (2003). The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition . Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Univ. Press.
Tomasello, M. (2016). Cultural learning redux. Child Dev . 87, 643–653.
doi: 10.1111/cdev.12499
Vasil, J., Badcock, P. B., Constant, A., Friston, K., and Rams tead, M. J. D. (2020). A
world unto itself: human communication as active inference. Front. Psychol . 11, 417.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00417
Warneken, F., and Tomasello, M. (2009). Varieties of altruism i n children and
chimpanzees. Trends Cogn. Sci . 13, 397–402. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.06.008
Whitehead, A. N. (2010). Science and the Modern World. Number 1925 in Lowell
Lectures. New York, NY: Free Press.
Wilson, B. J. (2020). The Property Species: How “Mine” Makes Us Human, How
“Yours” Makes Us Humane. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Wittgenstein, L., Anscombe, G. E. M., and von Wright, G. H. (196 9). On Certainty.
Number 1686 in Harper Torchbooks . New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Frontiers in Sociology /one.tnum/seven.tnum frontiersin.org