Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205
www.elsevier.com/locate/plrev
Review
Variational ecology and the physics of sentient systems
Maxwell J.D. Ramstead a,b,c,∗,1, Axel Constant c,d,1, Paul B. Badcock e,f,g, Karl J. Friston c
a Division of Social and Transcultural Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3A 1A1, Canada
b Department of Philosophy, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3A 2T7, Canada
c Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, University College London, London, WC1N 3BG, UK
d Amsterdam Brain and Cognition Center, The University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 1098 XH, the Netherlands
e Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 3010, Australia
f Centre for Youth Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 3052, Australia
g Orygen, the National Centre of Excellence in Youth Mental Health, Melbourne, 3052, Australia
Available online 7 January 2019
Communicated by Felix Schoeller
Abstract
This paper addresses the challenges faced by multiscale formulations of the variational (free energy) approach to dynamics 
that obtain for large-scale ensembles. We review a framework for modelling complex adaptive control systems for multiscale free 
energy bounding organism–niche dynamics, thereby integrating the modelling strategies and heuristics of variational neuroethology 
with a broader perspective on the ecological nestedness of biotic systems. We extend the multiscale variational formulation beyond 
the action–perception loops of individual organisms by appealing to the variational approach to niche construction to explain the 
dynamics of coupled systems constituted by organisms and their ecological niche. We suggest that the statistical robustness of 
living systems is inherited, in part, from their eco-niches, as niches help coordinate dynamical patterns across larger spatiotemporal 
scales. We call this approach variational ecology. We argue that, when applied to cultural animals such as humans, variational 
ecology enables us to formulate not just a physics of individual minds, but also a physics of interacting minds across spatial and 
temporal scales – a physics of sentient systems that range from cells to societies.
© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V . This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Keywords: Physics of the mind; Free energy principle; Evolutionary systems theory; Variational neuroethology; Variational ecology; Niche 
construction
0. Introduction
Recent decades have witnessed the emergence of a new project for a physics of the mind. This effort has leveraged 
the constructs, principles, and methods of theoretical and experimental physics to investigate and understand what 
we call sentience and the ‘mind’. At the turn of the century, a new evolutionary systems theory of comple x adaptive 
* Corresponding author at: Department of Philosophy, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3A 2T7, Canada.
E-mail address: maxwell.ramstead@mail.mcgill.ca (M.J.D. Ramstead).
1 Contributed equally.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2018.12.002
1571-0645/© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V . This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205 189
systems was proposed, made possible by the advent of computational modelling, variational methods of inference, 
and machine learning: the (variational) free energy principle (FEP) [1–3].
According to the FEP , the physics of sentient systems follows from the statistical mechanics of life. This varia-
tional formulation stems from the observation that living systems, over time and on average, tend to revisit the same 
set of attracting or characteristic states. These can be cast as the characteristic phenotypic states (and tr aits) of the 
organism. The FEP explains the dynamics of any random dynamical system that appears to resist decay through adap-
tive action [3,4]. Under the FEP, organisms engage the environment in a self-fulﬁlling prophecy of sorts; ‘surﬁng’ up 
probability gradients towards their most probable phenotypic states [5]. The FEP wa s originally proposed in compu-
tational neuroscience to explain neural dynamics [6,7], where it coheres broadly with predictive coding approaches 
[8–11], and is widely recognised as a unifying theory of the function, structure, and dynamics of the brain [5,12–14]. It 
has since been e xtended to explain the dynamics of biological systems within and beyond the brain, ranging from the 
cellular level [15] and action–perception loops [16], to psychiatry [17–22], psychology [14,23–25] and embodied cog-
nitive science [26], through to evolutionary dynamics (cf. [7,27–29]) and, recently, to intersubjecti ve and sociocultural 
dynamics [30–33].
The FEP has recently been le veraged to furnish a fully generalisable metatheory for adaptive behaviour in sentient 
systems across spatial and temporal scales, called variational neuroethology (VNE) [4]. VNE synthesises the FEP 
with Tinbergen’s [34] four levels of explanation in biology (i.e., adaptation, phylogeny, ontogeny, and mechanism) 
to provide a systematic guide for theorising and research in the sciences of life and mind. As a metatheory , VNE 
comprises two principal components: a multiscale theoretical ontology for living systems based on a recursively nested 
formulation of Markov blankets (MBs); and a multidisciplinary research heuristic in the biological and cognitive 
sciences [35]. In their response to peer commentaries, Ramstead and colleagues [4] address the promise and limitations 
of VNE as a heuristic for scientiﬁc inquiry, and review its scope as a research programme. This paper will complement 
this discussion by concentrating on criticisms of VNE as a multiscale ontology.
To date, VNE has only pro vided a principled method of analysing nested and mutually constraining biological sys-
tems and their complex adaptive dynamics across spatiotemporal scales [4,35]. It has yet to offer a way to individuate 
systems at scales beyond that of the organism acting in its environment; e.g., large-scale ensembles such as societies 
or ecosystems that realise free ener
gy bounding dynamics. This issue was cogently articulated by Bruineberg and 
Hesp [36] and Kirmayer [37]i n their critique of VNE. They asked whether the MB formalism leveraged by VNE to 
individuate systems is adequate for modelling phenomena at scales beyond those of a single or ganism (e.g., socio-
cultural dynamics); since phenomena at these scales may be too transient or not sufﬁciently robust to license the MB 
formalism (which is deﬁned in terms of conditional independencies in weakly mixing random dynamical systems). 
Could this reﬂect a fundamental distinction between the FEP as an e xplanatory principle for clearly bounded, ergodic, 
biological systems, and the greater, complementary forces at play that constrain complex adaptive systems in general 
(including groups of organisms and their ecological niches)? Should we restrict the FEP to the level of the organism, 
and then explore how this model connects meaningfully to other key concepts in e volutionary systems theory about 
the agent-niche relation?
The aim of this paper is to address the challenges f aced by VNE with regard to dynamics that obtain for large-scale 
ensembles. Speciﬁcally, we review a framework for modelling complex adaptive systems for multiscale free energy 
bounding organism–niche dynamics, thereby integrating the modelling strategies and heuristics of VNE with a broader 
perspective on the ecological nestedness of biotic systems. We e xtend VNE beyond the action–perception loops of 
individual organisms (i.e., active inference, [38,39]) by appealing to the variational approach to niche construction
(V ANC) [40]t o explain the dynamics of coupled systems constituted by organisms and their ecological niche. We 
suggest that the statistical rob ustness of living systems is inherited, in part, from their eco-niches, as niches help 
coordinate dynamical patterns across larger spatiotemporal scales. We call this approach variational ecology (VE), 
which subsumes VNE and the V ANC.2 When applied to cultural animals such as humans, VE has the important 
consequence of allowing us to formulate not just a physics of individual minds, but also a physics of interacting minds
across spatial and temporal scales – a physics of sentient systems that range from cells to societies.
2 Note that we use the term ‘ecology’ non-technically, to capture the sorts of interactions among agents and their environment, leading to 
intentional behaviour, or ‘mind’. We do not appeal directly to the science of ecology, or to human ecology.
190 M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205
1. The variational (free energy) formulation
The free energy formulation appeals to a statistical conception of life. It rests on the fact that on average and over 
time, living systems endure as bounded, self-organising partitions of dynamical systems. In other words, organisms 
appear to counter dissipative environmental perturbations by resisting the weathering effects of entropic decay dictated 
by the ﬂuctuation theorems that hold at nonequilibrium steady-state [41,42]. T
echnically, biological systems revisit 
the same set of characteristic states that constitute a random dynamical attractor. This attracting set means they have 
properties that can be measured (i.e., they are locally ergodic). Put another way, an organism possesses an attracting 
set of states that it tends to occup
y with a much higher frequency than others. The FEP provides a formal description 
of how organisms resist entropic erosion and maintain themselves within their phenotypic bounds. More exactly, it 
describes the dynamics they must exhibit, if they possess characteristic or attracting states.
For an or ganism  to exist as a bounded system means that it must be able to maintain itself as a whole. By deﬁ-
nition, for a system to exist at all, it must evince a robust form of conditional independence with respect to external 
(non-systemic) states. The variational framework addresses the individuation of rele vant  systems by operationalising 
the notion of conditional independence using the Markov blanket (MB) formalism. For a set of states to be enshrouded 
by a MB means that the dynamics of that system induce a statistical partition of its states [3,4,43]. A MB is the set of 
states that statistically isolates (insulates) internal (systemic) from e xternal (non-systemic) states, such that changes 
in internal states are mediated by the states of the MB. The MB itself can be partitioned into active and sensory states, 
which are deﬁned by the following relations: internal states do not inﬂuence sensory states, and external states do not 
inﬂuence acti
ve states.
Now, we should note that the terms ‘acti ve’ and ‘sensory’ are potentially misleading. They are only meant to capture 
relations of statistical dependence between random variables. This will be crucial to our argument below, as things 
that we would not readily describe as literally acting or sensing in any meaningful sense can still be captured with 
this formalism, since it entails only a statistical enshrouding of systemic states from e
xternal ones, and the systematic 
statistical partition of the whole organism–niche system [4].
1.1. Active inference and generative models
To keep the MB in play is not a trivial matter. The FEP explains the emergence and maintenance of this existential 
boundary. Under the FEP, the Markov boundary is dynamically enabled by adaptive action. The idea behind the FEP 
is that the active behaviour of organisms maintains them in states of viable, adapti ve coupling with their ecological 
niche. Active inference is the process whereby living systems act on the world – and update their internal states 
– so as to embody or encode the statistical structure of their local environment, leading to the adaptive control of 
behaviour [38,44]. In other words, ove r  time and on average, biological systems come to ﬁt their environment, via 
active optimisation procedures; e.g., action, perception, and learning [45]. From a developmental perspective, this can 
be cast as phenotypic accommodation and developmental plasticity [46,47].
Crucially, this functionalist interpretation is underwritten by the gradient ﬂo ws implied by the existence of a random 
dynamical attractor (and implicit ergodicity). This is fairly straightforward to show using either a path integral or 
Fokker Planck formulation of density dynamics; in which the ﬂow of states must climb probability gradients to 
counter the dispersi
ve effects of random ﬂuctuations. When we put the MB in play, the same gradient ﬂows reveal 
an (en)active and adaptive interpretation of active states, which are informed by, and only by, sensory and internal 
states. This follows because the ﬂows of active and internal states are special, in the sense that their ﬂo w does not 
depend upon external states. These structured dependencies, which necessarily follow from the existence of random 
dynamical attractors with MBs, lead to active inference.
In acti ve inference, active and internal states of the organism’s MB can always be expressed as minimising or 
bounding a quantity called variational free energy (see Fig. 1). We can cast variational free energy as the disattunement 
between the statistical structure of the ecological niche and that of the organism (i.e., its phenotype and beha vioural  
dynamics) [26,48]. Technically, variational free energy is a proxy for a quantity called surprise (a.k.a. surprisal), which 
reﬂects the improbability of ﬁnding an organism in some sensory state (technically, surprise is the self-information or 
negative log probability of sensory samples encountered by an agent) [2]. The or ganism  cannot evaluate this quantity 
directly. Instead, it (or rather, its behaviour or dynamics) bounds a proxy quantity, which is a variational bound on 
surprise, in the sense that surprise can never be greater than this bound. This is variational free energy and is exactly the 
M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205 191
Fig. 1. The Markov blanket. These schematics illustrate the partition of states into internal (μ) and hidden or external states (η) that are separated 
by a MB – comprising sensory (s) and active states (a). The upper panel shows this partition as it would be applied to action and perception in 
the brain; where active and internal states minimise a free energy functional of sensory states. The ensuing self-organisation of internal states then 
corresponds to perception, while action couples brain states back to external states. The lower panel shows exactly the same dependencies but 
rearranged so that the internal states are associated with the intracellular states of a cell, while the sensory states become the surface states of the 
cell membrane overlying active states (e.g., the actin ﬁlaments of the cytoskeleton).
same quantity used in machine learning and variational Bayes (often referred to as an evidence bound). While surprise 
depends only on states of the world, variational free energy depends on a Bayesian belief or probability density that 
is encoded by its internal states. Through active inference, the probability densities entailed by or ganismic (internal) 
states tune themselves to effectively infer the process by which sensory states were generated; i.e., the dynamics of 
external, unobserved states that cause ﬂuctuations in sensory states and are hidden behind the MB.
Under the FEP , to function as a control system for the organism, and ensure it remains within phenotypic states, 
the dynamics (i.e., adaptive behaviour) of the organism entails a statistical model (that is, a generative model) of 
itself acting in its ecological niche. In this framework, a generative model is a probabilistic mapping from causes in 
the en
vironment (including, crucially, the actions of the organism itself) to sensory states (observations); while the 
generative process is the actual causal structure that generates sensed consequences from external causes that are 
hidden behind the MB [49]. This inference is a necessary consequence of gradient ﬂows that minimise v ariational 
free energy. This follows because minimising variational free energy is – mathematically – the same as maximising 
the evidence bound in machine learning and Bayesian statistics. In this instance, the evidence is for a generative 
model entailed by the internal states of a creature – technically, if the internal states parameterise a posterior density 
ove
r external states, then internal (and active) states will maximise the evidence for a generative model of external, 
niche dynamics. Active inference therefore means that the dynamics of living systems entails a generative model. The 
optimisation of this model corresponds to bounding or minimising variational free energy, which can be summarised 
as self-e
videncing [50]. This notion of self-evidencing places the MB centre stage as both an evidentiary and existential 
boundary.
In summary , active inference can be cast as the process that conﬁrms and updates evidence for the statistical 
(generative) model that a living system entails and enacts in existing – thereby producing evidence for its own existence 
[50]. This neatly covers action and perception in a folk psychology sense; because internal states cannot, in themselv es, 
change sensory states, but they can optimise the probabilistic explanations (i.e. posterior probability distributions or 
Bayesian beliefs) for sensory impressions by minimising variational free energy. This has all the look and feel of 
perception. Conversely, active states cannot change posterior beliefs but they can change sensory states; either directly 
or vicariously via e
xternal states. This corresponds to action, which is informed by perception. In short, the MB will 
192 M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205
actively seek evidence for its own existence. Over time, the states of the organism (e.g., the brain) come to encode the 
statistical structure of causal regularities in the world, and underwrite the generative model – the behavioural control 
system (cf. [51,52]) that regulates patterns of interaction with the environment. This sort of slo w perception can be 
regarded as learning and is generally associated with plasticity of a developmental or experience-dependent sort in 
internal states that comprise internal structure and connectivity.
Two recent e xtensions of the free energy formulation will be the focus of our attention. These are variational 
neuroethology (VNE) [4] and the variational approach to niche construction (V ANC) [40]. VNE and the V ANC are 
about enabling the application of the FEP to phenomena within and beyond the brain. These approaches hold the 
promise of e
xtending the variational (free energy) approach to the dynamics of sentient systems (i.e., systems with 
sensory states) across spatial and temporal scales.
2. Variational neuroethology
VNE provides a framework for modelling the dynamics of sentient systems across the spatiotemporal scales they 
manifest and an explanation or description of their self-organisation. Formally, VNE provides a principled way of 
scaling up active inference over: (i) ensembles of MBs; and (ii) MBs of MBs. This allows us to formulate an inte grative 
multiscale dynamics that link the partial dynamics of phenomena at each scale (also see [53]). In what follows, we 
speak to the multiscale aspects of MBs and then turn to ensembles of MBs that are coupled to each other.
2.1. Multiscale levels of analysis
VNE synthesises the process theory derived from the FEP (active inference) with Tinbergen’s seminal four ques-
tions in biology (i.e., adaptation, phylogeny, ontogeny, and mechanism) to propose a heuristic guide to research in 
the sciences of life and mind. Integrating these two paradigms allows substantive insights drawn from one to inform 
and constrain models and research in the other – the FEP is a non-substanti ve principle that can be applied to any 
biological system in general (much like Hamilton’s principle of least action), while Tinbergen’s framework can pro-
vide substantive explanations for biological phenomena drawn from four complementary levels of analysis [54]. This 
heuristic has already inspired an interdisciplinary theory of the human brain called the Hierarchically Mechanistic 
Mind ([4], Badcock, P.
B., Friston, K.J., Ploeger, A., Hohwy, J., and Ramstead, M.J., in review, [23]). The HMM rests 
on the idea that the brain is a hierarchically structured, self-organising system that has been sculpted by natural selec-
tion [23,25,55,56]. It suggests that the dynamics, structure, and function of the human brain instantiate an embodied, 
situated, comple
x adaptive system that actively minimises free energy by generating adaptive action–perception cycles 
via recursive interactions between hierarchically nested, functionally differentiated subsystems ([23] Badcock, P.B., 
Friston, K.J., and
Ramstead, M.J.D. (this issue)). By synthesising the FEP with Tinbergen’s four levels of analysis, 
this perspective can be reduced to four complementary research questions – What is the adaptive function of a pheno-
typic trait? How does it emerge from circular interactions between phylogenetic (resp. intergenerational), ontogenetic 
and mechanistic processes? In what w ays does it instantiate the FEP? And how does it manifest in hierarchical neural 
dynamics? This research heuristic has already been leveraged to develop a new evidence-based theory of our capacity 
for depression [25].
On the other hand, VNE entails a multiscale ontolo gy for living systems as well. This ontology extends the MB 
formalism as a method of individuating systems under the FEP. As discussed above, a MB is a set of states that 
separates a system (a set of internal states) from external, non-systemic ones, which operationalises the idea that 
systems only e
xists per se if they are endowed with a robust form of conditional independence. According to VNE, 
the dynamics of living systems can be cast as active inference over recursively nested MBs (see Fig. 2). Indeed, the 
MB ontology can be reiterated recursively, such that the MBs at an y one scale are composed in turn of MBs at the 
scale above and below – which are also made of MBs, and so on, all the way up, and all the way down [43].
The key notion here is that in mo ving from one level or scale of dynamics to the next, things not only get bigger, 
they also get much slower. The basic idea is that the states at one scale constitute microscopic states that can be 
partitioned into an ensemble of MBs. To m ove  to the higher scale, one treats each MB as an entity (e.g., particle) and 
summarises its dynamics with mixtures of blanket states that ﬂuctuate slowly. In this multiscale setting, a (effective) 
state at any scale becomes the expression of an eigenmode of blanket states; namely, the principal eigenvectors of 
their Jacobian (i.e., rate of change of ﬂo w with respect to state). These mixtures are formally identical to order 
M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205 193
Fig. 2. Explanatory scope of variational approach. Variational neuroethology leverages the FEP to explain the adaptive free energy bounding 
dynamics of living systems across spatial and temporal scales. Here we indicate some of the scales at which these dynamics unfold. Given the 
intrinsic correlation between spatial and temporal scales, the phase space described here is populated mostly along its diagonal. Adapted from [92].
parameters in synergetics that reﬂect the amplitude of slow, unstable eigenmodes [57]. In terms of centre manifold 
theory, they correspond to solutions on the slow (unstable or centre) manifold [35,58]. In short, the MB of a system 
(or particle), at any scale, constitutes an ensemble whose order parameters subtend blank et or internal states at the 
scale above. Note that the constituent (microscopic) states of an ensemble are always blanket states, although their 
order parameters could be blanket states or internal states at the (microscopic) scale above. This follows from the fact 
that the only states ‘that matter’ are those that inﬂuence other (blank et) states. Effectively, all we are doing here is 
applying the (en)slaving principle, or centre manifold theorem [57], recursively to MBs of MBs. Fig. 3 provides a 
schematic illustration of this recursive decomposition.
In this multiscale frame work, active inference is inherently a group activity. That is, the entire ensemble of nested 
MBs are bound, enslaved and constrained by dynamics at higher scales, while the lower (microscopic) scales furnish 
the (macroscopic) states at any given level. This construction evinces exactly the same circular causality that underlies 
syner
getics [57,59]; however, here it is generalised to a recursive hierarchy of scales – i.e., the hierarchical composition 
of blankets of blankets. Intuitively, the dynamics at one scale provide constraints (technically, establish probability 
gradients) on dynamics at other scales. Active inference destroys free energy gradients at each scale,3 under the 
guidance or control of a generative model at the scale above. This guidance is exerted through inﬂuences on sensory 
states, where circular causality means that the action of any MB in an ensemble of MBs could be involved in sensing, 
action or perception; depending upon its role at the superordinate scale; i.e., has a sensory , active or internal state at 
the level above. Please see [43]f o r a worked example using simulations of biological self-assembly.
This may sound a little abstract; ho wever, imagine you are an employee as an institution, where you transact your 
(microscopic) affairs with other personnel to self-evidence your prior beliefs that you are ‘good at your job’. This 
would entail responding to corporate or institutional goals that emerge collectively (i.e., an implicit generati ve model 
at the macroscopic level). Note that your job may be homologous to an internal state at the institutional (macroscopic) 
level – relating only to other employees. Alternatively, you could be working on reception (i.e., a sensory state) or 
3 The destruction of probability gradients simply means that gradient ﬂows will seek out variational free energy minima, where the gradients 
disappear [77].
194 M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205
Fig. 3. Blankets of blankets. This schematic ﬁgure illustrates the recursive architecture by which successively larger (and slower) scale dynamics 
arise from subordinate levels. Starting at the bottom of the ﬁgure (lower panel) we can consider an ensemble of vector states (here nine). The 
conditional dependencies among these vector states then deﬁne a particular partition of into particles (upper panels). Crucially, this partition 
equips each particle with a bipartition into blanket and internal states, where blanket states comprise active (red) and sensory states (magenta). 
The behaviour of each particle can now be summarised in terms of (slow) eigenmodes or mixtures of its blanket states to produce vector states 
at the next level or scale. These constitute an ensemble of vector states and the process starts again. The upper panels illustrate the bipartition for 
a single particle (left panel) and an ensemble of particles; i.e., the particular partition per se (right panel). The insets on top illustrate the implicit 
self-similarity in moving from one scale to the next using. In this ﬁgure, /Omega1 · b denotes a linear mixture of blanket states speciﬁed by the principal 
eigenvectors of their Jacobian. Because the corresponding eigenvalues play the role of Lyapunov exponents, the resulting mixtures correspond to 
slow or unstable dynamical modes of activity.
issuing press releases (i.e., an active state). Another example of multiscale self-organisation is provided in Fig. 4
to illustrate a less anthropomorphic form of self-assembly at the cellular and molecular level. In this example, the 
extensive nature of variational free energy is laid bare: each system or agent that comprises the ensemble shares the 
same generati
ve model. This means that the total free energy is composed in exactly the same way statisticians would 
accumulate statistical evidence through Bayesian belief updating with each new source of evidence.4 The twist here 
is that the (sensory) evidence for each agent’s model is generated by another agent. In short, multiscale ensembles 
that endure, in an ergodic sense, dissolve free energy gradients, thereby integrating dynamics within and between 
scales. This brings us to questions about coupling among MBs within a particular scale, which will be our focus for 
the remainder of the paper
.
2.2. Ensembles of MBs
In what follows, we look more closely at the partition of states into an ensemble of MBs – and what this means for 
self-organisation at any scale of dynamics. A crucial point, which enables the integration of ensemble dynamics into 
4 Bayesian belief updating treats each posterior belief – based upon some data seen so far – as the prior belief for the next set of data. This is 
formally equivalent to adding the log-evidence (i.e., variational free energy), because adding logs is equivalent to multiplying probabilities and 
evidence corresponds to the probability of the data, given a model.
M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205 195
Fig. 4.  Self-assembly and active inference. This ﬁgure shows the results of a simulation of morphogenesis under active inference reported in 
[70]. This simulation used a gradient descent on variational free energy using a simple ensemble of eight cells; each of which had the same 
(pluripotential) generative model. This generative model predicted what each cell would sense and signal (chemotactically) for any given location 
in a ‘target morphology’ (lower middle panel – extracellular target signal; in other words, what each agent would expect to sense if it were at a 
particular location). By actively moving around, all the cells minimised their variational free energy (i.e., surprise) by inferring where they were, 
in relation to others. Because variational free energy is an extensive quantity, the free energy minimising arrangement of the ensemble is the target 
morphology. In other words, every cell has to ‘ﬁnd its place’, at which point each cell minimises its own surprise about the signals it senses (because 
it knows its place) and the ensemble minimises the total free energy. The upper panels show the time courses of expectations about its place in 
the morphology (upper left), the associated active states mediating migration and signal expression (upper middle) and the resulting trajectories; 
projected onto the ﬁrst (vertical) direction – and colour-coded to show differentiation (upper right). These trajectories progressively minimise total 
free energy (lower left panel). The lower right panel shows the ensuing conﬁguration. Here, the trajectory is shown in small circles (for each time 
step). The insert corresponds to the target conﬁguration. Please see [70]f o r further details.
adaptive behaviour, is that variational free energy is an extensive quantity; in other words, it increases with the size 
or compass of the system in question. In the context of an ensemble of MBs, this means we can add the free energy 
of each agent or particle to describe the behaviour of the ensemble (see Fig. 4).
Applying the MB formalism to sentient systems is intuiti ve when modelling systems whose conditional indepen-
dence is maintained via literal sensorimotor loops, where the interaction between active and sensory states ranges 
over relatively small spatiotemporal scales. Note that every leap upward in the nested hierarchy implies a concomitant 
increase in spatial and temporal scale (see Fig. 3), which in some cases entails an increase in the distances among the 
states of the system, as well as a decreased rate of change and (Bayesian) optimisation. As we ascend spatiotemporal 
scales, it becomes increasingly unclear ho
w the Markov boundaries are implemented. Indeed, the justiﬁcation for 
the use of the MB formalism to describe li
ving systems rests on the observation that if the coupling among an en-
semble of dynamical subsystems is mediated by short-range forces, then the states of those remote subsystems must 
be conditionally independent [3]. In summary, despite providing a framework to inte grate dynamics across scales – 
and ensemble dynamics within a scale – VNE does not tell us how large scale ensembles self-organise so as to form 
higher-order MBs. In the next section, we address this issue; namely, how to draw MBs for large-scale systems like 
196 M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205
ecological niches, social ensembles, and cultural dynamics, drawing on the notion of affordances from the skilled 
intentionality framework [48,60].
3. The variational approach to niche construction and the ontology of affordances
3.1. The variational approach to niche construction
Niche construction theory in evolutionary biology (e.g., [61–64]) argues that via their bioregulatory behaviour, 
living organisms (explicitly and implicitly) modify their environment, so as to steer their evolutionary trajectory, and 
that of other species. Arguably, then, niche construction is on a par with natural selection as a bona ﬁde evolutionary 
force. Niche construction can be understood in tw
o ways: in terms of selective niche construction (SNC), or in terms 
of developmental niche construction (DNC) [64]. SNC refers to changes to the ecological niche induced by the action 
of organisms, and by which living systems come to modify selection pressures on themselv es and other species 
that inhabit the niche. SNC operates on a phylogenetic time scale, and involves processes like ecological and cultural 
inheritance [65,66], where evolutionarily signiﬁcant components of an environment are passed on from one generation 
to another; e.g., the remains of beaver dams are reconstructed by bea vers,  while the concept of a ‘canoe’ is passed down 
generations in the form of ‘cognitive gadgets’ [67]. DNC refers to the production in ontogeny of exogenetic resources
by organisms themselves; in order to change developmental inputs, and secure the reliable and ﬂexible reproduction of 
the individual life cycle [64]. DNC operates on the scale of de velopment, learning, and action–perception cycles. The 
set of exogenetic resources that it optimise’s include evolved loops of adaptive behaviour (e.g., grooming, parental 
care) and physical changes to the niche itself [68].
As an e xample of niche construction outcome in humans, consider improvised ‘desire paths’; e.g., a dirt trail in 
the park carved out by recurrent actions of agents in the neighbourhood. From the point of view of the FEP, such 
a path can function as an exogenetic resource. It encodes precise (high certainty , reliable) information about the 
fact that the end of the park is at the end of the trail. An agent can rely on this information to navigate the park 
efﬁciently, without having to know the layout of the neighbourhood. While crossing a park might not be as essential 
a behaviour as grooming, from the point of vie w of the FEP, ﬁnding oneself in expected sensory states certainly is. 
Indeed, exogenetic resources of the niche such as desire paths can function as reliable indicators of surprise- and 
ambiguity-resolving actions, which, under the statistical conception of the phenotype entailed by the FEP, is crucial 
for maintaining the agent’
s continued existence. In short, the collective behaviour of an ensemble of agents provides 
a form of semiotics or a set of possibilities for engagement with the niche (a.k.a. affordances) that become relevant 
from the point of view of the needs and concerns of any single agent. So ho w can a variational ecology shed light on 
the role of affordance in selecting adaptive actions that emerge from ensemble dynamics?
Selecting adapti ve actions requires an organism to evaluate expected free energy under possible action policies [69]. 
Expected free energy can be expressed in different ways; e.g., as expected energy minus entropy, or as a mixture of 
epistemic and pragmatic value (see Fig. 5). With respect to our purposes here, expected free ener gy can be expressed as 
the expected cost of an outcome, given a certain action, plus the expected ambiguity of the outcome (cf. [70]). Expected 
cost corresponds to the discrepancy between outcomes conditional on a given action, and expectations or preferences 
about outcomes (technically, the Kullback–Leibler divergence between the two beliefs). Ev aluating  expected cost 
enables the selection of actions that bring about sensory states (observations) expected by the agent – i.e., those 
predicted by its generative model, and by the same token, those that once brought about, have the least deleterious or 
‘costly’ consequences with regard to their surprisal. In turn, the ambiguity reﬂects an agent’ s expectations about the 
uncertainty of outcomes, dependent upon causes in the world.
This is where the v ariational approach to niche construction (V ANC) comes in. VA N C exploits the expression 
of expected free energy as expected cost plus ambiguity, to propose that agents upload, as it were, much of the leg 
work in computing expected free energy to their self-tailored, constructed environment. More precisely, it ar gues  that 
niche construction can be cast as the collective activity by which organisms act on their material environment to 
create unambiguous structure, which can be leveraged (via active inference). Lasting changes to the niche capture 
the fact that environmental cues function as an unambiguous indicator of the affordance of action possibilities. These 
can be cast in terms of epistemic r
esources that ﬂag those actions that resolve the ambiguity associated with future 
observations [71], while conforming to the (prior) preferences of the organism entailed by its generative model.
M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205 197
Fig. 5. Bayesian mechanics and active inference. This graphic summarises the belief updating scheme in the minimisation of variational free 
energy and expected free energy [38,45,93]. In the ﬁrst step (circles on the left), discrete actions solicit a sensory outcome (i.e., in the parlance of 
the SIF, a solicitation) used to form approximate posterior beliefs about states of the world. This belief updating involves the minimisation of free 
energy under a set of plausible policies (blue panel – Perceptual inference). Note that free energy F(π, s) includes Markovian dependencies among 
hidden states. This reﬂects the fact that the generative model is a Markov decision process. In the second step (green panel – Policy selection), 
the approximate posterior beliefs from the ﬁrst step are used to evaluate expected free energy F(π, τ) and subsequent beliefs about action. These 
beliefs correspond to the epistemic and pragmatic affordances that underwrite policy selection. Note that the free energy per se is a function of 
sensory states, given a policy. In contrast, the expected free energy is a function of the policy. The construct of affordance in active inference 
corresponds to inferences about action on the environment, which are selected in terms of competing policies via the minimisation of expected free 
energy. The variables in this ﬁgure correspond to those in Fig. 1. Here, a policy π comprises a sequence of actions; the expression Q(η|π) denotes 
beliefs about hidden states given a particular policy; and Q(π) denotes posterior beliefs about the policy that is currently being pursued by the 
agent. Free energy is the difference between complexity and accuracy, while expected free energy can be decomposed into expected complexity 
(i.e., complexity cost or risk) and expected inaccuracy (i.e., ambiguity). Risk can be regarded as the (KL) divergence (D) between beliefs about 
future states under a particular policy and prior preferences about states. Ambiguity denotes the loss of a deﬁnitive mapping between external 
states and observed sensory states (quantiﬁed as entropy, H). Alternatively, expected free energy can be decomposed into epistemic and pragmatic 
affordance. Posterior beliefs about policies depend on their expected free energy. Crucially, these posterior beliefs include the free energy evaluated 
during perceptual inference. This has several interesting consequences from our perspective. This construction means that the agent has to infer the 
policy that it is currently pursuing and verify its predictions in light of sensory evidence. This is possible because the beliefs about actions that are 
encoded by internal states are distinct from the active states of the agent’s MB. Free energy per se provides evidence that a particular policy is being 
pursued. In this scheme, agents (will appear to) entertain beliefs about their own behaviour, endowing them with what is deﬁned as intentionality of 
goal directed behaviour under active inference. In effect, this enables agents to author their own sensorium in a fashion that has close connections 
with niche construction: see main text and [48]. See [94]f o r technical discussion. Figure from [95].
V ANC casts DNC as the joint optimisation of the niche – and its constituent ensemble of agents – over ontogeny 
through dense histories of active inference, and casts SNC as Bayesian model selection [29,40]. By engaging eco-
logically inherited exogenetic resources of the niche, living organisms – especially those, like humans, that depend 
on lar
ge-scale coordination – can reliably track, predict, and model the unfolding of causal regularities at and across 
large spatiotemporal scales [54]. We will argue that this is so because niches themselves (including the organisms and 
their material setting) track those regularities. For instance, a complex system of agriculture that emplo ys irrigation 
techniques enables groups of humans to smoothly cope with climate ﬂuctuations that could otherwise jeopardise food 
production. In Section 4, we explain how the existence of higher-order, large-scale human ensembles depend on spe-
198 M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205
ciﬁc exogenetic resources of the niche – namely, epistemic resources of the kind just discussed – and how this emerges 
from ensembles of agents engaging in active inference.
3.2. The ontology of affordances under the variational approach
The skilled intentionality framework (SIF) [60] provides an account of the origin of intentionality or directed 
purposiveness in cognitive systems. We appeal to the SIF in offering an account of how to draw higher-order MBs; 
namely, by mobilising the notion of affordances. The SIF recasts cognition as the engagement by organisms of the 
af
fordances that make up their local niche, thereby providing a real-time dynamics for the engagement of exogenetic 
(epistemic) resources that the niche affords, and enabling the stabilisation of the local niche.
What are af fordances,  and how are they to be interpreted under the free energy formulation? The SIF deﬁnes 
affordances as possibilities for engagement that obtain between a set of abilities at an organism’s disposal and relevant 
or salient features of the material environment [33,48,72,73]. Here, ‘engagement’ refers to structured, skillful patterns 
of action and perception5 – what we have covered under the rubric of active inference. In effect, the SIF provides 
an organism-centred dynamics that explains, concretely, what it means for an agent or group of agents and their 
ecological niche to engage in active inference and niche construction. Moreover, it does this by considering explicitly 
how the ecological niche is disclosed to the or ganism – as a ﬁeld of affordances.
The SIF tells us what is special about li ving systems in terms of their being directed towards meaningful worlds (or 
strictly speaking, outcomes). Namely, it points out something special about the way living systems self-organise. The 
dynamics of most (non-living) self-organising systems emerge and stabilise around an energy gradient, which those 
same dynamics then typically resolv e or consume; e.g., as a lightning bolt strikes, the charge gradient around which it 
organised dissipates. Unlike other self-organising systems, living organisms are unique in that they actively generate 
and maintain the gradients that sustain them, through adaptive actions. In other words, an organism’s self-evidencing 
underwrites self-organisation and the ve ry  ergodicity upon which both rest [48,74].
What are the gradients around which li ving systems organise? The variational framework suggests that these gra-
dients are variational free energy gradients resolved through active inference. Consistent with the FEP, under the 
SIF, affordances are cast as expected free energy gradients or differences. These differences are in the expected free 
energy associated with the repertoire of actions or abilities a vailable to an organism under its generative model and 
the learned niche [33,48]. In formulations of active inference for generative models of discrete states (i.e., Markov 
decision processes), these abilities correspond to the policies and their affordance is quantiﬁed in terms of the ex -
pected free energy under each policy. Given this equivalence, affordance can be decomposed into complexity cost and 
ambiguity (as in Fig. 5). Alternatively, by rearranging its terms, expected free energy can be expressed in terms of 
epistemic (i.e., intrinsic) and pragmatic (i.e., extrinsic) affordance (see [71,75]f o r details). The ensuing variational 
formulation of af
fordances uses the path integral of free energy from the current point in time to a future time point, 
where the only difference between expected free energy and free energy per se is that sensory states have yet to be 
realised. This means the expectation in expected free energy is ove r  sensory states in the future, based upon posterior 
beliefs informed by sensory states in the past. Put simply, the best action is the next action that belongs to the policy 
(i.e., sequence of actions) with the greatest affordance – or the least expected free energy. This is formally related to 
Hamilton’
s principle of least Action6 that translates here into a variational principle of greatest ‘Affordance’.
For or ganisms  to engage the affordances offered by their niche is the variational ‘tissue’ that connects dynamics to 
the niche in which those organisms exist. The expected free energy of each policy can be cast as constituting the set of 
affordances that an organism can entertain. Action and policy selection integrate ensemble dynamics, by minimising 
e
xpected free energy directly and learning the affordances on offer from the niche by selecting courses of action (i.e. 
policies) with the greatest epistemic affordance. This has close relationships with intrinsic motivation and exploration 
in ethology [76–79] where, perhaps, the most important exploration is “what can I do with my body?” (i.e., the body 
as niche). This is most clearly seen in de
velopment and neurorobotics [78]. Things get more interesting when we 
appreciate that the niche itself is subject to exactly the same normative principles. In other words, as each agent is 
trying to learn about and infer its niche, the niche – through the collecti ve inferences, actions and material artifacts 
5 These abilities are known as policies in active inference (please see below).
6 Where Action here denotes a path or time integral of free energy. The Action corresponds to the ‘work done’ in classical mechanics.
M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205 199
of its constituent agents – appears to learn about and predict the behaviour of each agent. This must be true, because 
each MB that comprises the eco-niche is itself trying to minimise variational free energy. Heuristically, this means 
that because every agent is trying to predict their niche, they collectively shape their ﬁeld of af fordances in such a way 
that their niche appears to infer the behaviour of its agents and therefore becomes inherently more predictable (i.e., 
less ambiguous).
This prompts a re vision of the ontology of affordances under the SIF [48]. The ‘ﬁeld of affordances’ is the set 
of affordances that solicit the organism at a given time. This ﬁeld is constituted by expected free energy gradients 
that are induced by the entire ensemble. The engagement of the niche by the or ganism then corresponds to active 
inference; in the sense that these dynamics are simply the resolution of a local free energy landscape – a path of least 
(Hamiltonian) Action over the ﬁeld of affordances. ‘Solicitations’ are those affordances that effectively engage the 
organism in action–perception loops at a gi ven time. The ‘landscape of affordances’ is thus the set of affordances 
available in a niche at a given time. On this view, the landscape of affordances is a product of inference about “what 
would happen if I did that?” [79]. Affordance is therefore an attribute of active, if counterf actual, engagement with 
the niche. Yet at the same time, it is a statement about the learned (and therefore lived) world.
The picture that emer ges by integrating a variational approach to niche construction with the ontology of affor-
dances could be summarised as follows. When you select actions with the greatest affordance, you learn about your 
niche. However, your niche comprises other MBs that must be learning about you. These can be other ‘creatures lik e 
you’, ‘cognitive gadgets’, and ‘desire paths’, and so on. In other words, your action on the environment constitutes 
sensory evidence for a niche (i.e., landscape of affordances) that is trying to model you, while the niche acts on you 
via sensory impressions. From the perspective of some ‘Godhead’ looking do wn on your niche, a self-organisation 
would emerge at a higher spatiotemporal scale – that itself looks exactly like a self-organising, free energy minimising 
process. This has to be the case if your niche and all of its constituents attain some form of ergodicity, in virtue of 
the FEP. In other wo rds,  the network of conspeciﬁcs, their ‘desire paths’, and ‘cognitive gadgets’ would look like the 
internal states surrounded by a MB, separating your niche from another. We now develop this argument in the ﬁnal 
section.
4. Variational ecology: a physics of shared minds
How can we describe the sort of relationships that induce conditional independence among remote subsystems of 
ensembles (e.g., other animals as part of a larger niche)? Can we make sense of the self-organisation of large-scale 
systems using MBs, to constitute robust and enduring sets of conditionally independent subsystems? How are MBs 
implemented at higher scales, and ho w can we deﬁne the relations among their states?
The internal states of a MB can be separated by a great deal of distance, while retaining some form of dependenc y. 
When looking at phenomena unfolding across longer temporal scales, imagining internal states as physically isolated 
in a literal sense from external states becomes conceptually constraining. Two states clearly do not need to be (and 
as a matter of f
act cannot be) in direct contact to be part of the same system; e.g., nodes of the Internet, soldiers in a 
battalion. What matters is the statistical relationship between states; i.e., to form a MB, the right kinds of statistical re-
lations and partitions need to be in play . In other words, ensembles sharing the same MB, whether cells or organisms, 
need not be ‘spatially’ compartmentalised, but ought to be ‘statistically’ or ‘behaviourally’ segregated; that is, some 
recurrent patterns of behaviours should govern the way different sets of internal states maintain their conditional inde-
pendence. Practically speaking, the only thing one needs to partition states into an ensemble of MBs is their adjacenc y 
matrix. This matrix (from graph theory) encodes directed dependencies in a weighted or unweighted fashion. One can 
then identify a subset of internal states, their MB, and the resulting external states [3]. This process can be repeated by 
identifying a second set of internal states within the e
xternal states and continuing until all external states have been 
exhausted. Note that, to pursue this partition into an ensemble of MBs, one only needs the adjacency matrix describing 
‘who is connected to whom’. This can easily be applied to dif ferential equations describing evolutionary dynamics – 
or links in social media networks. See Fig. 6 for an illustrative example. The question then is to determine how the 
active and sensory states are manifest, where the partition of states is dispersed over high dimensions of abstract state 
spaces. In other wo rds,  we need to understand what sort of ‘behaviour’ their states exhibit.
200 M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205
Fig. 6. A particular partition. This schematic ﬁgure illustrates a partition of vectors states (small coloured balls) into particles (comprising nine 
vectors), where each particle (π) has six blanket states (red and magenta for active and sensory states respectively) and three internal states (cyan). 
The upper panel summarises the operators used to create a particular partition. We start by forming an adjacency matrix that characterises the 
coupling between different vectors states. In this example, the adjacency matrix is based upon the Jacobian and implicitly the ﬂow of vector states. 
The resulting adjacency matrix deﬁnes a MB forming matrix (B), which identiﬁes the children, parents, and parents of the children. The same 
adjacency matrix is used to form a graph Laplacian (L) that is used to deﬁne neighbouring (i.e., coupled) internal states. One ﬁrst identiﬁes a set 
of internal states using the graph Laplacian. Here, the j-th subset of internal states at the level i are chosen based upon dense coupling with the 
vector state with the largest graph Laplacian. Closely coupled internal states are then selected from the columns of the graph Laplacian that exceed 
some threshold. In practice, the examples used later specify the number of internal states desired for each level of the hierarchical decomposition. 
Having identiﬁed a new set of internal states (that are not members of any particle that has been identiﬁed so far) its MB is recovered using the 
MB forming matrix. The internal and blanket states then constitute a new particle, which is added to the list of particles identiﬁed. This procedure 
is repeated until all vector states have been accounted for. In the example here, we have already identiﬁed four particles and the procedure adds a 
ﬁfth (top) particle to the list of particles; thereby accounting for nine of the remaining vector states.
4.1. Markov blankets and ensemble dynamics: active and sensory states
Under the MB formalism, sensory and active states are to be interpreted in their minimal sense; that is, as instan-
tiating statistical relations. What it means for a system to have active states is for it to have states the dynamics of 
which change as a function of some systemic quantities (namely ,  as a function of internal and sensory states). In turn, 
what it means for something to have sensory states is for it to have states that change as a function of other systemic 
quantities (external and active states). On this view, both sensing and acting assume a statistical deﬁnition. Indeed, one 
could w
onder about the difference between an agent sensing things in the world with a visual saccade and a photon 
hitting the retina of the agent. In the parlance of the MB formalism, whether a state counts as an active or a sensory 
state depends on whether or not it is inﬂuenced by internal and e xternal states in the right way [3]. Thus, an active 
state is just one that is inﬂuenced by the system’s deﬁning states, and a sensory state is one that is not. Accordingly, a 
sensory state – at any level of description – might just mean a state that reliably co varies with, and conveys information 
about, some distal causes in the external system to which it is coupled (e.g., a receptionist taking calls on an external 
M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205 201
telephone line); and active states are just those states that enable the system to effect changes on the ‘outside’ (e.g., 
a public relations ofﬁcer emitting press releases). An ecological niche could thus have sensory and active states (and 
thus, have a MB) in a sufﬁcient and minimal statistical sense.
For a number of reasons, elements of the ontology of af fordances are interesting candidates for the implementation 
of the sort of large scale behaviour under consideration. First, similar to the cell membrane, the sensory signals that 
actively engage an organism at a given time (i.e., solicitations) mediate the functional relationship between internal and 
e
xternal states of both the organism and its niche. In the parlance of the FEP, solicitations secure adaptive exchanges 
among the internal and external states by engaging the organism in loops of active inference that conform to internal 
expectations (e.g., they are perceived relative to the needs of the system), while enabling the learning of the causal 
structure of some e
xternal states (i.e., they are perceived relative to the actual causal structure). In this respect, similar 
to cell membranes, we can say that a solicitation “points both ways, to the environment and to the observer” [80]. 
In Fig. 1, this ‘pointing both w ays’ is established in virtue of the circular causality induced by the MB and ensuing 
active inference. This brings affordances into play, in terms of the expected free energy attributed to different policies 
of courses of action on the environment (see Fig. 5).
Second, af fordances,  especially those enabled by epistemic resources, carry cultural knowledge that can be ac-
quired in ontogeny [81], thereby securing the reproduction of adaptive patterned practices when transmitted across 
generations [40]. As such, affordances – especially the cultural affordances [33] that characterise a given local group – 
play a role in the coordination of the adapti ve behaviour of members in a group over large spatial and temporal scales. 
Brieﬂy, cultural affordances are the affordances with which human agents interact, and which depend on shared sets of 
cultural expectations, internalised through immersive practices [33]. Affordances thus allow for adaptive behavioural 
self-organisation among groups of agents, independent of their spatial proximity . In effect, cultural information en-
coded in the physical states of the ecological niche (in epistemic resources) enables the recognition and diffusion 
of epistemic affordances among groups over larger spatiotemporal scales (e.g., the intergenerational scale, via the 
passing on of affordances via cultural inheritance).
Third, deﬁning a MB for niche systems in volves the description of the conditional independence among the parti-
tions of the system. The ontology of affordances, especially the layering it entails (e.g., organism and ﬁeld, solicitation 
and landscape of affordances) can, in principle, be used to deﬁne the statistical compartments (partition) of the niche, 
and by the same tok
en explain the conditional independence among the states of the niche.
Given these ve ry reasons, we suggest that the ﬁeld of affordances (and especially the solicitations that actually 
engage the agent at a given time) functions as the ‘surface’ that allows the niche to ‘sense’ agents via the agent’s action 
on the niche [82]. The agent’s actions when repeated over time encode regularities about niche-agent interactions via 
changes to the structure of the ecological niche. In virtue of the circular causality discussed a
bove, this structure is 
determined by – and indeed, determines – the affordances that underlie each agent’s action. The niche then ‘acts’ on 
the agent as it is sensed by the agent. We can say that an agent will be acted upon when eng aging an affordance, as the 
affordance is a possible action to be selected, and the selection of which will entail changes in the agent. The action 
of the niche thus takes the form of ‘offering possibilities for engagement’. Crucially, a niche that w ould not offer a 
variety of possible engagements could not ‘act’ in any meaningful sense. The ‘active’ property of the niche rests on 
their ability to conform to the changing needs of the agent(s), that is, to solicit the agent by providing the right sort of 
sensory cues.
4.2. What is it that models, and what is modelled? – internal and external states
So far, we have discussed the relevant quantities to deﬁne the niche’s MB. These are captured by the dynamics 
of the agent’s ﬁeld of solicitation, which involves patterns of action and sensation for the agent, which coincide with 
the action and perception of the niche. The key point here is that the a gent’s  ﬁeld of affordances (and solicitations) 
emerges from the dynamics of the MB of the niche, and thereby enables the niche to model sensory causal regularities, 
or underlying structure of the form of life it constitutes [83,84].
Now, what are the internal states of the niche? And what are the causal re gularities that they model? We suggest 
that internal states of the niche are a subset of the physical states of the material environment. Namely, the internal 
states of the niche are the physical states of the environment, which ha ve been modiﬁed by the dense histories of 
different organisms interacting in their shared niche (i.e., histories of active inference). This subset of physical states 
comes to encode information that is used in the self-evidencing dynamics of organisms. In other words, the ecological 
202 M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205
niche becomes part of the embodied model parameters that encode the variational or recognition density that the agent 
uses in active inference. These model parameters encode causal regularities about agents’ behaviour, which function 
as the external, hidden states of the niche, which it models in niche construction.
The internal states of the niche encode information about re gularities of the niche-agent(s) relation [40]. This 
means that the internal states of the niche encode organism-speciﬁc information (e.g., affordances), not merely any 
changes to the physical layout. Otherwise, it would mean that the internal states would also encode random changes 
to the en vironment  (e.g., volcanic eruptions and tsunamis). Hence, the ecological niche is a subset of the physical 
environment that the organism constructs through reiterated action over time (i.e., active inference). We can see the 
propensity of the environment to encode organism-speciﬁc information as the propensity to change its structure as 
a function of the actions of the or
ganism (i.e., sensations of the niche) [82]. For instance, a grass patch has a much 
higher propensity to encode organisms-speciﬁc information than a sidewalk made of concrete – hence a grass patch 
after some time, and recurring actions, might encode a desire path (i.e., will turn into a cultural af fordance). The point 
here is that the niche is always organisms, or species-speciﬁc, an Umwelt of sorts [85], whose relational structure 
consists of affordances, encoded through niche construction (cf. section 3).
The ﬁnal quantity to deﬁne is that of the causal re gularities modelled by the niche, and transcribed by its physical 
layout (the internal states). We have seen that for groups of enculturated agents like humans, internal states of the 
niche encode affordances that pertain to group behaviour; e.g., what the desire path models is the action possibility 
to ‘cut corners’. No
w, it is a small step from this point to the one that the internal states of the niche track statistical 
regularities and ﬂuctuations that underwrite the meaning of shared intentionality and normative group behaviour (cf. 
[86–88]). These regularities are highly abstract, and can only ex ist – as causes – for large-scales ensembles like 
groups of agents. With the example of the desire path, one can start to appreciate the continuity that obtains between 
the physics of self-organising systems, the form of pragmatic engagements afforded by constructed niches, and the 
sort of meanings and intentions that people deri ve from them.
In summary , the niche transcribes regularities that pertain to group behaviour – they are transcribed in the physical 
layout of the niche – through the active and perceptual dynamics of the agent, which coincides with the perceptual 
and active dynamics of the niche. These same dynamics entail the landscape of action possibilities (i.e., af fordances), 
which maintains the structural integrity of the agent-niche system – niche dynamics resolve the free energy gradients 
that are induced by the physical structures of organisms and their niche, and their history of dense interaction and 
dynamic coupling. In this sense, the robustness of patterns of shared intentionality and enaction of shared meanings 
is inherited from the rob
ustness of the niche, and vice versa.
5. Concluding remarks
Variational ecology (VE) is a synthesis of VNE [4], the V ANC [40], and the SIF [73], and provides an explanation 
of collective purposive action and intentionality of living systems – a physics of sentient systems. An ecological 
niche ‘just is’ a structured set of affordances that are shared by agents, which enables its denizens to coordinate 
purposi
ve action over sometimes vast spatial and temporal distances. The sort of affordances that emerge from niche 
construction, and that constitute large scale ensembles, carry semiotic and axiological meaning like moral states held in 
common (cf. [89]) (e.g., this dirt trail ‘means’ cutting through the park, and you shall not be late to your appointment). 
In ef
fect, there is a deep sense in which affordances are what meanings are [80], and a sense in which meaning is 
entailed by the existence of groups of agents that share a niche (cf., sense making, [90,91]). As the y engage with 
the affordances of their niche, ensembles of agents: (i) maintain the structural integrity of the niche through niche 
construction (and active inference); and (ii) collectively enact a generative model of their relation to the niche, thereby 
providing an account of the physics of intentionality, and especially of shar ed intentionality. VE, then, is also a physics 
of interacting minds.
Acknowledgements
Work on this article was supported by the Wellcome Trust (K. Friston: Principal Research Fellowship; Ref: 
088130/Z/09/Z), the Canada First Research Excellence Fund, awarded to McGill University for the Healthy Brains 
for Healthy Lives initiative (M.J.D. Ramstead), and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada 
M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205 203
(M.J.D. Ramstead). We thank Casper Hesp, Samuel Veissière, and Laurence Kirmayer for their insightful critical re-
marks on variational neuroethology in this journal, which prompted us to revisit our account, as well as Adam Safron 
for his helpful comments.
References
[1] Friston KJ, Kilner J, Harrison L. A free energy principle for the brain. J Physiol Paris 2006;100:70–87.
[2] Friston KJ.  The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nat Rev Neurosci 2010;11:127–38.
[3] Friston KJ.  Life as we know it. J R Soc Interface 2013;10:20130475.
[4] Ramstead MJ, Badcock PB, Friston KJ. Answering Schrödinger’s question: a free-energy formulation. Phys Life Rev 2018;24:1–16.
[5] Clark A.  Surﬁng uncertainty: prediction, action, and the embodied mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2015.
[6] Friston KJ.  A theory of cortical responses. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B, Biol Sci 2005;360:815–36.
[7] Friston KJ,  Stephan KE. Free-energy and the brain. Synthese 2007;159:417–58.
[8] Dayan P,  Hinton GE, Neal RM, Zemel RS. The Helmholtz machine. Neural Comput 1995;7:889–904.
[9] Rao RP,  Ballard DH. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-ﬁeld effects. Nat 
Neurosci 1999;2:79–87.
[10] Knill DC,  Pouget A. The Bayesian brain: the role of uncertainty in neural coding and computation. Trends Neurosci 2004;27:712–9.
[11] Metzinger T, Wiese W. Philosophy and predictive processing. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group; 2017.
[12] Clark A.  Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science. Behav Brain Sci 2013;36:181–204.
[13] Huang GT.  Essence of thought. New Sci 2008;198:30–3.
[14] Hohwy J. The predictive mind. Oxford University Press; 2013.
[15] Kiebel SJ,  Friston KJ. Free energy and dendritic self-organization. Front Syst Neurosci 2011;5:80.
[16] Friston KJ, FitzGerald T, Rigoli F, Schwartenbeck P, Pezzulo G. Active inference: a process theory. Neural Comput 2017;29:1–49.
[17] La wson RP,  Rees G, Friston KJ. An aberrant precision account of autism. Front Human Neurosci 2014;8:302.
[18] Va n  de Cruys S, Evers K, Van der Hallen R, Van Eylen L, Boets B, de-Wit L, et al. Precise minds in uncertain worlds: predictive coding in 
autism. Psychol Rev 2014;121:649–75.
[19] Adams RA, Huys QJM, Roiser JP. Computational psychiatry: towards a mathematically informed understanding of mental illness. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry 2016;87:53–63.
[20] Corlett PR, Fletcher PC. Computational psychiatry: a Rosetta Stone linking the brain to mental illness. Lancet Psychiatry 2014;1:399–402.
[21] Redish AD, Gordon JA. Computational psychiatry: new perspectives on mental illness. MIT Press; 2016.
[22] Constant A, Bervoets J, Hens K, Van de Cruys S. Precise worlds for certain minds: an ecological perspective on the relational self in autism. 
Topoi 2018:1–13.
[23] Badcock PB.  Evolutionary systems theory: a unifying meta-theory of psychological science. Rev Gen Psychol 2012. Available from http://
psycnet .apa .org /journals /gpr /16 /1 /10/.
[24] Apps MAJ,  Tsakiris M. The free-energy self: a predictive coding account of self-recognition. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2014;41:85–97.
[25] Badcock PB, Davey CG,  Whittle S,  Allen NB,  Friston KJ.  The depressed brain: an evolutionary systems theory. Trends Cogn Sci 
2017;21:182–94.
[26] Bruineber g J, Kiverstein J, Rietveld E. The anticipating brain is not a scientist: the free-energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspec-
tive. In: Synthese. Springer Netherlands; 2016. p. 1–28.
[27] Friston K. Embodied inference: or I think therefore I am, if I am what I think. In: The implications of embodiment (cognition and communi-
cation); 2011. p. 89–125.
[28] Friston KJ, Ao P. Free energy, value, and attractors. Comput Math Methods Med 2012;2012:937860.
[29] Campbell JO. Universal Darwinism as a process of Bayesian inference. Front Syst Neurosci 2016;10:49.
[30] Friston KJ, Frith CD. Active inference, communication and hermeneutics. Cortex 2015;68:129–43.
[31] Kirmayer LJ, Ramstead MJD. Embodiment and enactment in cultural psychiatry. In: Christoph Durt Thomas Fuchs, editor. Embodiment, 
enaction, and culture. MIT Press; 2017. p. 397–422.
[32] Fa bry RE.  Betwixt and between: the enculturated predictive processing approach to cognition. Synthese 2017:1–36.
[33] Ramstead MJD, Veissière SPL, Kirmayer LJ. Cultural affordances: scaffolding local worlds through shared intentionality and regimes of 
attention. Front Psychol 2016;7:1090.
[34] T inbergen N.  On aims and methods of ethology. Z Tierpsychol 1963;20:410–33.
[35] Carr J.  Applications of centre manifold theory. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1981.
[36] Bruineber g J, Hesp C. Beyond blanket terms: challenges for the explanatory value of variational (neuro-)ethology: comment on “Answering 
Schrödinger’s question: a free-energy formulation” by Maxwell James Désormeau Ramstead et al. Phys Life Rev 2018;24:37–9.
[37] Kirmayer LJ. Ontologies of life: from thermodynamics to teleonomics: comment on “Answering Schrödinger’s question: a free-energy for-
mulation” by Maxwell James Désormeau Ramstead et al. Phys Life Rev 2018;24:29–31.
[38] Friston KJ, Daunizeau J, Kiebel SJ. Reinforcement learning or active inference? PLoS ONE 2009;4:e6421.
[39] Friston KJ, Rosch R, Parr T, Price C, Bowman H. Deep temporal models and active inference. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2017;77:388–402.
[40] Constant A, Ramstead MJD, Veissière SPL, Campbell JO, Friston KJ. A variational approach to niche construction. J R Soc Interface 2018:15. 
https://doi .org /10 .1098 /rsif .2017 .0685.
[41] Seifert U.  Stochastic thermodynamics, ﬂuctuation theorems and molecular machines. Rep Prog Phys 2012;75:126001.
[42] Ev ans DJ,  Searles DJ. The ﬂuctuation theorem. Adv Phys 2002;51:1529–85.
204 M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205
[43] Palacios ER, Razi A, Parr T, Kirchhoff M, Friston K. Biological self-organisation and Markov blankets. bioRxiv 2017:227181. https://doi .org /
10 .1101 /227181.
[44] Friston KJ, Daunizeau J, Kilner J, Kiebel SJ. Action and behavior: a free-energy formulation. Biol Cybern 2010;102:227–60.
[45] Friston KJ, FitzGerald T, Rigoli F, Schwartenbeck P, Doherty JO,  Pezzulo G.  Active inference and learning. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
2016;68:862–79.
[46] Stearns SC. The evolutionary signiﬁcance of phenotypic plasticity phenotypic sources of variation among organisms can be described by 
developmental switches and reaction norms. Bioscience, vol. 39. Oxford University Press; 1989. p. 436–45.
[47] W est-Eberhard MJ.  Developmental plasticity and evolution. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; 2003.
[48] Bruineberg J,  Rietveld E. Self-organization, free energy minimization and optimal grip on a ﬁeld of affordances. Front Human Neurosci 
2014:8. https://doi .org /10 .3389 /fnhum .2014 .00599.
[49] Friston KJ. A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy 2012;14:2100–21.
[50] Hohwy J. The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 2016;50:259–85.
[51] Seth AK. The cybernetic Bayesian brain. Open Mind open-mind.net 2014. Available from http://open -mind .net /papers /the -cybernetic -
bayesian -brain /at _download /paperPDF.
[52] Anderson ML. Of Bayes and bullets: an embodied, situated, targeting-based account of predictive processing. In: Philosophy and predictive 
processing. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group; 2017.
[53] Clark A.  How to knit your own Markov blanket. In: Metzinger T, Wiese W, editors. Philosophy and predictive processing. Frankfurt am Main: 
MIND Group; 2017.
[54] Clark A.  Natural-born cyborgs, minds, technologies, and the future of human intelligence. Oxford University Press; 2004.
[55] T ognoli E,  Kelso JAS. The metastable brain. Neuron 2014;81:35–48.
[56] Badcock PB,  Ploeger A, Allen NB.  After phrenology: time for a paradigm shift in cognitive science. Behav Brain Sci 2016:39. https://
doi .org /10 .1017 /S0140525X15001557.
[57] Hak en H.  Synergetics: an introduction. Non-equilibrium phase transition and self-organisation in physics, chemistry and biology. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag; 1983.
[58] Da vis MJ.  Low-dimensional manifolds in reaction–diffusion equations. 1. Fundamental aspects. J Phys Chem A 2006;110:5235–56.
[59] Frank TD.  Nonlinear Fokker–Planck equations: fundamentals and applications. Berlin: Springer; 2004.
[60] Rietv eld E.  Special section: the skillful body as a concernful system of possible actions: phenomena and neurodynamics. Theory Psychol 
2008;18:341–63.
[61] Laland K, Matthews B, Feldman MW. An introduction to niche construction theory. Evol Ecol 2016;30:191–202.
[62] Odling-Smee J, Laland KN, Feldman MW. Niche construction: the neglected process in evolution. Princeton University Press; 2003.
[63] Le wontin RC.  Organism and environment. In: Learning, development, and culture; 1982.
[64] Stotz K.  Why developmental niche construction is not selective niche construction: and why it matters. Interface Focus 2017;7.
[65] Odling-Smee J, Laland KN. Ecological inheritance and cultural inheritance: what are they and how do they differ? Biol Theory 2011;6:220–30.
[66] Odling-Smee J. Niche constructing phenotypes. In: Plotkin, editor. The role of behavior in evolution. Cambridge: MIT Press; 1988.
[67] He yes CM.  Cognitive gadgets: the cultural evolution of thinking. Harvard University Press; 2018.
[68] Stotz K,  Grifﬁths PE. A developmental systems account of human nature. In: Lewens T, Hannon E, editors. Why we disagree about human 
nature. Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press; 2017.
[69] Elfwing S, Uchibe E, Doya K. From free energy to expected energy: improving energy-based value function approximation in reinforcement 
learning. Neural Netw 2016;84:17–27.
[70] Friston KJ,  Levin M, Sengupta B, Pezzulo G. Knowing one’s place: a free-energy approach to pattern regulation. J R Soc Interface 2015:12. 
https://doi .org /10 .1098 /rsif .2014 .1383.
[71] Friston KJ, Rigoli F, Ognibene D, Mathys C, Fitzgerald T, Pezzulo G. Active inference and epistemic value. Cogn Neurosci 2015;6:187–214.
[72] Rietv eld E,  Kiverstein J. A rich landscape of affordances. Ecol Psychol 2014;26:325–52.
[73] va n  Dijk L, Rietveld E. Foregrounding sociomaterial practice in our understanding of affordances: the skilled intentionality framework. Front 
Psychol 2016;7:1969.
[74] Tschacher W, Haken H. Intentionality in non-equilibrium systems? The functional aspects of self-organized pattern formation. New Ideas 
Psychol 2007;25:1–15.
[75] Pa rr T,  Friston KJ. Working memory, attention, and salience in active inference. Sci Rep 2017;7:14678.
[76] Barto A,  Mirolli M, Baldassarre G. Novelty or surprise? Front Psychol 2013;4:907.
[77] Eccles JS,  Wigﬁeld A. Motivational beliefs, values, and goals. Annu Rev Psychol 2002;53:109–32.
[78] Oude yer P-Y ,  Kaplan F. What is intrinsic motivation? A typology of computational approaches. Front Neurorobot 2007;1:6.
[79] Schmidhuber J. Formal theory of creativity, fun, and intrinsic motivation (1990–2010). IEEE Trans Auton Ment Dev 2010;2:230–47.
[80] Gibson JJ. The ecological approach to visual perception. Houghton Mifﬂin; 1979.
[81] Costall A. The meaning of things. Soc Anal 1997;41:76–85.
[82] Bruineberg J, Rietveld E, Parr T, van Maanen L, Friston KJ. Free-energy minimization in joint agent-environment systems: a niche construction 
perspective. J Theor Biol 2018. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jtbi .2018 .07 .002.
[83] Rietv eld E,  Kiverstein J. A rich landscape of affordances. Ecol Psychol 2014;26:325–52.
[84] W ittgenstein L.  Philosophical investigations (GEM Anscombe, trans.). Oxford: Blackwell; 1953.
[85] Vo n  Uexküll T. The sign theory of Jakob von Uexküll. Classics of semiotics. Boston, MA: Springer; 1987. p. 147–79.
[86] T omasello M,  Carpenter M, Call J, Behne T, Moll H. Understanding and sharing intentions: the origins of cultural cognition. Behav Brain Sci 
2005;28:675–91. discussion 691–735.
[87] T omasello M,  Carpenter M. Shared intentionality. Dev Sci 2007;10:121–5.
M.J.D. Ramstead et al. / Physics of Life Reviews 31 (2019) 188–205 205
[88] Henrich J. The secret of our success: how culture is driving human evolution, domesticating our species, and making us smarter. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press; 2015.
[89] K eane W.  Affordances and reﬂexivity in ethical life: an ethnographic stance. Anthropol Theory 2014;14:3–26.
[90] Di Paolo EA, Thompson E. The enactive approach. In: Shapiro LE, editor. The Routledge handbook of embodied cognition. London: Rout-
ledge; 2014. p. 68–78.
[91] De Jaegher H, Di Paolo EA. Participatory sense-making. Phenomenol Cogn Sci 2007;6:485–507.
[92] Sengupta B, Tozzi A, Cooray GK, Douglas PK, Friston KJ. Towards a neuronal gauge theory. PLoS Biol 2016:14.
[93] Kaplan R, Friston KJ. Planning and navigation as active inference. Biol Cybern 2018. https://doi .org /10 .1007 /s00422 -018 -0753 -2.
[94] Friston KJ, Parr T, de Vries B.  The graphical brain: belief propagation and active inference. Netw Neurosci, vol. 1.  MIT Press; 2017. 
p. 381–414.
[95] Linson A, Clark A, Ramamoorthy S, Friston KJ. The active inference approach to ecological perception: general information dynamics for 
natural and artiﬁcial embodied cognition. Front Robot AI 2018;5:611.