Author: 
Maxwell J. D. Ramstead (maxwell.d.ramstead@gmail.com) 
 
Affiliations: 
1. Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London, UK. 
2. VERSES Labs/Spatial Web Foundation, Los Angeles, California, USA. 
 
Word counts: 
Abstract: 60 words 
Main text: 1000 words 
References: 1174 words 
Entire text: 1446 words 
 
Title: 
The empire strikes back: Some responses to Bruineberg and colleagues. 
 
Abstract: 
In their target paper, Bruineberg and colleagues provide us with a timely opportunity to discuss 
the formal constructs and philosophical implications of the free-energy principle. I critically 
discuss their proposed distinction between Pearl blankets and Friston blankets. I then critically 
assess the distinction between inference with a model and inference within a model in light of 
instrumentalist approaches to science.  
 
Acknowledgements: 
I wish to express my gratitude to Lancelot Da Costa, Karl Friston, Conor Heins, Alex Kiefer, 
Dalton Sakthivadivel, and Thomas Parr for helpful discussions that were of great assistance in 
writing this paper. 
 
Funding statement: 
No funding to report. 
 
Conflicts of Interest statement:  
None.  
 
 
  
Main text: 
 
Bruineberg and colleagues provide us with a timely opportunity to discuss the core mathematical 
and philosophical aspects of the variational free-energy principle (FEP) and the Bayesian 
mechanics that follows from it. They focus on the construct of Markov blankets (MBs), which 
they claim has been deployed in two different—but largely conflated—ways in the literature. In 
their view, this conflation has led some to unduly project the epistemic virtues of one use of the 
construct—to formalize conditional independence in the context of inference in Bayesian 
networks, what they call “Pearl blankets” (PBs)—to another use; namely, to demarcate the 
boundaries of things that exist—what they call “Friston blankets” (FBs). Furthermore, the 
authors argue that these constructs are employed to pursue quite distinct research projects. These 
are “inference with a model,” where the features of the model (here, the MBs) are assumed to be 
part of the scientist’s model of the world, and “inference within a model,” where these features 
are assumed to be present in the modelled system itself (i.e., the MB is cast as an actually 
existing boundary between the system modelled and its embedding environment).  
 
Here, I respond critically to these claims. First, I argue that PBs and FBs are nothing more than 
articulations of Markov blankets in different mathematical contexts (i.e., in static statistical 
inference versus stochastic dynamics). Second, I claim that an instrumentalist reading of the FEP 
is available and informative, and that it is not given enough consideration in the account by 
Bruineberg and colleagues.  
 
1. Friston blankets and Pearl blankets are just Markov blankets  
 
The target paper claims that FBs are a novel mathematical construct that do not inherit their 
epistemic virtues from the use of MBs in statistical inference (i.e., from the use of PBs). 
Mathematically speaking, however, there is no justification for this hardline distinction.  
 
This is because FBs and PBs just are MBs—in different in mathematical contexts. Generally 
speaking, as the authors note, MBs formalize conditional (in)dependence between variables, 
where the MB itself is a set of variables that renders two other sets of (‘internal’ and ‘external’) 
variables conditionally independent of each other. The fundamental distinction is that PBs are the 
kind of MB that arises in the context of static statistical inference within a Bayes network, while 
FBs arise when considering the interdependencies between dynamics, which is crucial, for 
instance, when defining the self in relation to the non-self. However, both PBs and FBs are MBs. 
 
A same mathematical object may have different mathematical properties in different 
mathematical contexts. Consider an analogy. Let us list the numbers that are generated by the 
Peano axioms. We start by defining a first number, and we call it “0.” Next, we define a 
successor function S, such that for ever number n, S(n) = n + 1. Now, when considered as objects 
of the category of natural numbers, these Peano numbers have specific properties. For instance, 
there exist no numbers between any numbers and its successor, and there exists no number 
smaller than zero. Next, consider the same sequence, now interpreted in the category of real 
numbers. Although the objects have not changed (since, after all, we are considering the same 
sequence), their properties are remarkably different. For instance, there are not zero but now 
infinitely many numbers between any number in the sequence and its successor, and there are 
infinitely many numbers smaller than zero. 
 
This example illustrates that mathematical context matters in determining the properties of 
mathematical objects. Just as the number 1 is the same object in both categorical interpretations 
(albeit with different properties when considered as a natural versus as a real number), so, too, 
are FBs and PBs—just MBs, albeit defined in different mathematical contexts. In category-
theoretic terms, we have changed the category, so the object instance has new properties, but it is 
still the same object. 
 
2. The Bayesian mechanics is physics, not metaphysics 
 
I believe that the core issue with the target paper is that it treats the FEP as if it were a 
metaphysical statement, when in reality, it is better understood as a new chapter of physics—a 
Bayesian mechanics—and is compatible with instrumentalism about scientific theories (Friston, 
Heins, Ueltzhoffer, Da Costa, & Parr, 2021). Although the authors discuss this possibility in 
passing, they downplay its significance.  
 
There is a longstanding tradition in the philosophy of physics that is instrumentalist about 
physical theories (Giere, 1999, 2010; Van Fraassen, 1980). On the instrumentalist view, all 
scientific models, such as the ones used in physics, are literally false and play the role of useful 
fictions that help us to understand the world.  
 
Now, there is nothing about the FEP that commits us to realism about scientific models. In fact, 
we have argued that precisely the opposite is the case; see (Ramstead, Friston, & Hipólito, 2020). 
 
In section 3.2. of their paper, the authors provide a great outline of the modelling strategy at play 
in the computational neuroscience literature: what they call “models of models.” We agree with 
this way of putting things but would suggest to extend the logic at play to FBs. They point out 
that in computational neuroscience, there are two ‘levels’ of modelling at play, which are 
explored in (Ramstead et al., 2020). The first level is that of the scientist that is modelling some 
target phenomenon, e.g., constructing scientific models of living systems. The second level is 
that of the system being modelled. In computational neuroscience, scientists are constructing 
scientific models of the inferential models and processes that are assumed to be used by 
cognitive systems themselves. Crucially, this ‘second level’ of modelling is just a special case of 
the first level—it just happens to be that the physical system being modelled, is modelled as if it 
were inferring the causes of its sensory states. As Alex Kiefer put it (personal communication), 
according to the FEP, the best scientific model of the organism is a statistical model of its world.  
 
From an instrumentalist perspective, there is no robust philosophical difference between 
inference with a model and inference within a model. There is no reason why we cannot use 
MBs as a modelling tool, to carve out the boundaries of systems, when these are modelled as 
random dynamical systems (i.e., as sets of random variables over paths—i.e., stochastic 
processes—with dependence relations). 
 
The authors appeal to the notion of a formal ontology that was introduced by (Ramstead, 
Constant, Badcock, & Friston, 2019), but misapprehend it. The formal ontology that flows from 
the Bayesian mechanics is not an a priori attempt to find or draw boundaries in nature. Rather, it 
is an attempt to construct scientific models of these boundaries, in an instrumentalist fashion. 
The formal ontology only entails that we create empirically evaluable, formal models of 
organism boundaries. Interestingly, this model of boundaries is itself evaluable via Bayesian 
model evidence, leading to a nice, reflexive aspect to the framework: our scientific model of the 
boundaries of living systems that can be improved iteratively via free energy or prediction error 
minimization.  
 
 
References  
 
Friston, K., Heins, C., Ueltzhoffer, K., Da Costa, L., & Parr, T. (2021). Stochastic Chaos and 
Markov Blankets. Entropy (Basel), 23(9), 1220. doi:10.3390/e23091220 
Giere, R. N. (1999). Science without laws: University of Chicago Press. 
Giere, R. N. (2010). Scientific perspectivism: University of Chicago Press. 
Ramstead, M. J., Constant, A., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Variational ecology and 
the physics of sentient systems. Physics of life Reviews.  
Ramstead, M. J., Friston, K. J., & Hipólito, I. (2020). Is the free-energy principle a formal theory 
of semantics? From variational density dynamics to neural and phenotypic 
representations. Entropy.  
Van Fraassen, B. C. (1980). The scientific image: Oxford University Press. 
 