Cross-Frequency Coupling as a Neural Substrate for Prediction
Error Evaluation: A Laminar Neural Mass Modeling Approach
NE TN0384 (v2, March 1 2025)
Giulio Ruffini∗1, Edmundo Lopez-Sola∗1,2, Raul Palma2, Roser Sanchez-Todo1,2,
Jakub Vohryzek2, Francesca Castaldo1, and Karl Friston3
1Neuroelectrics, Barcelona, Spain
2Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
3Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London, UK
March 19, 2025
Abstract
Predictive coding frameworks suggest that neural computations rely on hierarchical er-
ror minimization, where sensory signals are evaluated against internal model predictions.
However, the neural implementation of this inference process remains unclear. We propose
that cross-frequency coupling (CFC) furnishes a fundamental mechanism for this form of
inference. We first demonstrate that our previously described laminar neural mass model
(LaNMM) supports two key forms of CFC: (i) Signal-Envelope Coupling (SEC), where low-
frequency rhythms modulate the amplitude envelope of higher-frequency oscillations, and
(ii) Envelope-Envelope Coupling (EEC), where the envelopes of slower oscillations modulate
the envelopes of higher-frequency rhythms. Then, we propose that—by encoding informa-
tion in signals and their envelopes—these processes instantiate a hierarchical “Comparator”
mechanism at the columnar level. Specifically, SEC generates fast prediction-error signals
by subtracting top-down predictions from bottom-up oscillatory envelopes, while EEC op-
erates at slower timescales to instantiate gating—a critical computational mechanism for
precision-weighting and selective information routing. To establish the face validity—and
clinical implications of—this proposal, we model perturbations of these CFC mechanisms
to investigate their roles in pathophysiological and altered neuronal function. We illustrate
how, in disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease, disruptions in gamma oscillations follow-
ing dysfunction in fast-spiking inhibitory interneurons impact Comparator function with
an aberrant amplification of prediction errors in the early stages and a drastic attenua-
tion in late phases of the disease. In contrast, by increasing excitatory gain, serotonergic
psychedelics diminish the modulatory effect of predictions, resulting in a failure to attenuate
prediction error signals (c.f., a failure of sensory attenuation). Together, these results estab-
lish cross-frequency coupling—across temporal scales—as candidate computational processes
underlying hierarchical predictive coding in health and disease.
∗co-First author; Email: giulio.ruffini@neuroelectrics.com, edmundo.lopez@neuroelectrics.com
1
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
CONTENTS 2
Contents
1 Introduction 4
1.1 Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.2 The Role of Oscillations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.3 The Laminar Neural Mass model (LaNMM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.4 Amplitude Modulation for Information Encoding and Processing . . . . . . . . . 10
2 Methods 11
2.1 Dynamics and Cross-Frequency Coupling in the LaNMM . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2 Comparator I: Implementation Using SEC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3 Comparator II: The role of EEC for precision weighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4 Disruption of Comparator Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3 Results 19
3.1 The LaNMM Sustains Robust SEC and EEC for a Wide Range of Mean Inputs . 19
3.2 SEC subserves Fast-Time Comparator Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3 EEC subserves Slow-Time Precision Modulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.4 Psychedelics and Interneuron Pathology Disrupt the Comparator . . . . . . . . . 21
4 Discussion 26
4.1 Interpretation of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2 Predictive coding and precision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3 Gating by Inhibition and Predictive Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4 Error Evaluation Dysfunctions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.5 Previous Computational Models of CFC and Prediction Error . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.6 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5 Conclusion 36
Appendix 51
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
CONTENTS 3
Highlights
• Using an encoding scheme where information is encoded in signals, their envelopes, and
envelopes of envelopes, we show how to implement prediction error and precision modu-
lation in a neural mass model through cross-frequency coupling (CFC).
• We use the laminar neural mass model (LaNMM), which integrates Jansen-Rit and pyra-
midal interneuron gamma (PING) submodels to display fast and slow rhythms and pro-
vides mechanisms for a) Signal-Envelope Coupling (SEC), where slow-wave activity modu-
lates the amplitude envelope of fast oscillations (analogous to phase-amplitude coupling),
and b) Envelope-Envelope Coupling (EEC), where the envelopes of slower oscillations
modulate the envelopes of higher-frequency rhythms.
• We show how to use the LaNMM to implement information-based prediction-error evalu-
ation (as used in Active Inference and Kolmogorov Theory), computing the approximate
precision-weighted difference between incoming sensory data (envelopes) to internal model
predictions (signals or envelopes).
• We show that using these mechanisms, the Comparator mechanism can operate at multiple
levels and timescales, generating fast prediction-error signals (via SEC) and slower gating
signals that encode context (e.g., precision) (via EEC).
• The model provides insights into the cognitive consequences of LaNMM alterations in
the context of predictive coding. First, we study disorders of fast-spiking interneurons,
such as Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). In the early stages of AD (mild PV+ impairment),
error evaluation and precision are disrupted (inflated error and reduced gating/weight of
predictions), leading to higher prediction errors even when signals match. In later stages
(high PV+ impairment), prediction errors are suppressed regardless of predictions or their
precision. Serotonergic psychedelics increase the effective weight of inputs and diminish
that of predictions, resulting in higher prediction error signals.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
1 INTRODUCTION 4
1 Introduction
1.1 Background and Motivation
Predictive coding has become a central framework for understanding cognitive processing. It
holds that the brain continuously generates predictions about incoming sensory data and up-
dates these predictions in response to mismatches or prediction errors. 1,2
Prediction errors are thought to be passed forward through cortical hierarchies to update higher-
level beliefs, while predictions are sent via feedback connections to explain away expected in-
put.3,4 Notably, this bidirectional information flow is reflected in the nature of the extracellular
signal—its fundamental features remain consistent across spatial and temporal scales, from mi-
croelectrode recordings to large-scale scalp measurements. 5 This scale-invariance implies that
the same principles underwrite local and global dynamics, a property that may facilitate the
orchestration of predictive processes under deep (i.e., hierarchical) world models. Neural os-
cillations are hypothesized to play a key role in this hierarchical inference: higher-frequency
activity (particularly in the gamma band, ∼30–100 Hz) is often associated with feedforward
signaling of surprise or prediction error, whereas lower-frequency rhythms (alpha/beta bands,
∼8–30 Hz) are linked to top-down predictive signals. 3,4 Cross-frequency coupling (CFC), such
as the phase or amplitude of slower waves modulating the amplitude of faster oscillations, is
thought to coordinate communication between levels of the hierarchy. 6 This contextual coor-
dination is sometimes cast in terms of minimizing precision-weighted prediction errors where
precision (i.e., estimated signal-to-noise in prediction errors, see Appendix D) is encoded in
the excitability of neuronal populations encoding prediction errors: c.f., Precision and Kalman
gain in Bayesian filtering formulations of predictive coding. 1,7,8 The empirical support for this
scheme comes from studies showing that unpredictable stimuli (violating expectations) evoke in-
creased gamma-band power and spiking that propagate feedforward, while predictable contexts
enhance alpha/beta oscillations and connectivity in deep cortical layers, which can suppress
gamma drive.3,4
In Active Inference theory (AIF), predictive coding provides a computational foundation for
how the brain continuously minimizes variational free energy through a hierarchical interplay
of top-down predictions (priors) and bottom-up prediction errors (data)—evaluating prediction
errors (perception), updating its model state and acting on the environment to fulfill these
predictions (action).9,10 Kolmogorov Theory (KT) formalizes this framework through Algorith-
mic Information Theory (AIT), where algorithmic agents optimize predictions by finding short
(compressive) models of the world to optimize an Objective function. In the Bayesian frame-
work of AIF, to achieve this, agents optimize the marginal likelihood of sensory input under a
generative (i.e., compressive world) model of that input, where the log marginal likelihood or
log evidence is bounded by variational free energy. Under the assumptions of predictive coding
(i.e., continuous latent states and well-behaved random fluctuations), the objective function
in AIF reduces to a mixture of precision-weighted prediction errors. 9,10 In KT, the Objective
function represents the homeostatic and the tele-homeostatic (reproduction) goals of the agent,
which indirectly translate into goals on minimizing prediction error 11–17—see Figure 1. In both
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
1 INTRODUCTION 5
cases, measuring and managing prediction error is necessary.
Although the predictive biological brain operates as a putative analog computational system,
seemingly removed from the algorithmic digital agents described in KT, these paradigms are
closely related. Both analog (e.g., brains) and digital algorithmic agents aim to model and track
the world, a process that fundamentally relies on computing sensory prediction errors to update
internal representations (information theory deals with both discrete and continuous notions of
information under the same umbrella 18). Predictive coding requires a Comparator mechanism
to evaluate prediction error ( E) to quantify how predictions P diverge from sensory input I
to update predictions (see Figure 1). The Comparator assesses discrepancies, driving model
adjustments to reduce Eand aligning sensory and generative model dynamics. From a Bayesian
filtering perspective, this can be read as Bayesian belief updating. 2,19
In this paper, we start by defining an information encoding framework inspired by amplitude
modulation (AM) radio to explore, through neural mass modeling, the mechanisms by which
prediction errors can be evaluated, identifying neural substrates and oscillatory instantiations
of the Comparator function at the mesoscopic scale.
Our definition of the Comparator highlights essential distinctions between generating prediction
errors and other important processes such as inhibition, gating, 20 and routing, 21 which can
be read as predicting and instantiating the precision required to minimize precision-weighted
prediction errors. In this setting, precision corresponds to an encoding of confidence, which
plays a key role in weighting prediction errors that compete for belief updating. In Bayesian
filtering schemes, this would correspond to optimizing the Kalman gain. 10 In Psychology, this
aspect of predictive coding has been associated with selective attention, attentional gain, and
sensory attenuation. Physiologically, this context-sensitive aspect of predictive coding is usually
attributed to cortical gain control or excitation-inhibition balance. The link between attention
and physiological encoding of precision or uncertainty is nicely illustrated by the notion of
communication through coherence.3,22–26
In the binary encoding context, the Comparator is represented logically by the “exclusive” OR
operation (XOR). XOR returns one if the inputs are different and zero otherwise, which can be
expressed as E∼ XOR(I,P) = I⊕P = (I∧¬P ) ∨ (¬P∧I ), where Erepresents the predic-
tion error, Ithe input and Pthe prediction. In predictive coding, the Comparator produces
precision-weighted prediction errors that are crucial for model updating, directly informing ad-
justments to the generative model. Similarly, prediction errors are actively employed in Kalman
filtering,27 enabling continuous updates to model parameters based on incoming sensory infor-
mation.19 Thus, in the analog version, which is more appropriate for the physiological context,
we generalize the Comparator function to evaluate the weighted difference between data and
model, i.e.,
E(t) ∼Π ·
(
I(t) −P(t)
)
(1)
or some approximation to this quantity. Here, Π refers to the Precision (in reference to the
Kalman filtering, see Appendix D) assigned to the prediction error, which we can think of as a
multiplicative factor (or, more generally, an operator). Precision modulates the impact of the
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
1 INTRODUCTION 6
Figure 1: The Comparator in KT algorithmic agents. An algorithmic agent is an information-
processing system with an Objective Function that interacts bidirectionally with the external
world, creating and running compressive models, planning, and acting to maximize its Objective
Function.14–16 The agent interacts dynamically with its environment, continuously exchanging
data inputs ( I) and outputs ( O). The Modeling Engine formulates predictions ( P) and the
estimated precision (Π) of the prediction error to evaluate the precision-weighted prediction
error (E) in the Comparator to update the Model. The Comparator is a key agent element
monitoring the performance of the modeling engine and providing the information for model
updates.
discrepancy of model and data for model updates (loosely, the higher the precision, the greater
the model update). More precisely, precision specifically refers to the inverse covariance of the
prediction errors. However, in what follows, we will use the term somewhat loosely here to refer
to inverse covariance (confidence) associated with a given signal (input, prediction, error).
1.2 The Role of Oscillations
There is a natural gradation from neuronal spiking to fast oscillations (gamma band), to slower
rhythms such as beta, alpha, theta and delta. 28,29 These rhythms also exhibit distinct spa-
tial coherence scales. Gamma oscillations tend to synchronize within local neuronal assem-
blies, whereas slower rhythms (e.g., theta, alpha) can coordinate across larger cortical net-
works.28 Consequently, information is encoded and integrated across these distinct spatiotem-
poral scales. Gamma oscillations (30–100 Hz) are critical for integrating information, feature
binding, and encoding task-relevant signals across cortical circuits. 25,28,30 In motor cortex,
gamma supports movement control and learning, 31 while in the hippocampus it aids episodic
memory formation.32 Disruptions in gamma are linked to neuropsychiatric disorders, 33,34 and
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
1 INTRODUCTION 7
gamma entrainment via sensory stimulation shows therapeutic promise. 35,36 Gamma synchro-
nization—enabling communication through coherence—facilitates selective routing and feature
binding.25,30,37
Animal studies further indicate that unpredicted stimuli evoke robust gamma (and theta) re-
sponses in superficial cortical layers, consistent with the feedforward transmission of prediction
errors.38 Collectively, gamma rhythms are fundamental carriers of information for perception,
attention, memory, and behavior.39 In contrast, alpha (8–12 Hz) and theta (4–8 Hz) oscillations
are associated with inhibition, attentional gating, and cognitive control. 20,40–44 While gamma
typically propagates feedforward, alpha is implicated in feedback processing.45 Moreover, alpha
and beta oscillations have been shown to encode stimulus predictions and modulate spatial
attention by selectively amplifying relevant signals.46–49
An important example of CFC, 6 Phase-amplitude coupling (PAC) between gamma and slower
brain rhythms (theta, alpha, spindle, slow, and ultra-slow) is well documented. 28,50 For ex-
ample, theta oscillations organize gamma activity via PAC, with the theta phase modulating
the gamma envelope to segment complex information (e.g., speech into syllabic units). 51–53
Electroenchephalography (EEG), Magnetoencephalography (MEG), and Electrocorticography
(ECoG) studies confirm that low-frequency responses track the temporal envelope of attended
speech, while high-gamma envelopes selectively encode auditory information. 54–58 Together,
CFC among gamma, alpha, and theta rhythms establish a dynamic balance between local pro-
cessing and contextual coordination, which are hypothesized to subserve efficient and flexible
neural computation.59,60
Supporting this idea, abnormal PAC has been observed in several neurological and psychiatric
disorders. In Parkinson’s disease, increased beta–gamma PAC in the motor cortex correlates
with symptom severity and responds to medication, 61–63 with significant changes emerging in
advanced stages.64 Similarly, in AD, PAC (theta/alpha to gamma) is decreased relative to
healthy controls and correlates with cognitive impairment. 65–67 Region-specific reductions in
PAC, such as in the lower left temporoparietal area 68 and in the hippocampus and medial pre-
frontal cortex of transgenic AD models,69 are likely driven by amyloid-beta and tau pathologies,
with reduced gamma PAC also reported in the left parahippocampal cortex.67 Gamma entrain-
ment via sensory70,71 or electrical stimulation72—which appears to modulate theta–gamma PAC
in the frontal cortex 73—has been proposed as a potential treatment for AD. PAC disruptions
are also evident in psychiatric conditions. 74,75,75, 76 Finally, psilocybin has also been shown to
disrupt PAC (theta–gamma) in a dose-dependent manner in animal models. 77
1.3 The Laminar Neural Mass model (LaNMM)
Cortical function emerges from dynamics on cortical and subcortical hierarchies with multi-
scale architectural features.78,79 These networks can be modeled using connectomes80 and node
activity generated by physiologically realistic mesoscopic neural mass models (NMMs)81 to pro-
vide a high-level representation of the mean activity of large neuronal populations. A typical
cortical column in the mammalian neocortex is estimated to contain on the order of 104 neurons,
with some regions or species exhibiting counts closer to 10 5 neurons.82 For instance, in primary
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
1 INTRODUCTION 8
Figure 2: Laminar Neural Mass Model Overview. (a) Laminar neural mass model architec-
ture. Driving inputs studied in the model (all glutamatergic) are displayed ( µP1 is the mean
input parameter to P1, µP2 is the mean input parameter to P2, as well as stochastic zero
mean input to PV). (b) Sample signals. (c) Two-parameter bifurcation diagram of the LaNMM
model as a function of the external inputs µP1 and µP2 obtained using the continuation software
AUTO-07p.85 Symbols indicate the dynamical regimes within the colored regions: steady-state
(white), periodic (light blue), and quasi-periodic (dark blue). The lines represent bifurcations,
as described in the main text. The white dot marks the mean input parameter values used in
Sanchez-Todo et al. (2023), 86 (µP1 ,µP2 ) = (200,90) Hz. The black dot indicates the represen-
tative values chosen in this study, (µP1 ,µP2 ) = (270,90) Hz, which place the model deeper into
the quasi-periodic regime and display a stronger EEC (see Figures 4 and H1).
sensory cortices—such as the visual or somatosensory areas—a column is often characterized
by roughly 10,000 neurons, although precise numbers can vary based on anatomical definitions
and the specific cortical region. This mesoscopic scale—situated between single neurons and
large-scale networks—provides a natural level of description for many electrophysiological phe-
nomena. NMMs are designed to capture the aggregate dynamics of large neuronal populations
by averaging individual activity into mean-field variables, such as average membrane poten-
tials or firing rates. 83,84 Given that a cortical column comprises tens of thousands of neurons,
the underlying assumption that microscopic fluctuations average out is largely justified. This
averaging allows NMMs to reproduce key oscillatory and coupling phenomena, including cross-
frequency interactions and the propagation of prediction errors, without modeling each neuron
individually. Thus, NMMs are well-suited to describe mesoscopic dynamics within cortical
columns, although they necessarily abstract away finer-scale micro-circuital details.
We have previously introduced alaminar neural mass model (LaNMM)86,87 optimized from lam-
inar recordings from the macaque prefrontal cortex 88 and designed to capture both superficial-
layer fast and deeper-layer slow oscillations along with their interactions (cross-frequency cou-
pling), such as PAC and amplitude-amplitude anti-correlation (AAC). The spectrolaminar motif
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
1 INTRODUCTION 9
is ubiquitous across the primate cortex. 89 The LaNMM combines conduction physics with two
NMMs—Jansen-Rit and Pyramidal Interneuronal Network Gamma (PING) subpopulations at
slow and fast frequencies, respectively—to simulate depth-resolved electrophysiology.
Although the LaNMM is only one of several potential modeling frameworks, it provides a
powerful and physiologically realistic tool to address the broader hypothesis that (1) information
can be encoded both in ongoing signals and in their amplitude envelopes, and (2) prediction-error
evaluation may be instantiated by cross-frequency coupling in cortical columns—particularly
signal-to-envelope and envelope-to-envelope couplings. As we show, the LaNMM allows for
a dynamic instantiation of the Comparator, facilitating the analysis of how prediction errors
and top-down predictions may be integrated across different cortical lamina. By analyzing
cross-frequency coupling in the model simulations, one can gain insight into how fast and slow
oscillatory interactions may underpin prediction error generation, routing, and inhibition in
hierarchical cortical processing.
The LaNMM is a biologically plausible extension of existing neural mass models (NMMs), in-
tegrating realistic cortical architectures with self-sustaining oscillatory dynamics and emergent
cross-frequency coupling (CFC). This design makes it well-suited for investigating cortical pro-
cessing and oscillatory interactions. By featuring two interacting populations—each capable of
autonomously generating oscillations—the LaNMM provides a physiologically grounded frame-
work for studying cortical rhythms. In contrast, other models such as PING, 29 Jansen–Rit
(JR),83 Wendling,90 and Chehelcheraghi 91,92 differ in their structural assumptions and how
they produce oscillations or cross-frequency coupling. Notably, the LaNMM does not rely on
stochastic inputs to sustain its rhythms. For example, the Chehelcheraghi models require noise
to induce inhibition-based gamma (ING) and CFC, whereas the LaNMM combines JR and
PING sub-models, each generating slow or fast rhythms independently—leading naturally to
phase-amplitude (PAC) and amplitude-amplitude coupling (AAC).
Furthermore, the LaNMM is explicitly designed with a cortical laminar architecture amenable
for realistic physical measurements,86,93,94 distinguishing it from the lumped population models
of PING, JR, and Wendling. While the PING model primarily produces gamma oscillations
through an excitatory-inhibitory loop and the JR/Wendling models focus on alpha rhythms
with additional fast inhibitory loops, the LaNMM naturally produces multiple frequency bands
by leveraging laminar interactions. This makes it particularly suited for modeling observed
laminar-specific oscillations, such as deep-layer alpha/beta modulating superficial-layer gamma,
as seen in frontal and parietal cortices. 23 Additionally, the model’s structure allows generaliza-
tion beyond the alpha-gamma framework, accommodating different slow-fast frequency pairs
(e.g., theta-beta, theta-gamma, beta-gamma) through parameter adjustments. This flexibility
further enhances its relevance for modeling diverse cortical dynamics across brain regions (some
examples are given in Appendix F).
Finally, the LaNMM fits squarely in the context of hierarchical processing and predictive cod-
ing. There exist evident asymmetries in hierarchical cortical connectivity, particularly in the
distinct roles of feedforward and feedback pathways in sensory processing. 95,96 Anatomical
studies have established that feedforward pathways typically originate from superficial layers
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
1 INTRODUCTION 10
and project to granular layers, while feedback pathways arise from deeper layers, connecting to
non-granular areas, supporting a hierarchical processing model. Functionally, feedforward and
feedback connections also differ in frequency domains. Feedforward signals often use gamma-
band frequencies and are associated with prediction error transmission, while feedback signals
utilize lower alpha and beta frequencies, hypothesized to convey predictions and in alignment
with predictive coding models. 95 In this framework, feedforward connections deliver prediction
errors to higher-order areas, while feedback signals transmit top-down predictions to explain
sensory input. Experimental studies support this model, showing that gamma coherence is
stronger in feedforward pathways, while alpha/beta coherence is more prominent in feedback
pathways, suggesting a mechanism where faster frequencies convey discrepancies and slower
frequencies signal model-driven predictions. 95
1.4 Amplitude Modulation for Information Encoding and Processing
In digital communication systems, information is typically represented as a sequence of binary
digits. In contrast, analog systems and biological networks convey information via continuous
signals. A classic example is AM radio, where a high-frequency carrier wave is modulated
by a low-frequency signal so that the carrier’s amplitude (its envelope) encodes the desired
information. Neural systems appear to operate on a similar principle, encoding information in
aspects such as signal power, phase, or envelope. 97 For instance, high gamma-band activity in
the auditory cortex exhibits amplitude modulation that closely tracks the stimulus envelope, 98
and Pasley et al. (2012) 99 demonstrated that speech could be reconstructed from the high
gamma power envelope extracted from ECoG recordings.
In our framework for error evaluation, and as further discussed in Ruffini et al. (2025), 100 we
assume that oscillatory information is encoded in the slow (top-down) signal, its envelope, or in
the fast signal’s envelope. As the dynamic impact of error signals is proportional to their power,
“loud” (i.e., precise) signals exert a stronger effect on predictive processing (i.e., belief updating
in higher hierarchical levels). In this view, the Comparator mechanism at each hierarchical level
does not operate on the full detail of the gamma signal but rather on a coarse-grained version—
the amplitude envelope—that approximates the difference between internal predictions and
incoming sensory data. A successful match yields a lower power gamma signal with a reduced
modulation index, whereas a discrepancy results in a modulated signal conveying the prediction
error.
AM radio provides a relevant analogy. It transmits information—such as speech or music—by
encoding it as variations in the dynamic amplitude (envelope) of a high-frequency carrier wave.
In more detail, the fast carrier signal, expressed as C(t) = Ac cos(2πfct), is modulated by a
slower base-band (information) signal m(t) to produce S(t) = Ac [1 + am(t)] cos(2πfct), where
a <1 is the modulation index ensuring the envelope reliably follows m(t). At the receiver,
demodulation extracts the original information from the envelope variations of S(t). In the Hi-
erarchical Amplitude Modulation (HAM) model discussed elsewhere,100 information is similarly
encoded not only in the raw oscillatory signals but also in their successively extracted envelopes,
establishing a multiscale coding scheme that reflects the brain’s hierarchical organization—and
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
2 METHODS 11
implicit depth of its generative world model. In this context, information is encoded in the
signals or their envelopes, and we will focus on their couplings. For this reason, rather than
PAC, we will focus on signal-to-envelope coupling.
In the following sections, we detail how our model capitalizes on the above encoding mech-
anisms. First, we show that the LaNMM provides concrete mechanisms for SEC and EEC.
In SEC, slow-wave activity modulates the amplitude envelope of fast oscillations (analogous
to phase-amplitude coupling), while in EEC, slower envelopes modulate amplitude-amplitude
interactions, thereby adding an extra layer or order of predictive control. In brief, we implicitly
associate (fast) phase amplitude coupling with the encoding of first-order content of prediction
errors, while the (slow) amplitude-amplitude coupling is associated with the encoding of second-
order context in which content is inferred, where the context can be regarded as the precision
(i.e., inverse variance) or second-order statistics of first-order prediction errors. 8,101
Next, we demonstrate how the LaNMM can provide weighted prediction-error evaluation, i.e.,
computing an approximate difference between incoming sensory data (as captured in input
signal envelopes) and internal model predictions (either as signals or their envelopes). These
mechanisms enable the Comparator to operate across multiple levels and timescales—generating
fast prediction-error signals via SEC and slower context-sensitive weighted gating signals via
EEC.
To explore how alterations in the LaNMM and prediction error function can shed light on
the adverse effects observed in certain pathological or altered states, we discuss how deficits
in fast inhibitory synapses, as seen in Alzheimer’s Disease, and increased glutamate receptor
gain, characteristic of serotonergic psychedelic states, may disrupt the Comparator process and
compromise effective information processing.
Finally, although the analysis will center on the LaNMM as originally described, 86,102 it can
be extended to other LaNMM parameterizations and frequency schemes (not necessarily alpha
and gamma at 40 Hz), or indeed other computational models displaying CFC (positive SEC
and negative EEC).
2 Methods
Figure 3 provides an overview of the Comparator mechanism in predictive coding, which we
will implement in our LaNMM. Here, incoming “input” Iis combined with a “prediction” P,
producing a precision-weighted “error” signal Epropagating up the hierarchy.
Information is encoded in the “fast envelope” of the input signal Iand in the prediction signal
P itself, while input precision (gain) is encoded in the slow envelope of the input (envelope
of the envelope, i.e., average power) and prediction precision in the envelope of the prediction
signal. More specifically, the envelope of the prediction signal encodes the inverse precision
of the prediction Π −1
P (i.e., covariance or uncertainty), while the envelopes of input and error
encode their precision, Π I, and ΠE respectively (inverse covariance or confidence).
In line with predictive coding frameworks, we aim to show how the LaNMM can explicitly
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
2 METHODS 12
Figure 3: Laminar model concept implementation of the evaluation of prediction error ( E) via
two timescales and two mechanisms: a) Signal-Envelope coupling (SEC) mediated evaluation of
prediction error, where the incoming information is encoded in the (fast) envelope of the carrier,
and the prediction is directly the slower signal; b) Envelope-Envelope coupling (EEC) implemen-
tation of precision computation (digital simplification), where the precision of prediction errors
is modulated by the envelope of the slower signal flowing downstream. Panel (c) illustrates the
combination of both mechanisms, where precision (very slow envelope) and predictions (sig-
nals) are encoded into the same signal ( P). The LaNMM (center) includes two bidirectionally
interacting subpopulations. 86 Bottom-up input data ( I) arrives at the PING subpopulation
pyramidal cell P2 encoded in the fast oscillation envelope, while top-down weighted predictions
(P) arrive encoded in slower signals (alpha band in the model) at the bottom JR population
pyramidal cell P2 or at the PV cell in the PING subpopulation. The interaction alters the
dynamics of P2, which produces an approximate, weighted difference of input and prediction E
encoded in the envelope.
encode how mismatch signals (errors) update and refine internal predictions, thereby emulating a
biologically plausible Comparator process at multiple cortical levels. In this paper, we will focus
on local processing at a single column and the implementation of modulation, demodulation,
and Comparator mechanisms. The analysis of coupled columns for a full implementation of
predictive coding will be pursued elsewhere.
For the implementation of the Comparator, we rely on oscillations and their cross-frequency
coupling properties. In our demonstration, we focus on a particular combination of inputs.
However, the mean inputs of the LaNMM nodes in a whole brain model will vary as a function
of their connectivity to other nodes. To illustrate the range of applicability of the model, we
start by characterizing the dynamics and CFC properties of the model in the input landscape.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
2 METHODS 13
2.1 Dynamics and Cross-Frequency Coupling in the LaNMM
To analyze the dynamics of the model—prior to our implementation of the Comparator function—
we first obtained the bifurcation diagram of the model as a function of mean inputs to the two
pyramidal populations. Figure 2 presents the two-parameter bifurcation diagram of the model
for (µP1 ,µP2 ), with other parameters as in Sanchez-Todo et al. (2023). 86 Starting at µP1 = 0,
the system exhibits a stable fixed point and evolves toward a steady state. Along the x-axis for
µP2 = 0, the system undergoes a saddle-node on an invariant cycle (SNIC) bifurcation around
µP1 ≈ 104 (depicted in green), after which it transitions to periodic dynamics. Increasing
µP1 further leads to two Fold of Limit Cycles (FLC) bifurcations, represented by the dashed
red lines. Finally, around µP1 ≈364 the periodic dynamics disappear at a supercritical Hopf
bifurcation HB+
1 (purple).
This bifurcation scenario closely resembles that of the coupled Jansen-Rit model discussed
in.103 Notably, without external inputs to P2, the system is unable to generate gamma rhythms
within this range. While the overall structure remains consistent as µP2 increases, an additional
supercritical Hopf bifurcation HB +
2 (gray) emerges. Of particular interest is the region where
two limit cycles coexist, leading to a torus bifurcation (TR) and subsequently driving the system
into a quasi-periodic regime. The white dot marks the mean input parameter values used in
Sanchez-Todo et al. (2023), 86 (µP1 ,µP2 ) = (200, 90) Hz. The black dot indicates the values
chosen for this study, ( µP1 ,µP2 ) = (270,90) Hz, used in recent modeling work on psychedelics
and AD.104
Next, we analyze the cross-frequency properties of the model. Signal-envelope coupling (SEC)—
which is related but not equivalent to PAC 88,105–109 — can be used to implement the error
evaluation/comparison process Eat relatively fast time scales (dictated by the low-frequency
signal). Here, a slower oscillatory rhythm (encoding predictions) modulates the envelope (or
the overall magnitude) of faster oscillations (encoding the incoming sensory data) at the slower
timescale. This mechanism allows the slower predictive oscillation to interact with information
encoded in the fast oscillation at a “coarse-grained” level, where discrepancies are identified.
Both the phase and the instantaneous value of the slower oscillation impact this modulation,
aligning the processing of fast inputs with the slower rhythm and enabling the system to compute
the necessary error signal.
Envelope-Envelope Coupling (EEC) , sometimes referred to as Amplitude-Amplitude Coupling
(AAC) or power coupling, can act as a suppression or gating mechanism at a slower timescale ,
which acts by modulating the envelope of faster oscillations according to the envelope of a
slower rhythm. This coupling creates windows of increased or decreased excitability, effectively
allowing or restricting the propagation of error signals based on the slow oscillatory envelope.
Through this gating function, EEC facilitates selective routing by maintaining or suppressing
the transmission of specific error signals, extending routing effects over broader timescales.
This mechanism we associate with the modulation of prediction error signaling to effectively
broadcast precision-weighted prediction errors. EEC allows predictive coding circuits to remain
dynamically sensitive to shifts in attentional or contextual relevance. By sustaining periods of
high or low excitability based on slower rhythmic inputs, EEC supports long-term gating of
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
2 METHODS 14
information flow, ensuring that predictive models align with high-level task demands or goals
(e.g., attention, vigilance). However, EEC can also be used as a graded inhibitory mechanism
capable of encoding contextual information to be contrasted with the input power at longer
timescales.
From a statistical perspective, the greater integration time is mandated by the need to accu-
mulate evidence for the precision of prediction errors. This follows because the estimation of
precision requires the pooling of instantaneous prediction errors over time (in the same way that
a statistician would pool prediction errors over multiple observations to estimate the standard
error of her estimated effect size).
The LaNMM model as described in Sanchez-Todo et al. (2023) 86 was used to investigate the
interactions between the two pyramidal populations in the neural mass, designated as P1 and
P2, under varying external inputs φe1(t) and φe2(t). The starting point was the analysis of SEC
and EEC.
Simulations were conducted across a two-dimensional parameter space by performing a sweep
over the mean input values µP1 and µP2 for P1 and P2, respectively. For each combination
of (µP1 ,µP2 ), the LaNMM was integrated over a predefined timespan using numerical solvers,
and the initial transient dynamics were excluded from the analysis by discarding the initial
segments of the simulation. The resulting time series of membrane potentials uP1 (t) and uP2 (t)
were stored for subsequent analysis (all analysis was carried out using membrane potentials).
EEC was quantified by computing the Pearson correlation coefficient between the amplitude
envelopes of P1 in the alpha band (8 −12 Hz) and P2 in the gamma band (30 −50 Hz). SEC
was similarly assessed by correlating the band-pass alpha band signal of P1 with the amplitude
envelope of P2’s gamma signal.
Additionally, the power within the alpha and gamma bands for both populations was calculated
using both a band-passed Hilbert transform and Welch’s power spectral density estimation.
These power metrics provide insight into the oscillatory behavior and energy distribution across
the specified frequency bands under different input conditions.
Simulations were performed by sweeping µp1 and µp2 over a range from 50 to 400 in steps
of 5 Hz. For each parameter pair, we integrated the LaNMM model using a fixed time step
(∆t= 1 ms) and a total simulation time of ∼90 s, discarding an initial transient. Depending on
the desired drive condition, the model was run in one of three modes: P1 drive, P2 drive, or PV
drive. External inputs were generated using a multiscale noise generator that produces a slow
random-walk drift and a fast white-noise component (see Appendix G), which were injected
into the appropriate population (either P1, P2 or, via an extra glutamatergic synapse, PV). For
each simulation, we computed coupling metrics: specifically, the correlations between the band-
pass-filtered P1 signal (or its envelope) in the alpha band (8–12 Hz) and the envelope of the P2
gamma band (30–50 Hz) signal, yielding the SEC and EEC values. In addition, we computed
the Population Excitation-Inhibition Index (PEIX) to characterize the saturation of fast and
slow oscillatory activity in the model to complement the bifurcation analysis and others (SEC,
EEC and power, see Appendix A for details). Maps of the coupling metrics, band power, and
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
2 METHODS 15
PEIX as a function of mean input to the two pyramidal populations were generated.
2.2 Comparator I: Implementation Using SEC
2.2.1 Error suppression
We can formulate a first hypothesis, regarding the implementation of the comparator with the
LaNMM: for a given input, if the correct prior is applied (i.e., a prior alpha signal matching the
gamma envelope of the input signal), the output error should be low, which can be measured
using the power of the P2 output envelope—see Figure 3.
To demonstrate this, we created synthetic signals to be used as input and prior messages. The
input signal was generated by amplitude modulating a 40 Hz carrier signal with an alpha-band
(8–12 Hz) envelope extracted from filtered white noise. To ensure non-zero values, a constant
offset was added to the envelope and the carrier wave. The prior signal was designed to either
match this alpha envelope (match condition), remain constant (flat condition), or originate from
an independent alpha source (wrong condition). These conditions allowed us to investigate the
role of input-prior alignment in modulating the network’s response.
Given that P1 is an excitatory population and that the SEC for P1-driving inputs is positive
(see Figure 4), we expected—and confirmed—that for effective suppression of the input signal
in the match condition, the prior signal had to be phase-shifted by 180 º (i.e., inverted). This
inversion allowed the prior to counteract the excitatory input effectively. In contrast, for the PV
population, which is inhibitory and has positive SEC for PV-driving inputs, the prior had to be
applied in phase with the input signal to achieve suppression. Further details on the variation
of power suppression depending on the phase of the matching prior are shown in Appendix C.
These signals were then used to drive the LaNMM. The generated signals were applied as
inputs, modifying the membrane potential perturbation un of the corresponding populations.
The inputs and priors were scaled by gain factors GI,GP. Simulations were run for a total
duration of 100 seconds with a sampling frequency of 1000 Hz.
After running the model, the membrane potential perturbation of the P2 population, uP2,
was extracted and analyzed. This output signal was band-pass-filtered between 30 and 50 Hz
to isolate gamma activity, and its envelope was computed using the Hilbert transform. The
envelope P2 signal was then further filtered in the alpha-band (8–12 Hz) to extract the error
signal (E). Finally, the power of this alpha-band signal was computed as a measure of error
power, allowing us to quantify the impact of different prior conditions on the suppression of
mismatch signals.
We first optimized the gain factorsGI,GPto determine the conditions that resulted in maximal
suppression of the error signal in the “match” condition. This optimization was performed by
varying the gains and evaluating the resulting error power. The detailed methodology used to
compute the gain values is reported in Appendix B.
Using these optimized parameters, we ran ten simulations using different seeds to generate the
signals and compared the power of the error signal across the different prior conditions. This
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
2 METHODS 16
analysis allowed us to assess the extent to which the alignment between the prior and the input
influenced the suppression of mismatch-related activity within the model.
2.2.2 Computation of prediction error
The above study is a special case of a more general statement: for a given input signal encoding
a message (in the gamma envelope) and a given prior signal encoding a different message (as an
alpha band oscillation), the output signal (encoded as the gamma envelope of the P2 output)
will approximate the difference of the signals, i.e., a prediction error approximation.
The hypothesis can be formalized as E= a·I+b·P+ ˆη, where Eis the P2 output envelope (and
prediction error estimate) produced by the LaNMM, as explained in the previous section, Iis
the input message (fast oscillation envelope), Pis the prior message (slow oscillation signal),
and ˆηdenotes unmodeled noise. Here, aand bare constants (real numbers) that scale the input
and prior, respectively, and we expect a and b to be of opposite sign (subtraction).
To determine a and b, we optimize the loss function
L(a,b) = ||E(I,P) −(a·I + b·P)||2 (2)
Using this loss function, we find a and b with which the LaNMM output is best approximated
as a linear function of input and prediction.
To demonstrate that the minimal loss is meaningful, we define an alternative loss function,
L′(a,b) = ||E(I,P) −(a·I + b·X)||2 (3)
where X denotes a random assignment of mismatched predictions. We can then verify that,
for a given pair ( I,P) used as input and prediction to the LaNMM, the minimization of L
results in a lower loss than the minimization of L′. We assume that the unrelated priors Xare
instantiations of different alpha signals with the same mean and amplitude as the priors sent
to the LaNMM, obtained with different seeds.
To generate information-rich output and subtraction messages and avoid power suppression of
the input, the signals used as priors did not match the input signals (i.e., they were generated
with different seeds than the input, corresponding to the “wrong” prior case in the previous
section).
We generated ten such pairs of (I,P) and ten unrelated priors Xi for each pair, and minimized
Land L′ in each case. To understand whether the error computed with the LaNMM was
best approximated by a linear combination of ( I,P), we ran an independent samples t-test
comparing the distribution of Land L′ values. We carried out this study for the prior sent to
the P1 population and for the prior sent to the PV population.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
2 METHODS 17
2.3 Comparator II: The role of EEC for precision weighting
Here, we study the idea that EEC (anticorrelation) can be used to modulate the precision of
prediction errors within the column—see Figure 3. We assume that the precision of prediction
errors, ΠE, is encoded in their lower-frequency envelope (longer timescale averaged power) and
show how EEC can be used to amplify or attenuate the precision of error by applying top-
down precision-modulation signals ΠP. Implicitly, we assume that the confidence in inputs (the
precision of the incoming error from bottom-up layers), ΠI, is encoded in the amplitude of their
envelopes, too.
As input signal, we used a non-modulated 40 Hz carrier signal with mean 2 mV and amplitude
2 mV, to ensure that the input was always positive. To obtain a precision-modulation signal, we
created a random square wave of 100 seconds by adding 5 random steps of duration 10 seconds
and amplitude 1 mV to a flat signal of 1 mV. Such a square wave represents the input precision
ΠI. We amplitude-modulated a 10 Hz carrier signal to obtain the precision-modulation signal.
We added a constant offset of 2 mV to the resulting signal to ensure non-zero values. To
evaluate the effect of the precision-modulation signal, we used as a contrast condition a “flat”
precision-modulation signal (no modulation) oscillating at 10 Hz (with mean 2 mV and 2 mV
amplitude).
As before, the inputs and priors were scaled by gain factors GI = 1,G P = 10, which were
optimized to result in maximal modulation of the error precision (such optimization is detailed
in Appendix B).
After running the model, the membrane potential of the P2 population was extracted and
analyzed. The output signal was band-pass-filtered between 30 and 50 Hz to isolate gamma
activity, and its envelope was computed using the Hilbert transform. The envelope P2 signal
was then further low-pass filtered below 1 Hz to extract the error signal precision (ΠE). Finally,
the gamma power of the P2 output was computed and compared for the precision-modulation
and flat modulation signals as a measure of error attenuation. We ran ten simulations using
different seeds to generate the signals and evaluated the difference across conditions using paired
t-tests.
2.3.1 Modulation of precision
Here we aim to show that for a given input signal encoding a message with some precision Π I
(in the slow envelope of gamma) and a given prior signal encoding some precision modulation
ΠP (in the alpha signal envelope), the output signal will encode an approximate subtraction of
the respective precisions, reflected in the slow envelope of the P2 output.
In this case, we used as input messages signals with varying precision Π I, obtained in the
same way as the precision-modulating signals described in the previous section. Prior messages
encoding the precision modulation were obtained in the same way.
We observed that such simple input and prior messages of amplitude 1 mV, the normalized P2
output slow envelope (between -1 and 1), ˆΠE, approximates the direct subtraction of input and
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
2 METHODS 18
prior precisions well. We thus computed the MSE between the slow envelope of the P2 output
and the subtraction of input and prediction precisions (long time scale envelopes),
L= ||ˆΠE(I,P) −(ΠI−ΠP)||2 (4)
We will refer to this as the consistent case since the input and prediction provided to the
LaNMM are the ones used in the subtraction to compute the MSE.
To demonstrate that such MSE obtained is meaningful and that the modulation computed
by the LaNMM approximates the subtraction of input and prior precision well, we can also
compute the MSE between the LaNMM output slow envelope and the subtraction of input and
an unrelated prior precision Π X (inconsistent case),
L′= ||ˆΠE(I,P) −(ΠI−ΠX)||2 (5)
The unrelated prior precision Xis constructed in the same way as the prior sent to the LaNMM
but with another seed to define the random signal generation.
As in the SEC case, the signals used as priors did not match the input precision signals (i.e.,
they were generated with different seeds than the input, corresponding to the “wrong” prior
case in the previous section). We generated 10 pairs of ( I,P) to be used as input and prior to
the LaNMM and one unrelated prior Xfor each pair, and computed Land L′. To understand
whether the error computed with the LaNMM approximated the subtraction well Π I−ΠP, we
ran a paired t-test comparing the distribution of MSE values for the consistent and inconsistent
cases.
2.4 Disruption of Comparator Function
2.4.1 Serotonergic Psychedelics
We then studied disruption of the comparator function due to the interaction with classical
serotonergic psychedelics ( psychedelics hereafter). The excitatory effects of psychedelics were
implemented in the model as an increase in the excitatory synaptic gains, Wexc, of the P1
population, based on previous modeling work. 104 See also the empirical changes in excitability
estimated using dynamic causal modelling in (Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2013). 110
We first analyzed the alterations induced by psychedelics in the oscillatory behavior of the
LaNMM by computing the alpha and gamma power of the P1 and P2 populations for different
values of the Wexc parameter. Based on those results, we chose a value of WΨ
exc = 4.5 mV to rep-
resent the acute phase of psychedelics. For this value, the alpha power in the P1 population was
strongly reduced in the model, while the gamma power in the P2 population was substantially
increased.
We analyzed the effects of these alterations in the LaNMM computation of prediction error
using the SEC and EEC mechanisms. We first computed the power of the error signal ( P2
output gamma envelope) obtained in the SEC scenario in the baseline condition (W0
exc = 3.25
mV, default value in the LaNMM and in Jansen-Rit83,86,104 ) and the psychedelics condition, in
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
3 RESULTS 19
the case where a prior matching the input was applied.
We then studied the alterations in the EEC mechanism for precision computation. As in the
SEC case, we computed the gamma power of the error signal ( P2 output slow envelope) in
the baseline condition and the psychedelics condition, in the case where a 10 Hz precision-
modulating signal was applied to P1.
2.4.2 PV+ disinhibition in Alzheimer’s Disease
The inhibitory deficits associated with AD were implemented in the model as a reduction in
the strength of inhibitory synaptic connections from the PV population to the P2 population,
CP V→P2, based on previous computational models of AD-related dysfunction. 111
We first analyzed the alterations induced by AD in the oscillatory behavior of the LaNMM by
computing the alpha and gamma power of the P1 and P2 populations for different levels of PV
dysfunction. Based on the work in Sanchez-Todo et al. (2024),111 we selected a level of inhibition
reduction for different stages of disease progression: healthy (baseline value, CP V→P2 = 550),
Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) ( CP V→P2 = 300) and AD ( CP V→P2 = 140).
We first evaluated the alpha and gamma power alterations in the different stages of AD due to
variations in the CP V→P2 parameter. We then analyzed the effects of these alterations in the
LaNMM computation of prediction error using the SEC and EEC mechanisms.
We computed the power of the error signal ( P2 output gamma envelope) obtained in the SEC
scenario for each AD stage, using a prior matching the input. We then studied the alterations
in error precision computation using EEC. As before, we used a flat input oscillating at 40 Hz
and a prior signal encoding some precision-modulation oscillating at 10 Hz. We computed the
power of the error signal in each AD stage as a measure of the EEC error suppression by the
precision-modulating signal.
3 Results
3.1 The LaNMM Sustains Robust SEC and EEC for a Wide Range of Mean
Inputs
We began by examining the behavior of the system when random inputs were presented to
P1, P2, and PV. Figure 4 displays maps indicating the mean positive SEC and negative EEC
values. These results reveal that in a wide range of configurations, the system naturally yields
the desired combination of positive SEC and negative EEC. This provides a baseline for how
the laminar model processes random inputs before introducing comparator mechanisms.
The results of the simulation of SEC and EEC highlight the robustness of EEC and SEC
couplings across wide ranges of the parameter space. As a result of robust EEC with P1 driving
(Figure 4), we see that envelope coupling provides a mechanism for suppression of competitive
oscillations. For example, alpha power (evaluated by its envelope) can be used to suppress the
gamma envelope or vice versa. However, the same applies in the other direction: fast oscillation
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
3 RESULTS 20
Figure
4: SEC (left column) and EEC (right) between neural populations P1 and P2 for random
inputs to P1 (top row), P2 (middle), and PV (bottom). Both P1 and P2 receive a constant mean
external drive (xand yaxis), with zero mean noise injected into one of them via a glutamatergic
synapse. This dual-input strategy allows the model to capture both the steady excitatory drive
and the stochastic fluctuations affecting the desired population. The right column displays the
correlation between the alpha envelope of P1 and the gamma envelope of P2 (EEC), while the
left column depicts the correlation between the alpha signal of P1 and the gamma envelope of
P2 (SEC). The white dot marks the mean input parameter values used in Sanchez-Todo el al.
(2023),86 (µP1 ,µP12) = (200,90) Hz. The black dot indicates the values chosen for this study,
(µP1 ,µP2 ) = (270,90) Hz.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
3 RESULTS 21
power can be used to regulate slow oscillation activity. This mechanism can subserve gating
by inhibition and predictive routing, as is further discussed below. Figures A1 and A2 in the
Appendix display maps of the computed power within the alpha and gamma bands for both
P1 and P2, revealing how power distributions vary with changes in the external drives µP1 , µP2
and µP V.
3.2 SEC subserves Fast-Time Comparator Function
We first employed the SEC mechanism to implement the Comparator function (i.e., the differ-
ence between input and prior). Two primary configurations were tested: providing the prior to
P1 and providing the prior to PV . Figure 5 illustrates the suppression of error signal power
in the first case. The second configuration (prior to PV ) is shown in Figure 7, demonstrating
that both achieve a similar comparator function using SEC. Indeed, in both cases, sending a
prior signal matching the input signal results in lower error power than sending a flat prior or
a wrong prior.
Figure 6 illustrates the computation of prediction error when the prior is provided to the P1
population. The results for the PV configuration are shown in Figure 8. As shown in Figures 6d
and 8b , the loss value with the original prior is always lower than the loss value with alternative
priors. This demonstrates that the linear combination of the input and prior signals sent to
the LaNMM explains the LaNMM output better than the combination of the input with other
arbitrary prior signals (i.e., that L∗is minimal).
3.3 EEC subserves Slow-Time Precision Modulation
Figures 9 depicts how EEC suppresses the precision of error signals: the error signal is signifi-
cantly attenuated (lower error power) when using a precision-modulating signal with transient
increases in alpha power (slow envelope), as opposed to the case where a flat, non-modulating
prior is sent to P1.
Figure 10 illustrates how EEC in the LaNMM can be used to perform modulation of prediction
errors by subtraction. The error signal precision encodes the difference between the input
precision and the precision-modulating prior signal, as quantified by the MSE between the
normalized error precision and the subtraction of the Π I and ΠP. The similarity between the
LaNMM output (Eprecision, ΠE) and the subtraction of input and prior precisions (ΠI−ΠP) is
illustrated in Figure 10b. Overall, the results indicate that EEC can be harnessed to modulate
the precision of error signals.
3.4 Psychedelics and Interneuron Pathology Disrupt the Comparator
Finally, we investigated how LaNMM disruptions associated with serotonergic psychedelics or
Alzheimer’s Disease interneuron pathology impact the comparator functions.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
3 RESULTS 22
Figure 5: SEC suppression scheme, prediction sent to P1. If the prediction signal matches
the input (blue traces), the error signal— P2 output envelope—is suppressed, as shown by the
reduced power (right bar plot). We compare the case of a matching prediction with the case
of a flat prediction signal (orange traces) and a wrong prediction signal (red traces). The
asterisk denotes a significant difference over multiple simulations in a paired t-test (p <1e−5),
a convention followed in all subsequent figures.
Figure 6: SEC subtraction scheme, prediction sent to P1. (a) Study hypothesis: we can find a
linear combination of the input and prediction signals α·I(t) +β·P(t) that approximates the
error signal, with α and β of different sign (subtraction). Using an unrelated signal X(t) for
the linear combination leads to a worse approximation. (b) Optimal values ˆ α,ˆβ for a specific
pair (I,P). The loss function Lis defined as the MSE between the error signal and the linear
combination of input and prediction. (c) The error computed by the LaNMM (grey traces) is
well approximated by the optimal subtraction of input and prediction (green traces) but not
by the optimal subtraction of the input and an unrelated signal (red traces). (d) The optimal
subtraction using Iand P(consistent case) is closer to the LaNMM output (minimal Lvalue)
than the optimal subtraction using an I and an unrelated signal X(inconsistent case).
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
3 RESULTS 23
Figure 7: SEC suppression scheme, prior sent to PV . If the prediction signal matches the input
(blue traces), the error signal— P2 output envelope—is suppressed, as shown by the reduced
power (right bar plot). We compare the case of a matching prediction with the case of a
flat prediction signal (orange traces) and a wrong prediction signal (red traces). The asterisk
denotes a significant difference over multiple simulations in a paired t-test (p <1e−5).
Figure 8: SEC subtraction scheme, prior sent to PV population. (a) Study hypothesis: we can
find a linear combination of the input and prediction signals α·I(t)+ β·P(t) that approximates
the error signal, with αand β of different sign (subtraction). Using an unrelated signal X(t) for
the linear combination leads to a worse approximation. (b) For a given input Iand prediction
Preceived by the LaNMM, the optimal subtraction using Iand P(consistent case) is closer
to the LaNMM output (minimal Lvalue) than the optimal subtraction using an I and an
unrelated signal X(inconsistent case). The asterisk denotes a significant difference over multiple
simulations in an independent samples t-test (p <1e−5).
3.4.1 Serotonergic Psychedelics
Figure 11 illustrates how the increased excitability due to serotonergic psychedelics, reflected in
the model by an increase of the parameter Wexc, translates into power spectrum alterations and
the disruption of the comparison process. In particular, we can see how the low prediction error
resulting from a matching input and prior in the baseline condition (low P2 envelope power) is
increased in the psychedelics condition, resulting in an error similar to the one obtained when a
flat prior is applied (see Figure 5). Moreover, under the psychedelics condition, the influence of
the precision attenuation signal is greatly reduced, causing the error to increase and primarily
reflect the input signal.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
3 RESULTS 24
Figure 9: EEC suppression scheme. The precision modulation signal presented to P1, Π P,
successfully attenuates the error precision Π E (P2 output slow envelope). The error precision is
reduced by the precision-modulation signal, as shown by the reduced error power (right violin
plot). We compare the case of a precision-modulation signal (blue traces) with the case of a
flat precision-modulation signal (orange traces, no modulation).
Figure 10: EEC subtraction scheme. (a) The error signal precision encodes the difference
between input precision and prior precision. (b) For a given input and prior encoding some
precision modulation sent to the LaNMM, the output error precision is better approximated by
the difference ΠI−ΠΠ (consistent case) than by the difference between the input precision and
unrelated modulation-precision signal Π I−ΠX (inconsistent case), as captured by the MSE
between the LaNMM output ˆΠE and the subtraction of each case.
Overall, these results suggest that serotonergic psychedelics increase the effective weight of
inputs due to increased power of fast (gamma) oscillations, and diminish the effect of predic-
tions and precision-modulating signals, as a consequence of the reduced power in slow (alpha)
oscillations. This results in higher prediction error signals in the psychedelics condition.
3.4.2 Alzheimer’s Disease
Figure 12 illustrates how positive SEC/negative EEC patterns and comparator functionality
degrade under AD-disrupted predictive coding conditions. The alteration of the CP V→P1 pa-
rameter leads to an increase in alpha and gamma power in early stages (hyper-excitability) and
an overall power decrease in late stages.
In both the MCI and AD stages, we find that the error evaluation process is disrupted with
respect to the healthy stage. In particular, the low prediction error obtained through SEC for
a matching input and prior is strongly increased in MCI stage and then slightly increased in
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
3 RESULTS 25
Figure 11: Effects of serotonergic psychedelic alterations on the LaNMM model. (a) The
excitatory effects of serotonergic psychedelics are implemented as an increase of the excitatory
synaptic gains, Wexc, of the P1 population.104 (b) The alteration of Wexc in the model leads
to decreased alpha power and increased gamma power. (c) For the SEC mechanism, the error
suppression for a prediction matching the input is altered by psychedelics, resulting in a higher
power of the error signal. (d) For the EEC mechanism, the influence of the precision-modulating
signal is diminished, also resulting in increased error. (e, f) Example signals illustrating the SEC
(e) and EEC (f) comparator mechanism for the baseline and psychedelics condition, showing a
reduced effect of the prior and precision-weighting modulation in the psychedelics condition.
Figure 12: Effects of AD-like pathological alterations on the LaNMM model. (a) AD pathology
is introduced by reducing the connectivity of the PV+ to P2 population, CP V→P1 .111 (b) The
alteration of CP V→P2 reflects the different stages in the progression to AD and leads to an
increase in alpha and gamma power in early stages and an overall power decrease in late stages.
(c) The suppression of prediction error observed in the healthy stage for matching input and
prediction is disrupted in AD stages (especially MCI), resulting in higher prediction errors.
(d) The effect of the precision-modulating signal is reduced in the MCI stage, resulting in
higher error power, while in the AD stage, the error power is substantially diminished. (e, f)
Sample signals illustrating the SEC (e) and EEC (f) comparator mechanism for the baseline and
altered conditions, showing a reduced effect of the prior and precision-weighting modulation in
the altered condition.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
4 DISCUSSION 26
the AD stage with respect to the healthy condition (Figure 12c). The low prediction error
power observed in AD reflects Comparator dysfunction: the similarity in error power between
AD and healthy conditions arises not from accurate prediction, but rather from an overall
reduction in cortical power typical of AD, as illustrated by decreased alpha and gamma activity
in Figure 12b.
This is confirmed by the case of the EEC mechanism—panels (d) and (f)—, where the effect of
a precision-modulating signal is reduced in the MCI condition (higher prediction error as well),
but the error power is drastically reduced in the AD stage (Figure 12f).
In sum, these results suggest that in the early stages of AD, error evaluation and precision are
disrupted (increased prediction error computation and reduced influence of precision-modulating
signals), leading to higher prediction errors even when signals match. In later stages, prediction
errors are abnormally suppressed regardless of predictions or the modulation of precision by
top-down signals.
4 Discussion
4.1 Interpretation of results
Our modeling results show that it is possible to implement the evaluation of Ein various ways
using the cross-frequency properties of the LaNMM, with an information encoding scheme where
information is stored in signals or in their envelopes.
We first showed how the model, both in its nominal parametrization 86 and in a wider mean
input landscape, provides robust bidirectional cross-frequency coupling: controlling the input
fluctuations into P1, P2 or PV results in envelope fluctuations in the other population ( P2, P1,
and PV , respectively) (see Figure 4).
More specifically, we observed robust (positive) SEC, consistent with the previously reported
PAC.86,102 With regard to negative EEC, it is noteworthy how the two subpopulations operate
in what we may calldynamical competition, a sort of zero-sum game of the total power generated
by the column. Cross-frequency coupling provides the basis for the rest of our results, and, in
particular, SEC motivates the further exploration of an AM information encoding scheme in
neural signals.100,112
Exploiting SEC and EEC, we then showed how the evaluation of E can be carried out by
the laminar column. In the first case, information carried by the fast oscillation envelope
arriving at P2 is contrasted with a slow prediction signal, producing effective suppression if the
prediction is accurate. Two mechanisms were provided. The first was implemented with the
signal predictions arriving at P1 with a phase shift of ≈π with respect to the input signal. In
the second implementation, predictions arrived at the PV cell in the PING subpopulation (in
phase with the input signal).
In the case of EEC, where information is carried by the “envelope of the envelope” of the fast
oscillation at a slower time scale, the prediction is encoded as the envelope of the slower signal
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
4 DISCUSSION 27
arriving at P1, without phase shift or sign reversal, and the evaluation is carried out over a
longer time scale (determined by the time scale of the envelope of the slow signal). Figure 3
illustrates this scenario.
An instructive analogy with regard to the role of time scales comes from radar signal processing,
particularly Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), which distinguishes between fast-time and slow-
time scales.113 In SAR, fast-time corresponds to the rapid reflections of individual radar pulses
used for high-resolution range measurements—analogous to rapid signal-to-envelope coupling
(SEC) for fast prediction-error computations. Conversely, slow-time relates to the slower pro-
gression of the radar platform across multiple pulses, enabling integration of spatial information
over a larger scale—mirroring envelope-to-envelope coupling (EEC), which facilitates predictive
integration and gating at slower timescales.
4.2 Predictive coding and precision
Our results with EEC provide a mechanism for neural processing proposals hinging on the
availability of gating, which is necessary for the Bayesian implementation of predictive cod-
ing. Technically, predictive coding was introduced in the 1950s as a scheme for compressing
sound files.114 This is conceptually pertinent to KT in the sense that compression is exactly
the objective prescribed by minimizing algorithmic complexity under this framework. In the
neurosciences, predictive coding was subsequently applied to continuous (neuronal) signals and
state estimation in the brain. 2,115,116 From an engineering perspective, predictive coding for
continuous state space models corresponds to Bayesian filtering and, in the limit of linear mod-
els, Kalman filtering. 1 The Kalman filtering perspective is important because it reveals that
there are two things that need to be estimated in predictive coding: the prediction error per
se and the (Kalman) gain that is to be applied to the prediction error for model update (see
Appendix D). Crucially, the Kalman gain itself has to be optimized, which requires an esti-
mation of the precision (i.e., inverse variance) of sensory and state noise. In short, there are
two kinds of elements that need to be predicted in predictive coding: the (first-order) content
and the (second-order) precision. This dual aspect inherits directly from the assumption of
Gaussian posterior estimates in predictive coding, which have two sufficient statistics, namely,
(first-order) mean and (second-order) precision (inverse covariance).
When translating this dual estimation problem into the frequency domain, the current formu-
lation associates this with cross-frequency coupling of a fast and slow sort, respectively (i.e.,
phase-amplitude or, more generally, SEC, and amplitude-amplitude / EEC coupling). Intu-
itively, assigning a high precision to a prediction error enables it to have a greater effect on
subsequent state estimation or (Bayesian) belief updating. This manifests—in deep or hierar-
chical models—as an optimal gating of ascending prediction errors, such that precise prediction
errors are selected over imprecise prediction errors. When the precision of prediction errors
fluctuates, then the implicit selection, routing, or gating acquires a dynamic aspect, resulting
in a Bayes-optimal dynamic coordination, routing or gating.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
4 DISCUSSION 28
4.3 Gating by Inhibition and Predictive Routing
EEC in the LaNMM can support functions that can be interpreted in terms of gating by
inhibition and predictive routing. Gating mechanisms are used to implement fundamental logic
gates, the building blocks of all digital computation and self-regulating systems. 117 Gates lie
at the heart of every computational system because they enable conditional branching—the
capacity to direct information flow according to context.
At its most elementary level, computation is realized by functions f : {0,1}n → {0,1}, where
inputs (bits) are mapped to an output bit in a rule-based manner. 118,119 In the simplest non-
trivial case, n = 2, there are only 16 possible functions from {0,1}2 →{0, 1}, including the
standard Boolean primitives AND, OR, XOR, NAND, NOR, and so on. 120 A logic gate is
nothing more than a controlled “pass” or “block” of a signal, and selectively letting signals
through or stopping them is the fundamental mechanism behind digital logic: every “yes/no”
decision in a computer boils down to whether a transistor (or switch) is opened or closed.121 By
chaining these yes/no gates together, we build up all of Boolean logic—and thus all the opera-
tions a computer performs (sufficient sets are the NAND, or the AND plus NOT). Historically,
Babbage’s mechanical engines relied on gears and levers as physical switches to select different
arithmetic operations.122 Later, early electronic computers such as Colossus employed vacuum
tubes to achieve fast on/off behavior essential to codebreaking. 123 Modern computing systems
now integrate billions of transistor-based switches to flexibly control signal routing, forming the
basis for reprogrammable logic.124 In the brain, switching is implemented via inhibitory gating,
in which interneurons can switch neural pathways on or off by hyperpolarizing downstream tar-
gets or, as discussed here, through competitive oscillations via EEC. This gating provides the
same conditional-branching capability seen in electronic hardware: specific signals are allowed or
blocked depending on context, supporting attention, learning, and adaptive decision-making.125
Thus, whether realized with mechanical gears, vacuum tubes, transistors, synaptic inhibition,
or oscillatory competition, switching at different spatiotemporal scales is foundational to any
system that must selectively route information—and it underscores the shared computational
logic between engineered machines and biological neural networks.
Although we have focused on the implementation of the Comparator with information encoded
in temporal signals, as a network, the brain also encodes information in space, i.e., where the
signals arrive. In the case of local error evaluation, weighted error predictions must arrive at the
right location to be effective in suppressing the propagation of errors. That is, agent predictions
are in general of the form “these signals will arrive at this location at these times” . This
expectation may be an active one, where the system reconfigures (via switches, for example) to
route information streams in a particular way. Information processing in space and time must,
therefore, work together for predictive error evaluation, and the predictions will, in general,
be about events in space and time following some actions (actions in the world or network
reconfigurations).
In contrast with the local evaluation of prediction error discussed above,routing21 or gating20 in
neuroscience refer to the dynamic modulation of information flow across cortical hierarchies, se-
lectively directing or suppressing signal propagation. Together, these processes ensure efficient,
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
4 DISCUSSION 29
prioritized information flow across brain networks.
Gating mechanisms determine which signals can pass through at any given time and modulate
the gain of signals based on relevance or salience. This is sometimes referred to as gating by
inhibition20, a framework where optimal task performance correlates with alpha activity in task-
irrelevant areas. Gating by inhibition has been proposed as an attentional mechanism, where
the agent chooses what information streams to process by selectively dampening or enhancing
signals through inhibitory processes. 20 In modern neural network transformer architectures, a
similar principle of selective attention is implemented via multi-head attention, which learns to
weight different input elements, effectively gating the flow of information in deep networks. 126
In relation to this, predictive routing is a proposed mechanism where top-down predictions
dynamically shape sensory information flow by selectively inhibiting expected inputs through
amplitude-amplitude coupling (AAC),21 the equivalent of EEC in our framework. In predictive
routing, the brain anticipates incoming sensory data based on prior knowledge and actively
suppresses the cortical pathways associated with these predictions. This can be interpreted in
light of prediction error evaluation where selective inhibition implements the Comparator in a
distributed manner (not on a single column) and on a longer, coarse-grained timescale than
SEC, dynamically routing unexpected signals for further processing. In this context, informa-
tion is encoded by route and predictions address the route taken by sensory stimuli: correctly
predicted inputs are inhibited, while unpredicted inputs propagate, signaling prediction errors
(see Appendix E and Figure E1 for further details). Top-down predictions are communicated
via alpha/beta oscillations (8–30 Hz) originating from deep cortical layers. These rhythms pre-
pare sensory pathways by pre-emptively inhibiting the columns that process expected inputs. It
is this pre-emptive aspect that reflects predictions of which prediction errors will convey precise
or salient information.
The interplay between these dynamics, governed by the laminar organization of the cortex,
ensures that deep layers provide the inhibitory feedback while superficial layers relay the feed-
forward sensory information. This layer-specific interaction dynamically selects the route for
information flow. Thus, EEC provides a mechanism for weighted spatiotemporal information
processing of prediction errors as well as other information processing agent choices in network
space and time (e.g., attention and sensory attenuation). In all these instances, it reflects the
choice and optimal use ofrelevant information for model updates conducive to the maximization
of the agent’s Objective function.
Finally, in the general KT algorithmic agent framework, modeling, objective functions, and
planning are treated as distinct processes. Attention (and action) emerges as a separate gating
mechanism that selectively routes information and allocates resources, while precision weighting
specifically modulates how prediction errors drive updates in the model. By contrast, in Active
Inference, goal optimization is effectively folded into the generative model through prior beliefs,
so that modeling, attention, and action all become facets of a single process—minimizing free
energy. As a result, gating for world-model precision and gating for attention are not explicitly
differentiated in AIF, which identifies all of them with precision, whereas KT retains their
conceptual separation.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
4 DISCUSSION 30
4.4 Error Evaluation Dysfunctions
We next review how AD and psychedelic drugs (serotonergic hallucinogens) impact predictive
coding, focusing on changes in error signaling and oscillatory mechanisms (gamma power and
CFC).
Prediction-error processing can be probed with paradigms like the mismatch negativity (MMN)
and the P300 component in event-related potentials in EEG/MEG. 127–129 The MMN is an
early (100–250 ms) response to oddball stimuli deviating from a regular pattern, reflecting
pre-attentive detection of prediction violations. The P300 (particularly its P3a/P3b subcom-
ponents) is a later ( ∼300 ms) positive deflection associated with conscious evaluation of novel
or target events and “updating” of context. 130,131 A related “local-global” auditory paradigm
distinguishes lower-level mismatches from higher-order pattern violations: a local MMN might
be generated by any deviant tone, whereas a global P3-like response occurs only if an entire
sequence violates an abstract rule (e.g., sequence pattern), requiring intact hierarchical pre-
dictions. Gamma oscillations and CFC are increasingly examined within these paradigms, as
transient gamma bursts and theta-gamma couplings have been observed during deviance detec-
tion, linking oscillatory dynamics to the evaluation of prediction errors.
4.4.1 Serotonergic Psychedelics
Classic serotonergic psychedelics (e.g., LSD, psilocybin, DMT) perturb the brain’s predic-
tive coding by acting as 5-HT 2A receptor agonists, acutely altering perception, cognition,
and self-awareness. According to the REBUS model (“Relaxed Beliefs Under Psychedelics”),
psychedelics reduce the precision of high-level priors (beliefs) in the brain’s hierarchy. 132 By
pharmacologically modulating deep-layer cortical neurons encoding predictions, psychedelics
“liberate” bottom-up information flow. 132 In Bayesian terms, they lower the relative preci-
sion of top-down expectations, allowing normally suppressed prediction errors to ascend and
influence conscious experience. This can explain the sensory hypersensitivity, cognitive disor-
ganization, and hallucinations observed under psychedelics: with weakened priors’ precision,
sensory fluctuations may be over-interpreted, producing divergent percepts. Mechanistically,
5-HT2A receptors are densely expressed on layer V pyramidal cells, whose excitability increases
upon psychedelic binding.110 Biophysical modeling of EEG/MEG data in humans under psilo-
cybin are consistent with an increase of deep pyramidal cell excitability (gain) of deep pyramidal
cells,104,110 tipping the usual balance of cortical circuitry. Because these deep layers typically
generate top-down signals, their heightened excitability disrupts the processing of weighted
prediction errors, aligning with an ’anarchic’ brain state where incoming sensations are less
constrained by prior belief. 132
Psychedelics’ relaxation of top-down constraints also manifests in oscillatory changes, notably a
broadband desynchronization of cortical rhythms. MEG and EEG studies show reduced power
across the frequency spectrum under psilocybin and LSD (cortical power is reduced from delta
through high gamma ranges in both frontal and posterior cortices). 110 Large power decreases
are especially prominent in high-level default-mode network hubs, 110 suggesting a breakdown
of dominant rhythmic activity. Similarly, low doses of LSD cause a dose-dependent reduction
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
4 DISCUSSION 31
in EEG power across the delta, theta, alpha, beta, and gamma bands during rest. 133 This
global desynchronization is thought to index an increase in neuronal entropy or disorder 132—
essentially, neurons firing in a less constrained manner. In terms of predictive coding, such
desynchronization corresponds to a collapse of precise priors (organized oscillatory states) and
a release of sensory processing from descending constraints. Gamma-band oscillations, in par-
ticular, become abnormal. The reduction of alpha oscillations under psychedelics (alpha is dra-
matically reduced by psilocybin, and LSD 134) likely contributes to this: since cross-frequency
coupling often involves alpha/beta phase gating gamma, the disruption of slower oscillations
means gamma activity is no longer properly coordinated in time. We can infer that the alpha-
gamma and theta-gamma coupling that orchestrates hierarchical processing is weakened, and
with it, an increase in the influence of sensory prediction errors.
Empirical evidence from prediction error paradigms under psychedelics underscores these changes.
Using an auditory roving oddball (which assesses how MMN amplitude builds up with repeated
standard stimuli), psilocybin was found to leave early error signaling largely intact: in one
study, psilocybin did not significantly disrupt the MMN “memory trace” effect, whereas NMDA
receptor blockade (ketamine) severely attenuated it. 131 This suggests that pre-attentive er-
ror detection in the sensory cortex (which relies on short-term synaptic plasticity and local
circuit NMDA function) is not abolished by 5-HT 2A agonism—consistent with the idea that
psychedelics primarily affect higher-level inference rather than basic sensory change detection.
In contrast, at the level of conscious processing, psychedelics do have notable effects. The
P300 response is reliably dampened by psychedelics. Under LSD, for instance, target oddball
stimuli evoke a much smaller P300 amplitude compared to placebo. 133 This reduction of P300
(and prolongation of its latency) implies that the brain’s ability to consciously evaluate and
categorize events is impaired—likely because imprecise priors make it hard to decide what is
contextually relevant. In a tactile mismatch paradigm, psilocybin likewise reduced the neu-
ral responses to surprising stimuli (both in EEG and associated fMRI activity in frontal and
sensory regions), indicating aberrant error processing in multi-sensory domains. 135 Notably,
some studies report that while “bottom-up” signals (like the basic MMN) remain, the later,
more “top-down” components are disrupted. 135 This fits a picture in which psychedelics leave
automatic error generation largely unimpeded or even enhanced but interfere with the brain’s
precision-weighting and integration of these errors into a coherent narrative.
In previous work,104 we employed the LaNMM to explore the effects of serotonergic psychedelics.
Using multi-modal neuroimaging data from thirty subjects diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease,
we simulated the impact of serotonin 2A receptor activation on cortical dynamics. By mod-
ulating the excitability of layer 5 pyramidal neurons, our model reproduced the characteristic
changes in EEG power spectra observed under psychedelics, including alpha power suppression
and gamma power enhancement. These spectral shifts were shown to correlate strongly with the
regional distribution of serotonin 2A receptors. Furthermore, simulated EEG revealed increased
complexity and entropy, suggesting restored network function.
The present work expands on this research using the LaNMM to connect pathology with
information-processing (cognitive) disruptions in the brain. Our results indicate that sero-
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
4 DISCUSSION 32
tonergic psychedelics weaken the influence of priors and precision attenuation mechanisms on
error computation, leading to increased (precision-weighted) error signals even when the prior
matches the input. The reduced influence of top-down precision-modulation signals suggests
that, under psychedelics, the error signal primarily reflects the input itself rather than the
mismatch between input and prior, effectively suppressing the prior’s influence. This computa-
tional shift could explain psychedelic-induced perceptual distortions, where sensory signals are
experienced with reduced interpretative constraints, as proposed by the REBUS model. 132 By
disrupting hierarchical inference in this way, psychedelics may both destabilize perception and
facilitate the revision of rigid priors, providing insight into their potential therapeutic effects.
4.4.2 PV+ Interneuron Dysfunction in Alzheimer’s, Schizophrenia, and ASD
PV+ interneurons serve as a fundamental element of cortical circuit dynamics, enabling the tight
inhibitory control and rhythmic synchronization necessary for normal cognition. In schizophre-
nia and ASD, disturbances in PV+ cell function and the resultant gamma oscillation impair-
ments represent a common mechanistic thread, even as the clinical manifestations diverge.
These impairments derail the brain’s ability to engage in predictive coding – the efficient com-
parison of expectations and sensory inputs.
Alzheimer’s disease is characterized by widespread cognitive deficits, which can be reinterpreted
as resulting from aberrant predictive coding in neural networks.130,136 Patients display blunted
neural responses to unexpected stimuli across modalities. The subjective experience of AD
begins in the preclinical phase with Subjective Cognitive Decline (SCD). SCD refers to self-
reported experiences of worsening cognitive function without objective evidence of impairment
on standard tests.137 It is often one of the earliest noticeable symptoms in the AD continuum,
preceding mild cognitive impairment and dementia. These subjective phenomena could be
associated with an increased flow of prediction errors, as our model suggests.
In the clinical phase of AD, the auditory MMN is significantly reduced compared to healthy
aging.130 This attenuation of MMN is especially pronounced at longer inter-stimulus intervals,
suggesting a rapid decay of the “memory trace” for standard stimuli—i.e. an impaired ability
to maintain predictions over time. Even individuals at risk for AD (e.g., APOE4 carriers) show
smaller MMNs than controls before clinical symptoms emerge.130 AD also impairs the detection
of higher-order regularities; for example, patients show deficits in perceiving melodic contour vi-
olations (sequence patterns in music),130 indicating trouble with global predictive inferences. At
a later processing stage, the P300 component is delayed and diminished in AD. Numerous studies
and meta-analyses have found prolonged P300 latency and reduced amplitude in AD patients,
correlating with cognitive decline. 131,133 The P3a (novelty-evoked) and P3b (target-evoked)
subcomponents are often both affected, reflecting deficits in involuntary attention switching
and conscious context updating, respectively. Overall, these ERP biomarkers suggest that AD
brains generate weaker prediction errors and/or fail to effectively propagate them to higher lev-
els for conscious detection. In a “global-local” auditory paradigm, one would predict that AD
patients might detect simple local oddball deviations (driven by residual bottom-up signals) but
struggle with global rule violations that require intact top-down integration—consistent with
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
4 DISCUSSION 33
findings that early sensory deviances are relatively preserved longer than complex cognitive
prediction error in AD. 130
AD is accompanied by marked changes in brain oscillatory activity. EEG shows a slowing of the
background rhythm, with increased power in delta and theta bands and a loss of power in faster
alpha, beta, and gamma frequencies. 138 Gamma oscillations, which depend on tightly synchro-
nized inhibitory interneuron networks, are often impaired in AD. In animal models, interneuron
dysfunction leads to deficits in gamma rhythmicity and aberrant network hyper-synchrony (e.g.,
epileptiform activity).139 For instance, AD model mice with reduced GABAergic interneuron
function show diminished gamma-band power and an over-synchronization of slower network
activity. In humans, MEG/EEG studies have also reported reduced gamma responses during
cognitive, sensory tasks or under evoked potentials induced by brain stimulation, 140 suggesting
a compromised ability to generate the high-frequency activity associated with error signaling.
Importantly, AD affects not only individual frequency bands but also their interactions.138 Such
alterations suggest that the normal hierarchical timing of predictions and errors is disrupted.
GABAergic dysfunction is a key factor: postmortem and in-vivo studies indicate reduced cor-
tical GABA levels and interneuron loss in AD. 141
In previous work,111 we used the LaNMM to represent the gradual dysfunction of PV interneu-
rons due to Amyloid Beta oligomer toxicity and the subsequent loss of excitatory pyrami-
dal neurons associated with advancing tau pathology. These mechanisms allowed our model
to reproduce the full spectrum of AD electrophysiological biomarkers across disease develop-
ment: early hyper-excitability—manifested as increased alpha synchrony and transient gamma
enhancement—in preclinical and mild cognitive impairment stages, and later hypo-activation—
characterized by a dominance of slow-wave (delta/theta) activity and diminished alpha/gamma
power—in moderate-to-severe AD. Model outputs closely matched MEG/EEG findings across
disease stages, supporting the hypothesis that fast interneuron dysfunction is the primary driver
of AD’s complex oscillatory dynamics.
Here, we extended this work by connecting the pathology in AD with information processing
dysfunction, demonstrating how predictive coding mechanisms are progressively impaired as
the disease advances. Our results indicate that the alterations in PV interneuron function lead
to disruptions in both SEC and EEC mechanisms, affecting the brain’s ability to suppress and
compute prediction errors. In the MCI stage, the increased alpha and gamma power contribute
to heightened error signals, reflecting an overactive yet unstable predictive system. In the AD
stage, the overall power decrease—particularly in high-frequency bands—reduces the ability
of the system to generate reliable prediction errors, leading to a collapse of error-signaling
and comparator functionality. This is evident in the SEC scenario, where error suppression
appears to recover in AD but is actually a byproduct of overall power loss rather than accurate
predictive coding (Figure 12c). The disruption of error computation is further highlighted by
the reduced influence of precision-modulating signals, revealing a severe breakdown of gating
mechanisms in both MCI and AD stages. Notably, the largest disruptions are observed in MCI,
consistent with the idea that interneuron dysfunction and alpha/gamma hyperactivity initially
drive pathological changes before leading to widespread network collapse.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
4 DISCUSSION 34
Finally, our model of PV+ dysfunction 111 is relevant to other conditions, such as ASD and
schizophrenia, which also display information processing alterations such as sensory attenu-
ation.142–144 Interneuron dysfunction, particularly involving fast-spiking PV+ interneurons,
is implicated in autism spectrum disorder (ASD), 145 Attention Deficit Hyperactive Disorder
(ADHD,146,147 and Schizophrenia.148 In ASD, the number of PV+ cells is decreased across
several cortical areas. Changes in the morphology or function of PV+ interneurons have also
been linked to schizophrenia, epilepsy, and bipolar disorder. 149
In schizophrenia, disrupted PV+ interneuron function leads to disrupted gamma oscillations,149
impairing sensory processing and predictive coding. Similarly, in ASD, alterations in PV in-
terneurons contribute to excitatory/inhibitory imbalances, affecting neural oscillations and pre-
dictive coding. These findings suggest that fast-spiking interneuron dysfunction across these
disorders compromises neural oscillations and leads to cognitive deficits associated to predictive
error evaluation disruptions.150–152,152
In summary, the LaNMM improves upon prior models by unifying multi-band oscillatory dy-
namics with weighted prediction-error computation in one coherent system. This advancement
highlights the model’s key contribution: a single model that simultaneously captures prediction,
error, and their cross-frequency interactions, providing a clearer and more accurate account of
cortical predictive processing.
4.5 Previous Computational Models of CFC and Prediction Error
Several physiologically grounded neural mass and network models have been developed to re-
produce CFC phenomena such as PAC and AAC. For instance, Mejias et al. (2016) 153 intro-
duced a laminar cortical network model of the primate visual hierarchy that captures distinct
frequency-specific feedforward vs. feedback signaling. Slow oscillatory input from deep layers
modulated superficial gamma, yielding PAC between layer-5/6 alpha ( ∼10 Hz) and layer-2/3
gamma (30–70 Hz). At the mesoscopic scale, NMMs with realistic neuronal interactions can
intrinsically generate PAC. Chehelcheraghi et al. (2016) 154 adapted a cortical column model
with pyramidal cells and fast and slow inhibitory interneurons. Under noise, the fast inhibitory
subpopulation became a self-oscillatory gamma source, while the slow inhibitory rhythm in
the alpha–theta range modulated the gamma amplitude, producing robust PAC. Extensions
of this model also demonstrated other coupling types (phase–frequency, amplitude–amplitude,
frequency–frequency). Sotero (2016) 155 highlighted how connectivity structure in a cortical col-
umn NMM shapes PAC generation, with balanced excitation–inhibition and resonant synapses
modulating cross-frequency interactions. More recently, “next-generation” NMMs 156,157 repli-
cated canonical CFC phenomena in coupled oscillatory circuits, attributing PAC emergence to
interacting inhibitory populations or slow sinusoidal drives near a Hopf bifurcation. At the
spiking-neuron level, models have also captured CFC with explicit physiological mappings. 158
Meanwhile, thalamocortical models showed how cortical slow oscillations (∼1 Hz) modulate
thalamic sleep spindles (12–15 Hz), again reflecting phase-amplitude relationships. 159
In parallel, some computational models explicitly encode prediction errors within physiologically
grounded architectures. Rao and Ballard 115 proposed a hierarchical visual model where higher-
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
4 DISCUSSION 35
level feedback suppresses predicted inputs, forwarding only the residual unexplained signal.
Spratling’s cortical models 160 similarly use inhibitory feedback for residual error computation,
and a network by Wacongne et al. 161 reproduces mismatch negativity by comparing predicted
vs. actual tones. Canonical microcircuit models further propose that distinct cortical popula-
tions encode predictions vs. errors (deep vs. superficial layers), though details of how the error is
evaluated remain less explicit.162 Song et al.163 extended these ideas to a pain perception NMM
in which top–down analgesic expectations modulate incoming nociceptive signals, generating a
residual error that drives cortical responses.
Though these studies illustrate how either CFC or explicit prediction error signals can be imple-
mented, most do not address how cross-frequency interactions themselves underwrite prediction
errors. In contrast, our approach incorporates both the generation of CFC and its computa-
tional role. By leveraging SEC and EEC, the proposed LaNMM provides a physiologically
grounded instantiation of the Comparator function central to predictive coding frameworks.
Unlike prior models that rely on noise-driven dynamics or impose CFC via structural con-
straints, the LaNMM produces emergent error signals approximating the difference between
bottom-up sensory inputs (fast oscillatory envelopes) and top-down predictions (slower oscil-
lations). This biologically plausible mechanism enables the dynamic, hierarchical modulation
of prediction errors across multiple timescales. Furthermore, by integrating physiological con-
straints on laminar-specific processing, the LaNMM offers a unifying framework for studying
predictive coding across cortical layers. In doing so, it builds a mechanistic bridge between
abstract predictive coding theories and the neurophysiological generation of cross-frequency
couplings, yielding new insights into both normal and pathological brain function.
4.6 Limitations
While our LaNMM approach captures key features of cross-frequency coupling and error eval-
uation, several limitations must be acknowledged. First, the model is an abstraction that
simplifies complex cellular and synaptic dynamics; parameters were chosen based on theoret-
ical and empirical considerations but may not fully capture the heterogeneous properties of
real cortical networks. 3,4 Second, although our simulations reproduce oscillatory signatures
observed in Alzheimer’s disease and psychedelic states, such as altered gamma power and CFC
patterns,132,164 the direct translation of these findings to in vivo conditions requires further
validation through combined EEG/MEG and invasive recordings. Third, the impact of neuro-
modulatory systems—especially the cholinergic and serotonergic influences—has been modeled
in a simplified manner, and future work should integrate more detailed receptor-level dynamics
to better account for state-dependent changes in error signaling. Fourth, our analysis covers
only mesoscopic processing in single node dynamics, while both micro and macro network effects
are undoubtedly relevant in predictive processing.
Finally, we have focused mainly here on the analysis of prediction error evaluation at the single
column level and using a particular model displaying oscillations in the alpha and gamma bands.
The model could be adjusted to other frequencies through parameter changes, and indeed,
other models of oscillations exhibiting CFC could be used for the same purpose. Moreover,
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 36
the framework proposed can be extended across spatial and temporal scales. In particular, the
information encoding scheme based on amplitude modulation can be extended hierarchically,
with information encoded in signals, their envelopes, the envelopes of envelopes, etc. 100
5 Conclusion
Our work supports the view that cross-frequency coupling provides a functional neural sub-
strate for the evaluation of weighted prediction errors within a hierarchical predictive cod-
ing framework. The model presented here demonstrates how distinct modes of amplitude
modulation—signal-envelope and envelope-envelope coupling—can instantiate a Comparator
mechanism leveraging fast (gamma) and slow (alpha/beta) oscillatory dynamics. Moreover, the
model speaks to causal relationships between neural CFC and cognitive functions 6 as well as
a mechanistic perspective on how pathophysiology, such as n AD or induced by serotonergic
psychedelics, disrupts the balance between top-down predictions and bottom-up error signal-
ing.110,130,132 Further work may explore the implications in other conditions associated with
predictive coding abnormalities, such as schizophrenia, 150 ASD,151 or ADHD.152 Our mecha-
nistic insights not only deepen our understanding of multiscale information processing in the
brain but can guide the development of potential therapeutic interventions aimed at restoring
normal oscillatory function and predictive coding.
References
[1] R P Rao and D H Ballard. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional inter-
pretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nature Neuroscience, 2(1):79–87,
January 1999. Publisher: Springer Science and Business Media LLC.
[2] Karl Friston and Stefan Kiebel. Predictive coding under the free-energy principle.
364:1211–1221, 2009. tex.date-added: 2021-01-25 10:56:48 +0100 tex.date-modified: 2021-
01-25 10:56:48 +0100.
[3] Andre M. Bastos, W. Martin Usrey, Rick A. Adams, George R. Mangun, Pascal Fries,
and Karl J. Friston. Canonical microcircuits for predictive coding. Neuron, 76(4):695,
November 2012.
[4] G. Spyropoulos and others. Layer and rhythm specificity for predictive routing. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(49):31459–31469, 2020.
[5] Gy¨ orgy Buzs´ aki and Brendon O. Watson. Brain rhythms and neural syntax: implications
for efficient coding of cognitive content and neuropsychiatric disease.Dialogues in Clinical
Neuroscience, 14(4):345–367, December 2012.
[6] Alexandre Hyafil, Anne-Lise Giraud, Lorenzo Fontolan, and Boris Gutkin. Neural Cross-
Frequency Coupling: Connecting Architectures, Mechanisms, and Functions. Trends in
Neurosciences, 38(11):725–740, November 2015.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 37
[7] D. A. Pinotsis, N. Brunet, A. Bastos, C. A. Bosman, V. Litvak, P. Fries, and K. J. Friston.
Contrast gain control and horizontal interactions in V1: a DCM study. NeuroImage,
92(100):143–155, May 2014.
[8] Stewart Shipp. Neural Elements for Predictive Coding. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, Novem-
ber 2016. Publisher: Frontiers.
[9] Karl Friston, James Kilner, and Lee Harrison. A free energy principle for the brain. Jour-
nal of Physiology Paris , 2006. Publisher: Elsevier tex.date-added: 2021-01-25 10:56:48
+0100 tex.date-modified: 2021-01-25 10:56:48 +0100.
[10] Thomas Parr. Active inference : the free energy principle in mind, brain, and behavior .
The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2022.
[11] Giulio Ruffini. Information, complexity, brains and reality (“Kolmogorov Manifesto”).
arXiv, 2007. tex.date-added: 2009-03-01 11:09:48 +0100 tex.date-modified: 2009-06-06
18:41:44 +0200.
[12] Giulio Ruffini. Reality as Simplicity, June 2009. arXiv:0903.1193 [physics].
[13] Giulio Ruffini. Models, networks and algorithmic complexity. arxiv, 2016. Publisher:
arXiv.
[14] Giulio Ruffini. An algorithmic information theory of consciousness. Neuroscience of
Consciousness, 2017(1):nix019, 2017.
[15] Giulio Ruffini and Edmundo Lopez-Sola. AIT foundations of structured experience. Jour-
nal of Artificial Intelligence and Consciousness , 9(2):153–191, September 2022. Publisher:
World Scientific Pub Co Pte Ltd.
[16] Giulio Ruffini, Francesca Castaldo, Edmundo Lopez-Sola, Roser Sanchez-Todo, and Jakub
Vohryzek. The Algorithmic Agent Perspective and Computational Neuropsychiatry: From
Etiology to Advanced Therapy in Major Depressive Disorder.Entropy, 26(11):953, Novem-
ber 2024. Number: 11 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
[17] Giulio Ruffini, Francesca Castaldo, and Jakub Vohryzek. Structured Dynamics in the
Algorithmic Agent. Entropy, 27(1):90, January 2025. Number: 1 Publisher: Multidisci-
plinary Digital Publishing Institute.
[18] Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of information theory. John Wiley
& sons, 2 edition, 2006. tex.date-added: 2016-10-20 21:00:29 +0000 tex.date-modified:
2016-10-20 21:00:58 +0000.
[19] Karl Friston. Hierarchical models in the brain. PLoS computational biology,
4(11):e1000211, November 2008.
[20] Ole Jensen and Ali Mazaheri. Shaping Functional Architecture by Oscillatory Alpha
Activity: Gating by Inhibition. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 4:186, November 2010.
[21] Andr´ e M Bastos, Mikael Lundqvist, Ayan S Waite, Nancy Kopell, and Earl K Miller. Layer
and rhythm specificity for predictive routing. Proceedings of the National Academy of
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 38
Sciences of the United States of America, 117(49):31459–31469, December 2020. Publisher:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
[22] Pascal Fries. A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: neuronal communication through
neuronal coherence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(10):474–480, October 2005.
[23] Andr´ e Moraes Bastos, Julien Vezoli, Conrado Arturo Bosman, Jan-Mathijs Schoffelen,
Robert Oostenveld, Jarrod Robert Dowdall, Peter De Weerd, Henry Kennedy, and Pascal
Fries. Visual areas exert feedforward and feedback influences through distinct frequency
channels. Neuron, 85(2):390–401, January 2015.
[24] Thilo Womelsdorf, Jan-Mathijs Schoffelen, Robert Oostenveld, Wolf Singer, Robert Des-
imone, Andreas K. Engel, and Pascal Fries. Modulation of neuronal interactions through
neuronal synchronization. Science (New York, N.Y.) , 316(5831):1609–1612, June 2007.
[25] Pascal Fries. Neuronal gamma-band synchronization as a fundamental process in cortical
computation. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 32:209–224, 2009.
[26] Christini Katsanevaki, Andr´ e M. Bastos, Hayriye Cagnan, Conrado A. Bosman, Karl J.
Friston, and Pascal Fries. Attentional effects on local V1 microcircuits explain selective
V1-V4 communication. NeuroImage, 281:120375, November 2023.
[27] R. E. Kalman. A New Approach to Linear Filtering and Prediction Problems. Journal of
Basic Engineering, 82(1):35–45, March 1960.
[28] Gy¨ orgy Buzs´ aki and Xiao-Jing Wang. Mechanisms of gamma oscillations.Annual Review
of Neuroscience, 35:203–225, 2012.
[29] M. A. Whittington, R. D. Traub, N. Kopell, B. Ermentrout, and E. H. Buhl. Inhibition-
based rhythms: experimental and mathematical observations on network dynamics.Inter-
national Journal of Psychophysiology: Official Journal of the International Organization
of Psychophysiology, 38(3):315–336, December 2000.
[30] Ole Jensen, Jochen Kaiser, and Jean-Philippe Lachaux. Human gamma-frequency oscil-
lations associated with attention and memory. Trends in Neurosciences, 30(7):317–324,
July 2007.
[31] Magdalena Nowak, Catharina Zich, and Charlotte J. Stagg. Motor Cortical Gamma
Oscillations: What Have We Learnt and Where Are We Headed? Current Behavioral
Neuroscience Reports, 5(2):136–142, 2018.
[32] Erika Nyhus and Tim Curran. Functional role of gamma and theta oscillations in episodic
memory. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 34(7):1023–1035, June 2010.
[33] Yong-Wook Shin, Brian F. O’Donnell, Soyoung Youn, and Jun Soo Kwon. Gamma Os-
cillation in Schizophrenia. Psychiatry Investigation, 8(4):288, December 2011.
[34] Ao Guan, Shaoshuang Wang, Ailing Huang, Chenyue Qiu, Yansong Li, Xuying Li, Jinfei
Wang, Qiang Wang, and Bin Deng. The role of gamma oscillations in central nervous sys-
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 39
tem diseases: Mechanism and treatment. Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience , 16:962957,
2022.
[35] Valerio Manippa, Annalisa Palmisano, Marco Filardi, Davide Vilella, Michael A.
Nitsche, Davide Rivolta, and Giancarlo Logroscino. An update on the use of gamma
(multi)sensory stimulation for Alzheimer’s disease treatment. Frontiers in Aging Neuro-
science, 14:1095081, 2022.
[36] Tallan Black, Bryan W. Jenkins, Robert B. Laprairie, and John G. Howland. Thera-
peutic potential of gamma entrainment using sensory stimulation for cognitive symptoms
associated with schizophrenia. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews , 161:105681, June
2024.
[37] W. Singer and C. M. Gray. Visual feature integration and the temporal correlation hy-
pothesis. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 18:555–586, 1995.
[38] Connor G. Gallimore, David A. Ricci, and Jordan P. Hamm. Spatiotemporal dynam-
ics across visual cortical laminae support a predictive coding framework for interpreting
mismatch responses. Cerebral Cortex (New York, NY) , 33(15):9417, June 2023.
[39] Conrado A. Bosman, Carien S. Lansink, and Cyriel M. A. Pennartz. Functions of gamma-
band synchronization in cognition: from single circuits to functional diversity across cor-
tical and subcortical systems. The European Journal of Neuroscience, 39(11):1982–1999,
June 2014.
[40] Wolfgang Klimesch, Paul Sauseng, and Simon Hanslmayr. EEG alpha oscillations: the
inhibition-timing hypothesis. Brain Research Reviews, 53(1):63–88, January 2007.
[41] Simon Hanslmayr, Joachim Gross, Wolfgang Klimesch, and Kimron L. Shapiro. The role
of alpha oscillations in temporal attention. Brain Research Reviews, 67(1-2):331–343, June
2011.
[42] W. Klimesch. EEG alpha and theta oscillations reflect cognitive and memory performance:
a review and analysis. Brain Research. Brain Research Reviews , 29(2-3):169–195, April
1999.
[43] Per B. Sederberg, Michael J. Kahana, Marc W. Howard, Elizabeth J. Donner, and
Joseph R. Madsen. Theta and Gamma Oscillations during Encoding Predict Subsequent
Recall. The Journal of Neuroscience , 23(34):10809, November 2003.
[44] Bradley Voytek, Ryan T. Canolty, Avgusta Shestyuk, Nathan E. Crone, Josef Parvizi, and
Robert T. Knight. Shifts in Gamma Phase–Amplitude Coupling Frequency from Theta
to Alpha Over Posterior Cortex During Visual Tasks. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,
4:191, October 2010.
[45] Timo van Kerkoerle, Matthew W. Self, Bruno Dagnino, Marie-Alice Gariel-Mathis, Jasper
Poort, Chris van der Togt, and Pieter R. Roelfsema. Alpha and gamma oscillations
characterize feedback and feedforward processing in monkey visual cortex. Proceedings
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 40
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 111(40):14332,
September 2014.
[46] Dorottya Hetenyi, Joost Haarsma, and Peter Kok. Pre-stimulus alpha oscillations encode
stimulus-specific visual predictions, March 2024. Pages: 2024.03.13.584593 Section: New
Results.
[47] William Turner, Tessel Blom, and Hinze Hogendoorn. Visual Information Is Predic-
tively Encoded in Occipital Alpha/Low-Beta Oscillations. The Journal of Neuroscience ,
43(30):5537–5545, July 2023.
[48] Anna Mayer, Caspar M. Schwiedrzik, Michael Wibral, Wolf Singer, and Lucia Melloni.
Expecting to See a Letter: Alpha Oscillations as Carriers of Top-Down Sensory Predic-
tions. Cerebral Cortex, 26(7):3146–3160, July 2016.
[49] Malte W¨ ostmann, Mohsen Alavash, and Jonas Obleser. Alpha Oscillations in the Human
Brain Implement Distractor Suppression Independent of Target Selection. Journal of
Neuroscience, 39(49):9797–9805, December 2019. Publisher: Society for Neuroscience
Section: Research Articles.
[50] Gy¨ orgy Buzs´ aki.Rhythms of the brain. Oxford University Press, Oxford New York, 2006.
[51] John E. Lisman and Ole Jensen. The Theta-Gamma Neural Code. Neuron, 77(6):1002–
1016, March 2013.
[52] Robson Scheffer-Teixeira and Adriano Bl Tort. On cross-frequency phase-phase coupling
between theta and gamma oscillations in the hippocampus. eLife, 5:e20515, December
2016.
[53] Anne-Lise Giraud and David Poeppel. Cortical oscillations and speech processing: emerg-
ing computational principles and operations. Nature Neuroscience, 15(4):511–517, April
2012. Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[54] Nai Ding and Jonathan Z. Simon. Neural coding of continuous speech in auditory cor-
tex during monaural and dichotic listening. Journal of Neurophysiology, 107(1):78–89,
January 2012.
[55] James A. O’Sullivan, Alan J. Power, Nima Mesgarani, Siddharth Rajaram, John J. Foxe,
Barbara G. Shinn-Cunningham, Malcolm Slaney, Shihab A. Shamma, and Edmund C.
Lalor. Attentional Selection in a Cocktail Party Environment Can Be Decoded from
Single-Trial EEG. Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y.: 1991) , 25(7):1697–1706, July 2015.
[56] Nima Mesgarani and Edward F. Chang. Selective cortical representation of attended
speaker in multi-talker speech perception. Nature, 485(7397):10.1038/nature11020, May
2012.
[57] Elana M. Zion Golumbic, Nai Ding, Stephan Bickel, Peter Lakatos, Catherine A. Schevon,
Guy M. McKhann, Robert R. Goodman, Ronald Emerson, Ashesh D. Mehta, Jonathan Z.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 41
Simon, David Poeppel, and Charles E. Schroeder. Mechanisms Underlying Selective Neu-
ronal Tracking of Attended Speech at a ‘Cocktail Party’ .Neuron, 77(5):980, March 2013.
[58] Vibha Viswanathan, Hari M. Bharadwaj, and Barbara G. Shinn-Cunningham. Elec-
troencephalographic Signatures of the Neural Representation of Speech during Selective
Attention. eNeuro, 6(5), September 2019. Publisher: Society for Neuroscience Section:
New Research.
[59] Raphael Kaplan, Daniel Bush, Mathilde Bonnefond, Peter A. Bandettini, Gareth R.
Barnes, Christian F. Doeller, and Neil Burgess. Medial prefrontal theta phase coupling
during spatial memory retrieval. Hippocampus, 24(6):656–665, June 2014.
[60] Pascal Fries. Rhythms for Cognition: Communication through Coherence. Neuron,
88(1):220–235, October 2015.
[61] Tisa Hodnik, Stiven Roytman, Nico I. Bohnen, and Uros Marusic. Beta–Gamma Phase-
Amplitude Coupling as a Non-Invasive Biomarker for Parkinson’s Disease: Insights from
Electroencephalography Studies. Life, 14(3):391, March 2024.
[62] Andrew B. O’Keeffe, Mahsa Malekmohammadi, Hiro Sparks, and Nader Pouratian. Syn-
chrony Drives Motor Cortex Beta Bursting, Waveform Dynamics, and Phase-Amplitude
Coupling in Parkinson’s Disease. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of
the Society for Neuroscience, 40(30):5833–5846, July 2020.
[63] Hong-Yuan Chu, Yoland Smith, William W. Lytton, Scott Grafton, Rosa Villalba, Gunas-
ingh Masilamoni, and Thomas Wichmann. Dysfunction of motor cortices in Parkinson’s
disease. Cerebral Cortex (New York, NY) , 34(7):bhae294, July 2024.
[64] Annaelle Devergnas, Damien Pittard, Donald Bliwise, and Thomas Wichmann. Relation-
ship between oscillatory activity in the cortico-basal ganglia network and parkinsonism in
MPTP-treated monkeys. Neurobiology of Disease, 68:156–166, August 2014.
[65] Roberto C. Sotero, Lazaro M. Sanchez-Rodriguez, Mehdy Dousty, Yasser Iturria-Medina,
and Jose M. Sanchez-Bornot. Cross-Frequency Interactions During Information Flow in
Complex Brain Networks Are Facilitated by Scale-Free Properties. Frontiers in Physics,
7:107, July 2019.
[66] Daniella B Victorino, Jean Faber, Daniel J. L. L Pinheiro, Fulvio A Scorza, Antˆ onio C. G
Almeida, Alberto C. S Costa, and Carla A Scorza. Toward the Identification of Neuro-
physiological Biomarkers for Alzheimer’s Disease in Down Syndrome: A Potential Role for
Cross-Frequency Phase-Amplitude Coupling Analysis. Aging and Disease, 14(2):428–449,
April 2023.
[67] Pooja Prabhu, Hirofumi Morise, Kiwamu Kudo, Alexander Beagle, Danielle Mizuiri, Faa-
timah Syed, Karunakar A Kotegar, Anne Findlay, Bruce L Miller, Joel H Kramer, Kather-
ine P Rankin, Paul A Garcia, Heidi E Kirsch, Keith Vossel, Srikantan S Nagarajan, and
Kamalini G Ranasinghe. Abnormal gamma phase-amplitude coupling in the parahip-
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 42
pocampal cortex is associated with network hyperexcitability in Alzheimer’s disease.Brain
Communications, 6(2):fcae121, April 2024.
[68] Jesus Poza, Alejandro Bachiller, Carlos Gomez, Maria Garcia, Pablo Nunez, Javier
Gomez-Pilar, Miguel A. Tola-Arribas, Monica Cano, and Roberto Hornero. Phase-
amplitude coupling analysis of spontaneous EEG activity in Alzheimer’s disease. An-
nual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society.
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. Annual International Conference ,
2017:2259–2262, July 2017.
[69] Paolo Bazzigaluppi, Tina L. Beckett, Margaret M. Koletar, Aaron Y. Lai, Illsung L. Joo,
Mary E. Brown, Peter L. Carlen, JoAnne McLaurin, and Bojana Stefanovic. Early-stage
attenuation of phase-amplitude coupling in the hippocampus and medial prefrontal cortex
in a transgenic rat model of Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Neurochemistry, 144(5):669–
679, March 2018.
[70] Hannah F. Iaccarino, Annabelle C. Singer, Anthony J. Martorell, Andrii Rudenko, Fan
Gao, Tyler Z. Gillingham, Hansruedi Mathys, Jinsoo Seo, Oleg Kritskiy, Fatema Abdur-
rob, Chinnakkaruppan Adaikkan, Rebecca G. Canter, Richard Rueda, Emery N. Brown,
Edward S. Boyden, and Li-Huei Tsai. Gamma frequency entrainment attenuates amyloid
load and modifies microglia. Nature, 540(7632):230–235, December 2016.
[71] Anthony J. Martorell, Abigail L. Paulson, Ho-Jun Suk, Fatema Abdurrob, Gabrielle T.
Drummond, Webster Guan, Jennie Z. Young, David Nam-Woo Kim, Oleg Kritskiy, Scar-
lett J. Barker, Vamsi Mangena, Stephanie M. Prince, Emery N. Brown, Kwanghun Chung,
Edward S. Boyden, Annabelle C. Singer, and Li-Huei Tsai. Multi-sensory Gamma Stim-
ulation Ameliorates Alzheimer’s-Associated Pathology and Improves Cognition. Cell,
177(2):256–271.e22, April 2019.
[72] Giulia Sprugnoli, Fanny Munsch, Davide Cappon, Rachel Paciorek, Joanna Macone, Ann
Connor, Georges El Fakhri, Ricardo Salvador, Giulio Ruffini, Kevin Donohoe, Mouhsin M.
Shafi, Daniel Press, David C. Alsop, Alvaro Pascual Leone, and Emiliano Santarnecchi.
Impact of multisession 40Hz tACS on hippocampal perfusion in patients with Alzheimer’s
disease. Alzheimer’s Research & Therapy, 13(1):203, December 2021.
[73] Seyyedeh Nahaleh Fatemi, Mohammad Javad Sedghizadeh, and Hamid Aghajan. Theta-
gamma phase-amplitude coupling explains the advantage of auditory plus visual gamma
entrainment in Alzheimer’s therapy. Alzheimer’s & Dementia, 17(S7):e053451, 2021.
eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/alz.053451.
[74] Shogo Hirano, Alexander Nakhnikian, Yoji Hirano, Naoya Oribe, Shigenobu Kanba, Toshi-
aki Onitsuka, Margaret Levin, and Kevin M. Spencer. Phase-Amplitude Coupling of the
Electroencephalogram in the Auditory Cortex in Schizophrenia. Biological Psychiatry.
Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, 3(1):69–76, January 2018.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 43
[75] Dashiell D. Sacks, Paul E. Schwenn, Larisa T. McLoughlin, Jim Lagopoulos, and Daniel F.
Hermens. Phase–Amplitude Coupling, Mental Health and Cognition: Implications for
Adolescence. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 15, March 2021. Publisher: Frontiers.
[76] Minah Kim, Yurim Shim, Junbeom Kwon, Sangyoon Bae, Junhee Lee, Jiook Cha, Soo-
Hee Choi, Se Hyun Kim, Ung Gu Kang, and Jun Soo Kwon. Resting-state theta-phase
gamma amplitude coupling as a biomarker for the transdiagnostic dimensional approach
in psychiatric disorders. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 77(7):410–411, July 2023.
[77] Brian H. Silverstein, Nicholas Kolbman, Amanda Nelson, Tiecheng Liu, Peter Guzzo, Jim
Gilligan, UnCheol Lee, George A. Mashour, Giancarlo Vanini, and Dinesh Pal. Psilocybin
induces dose-dependent changes in functional network organization in rat cortex. bioRxiv:
The Preprint Server for Biology , page 2024.02.09.579718, February 2024.
[78] Gustavo Deco, Viktor K. Jirsa, Peter A. Robinson, Michael Breakspear, and Karl Friston.
The Dynamic Brain: From Spiking Neurons to Neural Masses and Cortical Fields. PLOS
Computational Biology, 4(8):e1000092, August 2008. Publisher: Public Library of Science.
[79] Michael Breakspear. Dynamic models of large-scale brain activity. Nature Neuroscience,
20(3):340–352, February 2017.
[80] Olaf Sporns, Giulio Tononi, and Rolf K¨ otter. The human connectome: A structural
description of the human brain.PLoS Comput. Biol., 1(4):e42, September 2005. Publisher:
Public Library of Science (PLoS).
[81] Isabelle Merlet, Gwenael Birot, Ricardo Salvador, Behnam Molaee-Ardekani, Abeye
Mekonnen, Aureli Soria-Frish, Giulio Ruffini, Pedro C. Miranda, and Fabrice Wendling.
From oscillatory transcranial current stimulation to scalp EEG changes: A biophysical and
physiological modeling study. PLoS ONE, 8(2):e57330, February 2013. tex.date-added:
2016-06-10 15:40:27 +0000 tex.date-modified: 2016-06-10 15:42:30 +0000.
[82] V. B. Mountcastle. The columnar organization of the neocortex. Brain: A Journal of
Neurology, 120 ( Pt 4):701–722, April 1997.
[83] B. H. Jansen and V. G. Rit. Electroencephalogram and visual evoked potential generation
in a mathematical model of coupled cortical columns. Biological Cybernetics, 73(4):357–
366, September 1995.
[84] Fran¸ cois Grimbert and Olivier Faugeras. Bifurcation analysis of Jansen’s neural mass
model. Neural Computation, 18(12):3052–3068, December 2006.
[85] E. J. Doedel and others. AUTO-07P: Continuation and bifurcation software for ordinary
differential equations. manual, 2007.
[86] Roser Sanchez-Todo, Andr´ e M. Bastos, Edmundo Lopez-Sola, Borja Mercadal, Emiliano
Santarnecchi, Earl K. Miller, Gustavo Deco, and Giulio Ruffini. A physical neural mass
model framework for the analysis of oscillatory generators from laminar electrophysiolog-
ical recordings. NeuroImage, 270:119938, April 2023.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 44
[87] Giulio Ruffini, Edmundo Lopez-Sola, Jakub Vohryzek, and Roser Sanchez-Todo. Neu-
ral geometrodynamics, complexity, and plasticity: a psychedelics perspective. Entropy,
26(1):90, 2024. Publisher: MDPI.
[88] Andr´ e M. Bastos, Roman Loonis, Simon Kornblith, Mikael Lundqvist, and Earl K. Miller.
Laminar recordings in frontal cortex suggest distinct layers for maintenance and control
of working memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(5):1117–1122,
2018.
[89] Diego Mendoza-Halliday, Alex James Major, Noah Lee, Maxwell J. Lichtenfeld, Brock
Carlson, Blake Mitchell, Patrick D. Meng, Yihan (Sophy) Xiong, Jacob A. Westerberg,
Xiaoxuan Jia, Kevin D. Johnston, Janahan Selvanayagam, Stefan Everling, Alexander
Maier, Robert Desimone, Earl K. Miller, and Andr´ e M. Bastos. A ubiquitous spectrolam-
inar motif of local field potential power across the primate cortex. Nature Neuroscience,
pages 1–14, January 2024. Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[90] F. Wendling, F. Bartolomei, J. J. Bellanger, and P. Chauvel. Epileptic fast activity can be
explained by a model of impaired GABAergic dendritic inhibition. The European Journal
of Neuroscience, 15(9):1499–1508, May 2002.
[91] Mojtaba Chehelcheraghi, Chie Nakatani, Erik Steur, and Cees van Leeuwen. A neural
mass model of phase–amplitude coupling. Biological Cybernetics, 110(2):171–192, June
2016.
[92] Mojtaba Chehelcheraghi, Cees van Leeuwen, Erik Steur, and Chie Nakatani. A neural
mass model of cross frequency coupling. PLOS ONE , 12(4):e0173776, April 2017. Pub-
lisher: Public Library of Science.
[93] G. Ruffini, R. Sanchez-Todo, L. Dubreuil, R. Salvador, D. Pinotsis, E. K. Miller,
F. Wendling, E. Santarnecchi, and A. Bastos. P118 A Biophysically realistic Laminar
Neural Mass Modeling framework for transcranial Current Stimulation. Clinical Neuro-
physiology, 131(4):e78–e79, April 2020.
[94] Borja Mercadal, Edmundo Lopez-Sola, Adri` a Galan-Gadea, Mariam Al Harrach, Roser
Sanchez-Todo, Ricardo Salvador, Fabrice Bartolomei, Fabrice Wendling, and Giulio
Ruffini. Towards a mesoscale physical modeling framework for stereotactic-EEG record-
ings. Journal of Neural Engineering, 20(1), January 2023.
[95] A. M. Bastos, V. Litvak, R. Moran, C. A. Bosman, P. Fries, and K. J. Friston. A DCM
study of spectral asymmetries in feedforward and feedback connections between visual
areas V1 and V4 in the monkey. NeuroImage, 108:460–475, March 2015.
[96] Karl J Friston, Andr´ e M Bastos, Dimitris Pinotsis, and Vladimir Litvak. LFP and oscil-
lations—what do they tell us? Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 31:1–6, April 2015.
[97] Gy¨ orgy Buzs´ aki and Andreas Draguhn. Neuronal oscillations in cortical networks.Science
(New York, N.Y.) , 304(5679):1926–1929, June 2004.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 45
[98] Shunsuke Tamura and Yoji Hirano. Cortical representation of speech temporal information
through high gamma-band activity and its temporal modulation. Cerebral Cortex (New
York, NY), 33(13):8773, May 2023.
[99] Brian N. Pasley, Stephen V. David, Nima Mesgarani, Adeen Flinker, Shihab A. Shamma,
Nathan E. Crone, Robert T. Knight, and Edward F. Chang. Reconstructing Speech from
Human Auditory Cortex. PLOS Biology, 10(1):e1001251, January 2012. Publisher: Public
Library of Science.
[100] Giulio Ruffini and Francesca Castaldo. Neural Encoding through Hiearchical Amplitude
Modulation (HAM): a Laminar Neural Mass model implementation (“it is AM radio”).
biorxiv, 2025.
[101] Ryota Kanai, Yutaka Komura, Stewart Shipp, and Karl Friston. Cerebral hierarchies:
predictive processing, precision and the pulvinar. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences , 370(1668):20140169, May 2015.
[102] G Ruffini, R Sanchez-Todo, L Dubreuil, R Salvador, D Pitosis, Earl K Miller, F Wendling,
E Santarnecchi, and A Bastos. A Biologically realistic Laminar Neural Mass Modeling
Framework for Transcranial Electrical Stimulation. Clinical Neurophysiology, 131(4):e78–
e79, 2020.
[103] Pau Clusella, Gustavo Deco, Morten L. Kringelbach, Giulio Ruffini, and Jordi Garcia-
Ojalvo. Complex spatiotemporal oscillations emerge from transverse instabilities in large-
scale brain networks. PLOS Computational Biology , 19(4):e1010781, April 2023. Pub-
lisher: Public Library of Science.
[104] Jan C. Gendra, Edmundo Lopez-Sola, Francesca Castaldo, Elia Lleal-Custey, Roser
Sanchez-Todo, Jakub Vohryzek, Ricardo Salvador, and Giulio Ruffini. Restoring Oscil-
latory Dynamics in Alzheimer’s Disease: A Laminar Whole-Brain Model of Serotonergic
Psychedelic Effects, December 2024.
[105] Eelke Spaak, Mathilde Bonnefond, Alexander Maier, David A. Leopold, and Ole Jensen.
Layer-specific entrainment of gamma-band neural activity by the alpha rhythm in monkey
visual cortex. Current biology : CB, 22(24):2313, November 2012.
[106] Sara M. Szczepanski, Nathan E. Crone, Rachel A. Kuperman, Kurtis I. Auguste, Josef
Parvizi, and Robert T. Knight. Dynamic changes in phase-amplitude coupling facilitate
spatial attention control in fronto-parietal cortex. PLoS biology, 12(8):e1001936, August
2014.
[107] Dino Dvorak and Andr´ e A. Fenton. Towards a proper estimation of phase-amplitude
coupling in neural oscillations. Journal of neuroscience methods, 225:42, January 2014.
[108] Jorge F. Mejias, John D. Murray, Henry Kennedy, and Xiao-Jing Wang. Feedforward and
feedback frequency-dependent interactions in a large-scale laminar network of the primate
cortex. Science Advances, 2(11):e1601335, November 2016.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 46
[109] Ravi V. Chacko, Byungchan Kim, Suh Woo Jung, Amy L. Daitch, Jarod L. Roland,
Nicholas V. Metcalf, Maurizio Corbetta, Gordon L. Shulman, and Eric C. Leuthardt.
Distinct phase-amplitude couplings distinguish cognitive processes in human attention.
NeuroImage, 175:111–121, July 2018.
[110] Suresh D. Muthukumaraswamy, Robin L. Carhart-Harris, Rosalyn J. Moran, Matthew J.
Brookes, Tim M. Williams, David Errtizoe, Ben Sessa, Andreas Papadopoulos, Mark
Bolstridge, Krish D. Singh, Amanda Feilding, Karl J. Friston, and David J. Nutt. Broad-
band Cortical Desynchronization Underlies the Human Psychedelic State. Journal of
Neuroscience, 33(38):15171–15183, September 2013. Publisher: Society for Neuroscience
Section: Articles.
[111] Roser Sanchez-Todo, Lopez-Sola Edmundo, Mercadal Borja, and Ruffini Giulio. Laminar
Neural Mass Model for Representing Alzheimer’s Disease Electrophysiopathology.biorxiv,
2024.
[112] Peter Cariani and Janet M. Baker. Time Is of the Essence: Neural Codes, Synchronies,
Oscillations, Architectures. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 16:898829, 2022.
[113] Ian G. Cumming and Frank H. Wong. Digital Processing of Synthetic Aperture Radar
Data: Algorithms and Implementation . Artech House, Boston, MA, USA, 2005.
[114] P. Elias. Predictive coding–I. IRE Transactions on Information Theory, 1(1):16–24, 1955.
[115] Rajesh P. N. Rao and Dana H. Ballard. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional
interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nature Neuroscience, 2(1):79–
87, 1999.
[116] M. V. Srinivasan, S. B. Laughlin, and A. Dubs. Predictive coding: a fresh view of
inhibition in the retina. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological
Sciences, 216(1205):427–459, November 1982.
[117] W. Ross Ashby. An Introduction to Cybernetics. Martino Fine Books, 2015.
[118] Alan M. Turing. On computable numbers, with an application to the entscheidungsprob-
lem. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society , 2(42):230–265, 1936. tex.date-
added: 2016-12-21 19:54:54 +0000 tex.date-modified: 2016-12-22 00:59:02 +0000.
[119] Paul Bernays. Alonzo Church. An unsolvable problem of elementary number theory.
American journal of mathematics, vol. 58 (1936), pp. 345–363. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 1(2):73–74, June 1936.
[120] C. E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System Technical
Journal, 27(3):379–423, July 1948. Conference Name: The Bell System Technical Journal.
[121] Richard P. Feynman. Feynman lectures on computation. Advanced book program. Perseus,
Cambridge, Mass, paperback print., [repr.] edition, 2001.
[122] Doron Swade. The Difference Engine: Charles Babbage and the Quest to Build the First
Computer. Penguin, 2000.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 47
[123] Brian Jack Copeland, editor. Colossus: the secrets of Bletchley Park’s codebreaking com-
puters. Oxford University Press, Oxford New York, 2006.
[124] Brian Randell. On alan turing and the origins of digital computers. In B. Meltzer and
D. Michie, editors, Machine Intelligence , volume 7, pages 3–20. 1972.
[125] Jeffry S. Isaacson and Massimo Scanziani. How inhibition shapes cortical activity. Neuron,
72(2):231–243, 2011.
[126] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N.
Gomez, /suppress Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. InProceedings of
the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’17,
pages 6000–6010, Red Hook, NY, USA, December 2017. Curran Associates Inc.
[127] R. N¨ a¨ at¨ anen, M. Tervaniemi, E. Sussman, P. Paavilainen, and I. Winkler. ”Primitive
intelligence” in the auditory cortex. Trends in Neurosciences, 24(5):283–288, May 2001.
[128] Marta I. Garrido, James M. Kilner, Klaas E. Stephan, and Karl J. Friston. The mismatch
negativity: A review of underlying mechanisms. Clinical Neurophysiology, 120(3):453–463,
March 2009.
[129] Brendon Qela, Stefano Damiani, Samanta De Santis, Federica Groppi, Anna Pichiecchio,
Carlo Asteggiano, Natascia Brondino, Alessio Maria Monteleone, Luigi Grassi, Pierluigi
Politi, Paolo Fusar-Poli, and Laura Fusar-Poli. Predictive coding in neuropsychiatric
disorders: A systematic transdiagnostic review. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews ,
169:106020, February 2025.
[130] E. Pekkonen. Mismatch negativity in aging and in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases.
Audiology and Neurotology, 5(3-4):216–224, 2000.
[131] Andr´ e Schmidt, Rosilla Bachmann, Michael Kometer, Philipp A. Csomor, Klaas E.
Stephan, Erich Seifritz, and Franz X. Vollenweider. Mismatch negativity encoding of
prediction errors predicts S-ketamine-induced cognitive impairments. Neuropsychophar-
macology: Official Publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology ,
37(4):865–875, March 2012.
[132] R L Carhart-Harris and K J Friston. REBUS and the anarchic brain: Toward a uni-
fied model of the brain action of psychedelics. Pharmacological Reviews, 71(3):316–344,
July 2019. Publisher: American Society for Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics
(ASPET).
[133] Conor H. Murray, Ilaria Tare, Claire M. Perry, Michael Malina, Royce Lee, and Harriet
de Wit. Low doses of LSD reduce broadband oscillatory power and modulate event-related
potentials in healthy adults. Psychopharmacology, 239(6):1735–1747, June 2022.
[134] M. Kometer and others. Psilocybin biases facial recognition, reduces negative affect, and
enhances bonding: behavioral and neural effects. Biological Psychiatry, 73(8):731–738,
2013.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 48
[135] C. Pallavicini and others. Psilocybin-induced modulation of EEG and fMRI signals during
a tactile learning task: evidence for aberrant prediction error processing. Cerebral Cortex,
32(1):186–204, 2021.
[136] Ece Kocagoncu, Anastasia Klimovich-Gray, Laura E. Hughes, and James B. Rowe. Evi-
dence and implications of abnormal predictive coding in dementia. Brain: A Journal of
Neurology, 144(11):3311–3321, December 2021.
[137] Frank Jessen, Rebecca E. Amariglio, Martin van Boxtel, Monique Breteler, Mathieu
Ceccaldi, Ga¨ el Ch´ etelat, Bruno Dubois, Carole Dufouil, Kathryn A. Ellis, Wiesje M.
van der Flier, Lidia Glodzik, Argonde C. van Harten, Mony J. de Leon, Pauline McHugh,
Michelle M. Mielke, Jose Luis Molinuevo, Lisa Mosconi, Ricardo S. Osorio, Audrey Per-
rotin, Ronald C. Petersen, Laura A. Rabin, Lorena Rami, Barry Reisberg, Dorene M.
Rentz, Perminder S. Sachdev, Vincent de la Sayette, Andrew J. Saykin, Philip Schel-
tens, Melanie B. Shulman, Melissa J. Slavin, Reisa A. Sperling, Robert Stewart, Olga
Uspenskaya, Bruno Vellas, Pieter Jelle Visser, Michael Wagner, and Subjective Cognitive
Decline Initiative (SCD-I) Working Group. A conceptual framework for research on sub-
jective cognitive decline in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s & Dementia: The
Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association , 10(6):844–852, November 2014.
[138] F. Passetti and others. Multiple cross-frequency coupling analysis of resting-state EEG
in MCI and AD. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 17:1149289, 2023.
[139] M. Martinez-Losa and others. Nav1.1-overexpression in mouse prefrontal interneurons
reverses cognitive deficits and gamma abnormalities in an Alzheimer’s model. Nature
Medicine, 24(3):358–364, 2018.
[140] Elias P. Casula, Maria C. Pellicciari, Sonia Bonn` ı, Ilaria Borghi, Michele Maiella, Mar-
tina Assogna, Marilena Minei, Caterina Motta, Alessia D’Acunto, Francesco Porrazzini,
Valentina Pezzopane, Lucia Mencarelli, Andrea Roncaioli, Lorenzo Rocchi, Danny A.
Spampinato, Carlo Caltagirone, Emiliano Santarnecchi, Alessandro Martorana, and Gia-
como Koch. Decreased Frontal Gamma Activity in Alzheimer Disease Patients. Annals
of Neurology, 92(3):464, July 2022.
[141] Karan Govindpani, Beatriz Calvo-Flores Guzm´ an, Chitra Vinnakota, Henry J. Wald-
vogel, Richard L. Faull, and Andrea Kwakowsky. Towards a Better Understanding of
GABAergic Remodeling in Alzheimer’s Disease. International Journal of Molecular Sci-
ences, 18(8):1813, August 2017.
[142] Clare E. Palmer, Marco Davare, and James M. Kilner. Physiological and Perceptual Sen-
sory Attenuation Have Different Underlying Neurophysiological Correlates. The Journal
of Neuroscience, 36(42):10803–10812, October 2016.
[143] Marika Mariano, Ileana Rossetti, Angelo Maravita, Eraldo Paulesu, and Laura Zapparoli.
Sensory Attenuation Deficit and Auditory Hallucinations in Schizophrenia: A Causal
Mechanism or a Risk Factor? Evidence From Meta-Analyses on the N1 Event-Related
Potential Component. Biological Psychiatry, 96(3):207–221, August 2024.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 49
[144] Ana Margarida Gon¸ calves and Patricia Monteiro. Autism Spectrum Disorder and audi-
tory sensory alterations: a systematic review on the integrity of cognitive and neuronal
functions related to auditory processing. Journal of Neural Transmission, 130(3):325–408,
2023.
[145] Federica Filice, Lucia Janickova, Thomas Henzi, Alessandro Bilella, and Beat Schwaller.
The Parvalbumin Hypothesis of Autism Spectrum Disorder. Frontiers in Cellular Neuro-
science, 14, December 2020. Publisher: Frontiers.
[146] Ewelina Bogda´ nska-Chomczyk, Maciej R´ owniak, Andrew Chih-Wei Huang, and Anna
Koz/suppress lowska. Parvalbumin interneuron deficiency in the prefrontal and motor cortices of
spontaneously hypertensive rats: an attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder animal model
insight. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 15, March 2024. Publisher: Frontiers.
[147] Dadao An, Yi You, Qianyi Ma, Zhengyi Xu, Zonghan Liu, Ruichu Liao, Han Chen, Yiquan
Wang, Yi Wang, Haibin Dai, Haohong Li, Lei Jiang, Zhong Chen, and Weiwei Hu. Defi-
ciency of histamine H2 receptors in parvalbumin-positive neurons leads to hyperactivity,
impulsivity, and impaired attention. Neuron, 113(4):572–589.e6, February 2025.
[148] Beulah Leitch. Parvalbumin Interneuron Dysfunction in Neurological Disorders: Fo-
cus on Epilepsy and Alzheimer’s Disease. International Journal of Molecular Sciences,
25(10):5549, January 2024. Number: 10 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing
Institute.
[149] Pablo Juarez and Ver´ onica Mart´ ınez Cerde˜ no. Parvalbumin and parvalbumin chande-
lier interneurons in autism and other psychiatric disorders. Frontiers in Psychiatry , 13,
October 2022. Publisher: Frontiers.
[150] Peter F. Liddle and Elizabeth B. Liddle. Imprecise Predictive Coding Is at the Core of
Classical Schizophrenia. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 16, March 2022. Publisher:
Frontiers.
[151] Zenas C. Chao, Misako Komatsu, Madoka Matsumoto, Kazuki Iijima, Keiko Nakagaki,
and Noritaka Ichinohe. Erroneous predictive coding across brain hierarchies in a non-
human primate model of autism spectrum disorder. Communications Biology, 7(1):1–16,
July 2024. Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[152] Maria Luz Gonzalez-Gadea, Srivas Chennu, Tristan A. Bekinschtein, Alexia Rattazzi,
Ana Beraudi, Paula Tripicchio, Beatriz Moyano, Yamila Soffita, Laura Steinberg, Federico
Adolfi, Mariano Sigman, Julian Marino, Facundo Manes, and Agustin Ibanez. Predictive
coding in autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Journal
of Neurophysiology, 114(5):2625–2636, November 2015.
[153] Jorge F. Mejias, John D. Murray, Henry Kennedy, and Xiao-Jing Wang. Feedforward and
feedback frequency-dependent interactions in a large-scale laminar network of the primate
cortex. Science Advances, 2(11):e1601335, 2016.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
REFERENCES 50
[154] Mojtaba Chehelcheraghi, Chie Nakatani, Erik Steur, and Cees van Leeuwen. A neural
mass model of phase–amplitude coupling. Biological Cybernetics, 110(2-3):171–192, 2016.
[155] Roberto C. Sotero. Topology, cross-frequency, and same-frequency band interactions shape
the generation of phase-amplitude coupling in a neural mass model of a cortical column.
PLOS Computational Biology, 12(11):e1005180, 2016.
[156] Andrea Ceni, Simona Olmi, Alessandro Torcini, and David Angulo-Garcia. Cross fre-
quency coupling in next generation inhibitory neural mass models. Chaos, 30(5):053121,
2020.
[157] Marco Segneri, Hongjie Bi, Simona Olmi, and Alessandro Torcini. Theta-nested gamma
oscillations in next generation neural mass models. Frontiers in Computational Neuro-
science, 14:47, 2020.
[158] Adam Ponzi, Salvador Dura-Bernal, and Michele Migliore. Theta-gamma phase amplitude
coupling in a hippocampal ca1 microcircuit. PLoS Computational Biology, 19(3):e1010942,
2023.
[159] Nikola Jajcay, Caglar Cakan, and Klaus Obermayer. Cross-frequency slow oscillation–
spindle coupling in a biophysically realistic thalamocortical neural mass model. Frontiers
in Computational Neuroscience, 16:769860, 2022.
[160] Michael W. Spratling. Reconciling predictive coding and biased competition models of
cortical function. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 2:4, 2008.
[161] Catherine Wacongne, Jean-Pierre Changeux, and Stanislas Dehaene. A neuronal model
of predictive coding accounting for the mismatch negativity. Journal of Neuroscience ,
32(11):3665–3678, 2012.
[162] Andr
’e M. Bastos, W. Martin Usrey, Rick A. Adams, G. R. Mangun, Pascal Fries, and Karl J.
Friston. Canonical microcircuits for predictive coding. Neuron, 76(4):695–711, 2012.
[163] Yuru Song, Mingchen Yao, Helen Kemprecos,
’Aine Byrne, Zhengdong Xiao, Qiaosheng Zhang, Amrita Singh, Jing Wang, and Zhe S.
Chen. Predictive coding models for pain perception. Journal of Computational Neuro-
science, 49(2):107–127, 2021.
[164] H. F. Iaccarino and others. Gamma frequency entrainment attenuates amyloid load and
modifies microglia in an Alzheimer’s disease model. Nature, 540(7632):230–235, 2016.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
A BAND POWER AND PEIX PLOTS 51
A Band power and PEIX plots
The following plots illustrate how power distributions within each frequency band are influenced
by the mean external inputs to the respective populations.
We also display PEIX, a normalized slope measure of excitation–inhibition balance. Neural
populations are often modeled by a sigmoid function,
S(V) = 2e0
1 + exp
(
r(V0 −V)
),
where V0 is the half-maximum potential (the linear operating point), e0 is the maximum firing
rate, and r sets the slope. The derivative,
S′(V) = 2e0 r exp
(
r(V0 −V)
)
(
1 + exp
(
r(V0 −V)
))2 ,
peaks at V = V0 with S′(V0) = e0r
2 and decreases as the system enters its excitatory ( V ≫V0)
or inhibitory (V ≪V0) saturation regimes.
To quantify the deviation from the ideal linear regime, we define the dimensionless variable
x= r
(
⟨V⟩−V0
)
,
where ⟨V⟩is the average membrane potential. By normalizing the local slope S′(V) with its
maximum value atV0, we obtain a measure of nonlinearity that distinguishes between excitation
and inhibition. The Population Excitation-Inhibition Index (PEIX)is defined as
∝(x) = −sign(x)


4 exp(−x)
(
1 + exp(−x)
)2 −1

.
This formulation ensures that:
• ∝(x) ≈0 when ⟨V⟩≈ V0 (linear regime),
• ∝(x) >0 when ⟨V⟩>V0 (excitatory state),
• ∝(x) <0 when ⟨V⟩<V0 (inhibitory state),
• | ∝(x)|≈ 1 in the saturated regimes.
Thus, by focusing on the normalized slope of the sigmoid, PEIX provides a compact, dimen-
sionless index of both the deviation from the optimal operating point and the underlying exci-
tation–inhibition balance.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
A BAND POWER AND PEIX PLOTS 52
Figure
A1: LaNMM band power for P1 and P2 populations for varying external mean drivesµP1
and µP2 (stochastic drive on P1). The left column displays the alpha band power (8 −12 Hz)
for P1 and P2, while the right column shows the gamma band power (30 −50 Hz) for each
population. The white dot marks the mean input parameter values used in Sanchez-Todo el al.
(2023),86 (µP1 ,µP2 ) = (200, 90) Hz. The black dot indicates the values chosen for this study,
(µP1 ,µP2 ) = (270,90) Hz. The bottom plot displays the PEIX indicator.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
A BAND POWER AND PEIX PLOTS 53
Figure
A2: LaNMM band power for P1 and P2 populations for varying external mean drivesµP1
and µP2 (stochastic drive on P2). The left column displays the alpha band power (8 −12 Hz)
for P1 and P2, while the right column shows the gamma band power (30 −50 Hz) for each
population. The white dot marks the mean input parameter values used in Sanchez-Todo et al.
(2023),86 (µP1 ,µP2 ) = (200, 90) Hz. The black dot indicates the values chosen for this study,
(µP1 ,µP2 ) = (270 ,90) Hz, which is deeper into the quasi periodic regime with stronger EEC
(see Figures 4 and H1. The bottom plot displays the PEIX indicator.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
C INPUT-PRIOR PHASE DEPENDENCE (SEC) 54
B Gain optimization
In this section, we detail the methodology used to select the gains applied to the input and
prior messages provided to the LaNMM for the SEC and EEC error computation.
In each case (SEC / EEC), we first selected the input gain GI so that when the input message
was applied alone (no prior), the output of the LaNMM ( E) showed a high PCC with the input
message. This way, we could ensure that the input was strong enough to modulate the activity
of the LaNMM and carry it through the output message. As shown in Figure B1, if the input
gain is sufficiently high, the output is highly correlated with the input. However, the higher
the input gain, the more it would dominate the output message and the harder it would be
to suppress it with a prior message. We thus selected in each case the lowest input gain that
resulted in high PCC with the input, i.e., G∗
I(SEC) = 10 and G∗
I(EEC) = 1.
For the SEC mechanisms, we used the selected input gain and evaluated the E power as a
function of the prior gain in the case when a prior message matching the input was sent to the
LaNMM. We studied the cases where the prior was sent to the P1 population and to the PV
population. In each case, there was an optimal value of prior gain that would lead to a minimum
error, as shown in Figure B1. We chose the nearest round values that better approximated such
a minimum, i.e., G∗
P(SEC,P 1) = 20, G∗
P(SEC,PV ) = 5.
For the EEC mechanism, we used the selected input gain and evaluated for different prior gains
the MSE between the subtraction of input precision and prior precision and the error precision,
as shown in Figure 10. We selected the nearest round value of prior gain that resulted in the
minimum MSE, G∗
P(EEC) = 10.
C Input-prior phase dependence (SEC)
We expected that for effective suppression of the input signal with a matching prior using the
SEC mechanism the prior signal sent to P1 had to be phase-shifted by 180º (i.e., inverted). This
inversion would allow the prediction message to counteract the excitatory input effectively. This
was due to the fact that P1 is an excitatory population and that the SEC for P1-driving inputs
is positive, as shown in Figure 4. We confirmed this by computing the power of the output from
the LaNMM Ewhen varying the phase of the matching prior (see Figure C1a). Interestingly,
we can see that when applying the matching prior in phase with the input (0º shift), the output
error is increased with respect to the flat prior and wrong prior conditions.
In contrast, for the PV population, which is inhibitory and has positive SEC for PV-driving
inputs, the prior had to be applied in phase with the input signal to achieve suppression (see
Figure C1b. When priors shifted 180 º (inverted) where sent to the PV population, the LaNMM
output Epower was increased.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
C INPUT-PRIOR PHASE DEPENDENCE (SEC) 55
Figure B1: Selection of input and prior gains for SEC and EEC. Top and bottom panels show
the gain optimization process for SEC and EEC, respectively. Left panels: Pearson correlation
coefficient (PCC) between the LaNMM error signal Eand the input message Ias a function of
input gain GI. The selected gain G∗
I (dashed line) corresponds to the lowest value that ensures
a high PCC. Middle and right panels: Epower (top) and MSE (bottom) as a function of prior
gain GP, showing a clear minimum when the prior matches the input. The selected prior gain
G∗
P (dashed line) approximates the value that minimizes error power.
Figure C1: Epower as a function of the phase shift of the prior with respect to the input signal.
Different prior configurations are used: matching prior (“match”), wrong prior (“other”) and
flat prior (“base”). (a) Prior to P1 condition. (b) Prior to PV condition.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
E PREDICTIVE ROUTING FROM EEC 56
D Precision and Kalman Gain
In the Kalman filtering framework, updating the state estimate involves balancing prior pre-
dictions with incoming measurements. At step k, this balance is quantified by the innovation
covariance Sk, defined as:
Sk = HP−
k HT + R, (6)
where:
• P−
k is the predicted (prior) state covariance, reflecting the uncertainty inherent in the
internal model’s prediction of the current state before incorporating new observations.
• H is the observation model, projecting uncertainty from state-space into measurement-
space, transforming prior state uncertainty P−
k into observation uncertainty HP−
k HT .
• R is the measurement noise covariance, explicitly encoding uncertainty or noise inherent
to the measurements themselves, independent of the model.
Thus, the innovation covariance Sk combines two distinct sources of uncertainty:
1. Model-based uncertainty (HP−
k HT ): uncertainty arising from the prediction step,
reflecting imprecision in the model’s prior expectation about the observed quantities.
2. Measurement uncertainty (R): intrinsic uncertainty in the data, reflecting how noisy
or unreliable the incoming observations are.
The precision matrix Π k, defined as the inverse of Sk, explicitly integrates both these uncer-
tainties:
Πk = S−1
k =
(
HP−
k HT + R
)−1
. (7)
Higher precision thus means lower combined uncertainty, increasing confidence in the prediction
errors.
The Kalman gain Kk, directly related to precision, weights prediction errors (innovations) when
updating the state estimate:
Kk = P−
k HT Πk. (8)
Finally, the posterior state estimate ˆ x+
k is updated using this gain applied to the prediction
error νk = zk −Hˆx−
k :
ˆx+
k = ˆx−
k + Kkνk. (9)
Precision thus clearly separates and balances model-derived and measurement-derived uncer-
tainties, directly controlling the integration of observational evidence into state inference.
E Predictive Routing from EEC
In predictive routing,21 information is encoded by route and predictions address the route taken
by sensory stimuli: correctly predicted inputs are inhibited, while unpredicted inputs propagate,
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
E PREDICTIVE ROUTING FROM EEC 57
Figure E1: Predictive routing: prediction of the route of the stimulus: information = route .
Bottom-up stimulus travels via route A or B (encoding 0 or 1, respectively), depending on the
stimulus. In the depicted case, it travels via Route A (encoding a 1). The prediction aims
to predict the route and inhibit information flow. Inhibition is implemented via EEC or SEC.
(a) The route is incorrectly predicted (prediction on the left, encoding a 0), so the signal flows
through (XOR(0,1)=1 on top, Output is ON). (b) The route is correctly predicted (Route 1 is
predicted), and information flow is suppressed (XOR(0,0)=0).
signaling prediction errors.
Top-down predictions are communicated via alpha/beta oscillations (8–30 Hz) originating from
deep cortical layers. These rhythms prepare sensory pathways by pre-emptively inhibiting the
columns that process expected inputs. It is this pre-emptive aspect that reflects predictions of
which prediction errors will convey precise or salient information.
When a prediction specifies a particular route—say, Route A—the corresponding cortical col-
umn is suppressed by alpha/beta activity, which in turn reduces gamma oscillations and neu-
ronal spiking in that column. As a consequence, expected stimuli arriving via Route A are
effectively blocked. Conversely, when the prediction is off (inhibition of Route B), the stimulus
bypasses the inhibitory control because the predicted pathway is not engaged, generating an
active output. In this case, the absence of alpha/beta-mediated inhibition allows for enhanced
gamma oscillations and increased spiking activity, which serve as a robust signal of a prediction
error. Figure E1 illustrates this process: when predictions indicate that a stimulus will follow
Route A, alpha/beta rhythms suppress gamma activity in the corresponding cortical column,
blocking that pathway. If the actual input follows Route B, the lack of inhibition permits gamma
activity and spiking, thereby signaling a prediction error and routing unpredicted information
upward in the cortical hierarchy. This provides a distributed implementation of the Comparator
using multiple columns.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
G NOISE GENERATION FOR SEC AND EEC CHARACTERIZATION 58
F LaNMM examples in other bands
Here we provide a couple of examples of the spectra produced by other parameter configurations
in LaNMM, obtained by changing synaptic time constants.
Figure F1: Examples from other LaNMM parameter configurations (only changing time con-
stants).
G Noise generation for SEC and EEC characterization
The external driving inputs to P1 and P2 used in Figure 4 were crafted using a multiscale noise
generator that amalgamates slow and fast fluctuations. The noise was generated by combining
two components: a slow drift and a fast fluctuation. The slow drift was produced using an
autoregressive (AR(1)) process with coefficient αslow, yielding an effective timescale τslow =
−∆t/ln(αslow), which captures long-term fluctuations. The fast component was generated as
white noise, scaled by a standard deviation σfast, and then low-pass filtered with a 4th-order
Butterworth filter having a cutoff frequency fcutoff, resulting in an effective timescale τfast =
1/(2πfcutoff). These two components were summed and offset by a base mean, and values were
clipped to a minimum floor to prevent extremely small or negative outputs. Noise was generated
over the simulation time vector with a sampling frequency fs = 1/∆t, and reproducibility was
ensured by setting a fixed random seed.
Figure G1 shows an example of the multiscale noise generated and its power spectral density.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
G NOISE GENERATION FOR SEC AND EEC CHARACTERIZATION 59
Figure G1: Example of multiscale noise (top panel) and its power spectral density (bottom
panel).
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
H SEC AND EEC UNDER AM MODULATION DRIVING 60
H SEC and EEC under AM modulation driving
Generation of AM-Modulated Signals.To evaluate the impact of AM driving vs noise, we
generated amplitude-modulated (AM) signals in the alpha band by applying nested modulation
to a carrier tone. 100 Formally, given a time array t, a carrier frequency fc, and two bandpass
filters for modulators m1(t) and m2(t), we compute
S(t) = E(t) cos
(
2πfc t
)
,
where the envelope E(t) is defined as
E(t) = Ac
[
1 + a1 m1(t)
][
1 + a2 m2(t)
]
.
where a1 and a2 are the modulation indexes. In practice, m1(t) and m2(t) are obtained by band-
pass filtering white noise within the specified frequency bands ( envelope band and slow band,
respectively), and the filtered signals are then rescaled to the range [−1, 1]. The final AM-
modulated signal S(t) is shifted to have zero mean. This nested structure allows the fast
modulator to impose rapid changes in amplitude on the carrier, while the slow modulator in-
troduces additional variations over longer timescales. In our simulation of priors, we set fc = 0,
as we are interested in the modulated envelope only.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 
H SEC AND EEC UNDER AM MODULATION DRIVING 61
Figure
H1: Top: sample modulation signal. Bottom: Couplings for P1 and P2 driving under
AM modulation. Modulation used a 0.5-2 Hz modulation of a 8-12 Hz band signal.
.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International licensemade available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted March 20, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.03.19.644090doi: bioRxiv preprint 