  
Generalized Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (G-SLAM) as unification framework for 
natural and artificial intelligences: towards reverse engineering the hippocampal/entorhinal 
system and principles of high-level cognition  
Adam Safron1,2,3*, Ozan Çatal4, Tim Verbelen4 
1Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA 
2Kinsey Institute, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA 
3Cognitive Science Program, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA 
4IDLab, Department of Information Technology, Ghent University – imec, Ghent, Belgium 
* Correspondence:  
Adam Safron 
asafron@gmail.com 
Keywords: SLAM, Free Energy Pri nciple, Active Inference, Hippocampal and Entorhinal 
Systems, Hierarchical Generative Models, Robotics, Artificial Intelligence. 
Abstract 
Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) represents  a fundamental problem for autonomous 
embodied systems, for which the hippocampal/entorhinal system (H/E-S) has been optimized over the 
course of evolution . We have developed a biologically-inspired SLAM architecture based on latent 
variable generative modeling  within the Free Energy Principle and Active Inference (FEP -AI) 
framework, which affords  flexible navigation and planning in mobile robots . We have  primarily 
focused on attempting to reverse engineer  H/E-S ‘design’ properties, but here we consider ways in 
which SLAM principles from robotics may help us better understand nervous systems  and emergent 
minds. After reviewing LatentSLAM and notable features of this control architecture, we consider how 
the H/E-S may realize these functional properties not only for physical navigation, but also with respect 
to high-level cognition understood as generalized simultaneous localization and mapping (G-SLAM). 
We focus on loop-closure, graph-relaxation, and node duplication as particularly impactful 
architectural features, suggesting these computational phenomena may contribute to understanding 
cognitive insight (as proto-causal-inference), accommodation (as integration into existing schemas) , 
and assimilation (as category formation). All these operations can similarly be describable in terms of 
structure/category learning on multiple levels of abstraction. However, here we adopt an ecological 
rationality perspective, framing H/E -S function s as orchestrating SLAM processes within both 
concrete and abstract hypothesis spaces . In this navigation/search process,  adaptive cognitive 
equilibration between assimilation and accommodation involves balancing tradeof fs between 
exploration and exploitation ; this dynamic equilibrium may be near optimally realized in FEP-AI, 
wherein control systems governed by expected free energy objective functions naturally balance model 
simplicity and accuracy. With respect to structure learning, such a balance would involve constructing 
models and categories that are neither too inclusive nor exclusive. We propose these (generalized) 
SLAM phenomena may represent some of th e most impactful sources of variation in cognition both 
within and between individuals , suggesting  that modulators of  H/E-S functioning may potentially 
illuminate the ir adaptive significance s as fundamental cybernetic control parameters. Finally, we 
discuss how understanding H/E-S contributions to G-SLAM may provide a unifying framework for  
high-level cognition and its potential realization in artificial intelligences. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
2 
1 Introduction 
“We take almost all the decisive steps in our lives as a result of slight inner adjustments of 
which we are barely conscious.” 
-W.G. Sebald 
 
“Not all those who wander are lost.” 
 - J.R.R. Tolkien, The Riddle of Strider, The Fellowship of the Ring 
 
“We shall not cease from exploration 
And the end of all our exploring 
Will be to arrive where we started 
And know the place for the first time.” 
 -T.S. Elliot, Little Gidding 
Autonomous systems face a fundamental challenge of needing to understand where they are positioned 
as they move through the world. Towards this end, roboticists have extensively investigated solutions 
to the problem of simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), whereby systems must infer both a 
map of their surroundings and their relative locations as they navigate through space  (Cadena et al., 
2016). Considering that these same challenges face any freely moving cybernetic system, natural 
selection has similarly exerted extensive  teleonomical (i.e., illusory purposefulness) optimization in 
this direction (Dennett, 2017; Safron, 2019b), so generating mechanisms for enabling wayfinding and 
situating organisms within environments where they engage in multiple kinds of adaptive foraging. 
Perhaps the most sophisticated of all biological SLAM mechanisms is the hippocampal -entorhinal 
system (H/E-S), whereby vertebrates become capable of both remembering where they have been, 
inferring where they are, and shaping where they are likely to go next. 
Here, we argue that the development of the H/E -S represented a major transition in evolution, so 
enabling the emergence of teleology (i.e., actual goal-directedness) of various forms (Safron, 2021b), 
ranging from governance by expec ted action -outcome associations to explicitly represented and 
reflexively modellable causal sequences involving extended self -processes. We focus on the 
implications of SLAM capacities via the H/E-S, and of evidence that this functionality may have been 
repurposed for intelligent behavior and cognition in seemingly non -spatial domains. We propose that 
all cognition and goal -oriented behavior (broadly construed to include mental actions) is based on 
navigation through spatialized (re-)representations, ranging from modeling abstract task-structures to 
temporal sequences, and perhaps even sophisticated motor control via SLAM with respect to body 
maps. Indeed, we would go as far as to suggest that the ubiquity of implicit and explicit spatial 
metaphors in language strongly points to a perspective in which cognition is centered on the 
localization and mapping of phenomena within both concrete and abstract feature spaces  (Lakoff and 
Johnson, 1999; Bergen, 2012; Tversky, 2019). 
In these ways , we believe Generalized Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (G -SLAM) may 
provide enactive groundings for cognitive science within the principles of ecological rationality (Todd 
and Gigerenzer, 2012). That is, we adopt a perspective in which cognition is traced back to its ultimate 
origins, wherein rationality is understood in terms of adaptations for shaping animal behavior in ways 
that further evolutionary fitness. Such ecological and ethological connections further provide bridges 
to optimal foraging theory and (generalized) search processes as ways of understanding cognition as a 
kind of covert behavior (Hills et al., 2013). While somewhat similar models of intelligence have been 
proposed (Hawkins, 2021), we suggest these other views may be somewhat misleading in neglecting 
to account for the central role of the H/E-S for realizing G-SLAM. In addition to providing an accurate 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
3 
viewpoint that grounds cognition in its cybernetic function as shaped over the course of evolution and 
development, G-SLAM will further allow rich cross-fertilization of insights between cognitive science 
and artificial intelligence. Given the particular functionalities enabled by the H /E-S, we propose this 
reverse-engineering project ought to be the central focus of cognitive science and machine learning, 
potentially constituting the most viable path forward towards realizing AI with advanced capacities for 
reasoning and planning (Bengio, 2017). 
A thorough discussion of these issues is beyond the scope of a single manuscript. However, below we 
attempt to provide an overview of why we believe the G-SLAM perspective may provide a unification 
framework for cognitive science . First (in Section 2) , we review our work on biologically-inspired 
SLAM architectures for robotics. Then, we consider features of the H/E-S, including its functionality 
for localization  and mapping in both physical and abstract domains. Finally, we discuss 
correspondences between features of SLAM and core aspects of cognitive functioning.  We hope to 
explain how common principles may apply not only to the fundamental task of finding one's  way to 
desired locations in physical space, but for thought as navigation through abstract spaces. While much 
of what follows will necessarily be under-detailed and speculative, in subsequent publications, we (and 
hopefully others) will explore these issu es in greater detail as we attempt to explain fundamental 
principles in neuroscience and artificial intelligence , while simultaneously seeking synergistic 
understanding by establishing conceptual mappings between these domains (Hassabis et al., 2017a). 
 
In the following section , we provide a high-level overview of Latent SLAM, which is also treated in 
greater detail in (Çatal et al., 2021a) and (Çatal et al., 2021b). While we believe many of these technical 
details may be relevant for explaining fundamental aspects of high-level cognition, a more qualitative 
understanding of this content should be sufficient for considering the conceptual mappings we (begin 
to) explore in this manuscript (Table 1). Section 3 then summarizes current views on the H/E-S and its 
functioning in relation to spatial modeling and cognition  more generally. Finally, Section 4 draws 
parallels between understanding in machines (using LatentSLAM) and humans (considering the H/E-
S) and propose G-SLAM as a unification framework for cognitive science and artificial intelligence. 
 
We realize that this may be a challenging manuscript for many readers, with some portions focused on 
describing a robotics perspective, and other  portions focused on cognitive/systems neuroscience. 
Indeed, this paper emerged from an ongoing collaboration between roboticists and a cognitive/systems 
neuroscientist, which has been both rewarding and challenging in ways that demonstrate why this kind 
of interdisciplinary work is both desirable and difficult. One of our primary goals for this manuscript 
is to provide a rough-but-useful conceptual scaffolding (i.e., an initial partial map) for those who would 
attempt such cross-domain research. In this way, interested readers ought not be overly concerned if 
some of the co ntent is found to be excessively technical relative to their particular background. 
However, we believe readers who follow through with exploring these suggested mappings (which we 
only begin to characterize) may be richly rewarded for those efforts. 
 
In brief, G-SLAM can be summarized as follows: 
1. It is increasingly recognized that the H/E -S may be the key to understanding high -level 
cognition. 
2. Within the field of robotics, the H/E-S has been identified as having been shaped by evolution 
for the problem of simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) for foraging animals, and 
where these capacities appear to have been repurposed for navigating through other seemingly 
non-spatial domains. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
4 
3. We believe it would be fruitful to explicitly think of the core functionalities of SLAM systems 
and test whether these are not just reflected in the functioning of the H/E -S with respect to 
physical navigation, but with respect to other high-level cognitive processes as well. 
 
If the H/E-S is the kind of gateway to high-level cognition that it is increasingly suggested to be (Evans 
and Burgess, 2020; George et al., 2021; McNamee et al., 2021), and if it can be well-modeled as having 
been selected for SLAM functionalities that were later repurposed , then we believe the difficulty of 
exploring the following material will more than repay the effort of attempting to make the journey. We 
also ask readers to note places where spatial language can be found, only some of which was 
intentional. Indeed, we take suc h linguistic spatializations as supporting evidence for the G -SLAM 
perspective, which perhaps may be overlooked by virtue of its very ubiquity (cf. fish not noticing 
water). This is not to say that all spatial cognition points to a SLAM perspective. Yet we believe such 
spatial mappings are notable in affording opportunities for localization and mapping with respect to 
such domains. We leave it up to  the discernment of  our readers to assess how far one can go with 
following such paths through conceptual spaces, which may not only provide new perspectives on 
familiar territories on minds, but may even make inroads into discovering how we may follow similar 
paths to the destination of creating artificial systems with capacities that were formerly considered to 
be uniquely human. 
2 LatentSLAM, a bio-inspired SLAM algorithm 
Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) has been a long standing challenge in the robotics 
community (Cadena et al., 2016). For autonomous functioning, a robot must try to map its environment 
whilst trying to localize itself in the map it is simultaneously constructing (i.e., SLAM). This setup 
creates a kind of “ chicken and egg ” problem in that a well -developed map is required for precise 
localization, but accurate location estimation is also required for knowing how to develop the map by 
which locality is estimated. This challenge is rendered even more difficult in that not only must the 
system deal with the seemingly ill -posed problem just described, but the inherent ambiguity of the 
environment is made even more difficult by sources of uncertainty from sensors and actuators. A 
fundamental challenge (and opportunity) with localizing and mapping is the detection of loop-closures: 
i.e., knowing when the robot re-encounters a location it has already visited. The challenge is due to the 
circular inference problems just described, and the opportunity is due to the particularly valuable 
occasion for updating afforded by the system having a reliable reference point in space.  Such loop-
closures have a further functional significance in allowing experiences to be bound together into a 
unified representational system where updates can be propagated in a mutually -constrained wholistic 
fashion, so providing a basis for  the rapid and flexible  construction and refinement of  knowledge 
structures in the form of cognitive schemas that have both graph -like and map -like properties. With 
further experience, these schemata can then be transferred to the neocortex in the form of more stable 
adaptive action and thought tendencies, so forming a powerful hybrid architecture for instantiating 
robust causal world models (Hafner et al., 2020; Safron, 2021b). 
 
SLAM has traditionally been tackled by Bayesian integration  of sensor information  within a metric 
map, typically expressed in terms of absolute distances and angles. In previous work, this amounted to 
keeping track of distances between the robot and various landmarks in the environment. Distance 
measurements were typically combined through Baye sian filtering, a principled way of combining 
heterogenous information sources through Bayesian inference. Modern successful metric SLAM 
solutions, however, combine lidar scans with the robots internal odometry estimate through Kalman 
filtering (Kalman and Bucy, 1961) into 2D or 3D occupancy grid maps (Mur-Artal et al., 2015; Hess 
et al., 2016). These occupancy maps ( Figure 1B and Figure 1C) keep track of lo cations of objects in 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
5 
the environment by rasterizing space and then marking certain grid locations as inaccessible —due to 
being occupied with physical obstructions—so creating a map that resembles what an architect would 
create to diagram a room (Figure 1A). 
 
Variations on this scheme are popular and differ wildly, either substituting the integration algorithm or 
the type of metric map. A metric map is akin to a Cartesian grid with regular spacings. However, such 
spatial maps do not speak to the object identities within the space of interest, nor the particular relations 
between those objects. Thus, one of the downsides of using metric maps is that by extension all robotic 
reasoning must also happen on a metric level, any semantic information (i.e., the meaning of a certain 
cluster of grid -cell activations) needs to be added in later.  Further, such metric spaces represent an 
instance of deviating from natural designs, as hippocampal/entorhinal system (H/E-S) mappings are 
not independent of the objects contained within these spaces , but instead induce distortions (e.g. 
expansions and compressions) of spatial relations , which are also  modulated as a function of the 
salience of these entities for the organism/agent (Bellmund et al., 2019; Boccara et al., 2019; Butler et 
al., 2019). 
 
Figure 1. An overview of different map types, show-casing our robotics lab. Subfigure A gives an 
exact metric view of the room as drawn by an architect. Subfigure B shows  the same map as a 
2D grid map, to create this map from subfigure A the map was rasterized and untraversable 
terrain was filled into the granularity of a single raster cell. Subfigure C shows the same room as 
an x,y,z mapping of red/green/blue values extracted from a RGBD camera. This 3D grid map 
was generated by moving the camera through the physical lab. Finally, subfigure D shows the 
lab as a sparse graph. 
Popular approaches for such spatiotemporal modeling use particle filters or extended Kalman filters as 
Bayesian integration methods (Thrun et al., 2005) . Kalman filters are notable in that they allow for 
estimation based on a precision -weighted combination of probabilistic data sources, so allowing for 
synergistic power in inference and updating, which is also theoretically optimal in making use of all 
available data (weighted by relative certainty). As will be discussed in greater detail below , such 
integration may be implemented in the H/E-S via convergent activation in regions supporting high 
degrees of recurrent processing, such as the CA3 subfield of the hippocampus. However, not only does 
the H/E -S promote integrative estimation, but also pattern separation/differentiation  via other 
subregions such as CA1, so allowing for attractors to take the form of sparsely-connected graphs—cf. 

  Generalized SLAM 
 
6 
hybrid continuous/discrete architectures based on Forney factor graphs and agent-designs based on 
independently controllable factors (Friston et al., 2017b; Th omas et al., 2017, 2018) . Below we will  
also describe how such graph -like representations not only help to solve problems in navigating 
through physical spaces, but may also form a basis for the kinds of high-level cognition sought after in 
the domain of neurosymbolic AI (Bengio, 2017). 
 
We do not internally represent the world in a metric map. For instance, none of our senses can naturally 
give us an accurate distance measurement. Neither are we very effective in following a metric 
description of a path. Hence, it makes more sense for minds like ours (and potentially for artificial 
agents) to represent a map intuitively as a graph -like structure (Figure 1D), where subsequent graph-
nodes could represent subsequent high -level parts of the environment e.g., a node could represent a 
part of the environment containing a door at a certain rough location. Map traversal then becomes 
equivalent to the potentially more intuitive problem of graph-traversal or  navigating between 
meaningful landmarks . Trajectories can then be expressed in terms of consecutive semantically 
meaningful directions. For example, t he metrical path “move forwards 2 meters, turn 90 degrees 
clockwise and continue for 2 meters” could become “after going through the door go right towards the 
table.” (Note: In vertebrate nervous systems, such forms of navigation could either be based on H/E-S 
graphs/maps, or via canalized striatocortical loops implicitly mapping states to actions, possibly with 
functional synergy , and also enhanced robustness (and thereby learnability) via 
degeneracy/redundancy.) 
 
In LatentSLAM (Çatal et al., 2021a), we proposed a bio-inspired SLAM algorithm which tries to mimic 
this kind of intuitive mapping. With this architecture , we built topological, graph -based maps on top 
of a predictive model of the world , so a llowing for separation of the low -level metric actions of the 
robot and high-level salient paths. Instead of using raw sensory data—or fixed features thereof (Milford 
et al., 2004) —directly as node representation s, Lat entSLAM learns compact state representation s 
conditioned on the robot’s actions, which are then used as nodes. This latent representation gives rise 
to a probabilistic belief space that allows for Bayesian reasoning over environmental states. Graph 
nodes are formed from trajectories on manifold s formed by belief distribution s. That is, rather than 
utilizing static maps, our agents navigate through space by moving between landmarks based on 
expectations of which state transitions are likely to be associated with those kinds of percepts. As an 
underlying foundation, LatentSLAM adopts the Free Energy Principle and Active Inference (FEP-AI) 
framework to unify perception (i.e. localization), learning (i.e. map building) and action (i.e. 
navigation) as a consequence of the agent optimizing one sole objective: minimizing its (expected) free 
energy (Friston, 2010; Friston et al., 2017a) . As will be described in greater detail below, we believe 
this is an apt description of thinking as the unfolding of a stream of consciousness , with a variety of 
somatic states being generated in various combinations as the agent perceives and imagines itself 
moving through space and time. 
2.1 Representing the world in a graph 
Graphs form a natural way of representing relations between various sources of information in a sparse 
and easily traversable manner. In LatentSLAM, such a structure is used to build a high-level map from 
agent experiences. This experience map contains nodes consisting of a pose, i.e., the agent’s 
proprioceptive information, and a view distilled from the sensory inputs. Together, the pose and view 
of an agent specify its  unique experience : a different view in the same pose gives rise to  a new 
experience; likewise, the same view from a different pose also constitutes a novel experience. Views 
generally lie on some learned compact manifold as a compressed version of one or more sensory inputs, 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
7 
integrated and update d through time. Links between experiences in the graph indicate possible 
transitions between one experience and another. 
Figure 2 provides a visual overview of how poses and views combine into an integrated experience 
map. The pose information allows the agent to embed the graph relative to the geometrical layout of 
the environment. In this case, the embedding is done in 2D -Cartesian space as the example shows a 
ground based, velocity-controlled mobile robot. Embedding the graph in a reference frame correlated 
with environment characteristics organizes observations in way s that greatly enhance inferential 
power, since this avoids combinatorial explosions with respect to under-constrained hypothesis spaces. 
That is, a given sensory impression could correspond to an unbounded number of world states  (e.g., 
something may be big and far away, or small and near by), but coherent perspectival reference frames 
allow for likely causes to be inferred by mutually-constraining relevant contextual factors. 
 
Figure 2. The formation of an experience -map out of vie ws and proprioceptive poses. Sensory 
observations first need to be integrated into views to be compared to existing experiences from 
the graph. The shown graph is embedded in a Cartesian reference frame extracted from the 
proprioceptive information. 
2.1.1 Experience map 
The experience map (or graph) provides a high-level overview of the environment. Each node in the 
map represents a location in the physical world where the robot encountered some interesting or novel 
experience. These positions are encoded i n poses in a spatial reference frame, e.g., a 2D -Cartesian 
space, whilst the experiences themselves are expressed as implicit representation s of corresponding 
sensory observations. When view representations change according to distances to known landmarks, 
this setup resembles the approach described in the classical graphSLAM algorithm (Thrun and 
Montemerlo, 2006). Note that the seminal work on graph-based experience maps (Milford et al., 2004) 
also used an embedding of sensory observations into a lower dimensional space. However, in contrast 
to our approach, these mappings were deterministic and fixed for all observations. 

  Generalized SLAM 
 
8 
The graph is embedded in, as opposed to being expressed in, a spatiotemporal reference frame, meaning 
that over time stored (or inferred) poses on the map are likely to exhibit deviations from their initial 
recorded values  as they are progressively updated . Loop-closure events trigger a graph-relaxation 
phase wherein c urrent graph nodes are re -positioned to take into account the unique opportunity 
accompanying the closing of the loop (i.e., the creation of a closed system of node linkages allowing 
for updating of the entire graph through energy minimization, accompanied  by more confident 
location-estimation through experience -trajectory converging on known landmarks ). This relaxation 
not only affords opportunities for map refinement, but it is also necessary due to the accumulation in 
pose errors from odometry drift. Wheel slippage, actuator encoder errors, and other similar effects 
amount to a continual increase in the uncertainty of the pose estimate. These sources of error/noise are 
part of what makes loop-closure such a hard problem in general. However, the loose embedding of 
pose information in the graph (combined with associated views) allows the map building to become 
robust to sensor and actuator drift, thereby maintaining a consistent map of the environment. 
2.1.2 Views 
LatentSLAM probabilistically learns views from sensory observations  by incorporating the action 
trajectories from which they are generated , which differentiates our architecture from similar 
algorithms (Milford et al., 2004). The agent keeps track of a sample of the current belief distribution 
over states, which gets updated at each time-step into a new belief through variational inference. This 
sample constitutes either the current agent view, or a sensory-decoupled (or imagined) estimate of the 
environment from the latent space of the agent’s generative model. At each time-step, the agent inputs 
a conjunction of the current action , sample, and current observation into its generative model. This  
world model then generates a new state belief distribution based on the current state sample, which 
functions as a source of predictions for a predictive coding perceptual architecture . At train ing time, 
the generative model is tasked with predicting futu re observations based on previous recordings of 
trajectories through the environment. 
2.1.3 Proprioception 
An agent needs a principled way of keeping track of its estimated pose in the local environment. That 
is, an agent needs a coherent way to integrate changes in its local pose according to some local reference 
frame. In this form of proprioception, agents can estimate the effects of certain actions on local pose 
information relative to adjacent portions of its environment. This aspect of embodiment is essential in 
enabling consistent mapping and localization through challenging terrains. 
In LatentSLAM this is handled through the low-level generative model on the one hand, and the pose 
continuous attractor network (CAN) on the other hand. The generative model a llows for reasoning in 
terms of how actions affect views : i.e., it reduces the pose to an implicit part of the latent state 
representation. The CAN, however, leaves pose estimation as an explicit part of the greater 
LatentSLAM model. It integrates successive pose estimates through time in a multidimensional grid 
representing the agent in terms of internally measurable quantities. In the case of a ground -based 
mobile robot these quantities would be the expected difference in 𝑥, 𝑦 pose and relative rotation of the 
robot over the z-axis. Hence, for a ground-based robot the CAN would be expressed as a 3D grid, that 
wraps around its edges. Sufficiently large displacements along the x -axis of this grid would teleport 
the pose estimat e back to the negative bound of the same axis.  This to accommodate for traversing 
spaces that are larger than the number of grid cells in the CAN.  The pose estimate in the CAN is 
represented as an activation per grid cell, the value of which determines the amount of belief the model 
gives to the robot being in this exact relative pose. Multiple grid cell locations can be active at any 
given time, indicating varying beliefs over multiple hypotheses. The highest activated cell indicates 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
9 
the current most likely pose. Cell activity is generated in two ways: activity is added (or subtracted) to 
a cell through motion and the current proprioceptive translation thereof in terms of grid -cell entries; 
alternatively, activity may be modified through view-cell linkage. When a view is sufficiently different 
from others it gets added to the experience map together with the current most likely pose. This 
mechanism in turn allows experiences, when encountered, to add activation into the CAN at the stored 
pose estimate. This process can shift, and often correct, the internal pose estimate of the agent, allowing 
it to compensate for proprioceptive drift. 
This conjunction of views and poses has notable parallels with neural representations decoded from  
respective lateral and medial entorhinal cortices (Wang et al., 2018a), which constitute the predominant 
source of information for the hippocampal system (i.e., the experience map). It is also striking that the 
self-wrapping representational format for LatentSLAM poses/views recapitulates the repeated metric-
spacing observed for entorhinal grid cells, whose location invariance may potentially provide a basis 
for knowledge-generalization and transitive inference across learning epochs and domains  
(Whittington et al., 2022) . We believe that such correspondences between naturally and artificially  
‘designed’ systems constitutes strong evidence in support of a SLAM perspective for understanding 
the H/E-S. 
2.2 A hierarchical generative model 
The entirety of the LatentSLAM  framework can be understood mathematically in terms of a 
hierarchical generative model (Error! Reference source not found.) (Çatal et al., 2021b). 
 
Figure 3. Overview of the hierarchical generative model. Highlighted in blue is the bottom-up 
sensory stream,  and in pink the top -down prediction stream. As the agent moves about , it 
alternates between these two modes . On the one hand it will infer state information from the 
observations, and on the other hand it will predict future observations from inferred states. 
There are two distinct levels of reasoning , each using their own generative model to explain the 
dynamics of the environment at the corresponding level of abstraction . As the generative models are 
 

  Generalized SLAM 
 
10 
stacked, the higher-level model takes the states from the lower level as observations, while the lower 
level observes the actual environment through the agents’ sensors. Each separate generative model can 
be seen mathematically as representing the joint probability  𝑝(𝑜̃, 𝑠̃, 𝑎̃) =
𝑝(𝑎0)𝑝(𝑠0)𝑝(𝑜0|𝑠0) ∏ 𝑝(𝑠𝑡|𝑇
𝑡=1 𝑠𝑡−1, 𝑎𝑡−1)𝑝(𝑜𝑡|𝑠𝑡), with 𝑜  relevant observations at each level; 𝑠  state 
description, views or locations; and 𝑎  possible actions at each level  (either displacements in the 
environment or node transitions ). These models only consider the generative process up until some 
future time horizon 𝑇. The exact instantiation of the joint probability and corresponding posterior 
distributions differ between each level of the hierarchy; interested readers are referred to (Çatal et al., 
2021b) for a more thorough description of this kind of model , and some extra details are provided in 
the Appendix. 
Action and state inference , that is fi nding suitable instantiations of the posteriors 𝑝(𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡) and 
𝑝(𝑠𝑡|𝑠𝑡−1, 𝑜𝑡, 𝑎𝑡−1) is achieved through Active Inference as understood in the context of the Free 
Energy Principle (FEP-AI) (Friston et al., 2017a) . In FEP-AI, intelligent agents are governed by 
predictive models that attempt to minimize variational free energy through updating of internal beliefs 
and modification of external states through enaction (hence, active inference) . When implementing 
similar mechanism s in artificial agents  such as  robots, infere nce is amortized —cf. planning as 
inference via memorization of successful policies (Gershman and Goodman, 2014; Dasgupta et al., 
2018)—through training variational auto-encoders (VAEs) with objective functionals that minimize 
(variational) free energy . The model consists of three neural networks , with  each representing a 
conditioned probability distribution that outputs different multivariate Gaussian distributions based on 
differing inputs. These inputs can take the form of different sensor modalities such as lidar or camera; 
or they might be actions depending on the flow of information between neural networks.  
State inference emerges naturally from the neural network architecture and training method. Active 
inference, however, leverages the trained network to create a set of imaginary trajectories from which 
optimal action sequence s can be selected through expected free energy minimization.  The model is 
trained on a free-energy objective functional, wherein it is tasked with minimizing Bayesian surprise—
in the form of KL divergence—between prior and posterior estimates on the state. In this hierarchical 
generative model, there are two sources of information flowing in two directions  at any given time . 
Sensory observations flow u pwards from the real world through the lower -level pose-view model 
towards the higher-level mapping model. Predictions flow in the opposite direction, originating in the 
higher-level mapping model and flowing down into the environment through the predicted  actions in 
the lower-level pose-view model. 
2.2.1 Bottom-up sensory streams 
The agent observes the world through sensors as it moves around the environment. At the lower-level 
of the generative model, the agent actively tries to predict future incoming sensory observations 
(Error! Reference source not found., blue arrow indicating informational flow). The agent actively 
abstracts away distractor elements in the observations  as every observation gets encoded into a latent 
vector (i.e., views). As this encoding is generated from action s, observations and the previous latent  
state, the model considers the effects that history and actuation (or enaction) have on the environment. 
The abstracted view then gets fed into the higher-level mapping model which actively predicts the next 
experience from the previous one , taking into account the way the agent is presently traversing the 
experience graph and its current view. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
11 
2.2.2 Top-down prediction streams 
At the same time, decisions flow down from the higher-level to the lower-level of the generative model 
(Error! Reference source not found., red arrow indicating informational flow). As a new navigational 
goal is set, the desired trajectory through the experience map is generated. Each node transition denotes 
one or more displacements in the real environment. While traversing the graph, the agent sets the views 
associated with the visited nodes as planning targets for the lower -level model. At the hierarchically 
higher level, the agent samples multiple state estimates from the current belief distribution over states 
and leverages the predictive capabilities of the generative model to envision possible outcomes up until 
some fixed planning horizon  (Friston et al., 2020) . From all these imagined future outcomes , the 
optimal one is selected after which the process repeats itself until the target view and pose are met. In 
turn the next node in the map trajectory is used to generate a new lower-level planning target. 
2.3 Creating the map 
As mentioned earlier, once an agent encoun ters a sufficiently different experience, a new node is 
inserted in the experience map with the current view and pose. This process results in an ever-growing 
map of the environment as the agent explores the world. Hence, there needs to be a principled way  to 
determine whether a view is new or is already known to the agent. As with many such problems, the 
solution presents itself in the form of a distance function in some well-defined mathematical space. A 
well-chosen distance function will allow the agent to not only build a consistent map of its environment 
but also account for loop-closure events. 
2.3.1 Distance functions 
Many SLAM algorithms use the Euclidian distance between poses to determine whether the current 
observation and pose are known in the map or r epresent some novel experience. However, due to the 
inherent drift in proprioception in many real-world scenarios, often this distance metric between poses 
and/or observations is not enough. Alternatives present themselves depending on the form of the 
probabilistic framework upon which the algorithm is based.  
As described in Section 2.2, LatentSLAM learns a latent state space manifold over sensory inputs (i.e. 
camera images). This enables the agent to not only evaluate Euclidian distances between poses, but 
also distances between two sensory inputs in the latent statistical manifold. To evaluate distances inside 
the manifold we need an appropriate distance measure. One notable candidate is the Fisher information 
metric (Costa et al., 2015), which represents informational differences between measurements. In our 
context, this means that two measurements are only encoded in different nodes of the experience map 
when there is sufficiently more information in one compared to the other.  For example, moving in a 
long, white hallway with little texture  will not yield a change in information in the latent manifold, 
hence this will be mapped on a single experience node. Only when a salient feature appears, for 
example a door, there will be enough sensory information to encode a new experience.  In such a 
scenario however, methods building a metric map will likely fail as it is impossible to accurately track 
one’s position in a long, textureless hallway. 
Note how the Fisher information metric is also related to the free energy minimization objective used 
for manifold learning. Concretely, if we take 𝐾𝐿[𝑥 || 𝑥 + 𝛿𝑥] with x a probability distribution and 𝑥 +
𝛿𝑥 a distribution close to x we get that if 𝛿𝑥 → 0 then 𝐾𝐿[𝑥||𝑥 + 𝛿𝑥] →
1
2 𝐹(𝑥)(𝛿𝑥)2. In other words, 
for infinitesimally small differences between distributions the KL divergence approaches the Fisher 
information metric (Kullback, 1959) . This can be interpreted as integrating the agent’s Bayesian 
surprise over infinitesimal timesteps to measure the “information distance” traveled. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
12 
However, since the Fisher information metric  and KL divergence do not have closed form solution s 
for many  types of  probability distributions, we use cosine similarity between the modes of the 
distribution as a numerical stable approximation function. Therefore, LatentSLAM evaluates 
information differences between experiences instead of differences in exact environmental 
observations.  
2.3.2 Node creation and loop-closures 
When a salient landmark is identified, but the agent cannot find a single node in the graph which 
matches closely enough with the current view or pose , a new node must be inserted in the graph. 
Alternatively, if the current experience matches both on pose and view, a loop-closure is registered, 
but the agent leaves the map as is. In order to determine whether two experiences match, LatentSLAM 
uses a matching threshold 𝜃. Both the pose and view of an experience is matched to experiences stored 
in the map. Figure 4 gives a visual overview of the various possible matching cases. If neither view 
nor pose match with any possible stored view or pose, a new experience is created and inserted into 
the map, as is shown in subfigure A. When the view and the pose both match , a loop-closure has 
occurred and the current experiences shifts to the stored experience, at which point a graph-relaxation 
phase is initiated. If the current observed experience matches with a stored experience further along 
the path, a relocation is required, and the estimate is shifted further along the path in the graph. Finally, 
if the current pose estimate matches a stored experiences pose , but does not find the corresponding 
matching view, a new node is inserted at the same location. This allows the agent to keep track of 
varying views of the same landmark throughout the map.  
 
Figure 4. Different cases for illustrating the map updating procedure. For each case we show the 
map (top), pose (bottom right) and views (bottom left) in their own respective spaces. The current 
active map node is always indicated in red and the current pose or view value is the final one in 
the sequence. In case A, the agent encounters a new experience which is not within the threshold 
boundary of both the poses and views, so a new node is inserted into the map. Case B 
demonstrates a loop-closure event, where both the pose and view are within their respective 
thresholds, blu e indicating the area pose information demarcated by its threshold θ , pink 
indicating the area covered by the view threshold. If both view and pose are within the threshold 
boundary (blue and pink)  of the next node (case C), the estimate is shifted to the next node, 
skipping the current node in the graph. Finally, case D shows a matching pose without a matching 
view, requiring a new node insertion in the map.  
2.3.3 Graph-relaxation 
As nodes are inserted throughout the graph, each new pose observation is subjected to sensor drift , 
leading to increasing errors for remembered poses. To address this issue , whenever a loop-closure 
event is encountered, graph-relaxation is applied to the experience graph. The algorithm treats every 
node in the graph as being connected with its neighbors as if suspended by weighted springs. The 
strength of each spring is related to the pose distances between the nodes. Then the algorithm reduces 

  Generalized SLAM 
 
13 
the total “energy content” of the graph by shifting the poses in such a way that the sum of the forces is 
minimized. This approach is similar to graph-relaxation in similar SLAM algorithms (Thrun et al., 
2005; Thrun and Montemerlo, 2006). Graph-relaxation has the effect of morphing the shape of the pose 
embedding of the map to reflect the actual topology of the environment. 
2.3.4 Setting the threshold 
Because the matching threshold has a significant impact on the shape and content of the map, it is one 
of the more important hyper parameters of LatentSLAM. For every environment there is an optimally 
tuned threshold parameter θ⋆. A matching threshold much lower than this optimal value will result in 
a mapping procedure with almost no loop-closure events. The map will contain every tiny permutation 
in views and poses as a separate node and will be insufficient in countering odometry drift. Conversely, 
if the threshold is set much higher than θ⋆, the mapping procedure will lump everything together in a 
small cluster of nodes. Figure 5 provides a visual example of the effects of the matching threshold on 
the resulting map. 
 
Figure 5. (A) Metric map of our lab environment, with some example camera views at the marked 
locations. The views at different locations (i.e., 3 and 5 or 1 and 4) appear very similar, making 
this a hard environment for visual SLAM. Subfigures (B-D) show three possible mappings of the 
trajectory shown in red in subfigure (A). (B) With a well-tuned threshold 𝛉⋆, our LatentSLAM 
algorithm recovers a topological map of the environment, clearly separating the four different 
aisles. (C) If the threshold is too stringent (𝜽 ≪ 𝛉⋆), loop-closure events are not detected, as every 
view is seen as unique, and the map becomes incorrect as proprioception errors (the main source 
of mapping errors) add up. (D) When the threshold is too relaxed (𝛉 ≫ 𝛉⋆), similar looking aisles 
are mapped onto each other due to false positive loop-closures. 
2.4 Navigation 
Navigation is achieved through a dual process of first selecting nodes in the  higher-level experience 
map, and then setting the node -views as targets for the active inference based lower -level action 
planner. In the first phase a path is generated through the graph connecting the current node and the 
target node. The final node is selected based on the visual reconstruction of the stored view. That is, 
the user of the system selects the view they want the system to have at a certain place. Once an 
experience trajectory is found, the agent can s tart acting in the environment. As each consecutive 
experience node is separated from its neighbors  by a finite set of actions , a sequence of target views 
are extracted from the trajectory, forming the imaginary trajectory the agent may (approximately) bring 
about through overt enaction. The (active inference based) lower-level generative model is then capable 
of filling in further gaps between imagination and reality through additional planning.  

  Generalized SLAM 
 
14 
At each step, the agent take s into account its current view and imagine d trajectory up until the next 
target view. This imagination process leverages the learned intricacies and dynamics of the 
environment to compensate for the potential stochasticity in the interaction. Once a suitable trajectory 
is imagined at the higher-level, the agent enacts the first step of the trajectory, after which the lower -
level planning process is repeated. These step-by-step transitions through the  environment make the 
agent more robust against unexpected changes in the en vironment, which it might not have captured 
during model training. 
Crucially, imagined trajectories are scored using a common objective functional of expected free 
energy, both on the higher level of proposed paths through the experience map/graph, as well as on the 
lower level of inferring actions capable of transitioning the agent between nodes (Çatal et al., 2021b). 
That is, trajectories are more likely to be selected if they bring the agent towards preferred outcome s 
and/or resolve uncertainty about the  environment. Hence, action selection comprises a trade -off 
between instrumental value and epistemic value, which are naturally balanced according to a singular 
criterion of variational free energy . To provide an example in navigation, this tradeoff between the 
extrinsic value of realizing prior preferences and the intrinsic value of novel information could 
respectively manifest as either selecting a safer route via well-recognized landmarks or instead taking 
an unknown (but potentially shorter) path through a dark forest. Further, the discovery of such shortcut 
paths through space speaks to the kinds of flexible inference and learning that first motivated construals 
of the hippocampal system in terms of cognitive maps  (Tolman, 1948), and in a G -SLAM context 
could be thought of as a way of understanding a core aspect of intelligence in the form of  creative 
insight. And in the context of AI, such creative cognition may afford the creation of much sought after 
capacities for powerful inferences and one -shot learning in novel situations, which if realized could 
greatly enhance autonomous functioning. 
2.5 Limitations and future directions 
There are s everal limitations with the current implementation of LatentSLAM. First, the experience 
graph is incapable of merging nodes with similar views and approximately similar poses into a single 
unified stochastic node. This in turn leads the algorithm to generate an increasing number of nodes for 
each pass through a single location. Second, the lower-level planning is limited to the sequence length 
encountered during train ing, and as such t he model is incapable of imagining coherent outcomes 
beyond this time horizon. This brings us to a potentially substantial limitation of LatentSLAM, in that 
the lower-level generative model needs to be pre-trained on the types of observations it can encounter 
in the environment. That is, when the target views are unknown, imaginative planning may be required 
wherein agents visualize an assortment of potentially rewarding (counterfactual) action -outcome 
pairings. Going forward, we aim to alleviate these constraints by adapting the training procedure to 
accommodate online learning , allowing the agent to learn to imagine whilst exploring  (Safron and 
Sheikhbahaee, 2021), which may be understood as a kind of deep tree search through policy space via 
Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling  (Dohmatob et al., 2020; Friston et al., 2020) , with potentially 
relevant insights obtainable from advances in Bayesian meta-reinforcement learning (Schmidhuber, 
2020). 
To extend the biological fidelity (and potential functional capacities) of our architecture, we intend on 
attempting to recapitulate particular empirical phenomena such as the specific conditions under which 
new place fields are introduced or pruned away in mammalian nervous systems. For example, the 
insertion of environmental barriers or encountering corridors leading to identical rooms may induce 
duplication of sensory views at different locations, which may speak to the phenomenon of place-field 
duplication—which in a LatentSLAM context would involve node creation (Lever et al., 2009; Spiers 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
15 
et al., 2015)—yet where these representations may also d isappear with further learning. This kind of 
pruning of nodes —potentially involving “artificial sleep” —could be a valuable addition to latent 
SLAM’s functionality, and may potentially be understood as an instance of Bayesian model reduction 
with respect to structure learning (Friston et al., 2019), so providing another means by which capacities 
for creative insight (in terms of discovering more elegant models) may be realized in AI. 
With respect to these particular phenomena involving challenging ambiguous situations , we may 
speculate that highly-similar-but-subtly-different pose/experience map combinations could represent 
instances associated with high levels of prediction -error generation due to a combination of highly 
precise priors and contradictory information. Speculatively, this could be understood as an example of 
“hard negative mining” from a contrastive learning perspective  (Mazzaglia et al., 2022) . As will be 
described in greater detail below, such highly surprising events may be similar to experiences of 
doorway or threshold crossing, and may trigger the establishmen t of event -boundaries via frame-
resetting and spatial-retiling. Speculatively, the assignment of particular content to particular rooms in 
“memory palaces ” could be understood as a necessary part of the art of remembering due to this 
phenomenon potentially  interfering with semantic “chunking” (or coherent co -grounding). In 
attempting to apply LatentSLAM to cognition more generally, it could potentially be fruitful to look 
for generalizations of these phenomena with respect to seemingly non -spatial domains, such as with 
respect to creativity and insight learning problems in human and non-human animals. 
Finally, and with further relevance to realizing capacities for imaginative planning and creative 
cognition, we will attempt to include phenomena such as sharp -wave ripples and forward/ reverse 
replay across hippocampal place fields (Ambrose et al., 2016; de la Prida, 2020; Higgins et al., 2020; 
Igata et al., 2020) , which have been suggested to form a means of efficient structural inferen ce over 
cognitive graphs (Evans and Burgess, 2020). With respect to our goal-seeking agents, forward replay 
may potentially help to infer (and prioritize) imagined (goal -oriented) trajectories, and reverse replay 
may potentially help with a) back-chaining from goals, b) increasing the robustness of entailed policies 
via regularization, and (speculatively) c) allowing for a punishment mechanism via inverted orderings 
with respect to spike -timing-dependent-plasticity. In these ways, not only may a G -SLAM approach 
allow for deeper understanding of aspects of biological functioning, but attempting to reverse engineer 
such properties in artificial systems may provide potentially major advances in the development of 
abiotic autonomous machines. 
 
3 The Hippocampal/Entorhinal System (H/E-S) 
The hip pocampal/entorhinal system (H/E-S) represents a major transition in evolution (Gray and 
McNaughton, 2003; Striedter , 2004) , with homologues between avian and mammalian species  
suggesting its functionality becoming established at least 300 million years ago (Suryanarayana et al., 
2020), with some of its origins potentially traceable to over  500 million years in the pas t with the 
Cambrian explosion (Feinberg and Mallatt, 2013) , and potentially even earlier . It  may be no 
overstatement to suggest that the H/E-S represents the core of autonomy and cognition in the vertebrate 
nervous system, with similar organizational principles enabling the potentially surprising degrees of 
intelligence exhibited by insects (Ai et al., 2019; Honkanen et al., 2019). 
While their precise functional roles continue to be debated, t he discovery of hippocampal place cells 
and entorhinal grid cells was a major advance in our understanding of how space is represented in the 
brain (O’Keefe and Nadel, 1978; Hafting et al., 2005). Similarly important was the discovery of head 
direction cells in rats, which were found to activate according to moment-to-moment changes in head 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
16 
direction (Sharp PE, 2001). Place cells have been modeled as  representing a “predictive map” based 
on “successor representations” of likely state transitions for the organism  (Stachenfeld et al., 2017) , 
and grid cells have been understood as linking these graphs (or Markov chains)  to particular events 
happening within a flexible (multi-level) metric tiling of space, so allowing for estimates of locations 
via path integration over trajectories. While we need not resolve the precise correspondences between 
these cell types  here, there are intriguing developmental observations of place cells acquiring more 
mature functioning prior to grid cells, both of which likely depend on head -direction cells for their 
emergence (Canto et al., 2019; Mulders et al., 2021). In other contexts, place-specific cells have been 
found to index temporal sequence information, potentially functioning as “time cells”  (Pastalkova et 
al., 2008), so providing a further means by which the H/E -S may provide foundations for coherent 
sense-making and adaptive behavior through the spatiotemporal organizatio n of organismic 
information (Eichenbaum, 2014; Umbach et al., 2020). 
In addition to place , time and grid cells, a variety of additional s pecialized cell types have been 
observed in the H/E-S. While it was previously assumed that these features represent innate inductive 
biases (Zador, 2019) , increasing evidence suggests these specialized cell types may arise from 
experience-dependent plasticity, including models with similar architectural principles to the ones 
described here. In recent work from DeepMind (Uria et al., 2020) , a recurrent system was used to 
predict sequences of visual inputs from (the latent space) of variational autoencoders. A natural 
mapping from egocentric information to an allocentric spatial reference frame was observed, including 
the induction of specialized units with response properties similar to h ead direction, place, band, 
landmark, boundary vector, and egocentric boundary cells. Similar results have been obtained with the 
Tolman-Eichenbaum machine (Whittington et al., 2020) , including demonstrations of reliable cell 
remapping, so ena bling transfer learning across episodes with the potential for the creative (re -
)combination of ideas and inferential synergy. Other intriguing work on the emergence of specialized 
H/E-S functions through experience comes from work on “clone -structured cognitive graphs”, where 
various aspects of spatial maps are parsimoniously formed as efficient (and explanatory) 
representations of likely state transitions  through the duplication and pruning of nodes in a 
dynamically-evolving sequence memory  (George et al., 2021) . While this evidence suggests a 
potentially substantial amount of experience-dependence in the emergence of the “zoo” of specialized 
neurons for spatiotemporal navigation, the development of these features still inv olve clear innate 
inductive biases (Zador, 2019). Specifically, specialized pathways ensure that the H/E-S receives neck-
stretch-receptor information from  the mamillary bodies and yaw/pitch/roll information from the 
vestibular apparatus (Papez, 1937; Wijesinghe et al., 2015) , so providing bases for sensor-orientation 
with respect to head-direction and thereby the foundations of egocentric perspective. 
3.1 H/E-S as orchestrator of high-level cognition 
While the association of the hippocampus with autobiographical and declarative memory is well -
documented (MacKay, 2019) , the H/E -S is increasingly being recognized as foundational for 
cybernetic functioning on multiple scales. A more thorough understanding of the principles governing 
the H/E -S and its interactions with the rest of the brain may allow us to unders tand how such  
sophisticated cognition and behavior is demonstrated by biological organisms (Todd and Gigerenzer, 
2012). Even more, such knowledge may also allow us to find ways of reproducing these functionalities 
in artificial intelligences. 
The hippocampus is usually described in terms o f a “trisynaptic circuit” (Andersen, 1975) , with 
multiple specialized subsystems that interact with functional synergy. The dentate gyrus is the primary 
input area to the hippocampus from entorhinal cortex, with densely packed cells for pattern separation, 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
17 
so allowing for multiple separable/orthogonal representations. Much of this information then feeds into 
CA3, characterized by highly recurrent circuits with tight loops for dynamic pattern completion. This 
information is then routed to CA1, characterized by sparse and stable representations, representing the 
primary output area of the hippocampus and interface with the rest of the brain. Taken together, the 
subfields of the hippocampal complex allow multiple sources of information to be not just 
independently stored in memory, but also creatively combined within and across experiences, so 
affording powerfully synergistic functionalities such as transfer learning and generalizable knowledge. 
Intriguingly, some evidence suggests that humans might be unique in exhibiting less pattern separation 
in their hippocamp al subfields , potentially contributing to —and possibly being a function of —
cognition involving high degrees of abstraction/invariance (Liashenko et al., 2020; Mok and Love, 
2020; Quiroga, 2020). 
Indeed, the functional properties enabled by the H/E-S represent the state of the art in machine learning 
for real world applications such as autonomous vehicles and artificial intelligences attempting to realize 
higher-order reasoning abilities (Ball et al., 2013; Bengio, 2017; Hassabis et al., 2017a; Kaplan and 
Friston, 2018; Shang et al., 2019; Eppe et al., 2020; Friston et al., 2020; Greff et al., 2020; Parascandolo 
et al., 2020; Shamash et al., 2020) . This is a bold claim for a system that might be describable as an 
association machine or spatial mapper, which when lesioned tends to leave much of higher -order 
intelligence inta ct. However, closer inspection of hippocampal patients reveals its essential 
contributions to complex reasoning, emotion, and general behavioral flexibility (MacKay, 2019). It 
should also be kept in mind that while someone might be able to maintain certain functions after losing 
a system in adulthood—as this functionality may become distributed throughout the rest of the brain 
with experience—the congenital absenc e of a working H/E -S might be a wholly different manner, 
potentially precluding the bootstrapping of any kind of sophisticated cognition  or coherent world 
modeling whatsoever (Safron, 2021a). Further, principles of association may be surprisingly powerful 
if they are capable of representing specific relational structures as particular graphs/networks, which 
are increasingly being recognized as powerful learning and inferential systems (Gentner, 2010; Zhou 
et al., 2019; Crouse et al., 2020) . Some have even suggested that the mapping abilities of the H/E -S 
may provide bases for a potential core functionalities associated with conscious processing in the form 
of “unlimited associative learning” (Birch et al., 2020), in which knowledge may be flexibly aggregated 
across experiences (Mack et al., 2018, 2020; Mok and Love, 2019) —cf. transfer and meta -learning 
(Wang et al., 2018b; Dasgupta et al., 2019; Kirsch and Schmidhuber, 2020) . The central role of the 
H/E-S for higher-order cognition is further understandable in light of the fact that many (and possibly 
most) aspects of intelligence can be described as search processes (Conant and Ashby, 1970; Hills et 
al., 2010), which might be even more clearly apparent if we th ink of the possibility of spatializing 
abstract domains such as complex feature spaces (Eichenbaum, 2015; Whittington et al., 2018), or even 
time (Howard, 2018; Gauthier et al., 2019). 
The H/E-S represents both the developmental foundation and functional apex of the cortical hierarchy 
(Hawkins and Blakeslee, 2004; Barron et al., 2020). In predictive processing models of the brain—e.g. 
the variational autoencoder framework described here —observations not predicted at lower levels 
eventually reach the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus. We propose the H/E-S allows these high-level 
prediction-errors to be temporarily encoded and organized with spatiotemporal and abstract relational 
structure for informational synergy. Indeed, on a high-level of abstraction, the H/E-S can be considered 
to be a kind of Kalman variational autoencoder that combines heterogeneo us forms of (precision -
weighted) information for SLAM in generalized state/phase space (Fraccaro et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 
2017). Alternatively framed, the cortical predictive hierarchy can be viewed as hierarchical Kalman 
filtering all the way up and all the way down (Friston, 2010). Along these lines, it is notable that the 
H/E-S itself may operate in a manner that reflects more general principles of cortical predictive 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
18 
processing. With canonical microcircuits for predictive codin g, predictions are associated with deep 
pyramidal neurons and alpha/beta frequencies, and prediction -errors are associated with superficial 
pyramidal neurons and gamma frequencies (Bastos et al., 2012, 2020) . Consistently with the H/E -S 
involving predictive processing , novel information (i.e., prediction errors) induce activation of 
superficial pyramidal neurons for entorhinal c ortex, dentate, and CA3, and recollection (i.e., 
predictions) are associated with activations in deep pyramidal neurons for CA1 and entorhinal cortices 
(Maass et al., 2014) . Also consistently with a predictive processing account , another study observed 
superficial place c ells in CA1 responding (via a rate code) in cue poor -environments, and deep 
pyramidal neurons responding (via a phase code) in cue -rich environments , where we might 
respectively expect either prediction-errors or predictions to predominate (Sharif et al., 2020). 
From a predictive coding perspective, the hippocampus is a strange kind of cortex, not only because of 
its particular cytoarchitectonic properties (e.g. 3 vs.  6 layers), but also because of its connectomic 
centrality. Some proposals have suggested that m emory recall may arise from “fictive prediction 
errors” (Barron et al., 2020) —a perhaps somewhat counter -intuitive suggestion, in that the 
hippocampus is considered to be the top of the cortical heterarchy, and hence would be expected to 
only provide descending predictions —so providing a source of training signals for optimizing 
generative models of the world without sensory data, as well as affording stimulus -independent 
learning and ima ginative planning. This is consistent with work from DeepMind in which the 
hippocampus is described as operating according to principles of “big loop recurrence”, where its 
outputs can be recirculated as inputs for offline learning and counterfactual proce ssing (Koster et al., 
2018). Indeed, the H/E-S may not only provide sources of predictions for the neocortex, but potentially 
prediction-errors for itself, possibly by parameterizing simulations from cortical generative models 
(Higgins et al., 2020) . Further, recent evidence regarding episodic memory formation and retrieval 
suggests that interactions between cortex and the H/E -S may reflect the roles of various frequency 
bands in predictive coding, or “routing” (Griffiths et al., 2019a; Bastos et al., 2020) . In this work, 
neocortical alpha/beta (8-20 Hz) power decreases reliably correlated with subsequent hippocampal fast 
gamma (60-80 Hz), and hippocampal slow gamma (40-50 Hz) power, potentially indicative of a trading 
off between predictions and prediction errors. However, this is  somewhat different than the standard 
predictive coding account attributed to the cortex more generally, in that gamma frequency 
involvement may support the aforementioned idea that hippocampal reactivation of memories involve 
“fictive prediction errors” (Barron et al., 2020), rather than a suppressive explaining away. 
In contrast to other slow rhythms, hippocampal theta oscillations  may indicate enhancement of 
observations via cross-frequency phase coupling (Canolty and Knight, 2010), potentially providing a 
basis for high-level action and attentional selection. Along these lines, the ability of theta -oscillations 
to sele ct and orchestrate cortical ensembles at gamma frequencies may provide a role for the 
hippocampal system as a comparator, enabling contrasting between percepts, whether based on 
observations or imagination (Safron, 2021b). Opposite phase relations between CA1 and CA3 (Tingley 
and Buzsáki, 2018) are suggestive, potentially indicating both a kind of predictive coding within the 
hippocampal system, and possibly also instantiating and orchestrating the formation and contrasting of 
corresponding cortical ensembles as alternating phases of duty cycles for theta oscillations (Heusser et 
al., 2016; Kunz et al., 2019). Indeed, the entertainment of counterfactuals might not only depend on a 
cortical hierarchy of sufficient size to support an inner loop separable from immediate engagement 
with the sensorium (Buckner and Krienen, 2013) , but also a working H/E -S to stabilize ensembles 
associated with novel (due to being non -actual) possibilities (Hassabis et al., 2007) . In this way, in 
conjunction with the rest of the cortex, the H/E-S could be viewed as an energy-based self-supervised 
contrastive learner (Mazzaglia et al., 2022) , which may enable a substantial amount of adaptive -
  Generalized SLAM 
 
19 
autonomous behavior if (variational) free -energy/prediction-error is being minimized with respect to 
divergences between goals and present estimated states (Hafner et al., 2020; Safron, 2021b). 
It has recently been suggested by researchers at Numenta  (a biologically-inspired AI company) that 
the principles (and particular cellular adaptations such as grid cells) involved in H/E-S functioning—
e.g. allocentric object modeling (Sabour et al., 2017; Kosiorek et al., 2019) —may be recapitulated 
throughout the entire neocortex (Hawkins et al., 2019) . The idea that the H/E -S may represent a 
template for understanding the neocortex is not unreasonable, since while it is referred to as 
“subcortical”, it is technically composed of cortical tissue (Insausti et al., 2017). Along these lines, not 
only is the H/E-S topologically central as a “convergence divergence zone” (Damasio, 2012) and hub 
for “semantic pointers” (Blouw et al., 2016) , but it is also primary from an evolutionary (as 
archaecortex/periallocortex) and developmental perspective. 
Modeling based on object -centered reference frames may be a broader property of the neocortex 
(Hawkins, 2021). However, we believe that such coherent perspectives may depend on being able to 
conduct active inference and learning with sufficient degrees of  independence from other 
modeling/control processes (Thomas et al., 2017, 2018). That is, we suggest that for emergent modules 
to have H/E-S properties, they must be able to achieve informational closure with sufficient rapidity 
that they can both independently inform and be informed by act ion-perception cycles with respect to 
particular effector-sensor systems. For example, the establishment of such independently controllable 
factors may be the case for large macrocolumns such as rodent whisker barrels, but potentially not for 
ocular dominance columns. To the extent that hippocampal and entorhinal cell -types are found more 
generally throughout the cortex (Long and Zhang, 2021), we suggest that it remains ambiguous as to 
whether this reflects G -SLAM constituting a common cortical algorithm, or whether such 
representations are induced over the course of development via integrative functi oning involving the 
H/E-S. 
3.2 The H/E-S as sense-maker and value integrator/realizer 
Switching between conceptual scenes involves ramping of hippocampal activity, followed by high -
frequency signaling with the cortex as a new frame of sense making is established (de la Prida, 2020; 
Karimi Abadchi et al., 2020; O’Callaghan et al., 2021) . Theoretically, these events (potentially 
accompanied by sharp wave ripples) would represent the formation of new grid/place 
tiling/mapping/graphing over a space/scope of relevance, but where sufficient functionality is carried 
over across remapping s for integration of information across episodes. Functionally speaking, these 
frame-shifts could be understood in terms of Lévy flights with respect to generalized search, so 
allowing for more exploratory processing and creative solutions in the face of challenges (Hills et al., 
2010; McNamee et al., 2021) . That is, in contrast to searching via random walks  that would tend to 
result in reliable exploitative mapping of simple domains, such discontinuous (and potentially fanciful) 
flights to remote areas of hypothesis/phase spaces would allow agents to both more efficiently explore 
complex domains and escape from local optima. Considering that the H/E-S may be understood as the 
highest (or most flexibly integrative)  level of agent-level control processes, altering 
parameters/modulators relevant for this kind of more exploitative or exploratory (generalized) search 
could be some of the most significant sources on  variation both between and within individuals  and 
species (Safron, 2020c).  
While the precise conditions for remapping are likely to vary based on multiple conditions, degree of 
overall prediction-error seems to be one reliable trigger, as in an experiment in which participants were 
cued to retrieve well -learned complex room images from memory and then presented with either 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
20 
identical or modified pictures (Bein et al., 2020) ; in this study, the number of changes caused CA1 -
CA3 connectivity to decrease (potentially indicating less intra -hippocampal recurrent activity ) and 
CA1-entorhinal connectivity to increase. Consistently, another study found sensitivity to reward 
prediction errors with respect to the establishment of new event boundaries (Rouhani et al., 2020) . 
Similar influences on the stability of mappings by more general  salience is suggested by studies in 
which the H/E-S shows sensitivity to interactions with the amygdala and responses to fearful stimuli 
(Chen et al., 2019) , as well as modulation of encoding based on attention/expectancy (Mack et al., 
2018, 2020; Urgolites et al., 2020). The dividing of continuous unfoldings into discrete epochs provides 
another means by which abstract phenomena such as time may be conceptualized by the H/E -S (in 
addition to their spatialization, perhaps as a kind of multidimensional scaling onto lower dimensional 
manifolds that may be inspected either through fictive navigation or imaginative visual foraging 
(Ramachandran et al., 2016)).  
Notably, the H/E-S may not just be sensitive to reward, but it may also help to provide a major source 
of the prediction errors that drive phasic dopamine (Mannella et al., 2013; Ballard et al., 2019; Jang et 
al., 2019; Laubach et al., 2020) , potentially involving internal contrasting between hippocampal 
subfields, and with  overall prediction -error being further integrated via outputs to the subiculum 
(Tingley and Buzsáki, 2018; Canto et al., 2019). This may allow for the allostatic prioritization of goals 
with respect to not only cortical predictions from medial prefrontal cortices, but even homeostatic 
regulatory nuclei of the septum  (Tingley and Buzsáki, 2018; Ku nz et al., 2019; Livneh et al., 2020) . 
The importance of the H/E -S for motivational states is also evidenced by its ability to influence the 
interoceptive components of emotions (Edwards-Duric et al., 2020) , which may have a further 
(circular) causal significance in helping to drive counterfactual simulations, potentially understandable 
as affectively-canalized Markov chain Monte Carlo tree search through value space (Dohmatob et al., 
2020; Hesp et al., 2020; Parascandolo et al., 2020; Safron, 2021b) . In this way, not only would the 
H/E-S help implement S LAM processes with respect to both concrete and abstract cognition, but it 
may also help to explain how agent -level mental processes can enter causal streams leading to both 
mental simulations and overt enaction, so affording some of the varieties of “free  will” worth having 
for autonomous systems (Safron, 2021b). 
Some evidence for this affective influencing of H/E-S dynamics may potentially be found in studies of 
increased inter-hemispheric phase coupling (delta range coherence) during treadmill running periods 
(Furtunato et al., 2020) , potentially corresponding to periods of increased driving by biophysical 
signals indicating organismic salience. Crucially, sources of H/E-S ‘reward’ may not just take the form 
of the aforementioned extrinsic value of goal realization, but may also be driven by the intrinsic value 
of novel information, for the hippocampus could provide a natural integrator of prediction-error as top 
of the cortical hierarchy  (Hawkins and Blakeslee, 2004; Mannella et al., 2013; Fonken et al., 2020) . 
While the hippocampus and ventromedial prefrontal cortex may usu ally work together in estimating 
expected value (or opportunities for free energy minimization), theoretically, they may also function 
as semi-separate value signals in terms of respective information gain and preference satisfaction. In 
this way, convergence of the H/E-S and its ventromedial prefrontal collaborators upon the accumbens 
core—and thereby nigral motor dopamine (Mannella et al., 2013) —may represent physical 
manifestations of the dual optimization for intrinsic and extrinsic value prescribed by active inference 
as a normative account of intelligence. This kind of convergent control based on heterogeneous 
(fundamental) value signals is notable, as it is becoming increasingly clear the H/E-S is more than just 
a temporary memory buffer, but rather may constitute a primary basis for autonomous functioning for 
vertebrates as adaptive cybernetic systems, as highlighted in Figure 6. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
21 
 
Figure 6.  (Reprinted with permission from Safron , 2021b.) A model of hippocampally -
orchestrated imaginative planning and action selection via generalized navigation. Goal-oriented 
action sequences are depicted with respect to relevant neural processes. The hippocampal system 
provides (a) organization of  cortical attracting states into value -canalized spatiotemporal 
trajectories, (b) stabilization of ensembles via theta -mediated cross-frequency phase coupling, 
and (c) goal-oriented cognition and behavior via contrasting (not depicted) sensed and imagined 
states. Hippocampal trajectories are shaped according to whichever paths are expected to result 
in more positively valanced outcomes (cf. reward prediction errors). The expected value 
associated with navigating to different portions of (potentially abstrac t) space is informed via 
coupling with similarly spatiotemporally-organized value representations (red shaded hexagons) 
in vmPFC and associated systems. As chained patterns of activity progress across hippocampal 
place fields (red hexagons with variable de grees of shading), theta -synchronized frontal 
ensembles (yellow shading spreading towards the front of the brain) help to generate (via cross-
frequency phase coupling) ensembles for directing attention, working memory, and overt 
enaction. Sensory updating of posterior cortices occurs at alpha frequencies (blue shading), so 
providing a basis for conscious perception and imagination. With respect to these integrated 
estimates of sensory states, hippocampal coupling at theta frequencies (yellow shading spreading 
towards the back of the brain) provides a basis for (a) episodic memory and replay, (b) novel 
imaginings, and (c) adjustment of neuronal activity selection via orchestrated contrasting 
between cortical ensembles. Abbreviations: nAC = nucleus accumbens; vmPFC = ventromedial 
prefrontal cortex; dmPFC = dorsomedial prefrontal cortex; SMA = supplementary motor area; 
Pre-SMA = presupplementary motor area; SEF = supplementary eye fields; PCC = posterior 
cingulate cortex; PMCs = posterior medial cortices; IPL = inferior parietal lobule. 
 
4 G(eneralized-)SLAM as core cognitive process 

  Generalized SLAM 
 
22 
Table 1: Potential correspondences between LatentSLAM , cognitive psychological,  and bio -
computational phenomena . Please note, these cross -domain mappings are neither meant to be 
exhaustive nor definitive, but are instead intended to point in the direction of what a G -SLAM 
perspective might look like if more fully developed. 
LatentSLAM Cognitive-psychological processes Bio-computational processes 
Mapping/graphing: Inferring dimensions of feature spaces 
and relative locations of phenomena 
based on observations 
Relations between hippocampal place 
cells for particular locations combined 
with entorhinal grid cells for multi-scale 
metric-affordance information 
Localization:  Positioning specific phenomena 
(including the mapping and localizing 
system itself) within inferred feature 
spaces 
Conjunction of hippocampal/entorhinal 
place/grid cells for positioning specific 
events within maps/graphs 
Sensor and actuator uncertainty:  Perceptual (including mnemonic and 
imaginative) ambiguity  
Body and world states are indirectly 
inferred based on partial information 
from noisy signaling systems  
Views:  Visuospatial perception (as a function 
of actions) 
Information from ventral and dorsal 
visual streams (and other modalities) 
organized according to egocentric 
perspectival reference frames (via 
posterior midline structures)  
Proprioceptive poses:  Somatospatial perception (as a 
function of actions) 
Frontal-parietal hierarchies over the 
somatomotor strip, with 
modeling/control potentially enhanced 
via explicit mapping of lateral parietal 
body schemas by other systems (e.g. 
midline structures coupling with the 
H/E-S) 
Experience-map:  Structuring of episodic memory and 
imagination both informed by and 
informing visuospatial and 
somatospatial modalities 
Transitions between hippocampal place 
fields entailing spatiotemporal 
trajectories for organisms (potentially 
including trajectories for important 
effector/sensor systems such as eyes and 
hands), both entrained by and entraining 
largescale cortical attracting states 
Spatial landmark graphs:  Consciously-accessible representations 
of (salience-biased) spatial relations, 
potentially constituting our sense of 
space; semantic content of graph is 
based on actions and corresponding 
sensations as paths are traversed 
across/through these nodes 
Hippocampal place fields as chained 
attractors, mutually entrained with 
cortex to orchestrate attracting states for 
population activity along reduced-
dimensionality manifolds for both overt 
and covert action-perception cycles at 
and between these locations 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
23 
Hierarchical generative model:  The processes by which a coherent 
stream of experience is generated and 
remembered with respect to both 
action and perception 
A functional and algorithmic 
understanding of the brain as a hybrid 
machine learning architecture for 
predictive control of an embodied-
environmentally-embedded agent 
Fisher information metric:  The amount of information gained 
when traveling along a trajectory given 
a probabilistic generative model, 
wherein autonomous functioning is 
realized by minimizing discrepancies 
between predicted goal and present 
estimated states (via active inference); 
with respect to structure learning, the 
amount of “cognitive work” required 
to make sense of a domain 
The amount of neural activity that must 
be expended to achieve adaptive 
cybernetic functioning in a given 
context, including with respect to 
constructing and refining world models 
entailed by patterns of effective 
connectivity 
Accumulation of map 
uncertainty:  
Deviations between models and that 
which is represented due to uncertainty 
with respect to cognition and latent 
world states 
Deviations between likely patterns of 
neuronal attractor dynamics and their 
ability to orchestrate either overt or 
covert action-perception cycles (i.e., 
behaving or imagining) for autonomous 
functioning; cybernetic (and potentially 
thermodynamic) entropy for nervous 
systems 
Loop-closures:  Events in which a familiar location in 
feature space is encountered with high 
confidence 
High degrees of converging mutually 
consistent activity from the H/E-S and 
non-H/E systems 
Graph-relaxation:  Assimilation of novel information into 
existing schemas via iterated 
distribution of updates across 
interconnected cognitive structures 
Updating connectivity patterns to 
influence relative positioning of 
hippocampal place fields, potentially 
accompanied by largescale reductions in 
Hopfield energy 
Node creation:  Accommodation of novel information 
via altering the structure of cognitive 
maps/graphs, potentially resulting in 
major updates to internal working 
(world) models with novel concepts 
Creation of new place fields, involving 
various forms of (potentially 
neuromodulator-dependent) 
hippocampal plasticity, and/or 
establishment of new prefrontal 
attractors (i.e., patterns of canalized 
striatal-cortical loops) 
Navigation: Setting destinations in generalized 
space, which function as sources of 
prediction-error to be minimized 
through active inference; this may 
apply to the organism as a whole 
moving through (generalized) space, or 
to trajectories for parts of a system for 
which specific intentional control is 
warranted (e.g. directed ocular 
foveations or grasping/pointing 
Predictive sweeps of activity across 
place fields from hippocampal maps (cf. 
successor representations), which can 
orchestrate largescale cortical attracting 
states (cf. equilibrium points) and 
thereby drive both system-internal self-
organization (i.e., perceptual inference, 
imagination, and learning) and overt 
enaction, which in turn creates new 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
24 
movements), including with respect to 
spaces of a conceptual variety (e.g. 
spatialized time) 
sources of information to shape 
subsequent H/E-S dynamics 
 
As described above, the H/E-S and its functional relationships with the neocortex may be understood 
as implementing a kind of Kalman variational autoencoder (Fraccaro et al., 2017). In this capacity, the 
H/E-S may provide inspiration for developing advanced SLAM architectures. In its dual role as both 
memory and control system, the H/E-S has been further optimized for facilitating comparisons between 
largescale patterns (e.g. organismic states), which in machine learning terms may be understood as 
implementing something akin to energy-based contrastive learning (Marblestone et al., 2016; Richards 
et al., 2019; Mazzaglia et al., 2022). In this capacity, the H/E-S may provide inspiration for developing 
architectures capable of engaging in self -supervised learning , counterfactual modeling, and further 
enabling high-level reasoning abilities including analogical structure mapping (Gentner, 2010; Safron, 
2019a), causal inference (Pearl and Mackenzie, 2018), and imaginative planning (Kaplan and Friston, 
2018; Safron, 2021b). 
As described above, and elsewhere (Safron, 2020b, 2020c, 2021b, 2021a) , LatentSLAM’s dual-tier 
architecture provides an abstract cybernetic interpretation of the H/E -S as the highe st (or most 
integrative) level of heterarchical control for embodied -embedded organisms as they move through 
physical and imagined worlds in the pursuit of valued goals, so providing a computational/functional 
account of agency in biological (and perhaps artificial) systems. Further, this hierarchical architecture 
provides a basis for meta -learning in which slower and more encompassing “outer loop” processes 
aggregate information over faster “inner loop” processes, so affording the much -desired goal of 
realizing synergistic inference and generalization of knowledge across experiences (or lessons in 
curriculums for lifelong learning). Even more, the upper levels of this kind of hybrid architecture may 
provide a basis for explicit symbolic reasoning (via abstract experience graphs) in addition to enactive 
couplings with the world (via adaptive control of poses/views), both of which are likely required for 
achieving the goal of robust autonomous functioning for artificial systems. 
While attempting to navigate to wards such destinations may seem excessively ambitious,  we would 
note that work on the extended H/E-S was part of what inspired the formation of some of the world’s 
leading AI companies such as DeepMind, and continues to be a central part of their research programs 
(Hassabis and Maguire, 2009; Hassabis et al., 2017b; Koster et al., 2018; McNamee et al., 2021) . 
Indeed, it is increasingly being recognized that the spatiotemporal modeling properties of the H/E-S 
may constitut e an invaluable integrative framework for understanding high -level cognition  
(Whittington et al., 2022). However, we believe a G-SLAM framing might be particularly notable in 
connecting to the context under which these systems were first selected/shaped by evolution (and 
development), as well as one of the primary functionalities of the H/E-S that continues throughout the 
lifespan of organisms. That is, our abilities to navigate both physical and conceptual worlds represent 
an ongoing challenge for as long as we live. We further suggest the connection between the practical 
necessities involved in engineering physical systems may provide a particularly valuable source of 
empirical traction for attempting to specify the roles of particular features of the H/E-S, in that we can 
draw upon the rich data generated as robots attempt to navigate through the world. 
Further, by also drawing upon biological details in designing AI-architectures, we may find ourselves 
with access to invaluable inductive biases which might be otherwise overlooked. Two examples that 
come to mind include recent proposals by Bengio and LeCun with respect to “GFlowNets” and “Joint 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
25 
Embedding Predictive Architectures” (Bengio et al., 2022; LeCun, 2022). We believe these efforts in 
creating autonomous and generally intelligent systems may benefit by incorporating principles of G -
SLAM, such as the creation of systems capable of handling loop trajectories as potentially enabling 
greater open -ended and life -long learning , or in loo king towards  hybrid systems similar to 
LatentSLAM as potentially allowing for explicit representations and symbolic processing. While it has 
often been said that the goal of AI is to create the “cognitive equivalent of an airplane wing,” we would 
suggest that the magnitude of the challenge may be far greater (more akin to building a fully functioning 
plane or space ship) , and the problems of  navigating through  under-constrained architectural (and 
learning curricula) design-spaces may be unsurmountable without biological inspiration/grounding. 
While LatentSLAM continues to be refined, we believe these kinds of architectures provide a general 
framework for understanding core elements of minds and brains. Indeed, to localize something within 
a spatialized reference frame—which itself is impacted by the entities it maps/graphs — may be what 
it means to ‘understand’ and ‘explain’ somethin g (Lakoff and Johnson,  1999), and possibly even to 
experience anything at all (Safron, 2020a, 2021a, 2021b). That is to understand is to be able to adopt a 
stance (or pose) from which elements and their inter -relations may be mapped (or localized), as if 
projected onto a plane whereby they are made visible for inspection (or navigation). We believe these 
etymological considerations on the nature of knowledge may be more than ‘mere’ metaphors but could 
point to the fundamentally embodied nature of minds. 
We not only suggest that all thought may be understood as navigating between representations that are 
being localized and mapped (or graphed) within an organizing conceptual domain , but all 
communication may be understood as the transmission  of such structures (as trajectories) between 
minds (Zurn and Bassett, 2020) . While the simultaneity of generalized localization and mapping in 
cognition may not be obvious upon introspection, this is more clearly the case when considering 
unfamiliar concepts. For such novel domains, relationships between concepts and broader organizing 
schemas involves the same kind of challenges of circular inference as found in SLAM. That is, when 
we are first attempting to understand a conceptual domain, we do not know how to effectively connect 
the entities whose shared features and relations motivate the construction of organizing schemas. 
However, without such higher-order abstractions and the predictive (or compressive) capacities they 
provide, it is unclear which features of and relations between entities are relevant for shared structure 
learning. 
Heuristic algorithms may be invaluable in the bootstrapping process, such as the kind of clustering 
involved in the hierarch ical Dirichlet process  (Griffiths et al., 2019b) , models of category formation 
via analogical alignment  (Kuehne et al., 2000) , or concept derivation as abstraction over episodes  
(Mack et al., 2018). We agree that such accounts may speak to fundamental mental processes, but we 
also suggest that rather than static feature maps, such nonparametric (Bayesian) structure learning may 
apply to paths through mapped/graphed domains. This is part of why we emphasized our use of the 
Fisher distance measure above, as an information metric that naturally applies to trajectories may 
potentially provide the most valid (and potentially predictive) means of assessing 
similarity/dissimilarity between entities in feature spaces.  Indeed, one of the most notable aspects of 
thinking is its sequential  operation and sensitivity to path dependencies. While abstract 
conceptualization does allow for a good deal of cognitive flexibility, cognition is still largely defined 
by deriving knowledge via particular “chains of reasoning,” or ‘paths’ through mental space. 
Regardless of the particular routes by which we reach the heights of category learning, the formation 
of such abstract representations constitute what may be the most powerful aspect of our intelligence in 
terms of generalizable knowledge that can robustly transfer across particular episodes (Marcus, 2020). 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
26 
Such abstract categories  further allow for the kinds of st ructured representations whose importance 
was emphasized in decades of work in (non-radically-enactive) cognitive science and “good old 
fashioned AI.” The significance of such knowledge structures may prove even greater in light of the 
advent of graph networks within the context of geometric deep learning (Battaglia et al., 2018)—and 
symbolic regression as potentially representing a further degree of abstraction (Cranmer et al., 2020). 
Such graphical representations are of increasing interest because of both their interpretability as well 
as their extraordinary efficiency for modeling physical systems. With our models of node duplication 
and graph-relaxation, LatentSLAM provides a biologically plausible  and computationally-tractable 
account of how such cognitive schemas  may be formed and modified through experience . This is 
notable in that finding principled means of creating and modifying particular structures for graph neural 
networks (GNNs) remains an ongoing challenge. But if such challenge s can be surmounted, then we 
may achieve the promise of neurosymbolic AI in combining the power of connectionism with 
reasoning over explicit ly represented (and rela ted) symbols (Garcez and Lamb, 2020; Greff et al., 
2020). More specifically, we believe that the ability of the H/E-S to create navigable spaces populated 
by high-level attracting states may also provide a basis for creating “ad hoc” (Barsalou, 1983) GNN 
structures for different purposes. 
While the relationships between place cells in the H/E-S (or nodes in LatentSLAM) can be understood 
as a kind of GNN, we believe it would be more accurate to characterize these models as graph nets, in 
that they represent relations —or semantic pointers  (Blouw et al., 2016) —for hiera rchically lower 
graphs. While these details have yet to be incorporated into LatentSLAM, it has been suggested that 
heteromodal association cortices may constitute a shared latent space across (autoencoding) cortical 
hierarchies with quasi -topographic char acteristics akin to those found with GNNs  (Safron, 2020b, 
2021a, 2021b) . While the H/E -S has significant interactions with the entire cortical heterarchy, 
connectivity is most substantial for deeper (or hierarchically higher) portions of cortex, consistent with 
its potential role as a kind of graph network . The degree to which these machine learning analogies 
may apply to brain functioning is yet to be determined, but they nonetheless represent a promising 
direction for creating artificial systems that recapitulate the properties of natural intelligences (Greff et 
al., 2020). 
Intriguingly, the work in which brains were proposed to entail GNN-type computation was developed 
independently of LatentSLAM. However, similarly to how LatentSLAMs only uses views and 
proprioceptive poses for specifying particular  experiences to be mapped (Figure 2), this other work 
proposed that sufficient bases for agentic world modeling may involve conjoined visuospatial and 
somatospatial modalities, potentially (but not necessarily) understood as respective grid and mesh-pose 
GNNs. In the model of episodic memory and imagination described above (Figure 6), H/E -S 
trajectories are used to orchestrate state transitions between these experiences as the “stream of 
consciousness” (James, 1890) . While many aspects of cognition are unconscious, ‘think ing’ and 
‘reasoning’ are usually considered to involve sequentially generated conscious operations. Notably, 
the formal conceptualization of computation may have been largely inspired by Turing introspecting 
his own consciousness in the process of doing mathematics (Dehaene, 2014; Graves et al., 2014). Given 
that it is unclear that we can be conscious of anything that lacks grounding in somatic modalities and 
their abilities to change (and be controlled) through time, then all thin king/reasoning may potentially 
be understood as involving the kinds of action selection and modeling described by LatentSLAM. 
Fully describing the potential correspondences between SLAM and high-level cognition is beyond the 
scope of a single publication  (Table 1) , but before concluding we will briefly comment on the 
importance of loop-closures and thresholds for graph-relaxation and node duplication. In brief, we may 
understand a (generalized) loop-closure event as a primary factor contributing to the feel ing of 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
27 
understanding and insight (Gopnik, 1998; Fonken et al., 2020; Oh et al., 2020). After an initial period 
of relatively ambiguous exploration, the formation of a causal account (or trajectory through a concept 
space/graph) would allow for a rapid decrease in prediction -error (Joffily and Coricelli, 2013) , or 
increase in compression (Schmidhuber, 2010). While some individuals may be relatively insensitive 
to these feelings of (potentially sudden) conceptual familiarity (Hou et al., 2013; Ben -Yakov et al., 
2014), others may potentially be overly sensitive  (e.g. “déjà vu”  and other kinds of false positive 
inferences), with the specific functional tradeoffs invol ved depending on particular contexts 
(DeYoung, 2015; Blain et al., 2020; Safron and DeYoung, 2021). 
Events in which this kind of cognitive closure is achieved provide special opportunities for updating 
H/E-S models (or categories)  via graph-relaxation and node duplication. A variety of relevant 
parameters can be identified (Figure 3), whether in terms of thresholds for detecting loop-closures, the 
extent to which graphs may be relaxed, or the ease with which new nodes are created.  However, in a 
G-SLAM context of trying to model cognition more generally, we may think of loop-closure 
recognition thresholds as sensitivity to cumulative prediction error increases/decreases, graph-
relaxation as changing attractor dynamics within the H/E-S and neocortex on multiple scales, and node 
duplication as the establishment of new local ensembles of effective connectivity (cf. chained bump 
attractors)—and potentially (but not necessarily) involving neurogenesis, for which it is notable that 
the hippocampus is one of the few places where this phenomenon is r eliably observed. These core 
SLAM processes may depend on multiple factors, including neuromodulators such as dopamine and 
serotonin (Safron, 2020c; Safron and Sheikhbahaee, 2021) , a s well as on Bayesian priors (or 
“yesterday’s posteriors”). 
With respect to the previously described example of differential tuning thresholds for mapping the 
structure of aisles (Figure 5), we may potentially have a crucial source of individual difference s in 
cognition. In theory, G-SLAM may be pointing to (or localizing) a cognitive spectrum (and potential 
basis for differential diatheses) spanning autism and schizophrenia (Byars et al., 2014; Crespi and 
Dinsdale, 2019). Theoretically, we may even expect to see these kinds of variations in SLAM maps in 
the drawings of autistic and schizophrenic individuals (Morgan et al., 2019; Philippsen and Nagai, 
2020).  
Speculatively, not only may the conceptual understanding of that which is being drawn be mapped and 
navigated by the H/E-S as SLAM system, but the eye movements (Wynn et al., 2020) and hand motions 
involved in skilled actions such as drawing could themselves be orchestrated according to hippocampal 
trajectories as a basis for chained equilibrium setpoints (Latash, 2010). Even more speculatively, it 
could even be the case that further degrees of sophisticated control—as inference (Kaplan and Friston, 
2018; Friston et al., 2020)—are bootstrapped by simultaneously localizing and mapping the body itself 
as a kind of space/graph, so allowing for more rarefied and general SLAM capacities  over the course 
of development. In this view, much of cognitive development would involve initial phases of using the 
H/E-S to learn intentional control over either overtly or covertly expressed motor patterns, which then 
become automatized (or amortized) by the thalamic-cerebellar system (Safron, 2021a; Shine, 2021)  
and dorsal striatal-cortical loops (Mannella et al., 2013), so freeing up the G-SLAM system for further 
high-level predictive modeling and control. Can the body itself be understood as a mapped spatial  
domain, or is this just a way of speaking without any useful technical correspondences? How far can 
we go with using these patterns of linguistic use as hypotheses regarding cognitive processes and 
underlying neural mechanisms?  Could it even be the case t hat the phenomenology of embodiment 
involves navigation through and mapping of body maps via these cross-modal interactions, which when 
disrupted could potentially contribute to altered states of consciousness or potentially clinical 
conditions such as depersonalization (Safron, 2020c; Ciaunica and Safron, 2022)? 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
28 
With respect to personhood, beyond its foundational role for autonomous functioning, widespread 
orchestration of value-canalized trajectories through biophysical phase space by the H/E-S also enables 
the development (and ongoing functioning) of the spatiotemporally -extended processes required for 
autonoetic and autobiographical self -consciousness. In addition to constituting major transitions in 
evolution, the advent of such self-reflective capacities may have been required for the construction of 
advanced social coordination and a (s hared) symbolic order of being. While such rarefied processes 
may be well-beyond anything we are close to engendering in (abiotic) machines, it may be the case 
that we are forced to recapitulate these kinds of H/E -S functionalities if we are to successfull y arrive 
at the destination of creating robustly autonomous and general artificial intelligences. 
Indeed, G-SLAM parameters may constitute the most important source of variation we can identify 
both between and within individuals. To venture deep into unknown speculative territory, the H/E -S 
may be the source of key adaptations contributing to the evol ution of cognitive modernity through 
(potentially proto-schizotypal) flexibly creative cognition and the birth of cumulative culture, which in 
time came to represent what may be the “secret of our success” as a species and the greatest of all 
major transitions in (generalized) evolution (Premack, 1983; Gentner, 2010; Hofstadter and Sander, 
2013; Henrich, 2017; Safron, 2019b, 2020c; van den Heuvel et al., 2019; Dehaene et al., 2022). While 
such models extend far beyond domains of knowledge for which we have well -developed maps, we 
believe such possibilities are worthy of further exploration. 
Present limitations and future directions for G-SLAM 
While we describe experiments for LatentSLAM in other publications (Çatal et al., 2021a), future work 
should attempt to explicitly illustrate G-SLAM principles with experiments and mathematical 
models/simulations. Further, while approaches to localization and mapping may be diverse, this does 
not mean that all technical solutions involved are best described as SLAM problems. However, we 
believe that analogues of processes like loop closure and node duplication (and pruning) with respect 
to trajectories through cognitive spaces would constitute strong evidence for the value of a generalized 
SLAM perspective. It is also important to note that symbolic processing in the brain involves more 
than the H/E-S. For instance, a substantial amount of symbolic communication is linguistic in a way 
that could be described in terms of a hierarchical control system for vocal production and hearing 
(gestural communication could provide another illustrative example). While such ac tion-perception 
cycles need not involve the H/E-S, we also believe their functioning may potentially be enhanced via 
H/E-S orchestration of high -level dynamics (e.g. channeling neuronal manifolds along particular 
trajectories). 
We also believe it will be valuable to explore research attempting to combine SLAM and various forms 
of semantic processing in robotics/AI (Kostavelis and Gasteratos, 2015; Sünderhauf et al., 2017; Garg 
et al., 2020). Not only does such work illustrate the complexity of SLAM problems and how they may 
(and must) be integrated with other cognitive processes (cf. artificial consciousness?), but it also points 
to other ways in which robotics can be used to inform our understanding of minds, whether biologically 
grown and artificiall y engineered) . Finally, while we focus on a particular SLAM architecture 
developed within the Free Energy Principle and Active Inference framework, we believe it will be 
fruitful to consider other approaches as well , many of which are extremely well develo ped and 
sophisticated in their own right (Penny et al., 2013; Madl et al., 2018; Stoianov et al., 2022; Taniguchi 
et al., 2022). 
5 Conclusions 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
29 
We have searched through broad and diverse terrains in considering the ideas above, covering a lot of 
ground. To try to come full circle, we have described technical details of a machine learning 
architecture for autonomous robot navigation, discussed particulars of biological systems for realizing 
these functionalities in brains, and started to explore how these principles may provide a framework 
for understanding all high-level cognition in terms of simultaneous localization and mapping in space 
(broadly construed to include conceptual spaces). We have only begun this journey, but we believe the 
destination is promising, and we invite others to join us in exploring this framework for understanding 
the nature of thought. Some might contend that “prediction” or “modeling” are more encompassing 
and fundamental than a generalized SLAM perspective, and we would not disagree. However, we 
believe that G-SLAM is unique in allowing for all these perspectives to be combined with the principles 
of ecological rationality that constituted the primary selective pressures for  high-level cognition over 
the course of evolution  and development . We suggest this neuroethological perspective will be 
invaluable in allowing us to “carve nature at its joints” , in terms of identifying the most important 
features of functioning for the h ippocampal/entorhinal system and its connections to the rest of the 
brain (and body (and world)) . We further believe that G -SLAM is unique in the extent to which it 
connects to nature(s) of experience, where we do in fact exist in a spatial world through which we must 
navigate, and where it is difficult to find aspect s of mind not impacted by this fundamental physical 
situatedness. In light of these sources of potential insight, we believe that G-SLAM represents the way 
forward for understanding complex minds, and potentially for building them, if we can find sustainable 
paths into the unexplored territory of the future. 
6 Conflict of Interest 
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. 
7 Author Contributions 
AS, OÇ and TV  conceptualized G-SLAM and the main ideas for this manuscript . OÇ and TV 
conceived and performed the LatentSLAM experiments. AS contributed his knowledge gained from 
his ongoing study of the hippocampal/entorhinal system literature. All authors contributed to the article 
and approved the submitted version. 
8 Funding 
Ozan Çatal is funded by a Ph.D. grant of the Flanders Research Foundation (FWO). This research  
received funding from the “AI Flanders” program of the Flemish government. 
9 Acknowledgments 
We would like to express thanks to many people for many reasons. Hopefully you know who you are. 
We hope to share more of our gratitude with you in time (and space). 
10 Bibliography 
A Path Towards Autonomous Machine Intelligence OpenReview. Available at: 
https://openreview.net/forum?id=BZ5a1r-kVsf [Accessed June 28, 2022]. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
30 
Ai, H., Okada, R., Sakura, M., Wachtler, T., and Ikeno, H. (2019). Neuroethology of the Waggle 
Dance: How Followers Interact with the Waggle Dancer and Detect Spatial Information. 
Insects 10. doi: 10.3390/insects10100336. 
Ambrose, R. E., Pfeiffer, B. E., and Foster, D. J. (2016). Reverse replay of hippocampal place cells is 
uniquely modulated by changing reward. Neuron 91, 1124–1136. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuron.2016.07.047. 
Andersen, P. (1975). “Organization of Hippocampal Neurons and Their Interconnections,” in The 
Hippocampus: Volume 1: Structure and Development, eds. R. L. Isaacson and K. H. Pribram 
(Boston, MA: Springer US), 155–175. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4684-2976-3_7. 
Ball, D., Heath, S., Wiles, J., Wyeth, G., Corke, P., and Milford, M. (2013). OpenRatSLAM: an open 
source brain-based SLAM system. Auton. Robots 34, 149–176. doi: 10.1007/s10514-012-
9317-9. 
Ballard, I. C., Wagner, A. D., and McClure, S. M. (2019). Hippocampal pattern separation supports 
reinforcement learning. Nat. Commun. 10, 1073. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-08998-1. 
Barron, H. C., Auksztulewicz, R., and Friston, K. (2020). Prediction and memory: a predictive 
coding account. Prog. Neurobiol., 101821. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2020.101821. 
Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Mem. Cognit. 11, 211–227. doi: 10.3758/BF03196968. 
Bastos, A. M., Lundqvist, M., Waite, A. S., Kopell, N., and Miller, E. K. (2020). Layer and rhythm 
specificity for predictive routing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 117, 31459–31469. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2014868117. 
Bastos, A. M., Usrey, W. M., Adams, R. A., Mangun, G. R., Fries, P., and Friston, K. J. (2012). 
Canonical microcircuits for predictive coding. Neuron 76, 695–711. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.038. 
Battaglia, P. W., Hamrick, J. B., Bapst, V., Sanchez-Gonzalez, A., Zambaldi, V., Malinowski, M., et 
al. (2018). Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks. ArXiv180601261 
Cs Stat. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.01261 [Accessed August 26, 2020]. 
Bein, O., Duncan, K., and Davachi, L. (2020). Mnemonic prediction errors bias hippocampal states. 
Nat. Commun. 11, 3451. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-17287-1. 
Bellmund, J. L. S., Cothi, W. de, Ruiter, T. A., Nau, M., Barry, C., and Doeller, C. F. (2019). 
Deforming the metric of cognitive maps distorts memory. Nat. Hum. Behav., 1–12. doi: 
10.1038/s41562-019-0767-3. 
Bengio, Y. (2017). The Consciousness Prior. ArXiv170908568 Cs Stat. Available at: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1709.08568 [Accessed June 11, 2019]. 
Bengio, Y., Deleu, T., Hu, E. J., Lahlou, S., Tiwari, M., and Bengio, E. (2022). GFlowNet 
Foundations. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2111.09266. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
31 
Ben-Yakov, A., Rubinson, M., and Dudai, Y. (2014). Shifting gears in hippocampus: temporal 
dissociation between familiarity and novelty signatures in a single event. J. Neurosci. Off. J. 
Soc. Neurosci. 34, 12973–12981. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1892-14.2014. 
Bergen, B. K. (2012). Louder Than Words: The New Science of How the Mind Makes Meaning. 1st 
edition. New York, NY: Basic Books. 
Birch, J., Ginsburg, S., and Jablonka, E. (2020). Unlimited Associative Learning and the origins of 
consciousness: a primer and some predictions. Biol. Philos. 35, 56. doi: 10.1007/s10539-020-
09772-0. 
Blain, S. D., Longenecker, J. M., Grazioplene, R. G., Klimes-Dougan, B., and DeYoung, C. G. 
(2020). Apophenia as the disposition to false positives: A unifying framework for openness 
and psychoticism. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 129, 279–292. doi: 10.1037/abn0000504. 
Blouw, P., Solodkin, E., Thagard, P., and Eliasmith, C. (2016). Concepts as Semantic Pointers: A 
Framework and Computational Model. Cogn. Sci. 40, 1128–1162. doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12265. 
Boccara, C. N., Nardin, M., Stella, F., O’Neill, J., and Csicsvari, J. (2019). The entorhinal cognitive 
map is attracted to goals. Science 363, 1443–1447. doi: 10.1126/science.aav4837. 
Buckner, R. L., and Krienen, F. M. (2013). The evolution of distributed association networks in the 
human brain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17, 648–665. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.017. 
Butler, W. N., Hardcastle, K., and Giocomo, L. M. (2019). Remembered reward locations restructure 
entorhinal spatial maps. Science 363, 1447–1452. doi: 10.1126/science.aav5297. 
Byars, S. G., Stearns, S. C., and Boomsma, J. J. (2014). Opposite risk patterns for autism and 
schizophrenia are associated with normal variation in birth size: phenotypic support for 
hypothesized diametric gene-dosage effects. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 281, 20140604. doi: 
10.1098/rspb.2014.0604. 
Cadena, C., Carlone, L., Carrillo, H., Latif, Y., Scaramuzza, D., Neira, J., et al. (2016). Past, Present, 
and Future of Simultaneous Localization and Mapping: Toward the Robust-Perception Age. 
Trans Rob 32, 1309–1332. 
Canolty, R. T., and Knight, R. T. (2010). The functional role of cross-frequency coupling. Trends 
Cogn. Sci. 14, 506–515. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2010.09.001. 
Canto, C. B., Koganezawa, N., Lagartos, M. J. D., O’Reilly, K. C., Mansvelder, H. D., and Witter, 
M. P. (2019). Postnatal development of functional projections from para- and presubiculum to 
medial entorhinal cortex in the rat. J. Neurosci., 1623–19. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1623-
19.2019. 
Çatal, O., Jansen, W., Verbelen, T., Dhoedt, B., and Steckel, J. (2021a). LatentSLAM: unsupervised 
multi-sensor representation learning for localization and mapping. in 2021 International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
32 
Çatal, O., Verbelen, T., Maele, T. V. de, Dhoedt, B., and Safron, A. (2021b). Robot navigation as 
hierarchical active inference. Neural Netw. 142, 192–204. doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2021.05.010. 
Chen, B. K., Murawski, N. J., Cincotta, C., McKissick, O., Finkelstein, A., Hamidi, A. B., et al. 
(2019). Artificially Enhancing and Suppressing Hippocampus-Mediated Memories. Curr. 
Biol. 29, 1885-1894.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2019.04.065. 
Ciaunica, A., and Safron, A. (2022). Disintegrating and Reintegrating the Self – (In)Flexible Self-
Models in Depersonalisation and Psychedelic Experiences. doi: 10.31234/osf.io/mah78. 
Conant, R., C., and Ashby, W. R. (1970). Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that 
system. Int. J. Syst. Sci. 1, 89–97. doi: 10.1080/00207727008920220. 
Costa, S. I. R., Santos, S. A., and Strapasson, J. E. (2015). Fisher information distance: A geometrical 
reading. Discrete Appl. Math. 197, 59–69. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dam.2014.10.004. 
Cranmer, M., Sanchez-Gonzalez, A., Battaglia, P., Xu, R., Cranmer, K., Spergel, D., et al. (2020). 
Discovering Symbolic Models from Deep Learning with Inductive Biases. ArXiv200611287 
Astro-Ph Physicsphysics Stat. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11287 [Accessed August 
26, 2020]. 
Crespi, B., and Dinsdale, N. (2019). Autism and psychosis as diametrical disorders of embodiment. 
Evol. Med. Public Health 2019, 121–138. doi: 10.1093/emph/eoz021. 
Crouse, M., Nakos, C., Abdelaziz, I., and Forbus, K. (2020). Neural Analogical Matching. 
ArXiv200403573 Cs. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.03573 [Accessed April 12, 
2020]. 
Damasio, A. (2012). Self Comes to Mind: Constructing the Conscious Brain. Reprint edition. New 
York: Vintage. 
Dasgupta, I., Schulz, E., Goodman, N. D., and Gershman, S. J. (2018). Remembrance of inferences 
past: Amortization in human hypothesis generation. Cognition 178, 67–81. doi: 
10.1016/j.cognition.2018.04.017. 
Dasgupta, I., Wang, J., Chiappa, S., Mitrovic, J., Ortega, P., Raposo, D., et al. (2019). Causal 
reasoning from meta-reinforcement learning. ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv190108162. 
de la Prida, L. M. (2020). Potential factors influencing replay across CA1 during sharp-wave ripples. 
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 375, 20190236. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2019.0236. 
Dehaene, S. (2014). Consciousness and the Brain: Deciphering How the Brain Codes Our Thoughts. 
New York, New York: Viking. 
Dehaene, S., Al Roumi, F., Lakretz, Y., Planton, S., and Sablé-Meyer, M. (2022). Symbols and 
mental programs: a hypothesis about human singularity. Trends Cogn. Sci. 26, 751–766. doi: 
10.1016/j.tics.2022.06.010. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
33 
Dennett, D. (2017). From Bacteria to Bach and Back: The Evolution of Minds. 1 edition. New York: 
W. W. Norton & Company. 
DeYoung, C. G. (2015). Cybernetic Big Five Theory. J. Res. Personal. 56, 33–58. doi: 
10.1016/j.jrp.2014.07.004. 
Dohmatob, E., Dumas, G., and Bzdok, D. (2020). Dark control: The default mode network as a 
reinforcement learning agent. Hum. Brain Mapp. 41, 3318–3341. doi: 10.1002/hbm.25019. 
Edwards-Duric, J., Stevenson, R. J., and Francis, H. M. (2020). The congruence of interoceptive 
predictions and hippocampal-related memory. Biol. Psychol. 155, 107929. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsycho.2020.107929. 
Eichenbaum, H. (2014). Time cells in the hippocampus: a new dimension for mapping memories. 
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 15, 732–744. doi: 10.1038/nrn3827. 
Eichenbaum, H. (2015). The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map … of Social Space. Neuron 87, 9–11. 
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.06.013. 
Eppe, M., Gumbsch, C., Kerzel, M., Nguyen, P. D. H., Butz, M. V., and Wermter, S. (2020). 
Hierarchical principles of embodied reinforcement learning: A review. ArXiv201210147 Cs. 
Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2012.10147 [Accessed January 8, 2021]. 
Evans, T., and Burgess, N. (2020). Replay as structural inference in the hippocampal-entorhinal 
system. bioRxiv, 2020.08.07.241547. doi: 10.1101/2020.08.07.241547. 
Feinberg, T. E., and Mallatt, J. (2013). The evolutionary and genetic origins of consciousness in the 
Cambrian Period over 500 million years ago. Front. Psychol. 4. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00667. 
Fonken, Y. M., Kam, J. W. Y., and Knight, R. T. (2020). A differential role for human hippocampus 
in novelty and contextual processing: Implications for P300. Psychophysiology 57, e13400. 
doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13400. 
Fraccaro, M., Kamronn, S., Paquet, U., and Winther, O. (2017). A Disentangled Recognition and 
Nonlinear Dynamics Model for Unsupervised Learning. ArXiv171005741 Cs Stat. Available 
at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.05741 [Accessed June 14, 2019]. 
Friston, K., Da Costa, L., Hafner, D., Hesp, C., and Parr, T. (2020). Sophisticated Inference. 
Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.04120v1 [Accessed June 18, 2020]. 
Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11, 127–
138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787. 
Friston, K. J., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., and Pezzulo, G. (2017a). Active 
Inference: A Process Theory. Neural Comput. 29, 1–49. doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00912. 
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., and de Vries, B. (2017b). The graphical brain: Belief propagation and active 
inference. Netw. Neurosci. 1, 381–414. doi: 10.1162/NETN_a_00018. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
34 
Friston, K., Parr, T., and Zeidman, P. (2019). Bayesian model reduction. ArXiv180507092 Stat. 
Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.07092 [Accessed January 31, 2020]. 
Furtunato, A. M. B., Lobão-Soares, B., Tort, A. B. L., and Belchior, H. (2020). Specific Increase of 
Hippocampal Delta Oscillations Across Consecutive Treadmill Runs. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 
14. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2020.00101. 
Garcez, A. d’Avila, and Lamb, L. C. (2020). Neurosymbolic AI: The 3rd Wave. ArXiv201205876 Cs. 
Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2012.05876 [Accessed September 28, 2021]. 
Garg, S., Sünderhauf, N., Dayoub, F., Morrison, D., Cosgun, A., Carneiro, G., et al. (2020). 
Semantics for Robotic Mapping, Perception and Interaction: A Survey. Found. Trends® 
Robot. 8, 1–224. doi: 10.1561/2300000059. 
Gauthier, B., Pestke, K., and van Wassenhove, V. (2019). Building the Arrow of Time… Over Time: 
A Sequence of Brain Activity Mapping Imagined Events in Time and Space. Cereb. Cortex 
29, 4398–4414. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhy320. 
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the Mind: Analogical Processes and Symbol Systems. Cogn. Sci. 
34, 752–775. doi: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2010.01114.x. 
George, D., Rikhye, R. V., Gothoskar, N., Guntupalli, J. S., Dedieu, A., and Lázaro-Gredilla, M. 
(2021). Clone-structured graph representations enable flexible learning and vicarious 
evaluation of cognitive maps. Nat. Commun. 12, 2392. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-22559-5. 
Gershman, S., and Goodman, N. (2014). Amortized Inference in Probabilistic Reasoning. Proc. 
Annu. Meet. Cogn. Sci. Soc. 36. Available at: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/34j1h7k5 
[Accessed August 26, 2020]. 
Gopnik, A. (1998). Explanation as Orgasm*. Minds Mach. 8, 101–118. doi: 
10.1023/A:1008290415597. 
Graves, A., Wayne, G., and Danihelka, I. (2014). Neural turing machines. ArXiv Prepr. 
ArXiv14105401. 
Gray, J. A., and McNaughton, N. (2003). The Neuropsychology of Anxiety: An enquiry into the 
function of the septo-hippocampal system. OUP Oxford. 
Greff, K., van Steenkiste, S., and Schmidhuber, J. (2020). On the Binding Problem in Artificial 
Neural Networks. ArXiv201205208 Cs. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2012.05208 
[Accessed January 8, 2021]. 
Griffiths, B. J., Parish, G., Roux, F., Michelmann, S., Plas, M. van der, Kolibius, L. D., et al. (2019a). 
Directional coupling of slow and fast hippocampal gamma with neocortical alpha/beta 
oscillations in human episodic memory. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116, 21834–21842. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1914180116. 
Griffiths, T., Canini, K., Sanborn, A., and Navarro, D. (2019b). Unifying rational models of 
categorization via the hierarchical Dirichlet process. doi: 10.31234/osf.io/ketw3. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
35 
Hafner, D., Ortega, P. A., Ba, J., Parr, T., Friston, K., and Heess, N. (2020). Action and Perception as 
Divergence Minimization. ArXiv200901791 Cs Math Stat. Available at: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2009.01791 [Accessed January 8, 2021]. 
Hafting, T., Fyhn, M., Molden, S., Moser, M.-B., and Moser, E. I. (2005). Microstructure of a spatial 
map in the entorhinal cortex. Nature 436, 801–806. doi: 10.1038/nature03721. 
Hassabis, D., Kumaran, D., Summerfield, C., and Botvinick, M. (2017a). Neuroscience-Inspired 
Artificial Intelligence. Neuron 95, 245–258. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.06.011. 
Hassabis, D., Kumaran, D., Summerfield, C., and Botvinick, M. (2017b). Neuroscience-Inspired 
Artificial Intelligence. Neuron 95, 245–258. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.06.011. 
Hassabis, D., Kumaran, D., Vann, S. D., and Maguire, E. A. (2007). Patients with hippocampal 
amnesia cannot imagine new experiences. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 104, 1726–1731. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0610561104. 
Hassabis, D., and Maguire, E. A. (2009). The construction system of the brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. 
Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 364, 1263–1271. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0296. 
Hawkins, J. (2021). A Thousand Brains: A New Theory of Intelligence. Basic Books. 
Hawkins, J., and Blakeslee, S. (2004). On Intelligence. Adapted. Times Books. 
Hawkins, J., Lewis, M., Klukas, M., Purdy, S., and Ahmad, S. (2019). A Framework for Intelligence 
and Cortical Function Based on Grid Cells in the Neocortex. Front. Neural Circuits 12. doi: 
10.3389/fncir.2018.00121. 
Henrich, J. (2017). The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving Human Evolution, 
Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us Smarter. Princeton University Press. 
Hesp, C., Tschantz, A., Millidge, B., Ramstead, M., Friston, K., and Smith, R. (2020). Sophisticated 
Affective Inference: Simulating Anticipatory Affective Dynamics of Imagining Future 
Events. in Active Inference Communications in Computer and Information Science., eds. T. 
Verbelen, P. Lanillos, C. L. Buckley, and C. De Boom (Cham: Springer International 
Publishing), 179–186. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-64919-7_18. 
Hess, W., Kohler, D., Rapp, H., and Andor, D. (2016). Real-Time Loop Closure in 2D LIDAR 
SLAM. in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 1271–
1278. 
Heusser, A. C., Poeppel, D., Ezzyat, Y., and Davachi, L. (2016). Episodic sequence memory is 
supported by a theta-gamma phase code. Nat. Neurosci. advance online publication. doi: 
10.1038/nn.4374. 
Higgins, C., Liu, Y., Vidaurre, D., Kurth-Nelson, Z., Dolan, R., Behrens, T., et al. (2020). Replay 
bursts coincide with activation of the default mode and parietal alpha network. bioRxiv, 
2020.06.23.166645. doi: 10.1101/2020.06.23.166645. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
36 
Hills, T. T., Kalff, C., and Wiener, J. M. (2013). Adaptive Lévy Processes and Area-Restricted 
Search in Human Foraging. PLOS ONE 8, e60488. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060488. 
Hills, T. T., Todd, P. M., and Goldstone, R. L. (2010). The Central Executive as a Search Process: 
Priming Exploration and Exploitation across Domains. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 139, 590–609. 
doi: 10.1037/a0020666. 
Hofstadter, D., and Sander, E. (2013). Surfaces and Essences: Analogy as the Fuel and Fire of 
Thinking. 1 edition. New York: Basic Books. 
Honkanen, A., Adden, A., Freitas, J. da S., and Heinze, S. (2019). The insect central complex and the 
neural basis of navigational strategies. J. Exp. Biol. 222. doi: 10.1242/jeb.188854. 
Hou, M., Safron, A., Paller, K. A., and Guo, C. (2013). Neural correlates of familiarity and 
conceptual fluency in a recognition test with ancient pictographic characters. Brain Res. 1518, 
48–60. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.04.041. 
Howard, M. W. (2018). Memory as perception of the past: Compressed time in mind and brain. 
Trends Cogn. Sci. 22, 124–136. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2017.11.004. 
Igata, H., Ikegaya, Y., and Sasaki, T. (2020). Prioritized experience replays on a hippocampal 
predictive map for learning. bioRxiv, 2020.03.23.002964. doi: 10.1101/2020.03.23.002964. 
Insausti, R., Muñoz-López, M., Insausti, A. M., and Artacho-Pérula, E. (2017). The Human 
Periallocortex: Layer Pattern in Presubiculum, Parasubiculum and Entorhinal Cortex. A 
Review. Front. Neuroanat. 11. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2017.00084. 
James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology, Vol. 1. Reprint edition. New York: Dover 
Publications. 
Jang, A. I., Nassar, M. R., Dillon, D. G., and Frank, M. J. (2019). Positive reward prediction errors 
during decision-making strengthen memory encoding. Nat. Hum. Behav. 3, 719–732. doi: 
10.1038/s41562-019-0597-3. 
Joffily, M., and Coricelli, G. (2013). Emotional valence and the free-energy principle. PLoS Comput. 
Biol. 9, e1003094. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003094. 
Kalman, R. E., and Bucy, R. S. (1961). New results in linear filtering and prediction theory. TRANS 
ASME SER J BASIC ENG, 109. 
Kaplan, R., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Planning and navigation as active inference. Biol. Cybern. 112, 
323–343. doi: 10.1007/s00422-018-0753-2. 
Karimi Abadchi, J., Nazari-Ahangarkolaee, M., Gattas, S., Bermudez-Contreras, E., Luczak, A., 
McNaughton, B. L., et al. (2020). Spatiotemporal patterns of neocortical activity around 
hippocampal sharp-wave ripples. eLife 9, e51972. doi: 10.7554/eLife.51972. 
Kirsch, L., and Schmidhuber, J. (2020). Meta Learning Backpropagation And Improving It. doi: 
10.48550/arXiv.2012.14905. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
37 
Kosiorek, A., Sabour, S., Teh, Y. W., and Hinton, G. E. (2019). “Stacked Capsule Autoencoders,” in 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, eds. H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. 
Beygelzimer, F. d\textquotesingle Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (Curran Associates, 
Inc.), 15512–15522. Available at: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/9684-stacked-capsule-
autoencoders.pdf [Accessed May 14, 2020]. 
Kostavelis, I., and Gasteratos, A. (2015). Semantic mapping for mobile robotics tasks: A survey. 
Robot. Auton. Syst. 66, 86–103. doi: 10.1016/j.robot.2014.12.006. 
Koster, R., Chadwick, M. J., Chen, Y., Berron, D., Banino, A., Düzel, E., et al. (2018). Big-Loop 
Recurrence within the Hippocampal System Supports Integration of Information across 
Episodes. Neuron 99, 1342-1354.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.08.009. 
Kuehne, S. E., Forbus, K. D., Gentner, D., and Quinn, B. (2000). SEQL: Category learning as 
progressive abstraction using structure mapping. Available at: 
http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.38.4757. 
Kullback, S. (1959). Information Theory and Statistics. New York: Wiley. 
Kunz, L., Wang, L., Lachner-Piza, D., Zhang, H., Brandt, A., Dümpelmann, M., et al. (2019). 
Hippocampal theta phases organize the reactivation of large-scale electrophysiological 
representations during goal-directed navigation. Sci. Adv. 5, eaav8192. doi: 
10.1126/sciadv.aav8192. 
Lakoff, G., and Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh : The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge 
to Western Thought. Basic Books. 
Latash, M. L. (2010). Motor Synergies and the Equilibrium-Point Hypothesis. Motor Control 14, 
294–322. 
Laubach, M., Amarante, L. M., Caetano, M. S., and Horst, N. K. (2020). “Reward signaling by the 
rodent medial frontal cortex,” in International Review of Neurobiology (Academic Press). 
doi: 10.1016/bs.irn.2020.11.012. 
Lever, C., Burton, S., Jeewajee, A., O’Keefe, J., and Burgess, N. (2009). Boundary Vector Cells in 
the Subiculum of the Hippocampal Formation. J. Neurosci. 29, 9771–9777. doi: 
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1319-09.2009. 
Liashenko, A., Dizaji, A. S., Melloni, L., and Schwiedrzik, C. M. (2020). Memory guidance of value-
based decision making at an abstract level of representation. Sci. Rep. 10, 21496. doi: 
10.1038/s41598-020-78460-6. 
Livneh, Y., Sugden, A. U., Madara, J. C., Essner, R. A., Flores, V. I., Sugden, L. A., et al. (2020). 
Estimation of Current and Future Physiological States in Insular Cortex. Neuron 0. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuron.2019.12.027. 
Long, X., and Zhang, S.-J. (2021). A novel somatosensory spatial navigation system outside the 
hippocampal formation. Cell Res. 31, 649–663. doi: 10.1038/s41422-020-00448-8. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
38 
Maass, A., Schütze, H., Speck, O., Yonelinas, A., Tempelmann, C., Heinze, H.-J., et al. (2014). 
Laminar activity in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex related to novelty and episodic 
encoding. Nat. Commun. 5, 1–12. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6547. 
Mack, M. L., Love, B. C., and Preston, A. R. (2018). Building concepts one episode at a time: The 
hippocampus and concept formation. Neurosci. Lett. 680, 31–38. doi: 
10.1016/j.neulet.2017.07.061. 
Mack, M. L., Preston, A. R., and Love, B. C. (2020). Ventromedial prefrontal cortex compression 
during concept learning. Nat. Commun. 11, 46. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-13930-8. 
MacKay, D. G. (2019). Remembering: What 50 Years of Research with Famous Amnesia Patient H. 
M. Can Teach Us about Memory and How It Works. Prometheus Books. 
Madl, T., Franklin, S., Chen, K., and Trappl, R. (2018). A computational cognitive framework of 
spatial memory in brains and robots. Cogn. Syst. Res. 47, 147–172. doi: 
10.1016/j.cogsys.2017.08.002. 
Mannella, F., Gurney, K., and Baldassarre, G. (2013). The nucleus accumbens as a nexus between 
values and goals in goal-directed behavior: a review and a new hypothesis. Front. Behav. 
Neurosci. 7, 135. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2013.00135. 
Marblestone, A. H., Wayne, G., and Kording, K. P. (2016). Toward an Integration of Deep Learning 
and Neuroscience. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 10, 94. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2016.00094. 
Marcus, G. (2020). The Next Decade in AI: Four Steps Towards Robust Artificial Intelligence. 
ArXiv200206177 Cs. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.06177 [Accessed September 28, 
2021]. 
Mazzaglia, P., Verbelen, T., and Dhoedt, B. (2022). Contrastive Active Inference. ArXiv211010083 
Cs. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2110.10083 [Accessed April 3, 2022]. 
McNamee, D. C., Stachenfeld, K. L., Botvinick, M. M., and Gershman, S. J. (2021). Flexible 
modulation of sequence generation in the entorhinal–hippocampal system. Nat. Neurosci. 24, 
851–862. doi: 10.1038/s41593-021-00831-7. 
Milford, M. J., Wyeth, G. F., and Prasser, D. (2004). RatSLAM: a hippocampal model for 
simultaneous localization and mapping. in 2004 International Conference on Robotics and 
Automation (ICRA), 403–408. doi: doi: 10.1109/ROBOT.2004.1307183. 
Mok, R. M., and Love, B. C. (2019). A non-spatial account of place and grid cells based on 
clustering models of concept learning. Nat. Commun. 10, 5685. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-
13760-8. 
Mok, R. M., and Love, B. C. (2020). Abstract neural representations of category membership beyond 
information coding stimulus or response. bioRxiv, 2020.02.13.947341. doi: 
10.1101/2020.02.13.947341. 
Morgan, A. T., Petro, L. S., and Muckli, L. (2019). Line drawings reveal the structure of internal 
visual models conveyed by cortical feedback. bioRxiv, 041186. doi: 10.1101/041186. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
39 
Mulders, D., Yim, M. Y., Lee, J. S., Lee, A. K., Taillefumier, T., and Fiete, I. R. (2021). A structured 
scaffold underlies activity in the hippocampus. 2021.11.20.469406. doi: 
10.1101/2021.11.20.469406. 
Mur-Artal, R., Montiel, J. M. M., and Tardós, J. D. (2015). ORB-SLAM: A Versatile and Accurate 
Monocular SLAM System. IEEE Trans. Robot. 31, 1147–1163. doi: 
10.1109/TRO.2015.2463671. 
O’Callaghan, C., Walpola, I. C., and Shine, J. M. (2021). Neuromodulation of the mind-wandering 
brain state: the interaction between neuromodulatory tone, sharp wave-ripples and 
spontaneous thought. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 376, 20190699. doi: 
10.1098/rstb.2019.0699. 
Oh, Y., Chesebrough, C., Erickson, B., Zhang, F., and Kounios, J. (2020). An insight-related neural 
reward signal. NeuroImage 214, 116757. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.116757. 
O’Keefe, J., and Nadel, L. (1978). The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map. Oxford: Clarendon Press 
Available at: https://repository.arizona.edu/handle/10150/620894 [Accessed January 8, 2021]. 
Papez, J.W. (1937). A proposed mechanism of emotion. Arch. Neurol. Psychiatry 38, 725–743. doi: 
10.1001/archneurpsyc.1937.02260220069003. 
Parascandolo, G., Buesing, L., Merel, J., Hasenclever, L., Aslanides, J., Hamrick, J. B., et al. (2020). 
Divide-and-Conquer Monte Carlo Tree Search For Goal-Directed Planning. ArXiv200411410 
Cs Stat. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.11410 [Accessed August 18, 2020]. 
Pastalkova, E., Itskov, V., Amarasingham, A., and Buzsáki, G. (2008). Internally Generated Cell 
Assembly Sequences in the Rat Hippocampus. Science 321, 1322–1327. doi: 
10.1126/science.1159775. 
Pearl, J., and Mackenzie, D. (2018). The Book of Why: The New Science of Cause and Effect. Basic 
Books. 
Penny, W. D., Zeidman, P., and Burgess, N. (2013). Forward and Backward Inference in Spatial 
Cognition. PLOS Comput. Biol. 9, e1003383. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003383. 
Philippsen, A., and Nagai, Y. (2020). A predictive coding account for cognition in human children 
and chimpanzees: A case study of drawing. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Dev. Syst., 1–1. doi: 
10.1109/TCDS.2020.3006497. 
Premack, D. (1983). The codes of man and beasts. Behav. Brain Sci. 6, 125–136. doi: 
10.1017/S0140525X00015077. 
Quiroga, R. Q. (2020). No Pattern Separation in the Human Hippocampus. Trends Cogn. Sci. 24, 
994–1007. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2020.09.012. 
Ramachandran, V. S., Vajanaphanich, M., and Chunharas, C. (2016). Calendars in the brain; their 
perceptual characteristics and possible neural substrate. Neurocase 22, 461–465. doi: 
10.1080/13554794.2016.1250913. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
40 
Richards, B. A., Lillicrap, T. P., Beaudoin, P., Bengio, Y., Bogacz, R., Christensen, A., et al. (2019). 
A deep learning framework for neuroscience. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1761–1770. doi: 
10.1038/s41593-019-0520-2. 
Rouhani, N., Norman, K. A., Niv, Y., and Bornstein, A. M. (2020). Reward prediction errors create 
event boundaries in memory. Cognition 203, 104269. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2020.104269. 
Sabour, S., Frosst, N., and Hinton, G. E. (2017). Dynamic routing between capsules. in Advances in 
neural information processing systems, 3856–3866. 
Safron, A. (2019a). Bayesian Analogical Cybernetics. ArXiv191102362 Q-Bio. Available at: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.02362 [Accessed November 14, 2019]. 
Safron, A. (2019b). Multilevel evolutionary developmental optimization (MEDO): A theoretical 
framework for understanding preferences and selection dynamics. ArXiv191013443 Econ Q-
Bio Q-Fin. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.13443 [Accessed November 14, 2019]. 
Safron, A. (2020a). An Integrated World Modeling Theory (IWMT) of Consciousness: Combining 
Integrated Information and Global Neuronal Workspace Theories With the Free Energy 
Principle and Active Inference Framework; Toward Solving the Hard Problem and 
Characterizing Agentic Causation. Front. Artif. Intell. 3. doi: 10.3389/frai.2020.00030. 
Safron, A. (2020b). Integrated World Modeling Theory (IWMT) Implemented: Towards Reverse 
Engineering Consciousness with the Free Energy Principle and Active Inference. PsyArXiv 
doi: 10.31234/osf.io/paz5j. 
Safron, A. (2020c). On the Varieties of Conscious Experiences: Altered Beliefs Under Psychedelics 
(ALBUS). doi: 10.31234/osf.io/zqh4b. 
Safron, A. (2021a). Integrated World Modeling Theory (IWMT) Expanded: Implications for 
Theories of Consciousness and Artificial Intelligence. doi: 10.31234/osf.io/rm5b2. 
Safron, A. (2021b). The Radically Embodied Conscious Cybernetic Bayesian Brain: From Free 
Energy to Free Will and Back Again. Entropy 23, 783. doi: 10.3390/e23060783. 
Safron, A., and DeYoung, C. G. (2021). “Chapter 18 - Integrating Cybernetic Big Five Theory with 
the free energy principle: A new strategy for modeling personalities as complex systems,” in 
Measuring and Modeling Persons and Situations, eds. D. Wood, S. J. Read, P. D. Harms, and 
A. Slaughter (Academic Press), 617–649. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-819200-9.00010-7. 
Safron, A., and Sheikhbahaee, Z. (2021). Dream to explore: 5-HT2a as adaptive temperature 
parameter for sophisticated affective inference. doi: 10.31234/osf.io/zmpaq. 
Schmidhuber, J. (2010). Formal Theory of Creativity, Fun, and Intrinsic Motivation (1990–2010). 
IEEE Trans. Auton. Ment. Dev. 2, 230–247. doi: 10.1109/TAMD.2010.2056368. 
Schmidhuber, J. (2020). Reinforcement Learning Upside Down: Don’t Predict Rewards -- Just Map 
Them to Actions. ArXiv191202875 Cs. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.02875 
[Accessed March 27, 2022]. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
41 
Shamash, P., Olesen, S. F., Iordanidou, P., Campagner, D., Nabhojit, B., and Branco, T. (2020). Mice 
learn multi-step routes by memorizing subgoal locations. bioRxiv, 2020.08.19.256867. doi: 
10.1101/2020.08.19.256867. 
Shang, W., Trott, A., Zheng, S., Xiong, C., and Socher, R. (2019). Learning World Graphs to 
Accelerate Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning. ArXiv190700664 Cs Stat. Available at: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.00664 [Accessed January 8, 2021]. 
Sharif, F., Tayebi, B., Buzsáki, G., Royer, S., and Fernandez-Ruiz, A. (2020). Subcircuits of Deep 
and Superficial CA1 Place Cells Support Efficient Spatial Coding across Heterogeneous 
Environments. Neuron 0. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.10.034. 
Shine, J. M. (2021). The thalamus integrates the macrosystems of the brain to facilitate complex, 
adaptive brain network dynamics. Prog. Neurobiol. 199, 101951. doi: 
10.1016/j.pneurobio.2020.101951. 
Spiers, H. J., Hayman, R. M. A., Jovalekic, A., Marozzi, E., and Jeffery, K. J. (2015). Place field 
repetition and purely local remapping in a multicompartment environment. Cereb. Cortex N. 
Y. N 1991 25, 10–25. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht198. 
Stachenfeld, K. L., Botvinick, M. M., and Gershman, S. J. (2017). The hippocampus as a predictive 
map. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1643–1653. doi: 10.1038/nn.4650. 
Stoianov, I., Maisto, D., and Pezzulo, G. (2022). The hippocampal formation as a hierarchical 
generative model supporting generative replay and continual learning. Prog. Neurobiol. 217, 
102329. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2022.102329. 
Striedter, G. F. (2004). Principles of Brain Evolution. 1st edition. Sunderland, Mass: Sinauer 
Associates is an imprint of Oxford University Press. 
Sünderhauf, N., Pham, T. T., Latif, Y., Milford, M., and Reid, I. (2017). Meaningful maps with 
object-oriented semantic mapping. in 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent 
Robots and Systems (IROS), 5079–5085. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2017.8206392. 
Suryanarayana, S. M., Pérez-Fernández, J., Robertson, B., and Grillner, S. (2020). The evolutionary 
origin of visual and somatosensory representation in the vertebrate pallium. Nat. Ecol. Evol., 
1–13. doi: 10.1038/s41559-020-1137-2. 
Taniguchi, A., Fukawa, A., and Yamakawa, H. (2022). Hippocampal formation-inspired probabilistic 
generative model. Neural Netw. 151, 317–335. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2022.04.001. 
Thomas, V., Bengio, E., Fedus, W., Pondard, J., Beaudoin, P., Larochelle, H., et al. (2018). 
Disentangling the independently controllable factors of variation by interacting with the 
world. ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv180209484. 
Thomas, V., Pondard, J., Bengio, E., Sarfati, M., Beaudoin, P., Meurs, M.-J., et al. (2017). 
Independently controllable factors. ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv170801289. 
Thrun, S., Burgard, W., and Fox, D. (2005). Probabilistic robotics. MIT Press. 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
42 
Thrun, S., and Montemerlo, M. (2006). The Graph SLAM Algorithm with Applications to Large-
Scale Mapping of Urban Structures. Int. J. Robot. Res. 25, 403–429. doi: 
10.1177/0278364906065387. 
Tingley, D., and Buzsáki, G. (2018). Transformation of a Spatial Map across the Hippocampal-
Lateral Septal Circuit. Neuron 98, 1229-1242.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.04.028. 
Todd, P. M., and Gigerenzer, G. (2012). Ecological Rationality: Intelligence in the World. Illustrated 
edition. Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press. 
Tolman, E. C. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men. Psychol. Rev. 55, 189–208. doi: 
10.1037/h0061626. 
Tversky, B. (2019). Mind in Motion: How Action Shapes Thought. 1 edition. New York: Basic 
Books. 
Umbach, G., Kantak, P., Jacobs, J., Kahana, M., Pfeiffer, B. E., Sperling, M., et al. (2020). Time cells 
in the human hippocampus and entorhinal cortex support episodic memory. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. 117, 28463–28474. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2013250117. 
Urgolites, Z. J., Wixted, J. T., Goldinger, S. D., Papesh, M. H., Treiman, D. M., Squire, L. R., et al. 
(2020). Spiking activity in the human hippocampus prior to encoding predicts subsequent 
memory. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 117, 13767–13770. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2001338117. 
Uria, B., Ibarz, B., Banino, A., Zambaldi, V., Kumaran, D., Hassabis, D., et al. (2020). The Spatial 
Memory Pipeline: a model of egocentric to allocentric understanding in mammalian brains. 
bioRxiv, 2020.11.11.378141. doi: 10.1101/2020.11.11.378141. 
van den Heuvel, M. P., Scholtens, L. H., de Lange, S. C., Pijnenburg, R., Cahn, W., van Haren, N. E. 
M., et al. (2019). Evolutionary modifications in human brain connectivity associated with 
schizophrenia. Brain J. Neurol. 142, 3991–4002. doi: 10.1093/brain/awz330. 
Wang, C., Chen, X., Lee, H., Deshmukh, S. S., Yoganarasimha, D., Savelli, F., et al. (2018a). 
Egocentric coding of external items in the lateral entorhinal cortex. Science 362, 945–949. 
doi: 10.1126/science.aau4940. 
Wang, J. X., Kurth-Nelson, Z., Kumaran, D., Tirumala, D., Soyer, H., Leibo, J. Z., et al. (2018b). 
Prefrontal cortex as a meta-reinforcement learning system. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 860. doi: 
10.1038/s41593-018-0147-8. 
Whittington, J. C. R., McCaffary, D., Bakermans, J. J. W., and Behrens, T. E. J. (2022). How to build 
a cognitive map: insights from models of the hippocampal formation. ArXiv220201682 Cs Q-
Bio. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.01682 [Accessed March 27, 2022]. 
Whittington, J. C. R., Muller, T. H., Mark, S., Barry, C., and Behrens, T. E. J. (2018). Generalisation 
of structural knowledge in the hippocampal-entorhinal system. ArXiv180509042 Cs Q-Bio 
Stat. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.09042 [Accessed June 13, 2019]. 
Whittington, J. C. R., Muller, T. H., Mark, S., Chen, G., Barry, C., Burgess, N., et al. (2020). The 
Tolman-Eichenbaum Machine: Unifying Space and Relational Memory through 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
43 
Generalization in the Hippocampal Formation. Cell 183, 1249-1263.e23. doi: 
10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.024. 
Wijesinghe, R., Protti, D. A., and Camp, A. J. (2015). Vestibular Interactions in the Thalamus. Front. 
Neural Circuits 9. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2015.00079. 
Wynn, J. S., Ryan, J. D., and Buchsbaum, B. R. (2020). Eye movements support behavioral pattern 
completion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 117, 6246–6254. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1917586117. 
Zador, A. M. (2019). A critique of pure learning and what artificial neural networks can learn from 
animal brains. Nat. Commun. 10, 1–7. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-11786-6. 
Zhang, F., Li, S., Yuan, S., Sun, E., and Zhao, L. (2017). Algorithms analysis of mobile robot SLAM 
based on Kalman and particle filter. in 2017 9th International Conference on Modelling, 
Identification and Control (ICMIC), 1050–1055. doi: 10.1109/ICMIC.2017.8321612. 
Zhou, J., Cui, G., Zhang, Z., Yang, C., Liu, Z., Wang, L., et al. (2019). Graph Neural Networks: A 
Review of Methods and Applications. ArXiv181208434 Cs Stat. Available at: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.08434 [Accessed August 18, 2020]. 
Zurn, P., and Bassett, D. S. (2020). Network architectures supporting learnability. Philos. Trans. R. 
Soc. B Biol. Sci. 375, 20190323. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2019.0323. 
 
 
 
Appendix A: LatentSLAM mathematical model 
 
The latentSLAM  model for SLAM can be seen as a two -level active inference hierarchy working 
together to enable navigation. The lower -level abstracts actions and observations from the physical 
world into an abstract representation. The higher-level takes the lower-level abstractions as inputs and 
creates a global abstraction over them. In this appendix we will go into the mathematical details of 
these models. 
11 Generic active inference model 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
44 
 
Figure 7 Graphical representation of a generic active inference model. Gray nodes indicate that 
the corresponding value is observed, white nodes need to be inferred. 
Both levels of the hierarchy form an instantiation of an active inference model. This means that each 
level forms a generative model over its own actions and observations.  We assume the environment is 
modeled up to a certain time horizon T by the agent as a POMDP with joint probability distribution  
P(õ, s̃, ã, π) = 𝑃(𝑠𝑜)𝑃(π) ∏ 𝑃(𝑜𝑡|𝑠𝑡)𝑃(𝑠𝑡|𝑠𝑡−1, 𝑎𝑡−1)𝑃(𝑎𝑡−1|π)
𝑇
𝑡=1
 
Where tildes indicate sequences of the corresponding variables,  a indicates the action, o the 
observation, s the latent states and π the policy. 
The agent needs to infer the posterior belief on latent states 𝑃(𝑠̃|𝑜̃, 𝑎̃). In order to achieve this, we use 
a variational approximation of the true posterior, which we parametrize as  
𝑄(𝑠̃|𝑜̃, 𝑎̃) = 𝑄(𝑠0|𝑜0) ∏ 𝑄(𝑠𝑡|𝑠𝑡−1, 𝑎𝑡−1, 𝑜𝑡)
𝑇
𝑡=1
 
Note that in all following discussions we will use Q to designate a (variational) posterior and P as a 
prior distribution. As we the agent is acting according to the free energy principle, it is actively 
minimizing its variational free energy. Which we posit here as 
F = 𝐷𝐾𝐿 [𝑄(𝑠̃|𝑜̃, 𝑎̃) || 𝑃(𝑠̃, 𝑎̃ )] − 𝔼𝑄(𝑠̃|𝑜̃,𝑎̃)[𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑃 (𝑜̃|𝑠̃)] 
For a more detailed description of the derivation of F, we refer the reader to. The generative model and 
the free energy form only one aspect of active inference. The agent not only needs to infer states from 
the present, but also actions for the future. T his is achieved through the expected free energy, which 
we define for a future timestep τ and a given policy π as  
𝐺(π, τ) = 𝐷𝐾𝐿 [𝑄(𝑠𝜏| π)||𝑃(𝑠𝜏)] + 𝔼𝑄(𝑠𝜏)[𝐻(𝑃(𝑜𝜏|𝑠𝜏))] 
(1) 
Summing over the future timesteps then gives the expected free energy for a given policy. 
12 Navigation model 

  Generalized SLAM 
 
45 
Similar to the generic active inference model, we start by defining the generative model in terms of a 
joint distribution over its parts. 
𝑃(𝑜,̃ 𝑠,̃ 𝑎̃, 𝑙̃, 𝑝̃, 𝑚̃, 𝜋) = 𝑃(𝑜̃, 𝑠̃𝑖>0, 𝑎̃, 𝑝̃𝑖>0, 𝜋 | 𝑙̃, 𝑠̃0, 𝑝̃0)𝑃(𝑙̃, 𝑚̃, 𝑠̃0, 𝑝̃0) 
(2) 
Where o, s, and 𝜋 keep their earlier definition and we now introduce the pose p, location l and move 
m to the discussion. This joint distribution naturally decomposes into two new joints over a subset o f 
variables, allowing the independent treatment of higher-level and lower-level navigation. The resulting 
graphical model is shown in Error! Reference source not found.. 
 
Figure 8 Graphical overview of the hierarchical navigation model 
If we look at the free energy of this model, we get 
𝐹ℎ𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 = 𝔼𝑄[log 𝑄(𝑠̃, 𝑝̃) − log 𝑃(𝑜̃, 𝑠̃𝑖>0, 𝑎̃, 𝑝̃𝑖>0|𝑙̃, 𝑠̃0, 𝑝̃𝑜) + log 𝑄(𝑙̃) − log 𝑃(𝑙̃, 𝑚̃, 𝑠̃0, 𝑝̃0)] 
=  𝐹𝑙𝑜𝑤 + 𝐹ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ 
Allowing for a clean separation in the creation of the lower and higher-level state models. 
 
12.1 Lower-level model 
Using the same approximations for the lower-level model as in the generic active inference model, 
we write the free energy as 
𝐹𝑙𝑜𝑤 = ∑ 𝔼𝑄[log 𝑄(𝑝𝑡) − log 𝑃(𝑝𝑡|𝑝𝑡−1, 𝑎𝑡−1, 𝑠𝑡)] + 𝐷𝐾𝐿[𝑄(𝑠𝑡)||𝑃(𝑠𝑡|𝑠𝑡−1, 𝑎𝑡−1)] 
𝑡
+ 𝔼𝑄[− log 𝑃(𝑜𝑡|𝑠𝑡)] 
From this we recover the same generative model for the observations and observational latent states 
as before in the generic case, however, the model is now supplemented with a term responsible for 
the pose estimation aspects. In effect, this means that we do not use any pose information for the 

  Generalized SLAM 
 
46 
visual perception part of the model. Note that the pose estimation is in fact conditioned on the current 
perceptual state estimate. 
As might be expected from the free energy formulation, the lower-level perception is implemented as 
a generic active inference model. The pose estimation aspect is deliberately left as an expected 
difference between the pose posterior and prior.  
The pose prior is implemented as simple dynamics model from the action velocities used to control 
the agent, i.e., 
𝜃𝑡 = 𝜃𝑡−1 + 𝑣𝑎Δ𝑡 
𝑥𝑡 = 𝑥𝑡−1 + 𝑣𝑙Δ𝑡 
𝑦𝑡 =  𝑦𝑡−1 + 𝑣𝑙Δ𝑡 
With 𝑣𝑎and 𝑣𝑙 the angular and linear velocity of the agent and 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝜃 the coordinates and rotation in 
the plane of the agent. 
The pose posterior 𝑄(𝑝𝑡) is implemented as a CAN with energy dynamics described as 
𝜖Δ𝑥,Δ𝑦,Δ𝜃 = 𝑒𝑥𝑝 −Δ𝑥2 − Δ𝑦2
𝑘𝑝𝑒𝑥𝑐 𝑒𝑥𝑝 −Δ𝜃2
𝑘𝑑
𝑒𝑥𝑐  −  𝑒𝑥𝑝 −Δ𝑥2 − Δ𝑦2
𝑘𝑑
𝑖𝑛ℎ 𝑒𝑥𝑝 −Δ𝜃2
𝑘𝑑
𝑖𝑛ℎ  
With 𝑘𝑑and 𝑘𝑝the variance constants for place and direction, and the superscript exc and inh used to 
indicate whether the effect is inhibitory or excitatory. The resulting behavior is locally excitatory and 
globally inhibitory. The conditioning on observatory state 𝑠𝑡 is achieved by creating an extra excitatory 
link with a state-pose episodic memory. 
12.2 Higher-level model 
Starting again from the free energy functional  
𝐹ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ =  ∑ 𝐷𝐾𝐿[𝑄(𝑙𝕥) || 𝑃(𝑙𝕥|𝑙𝕥−1, 𝑚𝕥−1)] + 𝔼𝑄[− log 𝑃(𝑠𝕥,0|𝑙𝕥) − log 𝑃(𝑝𝕥,0|𝑙𝕥)]
𝕥
 
We again see the classical active inference model emerging. Note the usage of 𝕥 instead of t to indicate 
that this model operates on a different timescale. Likewise, only the init ial lower-level states for that 
inference cycle appear in the likelihood (remember that this model uses the states of the lower-level as 
observations). Here again, the actual implementation of these models is geared towards a navigational 
task. In order to infer the location, the prior distribution of locations is implemented as an experience 
graph. Each node in the graph incorporates a state, pose pair to link it with the lower level. Links 
between the nodes indicate a connection traversable on the lower l evel. The dynamics model 
𝑃(𝑙𝕥|𝑙𝕥−1, 𝑚𝕥 − 1) is deduced from the adjacency matrix of the graph. The posterior belief 
𝑄(𝑙𝕥|𝑠𝕥,𝑡, 𝑝𝕥,𝑡) is build by assigning probability inversely proportional to the cosine similarity and 
Euclidean distance between current state pose pair and the pairs reachable from the current node. 
Map updates also trigger a graph-relaxation pass, in order to facilitate loop-closures. The graph-
relaxation phase shifts the stored poses in each experience map node according to 
  Generalized SLAM 
 
47 
∆𝑝𝑖 = 1
2 [ ∑ (𝑝𝑗 − 𝑝𝑖 − ∆𝑝𝑖𝑗)
𝑖𝑛𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑
𝑗=1
+ ∑ (𝑝𝑘 − 𝑝𝑖 − ∆𝑝𝑖𝑗)
𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑
𝑘=1
] 
 
12.3 Action inference 
So far, we’ve only discussed the state inference aspects of the navigation model , however, action 
inference is also an important aspect of active inference. The expected free energy for the lower -level 
model is 
𝐺𝑙𝑜𝑤(𝜋, 𝜏) = 𝐷𝐾𝐿[𝑄(𝑠𝜏, 𝑝𝜏|𝜋) || 𝑄(𝑠𝑇+1, 𝑝𝑇+1|𝑙𝑇, 𝑚𝑇)] + 𝔼𝑄(𝑠𝜏)[𝐻(𝑃(𝑜𝜏|𝑠𝜏))] 
The prior preferences in th is equation are provided by the higher -level model, and form targets to 
achieve within the single timestep of that level. High level targets are then extracted according to 
𝐺ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ(𝑚̃ , 𝓉) = 𝐷𝐾𝐿[𝑄(𝑙𝓉|𝑚̃ )||𝑃(𝑙𝓉)] + 𝐸𝑄(𝑙𝓉) [𝐻(𝑃(𝑝𝓉,0|𝑙𝓉)) + 𝐻(𝑃(𝑠𝓉,0|𝑙𝓉))] 
Action selection happens than according to a two-phase planning process. First, at the coarser higher-
level, second at the fine -grained lower level. This allows for a reduction in search space for a given 
trajectory. 
 