fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 1
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 13 July 2022
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2022.906188
Edited by:
Cosimo Urgesi,
University of Udine, Italy
Reviewed by:
Rhett Diessner,
Lewis–Clark State College,
United States
Xianyou He,
South China Normal University, China
*Correspondence:
Pietro Sarasso
pietro.sarasso@unito.it
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Cognitive Neuroscience,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience
Received: 28 March 2022
Accepted: 09 June 2022
Published: 13 July 2022
Citation:
Sarasso P , Francesetti G,
Roubal J, Gecele M, Ronga I,
Neppi-Modona M and Sacco K
(2022) Beauty and Uncertainty as
Transformative Factors: A Free Energy
Principle Account of Aesthetic
Diagnosis and Intervention in Gestalt
Psychotherapy.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 16:906188.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2022.906188
Beauty and Uncertainty as
Transformative Factors: A Free
Energy Principle Account of
Aesthetic Diagnosis and Intervention
in Gestalt Psychotherapy
Pietro Sarasso1*, Gianni Francesetti2, Jan Roubal3, Michela Gecele2, Irene Ronga1,
Marco Neppi-Modona1 and Katiuscia Sacco1
1 BraIn Plasticity and Behaviour Changes Research Group, Department of Psychology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy,
2 International Institute for Gestalt Therapy and Psychopathology, Turin Center for Gestalt Therapy, Turin, Italy,
3 Psychotherapy Training Gestalt Studia, Training in Psychotherapy Integration, Center for Psychotherapy Research in Brno,
Masaryk University, Brno, Czechia
Drawing from ﬁeld theory, Gestalt therapy conceives psychological suffering and
psychotherapy as two intentional ﬁeld phenomena, where unprocessed and chaotic
experiences seek the opportunity to emerge and be assimilated through the contact
between the patient and the therapist (i.e., the intentionality of contacting). This
therapeutic approach is based on the therapist’s aesthetic experience of his/her
embodied presence in the ﬂow of the healing process because (1) the perception of
beauty can provide the therapist with feedback on the assimilation of unprocessed
experiences; (2) the therapist’s attentional focus on intrinsic aesthetic diagnostic criteria
can facilitate the modiﬁcation of rigid psychopathological ﬁelds by supporting the
openness to novel experiences. The aim of the present manuscript is to review recent
evidence from psychophysiology, neuroaesthetic research, and neurocomputational
models of cognition, such as the free energy principle (FEP), which support the notion of
the therapeutic potential of aesthetic sensibility in Gestalt psychotherapy. Drawing from
neuroimaging data, psychophysiology and recent neurocognitive accounts of aesthetic
perception, we propose a novel interpretation of the sense of beauty as a self-generated
reward motivating us to assimilate an ever-greater spectrum of sensory and affective
states in our predictive representation of ourselves and the world and supporting the
intentionality of contact. Expecting beauty, in the psychotherapeutic encounter, can help
therapists tolerate uncertainty avoiding impulsive behaviours and to stay tuned to the
process of change.
Keywords: neuroaesthetics, gestalt therapy, predictive coding, ﬁeld theory, psychopathology
Question: Would it be correct to suggest that the aesthetic is this unifying glimpse that makes us aware of
the unity of things which is not (in the limited sphere of) consciousness?
Gregory Bateson: That is right; that is what I am getting at. The ﬂash which appears in consciousness
as a disturbance of consciousness is the thing that I am talking about.
(Bateson, 1991; p. 300)
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 1 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 2
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
INTRODUCTION
We are instinctively drawn to seek causal relations in the
sensory regularities we observe. Not only natural sciences support
this view, but also a number of philosophers and poets: e.g.,
Kant considers causality as an a priori concept, and Goethe
aﬃrms that cause and eﬀect are the “most innate concepts”
(Heiddeger and Boss, 2000; p. 230). However, as suggested
by modern developments in quantum physics (Heisenberg,
1927; Schrödinger, 1944; Fantappiè, 2011) explaining phenomena
uniquely by the causality principle might be scarcely eﬀective
in natural science and, as widely discussed by Heidegger in
the Zollikon Seminars, completely misleading and objectifying
when approaching human suﬀering and healing (Meynen and
Verburgt, 2009). Indeed, suﬀering is not only “caused by” but
it has an intention, it tends towards something (Spagnuolo
Lobb, 2013; Roubal et al., 2017; Bloom, 2020). Even severe
psychopathological suﬀering, after all, makes sense and “is
about something, ” i.e., it carries (to suﬀer: from latin sub-
ferre, to carry) an intentionality for reaching out and making
sense of the world (i.e., intentionality of contacting in Gestalt
theory; Francesetti, 2015, 2021; Bloom, 2020). As any self-
regulating autopoietic biological system (Maturana and Varela,
1980), humans are intrinsically oriented to growth (Dempster,
2000). When possible, as we will better discuss in the third
section, self-regulating systems disrupt their habitual policies
(Kiverstein et al., 2019; Seth et al., 2020; Van de Cruys et al.,
2020) to integrate and create new dynamics (Kelso, 1995;
Miller et al., 2021). Both being and becoming at once, even
when they suﬀer, “people are inherently self-regulating and
growth-oriented and [. . .] their behaviour, including symptoms,
cannot be understood apart from their environment” (Yontef
and Jacobs, 2005). Gestalt therapy approaches rest on this
fundamental assumption.
If suﬀering has a meaning and is oriented toward a relational
“next” (Spagnuolo Lobb, 2013), the main question in giving
support is “where is the person headed to?” (Roubal et al.,
2017). In other words, in the gestalt approach the therapist
“trusts organismic self-regulation more than therapist-directed
change attempts” and is concerned with creating the conditions
“that focus attention where needed for healing and growth”
(Woldt and Toman, 2005; p. 82). The attentional attitude of the
therapist and his/her ability to tolerate uncertainty (Staemmler,
1997, 2000, 2006) is thus essential: “To be aware, awake, with
senses active, and at the same time relaxed, allowing you to
be touched by what happens. To remain conﬁdent that chaos
does indeed make “sense, ” and that with suﬃcient support
a meaning will emerge. The therapists are ready to gather
intentionality and to support its unfolding. It is the intentionality
towards contact that brings order to intersubjective chaos”
(Roubal et al., 2017; p. 6). Suﬀering represents an opportunity
for the patients to get in contact with their unintegrated or
chaotic experiences: when possible, its causes should not be
eliminated but rather supported in their intentionality. As we
will further explain in the second section, contrarily to the
medical approach, Gestalt therapists do not aim at reducing
the pain of the patients but at sharing it with them, in order
to help them process experiences that couldn’t be processed
and assimilated without the supportive presence of the other
(Francesetti, 2019a,b).
Within this theoretical framework, the aesthetic sensibility
of the therapist is a key factor for the success of a therapeutic
intervention (Bloom, 2011; Francesetti, 2012; Spagnuolo Lobb,
2018). Gestalt therapy might indeed be considered a fully-
ﬂedged evaluative process (Perls et al., 1951) following intrinsic
aesthetic criteria (Francesetti and Gecele, 2009; Bloom, 2011):
“the achievement of a strong Gestalt is itself the cure” (Perls
et al., 1951, p. 232). According to Gestalt therapy, when
assuming an aesthetic attitude, also referred to as aesthetic
diagnosis (Roubal et al., 2017), the therapist can tolerate
sensory, emotional, and relational uncertainty (Francesetti,
2019b) without avoiding it, thereby providing the necessary
support for change (Spagnuolo Lobb, 2018). In the words
of Wilfred Bion: “beauty makes a very diﬃcult situation
tolerable” (Lord, 2017). The aesthetic diagnosis (from the
Greek diagnosis, meaning to know through; Cortelazzo and
Zolli, 1983) is per se a transformative experience, with the
potential of being therapeutical: it may defy common knowledge-
acquisition processes oriented to predictability and control,
while re-orienting the physiological arousal to learning and
change (Sarasso et al., 2020a). A crucial starting point for
the therapist to trigger this process is to gather raw sensory
impressions without categorising them in predeﬁned knowledge
representation schemes: transient states of not-knowing with
increasing tension of stimulus may later make such sensory
impressions thinkable, as already intuited by psychoanalysis
(Freud, 1951). Bion suggested that the only way for someone
to stay on the path to cure is through the tolerance of
doubt and intimacy with the unknown (Bion, 1994). Bion,
indeed, similarly to Gestalt therapy, encouraged the therapist
to completely surrender to the therapeutic process, he even
discouraged therapists from maintaining a desire to cure patients
(Aguayo and Malin, 2013).
Such holistic perspective, also referred to as the paradoxical
theory of change (Beisser, 1970; Francesetti and Roubal, 2020)
will be discussed within the neurocomputational framework
of cognition called Free Energy Principle and its neural
implementation called predictive coding (PC), which has
recently gathered a wide consensus among neuroscientists
(Friston, 2010) and is starting to inform psychopathology
(Barrett et al., 2016; Badcock et al., 2017, 2019; Ciompi and
Tschacher, 2021; Smith et al., 2021) and clinical practice
(Tschacher et al., 2017; Holmes and Nolte, 2019). The basic
principle of FEP and PC (Section “Experimental Evidence
Linking Aesthetic Pleasure and Learning”) is that agents
constantly update the predictive representation (Sims and
Pezzulo, 2021) of their environment based on Bayesian inference
drawn from unpredicted sensory input while inhibiting
uninformative predicted input under the imperative of
minimising variational free energy (i.e., uncertainty; Friston
and Kiebel, 2009; den Ouden et al., 2012). The FEP resonates
with Gestalt therapy description of the organism-environment
interaction (see Section “Experimental Evidence Linking
Aesthetic Pleasure and Learning”), and with the principles of
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 2 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 3
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
Gestalt psychology (Van de Cruys and Wagemans, 2011b).
Indeed, Gestalts can be deﬁned as inferred predictive models
of the environment (Van de Cruys and Wagemans, 2011a),
and, mirrorwise, predictive inferences behave as Gestalts:
“in the predictive coding loop, the inferred cause (the idea,
the whole) predicts the evidence, while, at the same time,
the evidence (the words, the parts) modiﬁes the inferred
cause” (Frith and Wentzer, 2013; p. 658). As we will discuss
in Section “A Bridge Between Gestalt Field Theory and
the Free-Energy Principle, ” the FEP might provide a valid
theoretical framework to interpret neurophysiological data
to inform evidence-based psychotherapy. Coherently with
previous accounts, our main take is that psychotherapy
“stimulates bayesian inference, enabling experience and feeling
states to be “metabolised” and assimilated [ . . .] without
being overwhelmed by psychic entropy” (Holmes and Nolte,
2019; p. 1).
Furthermore, the FEP is vitalistic, in the sense that it
postulates the existence of an intrinsic intentionality of living
systems (i.e., free energy minimisation; Bruineberg and Rietveld,
2014), which could be considered the formal biological basis
for the emergence of the representational intentionality or
“aboutness” in living systems (Ramstead et al., 2020; Wiese
and Friston, 2021), as well as for skilled intentionality
(Bruineberg and Rietveld, 2014; Kiverstein et al., 2020), i.e.,
the organism tendency towards an optimal grip on a ﬁeld
of aﬀordances (Merleau-Ponty, 2002). In Section “A Bridge
Between Gestalt Field Theory and the Free-Energy Principle, ”
we will further discuss how the systematic tension toward free
energy minimisation emerges in complex systems encompassing
more than one organism, as in the case of the therapeutic
situation. Indeed, the FEP is a theory focused on the
functioning of the boundary between the organism and the
environment, which does not take subjectivity for granted.
On the contrary, the FEP describes the inferential nature of
the cognitive processes underlying our sense of being a self
separated from the external environment. For this reason, FEP
intuitions might support the current transversal paradigmatic
shift beyond relational approaches toward ﬁeld theory in
psychotherapy (Francesetti, 2019b), a novel approach that
radically that takes into account the pre-subjective continuous
and indissoluble interaction between the organism and the
environment (Francesetti and Roubal, 2020).
Furthermore, in Section “Aesthetics and Knowledge/Change, ”
we aim at reviewing and discussing the experimental, theoretical
and neurocomputational evidence derived from experimental
aesthetics, neuroaesthetics and psychopharmacology
suggesting that: (1) aesthetics sensibility might have
evolved as an hedonic feedback from the process of
growth at the contact boundary between the organism and
the environment; (2) beauty perception motivates us to
momentarily tolerate uncertainty to change our internal
representation of the world and of our relation with the
latter (Sarasso et al., 2020a). Finally, we will discuss how
aesthetic sensibility could support therapeutic change in the
clinical setting. Current developments in neuroaesthetics
have indeed renewed the interest in the link between
knowledge/meaning and beauty (Sarasso et al., 2020a,
2021c), perhaps supporting the hypothesis that aesthetic
sensibility and competences are key factors for the success of the
therapeutic encounter.
Lastly, we included a brief glossary in Appendix A, should the
reader need additional information on speciﬁc terms.
SUFFERING OF EXPERIENCE:
GESTALT-PHENOMENOLOGICAL
APPROACH TO
PSYCHOPATHOLOGICAL FIELDS
The Field Perspective: A Dive Into the
Undifferentiated
The dominant medical approach in clinical psychotherapy and
psychiatry today makes use of abstract third-person descriptive
diagnosis and clinical protocols aiming at changing the way
the patient functions (Barron, 1998; Francesetti and Gecele,
2009). The risk of this approach is that the connections
between the symptoms and the environment fails to be grasped
and the transformative potential of suﬀering is overlooked or
silenced (Francesetti, 2019a). Apart from being problematic
on a clinical level (Bracken et al., 2012), this dominant
clinical approach possibly reﬂects a fundamentally erroneous
ontological conception of human nature, perhaps initiated
with Descartes (Damasio, 1994; Heiddeger and Boss, 2000): “a
disconnection, from the continuity with the original unitary
ﬁeld [ between the psychic and the social environment ] (Perls
et al., 1951, p. 271).” We propose that ﬁeld theory (Latner,
1983; Parlet, 1991; Yontef and Jacobs, 2005; Spagnuolo Lobb,
2013; Philippson, 2017; Francesetti and Roubal, 2020; Bloom,
2021) is currently a most promising attempt to overcome
these shortcomings.
We all have a natural experience of ourselves as selves
separated from the environment upon which we can act. Perls
et al. (1951, p. 263) deﬁne this mode of experience: “an
unavoidable illusion, empirically given in average experience, ”
while Husserl calls it the “natural attitude” (Husserl, 2012),
where objects are something given out there that I can
perceive as separate from me. However, along with selfhood,
the Self and the Other are incessant and unending processes
emerging from an undiﬀerentiated ground (Husserl, 2012),
where they are not yet deﬁned (Perls et al., 1951; Philippson,
2009; Bloom, 2019; Francesetti and Roubal, 2020). Subjects
are not given, but constantly emerge as an expression
of the situation (Philippson, 2009; Francesetti, 2019b) that
precedes them and that provides a constitutive momentum.
From a neuroscientiﬁc perspective, according to Damasio,
the ﬁrst step of this process is the proto-self, a stage
where perception is not deﬁned as mine yet; it becomes my
perception only in the second stage, that of the subjective-
self (Damasio, 2012). Metzger (1941) referred to this second-
stage outcome as the Endgestlat, which emerges from a diﬀuse,
undiﬀerentiated, and global initial perceptual moment called
Vorgestalten.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 3 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 4
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
As we will further discuss, recent neurocomputational
accounts of cognition conﬁrm the pre-subjective root of
perception and behaviour. Similarly to the phenomenological
perspective (Merleau-Ponty, 2002; Waldenfels, 2011;
Husserl, 2012; Alvim Botelho, 2016) and early Gestalt psychology
intuitions [see as an example the work by Metzger (1941)],
current neuroscientiﬁc perspectives see the representation of
subjects as separated from stable objects as the outcome of
an inferential perceptual process occurring at the “statistical”
boundary (i.e., the Markov blanket, see Section “Predictive
Coding Accounts of Aesthetic Appreciation”) between the
organism, or a system of sensorily coupled organisms,
and the environment (Friston, 2010; Hohwy, 2016). These
ﬁndings suggest that clinical theory and practice should
overcome the natural experience of the subject-object split
and investigate and take into account pre-subjective ﬁeld
dynamics. Indeed, diﬀerent theories across a wide variety
of clinical approaches (Ogden, 2003; Ferro and Civitavese,
2016; Bourguignon and Katz-Gilbert, 2018; Francesetti
and Roubal, 2020) are starting to recognise that in the
complex and chaotic (Francesetti, 2019a) psychotherapeutic
ﬁeld or situation, the forces and tensions that move the
therapist and the patient belong to the ﬁeld or situation itself.
These forces of the ﬁeld (Lewin, 2016) are intentionalities:
intrinsic tensions moving towards the fulﬁlment of the
potentialities of the situation (Francesetti and Roubal, 2020).
In metaphorical terms: “The forces belong to the situationó
it is not just about the client and it is not just about the
therapist. What emerges is diﬀerent from the sum of the
parts, in much the same way as when a molecule of oxygen
and two molecules of hydrogen meet and a new, unique
quality of water appears.” The group or dyad behaves as
a whole (Bion, 1961). The relationship between parts and
whole is one of mutual constraints which Tschacher and
Haken deﬁned as circular causality (Tschacher and Haken,
2007). That is why in the patient-therapist interaction, the
priority is not to distinguish “what is mine” from “what is
yours, ” what matters is to recognise the forces that provide
momentum to subjects and let them transform the ﬁeld
(Francesetti and Roubal, 2020).
Field forces push towards the kind of contact where the
potentialities of the ﬁeld can be developed, where the situation
dynamics can be transformed through the assimilation of novel
experiences (Francesetti and Roubal, 2020). We hypothesise
that ﬁeld intentionalities correspond to the tension aiming at
reducing entropy central to current accounts of perception,
cognition, and action (Friston, 2010; Clark, 2013; Hohwy,
2016). Entropy in a self-regulating lively system can be reduced
either through active sampling of sensory inputs, i.e., acting
according to previously acquired behavioural and perceptual
patterns, thereby leading the ﬁeld to a rigid given set of
states, or, alternatively, through the update of the predictive
representation of the sensory causes of stimuli. As we will
see in Section “A Bridge Between Gestalt Field Theory and
the Free-Energy Principle, ” the tension to minimise entropy
becomes shared as soon as two organisms synchronise: it
becomes a tension of the ﬁeld. Change must thus necessarily
go through a (aesthetic) dive into the shared pre-subjective
perceptual milieu.
Psychopathology: Growing With
Unprocessed Experiences
Without the pretence of being exhaustive, for the purpose of the
present paper, we will consider suﬀering not as an attribute of
an individual, but rather, as an emergent property (Francesetti,
2019a) of the ﬁeld in the therapeutic situation. In these terms,
suﬀering is the result of a rigidity of experiential possibilities
(Francesetti, 2019b). Perception, cognition, or emotion are
dulled or restricted and embodied aﬀective resonance (Fuchs
and Koch, 2014) is constrained by the limits intrinsic to the
psychopathological situation itself. This limited set of possible
and probable experiences becomes shared as soon as the patient
and therapist meet. They both suﬀer. Indeed, in the therapeutic
session, the psychopathological ﬁeld emerges as a sort of
landscape already inhabited by the patient and therapist, that
moves them (Pallaro, 2002; Fuchs and Koch, 2014) and can be
experienced as an atmosphere (Francesetti, 2019a). Although
psychopathological atmospheres ontologically do not exist as
“external objects, ” these almost-entities unfold between and
around subjects; they are actualised in complex systems and
permeate feelings, bodies, languages, narrations, and cultures
(Francesetti, 2015). Becoming aware of our somatosensory and
aﬀective resonances within psychopathological atmosphere is
crucial in Gestalt therapy (Francesetti, 2019a). Psychoanalysts
(Shaw, 2003), also see the therapist’s body as a vital element of the
therapeutic encounter and may refer to this awareness of how we
are “moving through and being moved” (Boston Change Process
Study Group, 2018) as somatic countertransference (Margarian,
2014): “the therapist’s awareness of their own body, of sensations,
images, impulses, and feelings that oﬀer a link to the client’s
healing process” (Orbach and Carroll, 2006, p. 64).
The etiopathogenesis of psychopathology is related to
functional adjustments (Zinker, 1977) that evolved to adapt
the organism or a system of organisms, such as a family
or community, to a diﬃcult situation (Francesetti, 2015).
Psychopathological ﬁelds are the result of our ability to creatively
adjust to what could not be fully experienced processed and
assimilated, because the organism-environment ﬁeld lacked the
necessary social support. When support from others is absent,
anesthetised feelings (typically solitude, sadness, anger, pain,
and terror) cannot be assimilated and remain as more or less
chaotic and disorganised sensorial footprints (Francesetti and
Roubal, 2020). Aﬀects are behavioural heuristics that allow
us to respond quickly and automatically to environmental
threats and opportunities (Damasio, 1996), while the conscious
experience of feelings permits us to change future plans and
expectations on ourselves and the world (Panksepp, 1998,
2010; Damasio, 2010), allowing for more ﬂexible and eﬀective
corrective measures than neural mapping of body-states alone
(Damasio and Carvalho, 2013). Not all aﬀects however are
able to become proper feelings when social support is missing.
Even at a neurophysiological level, the presence of others
can make us more or less attuned to sensory and aﬀective
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 4 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 5
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
uncertainty (Sarasso et al., 2022). For example, John Bowlby
described aﬀective detachment or denial as the last defensive
phase of early childhood abandonment (Bowlby, 1960). The
detachment system is activated when the attachment ﬁgure
remains unavailable for too long and grief and mourning become
unbearable; as a result, a psychopathological ﬁeld becomes
structured around the necessity to avoid feeling too much pain
(Francesetti and Griﬀero, 2019).
We have the ability to encapsulate unprocessed experiences
(somewhere else referred to as “non-represented bits of
experience”; Botella and Botella, 2004; Levine et al., 2013; Lord,
2017), in order to make them as less disturbing as possible but
this can result in the anesthetised dissociation between aﬀective
states and the experience of an emotion (Francesetti and Roubal,
2020). As an example, “peritraumatic dissociation” (Marmar
et al., 1994; van der Hart et al., 2008; Danböck et al., 2021), could
be considered as an outcome of such defensive self-anaesthesia
mechanisms driven by the autonomic system activation to protect
the organism (van der Hart, 2021).
Unprocessed experiences, however, do not simply disappear,
but remain inscribed in the experiential possibilities of a given
ﬁeld (Francesetti et al., 2020). Meanwhile, our habitudinal
behaviour, mood, and personality becomes structured around
the avoidance of certain experiences (Francesetti et al., 2020).
Sensorial footprints or proto-feelings continue to aﬀect the
body, to inﬂuence and stimulate perception and behavioural
reactivity along repetitive patterns. When we are immersed
in a repetitive experiential ﬁeld, either as a patient or as a
therapist, we don’t know the cause of our sensations and
behaviours, but still, we sense something is happening to
us (Francesetti, 2019a). Indeed, what is not assimilated and
transformed nevertheless emerges in the therapy situation,
together with the potentiality for its transformation, i.e., the
potentialities of taking a form. The more the proto-feelings
are unformulated, unspeakable and dissociated, the more they
push throughout our body to be actualised and appear as
something disturbing ( Unheimlich in Freud’s terms). When
entering psychopathological ﬁelds, as described by early gestalt
psychologists, we remain occupied by unﬁnished Gestalts
(Zeingarnik eﬀect; Denmark, 2010) and experience intrusions by
Gestalts that are not concluded ( Ovsiankina eﬀect; Oyama et al.,
2018).
Natura Sanat: The Role of Aesthetic
Attitude in Allowing Change
Nature, when allowed to, heals itself through change. In the
therapeutic ﬁeld, change is achieved by changing the therapist’s
attitude: how she or he is with the client. It is the way
therapists are bodily present with the client that is changed
in the healing process. It is only when we are not trying to
change the client that the dissociated proto-feelings can be
embodied and emerge (Roubal and Francesetti, 2022). It is the
ﬁeld intentionality of contacting that provides the fundamental
momentum for change in therapy and constantly pushes for
proto-feelings to become feelings (Roubal and Francesetti,
2022). As we will hypothesise in Section “I Know I Don’t
Know: Paradoxical Strive for Uncertainty, ” this might be due
to the fact that humans are equipped with second order
expectationsto assimilate ever greater levels of uncertainty into
their predictive models of the self and the environment. This
section will discuss how “beauty can supports us” (Francesetti,
2012; p. 10) in “knowing through feelings” (Francesetti,
2012; p. 5).
To accomplish this task, we also have a natural system
to assimilate novel experiences beyond repetitive experiential
patterns, thereby fulﬁlling ﬁeld potentialities when possible. The
contact intentionality of the ﬁeld, the tension to bring order
into intersubjective chaos (see Section “Merging Predictions in
the Pre-subjective Chaos”), urges us to feel and experience more
intensely. It is precisely at that moment that the therapist is
“lending her ﬂesh” (Francesetti, 2019b) to the ﬁeld’s forces so
that what was dismissed and left unformulated can become
a ﬁgural Gestalt. In that precise moment, the therapist is
seized by a proto-feeling that needs his or her body open to
experience it (Francesetti, 2019b). The fundamental working
hypothesis of the present paper is that the evolutionary tool
that allows us to “turn up the volume” of proto-feelings
and dismantle the repetitive organisation of an experiential
ﬁeld corresponds to our aesthetic sensibility [we called this
function the “aesthetic valve” in a previous paper, see Sarasso
et al. (2020a)]. Indeed, Gestalt therapy sees aesthetic sensibility
as a fundamental diagnostic tool signalling to the clinician
the suitability of the direction of therapy (Francesetti and
Gecele, 2009; Spagnuolo Lobb, 2013), i.e., whether the couple
is moving toward the assimilation of proto-feelings. If the
extrinsic diagnosis is a sort of map that orients the therapist
in diﬀerent psychopathological experiential landscapes, the
intrinsic aesthetic diagnosis provides a sense of direction.
When the structure of the ﬁeld changes and novelty is
assimilated, we experience beauty (Francesetti, 2012). As in
Gregory Bateson’s aesthetics, beauty and ugliness are related
to the incompleteness of a self-organising system structure.
Ugliness is a case of pathogenic blockage or confusion between
an information and the total system that is its overall context
(Harries-Jones, 2004).
Even before the beauty-feedback signal is sensed, the
expectation of beauty in the therapeutic encounter can
motivate the therapist to remain open to embody unformulated
intersubjective chaotic proto-experiences. The expectation of
beauty (we previously called it aesthetic attitude; Stolnitz, 1978;
Sarasso et al., 2020a) might sustain the ﬁeld intentionality to
assimilate ever deeper layers of sensory chaos. Similarly, Jungian
psychotherapists consider the aesthetic attitude as part of what
Jung called the transcendent function to create new symbolic
possibilities for the growth of consciousness (Beebe, 2010).
When assuming an aesthetic attitude, we can better tame our
instinctive reactions which are functions of the forces organising
the psychopathological ﬁeld. We actively inhibit our tendencies
to change the situation, we do nothing and allow whatever
is happening to us. In this way we may welcome what was
dissociated and remained unformulated. In this moment of full
acceptance of our feelings, the change has already started to
happen. On the contrary, as we will further discuss in Section
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 5 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 6
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
“Beauty Makes Us Curious (and Less Anxious)”: “When the
situation has too much novelty for us and we are not self-
supported enough as therapists, we start to be anxious. It is
because we do not know well enough who we are in that situation,
so we cannot lose ourselves for the moment. The personality
function is not supporting us enough to be taken by whatever
comes. As a result, we start to take care of ourselves forgetting
the client for the moment. Our interventionsówhich seem to be
made to help the clientóare in fact helping to calm down our
own anxiety” (Roubal and Francesetti, 2022).
AESTHETICS AND
KNOWLEDGE/CHANGE
Review of Theories Linking Aesthetics
and Knowledge Acquisition: From
Aristotle to Neuroaesthetics
Some recent aesthetics and neuroaesthetics theories consider
the aesthetic experience as a knowledge experience (Consoli,
2015). This interpretation is not new: starting with Aristotle and
throughout the Western thought, aesthetic emotions have been
related to knowledge and meaning-making. In Aristotle’s Poetics,
the philosopher aﬃrms: “to be learning something is the greatest
of pleasure [ . . .] The reason in delight in seeing a picture is
that one is at the same time learning-gathering the meaning
of things” (Tracy, 1946, p. 43). Modern aesthetics itself as a
discipline has seen its rise following the romantic re-evaluation of
the senses and corporality in the study of knowledge acquisition
processes (Gross, 2002). German philosopher Baumgarten (1735)
ﬁrst deﬁned aesthetics ( epistêmê aisthetikê , i.e., aesthetics, the
science of what is sensed) as “the science of sensory knowledge
directed toward beauty” (Berleant, 2015, p. 1). Baumgarten’s
aesthetics was later extended to the interpretation of sensory
experience by Kant, who ﬁrst linked aesthetic emotions with
the correspondence between mental models and the world
(Perlovsky, 2010). Schopenhauer further developed this concept
and claimed that during aesthetic experiences the beholder
becomes a “pure will-less, painless, timeless subject of knowledge”
(Schopenhauer, 1969; p. 179).
Philosopher of art Monroe Beardsley (1981) ﬁrst explicitly
described aesthetic appreciation in terms of a cognitive process.
He suggested that aesthetic experiences occur when attention
is ﬁrmly focused on the perceptual features of the object
(Markovi´c, 2012). Similarly, according to the philosopher Dewey,
aesthetic experiences maintain the attentional focus of the
perceivers on the ever-changing present moment and thus
prevent the engagement in routinely and mechanical interactions
with the environment (Stroud, 2010). Dewey proposed that
during “transformative aesthetic experiences, ” perception is fully
receptive, and it replaces the mere recognition of objects (Girod
and Wong, 2005), including other individuals (Pappas, 2008).
More recently, drawing from experimental evidence,
Menninghaus and colleagues proposed the Distancing-
Embracing model (Menninghaus et al., 2017): during aesthetic
experiences, the transient suspension of prototypical motor
responses, resulting from perceivers’ absence of personal goals
and environmental threats, makes room for a higher intensity
of the felt sensations and emotions. “Moving” gives way to
“being moved” (Fuchs and Koch, 2014; Menninghaus et al.,
2015; Vuoskoski and Eerola, 2017). Such “aesthetic presence”
enables observers to direct attention to perception for its own
sake, with the subjectively felt intensity of present sensation and
emotions being a reward on its own right (Menninghaus et al.,
2019). Aesthetic experiences might thus be characterised by the
shift of attentional deployment toward sensory input perceptual
features which overcomes the automatic motor programming
driven by semantic stimulus contents (Cupchik et al., 2009;
Sarasso et al., 2020a). This is how Tellegen and Atkinson (1974)
deﬁned absorption: episodes of ampliﬁed attention that fully
engage the subject’s perceptual resources and lead to self-altering
experiences (Markovi ´c, 2012). As we discussed in Section
“Natura Sanat: The Role of Aesthetic Attitude in Allowing
Change, ” aesthetic perception might not be concerned with
the extrinsic homeostatic and utilitarian value of stimuli, but
rather with the intrinsic quality (i.e., informational value) of
the aesthetic object itself (Markovi ´c, 2012). Neuroaesthetics
describes this aspect of aesthetic perception as disinterested
interest and relates it to the activation of the “liking-without
wanting” neural network (Chatterjee and Vartanian, 2014;
Berridge and Kringelbach, 2015; Sarasso et al., 2020a).
Similary, Gallese’s “liberated embodied simulation” theory
proposes that aesthetic appreciation may be induced by enhanced
mirror system activation (Gallese, 2017, 2018), underlying the
empathic resonance with the emotional content of works of
art and interpersonal communication (Freedberg and Gallese,
2007; Gallese and Sinigaglia, 2011). Embodied simulation, which
the author hypothesises to be central in psychotherapy as well
(Gallese et al., 2007), is “liberated” during aesthetic experiences,
in the sense that it is free from threats and urgencies (Gallese,
2018). The potentiation of mirror mechanisms may be obtained
via the inhibition of motor responses: “immobility, that is, a
greater degree of motor inhibition, probably allows us to allocate
more neural resources, intensifying the activation of bodily-
formatted representations, and in so doing, making us adhere
more intensely to what we are simulating” (Gallese, 2017, p. 48).
Indeed, the primary motor cortex was shown to be more strongly
activated when participants viewed paintings (Kawabata and
Zeki, 2004) or sculptures (Di Dio et al., 2007) they rated as
ugly. The correlation between motor inhibition and aesthetic
appreciation of musical sounds was also found in the auditory
domain by Sarasso et al. (2019).
From a more “cognitive” standpoint, other researchers who
studied insight phenomena have claimed that creation and
manipulation of sense/meaning itself should be rewarding
(Ramachandran and Hirstein, 1999). Having an insight into
perceptual Gestalts per se might be suﬃcient to trigger aesthetic
pleasure (Muth and Carbon, 2013). Since Gestalts can be
seen as predictive representations of the environment (Van de
Cruys and Wagemans, 2011a), as we will further explore in
Section “Experimental Evidence Linking Aesthetic Pleasure and
Learning, ” the link between insight (i.e., the formation of a
new Gestalt) and beauty perception is central for our purpose
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 6 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 7
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
of bridging the gap between Gestalt accounts of aesthetics in
psychotherapy and neuroaesthetics models based on the FEP.
According to Schoeller and Perlovsky (2016) and Perlovsky
and Schoeller (2019) aesthetic emotions are related to the
satisfaction or dissatisfaction of the so-called Knowledge Instinct,
i.e., the drive to acquire knowledge about the external and
internal world and perceive events as meaningful (Perlovsky,
2010). Beauty is perceived when the everlasting reﬁnement of the
mental representation of the world reduces the overall dissonance
of the cognitive system (Perlovsky, 2010). The formal theory of
aesthetics proposed by Schmidhuber (2009) similarly posits that
the subjective aesthetic value of a stimulus depends on previously
stored knowledge and the steepness of the learning curve
(Schmidhuber, 2009). Altogether, as we will further explore in
Section “Experimental Evidence Linking Aesthetic Pleasure and
Learning” recent computational accounts of aesthetics suggest
that liking is a function of the subjective process of going from
a state of high uncertainty to a state of lower uncertainty (Van de
Cruys and Wagemans, 2011b; Van de Cruys, 2017).
Experimental Evidence Linking Aesthetic
Pleasure and Learning
Gestalt Effects, Insight, and Semantic Priming
Having an insight into images (the so-called “aha moment”;
Friston et al., 2017; Van de Cruys et al., 2021) can be
conceptualised as a form of intrinsic reward causing the
appreciation of visual images and fostering memory formation
(Van de Cruys et al., 2021). Muth and Carbon (2013)
demonstrated that liking signiﬁcantly increased after having an
insight for a Mooney image. Similarly in a previous study the
authors found a strong relationship between the detectability
of objects (the formation of a clear Gestalt) in cubist paintings
and likings (Muth et al., 2013). This suggests that information
gains reducing the uncertainty associated to sensory inputs
are at the core of aesthetic experiences. When, starting from
entropic and ambiguous sensations, sensory inputs are well-
explained by the perceived gestalts, our brain generates an
hedonic feedback (Van de Cruys et al., 2021). The disambiguation
of uncertain stimuli might also result in the subjective experience
of processing ﬂuency (Graf and Landwehr, 2017). Graf and
Landwehr’s Pleasure-Interest Model of Aesthetic Liking (Graf
and Landwehr, 2015) assumes that the experience of ﬂuent
perceptual processing triggers aesthetic pleasure while the
reduction of disﬂuency elicits aesthetic interest. Insight into a
Gestalt corresponds to a processing ﬂuency gain which is known
to be associated to positive aﬀect (Topolinski and Reber, 2010).
The link between likings and meaning-making might also explain
why a meaningful prime (reducing uncertainty high up in the
cognitive hierarchy) makes the subsequent aesthetic experience
more pleasurable than an incoherent Chomsky prime (a sentence
devoid of meaning; Schoeller and Perlovsky, 2016).
Simulation Theories and Motor Priming
Meaning-making, however, is not a prerogative of sensory and
cognitive disembodied processes. The motor system is not just a
mere movement controller, but an integral part of our cognitive
system (Gallese and Lakoﬀ, 2005). In simple terms, we “know”
also through motor simulation. As demonstrated by mirror
neuron research (Rozzi et al., 2006; Rizzolatti and Fogassi,
2014), we make sense of our experience also through motor
resonance encoded in the activation of subset of cross-modal
sensorimotor neurons (Gallese et al., 1996; Freedberg and Gallese,
2007; Keysers et al., 2010). We understand others and objects’
aﬀordances because we possess an internal motor representation
of what we observe (Umiltà et al., 2001; Rizzolatti and Sinigaglia,
2010). Such “embodied simulation” is also essentially implicated
in aesthetic experiences (Freedberg and Gallese, 2007; Cross
et al., 2011; Gallese, 2017). Motor simulation underpins an
empathic response contributing to aesthetic appreciation (Ticini
et al., 2015; Kirsch et al., 2016). In line with this view, during
the observation of paintings as compared to modiﬁed, non-
artistic stimuli, transcranial magnetic stimulation (Battaglia et al.,
2011), fMRI (Lutz et al., 2013), and EEG (Umilta’ et al.,
2012; Sbriscia-Fioretti et al., 2013) studies revealed greater
activation of fronto-parietal areas, known to match motoric
models of action execution with action observation (Rizzolatti
and Craighero, 2004). Interestingly, it seems that the strength
of motor resonances and the ease of the simulation correlate
with aesthetic appreciation. As an example, it has been shown
that mimicking the emotional expression depicted in classic
portraits increases their liking, in those individuals reporting
higher disposition to identify with others (Ardizzi et al., 2020;
Finisguerra et al., 2021). Furthermore, Leder et al. (2012)
demonstrated that participants’ aesthetic appreciation of canvases
was enhanced after they performed actions that matched an
artist’s painting style; even the observation of static images
depicting the actions corresponding to painting styles (e.g.,
pointillist-style dabbing of paint) produces the same eﬀect.
Indeed, the aesthetic appreciation of paintings is enhanced by
priming canvases with photos of actions that match the artist’s
painting style (Ticini et al., 2014). Altogether, this evidence
suggests a possible link between motoric simulation, empathy,
and the observer’s aesthetic appreciation (Gernot et al., 2018). In
sum, an insightful understanding of what we observe is strongly
linked with aesthetic sensibility, irrespective of the sensory or
motor nature of the representation conveying meaning.
Beauty-Driven Modulation of Electrophysiological
Indexes of Perceptual Learning
In a series of experiments (Sarasso et al., 2021a,b) we found
that widely acknowledged electrophysiological indexes of implicit
perceptual learning of sensory regularities, such as the mismatch
negativity (MMN), were enhanced for subjectively more
appreciated musical chords. The MMN negativity is a diﬀerential
wave obtained by subtracting EEG responses to standard events
to those elicited by deviant events. The MMN captures the
magnitude of the update of the predictive representation of
upcoming stimuli (Lieder et al., 2013). Interestingly, in the same
study (Sarasso et al., 2021a) we found that trial-by-trial MMN
responses to more appreciated chords were more strongly related
to Bayesian Surprise, an information-theoretic index quantifying
the magnitude of the update of Bayesian beliefs following each
sound. This means that during aesthetic appreciation our brain
is more attuned with sensory surprise and that surprising stimuli
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 7 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 8
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
trigger greater updates of mental representation encoded in the
neural hierarchy. Electrophysiological results were associated
with better memorisation for more appreciated musical intervals
(Sarasso et al., 2021b). As we will further explore in the
following paragraph, this is likely to be mediated by the role of
dopaminergic reward, signalling information gains, in learning
and memory consolidation (Kang et al., 2009; Ferreri et al., 2019).
It is worth noticing that the direction of the causal link between
beauty perception and enhanced learning is still to be determined
and not necessarily one-way (Sarasso et al., 2020a): as we will
argue in the following paragraphs, the reward signal of aesthetic
pleasure could be considered both a feedback and a trigger of
perceptual learning.
Aesthetic Pleasure and Informational Value Share a
Common Neurobiological Substrate
Reducing uncertainty is intrinsically rewarding (Bromberg-
Martin et al., 2010; Oudeyer et al., 2016; Brydevall et al., 2018)
and elicits dopamine transmission in reward related neural
networks (Bromberg-Martin and Hikosaka, 2009; Brydevall
et al., 2018). Indeed, informational value correlates with the
activation of dopaminergic midbrain reward-related structures
(Schwartenbeck et al., 2016). It was found (Bromberg-Martin
and Hikosaka, 2009) that dopaminergic transmission signals
the quantity of information conveyed by a task-relevant cue
in a cue signalling task. The intrinsic value of information
encoded by activations in reward-related areas is central to the
adaptive function of curiosity which optimally redirects energy
from goal-oriented behaviour to exploration and learning about
the environment (Schwartenbeck et al., 2019). Interestingly,
activations in the reward circuit substantially overlap with
the ones that correlate with aesthetic appreciation (Blood and
Zatorre, 2001; Cela-Conde et al., 2004; Kawabata and Zeki,
2004; Vartanian and Goel, 2004; Jacobsen et al., 2006). The
involvement of the dopaminergic reward-related neural system
in aesthetic pleasure is further demonstrated by the fact that the
dopamine precursor levodopa, compared with placebo, increases
the pleasure derived from music listening, while the dopamine
antagonist risperidone leads to a reduction of aesthetic pleasure
(Ferreri et al., 2019). Interestingly, the pleasure of music listening
mediated by the activation of subcortical structures, like the
Nucleus Accumbens, is signiﬁcantly related to the intrinsic
self-induced reward triggered by learning musical structures
(Gold et al., 2019a,b). Mencke et al. (2019), as an example,
explored the appreciation of atonal music and found a consistent
relationship with learning mechanisms. The authors suggested
that the dopaminergic activity subtending aesthetic pleasure may
mediate the reward generated in response to representational
models’ reﬁnement (Mencke et al., 2019). Moreover, as indicated
by studies in primates, dopaminergic activity in the reward-
related network, is observed in correspondence to a certain
degree of uncertainty, whereas it is lacking when the upcoming
input is completely predictable (Fiorillo et al., 2003) and carries
no novel information (Gold et al., 2019b). In other words,
this dopaminergic-based reward mechanism may intrinsically
motivate to acquire new (i.e., surprising) information (Koelsch,
2010; Ferreri et al., 2019), thus supporting the individual to
tolerate the distress deriving from uncertainty and to focus on
learning-oriented perception (Cheung et al., 2019; Gold et al.,
2019a; Koelsch et al., 2019; Mencke et al., 2019).
Pain, Beauty, and the Psychopharmacology of the
Endogenous Opioid System
Opioids, besides their commonly acknowledged (Machelska and
Celik, 2018; Kandasamy et al., 2021) role in pharmacological
analgesia (morphine is a mu-opioid agonist) and their less
obvious role in attentional analgesia (self-induced mental
distraction from pain; Esch et al., 2017; Oliva et al., 2021), placebo
analgesia and pain empathy (Rütgen et al., 2015) have a broader
and fundamental role in human sensibility and information
acquisition. In general, mu-opioid activity balances pain and
pleasure across sensory modalities (Meier et al., 2021).
Additionally, the brain’ crave for information (infovore
behaviour) through the senses might be mediated by the opioid
system (Schoeller and Perlovsky, 2016). Mu-opioid transmission
signals the quantity of information conveyed by stimuli and
might result in perceptual pleasure (Nadal, 2013). Indeed, beside
the well-acknowledged involvement of the mu-opioid receptor
system in the rewarding qualities of pleasant touch (L¯seth et al.,
2019), opioids might mediate perceptual pleasure across diﬀerent
sensory modalities (Mallik et al., 2017). Biederman and Vessel
(2006) propose that inferentially rich stimuli will be preferred
because they are accompanied by more activity in regions higher
up in the ventral visual stream, which possess higher amounts
of mu-opioid receptors. The release of endomorphins and the
stimulation of mu-opioid receptors might correlate with the
informational value conveyed by stimulation (Biederman and
Vessel, 2006), which in turn might activate the limbic hedonic
hot-spots in reward-related areas (Lacey et al., 2011; Nadal, 2013).
According to these authors, the mu-opioid receptors are essential
for the pleasures we derive from acquiring new information.
Indeed, the limbic system might underly the experience of
“liking” (Berridge and Kringelbach, 2015), which is mediated by
opioids and endocannabinoid activations in the ventral globus
pallidus and in the Nucleus Accumbens (Berridge et al., 2009;
Berridge and Kringelbach, 2015). Indeed, this system has been
suggested to be involved in aesthetic appreciation (Nadal, 2013).
Evidence from psychopharmacological studies conﬁrms this
suggestion (Sarasso et al., 2020a). As an example, the opioid
antagonist naltrexone dampens pupil responses to peak musical
pleasure (Laeng et al., 2021). Coherently with this idea, aesthetic
chills (i.e., non-thermoregulatory hedonic shivering) can be
inﬂuenced by the opioid-antagonist naloxone (Goldstein, 1980),
which is known to modulate stress-related amnesic mechanisms,
retention and learning performances in rats (Izquierdo, 1982;
Saha et al., 1991; Sajadi et al., 2007). Indeed, the motivational
component of learning seems deﬁcient in mu-opiod knockout
mice (Lubbers et al., 2007). Opioid peptides are mediators of
an endogenous amnesic mechanism in rats: the strength of
learning is dependent upon the release of these substances
(Izquierdo et al., 1980). Humans are naturally equipped with a
similar endogenous analgesic and amnesic mechanism, based on
opioids transmission, which mitigates the eﬀects of the exposure
to severe painful and disturbing experiences (Lanius, 2014).
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 8 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 9
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
Importantly, the defensive mechanism of distancing from
disturbing experiences may be progressively reduced during
psychotherapy, with the consequence of making the patient
feeling pain again. According to the Gestalt therapeutic approach,
this process may have therapeutic eﬀects and ﬁnally lead to
the perception of beauty (Francesetti, 2012). Coherently, it is
not surprising that the same pharmacological modiﬁcations
that alter our ability to appreciate beauty can inﬂuence the
perception and tolerance of pain. Crucially, opioid blockade
via Naloxone can increase pain perception (Anderson et al.,
2002), decrease pain tolerance and alter attentional analgesic
mechanisms (Esch et al., 2017).
In sum, the large overlap between the biochemistry of aesthetic
pleasure and perceptual learning (as well as togetherness and
social support as we will discuss in Section “A Bridge Between
Gestalt Field Theory and the Free-Energy Principle”) supports
the link between beauty and learning, even when learning means
experiencing painful or distressing feelings.
Predictive Coding Accounts of Aesthetic
Appreciation
We Are Embodied Models of Our World
The breakdown of the empiricist paradigm led to consider
organisms (and brains) in terms of their complexity, with an
emphasis on self-determination and self-organisation, as well as
on the organisms’ active, open, and plastic course of evolution
and growth (Guidano, 1991; Mahoney, 1991). The Free Energy
Principle (FEP) and its neural implementation-Predictive Coding
(PC)-are the two conceptual frameworks that consider the
cognitive system in these terms, i.e., not as a passive information
processor, but as an enactive (Varela et al., 2017) inferential
foreseer of reality. The following paragraph will give a general
introduction to the FEP and PC.
Drawing from Helmholtz’ notion of unconscious inference
(Hatﬁeld, 2002), PC describes the brain as a scientist making
observations, taking in data, and generating and updating
hypotheses based on that data (Hohwy, 2016). PC is derived from
the free energy principle (Feldman and Friston, 2010; Friston,
2010; Clark, 2013), which posits that living self-regulatory
systems must necessarily minimise variational free energy (a
function of entropy) to remain alive. Analogously to Varela’s
autopoietic cellular processes (Varela et al., 1974; Maturana and
Varela, 1980), FEP assumes that life forms must actively construct
and maintain themselves to counteract the tendency to disorder
(the second law of thermodynamics) in a stochastic and entropic
environment. This requires organisms to stay within a limited
set of states corresponding to their phenotype and econiche. As
an example, an epithelial cell will maintain a given form and
dimension, just as a seagull will spend most of his time out of
the water. Contrarily, a ﬁsh will stay mostly underwater, for the
simple reason that a ﬁsh that spends most of his time out of the
water is a dead ﬁsh. In this sense an agent is a model of its world.
Minimising free energy (formally, the upper bound on surprise)
means to minimise surprising sensory states, e.g., in case of a ﬁsh,
to stay out of water. Another way of saying this is that life forms
must minimise the uncertainty related to the states they occupy.
Again, it is not adaptive for a ﬁsh to be uncertain regarding
the probabilities of being in or out of water. This autopoietic
(Friston, 2013) process of seeking a limited number of “attractor”
states is called (local) ergodicity (Ramstead et al., 2018). The
main insight of the free energy principle is that ergodicity is
an intrinsic property of self-regulating biological systems that
emerges through modelling the world (Friston, 2010; Hirsh et al.,
2012). Gestalt therapy similarly hypothesises that self-regulation
leads to a limited set of modes and that novelty is sometimes
resisted: “the resistance protects him [the patient] by ensuring
that his habitual mode of self-regulation remains intact” (Yontef
and Jacobs, 2005; p. 311).
The simplest self-regulatory mechanism in stationary
organisms such as plants corresponds to homeostasis, which
keeps the internal milieu constant. Movement, however, brings
in the need for modelling future states (Van de Cruys and
Wagemans, 2011a). Animals move and act in the environment
to eat and ﬁnd shelter. Homeostasis thus requires non-stationary
life forms to predict future states and upcoming stimuli.
Therefore animals, especially those on the higher end of the
evolutionary scale, whose predictive capabilities are greatly
enhanced, constantly make predictions by inferring the causes
of sensations. These predictions, or predictive representations,
constitute a hierarchical generative model of the hidden causes of
the sensations (i.e., states of the world; Friston, 2003). Similarly
to Gestalt therapy, PC entails a boundary between the mind
and the “real world, ” which in principle cannot be directly
accessed but only guessed. The concept of a “Markov blanket”
(comprising action and sensory states) provides a formal basis
for this boundary that separates internal (mental) representation
and external hidden states (Hohwy, 2016). External states are
hidden from internal states in the sense that they can only be
seen indirectly by virtue of their causal dependencies. Biological
systems are ergodic dynamical systems that possess a Markov
blanket (Gallagher and Allen, 2018). The function of a Markov
blanket is to minimise the diﬀerence between the generative
model of the world (i.e., the predictive representation of the
causes of sensory inputs) and incoming sensory data (Friston,
2013). To simplify, we could say that we constantly make and
update a predictive representation of our environment (Friston
and Kiebel, 2009), our bodies and future actions (Limanowski
et al., 2018). Conscious perception, and even our sense of being
a self (Limanowski and Blankenburg, 2013; Limanowski and
Friston, 2018), is the best explanation (or best prediction) we can
come up with of sensory data (Havlík et al., 2017). In this sense,
we and the world that surrounds us are nothing but inferences
constantly drawn from somatosensory embodied processes
(Limanowski and Blankenburg, 2013).
The long-term imperative of minimising surprising sensory
states is thereby achieved in the short term via the minimisation
of prediction errors (Friston, 2010), i.e., the mismatches between
actual and predicted states. Both action and perception aim
at minimising prediction errors, either by changing the world
or by changing our internal representation of it, respectively.
Perception “explains away” prediction errors by adjusting
predictions according to unpredicted sensations. This is called
predictive coding (PC). Along the neural hierarchy, “conditional
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 9 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 10
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
expectations of perceptual causes” or predictions (priors) are
generated and transmitted from higher associative areas to lower
levels, where they are compared with incoming inputs. These
“top-down” predictions inhibit “bottom-up” sensory inputs that
are coherent with them, leaving only the unpredicted mismatches
between predicted and incoming data (i.e., prediction errors) to
propagate from lower areas upward along the sensory hierarchy.
PC shares many intuitions with Gestalt therapy. As an example,
in their foundational book on Gestalt therapy published in
1951, Perls, Heﬀerline, and Goodman reported the following
description of the intentionality of contacting, which might
sound similar to what we just described here: “Now what is
selected and assimilated is always novel. The organism persists
assimilating the novel, by change and growth [ . . .] what is
“unlike” that becomes “like”; and in the process of assimilation
the organism is in turn changed. Primarily, contact is the
awareness of, and behaviour toward the assimilable novelty; and
the rejection of the unassimilable novelty. What is pervasive,
always the same or indiﬀerent is not an object of contact” (Perls
et al., 1951; p. 230).
Alternatively, action reduces prediction errors by actively
ensuring that predictions are fulﬁlled. When we act we sample
sensory inputs so that they conform to predictions (i.e., active
inference). According to this principle the action-perception
cycle is a matter of uncertainty reduction (Sarasso et al., 2020a),
or as Humberto Maturana claimed: life should be understood as
a process of knowing (Ruiz, 1996).
A crucial question then emerges, which might be of interest
also for the study of change processes in psychotherapy. In the
words of Karl Friston: “If proprioceptive prediction errors can
be resolved by classical reﬂexes or changing (proprioceptive)
expectations, how does the brain adjudicate between these two
options?” We previously described aesthetic appreciation as a
feedback signalling the transient (informational) proﬁtability of
directing neural resources to changing predictive representations
rather than acting based on previous routines (Sarasso et al.,
2020a, 2021c). For this reason, as we will discuss in the following
paragraphs, the perception of beauty might be intimately linked
with therapeutic change.
Affect and Predictions: “I Feel Good, I Knew That I
Would, Now”
Agents in a volatile environment are not only equipped with
predictions but also with second-order predictions regarding
the accumulated evidence in favour of their predictions. This
“how am I doing” might be intimately linked with aﬀect (Hesp
et al., 2021). Emotions and moods provide feedback of our
coping eﬃcacy in the interaction with the environment (Frijda,
1986; Reisenzein, 2009; Clark et al., 2018) and are hypothesised
to have the adaptive role of adjusting learning rates according
to environmental changes (Joﬃly and Coricelli, 2013). Rates
of mismatch reduction relative to behavioural goals (i.e., the
distance between a desired state such as drinking water, and
the current state) have long been proposed to be at the root of
emotional valence, the positive-negative dimension of emotions
(Carver and Scheier, 1990). However, since goals are only one
important type of prior expectations (desired states are just
one among many types of expected states) we can generalise
this view and hypothesise that aﬀects such as pleasure and
distress reﬂect the dynamics in prediction error reduction (Joﬃly
and Coricelli, 2013). According to this view, emotional valence
relates to conﬁdence in one’s own internal model of the world
(Bodenhausen et al., 1994; Gasper and Clore, 2002; Seth and
Friston, 2016; Badcock et al., 2017; Clark et al., 2018). In
computational terms, emotional valence corresponds to the rate
of change of free-energy over time (proper emotions such as fear
or hope can only be explained once the second time-derivative of
free-energy is taken into account; Joﬃly and Coricelli, 2013).
Unpleasant emotions arise when free energy (uncertainty)
increases over time. On the contrary, when PE reduce over time,
we experience a positive aﬀect (Van de Cruys, 2017): we feel good
when the ﬁrst time-derivative of free energy is negative (Joﬃly
and Coricelli, 2013). “We are happy when we are growing” as the
Irish poet Yeats wrote, which, in Gestaltic terms, means that we
are happy when we are assimilating and integrating novelty at the
contact boundary between the organism and the environment.
As it has been already suggested above, and as will be further
discussed in the next paragraph, aesthetic pleasure might have a
fundamental epistemic role in uncertainty reduction dynamics.
What we are suggesting here is that, in a sense, all kinds of
pleasures have an epistemic status since they might be related to
prediction error reduction.
Beauty as a Meta-Learning Feedback From
Prediction Error Dynamics
As many enactivists (Noë, 2005) suggest, perception does not
serve only for recognition and identiﬁcation, but “is also
reward-oriented, hedonic, aesthetic, and aﬀective in the broadest
senseóand in ways that suggest that we may enjoy (and seek)
perceptual surprise” (Gallagher and Allen, 2018). Biological and
artiﬁcial intelligent systems must develop an intrinsic feedback
on learning gains in order to recognise stimuli which maximise
epistemic value, to direct attention to informative and “learnable”
stimuli and to modulate the active sampling of sensory input
(Gottlieb et al., 2013). For this purpose, the brain generates
intrinsic reward to learnable and novel stimuli with high
informational content (Oudeyer et al., 2007). Experiences are
indeed more pleasurable when they can be assimilated while still
providing novel information to the observer (Biederman and
Vessel, 2006). This hypothesis has been recently demonstrated by
Grzywacz and Aleem (2022) who have shown that the absolute
quantity of information computed as “Fisher information” (a
measure of uncertainty-reducing information quantifying “how
much can be learned” from a sensory stimulus) can modulate
aesthetic preferences for certain sensory patterns.
In terms of FEP the information conveyed by stimuli is
quantiﬁed by the magnitude in the update of beliefs brought by
prediction errors, which can be computed as the information-
theoretic index named Bayesian surprise (Baldi and Itti, 2010).
As it has been suggested before, we hypothesise that beauty is
how we experience the update of beliefs which “explains away”
prediction errors (Sarasso et al., 2020a). Since Gestalts can be
thought as speciﬁc predictions (prior beliefs in Bayesian terms)
used by the visual system to eﬃciently disambiguate visual input
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 10 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 11
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
(Costa and Wagemans, 2021), we could alternatively say that
we ﬁnd something beautiful when a new Gestalt brings order
into chaos. Therefore, the “achievement of a strong Gestalt”
(Perls et al., 1951, p. 232) guided by aesthetic criteria at the root
of the therapeutic intervention corresponds to a large update
in prior beliefs which we are naturally equipped to sense as
beautiful (Sarasso et al., 2020a). Aesthetic pleasure, however, can
only follow an eﬀortful tolerance of deﬁed predictability (Van de
Cruys and Wagemans, 2011b): “The eﬀort of mental work one
has to do to cope with the prediction error is a condition sine
qua non-for receiving perceptual pleasure of a Gestalt formation
(prediction error reduction)” (Kesner, 2014; p. 6). This resonates
with the idea that aesthetic experiences are both disruptive and
transformative at the same time (Pelowski and Akiba, 2011;
Kesner, 2014).
Similar ideas have been put forward by numerous authors. Van
de Cruys et al. (2021) further emphasise that meta-predictions
on the expected learning rate should also be taken into account:
both the gradient and the unexpectedness of prediction error
reduction are crucial for experiencing pleasurable aesthetic
emotions. Intense aesthetic appreciations mark unexpected
increases in error reduction rates (Van de Cruys and Wagemans,
2011b; Van de Cruys, 2017). Chetverikov and Kristjánsson
(2016), diﬀerently propose that it is not necessary to consider
meta-predictions in the genesis of positive aesthetic emotions
in response to prediction error reduction. According to these
authors, the update of perceptual predictions yields hedonic
feedback that is inversely weighted with prior probabilities (the
probability assigned to a given prediction before stimulation and
the consequent update in predictions) of these newly acquired
predictions, so that in highly predictable environments correct
predictions will trigger only mild positive aﬀect, while new
predictions in unpredictable environments are marked with a
strong positive aﬀect. What matters is not prediction error
reduction per se , but learning, since the magnitude of the
update of predictions (distance between priors before and after
stimulation) depends on its prior probability.
The proposed link between predictive processing dynamics,
knowledge acquisition, and the experience of beauty raised
several concerns among those who consider aesthetic experiences
mainly as an emotional rather than a cognitive/epistemic
experience (Armstrong and Detweiler-Bedell, 2008; Brielmann
et al., 2021). It is worth to acknowledge that the hypothesis
linking prediction error reduction and aesthetic appreciation is
susceptible to be misinterpreted as purely cognitive, or “un-
empathic” (Sarasso et al., 2020a). As we discussed in Sarasso
et al. (2020a), this interpretation is incorrect, as prediction
errors do not necessarily fall within what is usually considered
as the cognitive domain. Indeed, predictive coding deﬁes the
classic distinction between cognitive/conceptual and aﬀective
domains (Barrett, 2017). Aﬀects result from one special kind of
interoceptive inference which leads to predictions and prediction
errors as any other perceptual or cognitive act (Seth, 2013).
Similarly, embodied sensory-motor resonances are conveyed
by prediction errors in mirror areas and can result in the
update of predictions just as any other sensory information
(Kilner et al., 2007). The update of predictions can therefore
correlate with feelings at a phenomenological level and do
not necessarily trigger changes along more abstract and verbal
hierarchies of the generative model. Along these lines, if we
conceive knowledge as the result of an embodied, enactive and
emotional experience (Immordino-Y ang and Damasio, 2007;
Fuchs and Koch, 2014), the possible link between learning and
beauty perception becomes less “cognitive” and more “empathic”
(Gallese and Sinigaglia, 2011; Stamatopoulou, 2017).
I Know I Don’t Know: Paradoxical Strive for
Uncertainty
Nietzsche ﬁrst evidenced the ambiguity and paradoxical nature
of knowledge acquisition for “the seeker of knowledge forces his
spirit to recognise things against the inclination of the spirit”
(Nietzsche, 2010; p. 259). For Nietzsche “knowledge appears
as renunciation of the happiness of a sturdy and vigorous
illusion” (Nietzsche, 1982; p. 184). FEP posits that the brain
abhors informational surprise and that it minimises it by (A)
acting, enhancing the statistical likelihood of sensory samples,
or else (B) by revising inferences in the light of experience and
updating “priors” to reality-aligned “posteriors”; (C) optimising
the complexity of our generative models of the causes of
ambiguous sensations. Although, as explained above, our brain
is in the game of maximising the evidence of its internal model
of the world while minimising the uncertainty associated to
sensory states (i.e., prediction errors), organisms and especially
humans do not avoid all uncertainty. In principle, prediction
error minimisation, by generating action-perception cycles that
minimise surprising interactions with the world, would lead us
to seek out for stimulus-free dark rooms (the so-called dark
room paradox; Friston et al., 2012b). Lively organisms, however,
do not actually look for complete absence of prediction errors
by taking refuge in dark rooms, for the simple reason that
dark rooms would result into highly unpredictable states, since
humans developed both phylogenetically and ontogenetically
in an econiche that is very diﬀerent from a dark room (Sun
and Firestone, 2020). On the contrary, experience teaches us
to expect to encounter and “explain away” prediction errors
(Chetverikov and Kristjánsson, 2016; Van de Cruys, 2017).
McReynolds (1971) argued that humans maintain an expected
rate of cognitive experience (the process of assimilation of new
percepts into mental models) through exploration. The two
drives of such intrinsic cognitive motivation have been identiﬁed
by McReynolds as the minimisation of “unassimilated perceptual
material” and the optimisation of innovation rate (update of
mental models). In mathematical terms, since birth we build
second-order expectations over the (positive) rate of prediction
error reduction. We track and learn to expect certain non-zero
rates of change in prediction errors, which makes us inclined to
explore and learn (Van de Cruys, 2017).
The paradoxical search for learning gains is adaptive (Oudeyer
et al., 2016): “The paradox is that expecting uncertainty and
inviting chaos (what we could call radical curiosity) can lead one
to perceive new layers of regularities in reality” (Van de Cruys
et al., 2021, p. 31). We need to encounter some prediction errors
to get better at predicting our environment. In other words, to
survive as individuals and as a specie, we need to expect to keep
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 11 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 12
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
learning something new. In this sense, we are oriented to growth,
as Gestalt therapy posits. We instinctively know that we could
better explain reality and we foresee that we don’t see yet. We
know there is a model, which could provide us better explanation
for what we observe, we just don’t know the model yet. Mark
Miller has wonderfully expressed this point in his discussion
on metastable dynamics (Miller et al., 2021; p. 9): “agents also
tend to actively destroy ﬁxed point attractors therefore inducing
instabilities and creating peripatetic or itinerant (wandering)
dynamics (Friston et al., 2012a).” Predictive organisms do not
only seek to maximise error reduction but are also driven to
reduce error at a particular rate (Kiverstein et al., 2019). They
are willing to disrupt their own ﬁxed-point attractors (habitual
policies) to explore just-uncertain-enough environments that are
ripe for long term prediction error minimisation (Kiverstein
et al., 2019; Seth et al., 2020; Van de Cruys et al., 2020).
Organisms “that live in complex dynamic environments will
beneﬁt from remaining at the edge of criticality between order
and disorder, between what is well-known (and reliable) and the
unknown (and potentially more optimal) [. . .] Metastability is the
consequence of two competing tendencies of the parts of a system
to separate and express their intrinsic dynamics and to integrate
and coordinate to create new dynamics” (Miller et al., 2021; p. 9).
The authors go on explaining that “Metastability is intrinsically
linked to aﬀective value.” Indeed, when a particular econiche
ceases to yield negative error slopes, negative aﬀects signals to
the organisms that they need to destroy their own ﬁxed-point
attractors to favour exploration. On the contrary, when errors
accumulate over time because of unmanageable complexity,
negative aﬀects prompt the agent back to routinary behaviour
that is already well-known and highly reliable (Miller et al., 2021).
Our thirst for surprise and change (i.e., update of beliefs to
minimise prediction errors) might be at play also in pathological
conditions, in such a way that even psychopathology preserves
an intentionality for contacting (see Appendix A ). However,
the tension toward growth, novelty, and explorations seems
sometimes to fade away. As an example, it has been suggested that
some pathologies, such as Major Depression (MD), are “better
safe than sorry” adaptive responses to adverse social events
that minimise the likelihood of the occurrence of surprising
interpersonal interactions (Badcock et al., 2017). This behaviour
might be caused by the fact that, following ineﬀectual attempts
to alleviate interpersonal diﬃculties (e.g., social uncertainty; loss)
in competitive or adverse social contexts (Badcock et al., 2017),
the patient learned that it is diﬃcult to reduce uncertainty (i.e.,
prediction errors) through goal-directed behaviour, therefore
inhibiting the expectation to reduce prediction errors through
exploration and exploitation behaviours (Constant et al., 2021).
The organism learns that action cannot reduce social distance
in its social context. Therefore prediction errors, in this case the
diﬀerence between desired and actual (adverse) social outcomes,
remain high and continuously aﬀect the organism. Depressed
patients are strongly convinced that their environment is very
uncertain (Smith et al., 2021). For this reason, they learn
to be helpless (Abramson et al., 1978) and reduce energy
expenditure (Barrett et al., 2016; Kiverstein et al., 2020) through
“sickness behaviour” (Stephan et al., 2016; Badcock et al., 2017;
Quadt et al., 2018). In such cases, recovery in psychotherapy
might be triggered by “relearning” through the therapeutic
relationship a positive expected rate of error reduction through
experience and engagement with the world (Miller et al., 2021).
Depression itself might be a desperate adaptive attempt to
reduce prediction errors (i.e., social distance) with increased
sensitivity to social signals and signalling behaviours that either
garner support (e.g., reassurance seeking) or defuse conﬂict
(e.g., submissive behaviours; Badcock et al., 2017). In this sense
the intentionality of contacting might be preserved even in
severe depression.
In short, a “healthy” predictive agent seeks rather than avoids
novelty (Van de Cruys, 2017). In this learning process, curiosity
has a fundamental adaptive value, since it allows us to explain
ever deeper layers of regularities in the environment. Gestalt
therapists refer to this strive for uncertainty as “cultivated
uncertainty” or “willingness to be uncertain” and consider this
therapeutic attitude a fundamental, if not necessary, ingredient
for therapeutic change (Staemmler, 1997, 2006). For this reason,
we believe that the investigation of the diﬀerent motivational
components that facilitate the openness to uncertainty is
important for the evolution of psychotherapy (Francesetti,
2019b). Along this line, we should try answering the following
question: what is the role of aﬀect, in particular of aesthetic
pleasure, in teaching us to expect uncertainty reduction?
Beauty Makes Us Curious (and Less Anxious)
Not all uncertainty results in learning and change, since
social and motivational support is needed to overcome the
tendency toward a limited habitual set of sensory states.
Aesthetic pleasure might represent a peculiar case of motivational
support sustaining the integration of novel states in the
predictive models of the self-evironment. A state characterised
by an increase in prediction errors, corresponding to sensory
uncertainty and signalling the need to update sensory or motor
predictions, will transitorily produce negative emotions and
arousing sensations (Joﬃly and Coricelli, 2013; Braem et al.,
2015). Humans are typically uncertainty averse (Carleton, 2016)
and are willing to pay to reduce uncertainty (Lovallo and
Kahneman, 2000). This could be the case of therapy where
unformulated and unspeakable chaotic proto-feelings urge us
to seek help to become feelings (Francesetti and Roubal, 2020).
Arousal (norepinephrinergic neuronal excitations; Barrett, 2017)
is what in Gestalt therapy is referred to as excitement (see
Glossary). Arousing signals within the amygdala, other limbic
regions, and the cerebellum are forwarded to the cortex to correct
the generative model of sensory inputs (Buckner et al., 2011;
Haber and Behrens, 2014; Barrett, 2017). Arousing error signals
associated with increases in amygdala activations (Whalen, 1998;
Wilson-Mendenhall et al., 2013) can thus be considered a
learning signal (Li and McNally, 2014), but do not necessarily lead
to learning. When adequate support is lacking in the organism-
environment ﬁeld, excitement/arousal can result in anxiety (Perls
et al., 1951): “excitement that should lead to the contact becomes
undeﬁned energy” (Spagnuolo-Lobb, 2015; p. 8). Interestingly,
it has been suggested that clinical and subclinical anxiety is
related to the intolerance of emotionally arousing uncertainty
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 12 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 13
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
(Dugas, 1997; Bishop, 2007; Carleton, 2016; Anderson et al.,
2019) brought by prediction errors (Del Popolo Cristaldi et al.,
2021). Intolerance of uncertainty, both at a subjective and
neural level, in turn was shown to be detrimental for learning
(Hein et al., 2021).
Curiosity, on the contrary makes uncertainty and arousal
not aversive when accompanied by an appraisal of coping
potential, that is one’s expectation regarding the ability to
understand or deal with prediction errors, in the sense of
making it predictable or meaningful again (Silvia, 2005). Graf
and Landwehr’s (2015) hypothesised that stimulus processing
needs a suﬃcient processing motivation triggered by a perceiver’s
need for cognitive enrichment or the stimulus’ processing
aﬀordance. Only when this motivation is high the engagement
of elaborate perception resulting in aesthetic interest is possible.
Neurocomputational research, and neuroaesthetics particularly,
has renewed the interest on the intrinsic motivational aspects
of curiosity. Schmidhuber (2009), for example deﬁnes it as
if follows: “Curiosity is the desire to create or discover
more non-random, non-arbitrary, truly novel, regular data
that allows for compression progress because its regularity
was not yet known. This drive maximises “interestingness, ”
the ﬁrst derivative of subjective beauty or compressibility,
that is, the steepness of the learning curve. It motivates
exploring infants, pure mathematicians, composers, artists,
dancers, comedians, yourself, and recent artiﬁcial systems” (p.
1). Curiosity is a sort of heuristic for maximising learning
progresses (Oudeyer et al., 2016). Not surprisingly, indeed,
curiosity is the primary promoter of learning and change
(Kang et al., 2009).
Here we propose that, in a clinical context, the aesthetic
attentional attitude triggered by the expectation of aesthetic
reward (i.e., ﬁnding beauty in the therapeutic encounter, or, else
said, ﬁnding it beautiful) can facilitate the attainment of the
psychological distance necessary to fully embrace arousing and
potentially anxiogenic experiences (Menninghaus et al., 2017).
How might aesthetic sensibility help us to shift from anxiety
to curiosity when facing arousing unpredicted stimuli will be
discussed in the following paragraph.
One of the ﬁrst inﬂuential views on curiosity and aesthetics
is Berlyne’s optimal level account (Berlyne, 1970), arguing that
organisms seek out stimuli with medium level complexity or
novelty, to keep their arousal at an optimal, pleasing level. More
recently, along these lines, it has been suggested that aesthetic
pleasure support natural curiosity (Schoeller, 2015) and the
drive for knowledge acquisition and meaning (Perlovsky, 2006).
Within the PC framework, aesthetic emotions might motivate the
paradoxical drive for uncertainty since this type of self-generated
reward teaches us to expect steeper prediction error reduction
slopes (Sarasso et al., 2020a).
The eﬀect of expecting beauty is openness to experience.
Contemplation of the beauty is often compared to the
concept of absorption proposed by Tellegen and Atkinson
(1974), which is described as openness to experience in
which attentional ampliﬁcation engage the totality of available
mental (perceptive and representational) and executive (motor)
resources of the individual.
An aesthetic attitude allows the organism to tolerate a
momentary state of uncertainty for the seeking of new knowledge
instead of reacting according to previously stored knowledge. In
Sarasso et al. (2020a) we discuss evidence demonstrating that
aesthetic pleasure emerges in correspondence with an inhibition
of motor behaviour (i.e., minimising action), promoting a
simultaneous attentional perceptual enhancement, mediated by
synaptic gain modulations at the level of sensory cortices (i.e.,
optimising learning). Accordingly, we suggest that the perception
of beauty may represent an hedonic feedback over learning
progresses, motivating the individual to inhibit previously
acquired motor routines to seek novel knowledge acquisition.
Beauty perception might represent the motivational drive that
pushes us toward novelty. This motivation is intrinsic to the
process of new Gestalts formation (beliefs update in PC terms):
“the anxiety is tolerated [. . .] because the disturbing energy ﬂows
into the new ﬁgure” (Perls et al., 1951; p. 233). The founders
of Gestalt therapy then go on writing that the ability to tolerate
uncertainty-driven anxiety “comes from previous experience
having been assimilated and growth achieved.” Beauty is a self-
generated reward elicited by the assimilation of new experiences
that teaches us to expect learning progresses, i.e., to get better and
better at explaining what we observe. In PC terms it allows us to
form a second-order prediction (hyperprior or meta-prediction)
on learning progresses. Beauty might make us naturally curios
about the hidden causes of the world (Perlovsky et al., 2010;
Mirza et al., 2018). Without aesthetic rewards, we would avoid
uncertainty and novelty, act to escape the anxiety associated to
novelty and become emotionally and aesthetically numb with
respect to others and the environment (Hillman, 1988). This
might be the reason why aesthetic emotions are important in
psychotherapy. As we will discuss in detail in Section “Distancing
to Embrace, ” curiosity, and, indeed, also an aesthetic attitude [see
Menninghaus’s distancing-embracing model in Menninghaus
et al. (2017)], help the clinician to keep some distance from the
impulse to act triggered by the proto-feelings circulating in the
therapeutic ﬁeld (Francesetti and Roubal, 2020).
A BRIDGE BETWEEN GESTALT FIELD
THEORY AND THE FREE-ENERGY
PRINCIPLE
In the following section we will try to bridge the gap between
the notion of aesthetic pleasure presented in Section “Aesthetics
and Knowledge/Change” and Gestalt therapy intuitions. Our
aim is to suggest a plausible neurophysiological correlate of
therapeutic change mediated by the therapist’s aesthetic attitude.
In Section “Suﬀering of Experience: Gestalt-Phenomenological
Approach to Psychopathological Fields, ” we described how
conservative ﬁeld forces are perceived as sensations, impressions
or atmospheres in the form of unprocessed proto-feelings in rigid
psychopathological ﬁelds (Francesetti and Roubal, 2020). We
believe that modern neurocomputational modelling in cognitive
sciences can account for unprocessed feelings and the reason
they remain inaccessible and anesthetised in psychopathological
ﬁelds. Proto-feelings could be deﬁned as prediction errors
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 13 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 14
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
that still need to be “explained away” by the update of the
generative model of the causes of sensory states [no matter
whose model, the therapist’s or the patient’s, for at a ﬁrst stage
of perception they are still undiﬀerentiated (Damasio, 2012) in
the experiential ﬁeld (Section “The Field Perspective: A Dive
Into the Undiﬀerentiated”)]. Within this framework, based on the
FEP described in Section “Aesthetics and Knowledge/Change, ”
unprocessed proto-feelings and sensations transiently arise the
uncertainty associated to sensory inputs and urge the organisms,
or the system of two or more organisms, to reduce it, either
by action or learning (i.e., updating the generative model).
This corresponds to free energy minimisation in the FEP ,
which substantially maps onto what Gestalt therapists call the
intentionality of contacting. Changes in the shared generative
model can restructure the experiential ﬁeld organisation and lead
to therapeutic change. Coherently, some authors deﬁned therapy
as the generation of new predictive representations: “Moments of
creative not-knowing may emerge and hence the need for active
exploration, innovation and generative possibilities . . . [therapy]
may encompass both strategies to engage predictive processing
neurodynamicsósampling new sensory input through action
(active inference) and shaping the internal models of the world
(prediction signals) through meaning-making” (Vaisvaser, 2021;
p. 5). New predictions are therapeutic when they can explain
a greater deal of prediction errors which can be successfully
integrated into experience or otherwise remain unexplained
when suﬃcient interpersonal support lacks. People might ﬁnd
relief in this process since new priors can explain a greater deal
of prediction errors, thereby reducing the overall uncertainty and
intersubjective chaos they are exposed to. Indeed, as we discussed
in Section “Aﬀect and Predictions: “I Feel Good, I Knew That
I Would, Now”, ” we are equipped with an hedonic feedback
signalling uncertainty reduction dynamics: feeling good might be
intrinsically linked to the reduction of prediction errors over time
and at a certain rate (Joﬃly and Coricelli, 2013).
Change and the update of predictive representations, however,
follow a necessary momentary rise in sensory uncertainty, which
could be operationalised as a sensory upweighting of aﬀective
and sensory prediction errors (i.e., proto-feelings) mediated
by attentional dynamics via cortical gain control (Feldman
and Friston, 2010; Clark, 2013). Such neuromodulatory gain
control might correspond to a modulation of the excitability of
neuronal populations encoding prediction errors (Feldman and
Friston, 2010; Shipp et al., 2013). Sensations, impressions and
atmospheres must ﬁrst be felt to further be processed, shared
and communicated. Therapeutic change is not only a cognitive
act, since it is motivated by aﬀective value and it implies the
embodied attunement to the sensory phenomena emerging in
each therapeutic situation (Fonagy and Target, 1997; Holmes
and Nolte, 2019). The delay between the moment unprocessed
sensory impressions are up-weighted and the moment this
triggers an update in the predictive model can be distressing,
since the model of “what is happening to me” cannot account
for something that is clearly happening to me. The reason
this process is both arousing and distressing lies in the inverse
relation between aﬀective value and uncertainty described in
Section “Aﬀect and predictions: “I feel good, I knew that I would,
now”.” To provide support in tolerating such distress might be
the main function of clinical theories, settings and practices.
It is well-acknowledged that even at a neurophysiological level,
sensory inputs (i.e., prediction errors) that are too chaotic and
unlearnable, with a lower estimated signal to noise ratio are
attentionally down-weighted (Auksztulewicz and Friston, 2015;
Ronga et al., 2018; Sarasso et al., 2020b). The ability to resist
this tendency by shifting back attention to confused impression,
sensations, and chaotic feelings might be a key therapeutic ability.
Field therapy changes the focus from the patient to the therapist.
It is the therapist’s experience of the ﬁeld conservative forces
that changes in the therapeutic process. During psychotherapy
“[. . .] the therapist is continuously dealing with the uncertainty
of the unfolding ﬁeld. He/she needs to be able to tolerate
not knowing and to be ready to change direction according
to the ﬁeld’s forces” (Francesetti and Roubal, 2020; p. 10). In
simple terms, feeling proto-feelings that previously could not be
felt, can trigger therapeutic change. According to a synergetic
scheme (Ciompi and Tschacher, 2021), as we will discuss below,
this introduces new inputs into the complex dynamics of self-
organisation, which will eventually result in new attractor states
“enslaving” self-organisation along new patterns. A transient
rise in sensory uncertainty (i.e., Free energy) might require
the metastable patient-therapist system to move toward new
attractor states.
Processing proto-feelings, however, needs social, relational,
experiential, and attentional support. Most importantly, in our
view, aesthetic reward might provide additional motivational
support to tolerate uncertainty. Moreover, we need others to
“turn up the volume” of sensations that could not be assimilated
and integrated in our model of what is causing them. In the
following Section “Two Bodies Are Better Than One, ” we discuss
how solitude and togetherness inﬂuence attentional dynamics
and the neurophysiology of perceptual learning and change.
In the following paragraphs we will try to merge the theoretical
constructs of Gestalt therapy, ﬁeld theory and predictive coding
to discuss how the aesthetic sensibility of the therapist might be
among the factors supporting the transformative intentionality of
contact of the ﬁeld.
Two Bodies Are Better Than One
As we discussed in Section “Psychopathology: Growing With
Unprocessed Experiences, ” disturbing and dissociated proto-
feelings that remain unformulated in psychopathological ﬁelds
need another body to be sensed with full aesthetic sensibility,
and, secondly, to be consciously experienced, communicated
and signiﬁed, thereby reorganising the ﬁeld of experience.
Gestalt therapy posits that we need someone else next to
us to experience what could not be experienced (Francesetti,
2019a). Else said, updating the generative model of what is
happening to us necessitates the presence of others. New
Experiences (i.e., new Gestalts) need togetherness according to
this phenomenological account of therapeutic change. Is there
any neurophysiological evidence for the role of togetherness in
allowing the experience of novel sensory information? Evidence
from the Shared attention eﬀect and opioid transmission might
provide us a tentative answer.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 14 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 15
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
Sharing attentional targets with others (Koike et al.,
2016) favours the encoding of novel information, emotions,
and sensations (Decety and Fotopoulou, 2015). It has been
demonstrated that sensory outcomes of shared experiences are
ampliﬁed (Boothby et al., 2014; Shteynberg et al., 2016), and that
people devote greater cognitive resources to co-attended stimuli
(Shteynberg and Apfelbaum, 2013; Shteynberg et al., 2014).
Consequently, shared experiences undergo deeper perceptual
processing (Craik and Lockhart, 1972; Craik and Tulving,
1975). Shteynberg and colleagues demonstrated that sharing
experiences with others can foster emotional intensiﬁcation
(Shteynberg et al., 2014) and memory, e.g., the subsequent
recall of a list of co-attended words (Shteynberg, 2010). Sensory
information that are shared with signiﬁcant others, such as
in-group members (Shteynberg, 2010; He et al., 2011; Eskenazi
et al., 2013), familiar relationship partners (Boothby et al.,
2017), and caregivers (Reid et al., 2004; Tomasello et al., 2005)
are particularly likely to attract attentional resources. Indeed,
“psychological closeness” (i.e., strangers vs. friends; Boothby
et al., 2017), just like physical distance, between co-experiencers
is among the major factors that modulates the ampliﬁcation of
shared experiences (Boothby et al., 2014).
Altogether, these ﬁndings are referred to as shared attention
eﬀects (Shteynberg, 2015). We previously suggested (Sarasso
et al., 2022) that the intensiﬁcation of shared experience may
be interpreted as the result of a sensory up-weighting driven by
co-presence and implemented through the disinhibition of the
post-synaptic gain of pyramidal cells encoding prediction errors
(Auksztulewicz and Friston, 2015; Heilbron and Chait, 2017).
Furthermore, as we discussed above, the µ-opioid receptor
(MOR) system is known to interact with the dopamine system
in brain regions implicated in reward processing (Hagelberg
et al., 2002; Lintas et al., 2011). Namely, activations in the
limbic hedonic hotspots triggered by opioid transmission underly
aesthetic pleasure and the “liking” experience more in general.
The shared biochemical substrate between (aesthetic) pleasure
and learning/amnesic systems (Section “Pain, Beauty, and the
Psychopharmacology of the Endogenous Opioid System”) is
a piece of evidence suggesting the importance of aesthetic
sensibility in allowing learning and change in a psychotherapeutic
setting vs. the maintenance of a certain rigid experiential ﬁeld.
Furthermore, the opioid mediated learning system might not
be independent from social support and the presence of others.
Loneliness and separation might impair learning mediated by
the endogenous opioid system. E.g., it has been evidenced that
separation and loss (i.e., parental death, parental separation, or
divorce) aﬀect the functionality of the endogenous opioid system,
and the deﬁcit of the opioid system may explain separation
anxiety, respiratory anomalies and panic disorder (Preter et al.,
2011; Preter and Klein, 2014). Indeed, just as learning and
pleasure, social attachments may reﬂect an opioid mediated
addictive process in the brain (Panksepp, 1998). As suggested by
Katz (2005), opioid transmission subserves the felt hedonic core
of mammalian prosociality and of consummatory pleasure more
in general. The MOR system is proposed to interact with oxytocin
and dopamine in social bonding and social reward processing
(Depue and Morrone-Strupinsky, 2005; Tops et al., 2014). E.g.,
a 15 min separation from the dam during postnatal days can
induce long-term changes in brain opioid and opioid receptor
densities in rats (Ploj et al., 2003). On the contrary, engaging in
aﬃliative interactions such as social play and social grooming, is
associated with endogenous µ-opioid release in the brain reward
circuitry in both rodents and primates (Panksepp and Bishop,
1981; Keverne et al., 1989; Vanderschuren et al., 1995). The
eﬀect of prosociality on the disposability of endogenous opioids,
given the involvement of the MOR system in motivating the
processing of novel information, might be interpreted as the
neurochemical substrate of the inﬂuence of social support on
perceptual processing dynamics.
In sum, the upweighting of sensory information resulting in
learning and change, aesthetic pleasure and social bonding might
be concurrent and mutually interacting factors inﬂuencing the
possibility of sensing novel experiences. We speculate that the
hypothesised link between learning, beauty and sharing might be
subserved by common physiological substrates.
Distancing to Embrace
Besides social support, other motivational variables might
inﬂuence our ability to tolerate uncertain proto-feelings for the
seek of long-term prediction error minimisation.
A transient rise in aﬀective and sensory prediction errors can
be disturbing and sometimes unbearable for subjects involved in
an experiential ﬁeld such as the patient and therapist. Surprising
prediction errors raise the level of anxiety and favour rigid
experiential and relational patterns, which could be seen as a
“fast track” or automatic way to level prediction errors back
to homeostatic levels (i.e., attractor states). From the point of
view of the therapist: “Intervention at this point is usually a
way of avoiding the anxiety related to what is emerging. So,
I try not to take any action towards the client based on what
comes ﬁrst, on the ﬁrst wave of my experience. That way,
I am introducing a higher degree of freedom into the ﬁeld.
Acting according to the ﬁrst feeling would probably support
the repetitive patterns, since it is the way along which I am
taken by the absence that characterises the psychopathology
of the ﬁeld. To act now would carry a high risk of making
the enduring relational themes (Jacobs, 2017) circulate once
more, and a high risk of re-traumatising the client” (Francesetti
and Roubal, 2020; p. 125). In this case, the usual pattern, or
“order parameter, ” “enslaves” the complex dynamics of the system
by avoiding surprising sensory states (see Figure 1 ). However,
when the transient rise in prediction errors (i.e., uncertainty/free
energy/surprise) surpasses a critical level, the order parameter
cannot synchronise and coordinate the complex system dynamics
and elements anymore. Growing uncertainty levels, which we
subjectively feel as a growing emotional tension (Tschacher et al.,
2017), can push the therapist/patient system toward novel and
more (meta)stable functional patterns of feeling, thinking, and
behaving (Tschacher and Haken, 2007; Ciompi and Tschacher,
2021). Free energy might act as a control parameter at the
point of bifurcation where the system “chooses” between rigid or
novel attractor states (Ciompi and Tschacher, 2021). Thereby, a
transient rise in uncertainty needs to be accepted and assimilated
for change to occur.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 15 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 16
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
FIGURE 1 | Synergetics applied to psychological change. When Free energy
(i.e., uncertainty/prediction errors) reaches a critical level, the usual pattern of
feeling, thinking, and behaving can no longer coordinate and synchronise
system dynamics. These patterns, which in FEP terms correspond to a
shared generative model (see Section “Merging Predictions in the
Pre-subjective Chaos”), can be disturbed and altered by critically increasing
energetic tensions, so that the organism or system of organisms
self-organises into a novel metastable order parameter. Change occurs (either
in the direction of healthy or psychopathological development) at this point of
bifurcation, when the update of the order parameters prevails over the slaving
of the complex dynamics. This non-linear shift is promoted by psychotherapy,
which renders it possible to introduce into the system uncertainty, novelty and
the necessary distance to assimilate surprise without reproducing and
re-enacting previously acquired behavioural patterns.
Biological and artiﬁcial intelligences need a feedback
mechanism that pushes them to actively seek informationally
proﬁtable surprising sensory states (Kaplan and Oudeyer, 2004;
Oudeyer et al., 2007; Gottlieb et al., 2013). Therefore, similarly
to any costly, eﬀortful, and risky exploratory behaviour, also
attending and tolerating sensory uncertainty is rewarded by
an intrinsically generated hedonic feedback (FitzGibbon et al.,
2020). Moreover, as any reward, the expectation of self-generated
aesthetic pleasure might motivate the paradoxical search for
sensory uncertainty (Sarasso et al., 2020a, 2021a,c). We suggest
that aesthetic pleasure allows toleration of attentionally up-
weighted proto-feelings. Indeed, the suspension of fast instinctual
motor reactions and prototypical every-day attentional attitudes
allow more strongly felt sensations (Sarasso et al., 2020a), which,
in turn, is per se rewarding (Menninghaus et al., 2017). Such
aesthetic attitude is usually conﬁned to the artistic domain
(Pelowski et al., 2017) [as an example, Gallese, who deﬁnes
aesthetic distance in terms of freedom, writes: “when watching
a ﬁlm, reading a novel, or beholding a painting, we distance
ourselves from the “everyday” context. By adopting such
an attitude, our embodied simulation becomes “liberated”ó
that is, it is freed from the burden of modelling our actual
psychophysical presence in daily life; hence, new simulative
energies are liberated” (Gallese, 2018; p. 55)]. However, we
already discussed that such aesthetic attitude does not necessarily
require an artistic context (e.g., being in a museum or attending
to a theatre play; Pelowski et al., 2017), but can be triggered
by the expectation of beauty itself in the everyday context
(Sarasso et al., 2020a). As we demonstrated in a recent paper,
the “top-down” expectation of aesthetic pleasure prompted
by “bottom-up” aesthetically rewarding experiences, reorients
attention from self-referred to environmental stimuli (Sarasso
et al., 2022). Similarly, the aesthetic approach in perceiving ﬁeld
forces in therapy is at the root of therapeutic change (Bloom,
2011; Francesetti, 2012). According to this view, change is
not about what the therapist does, but it is triggered by the
therapist’s aesthetic evaluation of how he/she is “with” the patient
(Francesetti, 2015). The expectation of beauty supports the
therapist in distancing herself/himself from the desire to change
the client and the situation (Francesetti, 2015), a behaviour
which, according to the paradoxical theory of change (Beisser,
1970), would prevent full contact with the situation. Similarly to
Gallese’s viewpoint, recent approaches in Gestalt therapy describe
such attitudinal shift toward aesthetics in terms of freedom: “that
shift is generated by curiosity and a feeling of wonder about what
is happening” (Bloom, 2009; p. 6). As Husserl’s collaborator Fink
(1933) says, “wonder about the world” is the best deﬁnition of the
phenomenological attitude. It is an “enhancement of freedom
and a diﬀerentiation enabled by a distance from what is seizing
us” (Francesetti and Roubal, 2020; p. 4).
Merging Predictions in the
Pre-subjective Chaos
When two or more organisms interact are they governed by
separate self-regulation processes, or do they behave as a whole?
Do the boundaries of a self-regulating system transcend single
organisms? This matter has long been debated with radical and
less radical answers. As an example, James Lovelock’s famous
Gaia theory hypothesises that the entire planet: “functions in the
manner of a vast self-regulating organism, in the context of which
all living things collectively deﬁne and maintain the conditions
conducive for life on earth.” Another illustrious example is the
theory of autopoiesis by Humberto Maturana, who dedicated his
investigation to the alternative proposition of whole, rather than
part, as causal mechanism (Harries-Jones, 2004).
FE minimisation as a self-regulation principle in an ever-
changing environment did not solve this ongoing debate.
Although most of human’s sensations are caused by other
humans, FEP intuitions are insofar mainly limited to the life of
single organisms. This is problematic when trying to apply FEP
to a phenomenological holistic ﬁeld theory perspective where
subjects and agencies continuously emerge from a common
experiential ﬁeld. The ﬁeld itself as a whole has its own
intentionalities: conservative and transformative forces that
precede and transcend individual agencies. FEP accommodates
this idea of a decentralised and de-subjectivised (or agent-less, see
Friston and Frith, 2015a) intentionality governing ﬁeld dynamics:
we are being moved more than moving. Indeed, according to
the more enactive and dynamic readings of the free energy
principle: “the brain is not located at the centre of the organism-
environment, conducting tests along the radiuses; it’s on the
circumference, one station amongst other stations involved in
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 16 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 17
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
the recursive loop that also navigates through the body and
environment and forms the whole. Neural accommodation
occurs via constant reciprocal interaction between stations: parts
are coordinated without an executive agent or programme that
produces the organised pattern. Rather, coherence is generated
solely in the relationships between the organic components and
the constraints and opportunities of the environment. This self-
organisation means that no single element has causal priority”
(Smith and Thelen, 2003; p. 343). Friston (2013), borrowing
Tschacher and Haken (2007) terminology, characterises this
reciprocal coupling between an organism and its econiche in
terms of “circular causality.” This insight from the FEP has
been parallelled to Dewey’s notion of situation (Gallagher and
Allen, 2018), which largely inspired ﬁeld theory in Gestalt
therapy. The situation is not equivalent to the environment but
includes the agent in such a way that agent and environment
are co-deﬁned. When two (or more) agents share and are
included in a situation or a ﬁeld, the ﬁeld self-organisation might
transcend the two, movements are movements of the situations
(Gallagher and Allen, 2018).
Furthermore, along these lines, FEP was originally deﬁned as
a “mandatory principle” or vitalistic “imperative” that “applies to
any biological system [ . . .] from single-cell organisms to social
networks” (Friston, 2009; p. 293), thus leaving the door open to
the application of free energy minimisation dynamics to systems
that extends beyond single organisms. Indeed, when investigating
shared experiences, such as communication, the author suggests
that: “the inﬁnite regress induced by modelling another agentó
who is modelling youócan be ﬁnessed if you both possess the
same model. In other words, the sensations caused by others
and oneself are generated by the same process. This leads to a
view of communication based upon a narrative that is shared
by agents who are exchanging sensory signals. Crucially, this
narrative transcends agency” (Friston and Frith, 2015a; p. 1).
While interacting, two Bayesian brains do not simply try to
predict each other, “they predict themselves” (Friston and Frith,
2015a; p. 1). When two predictive systems are coupled it is
possible to assign the hidden states they are trying to infer to both
agents and to treat agency as a contextual factor, which transcends
individual agency and just contextualises a shared narrative
(Friston and Frith, 2015a). Not only action but also perception
becomes a shared process when we are together: “What makes
social interaction unique, then, is the emergence of this unifying
“narrative” (generative model) and its role in shaping our own
individualised perception” (Gallagher and Allen, 2018, p. 2640).
Sharing a common generative model is a necessary and emergent
phenomenon, which might be mathematically described as
generalised synchronisation (aka synchronisation of chaotic
dynamics; Hu et al., 2010). Generalised synchronisation implies
the presence of a synchronisation manifold , a set of attractor
states that deﬁnes the possibilities of the whole coupled system
(Friston and Frith, 2015b). Synchronisation between mutual
coupled systems and the stability of invariant manifolds (what
we somewhere else deﬁned as ﬁeld forces) are two inseparable
phenomena (Brown and Rulkov, 1997; Y amapi et al., 2010).
Interestingly, although beyond the scope of the present paper, it
has been shown that synchronisation can be used to change the
dynamic behaviour of complex systems such as the therapeutic
ﬁeld (Tschacher et al., 2017; Orsucci, 2021).
Altogether, it seems that the free energy principle and
predictive coding insights and assumptions can be applied to
the therapeutic situation and inform the clinical encounter
beyond a mono-personal and bi-personal perspective. Friston’s
intuition of a shared generative model, indeed, can explain
one of the most controversial aspects of contemporary Gestalt
ﬁeld therapy: the focus on the therapist’s sensation. How to
explain the fact that a change in the therapist’s experience of the
therapeutic ﬁeld can produce changes in the patient’s experience
as hypothesised by ﬁeld theory? From a relational or bi-personal
perspective this phenomenon can be explained as a sort of
contagion (Roubal and Rihacek, 2016). At a diﬀerent level of
explanation, something more complex than simple causality is
brought up. From a ﬁeld perspective, the transformation of a ﬁeld
organisation might start in an undiﬀerentiated pre-subjective
dimension, where the proto-feelings push to emerge through
the embodiment of client and therapist which primarily works
on transforming his/her experience of the ﬁeld (Francesetti and
Roubal, 2020; Roubal and Francesetti, 2022). This intentionality
of contacting belongs to the “in between” of the patient-therapist
medium, both concurring to maximise the evidence of a shared
generative model through actions and perception governed by
a common process.
CONCLUSION
In the present paper we review the neurocomputational and
neurophysiological evidence suggesting that the perception of
beauty might have evolved as an epistemic hedonic feedback
signalling the reduction of prediction errors over time and
the parallel update of the generative model of sensory causes
(i.e., the emergence of new Gestalt). In the context of
psychotherapy aesthetic sensibility provides a valuable tool
to evaluate the match between the direction of therapeutic
intervention and the transformative tension of the therapeutic
ﬁeld. Beauty reveals the assimilation of proto-feelings (i.e.,
prediction errors) into the cognitive and aﬀective model of
“what is happening to me.” As any reward, aesthetic pleasure
might have evolved to motivate the organism to tolerate a
distressing (but proﬁtable in the long-run) situation, such as
the experience of sensory uncertainty. This paradoxical search
for uncertainty is hedonically marked since it allows humans
to learn progressively deeper levels of sensory regularities
in the environment. An aesthetic attentional attitude, by
supporting the clinician to tolerate transient states of sensory
uncertainty, which are felt as disturbing sensory impressions
and motor resonances, supports change: proto-feelings that
previously lacked the adequate social support to be felt and
integrated into experience, can now emerge as proper feelings
and aﬀects in the therapeutic encounter. The application of
the free energy principle to systems that enclose more than
one organism demonstrates the natural emergence of a shared
intentionality and a set of attractor states that deﬁnes the
possibilities of the whole sensory coupled and synchronised
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 17 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 18
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
system. We discussed how the therapist and the client can be
treated as a unique coupled system with (1) its own shared
intentionality and (2) a set of attractor states where the organisms
involved in the system are more probably found. Hence, the
therapeutic ﬁeld can be treated as a unique metastable organism
or system governed by the concurrent tension to maintain a rigid
set of states to limit sensory uncertainty and (paradoxically) to
encounter sensory uncertainty to maintain a given (predicted)
rate of prediction error reduction over time. We hypothesise that
beauty in psychotherapy can signal the evolution of attractor
states into novel possibilities for experience. More importantly,
according to what we propose, focusing on the aesthetic qualities
of the therapeutic encounter by maintaining an aesthetic attitude
could promote therapeutic change.
Future studies should test the following preliminary empirical
predictions driven by our hypothesis:
1) Existence of a moment-by-moment correlation between
the emergence of aesthetic emotions subjectively felt by the
therapist and the patient during sessions and therapeutic
change as evaluated by an independent evaluation group.
2) Presence of a positive correlation between the aesthetic
evaluation of the ongoing theraeutic process and subjective
reports of therapeutic alliance.
3) Occurrence of a correlation between objective measures
of behavioural (and perhaps electrophysiological)
synchronisation between the therapist and the patient
when the therapist adopts and aesthetic attitude.
4) Better therapeutic outcomes when therapists adopt an
aesthetic attitude.
5) The possibility to assess -and train- therapists’ aesthetic
competences and interoceptive awareness and to measure
the correlation between aesthetic dimensions of training
and therapeutic outcomes.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
PS, GF , JR, and MG developed the manuscript concept. PS and IR
drafted the manuscript. KS, JR, GF , and MN-M provided critical
revisions. All authors contributed to the review of previous
research and approved the ﬁnal version of the manuscript for
submission.
REFERENCES
Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E., and Teasdale, J. D. (1978). Learned helplessness
in humans: critique and reformulation. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 87, 49–74.
Aguayo, J., and Malin, B. (eds) (2013). Wilfred Bion: Los Angeles Seminars and
Supervision. Abingdon: Routledge.
Alvim Botelho, M. (2016). “Id of the situation as the common ground of
experience, ” inSelf. A Polyphony of Contemporary of Gestalt Therapists, ed. J. M.
Robine (St. Romain-La-Virvée: L ’Exprimerie).
Anderson, E. C., Carleton, R. N., Diefenbach, M., and Han, P. K. J. (2019). The
relationship between uncertainty and aﬀect. Front. Psychol. 10:2504. doi: 10.
3389/fpsyg.2019.02504
Anderson, W. S., Sheth, R. N., Bencherif, B., Frost, J. J., and Campbell, J. N.
(2002). Naloxone increases pain induced by topical capsaicin in healthy human
volunteers. Pain 99, 207–216. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3959(02)00103-3
Ardizzi, M., Ferroni, F., Siri, F., Umiltà, M. A., Cotti, A., Calbi, M., et al. (2020).
Beholders’ sensorimotor engagement enhances aesthetic rating of pictorial
facial expressions of pain. Psychol. Res. 84, 370–379. doi: 10.1007/s00426-018-
1067-7
Armstrong, T., and Detweiler-Bedell, B. (2008). Beauty as an emotion: the
exhilarating prospect of mastering a challenging world. Rev. Gen. Psychol. 12,
305–329. doi: 10.1037/a0012558
Auksztulewicz, R., and Friston, K. (2015). Attentional enhancement of auditory
mismatch responses: a DCM/MEG study. Cereb. Cortex 25, 4273–4283. doi:
10.1093/cercor/bhu323
Badcock, P. B., Davey, C. G., Whittle, S., Allen, N. B., and Friston, K. J. (2017). The
depressed brain: an evolutionary systems theory.Trends Cogn. Sci. 21, 182–194.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2017.01.005
Badcock, P. B., Friston, K. J., and Ramstead, M. J. D. (2019). The hierarchically
mechanistic mind: a free-energy formulation of the human psyche. Phys. Life
Rev. 31, 104–121. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2018.10.002
Baldi, P., and Itti, L. (2010). Of bits and wows: a Bayesian theory of surprise with
applications to attention. Neural Netw. 23, 649–666. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2009.
12.007
Barrett, L. F. (2017). The theory of constructed emotion: an active inference
account of interoception and categorization. Soc. Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 12,
1–23. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsw154
Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., and Hamilton, P. (2016). An active inference theory
of allostasis and interoception in depression. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.
371:20160011. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0011
Barron, J. W. (ed.) (1998). Making Diagnosis Meaningful: Enhancing Evaluation
and Treatment of Psychological Disorders . Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Bateson, G. (1991). A Sacred Unity: Further Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York,
NY: Harper-Collins.
Battaglia, F., Lisanby, S. H., and Freedberg, D. (2011). Corticomotor excitability
during observation and imagination of a work of art. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
5:79. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2011.00079
Baumgarten, A. G. (1735). Reﬂections on Poetry. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Beardsley, M. C. (1981). Aesthetics: Problems in the Philosophy of Criticism .
Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company Inc.
Beebe, J. (2010). Psychotherapy in the aesthetic attitude. J. Anal. Psychol. 55,
165–186. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-5922.2010.01835.x
Beisser, A. (1970). “The paradoxical theory of change, ” in Gestalt Therapy Now ,
eds J. Fagan and I. Shepherd (New York, NY: Harper). doi: 10.1109/TMI.2012.
2199511
Berleant, A. (2015). Aesthetic sensibility. Ambiances 3:526.
Berlyne, D. E. (1970). Novelty, complexity, and hedonic value.Percept. Psychophys.
8, 279–286. doi: 10.3758/BF03212593
Berridge, K. C., and Kringelbach, M. L. (2015). Pleasure systems in the brain.
Neuron 86, 646–664. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.02.018
Berridge, K. C., Robinson, T. E., and Aldridge, J. W. (2009). Dissecting components
of reward: “liking”, “wanting”, and learning.Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 9, 65–73.
doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2008.12.014
Biederman, I., and Vessel, E. (2006). Perceptual pleasure and the brain: a novel
theory explains why the brain craves information and seeks it through the
senses. Am. Sci. 94, 247–253. doi: 10.1511/2006.3.247
Bion, W. (1961). Experiences in Groups. London: Tavistock Publications Ltd.
Bion, W. (1994). Clinical Seminars: And Other Works. London: Karnac Books.
Bishop, S. J. (2007). Neurocognitive mechanisms of anxiety: an integrative
account. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 307–316. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2007.
05.008
Blood, A. J., and Zatorre, R. J. (2001). Intensely pleasurable responses to
music correlate with activity in brain regions implicated in reward and
emotion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.98, 11818–11823. doi: 10.1073/pnas.19135
5898
Bloom, D. (2009) The phenomenological method of gestalt therapy: revisiting
husserl to discover the “Essence” of gestalt therapy. Gestalt Rev. 13, 277–295.
doi: 10.5325/gestaltreview.13.3.0277
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 18 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 19
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
Bloom, D. (2019). “Gestalt therapy and phenomenology: the intersection of parallel
lines, ” inHandbook for Theory, Research, and Practice in Gestalt Therapy , 2nd
Edn, ed. P. Brownell (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing).
Bloom, D. (2020). Intentionality: the fabric of relationality. Hum. Psychol. 48,
389–396. doi: 10.1037/hum0000212
Bloom, D. (2021). From the night before being: contacting the other. Gestalt. Rev.
25, 116–142. doi: 10.5325/gestaltreview.25.1.0116
Bloom, D. J. (2011). “Tiger! Tiger! Burning bright’ ó aesthetic values as clinical
values in gestalt therapy, ” inCreative License, eds M. S. Lobb and N. Amendt-
Lyon (Vienna: Springer).
Bodenhausen, G. V., Sheppard, L. A., and Kramer, G. P. (1994). Negative aﬀect
and social judgment: the diﬀerential impact of anger and sadness. Eur. J. Soc.
Psychol. 24, 45–62. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.2420240104
Boothby, E. J., Clark, M. S., and Bargh, J. A. (2014). Shared experiences are
ampliﬁed. Psychol. Sci. 25, 2209–2216. doi: 10.1177/0956797614551162
Boothby, E. J., Smith, L. K., Clark, M. S., and Bargh, J. A. (2017). The world looks
better together: how close others enhance our visual experiences.Pers. Relat. 24,
694–714. doi: 10.1111/pere.12201
Botella, S., and Botella, C. (2004). The Work of Psychic Figurability: Mental States
Without Representation, 1st Edn. Abingdon: Routledge.
Bourguignon, M., and Katz-Gilbert, M. (2018). The spaces of psychical reality.
A critical literature review. Res. Psychoanal. 26, 130–141. doi: 10.3917/rep1.026.
0130a
Bowlby, J. (1960). Grief and mourning in infancy and early childhood. Psychoanal.
Study Child 15, 9–52. doi: 10.1080/00797308.1960.11822566
Bracken, P., Thomas, P., Timimi, S., Asen, E., Behr, G., Beuster, C., et al. (2012).
Psychiatry beyond the current paradigm. Br. J. Psychiatry 201, 430–434. doi:
10.1192/bjp.bp.112.109447
Braem, S., Coenen, E., Bombeke, K., van Bochove, M. E., and Notebaert, W. (2015).
Open your eyes for prediction errors.Cogn. Aﬀect. Behav. Neurosci.15, 374–380.
doi: 10.3758/s13415-014-0333-4
Brielmann, A. A., Nuzzo, A., and Pelli, D. G. (2021). Beauty, the feeling. Acta
Psychol. 219:103365. doi: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2021.103365
Bromberg-Martin, E. S., and Hikosaka, O. (2009). Midbrain dopamine neurons
signal preference for advance information about upcoming rewards.Neuron 63,
119–126. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.06.009
Bromberg-Martin, E. S., Matsumoto, M., and Hikosaka, O. (2010). Dopamine in
motivational control: rewarding, aversive, and alerting. Neuron 68, 815–834.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.11.022
Brown, R., and Rulkov, N. F. (1997). Synchronization of chaotic systems: transverse
stability of trajectories in invariant manifolds. Chaos Interdiscip. J. Nonlinear
Sci. 7, 395–413. doi: 10.1063/1.166213
Bruineberg, J., and Rietveld, E. (2014). Self-organization, free energy minimization,
and optimal grip on a ﬁeld of aﬀordances. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8:599. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2014.00599
Brydevall, M., Bennett, D., Murawski, C., and Bode, S. (2018). The neural encoding
of information prediction errors during non-instrumental information seeking.
Sci. Rep. 8:6134. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-24566-x
Buckner, R. L., Krienen, F. M., Castellanos, A., Diaz, J. C., and Yeo, B. T. T. (2011).
The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional
connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. 106, 2322–2345. doi: 10.1152/jn.00339.2011
Carleton, R. N. (2016). Into the unknown: a review and synthesis of contemporary
models involving uncertainty. J. Anxiety Disord. 39, 30–43. doi: 10.1016/j.
janxdis.2016.02.007
Carver, C. S., and Scheier, M. F. (1990). Origins and functions of positive and
negative aﬀect: a control-process view. Psychol. Rev. 97, 19–35. doi: 10.1037/
0033-295X.97.1.19
Cela-Conde, C. J., Marty, G., Maestu, F., Ortiz, T., Munar, E., Fernandez, A.,
et al. (2004). Activation of the prefrontal cortex in the human visual aesthetic
perception. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 6321–6325. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
0401427101
Chatterjee, A., and Vartanian, O. (2014). Neuroaesthetics. Trends Cogn. Sci. 18,
370–375. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2014.03.003
Chetverikov, A., and Kristjánsson, Á (2016). On the joys of perceiving: aﬀect as
feedback for perceptual predictions. Acta Psychol. 169, 1–10. doi: 10.1016/j.
actpsy.2016.05.005
Cheung, V. K. M., Harrison, P. M. C., Meyer, L., Pearce, M. T., Haynes, J. D., and
Koelsch, S. (2019). Uncertainty and surprise jointly predict musical pleasure
and amygdala, hippocampus, and auditory cortex activity. Curr. Biol. 29,
4084.e4–4092.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2019.09.067
Ciompi, L., and Tschacher, W. (2021). Aﬀect-logic, embodiment, synergetics, and
the free energy principle: new approaches to the understanding and treatment
of schizophrenia. Entropy 23:1619. doi: 10.3390/e23121619
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future
of cognitive science. Behav. Brain Sci. 36, 181–204.
Clark, J. E., Watson, S., and Friston, K. J. (2018). What is mood? A computational
perspective. Psychol. Med. 48, 2277–2284. doi: 10.1017/S0033291718000430
Consoli, G. (2015). From beauty to knowledge: a new frame for the
neuropsychological approach to aesthetics. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 9:290. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2015.00290
Constant, A., Hesp, C., Davey, C. G., Friston, K. J., and Badcock, P. B. (2021). Why
depressed mood is adaptive: a numerical proof of principle for an evolutionary
systems theory of depression.Comput. Psychiatry5, 60–80. doi: 10.5334/cpsy.70
Cortelazzo, M., and Zolli, P. (1983). Dizionario Etimologico Della Lingua Italiana.
Bologna: Zanichelli.
Costa, T. L., and Wagemans, J. (2021). Gestalts at threshold could reveal Gestalts
as predictions. Sci. Rep. 11:18308. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-97878-0
Craik, F. I., and Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of processing and the retention of words
in episodic memory.J. Exp. Psychol. Gen.104, 268–294. doi: 10.1037/0096-3445.
104.3.268
Craik, F. I. M., and Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing: a framework for
memory research. J. Verbal Learning Verbal Behav. 11, 671–684. doi: 10.1016/
S0022-5371(72)80001-X
Cross, E. S., Kirsch, L., Ticini, L. F., and Schütz-Bosbach, S. (2011). The impact
of aesthetic evaluation and physical ability on dance perception. Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 5:102. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2011.00102
Cupchik, G. C., Vartanian, O., Crawley, A., and Mikulis, D. J. (2009). Viewing
artworks: contributions of cognitive control and perceptual facilitation to
aesthetic experience. Brain Cogn. 70, 84–91. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2009.01.003
Damasio, A. (2010). Self Comes to Mind: Constructing the Conscious Brain. London:
RHUK.
Damasio, A. (2012). Self Comes to Mind. Constructing the Conscious Brain .
New York, NY: Vintage.
Damasio, A., and Carvalho, G. B. (2013). The nature of feelings: evolutionary and
neurobiological origins. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14, 143–152. doi: 10.1038/nrn3403
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes Error : Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain .
New York, NY: G.P. Putnam.
Damasio, A. R. (1996). The somatic marker hypothesis and the possible functions
of the prefrontal cortex. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 351, 1413–1420.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.1996.0125
Danböck, S. K., Rattel, J. A., Franke, L. K., Liedlgruber, M., Miedl, S. F., and
Wilhelm, F. H. (2021). Peritraumatic dissociation revisited: associations with
autonomic activation, facial movements, staring, and intrusion formation. Eur.
J. Psychotraumatol. 12:1991609. doi: 10.1080/20008198.2021.1991609
Decety, J., and Fotopoulou, A. (2015). Why empathy has a beneﬁcial impact on
others in medicine: unifying theories. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 8:457. doi: 10.
3389/fnbeh.2014.00457
Del Popolo Cristaldi, F., Mento, G., Sarlo, M., and Buodo, G. (2021). Dealing
with uncertainty: a high-density EEG investigation on how intolerance of
uncertainty aﬀects emotional predictions. PLoS One 16:e0254045. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0254045
Dempster, B. (2000). Sympoietic and Autopoietic Systems: A New Distinction for
Self-Organizing Systems. Cham: Springer.
den Ouden, H. E. M., Kok, P., and de Lange, F. P. (2012). How prediction errors
shape perception, attention, and motivation.Front. Psychol. 3:548. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2012.00548
Denmark, F. (2010). “Zeigarnik eﬀect, ” inThe Corsini Encyclopedia of Psychology ,
eds I. B. Weiner and W. Edward Craighead (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley).
Depue, R. A., and Morrone-Strupinsky, J. V. (2005). A neurobehavioral model of
aﬃliative bonding: implications for conceptualizing a human trait of aﬃliation.
Behav. Brain Sci. 28, 313–395. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X05000063
Di Dio, D. C., Macaluso, E., and Rizzolatti, G. (2007). The golden beauty: brain
response to classical and renaissance sculptures. PLoS One 2:e1201. doi: 10.
1371/journal.pone.0001201
Dugas, M. J. (1997). Intolerance of uncertainty and problem orientation in worry.
Cogn. Ther. Res. 21, 593–606. doi: 10.1023/A:1021890322153
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 19 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 20
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
Esch, T., Winkler, J., Auwärter, V., Gnann, H., Huber, R., and Schmidt, S. (2017).
Neurobiological aspects of mindfulness in pain autoregulation: unexpected
results from a randomized-controlled trial and possible implications for
meditation research. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10:674. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.
00674
Eskenazi, T., Doerrfeld, A., Logan, G. D., Knoblich, G., and Sebanz, N. (2013). Your
words are my words: eﬀects of acting together on encoding. Q. J. Exp. Psychol.
66, 1026–1034. doi: 10.1080/17470218.2012.725058
Fantappiè, L. (2011). Che Cos’è La Sintropia. Rome: Di Renzo Editore.
Feldman, H., and Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 4:215. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215
Ferreri, L., Mas-Herrero, E., Zatorre, R. J., Ripollés, P., Gomez-Andres, A., Alicart,
H., et al. (2019). Dopamine modulates the reward experiences elicited by music.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116, 3793–3798. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1811878116
Ferro, A., and Civitavese, G. (2016). “Psychoanalysis and the analytic ﬁeld, ” inThe
Routledge Handbook of Psychoanalysis in the Social Sciences and Humanities, 1st
Edn, eds A. Elliott and J. Prager (Abingdon: Routledge).
Finisguerra, A., Ticini, L. F., Kirsch, L. P., Cross, E. S., Kotz, S. A., and Urgesi, C.
(2021). Dissociating embodiment and emotional reactivity in motor responses
to artworks. Cognition 212:104663. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2021.104663
Fink, E. (1933). Die phänomenologische philosophie husserls in der gegenwärtigen
Kritik. Kant Stud. 38, 319–383.
Fiorillo, C. D., Tobler, P. N., and Schultz, W. (2003). Discrete coding of reward
probability and uncertainty by dopamine neurons. Science 299, 1898–1902.
doi: 10.1126/science.1077349
FitzGibbon, L., Lau, J. K. L., and Murayama, K. (2020). The seductive lure of
curiosity: information as a motivationally salient reward.Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci.
35, 21–27. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2020.05.014
Fonagy, P., and Target, M. (1997). Attachment and reﬂective function: their
role in self-organization. Dev. Psychopathol. 9, 679–700. doi: 10.1017/
S0954579497001399
Francesetti, G. (2012). Pain and beauty: from the psychopathology to the aesthetics
of contact. Br. Gestalt J. 21, 4–18.
Francesetti, G. (2015). From individual symptoms to psychopathological ﬁelds.
Towards a ﬁeld perspective on clinical human suﬀering. Br. Gestalt J. 24, 5–19.
Francesetti, G. (2019a). Psychopathology, Atmospheres, and Clinical
Transformations: Towards a Field-Based Clinical Practice BT - Atmosphere
and Aesthetics: A Plural Perspective . Cham: Springer International Publishing,
223–240.
Francesetti, G. (2019b). “The ﬁeld perspective in clinical practice: towards a theory
of therapeutic phron ¯esis, ” inHandbook for Theory, Research, and Practice in
Gestalt Therapy, 2nd Edn, ed. P. Brownell (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge
Scholars Publishing), 268–302.
Francesetti, G. (2021).Fundamentals of Phenomenological-Gestalt Psychopathology:
A Light Introduction. Bordeaux: L ’Exprimerie.
Francesetti, G., Alcaro, A., and Settanni, M. (2020). Panic disorder: attack of fear
or acute attack of solitude? Convergences between aﬀective neuroscience and
phenomenological-Gestalt perspective. Res. Psychother. Psychopathol. Process
Outcome 23:421. doi: 10.4081/ripppo.2020.421
Francesetti, G., and Gecele, M. (2009). A Gestalt therapy perspective on
psychopathology and diagnosis. Br. Gestalt J. 18, 5–20.
Francesetti, G., and Griﬀero, T. (2019). Psychopathology and Atmospheres: Neither
Inside nor Outside. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambrige Scholar Publishing.
Francesetti, G., and Roubal, J. (2020). Field theory in contemporary gestalt therapy,
part 1: modulating the Therapist’s presence in clinical practice.Gestalt Rev. 24,
113–136. doi: 10.5325/gestaltreview.24.2.0113
Freedberg, D., and Gallese, V. (2007). Motion, emotion and empathy in esthetic
experience. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 197–203. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2007.02.003
Freud, S. (1951). “Formulations regarding the two principles in mental
functioning, ” inOrganization and Pathology of Thought: Selected Sources , ed.
D. Rapaport (New York, NY: Columbia University Press), 315–328.
Frijda, N. H. (1986). The Emotions. Paris: Editions de la Maison des Sciences de
l’Homme.
Friston, K. (2003). Learning and inference in the brain. Neural Netw. 16, 1325–
1352. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2003.06.005
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain? Trends
Cogn. Sci. 13, 293–301. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it.J. R. Soc. Interface 10:20130475. doi: 10.1098/
rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K., Thornton, C., and Clark, A. (2012b). Free-energy minimization and the
dark-room problem. Front. Psychol. 3:130. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00130
Friston, K., Breakspear, M., and Deco, G. (2012a). Perception and self-organized
instability. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 6:44. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2012.00044
Friston, K., and Frith, C. (2015a). A duet for one. Conscious. Cogn. 36, 390–405.
doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2014.12.003
Friston, K. J., and Frith, C. D. (2015b). Active inference, communication and
hermeneutics. Cortex 68, 129–143. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2015.03.025
Friston, K., and Kiebel, S. (2009). Predictive coding under the free-energy principle.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 364, 1211–1221. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0300
Friston, K., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A free energy principle for the brain.
J. Physiol. Paris 100, 70–87. doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.10.001
Friston, K. J., Lin, M., Frith, C. D., Pezzulo, G., Hobson, J. A., and Ondobaka, S.
(2017). Active inference, curiosity and insight. Neural Comput. 29, 2633–2683.
doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00999
Frith, C. D., and Wentzer, T. S. (2013). “Neural hermeneutics, ” inEncyclopedia of
Philosophy and the Social Sciences , ed. B. Kaldis (Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE
Publications, Inc).
Fuchs, T., and Koch, S. C. (2014). Embodied aﬀectivity: on moving and being
moved. Front. Psychol. 5:508. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00508
Gallagher, S., and Allen, M. (2018). Active inference, enactivism and the
hermeneutics of social cognition. Synthese 195, 2627–2648. doi: 10.1007/
s11229-016-1269-8
Gallese, V. (2017). “Mirroring, a liberated embodied simulation and aesthetic
experience, ” inMirror Images. Reﬂections in Art and Medicine , eds H. Hirsch,
A. Pace, G. Bernegger, and V. Gallese (Nuremberg: Verlag für moderne Kunst).
Gallese, V. (2018). Naturalizing aesthetic experience: the role of (liberated)
embodied simulation. Projections 12, 50–59. doi: 10.3167/proj.2018.120207
Gallese, V., Eagle, M. N., and Migone, P. (2007). Intentional attunement: mirror
neurons and the neural underpinnings of interpersonal relations. J. Am.
Psychoanal. Assoc. 55, 131–176. doi: 10.1177/00030651070550010601
Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., and Rizzolatti, G. (1996). Action recognition in
the premotor cortex. Brain 119, 593–609. doi: 10.1093/brain/119.2.593
Gallese, V., and Lakoﬀ, G. (2005). The Brain’s concepts: the role of the Sensory-
motor system in conceptual knowledge. Cogn. Neuropsychol. 22, 455–479. doi:
10.1080/02643290442000310
Gallese, V., and Sinigaglia, C. (2011). What is so special about embodied
simulation? Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 512–519. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2011.09.003
Gasper, K., and Clore, G. L. (2002). Attending to the big picture: mood and
global versus local processing of visual information. Psychol. Sci. 13, 34–40.
doi: 10.1111/1467-9280.00406
Gernot, G., Pelowski, M., and Leder, H. (2018). Empathy, Einfühlung, and aesthetic
experience: the eﬀect of emotion contagion on appreciation of representational
and abstract art using fEMG and SCR.Cogn. Process. 19, 147–165. doi: 10.1007/
s10339-017-0800-2
Girod, M., and Wong, D. (2005). An aesthetic (deweyan) perspective on science
learning: case studies of three fourth graders. Elem. Sch. J. 102, 199–224. doi:
10.1086/499700
Gold, B. P., Mas-Herrero, E., Zeighami, Y., Benovoy, M., Dagher, A., and Zatorre,
R. J. (2019a). Musical reward prediction errors engage the nucleus accumbens
and motivate learning. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116, 3310–3315. doi: 10.
1073/pnas.1809855116
Gold, B. P., Pearce, M. T., Mas-Herrero, E., Dagher, A., and Zatorre, R. J. (2019b).
Predictability and uncertainty in the pleasure of music: a reward for learning?
J. Neurosci. 39, 9397–9409. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0428-19.2019
Goldstein, A. (1980). Thrills in response to music and other stimuli. Physiol.
Psychol. 8, 126–129. doi: 10.3758/BF03326460
Gottlieb, J., Oudeyer, P. Y., Lopes, M., and Baranes, A. (2013). Information-seeking,
curiosity, and attention: computational and neural mechanisms. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 17, 585–593. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.001
Graf, L. K. M., and Landwehr, J. R. (2015). A dual-process perspective on ﬂuency-
based aesthetics: the pleasure-interest model of aesthetic liking. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. Rev. 19, 395–410. doi: 10.1177/1088868315574978
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 20 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 21
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
Graf, L. K. M., and Landwehr, J. R. (2017). Aesthetic pleasure versus aesthetic
interest: the two routes to aesthetic liking. Front. Psychol. 8:15. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2017.00015
Gross, S. W. (2002). The neglected programme of aesthetics. Br. J. Aesthet. 42,
403–414. doi: 10.1093/bjaesthetics/42.4.403
Boston Change Process Study Group (2018). Moving through and being moved
by: embodiment in development and in the therapeutic relationship. Contemp.
Psychoanal. 54, 299–321. doi: 10.1080/00107530.2018.1456841
Grzywacz, N. M., and Aleem, H. (2022). Does amount of information support
aesthetic values? Front. Neurosci. 16:805658. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.805658
Guidano, V. F. (1991). The Self in Process: Toward a Post-Rationalist Cognitive
Therapy. New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
Haber, S. N., and Behrens, T. E. J. (2014). The neural network underlying
incentive-based learning: implications for interpreting circuit disruptions in
psychiatric disorders. Neuron 83, 1019–1039. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.0
8.031
Hagelberg, N., Kajander, J. K., Någren, K., Hinkka, S., Hietala, J., and Scheinin,
H. (2002). Mu-receptor agonism with alfentanil increases striatal dopamine D2
receptor binding in man. Synapse 45, 25–30. doi: 10.1002/syn.10078
Harries-Jones, P. (2004). Revisiting Angels Fear: Recursion, Ecology and
Aesthetics. Available online at: https://see.library.utoronto.ca/SEED/Vol4-1/
Harries-Jones.htm (accessed June 24, 2022).
Hatﬁeld, G. (2002). “Perception as unconscious inference, ” in Perception and the
Physical World: Psychological and Philosophical Issues in Perception , eds D.
Heyer and R. Mausfeld (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons).
Havlík, M., Kozáková, E., and Horáˇcek, J. (2017). Why and how. The future of the
central questions of consciousness. Front. Psychol. 8:1797. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2017.01797
He, X., Lever, A. G., and Humphreys, G. W. (2011). Interpersonal memory-based
guidance of attention is reduced for ingroup members. Exp. Brain Res. 211,
429–438. doi: 10.1007/s00221-011-2698-8
Heiddeger, M., and Boss, M. (2000).Zollikon Seminars. Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press.
Heilbron, M., and Chait, M. (2017). Great expectations: is there evidence for
predictive coding in auditory cortex? Neuroscience 389, 54–73. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroscience.2017.07.061
Hein, T. P., de Fockert, J., and Ruiz, M. H. (2021). State anxiety biases
estimates of uncertainty and impairs reward learning in volatile
environments. Neuroimage 224:117424. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117
424
Heisenberg, W. (1927). Uber die Grundprincipien der ‘Quantenmechanik’ “ (On
the basic principles of quantum mechanics). Forschungen Fortschritte 3:83.
Hesp, C., Smith, R., Parr, T., Allen, M., Friston, K. J., and Ramstead, M. J. D. (2021).
Deeply felt aﬀect: the emergence of valence in deep active inference. Neural
Comput. 33, 398–446. doi: 10.1162/neco_a_01341
Hillman, J. (1988). The right to remain silent. J. Hum. Educ. Dev. 26, 141–153.
doi: 10.1002/j.2164-4683.1988.tb00322.x
Hirsh, J. B., Mar, R. A., and Peterson, J. B. (2012). Psychological entropy: a
framework for understanding uncertainty-related anxiety. Psychol. Rev. 119,
304–320. doi: 10.1037/a0026767
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs 50, 259–285. doi: 10.1111/nous.
12062
Holmes, J., and Nolte, T. (2019). “Surprise” and the bayesian brain: implications for
psychotherapy theory and practice. Front. Psychol. 10:592. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2019.00592
Hu, A., Xu, Z., and Guo, L. (2010). The existence of generalized synchronization
of chaotic systems in complex networks. Chaos Interdiscip. J. Nonlinear Sci.
20:13112. doi: 10.1063/1.3309017
Husserl, E. (2012). Ideas General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology . New York,
NY: Routlege.
Immordino-Y ang, M. H., and Damasio, A. (2007). We feel, therefore
we learn: the relevance of aﬀective and social neuroscience to
education. Mind Brain Educ. 1, 3–10. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-228X.2007.00
004.x
Izquierdo, I. (1982). The role of an endogenous amnesic mechanism mediated
by brain beta-endorphin in memory modulation. Braz. J. Med. Biol. Res. 15,
119–134.
Izquierdo, I., Dias, R. D., Souza, D. O., Carrasco, M. A., Elisabetsky, E., and Perry,
M. L. (1980). The role of opioid peptides in memory and learning. Behav. Brain
Res. 1, 451–468. doi: 10.1016/0166-4328(80)90001-7
Jacobs, L. (2017). Hopes, fear, and enduring relational themes. Br. Gestalt J. 26,
7–16.
Jacobsen, T., Schubotz, R. I., Höfel, L., and Cramon, D. Y. V. (2006). Brain
correlates of aesthetic judgment of beauty. Neuroimage 29, 276–285. doi: 10.
1016/j.neuroimage.2005.07.010
Joﬃly, M., and Coricelli, G. (2013). Emotional valence and the free-energy
principle. PLoS Comput. Biol. 9:e1003094. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003094
Kandasamy, R., Hillhouse, T. M., Livingston, K. E., Kochan, K. E., Meurice, C.,
Eans, S. O., et al. (2021). Positive allosteric modulation of the mu-opioid
receptor produces analgesia with reduced side eﬀects. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 118:e017118. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2000017118
Kang, M. J., Hsu, M., Krajbich, I. M., Loewenstein, G., McClure, S. M., Wang,
J. T., et al. (2009). The wick in the candle of learning: epistemic curiosity
activates reward circuitry and enhances memory. Psychol. Sci. 20, 963–973.
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02402.x
Kaplan, F., and Oudeyer, P.-Y. (2004). “Maximizing learning progress: an internal
reward system for development, ” inEmbodied Artiﬁcial Intelligence, eds F. Iida,
R. Pfeifer, L. Steels, and Y. Kuniyoshi (Cham: Springer). doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0195321
Katz, L. D. (2005). Opioid Bliss as the felt hedonic core of mammalian prosociality –
and of consummatory pleasure more generally? Behav. Brain Sci. 28:356.
Kawabata, H., and Zeki, S. (2004). Neural correlates of beauty. J. Neurophysiol. 91,
1699–1705. doi: 10.1152/jn.00696.2003
Kelso, J. A. S. (1995). Dynamic Patterns: The Self-Organization of Brain and
Behavior. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kesner, L. (2014). The predictive mind and the experience of visual art work.Front.
Psychol. 5:1417. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01417
Keverne, E. B., Martensz, N. D., and Tuite, B. (1989). Beta-endorphin
concentrations in cerebrospinal ﬂuid of monkeys are inﬂuenced by grooming
relationships. Psychoneuroendocrinology 14, 155–161. doi: 10.1016/0306-
4530(89)90065-6
Keysers, C., Kaas, J. H., and Gazzola, V. (2010). Somatosensation in social
perception. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11, 417–428. doi: 10.1038/nrn2833
Kilner, J. M., Friston, K. J., and Frith, C. D. (2007). Predictive coding: an account of
the mirror neuron system. Cogn. Process. 8, 159–166. doi: 10.1007/s10339-007-
0170-2
Kirsch, L. P., Urgesi, C., and Cross, E. S. (2016). Shaping and reshaping the aesthetic
brain: emerging perspectives on the neurobiology of embodied aesthetics.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 62, 56–68. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.12.005
Kiverstein, J., Miller, M., and Rietveld, E. (2019). The feeling of grip: novelty, error
dynamics, and the predictive brain. Synthese 196, 2847–2869. doi: 10.1007/
s11229-017-1583-9
Kiverstein, J., Miller, M., and Rietveld, E. (2020). How mood tunes prediction:
a neurophenomenological account of mood and its disturbance in major
depression. Neurosci. Conscious. 2020:niaa003. doi: 10.1093/nc/niaa003
Koelsch, S. (2010). Towards a neural basis of music-evoked emotions.Trends Cogn.
Sci. 14, 131–137. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2010.01.002
Koelsch, S., Vuust, P., and Friston, K. (2019). Predictive processes and the peculiar
case of music. Trends Cogn. Sci. 23, 63–77. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2018.10.006
Koike, T., Tanabe, H. C., Okazaki, S., Nakagawa, E., Sasaki, A. T., Shimada, K., et al.
(2016). Neural substrates of shared attention as social memory: a hyperscanning
functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Neuroimage 125, 401–412. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.09.076
Lacey, S., Hagtvedt, H., Patrick, V. M., Anderson, A., Stilla, R., Deshpande, G., et al.
(2011). Art for reward’s sake: visual art recruits the ventral striatum.Neuroimage
55, 420–433. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.11.027
Laeng, B., Garvija, L., L¯seth, G., Eikemo, M., Ernst, G., and Leknes, S. (2021).
‘Defrosting’ music chills with naltrexone: the role of endogenous opioids for
the intensity of musical pleasure. Conscious. Cogn. 90:103105. doi: 10.1016/j.
concog.2021.103105
Lanius, U. F. (2014). “Dissociation and endogenous opioids: a foundational role, ”
in Neurobiology and Treatment of Traumatic Dissociation: Toward an Embodied
Self, eds U. F. Lanius, S. L. Paulsen, and F. M. Corrigan (New York, NY: Springer
Publishing Company), 81–104.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 21 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 22
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
Latner, J. (1983). This is the speed of light: ﬁeld and systems theories in gestalt
therapy. Gestalt J. 6, 71–90.
Leder, H., Bär, S., and Topolinski, S. (2012). Covert painting simulations inﬂuence
aesthetic appreciation of artworks. Psychol. Sci. 23, 1479–1481. doi: 10.1177/
0956797612452866
Levine, H. B., Reed, G. S., Scarfone, D., and Saragnano, G. (2013). Unrepresented
States and the Construction of Meaning: Clinical and Theoretical Contributions,
1st Edn. Abingdon: Routledge.
Lewin, K. (2016). Frontiers in group dynamics: concept, method and reality in
social science; social equilibria and social change. Hum. Relations 1, 5–41.
Li, S. S. Y., and McNally, G. P. (2014). The conditions that promote fear learning:
prediction error and Pavlovian fear conditioning. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 108,
14–21. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2013.05.002
Lieder, F., Daunizeau, J., Garrido, M. I., Friston, K. J., and Stephan, K. E. (2013).
Modelling trial-by-trial changes in the mismatch negativity.PLoS Comput. Biol.
9:e1002911. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002911
Limanowski, J., and Blankenburg, F. (2013). Minimal self-models and the free
energy principle. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7:547. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00547
Limanowski, J., and Friston, K. (2018). ‘Seeing the dark’: grounding phenomenal
transparency and opacity in precision estimation for active inference. Front.
Psychol. 9:643. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00643
Limanowski, J., Sarasso, P., and Blankenburg, F. (2018). Diﬀerent responses of
the right superior temporal sulcus to visual movement feedback during self-
generated vs. externally generated hand movements. Eur. J. Neurosci. 47,
314–320. doi: 10.1111/ejn.13824
Lintas, A., Chi, N., Lauzon, N. M., Bishop, S. F., Gholizadeh, S., Sun, N., et al.
(2011). Identiﬁcation of a dopamine receptor-mediated opiate reward memory
switch in the basolateral amygdala-nucleus accumbens circuit. J. Neurosci. 31,
11172–11183. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1781-11.2011
Lord, S. (2017). Moments of Meeting in Psychoanalysis: Interaction and Change in
the Therapeutic Encounter, 1st Edn. Abingdon: Routledge.
L¯seth, G. E., Eikemo, M., and Leknes, S. (2019). Eﬀects of opioid receptor
stimulation and blockade on touch pleasantness: a double-blind randomised
trial. Soc. Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 14, 411–422. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsz022
Lovallo, D., and Kahneman, D. (2000). Living with uncertainty: attractiveness and
resolution timing. J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 13, 179–190.
Lubbers, M. E., van den Bos, R., and Spruijt, B. M. (2007). Mu opioid receptor
knockout mice in the Morris Water Maze: a learning or motivation deﬁcit?
Behav. Brain Res. 180, 107–111. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2007.02.021
Lutz, A., Nassehi, A., Bao, Y., Pöppel, E., Sztrókay, A., Reiser, M., et al. (2013).
Neurocognitive processing of body representations in artistic and photographic
images. Neuroimage 66, 288–292. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.10.067
Machelska, H., and Celik, M. Ö (2018). Advances in achieving opioid analgesia
without side eﬀects. Front. Pharmacol. 9:1388. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01388
Mahoney, M. J. (1991). Human Change Processes: The Scientiﬁc Foundations of
Psychotherapy. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Mallik, A., Chanda, M. L., and Levitin, D. J. (2017). Anhedonia to music and
mu-opioids: evidence from the administration of naltrexone. Sci. Rep. 7:41952.
doi: 10.1038/srep41952
Margarian, A. (2014). A cross-cultural study of somatic countertransference: a brief
overview. Asia Pac. J. Couns. Psychother. 5, 137–145. doi: 10.1080/21507686.
2014.894922
Markovi´c, S. (2012). Components of aesthetic experience: aesthetic fascination,
aesthetic appraisal, and aesthetic emotion. Iperception 3, 1–17. doi: 10.1068/
i0450aap
Marmar, C. R., Weiss, D. S., Schlenger, W. E., Fairbank, J. A., Jordan, B. K., Kulka,
R. A., et al. (1994). Peritraumatic dissociation and posttraumatic stress in male
Vietnam theater veterans. Am. J. Psychiatry 151, 902–907. doi: 10.1176/ajp.151.
6.902
Maturana, H. R., and Varela, F. J. (1980).Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization
of the Living. Dordrecht: Springer.
McReynolds, P. (1971). “The three faces of cognitive motivation, ” in Intrinsic
Motivation: A New Direction in Education , eds D. E. Berlyne and D. E. Hunt
(Toronto: Holt, Rinehart and Winston).
Meier, I. M., van Honk, J., Bos, P. A., and Terburg, D. (2021). A mu-opioid feedback
model of human social behavior. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 121, 250–258. doi:
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.12.013
Mencke, I., Omigie, D., Wald-Fuhrmann, M., and Brattico, E. (2019). Atonal
music: can uncertainty lead to pleasure? Front. Neurosci. 12:979. doi: 10.3389/
fnins.2018.00979
Menninghaus, W., Wagner, V., Hanich, J., Wassiliwizky, E., Jacobsen, T., and
Koelsch, S. (2017). The Distancing-Embracing model of the enjoyment of
negative emotions in art reception. Behav. Brain Sci. 40:e347. doi: 10.1017/
s0140525x17000309
Menninghaus, W., Wagner, V., Hanich, J., Wassiliwizky, E., Kuehnast, M., and
Jacobsen, T. (2015). Towards a psychological construct of being moved. PLoS
One 10:e0128451. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128451
Menninghaus, W., Wagner, V., Wassiliwizky, E., Schindler, I., Hanich, J., Jacobsen,
T., et al. (2019). What are aesthetic emotions? Psychol. Rev. 126, 171–195.
doi: 10.1037/rev0000135
Merleau-Ponty, M. (2002). Phenomenology of Perception. London: Routledge.
Metzger, W. (1941). Psychologie. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Meynen, G., and Verburgt, J. (2009). Psychopathology and causal explanation in
practice. A critical note on Heidegger’s zollikon seminars. Med. Heal. Care
Philos. 12, 57–66. doi: 10.1007/s11019-008-9137-z
Miller, M., Kiverstein, J., and Rietveld, E. (2021). The predictive dynamics
of happiness and well-being. Emot. Rev. 14, 15–30. doi: 10.1177/
17540739211063851
Mirza, M. B., Adams, R. A., Mathys, C., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Human visual
exploration reduces uncertainty about the sensed world.PLoS One 13:e0190429.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0190429
Muth, C., and Carbon, C. C. (2013). The aesthetic aha: on the pleasure of having
insights into gestalt. Acta Psychol. 144, 25–30. doi: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2013.05.001
Muth, C., Pepperell, R., and Carbon, C.-C. (2013). Give me gestalt! Preference for
cubist artworks revealing high detectability of objects. Leonardo 46, 488–489.
doi: 10.1162/LEON_a_00649
Nadal, M. (2013). The experience of art. Insights from neuroimaging. Prog. Brain
Res. 204, 135–158. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63287-6.00007-5
Nietzsche, F. (1982). Daybreak: Thoughts on the Prejudices of Morality. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Nietzsche, F. (2010). Beyond Good & Evil Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future .
New York, NY: Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.
Noë, A. (2005). Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ogden, T. H. (2003). What’s true and whose idea was it? Int. J. Psychoanal. 84,
593–606. doi: 10.1516/002075703766644634
Oliva, V., Gregory, R., Davies, W.-E., Harrison, L., Moran, R., Pickering, A. E.,
et al. (2021). Parallel cortical-brainstem pathways to attentional analgesia.
Neuroimage 226:117548. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117548
Orbach, S., and Carroll, R. (2006). “Contemporary approaches to body in
psychotherapy: two psychotherapists in dialogue, ” in About a Body: Working
with the Embodied Mind in Psychotherapy , eds J. Corrigalll, H. Payne, and H.
Wilkinson (London: Routledge), 63–82.
Orsucci, F. (2021). Human synchronization maps-the hybrid consciousness of the
embodied mind. Entropy 23:1569. doi: 10.3390/e23121569
Oudeyer, P. Y., Gottlieb, J., and Lopes, M. (2016). Intrinsic motivation, curiosity,
and learning: theory and applications in educational technologies. Prog. Brain
Res. 229, 257–284. doi: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2016.05.005
Oudeyer, P. Y., Kaplan, F., and Hafner, V. V. (2007). Intrinsic motivation systems
for autonomous mental development. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 11, 265–286.
doi: 10.1109/TEVC.2006.890271
Oyama, Y., Manalo, E., and Nakatani, Y. (2018). The Hemingway eﬀect: how failing
to ﬁnish a task can have a positive eﬀect on motivation. Think. Ski. Creat. 30,
7–18. doi: 10.1016/j.tsc.2018.01.001
Pallaro, P. (2002). “Somatic countertransference: the therapist in relationship, ” in
Authentic Movement: Moving the Body, Moving the Self, Being Moved , ed. P.
Pallaro (London: Jessica Kingsley), 176–193.
Panksepp, J. (1998).Aﬀective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human and Animal
Emotion. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Panksepp, J. (2010). Aﬀective neuroscience of the emotional BrainMind:
evolutionary perspectives and implications for understanding depression.
Dialog. Clin. Neurosci. 12, 533–545. doi: 10.31887/DCNS.2010.12.4/jpanksepp
Panksepp, J., and Bishop, P. (1981). An autoradiographic map of (3H)
diprenorphine binding in rat brain: eﬀects of social interaction. Brain Res. Bull.
7, 405–410. doi: 10.1016/0361-9230(81)90038-1
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 22 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 23
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
Pappas, G. F. (2008). John Dewey’s ethics: democracy as experience.Contemp. Polit.
Theory 9, 251–253. doi: 10.1057/cpt.2009.20
Parlet, M. (1991). Reﬂections on ﬁeld theory. Br. Gestalt J. 1, 68–91.
Pelowski, M., and Akiba, F. (2011). A model of art perception, evaluation and
emotion in transformative aesthetic experience. New Ideas Psychol. 29, 80–97.
doi: 10.1016/j.newideapsych.2010.04.001
Pelowski, M., Markey, P. S., Forster, M., Gerger, G., and Leder, H. (2017). Move me,
astonish me. . . delight my eyes and brain: the Vienna integrated model of top-
down and bottom-up processes in art perception (VIMAP) and corresponding
aﬀective, evaluative, and neurophysiological correlates. Phys. Life Rev. 21,
80–125. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2017.02.003
Perlovsky, L., Bonniot-Cabanac, M., and Cabanac, M. (2010). Curiosity and
pleasure. WebmedCentral Psychol. 1:1275. doi: 10.9754/journal.wmc.2010.
001275
Perlovsky, L., and Schoeller, F. (2019). Unconscious emotions of human learning.
Phys. Life Rev. 31, 257–262. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2019.10.007
Perlovsky, L. I. (2006). Toward physics of the mind: concepts, emotions,
consciousness, and symbols. Phys. Life Rev. 3, 23–55. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2005.
11.003
Perlovsky, L. I. (2010). Neural mechanisms of the mind, aristotle, zadeh, and fMRI.
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 21, 718–733. doi: 10.1109/TNN.2010.2041250
Perls, F., Heﬀerline, G., and Goodman, P. (1951). Gestalt Therapy, Vol. 64. New
York, NY: Julian Press, 19–313.
Perls, F. S. (1992). Ego, Hunger and Aggression. New York, NY: The Gestalt Journal
Press.
Philippson, P. (2017). We live in turbulent Gestalt times. Thoughts after the
UKAGP/BGJ Conference. Br. Gestalt J. 26:2.
Philippson, P. T. (2009). The Emergent Self. An Existential-Gestalt Approach .
London: Karnac Books.
Ploj, K., Roman, E., and Nylander, I. (2003). Long-term eﬀects of maternal
separation on ethanol intake and brain opioid and dopamine receptors in male
Wistar rats. Neuroscience 121, 787–799. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4522(03)00499-8
Preter, M., and Klein, D. F. (2014). Lifelong opioidergic vulnerability through early
life separation: a recent extension of the false suﬀocation alarm theory of panic
disorder. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 46(Pt 3), 345–351. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.
2014.03.025
Preter, M., Lee, S. H., Petkova, E., Vannucci, M., Kim, S., and Klein, D. F. (2011).
Controlled cross-over study in normal subjects of naloxone-preceding-lactate
infusions; respiratory and subjective responses: relationship to endogenous
opioid system, suﬀocation false alarm theory and childhood parental loss.
Psychol. Med. 41, 385–393. doi: 10.1017/S0033291710000838
Quadt, L., Critchley, H. D., and Garﬁnkel, S. N. (2018). The neurobiology of
interoception in health and disease. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1428, 112–128. doi:
10.1111/nyas.13915
Ramachandran, V. S., and Hirstein, W. (1999). The science of art a neurological
theory of aesthetic experience. J. Conscious. Stud. 6, 15–51. doi: 10.1179/
174327908X392906
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., and Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering
Schrödinger’s question: a free-energy formulation. Phys. Life Rev. 24, 1–16.
doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., and Hipólito, I. (2020). Is the free-energy
principle a formal theory of semantics? From variational density dynamics to
neural and phenotypic representations.Entropy 22:889. doi: 10.3390/e22080889
Reid, V. M., Striano, T., Kaufman, J., and Johnson, M. H. (2004). Eye gaze cueing
facilitates neural processing of objects in 4-month-old infants. Neuroreport 15,
2553–2555. doi: 10.1097/00001756-200411150-00025
Reisenzein, R. (2009). Emotional experience in the computational belief–desire
theory of emotion. Emot. Rev. 1, 214–222. doi: 10.1177/1754073909103589
Rizzolatti, G., and Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron system. Annu. Rev.
Neurosci. 27, 169–192. doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144230
Rizzolatti, G., and Fogassi, L. (2014). The mirror mechanism: recent ﬁndings and
perspectives. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.369:20130420. doi: 10.1098/
rstb.2013.0420
Rizzolatti, G., and Sinigaglia, C. (2010). The functional role of the parieto-frontal
mirror circuit: interpretations and misinterpretations. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11,
264–274. doi: 10.1038/nrn2805
Ronga, I., Sarasso, P., Fossataro, C., Salatino, A., Garbarini, F., Ricci, R., et al.
(2018). Everything is illuminated: prismatic adaptation lowers visual detection
threshold in normal subjects. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 44,
1619–1628. doi: 10.1037/xhp0000559
Roubal, J., and Francesetti, G. (2022). Field theory in contemporary gestalt therapy
part two: paradoxical theory of change reconsidered. Gestalt Rev. 26, 1–33.
doi: 10.5325/gestaltreview.26.1.0001
Roubal, J., Francesetti, G., and Gecele, M. (2017). Aesthetic diagnosis in gestalt
therapy. Behav. Sci. 7:70. doi: 10.3390/bs7040070
Roubal, J., and Rihacek, T. (2016). Therapists’ in-session experiences with
depressive clients: a grounded theory. Psychother. Res. 26, 206–219. doi: 10.
1080/10503307.2014.963731
Rozzi, S., Calzavara, R., Belmalih, A., Borra, E., Gregoriou, G. G., Matelli, M., et al.
(2006). Cortical connections of the inferior parietal cortical convexity of the
macaque monkey. Cereb. Cortex 16, 1389–1417. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhj076
Ruiz, A. (1996). The contribution of humberto maturana to the sciences of
complexity and psychology. J. Constr. Psychol. 9, 283–302.
Rütgen, M., Seidel, E.-M., Silani, G., Rie ˇcanský, I., Hummer, A., Windischberger,
C., et al. (2015). Placebo analgesia and its opioidergic regulation suggest that
empathy for pain is grounded in self pain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112,
E5638–E5646. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1511269112
Saha, N., Datta, H., and Sharma, P. L. (1991). Eﬀects of morphine on memory:
interactions with naloxone, propranolol and haloperidol. Pharmacology 42,
10–14. doi: 10.1159/000138762
Sajadi, A. A., Samaei, S. A., and Rashidy-Pour, A. (2007). Blocking eﬀects
of intra-hippocampal naltrexone microinjections on glucocorticoid-induced
impairment of spatial memory retrieval in rats. Neuropharmacology 52, 347–
354. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2006.08.021
Sarasso, P., Barbieri, P., Del Fante, E., Bechis, L., Neppi-Modona, M., Sacco, K.,
et al. (2022). Preferred music listening is associated with perceptual learning
enhancement at the expense of self-focused attention.Psychon. Bull. Rev. [Epub
ahead of print]. doi: 10.3758/s13423-022-02127-8
Sarasso, P., Neppi-Modona, M., Rosaia, N., Perna, P., Barbieri, P., Del Fante, E.,
et al. (2021a). Nice and easy: mismatch negativity responses reveal a signiﬁcant
correlation between aesthetic appreciation and perceptual learning. J. Exp.
Psychol. Gen. [Epub ahead of print]. doi: 10.1037/xge0001149
Sarasso, P., Perna, P., Barbieri, P., Neppi-Modona, M., Sacco, K., and Ronga,
I. (2021b). Memorisation and implicit perceptual learning are enhanced for
preferred musical intervals and chords. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 28, 1623–1637.
doi: 10.3758/s13423-021-01922-z
Sarasso, P., Ronga, I., Neppi-Modona, M., and Sacco, K. (2021c). The role of
musical aesthetic emotions in social adaptation to the Covid-19 pandemic.
Front. Psychol. 12:445. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.611639
Sarasso, P., Neppi-Modona, M., Sacco, K., and Ronga, I. (2020a). “Stopping
for knowledge”: the sense of beauty in the perception-action cycle. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 118, 723–738. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.09.004
Sarasso, P., Ronga, I., Kobau, P., Bosso, T., Artusio, I., Ricci, R., et al. (2020b).
Beauty in mind: aesthetic appreciation correlates with perceptual facilitation
and attentional ampliﬁcation. Neuropsychologia 136:107282. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuropsychologia.2019.107282
Sarasso, P., Ronga, I., Pistis, A., Forte, E., Garbarini, F., Ricci, R.,
et al. (2019). Aesthetic appreciation of musical intervals enhances
behavioural and neurophysiological indexes of attentional engagement
and motor inhibition. Sci. Rep. 9:18550. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-55
131-9
Sbriscia-Fioretti, B., Berchio, C., Freedberg, D., Gallese, V., and Umiltà, M. A.
(2013). ERP modulation during observation of abstract paintings by Franz
Kline. PLoS One 8:e75241. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075241
Schmidhuber, J. (2009). Simple algorithmic theory of subjective beauty, novelty,
surprise, interestingness attention, curiosity, creativity, art, science, music,
jokes. J. Soc. Instrum. Control Eng. 48, 21–32.
Schoeller, F. (2015). Knowledge, curiosity, and aesthetic chills. Front. Psychol.
6:1546. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01546
Schoeller, F., and Perlovsky, L. (2016). Aesthetic chills: knowledge-acquisition,
meaning-making, and aesthetic emotions. Front. Psychol. 7:1093. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2016.01093
Schopenhauer, A. (1969). The World as Will and Representation, Vol. 1. New York,
NY: Dover.
Schrödinger, E. (1944). What is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell .
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 23 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 24
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T. H. B., and Dolan, R. (2016). Neural signals
encoding shifts in beliefs.Neuroimage 125, 578–586. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2015.10.067
Schwartenbeck, P., Passecker, J., Hauser, T. U., FitzGerald, T. H. B., Kronbichler,
M., and Friston, K. J. (2019). Computational mechanisms of curiosity and
goal-directed exploration. eLife 8:e41703. doi: 10.7554/eLife.41703
Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self.Trends
Cogn. Sci. 17, 565–573. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.007
Seth, A. K., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the
emotional brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 371:20160007. doi: 10.1098/
rstb.2016.0007
Seth, A. K., Millidge, B., Buckley, C. L., and Tschantz, A. (2020). Curious inferences:
reply to sun and ﬁrestone on the dark room problem. Trends Cogn. Sci. 24,
681–683. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2020.05.011
Shaw, R. (2003). The Embodied Psychotherapist: The Therapist’s Body Story .
London: Routledge.
Shipp, S., Adams, R. A., and Friston, K. J. (2013). Reﬂections on agranular
architecture: predictive coding in the motor cortex. Trends Neurosci. 36, 706–
716. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2013.09.004
Shteynberg, G. (2010). A silent emergence of culture: the social tuning eﬀect.J. Pers.
Soc. Psychol. 99, 683–689. doi: 10.1037/a0019573
Shteynberg, G. (2015). Shared attention. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 10, 579–590. doi:
10.1177/1745691615589104
Shteynberg, G., and Apfelbaum, E. P. (2013). The power of shared experience:
simultaneous observation with similar others facilitates social learning. Soc.
Psychol. Personal. Sci. 4, 738–744. doi: 10.1177/1948550613479807
Shteynberg, G., Bramlett, J. M., Fles, E. H., and Cameron, J. (2016). The broadcast
of shared attention and its impact on political persuasion. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol.
111, 665–673. doi: 10.1037/pspa0000065
Shteynberg, G., Hirsh, J. B., Apfelbaum, E. P., Larsen, J. T., Galinsky, A. D., and
Roese, N. J. (2014). Feeling more together: group attention intensiﬁes emotion.
Emotion 14, 1102–1114. doi: 10.1037/a0037697
Silvia, P. J. (2005). Emotional responses to art: from collation and arousal to
cognition and emotion. Rev. Gen. Psychol. 9, 342–357. doi: 10.1037/1089-2680.
9.4.342
Sims, M., and Pezzulo, G. (2021). Modelling ourselves: what the free energy
principle reveals about our implicit notions of representation. Synthese 199,
7801–7833. doi: 10.1007/s11229-021-03140-5
Smith, L. B., and Thelen, E. (2003). Development as a dynamic
system. Trends Cogn. Sci. 7, 343–348. doi: 10.1016/s1364-6613(03)001
56-6
Smith, R., Badcock, P., and Friston, K. J. (2021). Recent advances in
the application of predictive coding and active inference models within
clinical neuroscience. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 75, 3–13. doi: 10.1111/pcn.1
3138
Spagnuolo Lobb, M. (2013). The Now-For-Next in Psychotherapy: Gestalt Therapy
Recounted in Post-Modern Society. Siracusa: Istituto di Gestalt HCC Italy.
Spagnuolo Lobb, M. (2018). Aesthetic relational knowledge of the ﬁeld: a revised
concept of awareness in gestalt therapy and contemporary psychiatry. Gestalt
Rev. 22, 50–68. doi: 10.5325/gestaltreview.22.1.0050
Spagnuolo-Lobb, M. (2015). “Fundamentals and development of Gestalt Therapy
in the contemporary context, ” in Gestalt Therapy In Clinical Practice – From
Psychopathology To The Aesthetics Of Contact , eds G. Francesetti, M. Gecele,
and J. Roubal (Milan: FrancoAngeli).
Staemmler, F. (1997). On cultivating uncertainty: an attitude for gestalt therapists.
Br. Gestalt J. 6, 40–48.
Staemmler, F. (2006). The willingness to be uncertain. preliminary thoughts about
interpretation and understanding in gestalt therapy. Int. Gestalt J. 29, 19–42.
Staemmler, F.-M. (2000). Like a ﬁsh in water: gestalt therapy in times of
uncertainty. Gestalt Rev. 4, 205–218. doi: 10.5325/gestaltreview.4.3.0205
Stamatopoulou, D. (2017). Empathy and the aesthetic: why does art still move us?
Cogn. Process. 19, 169–186. doi: 10.1007/s10339-017-0836-3
Stephan, K. E., Manjaly, Z. M., Mathys, C. D., Weber, L. A. E., Paliwal, S., Gard, T.,
et al. (2016). Allostatic self-eﬃcacy: a metacognitive theory of dyshomeostasis-
induced fatigue and depression. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10:550. doi: 10.3389/
fnhum.2016.00550
Stolnitz, J. (1978). “The aesthetic attitude” in the rise of modern aesthetics.
J. Aesthet. Art Crit. 36, 409–422. doi: 10.2307/430481
Stroud, S. R. (2010). Toward a deweyan theory of communicative mindfulness.
Imagin. Cogn. Pers. 30, 57–75. doi: 10.2190/ic.30.1.d
Sun, Z., and Firestone, C. (2020). The dark room problem. Trends Cogn. Sci. 24,
346–348. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2020.02.006
Tellegen, A., and Atkinson, G. (1974). Openness to absorbing and self-altering
experiences (“absorption”), a trait related to hypnotic susceptibility.J. Abnorm.
Psychol. 83, 268–277. doi: 10.1037/h0036681
Ticini, L. F., Rachman, L., Pelletier, J., and Dubal, S. (2014). Enhancing aesthetic
appreciation by priming canvases with actions that match the artist’s painting
style. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8:391. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00391
Ticini, L. F., Urgesi, C., and Calvo-Merino, B. (2015). “Embodied aesthetics:
insight from cognitive neuroscience of performing arts, ” in Aesthetics and the
Embodied Mind: Beyond Art Theory and the Cartesian Mind-Body Dichotomy.
Contributions To Phenomenology (In Cooperation with The Center for Advanced
Research in Phenomenology) , ed. A. Scarinzi (Dordrecht: Springer). doi: 10.
1016/bs.pbr.2018.03.012
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., and Moll, H. (2005).
Understanding and sharing intentions: the origins of cultural cognition. Behav.
Brain Sci. 28, 675–735. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X05000129
Topolinski, S., and Reber, R. (2010). Gaining insight into the “Aha”
experience. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 19, 402–405. doi: 10.1177/0963721410388
803
Tops, M., Koole, S. L., IJzerman, H., and Buisman-Pijlman, F. T. A. (2014).
Why social attachment and oxytocin protect against addiction and stress:
insights from the dynamics between ventral and dorsal corticostriatal systems.
Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 119, 39–48. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2013.07.015
Tracy, H. L. (1946). Aristotle on aesthetic pleasure. Class. Philol. 41:362919. doi:
10.1086/362919
Tschacher, W., Giersch, A., and Friston, K. (2017). Embodiment and schizophrenia:
a review of implications and applications. Schizophr. Bull. 43, 745–753. doi:
10.1093/schbul/sbw220
Tschacher, W., and Haken, H. (2007). Intentionality in non-equilibrium systems?
The functional aspects of self-organized pattern formation. New Ideas Psychol.
25, 1–15. doi: 10.1016/j.newideapsych.2006.09.002
Umilta’ , M. A., Berchio, C., Sestito, M., Freedberg, D., and Gallese, V. (2012).
Abstract art and cortical motor activation: an EEG study.Front. Hum. Neurosci.
6:311. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00311
Umiltà, M. A., Kohler, E., Gallese, V., Fogassi, L., Fadiga, L., Keysers, C., et al.
(2001). I know what you are doing: a neurophysiological study. Neuron 31,
155–165. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(01)00337-3
Vaisvaser, S. (2021). The embodied-enactive-interactive brain: bridging
neuroscience and creative arts therapies. Front. Psychol. 12:634079.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.634079
Van de Cruys, S. (2017). “Aﬀective value in the predictive mind, ” inPhilosophy and
Predictive Processing, eds T. K. Metzinger and W. Wiese (Owings Mills, MD:
MIND Group).
Van de Cruys, S., Damiano, C., Boddez, Y., Król, M., Goetschalckx, L., and
Wagemans, J. (2021). Visual aﬀects: linking curiosity, Aha-Erlebnis, and
memory through information gain. Cognition 212:104698. doi: 10.1016/j.
cognition.2021.104698
Van de Cruys, S., Friston, K. J., and Clark, A. (2020). Controlled optimism: reply
to sun and ﬁrestone on the dark room problem. Trends Cogn. Sci. 24, 680–681.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2020.05.012
Van de Cruys, S., and Wagemans, J. (2011b). Putting reward in art: a tentative
prediction error account of visual art. Iperception 2, 1035–1062. doi: 10.1068/
i0466aap
Van de Cruys, S., and Wagemans, J. (2011a). Gestalts as predictions - Some
reﬂections and an application to art. Gestalt Theory 33, 325–344.
van der Hart, O. (2021). Trauma-related dissociation: an analysis of two conﬂicting
models. Eur. J. Trauma Dissoc. 5:100210. doi: 10.1016/j.ejtd.2021.100
210
van der Hart, O., van Ochten, J. M., van Son, M. J. M., Steele, K., and
Lensvelt-Mulders, G. (2008). Relations among peritraumatic dissociation
and posttraumatic stress: a critical review. J. Trauma Dissoc. Oﬀ.
J. Int. Soc. Study Dissoc. 9, 481–505. doi: 10.1080/1529973080222
3362
Vanderschuren, L. J. M. J., Niesink, R. J. M., Spruijt, B. M., and Van Ree, J. M.
(1995). µ- and κ-opioid receptor-meiated opioid eﬀects on social play in
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 24 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 25
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
juvenile rats. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 276, 257–266. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(95)
00040-R
Varela, F. G., Maturana, H. R., and Uribe, R. (1974). Autopoiesis: the organization
of living systems, its characterization and a model. Biosystems 5, 187–196. doi:
10.1016/0303-2647(74)90031-8
Varela, F. J. (1997). Patterns of life: intertwining identity and cognition.Brain Cogn.
34, 72–87. doi: 10.1006/brcg.1997.0907
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., and Rosch, E. (2017). The Embodied Mind: Cognitive
Science and Human Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vartanian, O., and Goel, V. (2004). Neuroanatomical correlates of aesthetic
preference for paintings. Neuroreport 15, 893–897. doi: 10.1097/00001756-
200404090-00032
Vuoskoski, J. K., and Eerola, T. (2017). The pleasure evoked by sad music is
mediated by feelings of being moved. Front. Psychol. 8:439. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2017.00439
Waldenfels, B. (2011). Phenomenology of the Alien: Basic Concepts . Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press.
Whalen, P. J. (1998). Fear, vigilance, and ambiguity: initial neuroimaging studies
of the human amygdala. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 7, 177–188. doi: 10.1111/1467-
8721.ep10836912
Wiese, W., and Friston, K. J. (2021). Examining the continuity between life
and mind: is there a continuity between autopoietic intentionality and
representationality? Philosophies 6:18. doi: 10.3390/philosophies6010018
Wilson-Mendenhall, C. D., Barrett, L. F., and Barsalou, L. W.
(2013). Neural evidence that human emotions share core aﬀective
properties. Psychol. Sci. 24, 947–956. doi: 10.1177/0956797612464
242
Woldt, A. L., and Toman, S. M. (2005). Gestalt Therapy: History, Theory, and
Practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Inc.
Y amapi, R., Enjieu Kadji, H. G., and Filatrella, G. (2010). Stability of the
synchronization manifold in nearest neighbor nonidentical van der Pol-like
oscillators. Nonlinear Dyn. 61, 275–294. doi: 10.1007/s11071-009-9648-z
Yontef, G., and Jacobs, L. (2005). “Gestalt therapy, ” inCurrent Psychotherapies, 7th
Edn, eds R. J. Corsini and D. Wedding (Belmont, CA: Thomson Brooks/Cole
Publishing Co), 299–336.
Zinker, J. (1977). Creative Process in Gestalt Therapy. Levittown: Brunner/Mazel.
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note:All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Sarasso, Francesetti, Roubal, Gecele, Ronga, Neppi-Modona and
Sacco. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in
other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s)
are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 25 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188
fnhum-16-906188 July 7, 2022 Time: 14:55 # 26
Sarasso et al. Neuroaesthetics of Change in Psychotherapy
APPENDIX A
Glossary
Gestalt: Literally a form, pattern or conﬁguration. It is an organisation of the perceptual ﬁeld that is perceived as more than the
sum of its parts.
Contact: Subjective experience of the interaction between the organism and the environment, underlying both awareness and
motor behaviour (Perls et al., 1951; p. 227).
Support: Everything that facilitates the ongoing assimilation and integration of experience for a person, relationship, or society
(Perls, 1992; p. 132).
Growth: The function of the contact between the organism and the environment (Perls et al., 1951; p. 230): the assimilation of
sensory novelty.
Intentionality of contacting (contact intentionality): The emerging tension towards the contact between the therapist and the
client, which moves the interaction towards the actualisations of the potentialities in the hic et nunc of the therapeutic situation
(Roubal et al., 2017).
Enactive: The property of the dynamic interaction between an organisms and its environment for which the environment is
brought about, or enacted, by the active exercise of that organism’s sensorimotor processes.
Field of experience: The emergent relational phenomenon transcending subjects, perceptible by the senses and sensori-motor
resonances, in which certain experiential phenomena tend to emerge, while others do not.
Markov blanket: A mathematical description that deﬁnes the boundaries between the organism (e.g., a cell or a multi-cellular
organism) and the environment in a statistical sense, by partitioning into internal and external states. External states are conditionally
independent of internal states, and vice versa, as internal and external states can only inﬂuence each other via the blanket states.
Ergodicity: The property of an organism which occupies or revisits over time some typical states more than others over time in
order to maintain its structural and dynamical integrity.
Econiche: A limited set of states of the world occupied by a given organism.
Generative model: The living being must actively predict which set of states it will probabilistically encounter by creating
representations of environmental and internal dynamics. Such representations are in fact probability distributions, or what the author
calls “generative models” (Friston et al., 2006). The model that better explains sensory input is selected and consciously experienced. It
continuously adapts to account for novel stimuli. When the agent gathers new sensory evidence, it must combine a likelihood function
with its prior beliefs.
Autopoiesis: An autopoietic system (Varela, 1997) is organised as a network of processes of production (synthesis and destruction)
of molecules such that the system: (1) continuously regenerate and realise the network that produces the molecules, (2) constitutes as
a distinguishable unity in the domain in which it exists, and (3) is able to potentially distinguish the diﬀerent virtual implications of
otherwise equally viable paths of encounters with the environment.
Enactive: Enactive theories posit that cognition does not passively receive information from their environments, which they then
translate into internal representations. Organisms participate in the generation of meaning by the active exercise of that organism’s
sensorimotor processes.
Metastability: Fom latin, meta (beyond), stabilis (stable): the simultaneous realisation of two competing tendencies of parts of
complex self-regulating systems to converge on and destroy stable states and create new dynamics.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 26 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 906188