Optimization in Computational Chemistry and Molecular Biology, pp. 131-140 
C. A. Floudas and P. M. Pardalos, Editors 
©2000 Kluwer Academic Publishers 
Gene Sequences are Locally Optimized for Global mRNA 
Folding 
William Seffens 
Department of Biological Sciences 
Center for Theoretical Study of Physical Systems 
Clark Atlanta University 
Atlanta, GA 30134 USA 
Yseffens@cau.edu 
David Digby 
Department of Biological Sciences 
Clark Atlanta University 
Atlanta, GA 30134 USA 
ddigby@mindspring.com 
Abstract 
An examination of 51 mRNA sequences in GENBANK has revealed that calculated 
mRNA folding free energies are more negative than expected. Free energy minimiza­
tion calculations of native mRNA sequences are more negative than randomized mRNA 
sequences with the same base composition and length. Randomization only of the cod­
ing region of genes also yields folding free energies of less negative magnitude than the 
original native mRNA sequence. Examination of the predicted basepairing within the 
coding sequence finds an unequal distribution between the three possible frames. The 
wobble-to-1 frame, which is "in-frame", is preferred significantly compared to random­
ized sets of mRNA sequences. This suggests that evolution may bias or adjust the local 
selection of co dons to favor the global formation of more mRNA structures. This would 
result in greater negative folding free energies as seen in the 51 mRNAs examined. 
Keywords: mRNA, folding free energy, coding sequence, global optimization, codon­
choice optimization. 
1 Introduction 
Control of gene expression is known to occur at any of the events from promotion of tran­
scription to stabilization of the mature polypeptide product. The role of RNA structure in 
132 w. SEFFENS AND D. DIGBY 
gene expression is not well understood. Conserved RNA secondary structures in families 
of viruses are known to be important to the viral life cycle [3]. It is thought that the 3' 
UTRs of certain developmental genes in Drosophila are similarly important for localization 
[10]. RNA secondary structure is thought to be important in the coding regions of certain 
RNA viruses. Motifs such as pseudoknots have been shown to be responsible for frame­
shifting. It is not clear if RNA structure has any importance for non-viral protein coding 
mRNAs. Several studies have demonstrated that mRNA stability may be an important 
factor in gene expression for certain non-viral genes [1][4][9]. Structural RNA features are 
suspected to be involved in the regulation of mRNA degradation in those cases. Several 
authors have suggested that the choice of codons in eukaryotic genes may be constrained 
by effects other than the frequency of codons in the whole gene [6][8]. Major influences on 
codon usage have been shown to result from amino acid residue preferences and di-residue 
associations in proteins. Such biases could be related to replication and repair processes, 
and/or to DNA structural requirements. For a message coding 100 amino acids, there are 
approximately 3100 or 1048 different combinations of bases using synonymous codons coding 
for the same polypeptide. Evolution then has great freedom to tinker with mRNAs subject 
to the constraint of the amino acid sequence. This work tested the hypothesis that codon 
choice is biased to generate mRNAs with greater negative folding free energies, and results 
in base-pair frame patterns within the coding sequence. 
2 Methods 
mRNA sequences were selected from GENBANK using programs in the Wisconsin Group 
GCG software package [2]. mRNA sequence files were randomly selected from GENBANK 
with short Locus descriptors (limited to 8 or 9 characters) and which possessed sufficient 
information in the Features annotation to reconstruct the sequence of the mRNA. Fifty-one 
mRNA sequences were selected possessing the following properties identified in the Features 
annotation: 1) mRNA +1 start site identified, 2) MET start codon identified, 3) termination 
codon identified, 4) poly-A site or signal identified, and 5) the mRNA sequence must be 
less than 1200 bases long (due to computational constraints). A variety of sequence files 
were examined from diverse species including prokaryotes, plants, invertebrates and higher 
animals (Table 1 in [12]). These mRNA sequences were in silica folded using Zuker's 
MFOLD program from GCG using a VAXStation 4000 or SUN Ultra computer [14]. 
Each in silica folded native mRNA was compared with folded mRNA sequences ran­
domized by one of five different procedures. In the first procedure, each native mRNA 
sequence was randomized at least ten times using the SHUFFLE program in GCG. SHUF­
FLE randomizes the order of bases in a sequence keeping the composition constant. These 
randomized sequences (termed "whole-random" sequences) were folded and the free ener­
gies averaged. In the second randomization procedure, the native sequences were random­
ized only within the coding region, yielding "CDS-random" sequences. These sequences 
contained unmodified 5' and 3' UTRs. In the third randomization procedure, codons were 
shuffled within the coding sequence only, yielding" codon-shuffled" sequences. These contain 
unmodified UTR sequences of the respective native mRNA, and code for a polypeptide with 
identical amino acid composition yet different amino acid sequence. A program (RNAshuf­
fle) was written in FORTRAN using the GCG software library that randomized only the 