 
1 
 
Energy Relativity and its Implications on the Energy Conservation Principle 
Author: Moshe Segal1*†‡ 
Affiliations:  
1Independent Researcher, no University affiliation.  
*Corresponding author. Email: moshe_segal@yahoo.com 
†Moshe Segal's address is: Ravutzky st. #78 Ra'anana ISRAEL 4322141 
       ‡ Moshe has a B.Sc Graduated with distinction (Cum Laude) and a M.Sc in Electronics and 
        Electrical Engineering from the Technion, Haifa, Israel. 
 
 
Abstract:  
 
A corner stone of Physics is the Energy Conservation principle which states that the Energy is 
always conserved and that the Energy, embedded in the whole Universe, cannot disappear or be 
created from nothing.  
 
This should imply that the Total amount of the Energy, which is embedded in the whole Universe, 
must be a constant value.  
 
However, Humans are not able  to devise means or experiments which will provide the exact 
amount of the Energy embedded in the whole Universe, which implies that Humans are not able 
to devise means or experiments which will conclude, with complete validity, that the amount of 
the Energy embedded in the whole Universe, can be indeed represented by a constant value. 
 
Moreover, the fact, that the nowadays Science of Physics does agree that in addition to the 
Detectable Energy, the Universe embeds a very large amount of undetectable, or Dark Energy, 
(about 70% of the estimated Total Energy which is estimated to be embedded in the  whole 
Universe is estimated to be Dark Energy), might further imply, that Humans cannot evaluate the 
actual amount of the Total Energy embedded in the Universe, which might further support the 
assumption, that Humans cannot prove, that all the En ergy embedded in the Universe, is indeed 
conserved. 
 
The above implies that Humans are not able  to provide a proof for the Energy Conservation 
Principle, which means, that the Energy Conservation Principle is presented only as an axiom, and 
no discussion was yet provided as to the extent of validity that Humans can attribute to the Energy 
Conservation Principle, even though, it is a corner stone of the nowadays Science of Physics. 
 
Thus, in view of the above, this paper tries to examine the extent of the validity that Humans can 
attribute, to the Energy Conservation Principle. 
 
Initially, this paper tries to explore, if the evaluation of the amount of Energy, only in certain 
specific Energy components, in the Universe, will result in the evaluations of the same Energy 
amounts, by all Human evaluators, or, if separate Human evaluators might arrive at different 
 
2 
 
results, relating to the Total Energy Content, of these certain several specific Energy components, 
which they evaluated. 
 
Thus, in view of the above, this paper provides arguments that two separate Humans, evaluating 
the Total Energy Content of certain several specific Energy components, in the Universe, might 
arrive at different results, relating to this Total Energy Content, of these several specific Energy 
components, which they evaluated. 
 
The arguments mentioned above, relating to the possibility that two separate Humans, evaluating 
the Total Energy Content of certain several specific Energy components, in the Universe, might 
arrive at different results, relating to this Total Energy Content, of these several specific Energy 
components, which they evaluated, appear also in an additional paper, by the author of this paper, 
titled: "A discussion related to the Energy Relativity and its Implications" (4). 
 
However, in order to emphasize the possibility, that evaluations of Energy amounts by Humans 
might be also relative, to the Human which executed that evaluation of this Energy amount, the 
additional paper, mentioned above, did not elaborated on the limitations, that also exist, in the 
arguments that two separate Humans, evaluating the Total Energy Content of certain several 
specific Energy components, in the Universe, might arrive at different results, relating to this 
Total Energy Content, of these several specific Energy components, which they evaluated. 
 
Thus, this paper presents also these limitations which further emphasizes the conclusion, 
presented also in the additional paper, mentioned above, that, although Energy evaluations by 
Humans might be sometimes relative to the specific Human evaluating that Energy , The Energy 
Conservation Principle should be recognized as a valid principle. 
 
An important factor, in the arguments, presented in this paper, and the additional paper mentioned 
above, relating to the possibility that two separate Humans, evaluating the Total Energy Content 
of certain several specific Energy components, in the Univer se, might arrive at different results, 
relating to this Total Energy Content, of these several specific Energy components, which they 
evaluated, is the following: 
 
The nowadays Science of Physics recognizes only one velocity as absolute, non-relative velocity. 
This velocity is the velocity of Light in vacuum, which is also recognized as the maximum velocity 
that Humans can attribute to a moving body. 
 
All other velocities are recognized, by the nowadays Science of Physics, as non -absolute or as 
relative velocities, and this implies, as this paper presents, that Humans might be in situations, in 
which, their evaluations of the Kinetic Energies, which should be attributed to moving bodies, 
might turn to be wrong evaluations. 
 
The paper then elaborates on the Implications of what was presented above, on the Energy 
Conservation Principle, and, as presented above, concludes, that although Energy evaluations by 
Humans might be sometimes relative to the specific Human evaluating that Energy, The Energy 
Conservation Principle should be recognized as a valid principle.  
 
 
 
3 
 
1. Arguments that the Energy evaluations by Humans might be sometimes relative to 
the Human which evaluated that Energy. 
A corner stone of Physics is the Energy Conservation principle which states that any amount of 
the Energy which is embedded in the whole Universe, cannot disappear or be created from nothing.  
 
This should imply that the Total amount of the Energy, embedded in the whole Universe, must be 
a constant value, because no amount of Energy, in the Universe, can disappear or be created from 
nothing. 
 
Because, as already stated above, the Total amount of the Energy, which is embedded in the whole 
Universe, must be constant, according to the Energy Conservation Principle, all Humans should 
arrive at the same value of the Total amount of the Energy which is embedded in the whole 
Universe. 
 
However, Humans cannot devise means or experiments which end up in providing an exact value 
of the Total amount of the Energy which is embedded in the whole Universe. 
 
Thus, it seems that Humans did not provide yet a complete validity, or a complete proof , to the 
Energy Conservation Principle, and no discussion was yet provided as to the extent of validity that 
Humans can attribute to the Energy Conservation Principle , despite the fact that this principle is 
considered to be a very significant corner stone of the nowadays Science of Physics. 
 
Thus, this paper tries to elaborate on this very issue. 
 
This paper states, that in addition to the fact that  Humans cannot arrive at an exact value of the 
Total amount of the Energy which is embedded in the whole Universe, different and separate 
Humans might also arrive sometimes at different values for the amounts of Energy embedded in 
the same several Energy components in the Universe, which implies that at least some of these 
Humans might arrive at wrong results as related to these evaluations, of these same several Energy 
components in the Universe, and that Humans evaluations of the amounts of Energy might be  
sometimes relative to the Human who executed these evaluations. 
 
Moreover, the nowadays Science of Physics recognizes only one velocity as absolute, non-relative 
velocity. This velocity is the velocity of Light in vacuum, which is also recognized as the maximum 
velocity that Humans can attribute to a moving body. 
 
All other velocities are recognized, by the nowadays Science of Physics, as non -absolute or as 
relative velocities, and this implies, as this paper presents, that all Humans are sometimes bound 
to be in situations, in which, their evaluations of the Kinetic Energies, which should be attributed 
to all moving bodies, might turn to be wrong evaluations. 
 
This paper also provides arguments that Humans that evaluate the amount of Energy in specific 
Energy components, and then experience a change of velocity (Acceleration), and following this 
Acceleration end up in an Inertial Frame of Reference which is moving at a different velocity, as 
compared to the velocity that existed in the Inertial Frame of Reference, in which these Humans 
 
4 
 
resided, before they experienced the above mentioned Acceleration, might change their 
evaluations, as related to the amount of Energy embedded in the same above mentioned Energy 
components, and might not detect changes in the Energies that should be attributed to the same 
above mentioned Energy components. 
 
From the above, this paper presents arguments which imply that Humans might be sometimes 
bound to be in situations in which they will evaluate wrongfully the Kinetic Energies attributed 
to massive bodies in the Universe, and this is presented, in details, in the following: 
 
Einstein's Special Relativity Theory brought about the recognition that the Mass is equated with 
Energy via his famous equation (1): 
 
E= mc2.            
 
Where E is Energy, m is the amount of Mass and c is the velocity of Light in vacuum. 
 
Einstein's Special Relativity Theory also brought about the recognition that a Human evaluating 
the amount of Mass in a specific Massive body which is moving at a constant velocity, v, relative 
to this Human, sees an increase of the amount of Mass in this  Massive body, relative to the amount 
of Mass evaluated in this Massive body, by this Human, when this Massive body is at rest, relative 
to this Human, according to the following equation (2): 
 
m = m0 / √(1-v2/c2). 
 
Where m is the evaluated amount of Mass, by the Human, in the moving massive body, m0 is the 
evaluated amount of Mass, by the Human, when the massive body is at rest relative to the Human, 
v is the velocity of the massive body relative to the Human, and c is the velocity of Light in vacuum. 
 
It should be also stated, that the increase in the evaluation of the amount of Mass, that any Human 
detects in a Mass which is moving relative to this Human, as presented in Einstein's Special 
Relativity Theory, and was also presented above, is attributed to the Kinetic Energy  that this 
Human detects relating to this moving Mass, which implies, that any Human will indeed detect an 
additional Energy embedded in any moving Mass, the Kinetic Energy attributed to that moving 
Mass. 
 
Thus, let's examine how two Humans evaluate the Total amount of Energy in two specific massive 
bodies, when each Human resides in a separate Inertial Frame of Reference, and the relative 
velocity between these two Inertial Frames of Reference is v.  
 
In these evaluations each Human evaluates the amount of Mass , m1, in a specific massive body 
residing in his Inertial Frame of Reference, and also the amount of Mass, m2, in a specific massive 
body residing in the Inertial Frame of Reference related to the other Human.  
 
Also, the Rest Mass values of the above -mentioned massive bodies are not the same , or, m10 is 
different from m20. 
 
 
5 
 
The amount of Mass (Energy) that the first Human evaluates, related to the massive body residing 
in his Inertial Frame of Reference is m 10, because this massive body is at rest, relative to that 
Human. 
 
The amount of Mass (Energy) that the first Human evaluates, related to the massive body residing 
in the other Inertial Frame of Reference is m2 = m20 / √(1-v2/c2), because this massive body is 
moving at a velocity v relative to that Human. 
 
Thus, the Total amount of Mass (Energy) that the first Human evaluates related to the two massive 
bodies is: 
 
m10 + m20 / √(1-v2/c2) 
 
The amount of Mass (Energy) that the second Human evaluates, related to the massive body 
residing in his Inertial Frame of Reference is m20, because this massive body is at rest, relative to 
that Human. 
 
The amount of Mass (Energy) that the second Human evaluates, related to the massive body 
residing in the other Inertial Frame of Reference is m1 = m10 / √(1-v2/c2), because this massive 
body is moving at a velocity v relative to that Human. 
 
Thus, the Total amount of Mass ( Energy) that the second Human evaluates related to the two 
massive bodies is: 
 
m20 + m10 / √(1-v2/c2) 
 
And since m10 + m20 / √(1-v2/c2) is not equal to m20 + m10 / √(1-v2/c2) then, the two Humans arrive 
at different values for the Total Mass ( Energy) embedded in these two massive bodies, which 
implies that Energy evaluations might be  sometimes relative to the Human evaluating these 
Energy amounts, and this also implies, that at least one of the above mentioned Humans,  arrived 
at a wrong evaluation as related to the Energy amount evaluated in these two specific massive 
bodies. 
 
It might be argued, that what was just presented above is not accurate, because it did not take into 
consideration, how the above-mentioned Humans also evaluated the amounts of Mass (Energy) in 
the above-mentioned massive bodies, during any process, that might have occurred, before these 
Humans ended up in two separate Inertial Frames of Reference, which move at a velocity v relative 
to each other. 
 
However, even if the two Humans, mentioned-above, started in being in the same Inertial Frame 
of Reference, then, it is reasonable to assume, similarly to what was just presented above, that in 
any process, which might have occurred, which ended up in these Humans being in two different 
Inertial Frames of Reference, these Humans, still evaluated differently , the amounts of Mass 
(Energy) in the above -mentioned massive bodies, during any such process, which would have 
ended up, in these Humans, being in two different Inertial Frames of Reference. 
 
Because, if the first Human and the first massive body mentioned-above resided on a platform that 
initially resided in the Inertial Frame of Reference in which the second Human and the second 
 
6 
 
massive body mentioned -above also resided, and that platform started to move, relative to the 
second Human mentioned -above, then, in order to end up with the two Human s residing in two 
separate Inertial Frames of Reference, which move with a relative velocity v, that platform must 
first accelerate and then stop when it reaches the velocity v. 
 
But, at each specific moment, during that accelerating process of this platform, the first Human 
still evaluates the Mass (Energy) in the first massive body as m10, because this massive body is 
still at rest relative to this Human, and, at each specific moment, during that accelerating process 
of this platform, the first Human still evaluates the Mass (Energy) in the second massive body as 
greater than m20, or as m20 + δ1, because this second massive body is moving relative to this first 
Human, and thus, this Human might attribute to this massive body also a Kinetic Energy. 
 
And, at each specific moment, during that accelerating process of this platform, the second Human 
still evaluates the Mass (Energy) in the second massive body as m20, because this massive body is 
still at rest relative to this Human, and, at each specific moment, during that accelerating process 
of this platform, the second Human still evaluates the Mass (Energy) in the first massive body as 
greater than m10, or as m10 + δ2, because this first massive body is moving relative to this second 
Human, and thus, this Human might attribute to this massive body also a Kinetic Energy. 
 
The equation m = m 0 / √(1-v2/c2) presented by Einstein's Special Relativity Theory, relates to 
massive bodies that reside in Inertial Frames of Reference, and thus, move at constant velocities. 
 
But, because any moving Mass does embed also Kinetic Energy, then, it is reasonable to assume, 
that the evaluation of the amount of Mass in a massive body that is accelerating relative to a 
Human, by this Human, will be also greater, as compared to the amount of Mass in this massive 
body, that this Human will evaluate , if this massive body will be at rest , relative to this Human, 
even though, this massive body is accelerating, and not moving at a constant velocity, relative to 
this Human. 
 
And, because the Kinetic Energy that should be attributed to any moving Mass must be 
proportional to the amount of the Rest Mass embedded in this moving Mass, then, it is also 
reasonable to assume, that the increase in the evaluated Mass, in this massive body, by this Human 
mentioned-above, will be also proportional to the amount of Mass evaluated, in this massive body, 
by this Human mentioned -above, when this massive body is at rest, relative to the Human that 
evaluates the amount of Mass in this accelerating massive body. 
 
Thus, in the above description, since m10 is not equal to m20, then, also δ1 is not equal to δ2.   
 
Thus, at each specific moment, during that accelerating process of the platform in the above 
description, the first Human will evaluate the amount of Mass in both massive bodies mentioned-
above as m10 + m20 + δ1, and the second Human will evaluate the amount of Mass in both massive 
bodies mentioned-above as m20 + m10 + δ2, which are different evaluations. 
 
Thus, the above still implies that these two Humans will still evaluate differently  the Mass 
(Energy) embedded in these two massive bodies, also at each specific moment, during th e 
accelerating process of the platform mentioned-above. 
 
 
7 
 
Also, the above demonstrated that, even though both  Humans started on the same Inertial Frame 
of Reference, when they did agree on the amount of Mass (Energy) in the above mentioned two 
massive bodies, after the platform on which the first Human resided started moving, they started 
to arrive at  evaluating different values of the amount of Mass (Energy) embedded in the above 
mentioned two massive bodies. 
 
Let's try and evaluate now if the above-mentioned Humans can explain why this happened. 
 
One possibility which might provide such an explanation, might be a discussion on what happened, 
in the scenario described above, between these two Humans, maybe, sometime after they finished 
the above-described scenario. 
 
In such a discussion the second Human might tell the first Human, that he can explain why the 
first Human evaluated the Mass (Energy) embedded in the first massive body as m10, while he (the 
second Human) evaluated it as m10 / √(1-v2/c2).  
 
The second Human might say, that this occurred, because he (the second Human) noticed that an 
external Force was the cause of the Acceleration of the platform on which the first Human resided, 
and the Work done by this Force caused also the Acceleration of the first massive body, which 
resulted in a Kinetic Energy added to the first massive body, which caused the increase in the 
Mass (Energy) evaluation of this massive body by him (the second Human) which evaluated the 
Mass (Energy) embedded in this massive  body by him (the second Human), as m10 / √(1-v2/c2), 
and not just as m10, as the first Human evaluated it. 
 
The first Human might agree and might also mention, that he did suspect that an external Force 
might have been involved. 
 
Thus, the above implies that the second Human, mentioned above, did evaluated correctly the 
amount of Energy embedded in the first massive body mentioned above, but the first Human was 
wrong in his evaluation as related to the amount of Energy embedded in the first massive body 
mentioned above, because he could not detect the Kinetic Energy added to this moving massive 
body. 
 
Also, the above provides only a partial explanation to the discrepancies presented above in how 
the two Humans, mentioned above, evaluated the Mass (Energy) embedded in the two massive 
bodies, mentioned above, because this does not explain  yet the discrepancy in how the two 
Humans, mentioned above, evaluated the Mass (Energy) embedded in the second massive body 
mentioned above. 
 
Because, the first Human could not tell the second Human that he also noticed that an external 
Force was exerted on the second massive body , mentioned above, because, in  the scenario 
described above, only the platform on which the first Human resided started to move, while the 
second Human and the second massive body, mentioned above, did not move at all. 
 
The first Human did indeed notice that the second massive body moved relative to him, but only 
because he moved, and not because  an external Force or an Energy was exerted on the second 
massive body. 
 
 
8 
 
Thus, even though, the first Human, did not noticed any external Force or Energy exerted on the 
second massive body,  the first Human , still evaluated the Mass (Energy) in the second massive 
body as m20 / √(1-v2/c2), only because the first Human did detect the second massive body  as 
moving, and not because he detected any external Force or Energy exerted on the second massive 
body. 
 
And thus, the first Human could not provide a satisfactory explanation why he evaluated the Mass 
(Energy) embedded in the second massive body as m20 / √(1-v2/c2), which would explain this by a 
Force or an Energy exerted on the second massive body, as the second Human provided, regarding 
why he (the second Human) evaluated the first massive body as m10 / √(1-v2/c2), which did provide 
a cause of an external Force or Energy exerted on the first massive body. 
  
Thus, the above implies again that, the second Human evaluated , again, correctly the amount of 
Energy, in this case, in the second massive body, mentioned above, and the first Human, mentioned 
above, arrived, again, at a wrong evaluation of the Energy, in this case, in the second massive 
body, mentioned above, because he attributed to this massive body a Kinetic Energy which did 
not exist. 
 
Thus, the above still implies that Energy evaluations might be indeed sometimes relative to the 
Human evaluating these Energy amounts, and some of the Humans (in this case, the first Human 
mentioned above), might arrive at wrong results in their evaluations of Energy amounts. 
 
Moreover, it should be emphasized, that the first Human mentioned above, changed his evaluation 
as related to the amount of Mass (Energy) embedded in second massive body mentioned above, 
from m20 to m20 / √(1-v2/c2), after he underwent the acceleration mentioned above and ended in a 
new Inertial Frame of Reference.  
 
And this change of evaluation occurred only because this Human detected this second massive 
body mentioned above as moving relative to him, only because this Human was himself moving, 
and not because he could point out that an external Force or Energy was exerted on this second 
massive body mentioned above.  
 
Thus, in view of t he scenario described above, the following important conclusions  should be 
emphasized:   
 
If a Human undergoes an Acceleration, and after that Acceleration, ends up in an Inertial Frame 
of Reference which moves with a different velocity, as related to the velocity of the Inertial Frame 
of Reference on which this Human resided before he underwent that Acc eleration, this Human 
might evaluate differently the amount of Mass (Energy) embedded in the massive bodies which 
are external to his current Inertial Frame of Reference,  as related to how this Human evaluated 
these same amounts of Mass (Energy), before he underwent this Acceleration. 
 
Because this Human might evaluate differently the Kinetic Energy attributed to the massive bodies 
which are external to his current Inertial Frame of Reference , as the first Human, in the scenario 
described above, evaluated wrongfully, the Mass embedded in the second massive body, described 
above, by attributing to it a Kinetic Energy which did not exist, because this massive body did not 
move.  
 
 
9 
 
Moreover, if a Human  undergoes an Acceleration, and after that Acceleration, ends up in an 
Inertial Frame of Reference which moves with a different velocity, as related to the velocity of the 
Inertial Frame of Reference on which this Human resided before he underwent that Acceleration, 
this Human might not detect the change that have occurred in the amount of the Kinetic Energy 
attributed to the massive bodies which are in his current Inertial Frame of Reference, as the first 
Human, in the scenario described above, did not detect the change, that occurred in the amount of 
the Kinetic Energy that was added to the first massive body, described above, which did move 
because it resided in the platform on which the first Human, described above, also resided. 
 
Thus, the above implies, that a Human, who undergoes a change of velocity (Acceleration), might 
be sometimes bound to evaluate wrongfully the Energies, embedded (or attributed) to massive 
bodies, because that Human might not detect the changes in the Kinetic Energies attributed to the 
massive bodies residing in his Inertial Frame of Reference, and detect wrongfully the changes in 
the Kinetic Energies attributed to the massive bodies external to his Inertial Frame of Reference.  
 
The above might supports the conclusion, presented already before in this paper, that evaluations 
of Energy amounts by Humans might be sometimes relative to the Human evaluating these Energy 
amounts. 
 
2. Limitations in what was presented in the previous chapter of this paper 
The previous chapter of this paper presented a scenario which implied that evaluations of Energy 
amounts by Humans might be sometimes relative to the Humans who executed these Energy 
amounts, and also, that Humans might sometimes arrive at wrong results when evaluating Energy 
amounts. 
 
However, it turns out that although the above-mentioned scenario might indeed occur, it is a special 
scenario, and usually, evaluations of Energy amounts by Humans , as presented in the previous 
chapter of this paper, does not result in amounts which are relative to the Humans who evaluated 
these Energy amounts. 
 
A simple example to the above might be a scenario of Humans in a moving train which might be 
considered an Inertial Frame of Reference. 
 
Although Humans in such a moving train will notice the items external to the moving train as 
moving, these Humans will not conclude that these items, external to the train, are indeed moving, 
because th ese Humans do  know that they are moving, because they are in the train which is 
moving. 
 
It should be emphasized, that the scenario presented in the previous chapter of this paper 
concluded, that Humans might arrive at wrong conclusions when evaluating Energy amounts, if 
they are indeed moving, but are not aware of the fact that they are moving. 
 
In addition to the scenario of Humans in a moving train, presented above, it should be emphasized, 
that Humans can utilize various technological means, which Humans devised, which will provide 
them the indication if they are moving and the velocity of their movement, and if items external to 
their Inertial Frame of Reference are moving, and the velocities of these external items , such that 
 
10 
 
Humans do not necessarily have to depend on their feelings and their consciousness in order to 
decide if they are moving or items external to them are moving. 
 
Thus, the scenario presented in the previous chapter of this paper might occur only in situations in 
which Humans are stranded in an Inertial Frame of Reference in which they cannot figure out if 
they are moving, and they cannot utilize means which will provide them with indications if items 
external to their frame of reference are moving. 
 
An example of s uch a scenario might be a scenario in which Humans reside in a Space Station, 
deep in Space, where their technological means are not capable of providing good information 
about their movement and the movements of items, that they might encounter, external to their 
Space Station. 
 
Thus, such a scenario is indeed a special scenario. 
 
 
3. Humans might also have difficulties in evaluating exactly amounts of Kinetic 
Energies 
 
Although the situations in which Humans might evaluate wron gfully Energy amounts might be 
special, as presented in the previous chapter of this paper, there is also one additional limitation 
that Humans might have in exact evaluations of Energy amounts. 
 
Because velocities are relative, Humans might not be able to arrive at the exact Energy amounts 
embedded in moving massive bodies. 
 
Since Mass is Energy, and the amount of Energy embedded in any massive body depends also on 
the Kinetic Energy embedded in this massive body, Humans must know the exact value of the 
velocity of any massive body, in order to arrive at the exact value of the Energy embedded in this 
massive body. 
 
But, if a Human tries to evaluate the exact Energy embedded, for example, in a massive body 
which resides on planet Earth, then, this Human must take into account the velocity that this 
massive body has because of planet Earth movement, and the velocity the planet Earth has because 
of its movement together with the movement of the Milky Trail Galaxy, in which planet Earth 
resides, and the velocity of the Milky Trail Galaxy in the group of Galaxies this Galaxy belong s 
to, etc. 
 
Since Humans cannot arrive at the exact velocity of this massive body in the entire Universe,  
Human cannot arrive at the exact amount of Energy embedded in this massive body.  
 
4. Implications to what was presented in this paper. 
This paper elaborates on arguments which state that Humans might have difficulties in exact 
evaluations of Energy amounts because: 
 
 
11 
 
• Humans cannot arrive at an exact amount of the Energy embedded in the whole Universe, 
in order to state with complete validity that Energy is always conserved, as the Energy 
Conservation Principle implies. 
• Humans recognize that most of the Energy embedded in the Universe might be Dark 
Energy, which Humans might not be able to detect or evaluate exactly its amount. 
• Humans might not be able to evaluate exactly the velocity of massive bodies, and thus, 
Humans might not be able to evaluate exactly the amount of the Kinetic Energy embedded 
in massive bodies, which implies that Humans might not be able to evaluate exactly  the 
Total Energy embedded in massive bodies. 
• In certain special scenarios, the evaluations of Energy amounts by Humans might be also 
relative to the Human who evaluated these Energy amounts. 
 
Thus, on one hand, one might jump to a  conclusion, which one might derive from what was just 
presented above, that the Energy Conservation Principle might not be completely correct. 
 
One might also support this conclusion by the fact, that the nowadays Science of Physics does 
agree that in addition to the Detectable Energy, the Universe embeds a very large amount of 
undetectable, or Dark Energy, (about 70% of the estimated Total Energy which is estimated to be 
embedded in the whole Universe is estimated to be Dark Energy), which might further imply, that 
Humans cannot evaluate the actual amount of the Total Energy embedded in the Universe, which 
might further support the assumption, that Humans cannot prove, that all the Energy embedded in 
the Universe, is indeed conserved. 
 
However, on the other hand, even though the paper does highlight problematic issues in Human s 
exact evaluations of amounts of Energy, it should be emphasized, that this paper did not present a 
conclusive result which implies, that the Energy Conservation Principle is a false principle. 
 
The Science of Physics states that the laws of Physics are the same in all Inertial Frames of 
Reference.  
 
Thus, in view of the above, and since the Energy Conservation Principle is a very significant corner 
stone of the Science of Physics, still , the reasonable conclusion that one might conclude, should 
be, that despite what was presented in this paper , that Humans might have difficulties in exact 
evaluations of Energy amounts, the Energy Conservation Principle should be still considered a 
viable principle. 
 
Moreover, the statement that the laws of Physics are the same in all Inertial Frames of Reference 
should imply that each Human, residing in an Inertial Frame of Reference (which means that this 
Human moves at a constant velocity),  might still detect Energy Conservation  in his specific 
evaluations, especially if the evaluations related to each Human are limited to what this Human 
can evaluate, and not to the Energy embedded in the whole Universe. 
 
Thus, although the  reasonable conclusion presented above, that Humans can still relate to the 
Energy Conservation Principle as a viable principle , still, what was presented in this paper, that 
Humans might encounter basic limitations in exact evaluations of Energy amounts, should be also 
taken into consideration. 
 
 
12 
 
And, even though this paper does conclude that  Humans might be able to provide validity to the 
Energy Conservation Principle , what was presented in this paper  should point out a significant 
limitation that Humans might have  in Humans endeavors to achieve a deep and comprehensive 
understanding of the Universe or the Existence. 
 
The author of this paper published a paper: " Energy Might be the Only Unique, Distinct and 
Independent Entity in Nature." (3).  
 
This paper presents the possibility that the Universe is composed of only one distinct and 
independent entity, Energy. This implies that also Humans are composed of only this distinct and 
independent entity, Energy.  
 
And thus, since it is impossible to figure out completely an issue just by using this same issue, 
Human minds, being just an aggregate of forms of Energy, might not be able to figure out 
completely what is Energy, and what are all the details for understanding all the elements 
involved in all the interactions between Energy forms, and this might provide some explanation 
to the Humans limitation presented above. 
 
   
5. Summary and Conclusions 
The paper states that the Energy Conservation principle, which is considered a corner stone of 
the Science of Physics, actually implies that the Total amount of the Energy, which is embedded 
in the whole Universe, must be a constant value, because otherwise, this would imply that 
Energy can either disappear or be created from nothing, contrary to what is implied by the 
Energy Conservation principle. 
 
The paper then elaborates on arguments which state that Humans might have difficulties in exact 
evaluations of Energy amounts because: 
 
• Humans cannot arrive at an exact amount of the Energy embedded in the whole Universe, 
in order to state with complete validity that Energy is always conserved, as the Energy 
Conservation Principle implies. 
• Humans recognize that most of the Energy embedded in the Universe might be Dark 
Energy, which Humans might not be able to detect or evaluate exactly its amount. 
• Humans might not be able to evaluate exactly the velocity of massive bodies, and thus, 
Humans might not be able to evaluate exactly the amount of the Kinetic Energy embedded 
in massive bodies, which implies that Humans might not be able to evaluate exactly  the 
Total Energy embedded in massive bodies. 
• In certain special scenarios, the evaluations of Energy amounts by Humans might be also 
relative to the Human who evaluated these Energy amounts. 
 
The paper then elaborates on the Implication of the above, on whether this might render the 
Energy Conservation Principle to not be completely correct, or whether Humans still can decide 
that the Energy Conservation principle is a valid principle. 
 
 
13 
 
The paper does conclude that Humans should conclude that the Energy Conservation principle 
is a valid principle, but still, what is presented in this paper, might also point out a significant 
limitation that Humans might have in Humans endeavors to achieve a deep and comprehensive 
understanding of the Universe or the Existence, if Humans cannot provide a complete proof to a 
very significant building block, or corner stone, of the Science of Physics, the Energy 
Conservation principle. 
 
 
    References 
 
(1). Special Relativity. Wikipedia.  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special_relativity 
 
(2). Mass in special relativity. Wikipedia.  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_in_special_relativity 
 
(3). Energy Might be the Only Unique, Distinct and Independent Entity in Nature. Moshe Segal. 
SSRN preprints site. https://ssrn.com/abstract=4816130 or QEIOS preprints site: 
https://doi.org/10.32388/2HITLM.2. 
 
(4). A discussion related to the Energy Relativity and its Implications. Moshe Segal. Authorea 
preprints site. DOI: 10.22541/au.172979402.21252820/v1. 
  
 
 
  