Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans Ronald Sladky 
✉,1 
Abstract In the wake of the active inference framework, two popular theories of consciousness highlight the relevance of insular cortex for interoceptive self-modeling (Fermin et al., 2022; Seth, 2021) and subcortical brain regions for qualitative experience (Solms, 2021). Both provide a compelling eco-logical argument for integrated conscious experience, i.e., self-organization of complex organisms with optimization goals that are usually parallel, multifaceted, and hard to reconcile. Computa-tionally, both theories require some kind of self-model as basis, which could contradict credible reports of minimal phenomenal experience (MPE) (Metzinger, 2024). However, duality of con-scious experience could be explained by a neuroscientific theory of two distinct brain networks emerging from different neurodevelopmental pathways, leading to marked differences in cyto-architecture and function (Luu et al., 2024; Sanides, 1962). System-A, originating from an olfactory system and amygdala-centered expansion gradient towards ventral cortex, could enable intero-ceptive self-modeling for habitual interactions with the body and the world. System-H, hippo-campus-centered towards dorsal cortex, could enable less egocentric forms of cognition and ex-perience. In this sense, MPE could be a less salient/habitual form of experience, when neither interoceptive/exteroceptive prediction errors nor spontaneous episodic memory reactivation provide self-referential engagement of System-A. System-H, if not operating on content, could give rise to self-less experience of the world as such. 
1 Introduction In his book, The Hidden Spring, Mark Solms made several noteworthy claims about conscious experi-ence and a possible neuro-computational description: ‘Feelings are real, and we know about them because they permeate our consciousness. […] From their origin in some of the most ancient strata of the brain, they irrigate the dead soil of unconscious representations and bring them to mental life.’ (Solms, 2021). His proposal can be summarized to these claims: First, phenomenal experience (PE) result from feelings that have intrinsic meaning for my Self in the form of positive or negative valence,  
✉ Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at 1 Social, Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience Unit, Department of Cognition, Emotion, and Methods in Psychology, Faculty of Psychology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria 
1 Introduction  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   2 
which makes them subjective. Second, PE are not just processes that could be modeled as quantitative regulation processes using continuous variables (like reflex arcs or homeostatic regulation). Instead, they are qualitative states that require categorical distributions. Third, evidenced by numerous lesion studies in clinical cases, Solms argues that feelings and conscious experience do not arise from cortical but from subcortical regions. PE could be a function or feature of consciousness that aids survival. Similar to Solms, Cleeremans and Tallon-Baudry argue that only because ‘conscious agents experience things and care about those experiences’ they are ‘motivated to act in certain ways’ and ‘prefer some states of affairs vs. others’ (Cleeremans and Tallon-Baudry, 2024). Likewise, Seth argues PE emerge from embodied, control-ori-ented predictive regulation and that ‘experiences of having a body, and of simply “being” a body, the many and varied elements of selfhood are Bayesian best guesses, designed by evolution to keep you alive’ (Seth, 2021). A powerful ecological argument for PE could be that it equips agents with intrinsic value for optimal decisions, bringing evolutionary fitness advantages for complex multicellular or-ganisms living in complex eco-niches when solving far-from-trivial optimization problems in precar-ious situations far away from thermodynamic equilibrium.2 However, credible reports of experiential states without any subjective self or agency (Metzinger, 2024) are strong counterarguments for this proposal. Minimal phenomenal experience (MPE) (Metz-inger, 2020a) can be described as pure awareness, the simplest form of conscious experience, i.e., ‘an experience of awareness itself that is not even subjective in the sense of being tied to a consciously experienced first-person perspective or a personal-level self-model anymore.’ (Gamma and Metz-inger, 2021). Could there be PE without a subject, value, and agency? I argue that MPE do not reject self-interest guided theories of PE but unmask their incompleteness. I aim to provide formal constraints for MPE and suggest an empirical roadmap: What are the compu-tational requirements for MPE as a special case of more general computational principles? I will dis-cuss possible implementations for the computational mechanisms: What kind of neuronal architecture would allow for MPE, given the phenomenology and assumed computational requirements? While not committed to specific theories of consciousness or PE3, my computational perspective is based on active inference (Friston, 2013; Friston and Stephan, 2007; Parr et al., 2022), while avoiding too narrow formulations for compatibility. 
 2 For example, the most important decision in a zebra's lifetime could be whether to enjoy the experience of re-freshing water at the waterhole or to run away to avoid an unfavorably fatal experience with a lion. This undesired experience is already foreshadowed by an undesired perceptual experience, like the movement of a bush, inde-pendent of whether caused by a predator or by a harmless tourist engaged in wildlife photography. 3 To maximize compatibility with different concepts of consciousness, PE, cognition, and computation, I will assume an instrumentalism perspective. Irrelevant whether PE are causally essential or inessential/epiphenomenal (Cleeremans and Tallon-Baudry, 2024; Seth and Bayne, 2022), repots of first-hand phenomenal experiences provide data to inform computation models that can be useful for scientific research. Additionally, I do not claim that PE is caused by a computational model or that cognition is computation or that neurons perform computations. My goal for a computational model is that it should accurately predict data, ideally, across different modalities (e.g., experi-ential reports, psychological, behavioral, physiological, neuroscientific). 
2 Computational Requirements  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   3 
The aim is to make some progress in the conception of a neurocomputational model of the brain and cognitive processes that occur during MPE, using only a limited set of pragmatic assumptions: First, without making any mechanistic or metaphysical claims about the relationship between neuronal and phenomenal states, PE entail changes in localized and global neuronal states and dynamics that are observable using present or future neuroscientific methods. Second, neurons can implement cognitive functions that can be described using formal computational models. This pragmatic assumption is a framework on how to model observations and does not necessarily entail that cognition is computa-tion or neurons perform computation. Third, my main concern is to conceptualize requirements con-sistent with established principles in neuroscience and computational modeling for MPE. In section 2, I will raise and sketch out some requirements and obstacles that prevent us from using established active inference and neuroscientific models. In section 3, I will turn to neuroanatomy and suggest that in addition to an ego-centric neurocomputational system, including areas such as the brainstem, insula or amygdala, there could be a second system that has some degree of independence from interoceptive processing. Based on the dual origin hypothesis for cortical development and evo-lution (Sanides, 1962), I propose the hippocampus and connected brain areas as a candidate. Section 4 contains neurocomputational predictions, before concluding in section 5. 
2 Computational Requirements There are several ways to model (neuro)computational processes. Here I will base my arguments on active inference, which employs a particular formulation of predictive processing and the Bayesian brain framework: neurocomputationally, the brain performs Bayesian inference (it creates optimal Bayesian models of the world) using surprise minimization (by minimizing prediction errors between prior expectations and sensory evidence) using both perception and action, which allows the brain to create useful models of the world (high predictive accuracy, while maintaining low model complexity) and regulating itself, the body, and its environment via intervening in the world using its model of anticipated consequences of its actions. Under active inference, we assume that variational free energy is minimized, however, it is conceivable that a different objective function for optimization would achieve the same goals. Even if conditionally accepting active inference, methodologically, there are many possible formulations making different commitments to the kind of data and processes to model 4. Even if PE was irreducible to neurocomputation, we could find pragmatic, formalized 
 4 This means even though active inference is generic and broad, existing models are special cases of a more general model, tailored to specific kinds of experiments. For example, the popular formulation using partially observable Markov decision processes (Parr et al., 2022) is based on categorical distributions and might not be sufficiently informative for MPE models in the sense that it could be used to correctly describe the data but does not allow for any novel interpretations. A different approach would be the hierarchical Gaussian filter which would allow for the flexible construction of computational hierarchies using very minimal theoretical commitments to the involved neuro-computation. However, currently there are no easy methods to account for homeostatic set points and top-down attention in this model. The list of potential active inference modeling frameworks is not exhaustive and just used to illustrate that choosing the optimal model is a pragmatic choice. Ultimately one generalized model for MPE could be both too complex (empirically useless because of data requirements, computationally intractable) or not informa-tive as it could be too general and unspecific leading to circular reasoning. However, progress in computational 
2 Computational Requirements  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   4 
computational models that are testable using neuroscientific, behavioral, and phenomenological re-port data, and, if successful, are able to predict phenomenal states. A prediction of active inference is that I embody a hierarchically deep, laterally wide, temporally deep generative model of my Self and my interactions with the environment. First, the difference between low and high hierarchical depth of the computational model could represent the level of abstraction of experiences (Figure 1). Related to visual perception, concrete experiences of shapes require less abstraction and hierarchical depth than faces or complex scenes, which requires careful top-down at-tention to properly sample the relevant information. Second, the lateral width of a hierarchical model, or the size of the model space, would be a marker for the flexibility of experiences or choices an agent is able to make. In visual perception, width in color perception entails more fine-grained color or object discrimination. Third, increasing temporal depth allows for anticipation of future sensory data con-tingent on actions. In visual perception, familiarity of the context allows for more successful sampling of relevant data from the environment and perform actions to alter the course of future events.5 All, these different computational motifs can be combined together in a modular fashion giving rise to complex adaptive behavior (Pezzulo et al., 2022). The recently proposed many-to-(n)one theory (Laukkonen and Slagter, 2021) rests upon the assump-tion that, neurocomputationally, MPE entails a reduction of counterfactual or temporal depth and abstraction away from temporally precise and concrete lower hierarchical levels towards temporally thick and abstract higher levels. Neurophenomenologically, they distinguish between a narrative self, potentially implemented by the default mode network, hierarchically on top of an experiencing self, potentially implemented by task-positive and interoceptive networks, which include the insular cor-tex and subcortical structures (Fermin et al., 2022). As there are only limited ways for the brain to perform active inference, I will expand on the many-to-(n)one theory and offer neurocomputational predictions on how to satisfy computational require-ments for low lateral width, low temporal depth, and appropriate hierarchical height required for MPE. Yet, the elephant in the room is that there is always some kind of ownership of the generative model. It is used by an agent to model itself and the world to guide future actions. However, during MPE there is no agent, no action, no modeling of a concrete self and world. In the next section I will introduce a neuroanatomical model to solve this conundrum. 
 neuroscience has demonstrated that piecemeal approaches are in fact useful if they only answer partial questions. I will try to present a meta level perspective that should be applicable to any actual computational model used em-pirically. 5 E.g., I will be quicker to pick up subtle facial cues of a family member to predict they are currently inattentive and about to knock a cup off the table. With sufficient temporal depth, I can avoid negative experiences before they might happen. 
3 Neuroanatomical Background  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   5 
3 Neuroanatomical Background I have recently reviewed the amygdala’s role in creating predictive models for homeo-/allostatic con-trol and perception from an active inference perspective (Sladky et al., 2024), highlighting its function for linking interoceptive regulation (via inputs from brainstem and interoceptive models in the insular cortex) to exteroception (via temporal lobe and thalamus). Amygdala output is crucial for modifying behavior via brainstem (e.g., fast, stereotypical threat responses and regulation of the autonomous nervous system), ventral striatum (e.g., biasing action selection), prefrontal cortex (e.g., active avoid-ance requiring long-term planning) and hypothalamus (e.g., somatic arousal via hormonal cascades). My review allows for two additional insights on the amygdala’s role in hierarchical active inference and the different functional contributions of neuroanatomically different microstructures. First, the amygdala resembles a central hub for multimodal/multisensory integration, which would place it near the top of a hierarchical active inference model. This explains why amygdala activation (e.g., prediction errors from deviations from homeostatic preference priors) leads to strong changes in behavior (e.g., avoidance or approach behavior) and subjective experience (e.g., fear and other emo-tions). Placing subcortical areas on top of the hierarchy and not the prefrontal cortex is an important paradigmatic shift. The prefrontal cortex allows for functions that have traditionally been called higher cognitive functions, such as language production, based on the notion that they are hallmarks of higher animals like humans.6 However, mounting functional and neuroanatomical evidence lead to reconceptualized models that place the so-called limbic system on top of the computational hierarchy given its relevance for allostatic control (Chanes and Barrett, 2016; Katsumi et al., 2022; Luu et al., 2024; Tucker and Luu, 2021). Second, differences in anatomical microstructure parallel functional (sometimes complementary) spe-cializations that are often overlooked if not accounted for, as we previously demonstrated for the amygdala (Sladky et al., 2021b) and functionally-defined sub-parcellations could delineate the com-plex cytoarchitecture of subcortical brain areas, which underwent a long evolutionary history of model optimization (Garcia-Calero and Puelles, 2020). Understanding evolutionary trajectories of brain development have gained interest in neuroimaging (Bernhardt et al., 2022). Among them the dual origin hypothesis of cortical development suggests that two distinct brain networks emerged from different expansion points (Sanides, 1962), potentially lead-ing to marked functional differences. One system originated from the olfactory system and an amyg-dala-centered expansion gradient towards ventral cortex, which could enable interoceptive self-mod-eling for habitual interactions with the body and the environment (System-A, Figure 2A). The other 
 6 This overly human-centric notion is losing relevance also because, from a biological perspective, these higher func-tions have lower relevance for the survival of an organism in its ecological niche (Brooks, 1990) and we should reevaluate how these labels are useful for progress in neuroscience (Pessoa et al., 2022). In fact, there is mounting evidence that subcortical brain areas play an important role in regulating resting state brain connectivity (Li et al., 2021) and are involved in essentially all higher cognitive functions (Janacsek et al., 2022). 
3 Neuroanatomical Background  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   6 
system is hippocampus-centered, expanded towards dorsal cortex, and could enable allocentric forms of cognition and experience (System-H, Figure 2B).7 
3.1 System-A The central extended amygdala, which includes the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, has its origin in the subpallium, a subdivision of the embryonic telencephalon, which also comprises the striatum and parts of the olfactory system. Subpallial structures can already form a simple system that mediates approach and avoidance behavior and valenced perception: smell can be pleasant and preferred, in-dicating presence of food or social partners, which invites for approach behavior. Less preferred pun-gent smells can indicate danger such as proximity to predators or rivals, leading to avoidance, nega-tive affective tone and changes in alertness. The effects of smell on the medial amygdala is well-stud-ied in rodents (Wernecke et al., 2015) underscoring its relevance for survival on a principal level.8 After describing System-A‘s neurodevelopmental trajectory, I will discuss some of its functions in ego-centric self-modeling. In addition to the central amygdala, subpallial in origin, the basolateral amygdala develops from the pallial subdivision of the embryonic telencephalon. Like the hippocampus, discussed in the next sec-tion, it is a major pallial expansion gradient for cortical development. The pallial amygdala extends towards several directions including the following three important gradients: 1. From the amygdala to the sensorimotor cortex via the insula cortex and operculum. This gradient would be a good candidate for interoceptive functions and self-regulations. The expansion gradient terminates is the ventral part of sensorimotor cortex, which are relevant for face movements and sensations, important parts of affective behavior and experience. 2. From the amygdala to the posterior temporal lobe. This gradient reflects the ventral perceptual stream. The so-called What?-pathway in vision is for identification of visual stimuli from sim-ple concrete (posterior part) towards more complex features (anterior part), and relevance de-tection (amygdala). Importantly, it exhibits regions that are optimized for specialized feature detection (e.g., faces). This expansion gradient plays and important role in exteroception. We 
 7 Common in both systems is an increase in neuroanatomical complexity from their expansion points. They reflect a progression from older structures with fewer neural layers towards newer structures with more differentiated layers at the end of the expansion gradient: from the primordial limbic zones referred to as allocortex (amygdala and hippocampus) over three-layered paralimibic areas (piriform, entorhinal, parahippocampal, and the ventral cingulate cortex), to areas without (agranular insular and pre-central cortex) or only rudimentary granular layer IV (dsygranular insular, dorsal cingulate, and orbitofrontal cortex), towards the newest six-layered cortex, known as isocortex or neocortex, with the highest laminar differentiation only found in primates but not in rodents (García-Cabezas et al., 2022; Giaccio, 2006). 8 While olfaction is important in humans, the amygdalar structures have been repurposed. Waymel et. al argue that the stable and reliable access to food sources has contributed to volume and connectivity reduction within the olfaction system during brain evolution and development (Waymel et al., 2020). Additionally the phylogenetic ex-pansion of the basolateral part of the amygdala in primates (Janak and Tye, 2015) allows models with higher hierar-chical width leading to more, fine-grained, multimodal perception and increased action flexibility. 
3 Neuroanatomical Background  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   7 
assume the basolateral amygdala plays a role in tuning hierarchical feature selection (Sladky et al., 2024). A similar gradient exists for auditory processing. 3. From the amygdala to the ventral prefrontal cortex (vmPFC, vlPFC), which we know play a role in what is traditionally called prefrontal amygdala regulation (Sladky et al., 2021a, 2015). Lesions along these gradients do not lead to a complete loss of function but more towards impover-ished, less flexible models. E.g., lesions in medial prefrontal cortex lead to impairment in emotion regulations (Bechara et al., 1999). When it comes to interoception, Mark Solms notes that insula is not necessary for the experience of feeling the body.9 Selective lesions in the basolateral amygdala due to Urbach-Wiethe disease (Koen et al., 2016), however, affect self-related cognition in fundamental ways: not only do they lead to more generous economic investments in trust games (van Honk et al., 2013), they also impair identification of people that act against one’s interests (Rosenberger et al., 2019). Pa-tients were described to me as exceptionally prosocial, without much ego-centric concern in general, and more positive autobiographic memories (van Honk, personal communication) and dream expe-riences (Blake et al., 2019).10 In neurotypical people, in turn, non-aggressive responses and prosocial behavior seems to be mediated by the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (Beyer et al., 2015; Lockwood et al., 2024), which is also part of System-A and involved in voluntary amygdala down-regulation (Watve et al., 2024).  
3.2 System-H Like the amygdala, the hippocampus, is part of a subcortical brain system with evolutionary highly preserved microcircuits. However, over the course of primate brain evolution and simultaneous gain of function by specialized cortical connectivity the integration of the hippocampus within the rest of the brain has undergone fundamental reconfiguration (Eichert et al., 2023). As the second part of the allocortex, the hippocampus expands radially in several directions towards dorsal neocortical area, e.g.: 1. From hippocampus to anterior cingulate cortex and dorsal prefrontal areas (e.g., dorsolateral prefrontal cortex). Functionally, this gradient plays an important role in the formation of declarative, as-sociative memories, and relating new to old information (Menon, 2016). After acquisition, as 
 9 “Patient B., whose insular cortices were entirely destroyed, experienced body feelings as well as emotional feel-ings. He reported feeling pain, pleasure, itch, tickle, happiness, sadness, apprehension, irritation, caring and com-passion, and he behaved in ways consonant with such feelings when he reported experiencing them. He also re-ported feelings of hunger, thirst, and desire to void, and behaved accordingly. He yearned for play opportunities, for example, playing checkers, visiting with others, going for walks, and registered obvious pleasure when engaged in such activities as well as disappointment or even irritation when the opportunities were denied. [...] Given the impoverishment of his imagination, Patient B.’s existence was a virtually continuous ‘affective’ reaction to his own body states and to the modest demands posed by the world around him, undampened by high-order cognitive controls [...].” (Solms, 2021) 10 This altruistic stance could be a form of harm avoidance as a matter of principle, as complex moral decision-making is biased towards non-utilitarian judgments even in the most extreme cases of trolley dilemmas where thousands of lives could be saved by a sacrificial decision (van Honk et al., 2022). 
3 Neuroanatomical Background  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   8 
soon as memories are established in cortical areas, the functional relevance of the hippocam-pus is decreased (Eichenbaum, 2017) and, eventually, no longer required during the retrieval processes (Qin et al., 2014). 2. From hippocampus to parahippocampal cortex and parietal lobe. Historically, hippocampus has been studied extensively in the context of navigation. Place cells in the hippocampus (and grid cell in the adjacent entorhinal cortex) dynamically encode the current location. During memory consolidation, parietal cortex encoding changes to a more permanent and action-oriented for-mat (Whitlock et al., 2008). Following an abstraction gradient, hippocampus encodes abstract coordinate information, while parietal cortex is crucial for more concrete, categorical spatial relationships (Baumann and Mattingley, 2014). 3. From hippocampus to medial cingulate cortex and dorsal sensorimotor network. The sensorimotor network is a mostly cortical network that includes primary and sensory-motor areas as well supplementary motor areas (Yeo et al., 2011). As such, the world model from the hippocampus network enables coordinated, goal-directed motor actions. A model of space and time, derived from real-life experiences, appears to be the basis for encoding of episodic memories. Studies in humans suggests that the hippocampus represents the spatial and tem-poral location of memories for real-life events at scales of up to 30 km and a month of time (Nielson et al., 2015). Hippocampus encodes spatial and non-spatial relationships not as a static mapping but in the form of relational constructions, neuronally implemented by dynamic re-entrant loops and amorphous networks (Maurer and Nadel, 2021). The hippocampus is involved in sequence learning, which can be seen as the basis for an active construction of temporal order and duration (Bellmund et al., 2022), while temporal modeling in System-A could rely more on interoceptive expectations and physiological signals.11 Functional brain connectivity shows that different subfields of the hippocampus connect to different areas of the cortex, not only to the sensorimotor resting state network but also to the default mode network (Ezama et al., 2021), heteromodal regions in the neocortex, including the dorsolateral pre-frontal and parietal cortex, involved in mind wandering and sensory monitoring. Furthermore, the default mode network appears to be involved in some form of self-modeling, including autobiograph-ical memory, future thinking, and self-perception (Eichert et al., 2023). I argue that this form of self-modeling is more centered around a narrative self and how it relates to extrinsic factors, e.g., how I see myself in relationship to some external world, in contrast to System-A’s ego-centric model based on interoceptive sensations. 
 11 Considering that System-H provides a world-model with several layers of abstraction, its involvement in mathe-matical cognition is unsurprising. Prefrontal areas appear to be involved in rule-based and context-specific manipu-lations of quantity-related information encoded in the parietal cortex, whereas activation in temporal regions relates to reading/hearing mathematical symbols (Menon, 2016). 
3 Neuroanatomical Background  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   9 
3.3 Interactions Between System-A and System-H A central argument of my proposal is that there are two independent functional systems arising from an amygdala- and a hippocampus-centered brain network. While I have reported on evidence for their complementary functions, I also need to stress that these networks are most likely never truly disso-ciated during everyday cognition – maybe, MPE could be a rare case when this happens. E.g., in visual perception they perform complementary functions: System-A corresponds to the ventral What?-path-way for identifying relevant objects; System-H to the dorsal Where?-pathway for localizing and track-ing objects (Mishkin and Ungerleider, 1982).12 Along the neuroanatomical expansion gradient, interactions between System-A and H happen on sev-eral levels. Already on the most basic level, hippocampus connects to the olfactory system and, in fact, the link between smells and memory reactivation is well-known (Waymel et al., 2020). Amygdalar connections are generally excitatory and more extensive than the hippocampus, which appears more important for inhibition to limit the organism’s stress response using mechanisms based on contextual episodic and spatial memory, e.g., contextual conditioning, habituation, and extinction (Giaccio, 2006). There is no strong evidence for connectivity between the different subparts of the insula to hippocam-pus, entorhinal cortex, and other core System-H areas (Gehrlach et al., 2020). At multiple levels reciprocal pathways link System-A and H sectors of equivalent architectonic devel-opment, e.g., ventromedial and anterior cingulate cortex, ventrolateral and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Functionally, for the regulation of mood, it has been suggested that a reciprocal equilibrium between prefrontal sectors plays a central role, both in neurotypical and clinical populations (Giaccio, 2006).13 Motivated perception, e.g., how intrinsic motivation for salient stimuli drives spatial attention orien-tation in the hippocampal-parietal network, illustrates how amygdala influences System-H. In face perception, basolateral amygdala lesions lead to both reduced salience, failure to orient attention to-wards the stimulus (Jha et al., 2023), but also hyperfocus, failure to re-orient attention away from the stimulus (Terburg et al., 2012). Neuronally, there is hyperactivation in the parietal cortex and other System-H areas (Hortensius et al., 2016) such as the subgenual anterior cingulate and dorsomedial prefrontal cortices and deactivation of the temporal cortex (System-A) (Hortensius et al., 2017). More generally, lesions in the core of System-A disturb the motivation of behavior, while core System-H lesions disturb the temporospatial organization of action (Giaccio, 2006). A hippocampal subfield rest-ing state fMRI study suggests the existence of a connection between the hippocampal sensorimotor cortex network and the amygdala (and orbitofrontal cortex) (Ezama et al., 2021). As shown using intra-
 12 Interestingly, early theories have already proposed that the dorsal stream in the parietal cortex is not directly encoding abstract spatial information but more concrete models of motor control (Goodale and Milner, 1992; Tucker and Luu, 2012) to enable different forms of object grasping (Luppino and Rizzolatti, 2000; Luu et al., 2024; Rizzolatti and Matelli, 2003). Abstraction, i.e., placing these sensory-motor models into an abstract spatial model, happens along the gradient towards the hippocampus. 13 The ventrolateral PFC is known to play a prominent role in cognitive control over memory retrieval, especially for the selection of relevant memories (Menon, 2016), which is only one way how System-A could influence System-H. 
4 Neurocomputational Predictions  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   10 
cranial recordings, synchronization between amygdala and hippocampus and connected cortical net-works fluctuates across different sleep phases (Muñoz-Torres et al., 2023) 
4 Neurocomputational Predictions In the following, I will present a series of requirements for applying the neurocomputational princi-ples outline before to model MPE, mostly exemplified in the context of wakeful meditation (Metz-inger, 2020a).14 
4.1 Lateral width and attention Lateral width of the model allows for richness and flexibility in perception and action. A neural circuit that contains only one sensory, one inter, and one motor neuron computationally resembles a simple first-order cybernetic control loop. It can implement useful functions, such as homeostatic regulation, yet does not possess any adaptive behavior. Increasing the lateral width of the interneurons would increase the degrees of freedom of neuronal and behavioral states, which are selected based on self-organized systemic or top-down regulation. In visual perception, focusing on a particular feature, e.g., a face in a crowd, narrowing the lateral width by downregulating competing hypotheses, i.e., other faces, is usually termed top-down attention. Local lateral inhibition could also play a role in model selection within one hierarchical layer, e.g., as proposed for bistable perception in binocular rivalry (Hohwy et al., 2008). Experiential, cognitive, and brain states are dynamic processes that are not only triggered by external perturbation but are, even more so, a product of intrinsic spontaneous activity. Spontaneous activity is not unconstrained but carefully regulated and entrained by top-down attention processes. Under active inference, these attentional mechanisms are probably implemented by precision-weighting of top-down predictions. Even though there has been important progress in conceptualizing top-down and bottom-attention under active inference (Parvizi-Wayne, 2024), there are fundamental problems with the vague notion of attention and its mechanisms: ‘The vocabulary we use to discuss attention, decisions, reward, and motivation is informal and driven by intuitions that have advanced little over the years.’ (Maunsell, 2015). In empirical research, attention is typically not the cause (an explainer) but what we are trying to explain (an effect) (Wu, 2024), shifting the topic of controlled top-down regulation actually to the discussion of mental action, as carefully discussed by Metzinger (Metzinger, 2017).15 
 14 Even though the emergence of MPE appears to be a spontaneous event that could also happen in other situations (e.g., lucid dreamless sleep), meditation practice appears to at least increase the chance for MPE. E.g., mindfulness-based meditation suggests changes in brain dynamics (Atasoy et al., 2023) and dose-dependent reduction of sub-ject-object distinction and disembodiment that persisted for at least one year (Galante et al., 2024). 15 ‘My main claim […] is that mental action is the predictive control of effective connectivity, where what is predicted is the epistemic value of states integrated into the phenomenal self-model under counterfactual outcomes. I will 
4 Neurocomputational Predictions  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   11 
Focused attention requires tuning the generative model to specific (task) requirements. Inattention on the other hand, increases the likelihood that other models dominate, a phenomenon known as mind wandering. Already Hermann von Helmholtz speculated about the suggestive relationship between salience/relevance, attention and phenomenal experience, yet, the link is neither clear nor trivial (for details see Hohwy, 2012).16 Nevertheless, if one neurocomputational goal is to optimize models, then it is plausible that different models are iteratively selected and optimized, thus avoiding sticking to a model where no optimiza-tion progress can be made. This means, if there is nothing to process or optimize given a particular model (possibly leading to experiences of boredom or frustration), spontaneous reactivation of auto-biographical memories or shifts in interoceptive awareness can bring previously downregulated mod-els into the foreground for evaluation. In this sense, the brain can be described metaphorically as a phantastic organ, which constantly generates fantasies or hypotheses about the world that are tested against sensory evidences (Friston et al., 2014), elegantly described as a form of controlled hallucina-tion (Seth, 2021).17 Many meditation techniques require focused attention on interoceptive perceptions like breathing (Boyadzhieva and Kayhan, 2021). Ideally, the attentional top-down process leads to the suppression of alternative models that could interfere. Consequentially, the dominant model would be able to per-form optimal predictions (e.g., an optimal interoceptive model of respiration), leading to attenuation of prediction error18 in interoceptive regions such as the insula and, possibly, the attenuation of phe-nomenal self-experience (Limanowski and Friston, 2020).19 Paradoxically, the explaining away of all prediction errors appears to be an unfavored state. Given the system’s intrinsic goal for model optimization there is always the tendency that this vacuum is filled by remembering episodic memories and creating anticipatory plans on what we need to do 
 also claim that the circular causality constituting genuine mental action does not embrace events on any sensory sheet, that mental action is a rare event, and that the specific phenomenal signature of mental action can be ex-plained by a new content layer in the conscious self-model, the “epistemic agent model” (EAM), which may some-times transiently emerge in the brains of human beings.’ (Metzinger, 2017) 16 : ‘The natural unforced state of our attention is to wander around to ever new things, so that when the interest of an object is exhausted, when we cannot perceive anything new, then attention against our will goes to something else. [...]If we want attention to stick to an object we have to keep finding something new in it, especially if other strong sensations seek to decouple it (Helmholtz, 1860, p. 770; translated by Jakob Hohwy).’ 17 This generation process of competing hypotheses (i.e., increasing the lateral width of the generative model) could be both unconscious in the case of spontaneous insights or consciously experienced as mind wandering. Addition-ally, it is plausible to assume that this process is not entirely random but constrained by the organism’s pragmatic needs. In this sense, Metzinger proposes the cognitive affordance hypothesis ‘that a central function of autonomous activity in the mind wandering network is to create a constant stream of affordances for cognitive agency, a contin-uing internal competition among possible cognitive actions.’ (Metzinger, 2017). 18 I am using prediction error in a loose sense here. In fact, computationally we most likely need to model a reduction of precision, which also leads to a reduction of relevant prediction error. 19 Note that interoception in itself is a complex and multi-facetted and -dimensional challenge, both theoretical and empirical (Garfinkel et al., 2015). 
4 Neurocomputational Predictions  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   12 
instead of meditating. The phenomenal feeling of unconstrained openness in MPE would arise from focused attention and not from open, unconstrained cognition in the form of mind wandering. Suffi-cient meditation expertise reduces mind wandering (Lutz et al., 2008) likely by reducing the influence of System-H on System-A, which could reduce the lateral width of the generative model. Empirical evidence suggests that areas such as the insula do not create static mapping of an intero-ceptive self-model. Instead, insular activation is highly dynamic in response to interoceptive data and task demands (Gogolla et al. forthcoming, for review see Flavell et al., 2022). Focused attention on interoceptive sensations would reduce the fragility of the experiential self-model. Indeed, mindfulness training has been suggested to increase interoceptive accuracy and brain activation in interoceptive brain areas reviewed in (Manuello et al., 2016). Decreasing the lateral width of the actively engaged generative model could then be realized by well-regulated physiological control (high epistemic and instrumental interoceptive accuracy) and disregarding irrelevant fluctuations of bodily signals as noise (optimized signal-to-noise ratio) would decrease prediction error and prevents instantiation of counterfactual models. Additionally, focused attention should prevent exploratory top-down selec-tion of alternative models, which have not yet been attenuated. Attenuation of prediction error in the insular cortex would suppress prediction error signaling to the central amygdala, decreasing action initiation 20 and predictions along the exteroceptive parts of System-A originating from the basolateral amygdala. An experimental intervention could be the downregulation of the basolateral amygdala using fMRI neurofeedback training (Watve et al., 2024) or non-invasive brain stimulation. However, agentive attentional top-down effort could reduce the feeling of non-egocentric openness. Alternatively, not focusing on one particular model to suppress the others but attenuating prediction error from all models simultaneously via local lateral inhibition could avoid the strong experience of agentive control and self-identification; an issue that we will address next.  
4.2 Temporal depth and agency  In addition to focused attention (i.e., ‘voluntary focusing attention on a chosen object in a sustained fashion’), certain meditation techniques require ‘open monitoring’, which ‘involves non-reactively monitoring the content of experience from moment to moment’ (see Lutz et al., 2008 for a neuroscien-tific review). I argue that MPE requires both focused attention and non-agency 21. The fact that MPE entails non-agency conflicts with active inference’s pragmatic imperative that mod-els are for actions and allostasis. Even though sitting in a dark room would reduce all prediction error, (there are only predictable stimulation for my senses, i.e., darkness), (anticipated) metabolic demands force me out of this local optimum of minimal prediction error. I know that I will be hungry again 
 20 See (Seth et al., 2012) on the role of the anterior insular cortex in the sense of agency and presence in habitual forms of experience. 21 For a discussion on how the experience of being an agent and the belief that we could have done otherwise, which requires temporal depth and hierarchical width, would be relevant for habitual conscious experiences see (Frith and Metzinger, 2016). 
4 Neurocomputational Predictions  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   13 
and, therefore, I need to act now to avoid hunger in the future. This illustrates why optimal inferential outcomes on short timescales (no prediction error from sensations) can lead to suboptimal outcomes on longer timescales (prediction error from starvation). Instead, an optimal model at large should be accurate on all timescales, which means that the model’s predictions are confirmed by all available and expected future sensory experiences. Optimal exteroception requires model confirmation in the form of (1) epistemic hypothesis testing (perception, short temporal depth), (2) testing counterfactual hypotheses by actively sampling the world (exploration, long temporal depth), (3) taking actions to ensure the world confirms to expecta-tions (regulation, short temporal depth), and (4) simulating the consequences of future actions (antic-ipation, long temporal depth). Likewise, optimal interoceptive control requires model confirmation in the form of (1) instrumental model confirmation by directing attention to predicted interoceptive sensations (perception, short temporal depth), (2) self-evidencing behavior (Perrykkad and Hohwy, 2020) such as self-touching or altering respiration (exploration, long temporal depth), (3) habitual behavior (regulation, short tem-poral depth), and (4) goal-directed behavior (anticipation, long temporal depth).  Given these premises, what happens during meditation aiming for non-action, non-goal directedness, and presence in the moment? The solution would be to shrink the temporal depth of the model: being attentionally in the moment entails reduced planning of future actions. I consider this a necessary first step, yet insufficient to decrease agentive exploration (like opening the eyes) or regulation (like scratching). In addition, attenuation of the interoceptive and exteroceptive model should lead to min-imal prediction error reducing incentives for actions. What is left would be the convergence towards optimal interoceptive control and exteroception.22 This highly accurate self-model would be optimal only temporarily: it does not feel right and invites for self-evidencing, i.e., covert attention shift (focusing on breathing) or overt behavior (touching one-self). Absence of epistemic or instrumental prediction error reduction also drives explorative behavior to minimize expected free energy using habitual or goal-directed actions mediated by striatal areas. Downregulating the striatum could reduce goal-directed and habitual epistemic and instrumental ac-tions, as suggested by preliminary data where focused ultrasound of the caudate nucleus was used to support meditation (Cain et al., 2024). While action initiation, selection, and execution are likely caused or gated by System-A and striatal mechanisms, world model goals involve the hippocampus (Miller et al., 2017). MPE is accompanied by a loss of time perception (Gamma and Metzinger, 2021), which could be caused by attenuated interoceptive signals that provide temporal structure in System-A. Additionally, 
 22 Optimal interoceptive control is a state that is fundamentally different from (pathological) depersonalization where detachment is experienced as a loss of control over the self and the world (Ciaunica et al., 2022). 
4 Neurocomputational Predictions  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   14 
hippocampal time coding is thought to be actively constructed. Not following trains of spontaneous thoughts, preventing sequences of episodic memories, could attenuate temporal structure.23 Attenuating the interoceptive and agentive Self entails that certain higher levels in the hierarchy do not process any meaningful data. In this case the model is not optimal anymore due to unnecessarily complexity given the present empirical data. Deviation from optimality could violate the free energy principle, yet there is a potential solution discussed in the next section. 
4.3 Hierarchical height and complexity My computational description of MPE suggests a model architecture that is low in width (i.e., effort-less focused attention prevents mind wandering) and short temporal depth (i.e., an attenuated, well-regulated self-model without anticipation of future actions). Such a model is unable to increase accu-racy. The only possible model optimization entails complexity reduction. However, MPE would lead to needlessly overcomplex models as some hierarchical levels essentially encode no relevant data. Do MPE break model optimization goals and present a case beyond the scope of active inference and its free energy minimization imperative? I argue that MPE might be the phenomenally most simple experience – yet, it requires a computational model of high complexity. Adding hierarchical levels on top of simple regulation loops adds layers of progressively simplified abstraction. If I would directly experience only my bodily regulation efforts, e.g., how my nervous cells anticipate the next bolus of oxygen-rich blood, I would assume this expe-rience to be very unpleasant and stressful, maybe comparable to the experience of a panic attack. Adding another layer that explains the precision error on the lower level away removes this stressor. This layer would attenuate these fluctuations, explaining away the to be expected prediction error, by properly calibrating the signal-to-noise ratio. There is only a signal of relevant deviations from home-ostatic set points, e.g., if the actual deviation of blood oxygenation is larger than expected. Additional layers could be added until no more fluctuations are modeled. Phenomenologically, I suggest that this added complexity leads to the experience of calmness, turning into boredom after some time. Based on the free energy principle, we would expect that not being able to minimize free energy would be an unpleasant state (Joffily and Coricelli, 2013). However, if life as we know it entails free energy minimization (Friston, 2013), MPE states would (computationally) 
 23 Apparently, there should be some equilibrium between System-A and H. A strongly activated System-A and loss of System-H’s temporal structure could be one of the mechanisms of positive symptoms in schizophrenia (Giaccio, 2006): ‘reserved amygdaloid emotional memory, combined with impaired hippocampal time coding (episodic memory), might also explain some aspects of primary process cognition in schizophrenia. That is, memories retrieved solely by the attribute of emotional valence (in the absence of dorsal temporal structuring) may be experienced as a confusing jumble of images, which shift and merge in a dream-like fashion (without logical sequence or causality), or perhaps coalesce into a condensed symbolic image.’ However, if System-A is also attenuated as a result of a well-regulated self model, then spontaneous generation of mental content should be reduced as well. 
4 Neurocomputational Predictions  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   15 
amount to being dead. If we dismiss this option, I suggest MPE entails free energy minimization out-side the scope of the (completely attenuated) self-model.24 Altogether, attenuating interoceptive, exteroceptive, and agentive models leads to a situation where accuracy can no longer be increased using epistemic and instrumental (mental) actions. The only way free energy can be reduced is by reducing model complexity. If meditation has initiated too many levels of computation (e.g., meta levels for top-down attentional control) these layers will no longer contain any relevant data to explain the observed variance in sensory data (i.e., a flat line) and should be removed for parsimony, an established modeling practice known as Bayesian model reduction. Psychologically, this process has been called fact free learning (Friston et al., 2017) and could be related to the Vipassanā (insight) meditation practice (Laukkonen and Slagter, 2021)25. However, removing superfluous top-levels from System-A would stop the attenuation of the intero-ceptive self-model and reinstate the experience of being a body. Likewise, reducing abstract System-H top layers reinstates more concrete episodic memories, mediated by activity of an unattenuated default mode network. These autobiographical memories would likely reinstate their affective self-reference via a reengaged interoceptive self-model in System-A and, consequently, increase temporal depth again as one starts to simulate actions for counterfactual futures. Alternatively, model complexity could occur by simplifying the encoding of the modeled distribution – not by reducing the top layer. Phenomenologically, this could lead to the experience of knowledge increase in the most abstract sense. Speculatively, I assume that this kind of optimization cannot occur in System-A as the flexibility of the self-model is constrained by physiological needs that limit System-A’s degrees of freedom. System-H, on the other hand, would be less constrained; its architecture re-sembles an ideal system for unlimited associative learning, which has been proposed as another evo-lutionary driver for consciousness (Jablonka and Ginsburg, 2022). In fact, it has been shown empiri-cally that predictive models are created in the hippocampus (Stachenfeld et al., 2017) and entorhinal cortex (Ouchi and Fujisawa, 2024) and it has been demonstrated that hippocampus learns to general-ize by reducing complexity of how the data exploiting the flexible and abstract model architecture (Courellis et al., 2024). I can only speculate about the phenomenal experience of this neurocomputa-tional process but would assume a non-egocentric and non-agentic feeling of open-ended non-con-vergence and positive valence. 
 24 Possible evidence that this mode of computation is plausible stems from people with locked-in syndrome who usually seem to retain mental experience, some cognitive functions, and do not report their existence to be miser-able. Speculatively, I assume that the absence of somatic input which initially might have caused prediction error has been learned as to be expected, leading to an attenuated self-model. However, considering that clinical con-founds make this claim even more speculative, there is evidence that chronic locked-in syndrome reduces arousal over time, which would be a form of complexity reduction. Bayne et al. discuss the relationship between global consciousness and arousal in more detail (Bayne et al., 2016). This could mean that a chronically attenuated self-model would lead to an overall reduction of brain activity. So, instead, we need to find an alternative to self-centered free energy reduction. 25 This more divergent, open-ended form of insight would be different to convergent problem solving using insight, which depends on striatal involvement (Tik et al., 2018). 
5 Conclusion  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   16 
4.4 Ego-centricity and ownership The final, and most fundamental obstacle for any computational model of MPE are ego-centricity and ownership. The generative model is perspectival: it describes the computation that needs to be imple-mented for the agent’s self-regulation. Likewise, the phenomenal model exists for someone (the agent) to do something (self-regulation). So far, I suggest that the self-model can be stable in focus (low hier-archical width), attenuated and well-regulated (low temporal depth), and at least temporarily over-complex (high hierarchical depth). If free energy minimization is still an imperative the model needs to increase accuracy and decrease complexity somewhere else, i.e., outside its self-model.  Computationally, I suggest the existence of a neurocomputational model outside or parallel to the egocentric self-model, where free energy minimization happens during MPE. I propose that the hip-pocampus and connected brain areas (System-H) would be a candidate for these processes. However, for MPE there should not be an involvement of System-H’s lower hierarchical layers, such as the de-fault mode network, which could provide autobiographical details that reactive the self-model. This peripheral System-H deactivations would be in line with empirical EEG results in meditators who experienced a cessation of conscious experience during meditation where alpha-suppression was strongest over the occipital and parietal regions of the brain (Chowdhury et al., 2023). Altogether, MPE could require an attenuated System-A but active System-H engaged on its highest, most abstract computational levels leading to the experience of non-self, timelessness, and non-con-crete phenomenal content. Explaining away the bodily self-model could even feel ‘supernatural’ (Hohwy and Paton, 2010). Crucially, if System-H were not involved it would not be clear what kind of cognition and free energy minimization takes place to be experienced on a phenomenal level. MPE could be the experience of abstract hippocampal model optimization processes that happen usually without our conscious awareness, which is usually dominated by System-A’s activity in creating an interoceptive model that provides valence for an exteroceptive model and guides actions.26 
5 Conclusion I proposed a first draft of a hypothetical computational model for MPE (Figure 3). The next steps involve careful evaluation of the formal presuppositions and empirical claims. Neuroscientific meth-ods, such as (real-time) fMRI and non-invasive brain stimulation, would be useful to investigate the neurocomputational claims: attenuated insula, amygdala, striatum, default mode network – engage-ment of hippocampus. Model-based neuroimaging experiments could investigate if the proposed neu-ral processes cooccur with an MPE episode, given that MPE can be achieved reliably in the 
 26 Solms notes that ‘It is well-established that learning and memory can exert their effects without any “inner feel”; and the same applies to perception. […] The only exception to the rule is precisely what needs to be explained: namely the conscious part of cognition—the part that is left over when the performance of all the relevant functions is explained.’ (Solms, 2019). 
5 Conclusion  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   17 
experimental setting. Neuromodulation experiments could investigate if influencing the proposed neural processes is sufficient cause of an MPE episode.27 Computational phenomenology is a newly emerging discipline (Ramstead et al., 2022) and has started to become relevant for MPE (Sandved-Smith et al., 2021) 28, yet, we need to manage our expectations: ‘It seems unlikely that, at this point in time, a simple theory based on the relative weighting of priors and sensory signals can provide a satisfactory account of phenomenological control.’ (Lush et al., 2024). Even without satisfactory explanations and unified models, pragmatically, some phenomenal predictions of my model could be back-loaded into phenomenological analyses (Gallagher, 2003), e.g., regarding the relationship of attenuated interoceptive models and attenuated exteroception and agency and closer analyses of model complexity reduction without contraction (Metzinger, 2020b). Concluding, if System-A (plus striatum, brainstem and some other subcortical nuclei) is the hidden spring of self-centered phenomenal experiences, the habitual way of being in the world – then System-H could be the endless ocean of minimal phenomenal experience, an often ignored or transparent way of being in the world. Unconstrained by a self-model (via attenuated interoception), not able to in-crease model accuracy (via attenuated exteroception and agency), maybe the living brain’s only option is to minimize complexity on the most abstract levels of System-H’s world model, giving rise to the simplest form of wakeful phenomenal experience.  
 27 This approach would follow the minimal phenomenal selfhood research tradition (Blanke and Metz-inger, 2009). 28 Also see https://mpe-project.info/subprojects/#subproject_3  
Appendix Ethics Statement Unprecedented advancements in several domains of technology and science drive serious concerns that humans might reach the limit of artificially creating synthetic phenomenal states (Metzinger, 2021). My proposal in the present form is descriptive and does not yet include an executable compu-tational simulation, which would be a necessary condition for synthetic phenomenal states. Even if my proposal leads to a working simulation on conventual computing hardware, there is no immediate risk for creating synthetic phenomenal states and suffering due to fundamental differences in causal flow within this hardware (Wiese, 2024). However, `there are conscious states in which the transfer of information between the world and the brain is massively reduced, with the result that the brain (or parts thereof) becomes disconnected from its environment` (Bayne et al., 2020) and my proposal would assume a form of experience that is detached from an embodied self-model. I suggest that understanding the origin of MPE is also an ethical imperative in light of new technologies such as organoids, neural interfaces, and neuromorphic computing. 
Figures 
 Figure 1. Illustration of relevant computational motifs within a generative model. A. The lateral width of a model determines how many features can be encoded in parallel within a layer. Hierarchical height equips the model with different levels of abstraction. Temporal depth enables planning as it allows for simulating counterfactual conse-quences of actions. B. Illustration of two time series at different layers. Layer 1 is closer to the sensory organs and resembles fast-fluctuating data of concrete receptor activation. Layer 2-4 are distal, exhibit temporally more stable and integrated data resembling higher levels of abstraction. C. Illustration of planning in layer 4 using counterfactual models. Action 2 will be selected as the agent believes that this action leads to the preferred outcome, the reduction of future prediction error (or minimization of expected free energy). See section 4 for additional details. 

Appendix  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   19 
 Figure 2. Schematic illustration of the dual origin hypothesis. A. System-A represents the amygdala developmental expansion gradient towards the ventral cerebral cortices. Independently, central amygdala nuclei connect to the ol-factory system and striatal areas. B. System-H represents the hippocampal gradient towards the dorsal cerebral corti-ces via cingulate and parahippocampal cortices. 
 Figure 3. Schematic illustration of the causal flow in the hypothetical neurocomputational model for habitual self-modeling and MPE. A. Habitual interoceptive self-modeling is perturbed by bodily prediction errors. Deviations from preference priors in the central amygdala initiate agentive and exteroceptive top-down predictions to resolve the prediction error. Additionally, hippocampus and, e.g., the default mode network provide contextual, episodic, auto-biographic memories likely via a narrative self-model. B. Hypothetically, optimal interoceptive top-down predictions suppress somatic prediction errors during MPE, which could lead to attenuated interoceptive, exteroceptive, and agentive self-models. If cortical prediction errors to the hippocampus are attenuated 29, reactivation of the self-model via concrete, self-referential episodic memories would be prevented. Without relevant input to process, hippocampus 
 29 For completeness, other forms of prediction error should also be suppressed. This includes subcortical inputs but also somatic inputs via endocrine receptors to the hippocampus. 

Appendix  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   20 
reduces free energy by model optimization, which could be experienced as selfless, non-agentic, time-less, content-free MPE.  
References Allen, M., Levy, A., Parr, T., Friston, K.J., 2022. In the Body’s Eye: The computational anatomy of interoceptive infer-ence. PLoS Comput Biol 18, e1010490. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010490 Baumann, O., Mattingley, J.B., 2014. Dissociable roles of the hippocampus and parietal cortex in processing of coordi-nate and categorical spatial information. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00073 Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Damasio, A.R., Lee, G.P., 1999. Different Contributions of the Human Amygdala and Ven-tromedial Prefrontal Cortex to Decision-Making. J. Neurosci. 19, 5473–5481. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEURO-SCI.19-13-05473.1999 Bellmund, J.L.S., Deuker, L., Montijn, N.D., Doeller, C.F., 2022. Mnemonic construction and representation of tem-poral structure in the hippocampal formation. Nat Commun 13, 3395. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30984-3 Bernhardt, B.C., Smallwood, J., Keilholz, S., Margulies, D.S., 2022. Gradients in brain organization. NeuroImage 251, 118987. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.118987 Beyer, F., Münte, T.F., Göttlich, M., Krämer, U.M., 2015. Orbitofrontal Cortex Reactivity to Angry Facial Expression in a Social Interaction Correlates with Aggressive Behavior. Cereb. Cortex 25, 3057–3063. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhu101 Blake, Y., Terburg, D., Balchin, R., Van Honk, J., Solms, M., 2019. The role of the basolateral amygdala in dreaming. Cortex 113, 169–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2018.12.016 Brooks, R.A., 1990. Elephants don’t play chess. Robotics and Autonomous Systems 6, 3–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-8890(05)80025-9 Buckley, C.L., Kim, C.S., McGregor, S., Seth, A.K., 2017. The free energy principle for action and perception: A mathe-matical review. Journal of Mathematical Psychology 81, 55–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2017.09.004 Chanes, L., Barrett, L.F., 2016. Redefining the Role of Limbic Areas in Cortical Processing. Trends in Cognitive Sci-ences 20, 96–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2015.11.005 Cleeremans, A., Tallon-Baudry, C., 2024. The Function of Consciousness is to generate Experience. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/jfpw2 Courellis, H.S., Minxha, J., Cardenas, A.R., Kimmel, D.L., Reed, C.M., Valiante, T.A., Salzman, C.D., Mamelak, A.N., Fusi, S., Rutishauser, U., 2024. Abstract representations emerge in human hippocampal neurons during infer-ence. Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07799-x Eichenbaum, H., 2017. Prefrontal–hippocampal interactions in episodic memory. Nat Rev Neurosci 18, 547–558. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2017.74 Eichert, N., DeKraker, J., Howard, A.F.D., Huszar, I.N., Zhu, S., Sallet, J., Miller, K.L., Mars, R.B., Jbabdi, S., Bern-hardt, B.C., 2023. Hippocampal connectivity patterns echo macroscale cortical evolution in the primate brain (preprint). Neuroscience. https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.08.556859 Ezama, L., Hernández-Cabrera, J.A., Seoane, S., Pereda, E., Janssen, N., 2021. Functional connectivity of the hippo-campus and its subfields in resting-state networks. Eur J of Neuroscience 53, 3378–3393. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejn.15213 Friston, K.J., Stephan, K.E., Montague, R., Dolan, R.J., 2014. Computational psychiatry: the brain as a phantastic or-gan. The Lancet Psychiatry 1, 148–158. Galante, J., Montero-Marín, J., Vainre, M., Dufour, G., García-Campayo, J., Jones, P.B., 2024. Altered states of con-sciousness caused by a mindfulness-based programme up to a year later: Results from a randomised controlled trial. PLoS ONE 19, e0305928. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0305928 Gamma, A., Metzinger, T., 2021. The Minimal Phenomenal Experience questionnaire (MPE-92M): Towards a phe-nomenological profile of “pure awareness” experiences in meditators. PLoS ONE 16, e0253694. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0253694 
Appendix  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   21 
García-Cabezas, M.Á., Hacker, J.L., Zikopoulos, B., 2022. Homology of neocortical areas in rats and primates based on cortical type analysis: an update of the Hypothesis on the Dual Origin of the Neocortex. Brain Struct Funct 228, 1069–1093. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-022-02548-0 Garcia-Calero, E., Puelles, L., 2020. Histogenetic Radial Models as Aids to Understanding Complex Brain Structures: The Amygdalar Radial Model as a Recent Example. Front. Neuroanat. 14, 590011. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnana.2020.590011 Gehrlach, D.A., Weiand, C., Gaitanos, T.N., Cho, E., Klein, A.S., Hennrich, A.A., Conzelmann, K.-K., Gogolla, N., 2020. A whole-brain connectivity map of mouse insular cortex. eLife 9, e55585. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55585 Giaccio, R.G., 2006. The dual origin hypothesis: An evolutionary brain-behavior framework for analyzing psychiatric disorders. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 30, 526–550. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2005.04.021 Goodale, M.A., Milner, A.D., 1992. Separate visual pathways for perception and action. Trends in Neurosciences 15, 20–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-2236(92)90344-8 Hortensius, R., Terburg, D., Morgan, B., Stein, D.J., Van Honk, J., De Gelder, B., 2017. The Basolateral Amygdalae and Frontotemporal Network Functions for Threat Perception. eNeuro 4, ENEURO.0314-16.2016. https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0314-16.2016 Hortensius, R., Terburg, D., Morgan, B., Stein, D.J., van Honk, J., de Gelder, B., 2016. The role of the basolateral amyg-dala in the perception of faces in natural contexts. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 371, 20150376. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0376 Huntenburg, J.M., Bazin, P.-L., Margulies, D.S., 2018. Large-Scale Gradients in Human Cortical Organization. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 22, 21–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2017.11.002 Janacsek, K., Evans, T.M., Kiss, M., Shah, L., Blumenfeld, H., Ullman, M.T., 2022. Subcortical Cognition: The Fruit Be-low the Rind. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 45, 361–386. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-110920-013544 Janak, P.H., Tye, K.M., 2015. From circuits to behaviour in the amygdala. Nature 517, 284–292. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14188 Jha, A., Diehl, B., Strange, B., Miserocchi, A., Chowdhury, F., McEvoy, A.W., Nachev, P., 2023. Orienting to fear un-der transient focal disruption of the human amygdala. Brain 146, 135–148. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awac032 Katsumi, Y., Theriault, J.E., Quigley, K.S., Barrett, L.F., 2022. Allostasis as a core feature of hierarchical gradients in the human brain. Network Neuroscience 6, 1010–1031. https://doi.org/10.1162/netn_a_00240 Koen, N., Fourie, J., Terburg, D., Stoop, R., Morgan, B., Stein, D.J., Van Honk, J., 2016. Translational neuroscience of basolateral amygdala lesions: Studies of urbach-wiethe disease. J of Neuroscience Research 94, 504–512. https://doi.org/10.1002/jnr.23731 Li, J., Curley, W.H., Guerin, B., Dougherty, D.D., Dalca, A.V., Fischl, B., Horn, A., Edlow, B.L., 2021. Mapping the subcortical connectivity of the human default mode network. NeuroImage 245, 118758. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118758 Lockwood, P.L., Cutler, J., Drew, D., Abdurahman, A., Jeyaretna, D.S., Apps, M.A.J., Husain, M., Manohar, S.G., 2024. Human ventromedial prefrontal cortex is necessary for prosocial motivation. Nat Hum Behav 8, 1403–1416. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-024-01899-4 Luppino, G., Rizzolatti, G., 2000. The Organization of the Frontal Motor Cortex. Physiology 15, 219–224. https://doi.org/10.1152/physiologyonline.2000.15.5.219 Lutz, A., Slagter, H.A., Dunne, J.D., Davidson, R.J., 2008. Attention regulation and monitoring in meditation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 12, 163–169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2008.01.005 Luu, P., Tucker, D.M., Friston, K., 2024. From active affordance to active inference: vertical integration of cognition in the cerebral cortex through dual subcortical control systems. Cerebral Cortex 34, bhad458. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhad458 Manuello, J., Vercelli, U., Nani, A., Costa, T., Cauda, F., 2016. Mindfulness meditation and consciousness: An integra-tive neuroscientific perspective. Consciousness and Cognition 40, 67–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.con-cog.2015.12.005 Maunsell, J.H.R., 2015. Neuronal Mechanisms of Visual Attention. Annu. Rev. Vis. Sci. 1, 373–391. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-vision-082114-035431 Maurer, A.P., Nadel, L., 2021. The Continuity of Context: A Role for the Hippocampus. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 25, 187–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.12.007 
Appendix  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   22 
Menon, V., 2016. Memory and cognitive control circuits in mathematical cognition and learning, in: Progress in Brain Research. Elsevier, pp. 159–186. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.pbr.2016.04.026 Metzinger, T., n.d. The Elephant and the Blind. Metzinger, T.K., 2017. The Problem of Mental Action: Predictive Control without Sensory Sheets: Predictive Control without Sensory Sheets. Philosophy and Predictive Processing. https://doi.org/10.15502/9783958573208 Mishkin, M., Ungerleider, L.G., 1982. Contribution of striate inputs to the visuospatial functions of parieto-preoccipi-tal cortex in monkeys. Behavioural Brain Research 6, 57–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-4328(82)90081-X Muñoz-Torres, Z., Corsi-Cabrera, M., Velasco, F., Velasco, A.L., 2023. Amygdala and hippocampus dialogue with neocortex during human sleep and wakefulness. Sleep 46, zsac224. https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsac224 Nielson, D.M., Smith, T.A., Sreekumar, V., Dennis, S., Sederberg, P.B., 2015. Human hippocampus represents space and time during retrieval of real-world memories. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 11078–11083. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1507104112 Pessoa, L., Medina, L., Desfilis, E., 2022. Refocusing neuroscience: moving away from mental categories and towards complex behaviours. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 377, 20200534. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2020.0534 Pezzulo, G., Parr, T., Friston, K., 2022. The evolution of brain architectures for predictive coding and active inference. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 377, 20200531. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2020.0531 Qin, S., Cho, S., Chen, T., Rosenberg-Lee, M., Geary, D.C., Menon, V., 2014. Hippocampal-neocortical functional reor-ganization underlies children’s cognitive development. Nat Neurosci 17, 1263–1269. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3788 Rizzolatti, G., Matelli, M., 2003. Two different streams form the dorsal visual system: anatomy and functions. Experi-mental Brain Research 153, 146–157. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-003-1588-0 Rosenberger, L.A., Eisenegger, C., Naef, M., Terburg, D., Fourie, J., Stein, D.J., van Honk, J., 2019. The Human Baso-lateral Amygdala Is Indispensable for Social Experiential Learning. Current Biology 29, 3532-3537.e3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2019.08.078 Sanides, F., 1962. Architectonics of the human frontal lobe of the brain. With a demonstration of the principles of its formation as a reflection of phylogenetic differentiation of the cerebral cortex. Monogr Gesamtgeb Neurol Psy-chiatr 98, 1–201. Seth, A., 2021. Being you: a new science of consciousness. Faber & Faber, London. Seth, A.K., Bayne, T., 2022. Theories of consciousness. Nat Rev Neurosci 23, 439–452. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-022-00587-4 Sladky, R., Hahn, A., Karl, I.-L., Geissberger, N., Kranz, G.S., Tik, M., Kraus, C., Pfabigan, D.M., Gartus, A., Lanzen-berger, R., others, 2021a. Dynamic causal modeling of the Prefrontal/Amygdala network during processing of emotional faces. Brain connectivity. Sladky, R., Höflich, A., Küblböck, M., Kraus, C., Baldinger, P., Moser, E., Lanzenberger, R., Windischberger, C., 2015. Disrupted effective connectivity between the amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in social anxiety disorder during emotion discrimination revealed by dynamic causal modeling for fMRI. Cerebral Cortex 25, 895–903. Sladky, R., Kargl, D., Haubensak, W., Lamm, C., 2024. An active inference perspective for the amygdala complex. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 28, 223–236. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2023.11.004 Sladky, R., Riva, F., Rosenberger, L.A., van Honk, J., Lamm, C., 2021b. Basolateral and central amygdala orchestrate how we learn whom to trust. Communications Biology 4, 1–9. Solms, M., 2021. The Hidden Spring. Stachenfeld, K.L., Botvinick, M.M., Gershman, S.J., 2017. The hippocampus as a predictive map. Nat Neurosci 20, 1643–1653. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4650 Terburg, D., Morgan, B.E., Montoya, E.R., Hooge, I.T., Thornton, H.B., Hariri, A.R., Panksepp, J., Stein, D.J., van Honk, J., 2012. Hypervigilance for fear after basolateral amygdala damage in humans. Transl Psychiatry 2, e115–e115. https://doi.org/10.1038/tp.2012.46 Tschantz, A., Barca, L., Maisto, D., Buckley, C.L., Seth, A.K., Pezzulo, G., 2022. Simulating homeostatic, allostatic and goal-directed forms of interoceptive control using active inference. Biological Psychology 169, 108266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2022.108266 Tucker, D.M., Luu, P., 2012. Cognition and neural development. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Appendix  Of Hidden Springs and Endless Oceans 
 
Ronald Sladky, ronald.sladky@univie.ac.at   23 
van Honk, J., Eisenegger, C., Terburg, D., Stein, D.J., Morgan, B., 2013. Generous economic investments after basolat-eral amygdala damage. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110, 2506–2510. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1217316110 van Honk, J., Terburg, D., Montoya, E.R., Grafman, J., Stein, D.J., Morgan, B., 2022. Breakdown of utilitarian moral judgement after basolateral amygdala damage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 119, e2119072119. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2119072119 Watve, A., Haugg, A., Frei, N., Koush, Y., Willinger, D., Bruehl, A.B., Stämpfli, P., Scharnowski, F., Sladky, R., 2024. Facing emotions: real-time fMRI-based neurofeedback using dynamic emotional faces to modulate amygdala activity. Front. Neurosci. 17, 1286665. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2023.1286665 Waymel, A., Friedrich, P., Bastian, P.-A., Forkel, S.J., Thiebaut de Schotten, M., 2020. Anchoring the human olfactory system within a functional gradient. NeuroImage 216, 116863. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neu-roimage.2020.116863 Wernecke, K.E.A., Vincenz, D., Storsberg, S., D’Hanis, W., Goldschmidt, J., Fendt, M., 2015. Fox urine exposure in-duces avoidance behavior in rats and activates the amygdalar olfactory cortex. Behavioural Brain Research 279, 76–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2014.11.020 Whitlock, J.R., Sutherland, R.J., Witter, M.P., Moser, M.-B., Moser, E.I., 2008. Navigating from hippocampus to parie-tal cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 14755–14762. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0804216105 Wu, W., 2024. We know what attention is! Trends in Cognitive Sciences 28, 304–318. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2023.11.007 Yeo, B.T., Krienen, F.M., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M.R., Lashkari, D., Hollinshead, M., Roffman, J.L., Smoller, J.W., Zöl-lei, L., Polimeni, J.R., Fischl, B., Liu, H., Buckner, R.L., 2011. The organization of the human cerebral cortex esti-mated by intrinsic functional connectivity. Journal of Neurophysiology 106, 1125–1165. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00338.2011 